
Cover images 0 
Murray Robertsonhisual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-662-3 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2002 
All rights reserved 
Apart j i o m  unj’jhir dealingfor the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
review as permitted under the terms of the UK Copj’right, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, thispuhlication n?aj? not he reproduced, Jtored or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in writing of The Roycrl Society of Chemistry, 
or in the cuse of reprographic reproduction only in accordance wiith the terms of the 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
t e r m  of the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Orgunization out- 
side the UK. Enquiritv concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should he 
sent fo The Royd Society of Chemistry at the address printed on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 21, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
Aromatic chemistry, in terms of the production of derivatives of benzene 
and, to a less extent, other carbocyclic aromatic compounds, is of 
immense industrial importance and is the mainstay of many chemical 
companies. Derived products are in general use across such diverse indus- 
tries as pharmaceuticals, dyestuffs, and polymers. 
The aromatic chemistry required by an undergraduate in chemistry, 
biochemistry, materials science and related disciplines is assembled in this 
text, which also provides a link to other aspects of organic chemistry and 
a platform for further study. In line with the series style, a number of 
worked problems and a selection of questions designed to help the stu- 
dent to understand the principles described are included. 
The first chapter discusses the concept of aromaticity, after which there 
is a description of aromatic substitution reactions. Chapters covering the 
chemistry of the major functionalized derivatives of benzene follow. A 
chapter on the use of metals in aromatic chemistry discusses not only the 
chemistry of Grignard reagents and aryllithium compounds but also the 
more recent uses of transition metals in the synthesis of aromatic com- 
pounds. The penultimate chapter discusses the oxidation and reduction of 
the benzene ring and the text concludes with the chemistry of some poly- 
cyclic compounds. 
We have chosen to use the names of chemicals that are in common 
usage on the basis that students should then be able to read and make use 
of the chemicd literature and also to locate chemicals in the laboratory. 
Systematic names are given in parentheses at the first appropriate oppor- 
tunity. Ideally, a student should be able to use both systems interchange- 
ably without difficulty. The RSC website has an Appendix of Common 
and Systematic Names (http://www.chemsoc.org/pdf/tct/functionalap- 
pendix.pdf) to which students are referred. A Further Reading list is also 
available at (http://www.chemsoc.org/pdf/tct/functionalreading.pd~. 
We are grateful to Dr. Mark Heron for his valuable comments on the 
draft manuscript and to Dr. Alan Jones and Ms. Beryl Newel1 for their 
help in preparation of the final manuscript. Mr. Martyn Berry and 
Professor Alwyn Davies FRS offered advice, encouragement and criti- 
cism throughout the preparation of the text which were most appreciated. 
Mrs. Janet Freshwater of the Royal Society of Chemistry was involved in 
the project from start to finish and we thank her for her efficiency and 
guidance. We thank our wives, Annabelle, Margaret and Anita, for their 
help, patience and understanding during the writing of this book. 
J. D. Hepworth, University qf Central Lancashire 
D. R. Waring, formerly of Kodak Ltd., Kirkby, Liverpool 
M. J. Waring, AstraZenecu, Alderley Park, Cheshire 

L U I 1  OR - I N - C  ti I t t 
Professor E W Ahel 
r x r  c u T i v t  L D I T O K S  
Profl.ssor A G Davirs 
Prqfl.ssor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
L: D U C AT I0 N A L C O N S  CI L T A  N T 
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Joncs 
Structure and Bonding J Burvc.fr 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Himson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Sriinshurj9 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Organic Synthetic Methods J R Hunson 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
S E Dann 
J M Soddon & J D Gale 
J A4 Hollas 
J D Hepivorth, D R Wuring & M J Waring 
D 0 Hay\t’ard 
F O  RT H C O  M I N Ci T I T L E S  
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multi-element NMR 
Peptides and Proteins 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Natural Product: The Secondary 
Metabolites 
Furtlier inforniution about this series is uvailahle at \vivtr. cliernsoc. orgltct 
Orders und cnyuiries should he sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 42601 7; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
I. 1 Introduction 
1.2 Structure of Benzene 
1.3 
1.4 The Huckel Rule 
I. 5 
Nomenclature 
Stability of the Benzene Ring 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 Electrophilic Aromatic Substitution (SEAr) 
2.3 
2.4 The Hammett Equation 
2.5 Nucleophilic Aromatic Substitution 
2.6 
ips0 Substitution 
Reactivity and Orientation in Electrophilic Aromatic 
Substitution 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Source of Alkylbenzenes 
3.3 Introduction of Alkyl Groups 
3.4 Reactions of Alkylbenzenes 
3.5 Aryl Derivatives of Benzene 
1 
2 
2 
5 
11 
15 
16 
20 
31 
33 
35 
38 
38 
39 
42 
44 
V 

vi 
Contents 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
Introduction 
Industrial Synthetic Methods 
Laboratory Syntheses 
The Acidity of Phenols 
Reactions of the Hydroxy Group 
Reactions of the Ring 
Dihydroxybenzenes 
Introduction 
Introduction of Acidic Groups 
Reactions of Aromatic Acids 
Acidity of Aromatic Acids 
Compounds with More Than One Acidic Group 
Side-chain Acids 
Introduction 
Aromatic Alcohols 
Aromatic Aldehydes 
Aromatic Ketones 
Introduction 
Introduction of the Nitro Group 
Charge Transfer Complexes 
Reactions of Nitro Compounds 
Nitrosobenzene and Phenylhydroxylamine 
Introduction 
Introduction of the Amino Group 
Reactions of Aromatic Amines 
Related Compounds 
Basicity of Amines 
Diazonium Salts 
47 
47 
48 
50 
51 
53 
55 
58 
58 
60 
63 
64 
65 
67 
67 
68 
76 
79 
79 
83 
83 
85 
88 
89 
91 
93 
94 
95 

Contents 
vii 
9.1 Introduction 
104 
9.2 Synthesis of Aryl Halides 
105 
9.3 Reactions of Aryl Halides 
108 
9.4 Aromatic Halogen Compounds Substituted in the Side 
Chain 
111 
10.1 Grignard and Organolithium Reagents 
10.2 Electrophilic Metallation 
10.3 Transition Metal Mediated Processes 
10.4 Aryl Coupling Reactions 
1 0.5 Arene-Chromium Tricarbonyl Complexes 
11.1 Introduction 
1 1.2 Reduction of the Benzene Ring 
I 1.3 Oxidation of the Benzene Ring 
12.1 Introduction 
12.2 Chemistry of Naphthalene 
12.3 Chemistry of Anthracene 
12.4 Chemistry of Phenanthrene 
114 
118 
119 
121 
125 
129 
129 
131 
135 
135 
141 
143 


Aromatici ty 
I. I Introduction 
0 
0 0  
The classification of organic compounds is based on the structure of the 
molecules. 
compounds have open-chain structures such as 
bonds. In 
molecules, the carbon atoms form a cyclic structure, 
as in cyclohexane (2) and cyclohexene (3). 
compounds are unsaturated cyclic molecules that possess 
additional stability as a result of the arrangement of .Tc-electrons 
associated with the unsaturation of the ring system. This book will 
concentrate on the chemistry of benzene (4) and its derivatives and 
related polynuclear hydrocarbons. Aromatic compounds are also known 
as 
; they can be 
, indicating that the ring skeleton con- 
tains only carbon atoms, or 
, with at least one atom other 
than carbon in the ring. These heteroatoms are typically N, 0 or S. 
Heterocyclic compounds, which can be aromatic or alicyclic, are covered 
in another book in this series. 
Initially, we will look at what distinguishes aromatic compounds from 
other cyclic molecules and how chemists’ understanding of aromaticity 
has developed up to the present day. 
hexane (1) and can contain single (C-C), double (C=C) and triple (C=C) 
1 
2 
3 
4 

2 
Aromatic Chemistry 
5 
R 
I 
7 
M 
6 
R 
8 
1.2 
Structure of Benzene 
Based on elemental composition and relative molecular mass determi- 
nations, the formula of benzene was found to be C,H,. The saturated 
hydrocarbon hexane has the molecular formula C,H,, and therefore it 
was concluded that benzene was unsaturated. Kekule in 1865 proposed 
the cyclic structure 4 for benzene in which the carbon atoms were joined 
by alternate single and double bonds. Certain reactions of benzene, 
such as the catalytic hydrogenation to cyclohexane, which involves the 
addition of six hydrogen atoms, confirmed that benzene was a ring 
compound and that it contained three double bonds. However, since 
benzene did not undergo addition reactions with HCl and HBr, it was 
concluded that these double bonds were different from those in ethene 
and other unsaturated aliphatic compounds. 
In 1867, Dewar proposed several possible structures for benzene, one 
of which was 5. However, in 1874, Ladenburg proved experimentally 
that all the hydrogen atoms of benzene were equivalent and suggested 
the prismatic structure 6. 
Kekule’s proposed structure 4 looks more in keeping with our current 
knowledge of benzene, although it does not explain how the double 
bonds differ from the aliphatic type. Furthermore, although the two 
structures 7 and 8 can be drawn for a 1,2-disubstituted benzene, only 
one such compound exists. Kekule proposed that the equivalent struc- 
tures 7 and 8 oscillated between each other, averaging out the single and 
double bonds so that the compounds were indistinguishable. 
1.3 
Stability of the Benzene Ring 
Kekule’s proposals gained wide acceptance and were supported by the 
experimental work of Baeyer in the late 19th century, but these ideas did 
not explain the unusual stability of benzene. This is typified by its chem- 
ical reactions, which are almost exclusively substitution rather than the 
expected addition. Throughout this book there will be many examples 
of this property. In addition, physical properties such as enthalpies 
of hydrogenation and combustion are significantly lower than would be 
expected for the cyclohexatriene structure of Kekule. The enthalpy 
of hydrogenation (AH) of the double bond in cyclohexene is -120 kJ 
mol-I and that of cyclohexa-1,3-diene with two double bonds is almost 
twice that at -232 kJ mol I .  Cyclohexatriene, if it existed, would be 
expected to have an enthalpy of hydrogenation of three times the value 
of cyclohexene, a AH of approximately -360 kJ mol - I .  However, the value 
for benzene is less exothermic than this comparison suggests, being only 
-209 kJ mol I .  Thus benzene is 151 kJ mol-’ more stable than cyclo- 
hexatriene (Figure 1.1). This is known as the 
of ben- 

Aromaticity 
3 
zene or its 
. This stabilizing feature dominates the 
Figure 1.1 Hydrogenation of 
chemistry of benzene and its derivatives. 
cyclohexene, cyclohexadiene and 
benzene 
1.3.1 Valence Bond Theory of Aromaticity 
X-ray crystallographic analysis indicated that benzene is a planar, regular 
hexagon in which all the carbon-carbon bond lengths are 139 pm, inter- 
mediate between the single C-C bond in ethane (1 54 pm) and the C=C 
bond in ethene (134 pm), and therefore all have some double bond 
character. Thus the representation of benzene by one Kekule structure 
is unsatisfactory. The picture of benzene according to valence bond the- 
ory is a resonance hybrid of the two Kekule or canonical forms 4 and 
9, conventionally shown as in Figure 1.2, and so each carbon-carbon 
bond apparently has a bond order of 1.5. 
Figure 1.2 
4 
9 
10 
Kekulk structures 
L 
J 
5 
11 
12 
Dewar structures 

4 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Although the canonical forms for benzene are imaginary and do not 
exist, the structure of benzene will be represented by one of the Kekule 
structures throughout this book. This is common practice. A circle with- 
in a hexagon as in 10, symbolic of the n-cloud, is sometimes used to rep- 
resent benzene. 
1.3.2 Molecular Orbital Theory of Benzene 
The current understanding of the structure of benzene is based on molec- 
ular orbital (MO) theory. The six carbon atoms of benzene are sp2 
hybridized. The three sp’ hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom, which are 
arranged at angles of 120°, overlap with those of two other carbon atoms 
and with the s orbital of a hydrogen atom to form the planar o-bonded 
skeleton of the benzene ring. The p orbital associated with each carbon 
contains one electron and is perpendicular to the plane of the ring. 
MO theory tells us that the six parallel p atomic orbitals are com- 
bined together to form six MOs, three of which are bonding orbitals and 
three anti-bonding. Figure 1.3 shows the relative energy levels of these 
MOs. The six nelectrons occupy the three bonding orbitals, all of lower 
energy than the uncombined p orbitals; the higher energy anti-bonding 
MOs are empty. 
Figure 1.3 
Figure 1.4 
This arrangement accounts for the extra stability or aromaticity of 
benzene. The six overlapping p orbitals can be pictured as forming a 
x-electron cloud comprising of two rings (think of them 
as doughnuts!), one above and one below the molecular plane as shown 
in Figure 1.4. There are no localized C=C bonds as there are in alkenes. 
The MOs of benzene are shown pictorially in Figure 1.5. The stability 
of a MO is related to the number of nodes it possesses; that is to say, 
the number of times the wave function changes phase (sign) around the 
ring system. The most stable form has no nodes, when there is a bond- 
ing interaction between all six adjacent carbon atoms. 

Aromaticity 
5 
Figure 1.5 
1.4 
The Huckel Rule 
It is important to examine aromaticity in its wider concept at this point. 
There are many compounds and systems besides benzene that are 
aromatic. They possess common features in addition to planarity 
and aromatic stability. MO calculations carried out by Hiickel in the 
1930s showed that aromatic character is associated with planar cyclic 
molecules that contained 2, 6, 10, 14 (and so on) n;-electrons. This series 
of numbers is represented by the term 4n + 2, where n is an integer, and 
gave rise to Hiickel’s 4n + 2 rule that refers to the number of nelectrons 
in the p-orbital system. In the case of benzene, n = 1, and thus the system 
contains six n-electrons that are distributed in MOs as shown above. 

6 
Aromatic Chemistry 
This rule is now an important criterion for aromaticity. Those systems 
that contain 4n n;-electrons are unstable and are referred to as anti- 
aromatic compounds. 
The reason for the success of the Hiickel rule in predicting aromatic- 
ity lies in the derivation of the 71: MOs. For cyclic conjugated molecules, 
the energy levels of the bonding MOs are always arranged with one low- 
est-lying MO followed by degenerate pairs of orbitals. The anti-bonding 
orbitals are arranged inversely, with sets of two degenerate levels and a 
single highest energy orbital. In the case of benzene, it requires two 
electrons to fill the first MO and then four electrons to fill each of the n 
succeeding energy levels, as illustrated in Figure 1.3. A filled set of bond- 
ing MOs results in a stable system. This idea is very like that which links 
the stability of the noble gases to a filled set of atomic orbitals. 
Figure 1.6 

Aromaticity 
7 
Although adherence to the Huckel rule is a valuable test for aromaticity, 
other properties are also used to assess whether a compound is aromatic 
or not. One such diagnostic tool is 'H NMR spectroscopy. When exposed 
to a magnetic field, the n-electron cloud circulates to produce a ring 
current that generates a local magnetic field (Figure 1.7). This new field 
boosts the applied magnetic field outside the ring. As a result, the 
hydrogen atoms are deshielded and resonate at a lower applied field, 
usually in the range 6 6.5-8.5 ppm. Alkenyl hydrogen atoms are also 
deshielded, but to a lesser extent and normally resonate in the region 6 
4.5-5.5 ppm. The local field inside the ring opposes the applied field 
and this effect is apparent in the 'H NMR spectra of the annulenes (see 
p. 11). 
1.4.1 2n-Electron Systems 
Aromatic systems that obey Hiickel's 4n + 2 rule where n = 0 and so 
possess two n-electrons do exist and are indeed stable. The smallest 
possible ring is three membered and the derived unsaturated structure is 
cyclopropene. The theoretical loss of a hydride ion from this molecule 
leads to the cyclopropenyl cation, which contains two n-electrons 
distributed over the three carbon atoms of the planar cyclic system 
(Figure 1.8). 
Figure 1.7 
Figure 1.8 
This cationic species and a number of its derivatives have been pre- 
pared and they are quite stable, despite the strain associated with the 
internal bond angles of only 60". For example, the reaction of hydrogen 
bromide'with diphenylcyclopropenone, which is itself a stable compound 
with aromatic character, gives the diphenylcyclopropenium salt (Scheme 
1.1). 
Ph 
ph)+O 
Ph 
Ph 
HBr * 
N
O
H
 
Br- 
Scheme 1.1 

a 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 1.2 
Scheme 1.3 
Examination of the cyclobutadiene system indicates that it possesses 
four n-electrons and is thus an unstable 4n system. Cyclobutadiene itself 
only exists at very low temperatures, though some of its derivatives are 
stable to some extent at room temperature. Cyclobutadiene is a rectan- 
gular diene. Loss of two electrons through the departure of two chloride 
ions from the 3,4-dichlorocyclobutene derivative creates a 2n-electron 
aromatic system, the square, stable cyclobutenyl dication (Scheme 1.2). 
Me FMe 
2SbFsCl- 
I.,, 
I 
Me 
Me 
I 
.4.2 6.n-Electron Systems 
We have seen that benzene fits into this category, but there are a num- 
ber of other stable aromatic systems that contain six n-electrons. 
Cyclopentadiene is surprisingly acidic (pKa ca. 16) for a hydrocarbon. 
This property arises because the cyclopentadienyl anion, generated by 
abstraction of a proton by a base such as sodium ethoxide (Scheme 1.3), 
has a delocalized aromatic set of six n-electrons. 
The cyclopentadienyl anion 13 is an efficiently 
in which all the carbon-carbon bond lengths are equal (Figure 
1.9). It forms stable compounds, of which ferrocene (14) is an example, 
which undergo aromatic substitution reactions such as sulfonation and 
ace tylation. 
derived from cyclo- 
heptatriene that possesses the aromatic sextet of n-electrons. Tropylium 
bromide is formed by the addition of bromine to cycloheptatriene and 
In contrast, it is the 
Figure 1.9 

Aromaticity 
9 
then loss of hydrogen bromide by heating. It can also be generated direct- 
ly from cycloheptatriene by hydride ion abstraction using triphenylcar- 
benium perchlorate (Scheme 1.4). In the tropylium ion 15, the bond 
lengths are equal and all seven carbon atoms share the positive charge 
(Figure 1.10). 
H 
I 
15 
Scheme 1.4 
Figure 1.10 
Scheme 1.5 

I 0  
Aromatic Chemistry 
Figure 1.12 
Azulene (16) is a stable, blue solid hydrocarbon that undergoes typical 
electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. It may be regarded as a 
combination of 13 and 15; in keeping with this it has a dipole moment 
of 0.8 D (Figure 1.1 1). The fusion bond linking the two rings is longer 
(1 50 pm) than the other bonds (1 39-140 pm), indicating that azulene is 
a peripherally conjugated system. 
16 
Figure 1 .l 
1 
Some heterocyclic compounds possess aromatic character. One such 
important compound is pyridine (17), in which one of the CH units of 
benzene has been replaced by a nitrogen atom (Figure 1.12). Although 
the chemistry of pyridine shows several important differences from 
benzene, it also has some common characteristics. The five carbon atoms 
and the nitrogen atom each provide one electron for the n-cloud, there- 
by conferring aromaticity on pyridine according to Huckel’s rule. Notice 
that the nitrogen retains a lone pair of electrons in an sp2 orbital directed 
away from the ring; this accounts for the basic properties of’pyridine. 
Similarly, the five-membered heterocycle pyrrole (18) is aromatic, 
although this molecule obeys Huckel’s rule only because the nitrogen 
atom contributes two electrons to the n-cloud. In this respect, pyrrole is 
analogous to the cyclopentadienyl anion. As a consequence, the nitro- 
gen atom does not retain a lone pair of electrons and pyrrole is not basic. 
1.4.3 1 OX-, 147~- and 18lt-Electron Systems 
The most important 10n carbocyclic system is naphthalene (19) in which 
two benzene rings are fused together. The fused systems anthracene (20) 
and phenanthrene (21) obey Huckel’s rule, where n = 3, and have 14n- 
electrons. All three compounds are typically aromatic and their chem- 
istry is similar to that of benzene, as discussed in Chapter 12. 
19 
20 
21 

Aromaticity 
11 
In 1962, Sondheimer prepared a series of conjugated monocyclic poly- 
enes called 
, with the specific purpose of testing Huckel’s rule. 
Amongst the annulenes prepared, compound 22 with 14 and compound 
23 with 18 carbon atoms, that is n =3 and n = 4, respectively, have the 
magnetic properties required for aromatic character, but behave chemi- 
cally like conjugated alkenes. In [ 18lannulene (23), the hydrogen atoms 
on the outside of the ring resonate in the aromatic region at 6 9.3 ppm. 
However, the inner protons lie in the region where the induced field asso- 
ciated with the ring current opposes the applied field. They are therefore 
shielded and so resonate upfield at 6 -3.0 ppm. 
22 
I 
.5 
Nomenclature 
23 
The remainder of this book will be devoted to the synthesis and reactions 
of a range of aromatic compounds. It is important that you understand 
the naming of these compounds. The use of trivial names is widespread, 
particularly in the chemical industry; although some of the older names 
have disappeared from use, many persist and are allowed in the IUPAC 
system. Some of these are presented in Figure 1.13. 
Monosubstituted compounds are commonly named as in aliphatic 
chemistry, with the substituents appearing as a prefix to the parent name 
benzene; bromobenzene, chlorobenzene and nitrobenzene are examples 
(Figure 1.14). 
Figure 1.13 
Figure 1.14 
There are two acceptable ways of naming the three positional isomers 
that are possible for disubstituted benzene rings. The substituent 

12 
Aromatic Chemistry 
positions 1,2-, 1,3- and 1,4- are sometimes replaced by the terms 
ortho-, meta- and para- (abbreviated to 0-, m- and p-, respectively) (see 
6; 
borth0 
24 and 25). You are advised to become familiar with both systems so 
that you can use them interchangeably. 
In multiply substituted compounds, the groups are numbered so that 
the lowest possible numbers are used. The substituents are then listed in 
alphabetical order with their appropriate numbers. Examples are given 
in Figure 1.15, which also introduces further trivial names. 
meta 
4 
para 
24 
25 
Figure 1.15 
There are occasions when the benzene ring is named as a substituent 
and in these cases the name for C,H,- is phenyl, abbreviated to Ph. The 
name for C,H,CH,- is benzyl or Bn, whilst the benzoyl substituent is 
C,H,CO- or Bz. These substituents can also be named systematically as 
shown in Figure 1.16. 
Figure 1.16 

Aromaticity 
13 

14 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Aromatic Substitution 
2.1 
Introduction 
In Chapter 1 it was stated that the principal reaction of benzene and its 
derivatives is 
rather than addition. Indeed, electrophilic sub- 
stitution in aromatic systems is one of the most important reactions in 
chemistry and has many commercial applications. 
The nelectron cloud above and below the plane of the benzene ring 
is a source of electron density and confers nucleophilic properties on the 
system. Thus, reagents that are deficient in electron density, 
9 
are likely to attack, whilst electron-rich nucleophiles should be repelled 
and therefore be unlikely to react. Furthermore, in electrophilic substi- 
tution the leaving group is a proton, H+, but in nucleophilic substitution 
it is a hydride ion, H-; the former process is energetically more 
favourable. In fact, 
is not common, 
but it does occur in certain circumstances. 
15 

16 
Aromatic Chemistry 
2.2 
Electrophilic Aromatic Substitution (SAr) 
In simple terms, electrophilic aromatic substitution proceeds in two steps. 
Initially, the electrophile E' adds to a carbon atom of the benzene ring 
in the same manner in which it would react with an alkene, but here the 
n-electron cloud is disrupted in the process. However, in the second step 
the resultant carbocation eliminates a proton to regenerate the aromat- 
ic system (Scheme 2.1). The combined processes of addition and elimi- 
nation result in overall substitution. 
Scheme 2.1 
The hybridization state of the carbon atom that is attacked changes 
from sp2 to sp3 and the planar aromatic system is destroyed. An unstable 
is simultaneously produced and so it is clear that this step is 
energetically unfavourable. It is therefore the slower step of the sequence. 
However, the intermediate carbocation is stabilized by resonance, with 
the positive charge shared formally by three carbon atoms of the ben- 
zene ring (Scheme 2.2). The resonance hybrid structure 1 indicates the 
delocalization of the charge. The carbocation is also referred to as a 
or 
In the second step, a proton is abstracted by a basic species present 
in the reaction mixture. The attacked carbon atom reverts to sp2 
hybridization and planarity and aromaticity are restored. This fast step 
is energetically favourable and is regarded as the driving force for the 
overall process. The product is a substituted benzene derivative. 
The energy changes that occur during the course of the reaction are 
related to the structural changes in the reaction profile shown in Figure 
2.1. It should be noted that each step proceeds through a high-energy 
transition state in which partial bonds attach the electrophile and the 
proton to the ring and the n-cloud is incomplete. 

Aromatic Substitution 
17 
Figure 2.1 Energy profile for electrophilic attack on benzene 
Most examples of electrophilic aromatic substitution proceed by this 
sequence of events: 
Generation of an electrophile 
The electrophile attacks the n-cloud of electrons of the aromatic ring 
The resulting carbocation is stabilized by resonance 
A proton is abstracted from the carbocation, regenerating the 
A substituted aromatic compound is formed 
~c-cloud 
In the following sections, various examples are reviewed, highlighting 
the source of the electrophile and any variations in mechanistic detail. 
Further discussion of the reactions and the products will be found in 
Chapters 4-9, which deal with the chemistry of functionalized deriva- 
tives of benzene. 
2.2.1 Nitration of Benzene 
Benzene cannot be nitrated using nitric acid alone, which lacks a strong 
electrophilic centre, but it is readily achieved using a mixture of 
concentrated nitric acid and concentrated sulfuric acid, the so-called 
“mixed acid”. The product is nitrobenzene. The interaction of nitric acid 
and sulfuric acid produces the electrophile, the nitronium ion NO,+, 
according to Scheme 2.3. The sulfuric acid is also the source of the base 
HSO, that removes the proton in the second step. 

18 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 2.3 
2.2.2 Halogenation of Benzene 
Halogen molecules are not strong electrophiles and, fluorine excepted, 
do not react with benzene. However, in the presence of a Lewis acid, 
reaction occurs readily. The role of the catalyst is to accept a lone pair 
of electrons from the halogen molecule, which then becomes electron 
deficient at one of the halogen atoms. The actual electrophile is proba- 
bly the complex formed from the halogen and the catalyst, rather than 
a halonium ion, e.g. Cl+ or Br+. Bromination of benzene serves as a good 
example of halogenation (Scheme 2.4). 
Scheme 2.4 
2.2.3 Friedel-Crafts Alkylation 
Alkyl halides require a Lewis acid catalyst to accentuate the polariza- 
tion and create a more powerful electrophile. There is not enough pos- 
itive character on the carbon atom in alkyl halides for them to react with 
benzene; the catalyst increases the positive character. Aluminium 
Scheme 2.5 

Aromatic Substitution 
19 
chloride is commonly used as the Lewis acid, accepting a pair of elec- 
trons from the halogen atom (Scheme 2.5). The electrophile may be a 
carbocation or perhaps more likely the complex shown. An alkylbenzene 
is produced. 
2.2.4 Friedel-Crafts Acylation 
Acylation can be achieved using either acyl halides or acid anhydrides. 
The product is a ketone. Acyl halides are more reactive than the anhy- 
drides, but still require a Lewis acid catalyst to promote the reaction 
(Scheme 2.6). The attacking species is the resonance-stabilized acylium 
ion or the complex. 
Scheme 2.6 
2.2.5 Sulfonation of Benzene 
Benzene itself is not attacked by concentrated sulfuric acid, but is read- 
ily converted to benzenesulfonic acid by fuming sulfuric acid. This is a 
solution of sulfur trioxide in concentrated sulfuric acid, and is known as 
oleum. Note here that the attacking electrophile is a neutral species and 
that the electron-deficient sulfur atom of SO, is the electrophilic centre 
(Scheme 2.7). 
Scheme 2.7 
Sulfonation differs from the other examples which have been discussed 
in that it can readily be reversed. Heating benzenesulfonic acid with dilute 
sulfuric acid or water converts it back to benzene. 

20 
Aromatic Chemistry 
2.2.6 Protonation 
Although benzene is a very weak base, it is protonated in concentrated 
sulfuric acid to a very slight extent. This reaction can be detected if the 
protonating mixture contains deuterium or tritium, the isotopes of 
hydrogen, since isotope exchange takes place. Some deuteriated benzene 
is produced when benzene is treated with D,SO,, and this can be detect- 
ed by mass spectrometry and NMR spectroscopy. The more deuterium 
there is in the protonation mixture, the more exchange occurs. Notice 
that the regeneration of the aromatic system occurs by elimination of a 
proton (Scheme 2.8). 
Scheme 2.8 
2.3 
Reactivity and Orientation in Electrophilic 
Aromatic Substitution 
How do derivatives of benzene behave towards electrophilic attack? 
Two experimental observations illustrate that the behaviour is quite 
varied. The rate of nitration of toluene is appreciably faster than that of 
benzene and produces a mixture of 2- and 4-nitrotoluenes. On the other 
hand, the nitration of nitrobenzene is more difficult than that of ben- 
zene and gives just one product, 1,3-dinitrobenzene (Scheme 2.9). 

Aromatic Substitution 
21 
A substituent in a benzene ring therefore influences the course of elec- 
Scheme 2.9 
trophilic substitution in two ways: 
It affects the reactivity of the molecule 
It controls the orientation of attack, i.e. which isomer is formed 
It is important to understand why this should happen. In the above 
examples, the two substituents, the methyl group and the nitro group, 
exhibit different electronic behaviour. The methyl group is an 
and so increases the electron density of the ring. The nitro group 
is an 
It is these properties that influence the course of the reactions of 
aromatic compounds with electrophiles. An electron-releasing group 
increases the electron density of the benzene ring, promoting electrophilic 
attack. Such substituents are known as 
. An electron- 
withdrawing group is 
and reduces the electron density of 
the ring, making attack by the electron-deficient reagent more difficult. 
Both types of substituents affect the electron density at all positions 
of the ring, but exert their greatest effects at the ortho and para positions, 
making these sites the most electron rich in the case of donor groups and 
most electron deficient when electron-withdrawing groups are present. 
Donor groups therefore direct attack of the electrophile to the ortho and 
para positions and are known as 
. Conversely, aro- 
matic compounds containing electron acceptor groups are attacked at 
the meta position since this is the least electron-deficient site. Such groups 
are called 
. Not all substituents fit exactly into this picture: 
halogens are deactivating but direct attack to the ortho and para posi- 
tions. 
and withdraws electron density from the ring. 
Electron-donating substituents activate the benzene ring to electro- 
philic attack, which results in the formation of the ortho- and para- 
disubstituted benzene derivatives. 
Electron-withdrawing substituents deactivate the ring to attack by 
electrophiles, which occurs at the meta position. 
Substituents exert their influence on a molecule through either the 0- 
bonds or the .Jc-bonding system, in other words by inductive and 
mesomeric (resonance) effects, respectively (see below). The interaction 

22 
Aromatic Chemistry 
influences both the electron density at the various ring positions and the 
stability of the intermediate carbocation. The outcome can be under- 
stood by superimposing the electronic effects of the substituents on the 
slow, rate-determining step of the general mechanism for electrophilic 
aromatic substitution discussed above. 
In a o-bond between two atoms of differing electronegativities there 
is an unequal sharing of the electron pair, with the electrons being attract- 
ed towards the more electronegative atom. This causes a permanent 
polarization of the molecule. This influence of an atom or group on the 
distribution of the electron pair is called the 
. Inductive 
effects rapidly die away along a saturated carbon chain (see 4). 
Substituents in an aromatic ring that withdraw electrons in this way 
exert a 
. They include not only halogens and the hydroxyl and 
nitro groups, where an electronegative atom is attached to the ring, but 
also groups such as carbonyl and nitrile in which an electron-deficient 
carbon atom is bonded to the ring. Alkyl groups behave in the opposite 
manner, exerting a 
is the analogous redistribution of electrons in 
n-bonds. However, this resonance effect is transmitted throughout the 
whole of a conjugated system and creates alternate polarity at the car- 
bon atoms along the system. Substituents that withdraw electron densi- 
ty in this way ( 
) include carbonyl (see 5 )  and nitro groups, 
whilst electron-releasing ( 
) functions include amino and hydroxy 
groups. 
Note that some groups can withdraw electrons by one of the two 
effects but release electrons by the other, although one of the effects usu- 
ally predominates. 
6 6 + &  6 
c-c-c-c-c1 
4 
and releasing electron density to the ring. 
The 
2.3.1 Groups which Donate Electrons by the Mesomeric 
Effect 
Groups (Z) in which the atom attached to the benzene ring possesses a 
lone pair of electrons can interact with the aromatic ring as shown in 6, 
promoting ortho and para attack. The ring becomes more electron rich 
and so the reaction with electrophiles is facilitated. You can think of the 
lone pair of electrons as being formally located at the ortho and para 
positions. 
In order to assess the influence that substituents have on the reactiv- 
ity of aromatic molecules, it is important to consider their effects not 
only on the benzene ring itself as above, but also on the carbocation 
intermediates resulting from electrophilic attack. These species are rela- 
tively unstable and any feature that affects their stability will influence 
their ease of formation and therefore the outcome of a reaction. 
We can illustrate the latter point by examining the attack by an elec- 

Aromatic Substitution 
23 
trophile E" on methoxybenzene (anisole) at the three possible sites of 
attack (Scheme 2.10). 
Consider first attack at the ortho position. The structure 7 has the 
positive charge located on the carbon atom to which the methoxy group 
is bonded. Notice that this is a 
, a species that is 
recognized as being particularly stable (remember nucleophilic aliphatic 
substitution reactions). An additional canonical structure can be drawn 
involving donation of the lone pair of electrons on the oxygen atom to 
the electron-deficient C'. 
This fourth canonical form confers extra 
stability on the intermediate and lowers the energy of the transition state 
leading to it. An oxonium species such as 8 is more stable than a 
carbocation, e.g. 7, and hence can be considered to contribute more to 
the resonance hybrid. 
A similar situation arises with species 9 associated with attack at the 
4-position and this carbocation intermediate is therefore also addition- 
ally stabilized by 10. However, no such structure can be drawn follow- 
ing meta attack and so the cation derived from this mode of attack is 
not additionally stabilized. 
The consequences of the involvement of the methoxy group are to 
stabilize especially the carbocations arising from ortho and para attack 
and to lower the energy of activation for their formation, as illustrated 
in Figure 2.2. Notice that even attack at the meta position has a lower 
activation energy than does benzene. 
Scheme 2.10 

24 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Figure 2.2 Energy profile for 
electrophilic attack on methoxy- 
benzene at the ortho, meta and 
para positions compared with 
benzene 
It should therefore be no surprise that the nitration of methoxyben- 
zene is easier and faster than that of benzene and yields essentially only 
the 1,2- and 1,4-isomers (in almost equal amounts). Less than 1% of 3- 
nitroanisole is formed. Other electrophilic reactions follow this pattern. 
and 
groups behave like a methoxy group. 
9 
in which the oxygen carries a full negative charge, are especially acti- 
vated towards electrophilic attack. 
atoms also fall into this category. Possessing a lone pair of 
electrons, they are able to stabilize the intermediate cation arising from 
ortholpara attack. However, the halogenobenzenes behave differently 
from methoxybenzene and aniline in that the reaction with electrophiles 
is slower than for benzene. The nitration of chlorobenzene is about 30 
times slower than that of benzene. Halogens are deactivating substituents 
and yet are ortholpara directors. As with methoxy and amino groups, 
the halogens withdraw electrons inductively, but donate them by the 
mesomeric effect. Only in the case of the halogens does the former effect 
dominate, with the consequence that the three intermediates from ortho, 
meta and para attack are all less stable than that arising from electrophilic 
attack of benzene. Nonetheless, ortholpara attack is still favoured because 
of the additional stabilization of the cations from the resonance forms 
&
J
E
 
0 
H E 
11 
12 
11 and 12. 
2.3.2 Groups which Withdraw Electrons by the 
Mesomeric Effect 
Substituents which fall into this category include 
and 
. All are characterized by the atom attached to the ring being 
linked to a more electronegative atom by a multiple bond and may be 
represented by X=Y, where Y is more electronegative than X (see Scheme 

Aromatic Substitution 
25 
2.11). Electrons are therefore attracted towards Y, making X more 
electron deficient and therefore more strongly electron withdrawing. 
Formally, a positive charge is placed on the ortho and para positions. 
Electrophilic attack on compounds which contain a substituent that 
withdraws electrons from the ring always leads to the 3-substituted com- 
pound, with very little of the 2- and 4-isomers being formed. The reac- 
tion is more difficult than for benzene, in keeping with the reduced 
electron density at the ring carbon atoms. 
Again, it is important to examine the intermediates formed by attack 
of an electrophile, E+, at the ortho, meta and para positions (Scheme 
2.12). This time, nitrobenzene will be used as the substrate. It should be 
noticed that in the structures 13 and 14 associated with ortho and para 
attack, a positive charge is placed on the carbon to which the substituent 
is attached. The resulting situation is destabilizing because positive 
charges are located on adjacent atoms. 
Scheme 2.1 I 
Scheme 2.12 

26 
Aromatic Chemistry 
I 
0 
0 
OR 
N 
II 
II 
I 
111 
o*+/o- 
C 
< 
< O=S=O 
< C < 
N 
Ar' 
'OR 
Ar'',R 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 2.3 Energy profile for 
electrophilic attack on nitroben- 
zene at the ortho, meta and para 
positions compared with benzene 
Figure 2.4 
While attack at the 3-position is still much slower than for benzene, 
no canonical form places positive charges on adjacent atoms and so the 
intermediate is less destabilized than those arising from ortho and para 
attack. Hence meta attack is the preferred reaction, as illustrated in 
Figure 2.3. For example, nitration of nitrobenzene gives 88% of 1,3- 
dinitrobenzene and only 8% and 1% of the 1,2- and 1,4-isomers, respec- 
tively. The reaction occurs at a relative rate of 6 x lo-* to that of benzene. 
The efficiency of electron withdrawal by substituents increases in the 
order shown in Figure 2.4. 
Ar 
Ar 
Ar 

Aromatic Substitution 
27 
Scheme 2.13 
2.3.3 Groups which Withdraw Electrons by the Inductive 
Effect 
Groups such as 
, CF,, and 
, R,N+, are 
unable to interact with the n-system, but withdraw electrons as a result 
of the electronegativity of the fluorine atoms and the positively charged 
nitrogen, respectively. A study of the canonical forms for electrophilic 
attack at the three sites indicates a situation similar to that discussed 
above for mesomerically withdrawing groups (Scheme 2.14). The inter- 
mediates are overall destabilized by electron withdrawal, but structures 
15 and 16 are particularly unfavourable because the positive charge is 
adjacent to the electron-deficient atom of the substituent. Thus, attack 
occurs preferentially at the 3-position, but is more difficult than elec- 
trophilic attack on benzene. 
2.3.4 Groups which Donate Electrons by the Inductive 
Effect 
It is well known that, in comparison to hydrogen, 
donate 
electrons. It is therefore to be expected that toluene and other alkylben- 
zenes will react with electrophiles rather more easily than benzene. 
This is certainly the case, toluene reacting with mixed acid at room 
temperature. 
The canonical forms that contribute to the structure of the inter- 
mediate carbocation are shown in Scheme 2.15. Once again, one con- 

28 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 2.14 
Scheme 2.15 

Aromatic Substitution 
29 
tributing form derived from attack at the 2- and the 4-positions has the 
positive charge located on the carbon atom to which the substituent is 
attached. It is noted that these structures, 17 and 18, are tertiary carbo- 
cations and that they are further stabilized by delocalization of the charge 
onto the methyl group, which therefore shares some of the electron 
deficiency. No such benefit results from attack at the 3-position, which 
is therefore not a favoured site for reaction. Nitration of toluene occurs 
about 25 times faster than that of benzene under similar conditions. It 
leads to a 2:l mixture of 2- and 4-nitrotoluenes; only about 5% of the 
product is the 3-isomer (remember there are two ortho positions but only 
one para position). 
The more efficient the alkyl group is at releasing electrons, the greater 
is the stabilization of the intermediate carbocation and the rate of elec- 
trophilic attack. Thus, tert-butylbenzene is nitrated faster than toluene. 
This picture is somewhat generalized, since there are some exceptions. 
For instance, the chlorination of toluene proceeds faster than that of 
tert- but ylbenzene. 
(Scheme 2.16) is at a maximum 
for a methyl group and has been offered as an explanation for these 
anomalies. 
Scheme 2.16 

30 
Aromatic Chemistry 
2.3.5 The Effects of Multiple Substitution 
In general, the effects of two substituents on the orientation and rate of 
electrophilic substitution are additive. The best product selectivity occurs 
when the two substituents are working together, but unfortunately this 
is not always the case. 
There are several guiding principles that help to decide the product in 
less obvious cases: 
Strongly activating groups dominate all other substituents 
Weakly activating groups next take control of orientation 
Deactivating groups exert the least control 
Steric effects often play a part in deciding the outcome of a reaction 
When devising a synthesis of a particular compound (the target mole- 
cule), the effects of substituents have to be taken into account. It is essen- 
tial to introduce substituents in the correct order so that their directing 
influence assists the synthesis rather than hinder it. Remember: 
ortho/para directors give mixtures of two isomers that can usually be 
separated 
meta directors give only the meta isomer 
ortho/para directing groups always overcome the influence of meta 
directors 
attack 
a 
strongly electron-withdrawing groups may prevent electrophilic 
1 
Aromatic hydrocarbons such as naphthalene (19) also undergo elec- 
trophilic substitution, although now not all ring positions of the parent 
hydrocarbon are equivalent. Nitration occurs almost exclusively in the 
1 - or a-position of naphthalene. Consideration of the contributing struc- 
tures to the hybrid carbocation indicates why this is so. For a-attack, 
the canonical structures include 20,21 and 22. Whereas in 20 and 21 the 
stable aromatic sextet is preserved, in 22 the aromaticity is disrupted. 
However, for attack at the 2- or P-position, only one structure, 23, can 
a2p 
19 

Aromatic Substitution 
31 
be drawn in which the aromatic sextet is preserved. It is therefore expect- 
ed that the carbocation produced during a-attack is more stable than 
that formed from P-attack and hence the rate of reaction at the a-posi- 
tion is significantly faster. 
The effects of substituents on the regioselectivity of electrophilic aro- 
matic substitution are summarized in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1 Reactivity and directing effects of substituent groups 
ortho/para directors 
meta directors 
Strongly activating groups 
NR,, NHR, NH,, 
NHCOCH, 
0-, OH, OR 
Weakly activating groups 
Al kyl , phenyl 
Weakly deactivating groups 
F, CI, Br, I 
Strongly deactivating groups 
NO,, 'NR, 
SO,H, 
CO,H, CO,R, COR 
CN, CF, 
2.4 
The Hammett Equation 
The relative ability of substituents in an aromatic ring to donate or with- 
draw electrons is indicated qualitatively by 
. It was observed that a plot of the logarithms of the rate constants 
(k) for the alkaline hydrolysis of esters of benzoic acid against the PKa 
values of the corresponding acids, XC,H,CO,H, was linear, i. e. 
where p (rho) and C are constants. 

32 
Aromatic Chemistry 
The line 
describes the point for the unsubstituted compounds (X = 13). 
Subtraction of equation (2.2) from equation (2.1) gives: 
Log k and PKa are related to free energies of activation and ionization, 
respectively, and hence a linear free energy relationship exists between 
the rates of ester hydrolysis and acid strengths. 
Similar correlations between rate and equilibrium constants exist for 
various other side-chain reactions of benzene derivatives. The magnitude 
of p, which is called the 
, is the slope of the line and 
varies with the reaction. The sign of p can be positive or negative accord- 
ing to whether the reaction rate is increased or decreased by the with- 
drawal of electrons. 
The term (PKaO - PKa) is given the symbol o (sigma) and is constant 
for given substituents. Equation 2.3 thus simplifies to: 
log klko = po 
(2.4) 
This is the 
The data for the ionization of benzoic acid and its derivatives in water 
at 25 "C are extensive and accurate and this was chosen as the standard 
reaction to which all other reactions would be compared. The value of 
p for the standard reaction is 1.00. 
, o, is a measure of the electron- 
donating or electron-withdrawing power of the particular substituent, 
with H being given a value of 0.00. Some typical values are listed in 
Table 2.2. These linear free energy correlations only apply to meta and 
para substituents in aromatic systems, since ortho substituents exert steric 
The 
Table 2.2 Hammett substituent constants for some substituents 
Substituen t 
Ometa 
Omra 
Substituen t 
Ometa 
Omra 
0- 
-0.71 
-1.00 
F 
+0.34 
+0.06 
NH2 
-0.16 
-0.66 
CI 
+0.37 
+0.23 
OH 
+0.12 
-0.37 
COCH3 
+0.38 
+0.50 
CH3 
-0.07 
-0.17 
CF3 
+0.43 
+0.54 
OCH3 
+0.11 
-0.27 
CN 
+0.56 
+0.66 
'
H
 
0.00 
0.00 
NO2 
+0.71 
+0.78 

Aromatic Substitution 
33 
effects which can alter the normal electronic behaviour. It can be seen 
that the more negative the value, the higher the electron-donating capac- 
ity of the group; substituents with a positive B value are electron with- 
drawing. 
The B values reflect the interaction of the substituents with the reac- 
tion centre. The methoxy group can exert only its -I effect in the meta 
position: the stronger +M effect dominates in the para position. 
Consequently, Ometa and opara have opposite signs for this group, 
indicating its electron-withdrawing and electron-donating ability, 
respectively . 
2.5 
Nucleophilic Aromatic Substitution 
There are two distinct and major mechanisms by which a 
can be introduced into the aromatic ring. In one, the nucleophi 
at a ring carbon atom and this type is covered in detail below 
ond method depends on an electron-rich species behaving as a 
attacking at hydrogen. This type of reaction is covered in 
Chapter 9 and is only briefly considered here. 
e attacks 
The sec- 
base and 
detail in 
2.5.1 By an Addition-Elimination Mechanism (S,Ar) 
Whereas electrophilic attack of benzene is both well known and impor- 
tant, the corresponding reaction with nucleophiles is very difficult and 
is not typical of aromatic compounds. However, if the aromatic ring is 
IT-electron deficient because an electron-withdrawing group (EWG) is 
present, then nucleophilic attack can occur. The mechanism for the addi- 
tion-elimination sequence for nucleophilic substitution is shown in 
Scheme 2.17. 
The initial attack disrupts the IT-cloud and the resulting intermediate 
species, a carbanion, is stabilized by resonance. There is a close similarity 
between this mechanism and that proposed earlier in this chapter for 
electrophilic attack on benzene, although in that reaction the inter- 
mediate was a carbocation. In both cases, this first step is usually the 
slower and therefore rate determining. 
Evidence to support this mechanism for nucleophilic substitution 
Scheme 2.17 

34 
Aromatic Chemistry 
includes isolation of several examples of the intermediate species and 
their structural determination by both NMR spectroscopy and X-ray 
crystallography. The intermediate species are called 
, many of which are strongly coloured. 
In the second step, aromaticity is restored through elimination of an 
ionic species and it is here that the two reaction types diverge: 
The nature of X- is of fundamental importance to the success of the reac- 
tion. Displacement of hydrogen is very difficult, because the hydride ion, 
H , is a very poor leaving group. Benzene itself does not react with nucle- 
ophiles. The important nucleophilic substitution reactions involve the 
displacement of a group other than hydride ion. The more effective 
leaving groups are the halogens, whose reactions are studied in Chapter 
9, the diazonium group (Chapter 8) and the sulfonic acid group 
(Chapter 5). The diazonium group is the most effective because a very 
stable nitrogen molecule results from the elimination step. In these reac- 
tions, nucleophilic attack occurs at the carbon atom to which the sub- 
stituent is attached. In the product, the nucleophile occupies the position 
of the original substituent. This process is called 
. Electrophilic @so substitution is discussed below. 
Aryl halides only undergo substitution with extreme difficulty unless 
activated by electron-withdrawing groups, the role of which is to stabi- 
lize the intermediate species and so lower the energy of activation of the 
first step. In this respect, they serve the same purpose as donor groups 
in electrophilic substitution reactions. Nitro, nitrile and carbonyl are typ- 
ical activating groups. Activation is best achieved when the group is ortho 
or para to the halogen, since both inductive and mesomeric withdrawal 
of electrons operate. The latter is of prime importance, providing addi- 
tional resonance stabilization of the negative charge of the intermediate. 
This is illustrated for 1-chloro-2-nitrobenzene (Scheme 2.18) and is fur- 
ther discussed in Chapter 9. A 3-substituent is much less efficient at pro- 
moting nucleophilic attack since only the -I effect assists the process. 
Note that an electron-withdrawing substituent also reduces the electron 
density of the ring, thereby helping the initial attack by the nucleophile. 
In electrophilic attack a proton, H+, is lost through abstraction by 
a base. 
In nucleophilic substitution the leaving group is X . 
2.5.2 By an Elimination-Addition Mechanism 
This topic is discussed in detail in Chapter 9 and only an outline is pre- 
sented here. When simple aryl halides react with strong bases such as 
the amide ion, NH,-, a hydrogen atom adjacent to the C-halogen unit 
is abstracted by the base. The resulting carbanion acts as a nucleophile 

Aromatic Substitution 
35 
Scheme 2.18 
and displaces the halide ion in an intramolecular process. The initial 
product is a highly reactive species called an aryne. It is rapidly attacked 
by NH, , or its protonated derivative NH,, now acting as a nucleophile. 
The final product, which results from protonation of a second carban- 
ion, is the new substituted benzene derivative (Scheme 2.19). 
Scheme 2.19 
2.6 
ips0 Substitution 
Electrophilic attack can also occur at a position already occupied by a 
substituent, the @so position. Such ips0 substitutions are not common, 
but they are industrially useful. An example is @so nitration by 
OH 
OH 
H03s7($Me 
aq. HN03 
HlS04 
02N@Me 
Me 
Me 
I 
I 
Me 
Me 
Scheme 2.20 

36 
Aromatic Chemistry 
displacement of a sulfonic acid group (Scheme 2.20). A proton can also 
displace the sulfonic acid group, with benzenesulfonic acid being con- 
verted into benzene. Nucleophilic ips0 substitution reactions also occur 
(see Section 2.5.1). 

Aromatic Substitution 
37 

Me 
1 
Me bMe 
2 o-xylene 
( 1,2-dirnethylbenzene) 
4. 
Me 
3 rn-xylene 
( I  ,3-dimethylbenzene) 
Me 
4 p-xylene 
( 1,4-dirnethylbenzene) 
Alkylbenzenes and 
Arylbenzenes 
3.1 
Introduction 
Benzene and its simple alkyl derivatives are the building blocks of the 
aromatic chemical industry and are also important solvents for many 
reactions and processes. The simplest derivative, 
(methyl benzene, 
l), is the source of a range of nitrotoluenes and is one of the most impor- 
tant industrial solvents. The three isomeric dimethylbenzenes, u-, m- and 
p-xylene (2-4) are often used as a mixture in industrial solvents. 
3.2 
Sources of Alkylbenzenes 
Traditionally, the source of benzene and toluene has been coal. Coke is 
produced for use in the steel industry and a by-product of this process 
is coal tar which, when distilled, provides benzene, toluene, xylenes, phe- 
nol and cresols (methylphenols), and naphthalene, the most abundant 
single component. 
However, the major source of these hydrocarbons is now petroleum. 
Although aromatic compounds do occur naturally in petroleum, they are 
mainly obtained by the process of catalytic reforming, in which aliphat- 
ic hydrocarbons are aromatized through dehydrogenation, cyclization 
and isomerization. The process, which is also known as 
, 
is carried out under pressure at 480-550 "C in the presence of a catalyst, 
typically chromium(II1) oxide or alumina. Benzene is thus produced from 

Alkylbenzenes and Arylbenzenes 
39 
hexane, and toluene from heptane. Octane gives rise to the three isomers 
of xylene and to ethylbenzene. Since more toluene than benzene is pro- 
duced in the process, a quantity of toluene is converted into benzene by 
. High temperature 
(650-680 "C) of longer 
chain alkanes, a process that breaks them down into smaller alkanes, is 
also a source of aromatic compounds. 
3.3 
Introduction of Alkyl Groups 
3.3. I Friedel-Crafts Reaction 
The most important means of introducing an alkyl group into an 
aromatic ring is the 
. In its simplest form, this is 
the reaction of an alkyl halide (halogenoalkane) with an aromatic 
compound, such as benzene, in the presence of a 
, commonly 
aluminium chloride (Scheme 3.1). 
L 
-1 
Scheme 3.1 
A wide range of reactants, catalysts, solvents and reaction conditions 
can be used, making the Friedel-Crafts reaction a very valuable and ver- 
satile process. 
As well as alkyl halides, alcohols and alkenes are direct sources of 
alkyl groups. Acyl chlorides and anhydrides are additional sources, but 
these involve the subsequent reduction of a carbonyl group (C=O) to a 
methylene (CH,) unit. 
A variety of catalysts, including other Lewis acids such as FeCl, and 
BF,, and the protic acids HF, phosphoric acid and sulfuric acid, has been 
used. In reactions using alcohols, the favoured catalyst is BF,; HF is 
often used in reactions involving alkenes. 
The reaction can be very fast, but can be moderated by the use of an 
inert solvent such as nitrobenzene or carbon disulfide. The temperature 
at which the reaction is carried out can vary from below room temper- 
ature to about 200 "C. 
However, there are several drawbacks to this alkylation reaction. The 
use of longer alkyl chains than ethyl can be complicated by isomerization 
of the alkyl group arising from carbonium ion hydride shifts. It is there- 
fore not uncommon for mixtures to be produced. In extreme cases, a 
completely different alkyl group from that of the starting material can 
be present in the product. 
A specific example is the alkylation of benzene with 1-chloropropane 

40 
Aromatic Chemistry 
in the presence of aluminium chloride. Propylbenzene (5) predominates 
when the reaction mixture is kept cold, but as the temperature is 
increased, isopropylbenzene (6) becomes the major product and at 80 "C 
accounts for approximately 70%0 of the mixture. 
Reaction conditions can also influence the orientation of substitution. 
An example is the reaction of toluene with chloromethane in the presence 
of aluminium chloride. At room temperature, a mixture of 1,2- and 
1,4-dimethylbenzenes results, but at 80 "C the product is mainly 
1,3-dimethylbenzene. In fact, heating either of the 1,2- or 1,4-isomers 
in the presence of aluminium chloridelhydrochloric acid results in 
rearrangement to the more stable 1,3-dirnethylbenzene. 
A further drawback results from the electron-donating nature of 
alkyl groups, which assists attack on the benzene ring by electrophiles. 
The initial product, an alkylbenzene, is therefore more reactive than the 
starting material and a second and even further alkylation may occur, 
leading to mixed products. 
Isomerization does not occur in the route that involves acylation and 
carbonyl reduction. This technique also prevents polysubstitution, since 
the acyl group is electron withdrawing and deactivates the ring to further 
elec tr o philic attack . 
Friedel-Crafts alkylation fails when the substrate contains more 
powerful electron-withdrawing groups than halogen. Nitrobenzene is 
therefore a useful solvent for the reaction. Aromatic amines, although 
reactive towards electrophilic attack (see Chapter 8), do not undergo 
alkylation. The lone pair of electrons on the N atom of the amino group 
forms a coordinate bond to the AlCl,, preventing its complexation to 
the alkyl halide. It should also be noted that the reaction does not work 
with aryl halides. 
5 
6 
3.3.2 Mechanism of the Friedel-Crafts Reaction 
In reactions involving alkyl halides, two mechanisms have been 
recognized which differ in the exact nature of the electrophile. One mech- 
anism involves an 
generated by abstraction of the halo- 
gen from the alkyl halide by the AlCl,. In the second processl;a complex 
formed between the halide and the Lewis acid such as [R-Cl-AlCl,] 
is 
the attacking electrophile. The difference between the two mechanisms 
is essentially whether an alkyl cation is actually formed (Scheme 3.2) and 
the effective mechanistic pathway may be somewhere between the two. 
In the first mechanism, the reaction involves attack of the cation on the 
benzene ring followed by abstraction of a proton by [AlCl,]-, which is 
formally converted into HC1 and AlCl,. 
In the second mechanism, the alkyl group is transferred to the aro- 
matic ring from the complex. 

Alkylbenzenes and Arylbenzenes 
41 
Scheme 3.2 
Alcohols and alkenes generate these carbocations in the presence of 
acids such as sulfuric acid (Scheme 3.3). Some alkyl cations rearrange to 
form the most stable ion, thus accounting for the isomerization noted 
earlier. 
Scheme 3.3 
In the case of acyl chlorides, reaction with the Lewis acid generates 
an electrophilic 
. These species show no tendency to rearrange 
(Scheme 3.4). Again, it is questionable whether a free cation is formed 
or if a complex between the acyl group and AlCl, is the attacking species. 
Scheme 3.4 
3.3.3 Wu rtz-Fi tt ig React ion 
Alkyl derivatives of benzene may be prepared by reacting an alkyl halide 
and an aryl halide with sodium in an inert solvent such as diethyl ether 
(Scheme 3.5). Although symmetrical by-products are also formed, it is 
possible to introduce long unbranched side-chains by this route without 
isomerization occurring. 
Scheme 3.5 

42 
Aromatic Chemistry 
3.4 
Reactions of Alkylbenzenes 
3.4.1 Reactions of the Ring 
An alkyl group activates the ring to electrophilic substitution mainly 
through an inductive effect and directs attack to the 2- and 4-positions. 
Examples of these reactions will appear throughout the book in the chap- 
ters on functionalized aromatic compounds. 
3.4.2 Reactions of the Side-chain 
Free Radical Halogenation 
In the presence of light, but in the absence of a Lewis acid catalyst, 
halogenation of toluene occurs in the methyl group by a free-radical 
mechanism. The reaction proceeds stepwise, leading eventually to 
(trichloromethy1)benzene (benzotrichloride, PhCCl,). With ethylbenzene, 
a similar reaction results; chlorination occurs initially at the a-position. 
c1 
8 

Alkylbenzenes and Arylbenzenes 
43 
Scheme 3.6 
Side-chain Oxidation 
Oxidation of aromatic systems containing alkyl side-chains results in the 
formation of a carboxylic acid, irrespective of the length of the side- 
chain. The usual oxidizing agents are potassium permanganate [potassi- 
um manganate(VII)] or chromic acid [chromium(VI) acid]. For example, 
1,4-dirnethylbenzene is oxidized to benzene- 1,4-dicarboxylic acid (tereph- 
thalic acid, 9), an important building block for polyesters. The oxida- 
tion of isopropylbenzene (cumene) to phenol is an important industrial 
process and is discussed in Chapter 4. 
Side-chain Dehydrogenation 
Styrene (phenylethene, 10) is an important industrial chemical, that is 
prepared by dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene at 600 "C over zinc oxide 
or chromium(II1) oxide on alumina (Scheme 3.7). Ethylbenzene can be 
produced from benzene and ethene by a Friedel-Crafts reaction. 
0 
H3P04 
- 
600°C 0" 
/ H*C=CH;? 
/ 
catalyst 
/ 
C02H 
I 
C02H 
9 
10 
Scheme 3.7 

44 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 3.8 
3.5 
Aryl Derivatives of Benzene 
There are two classes of compounds that can be considered to fall 
into this category. The simplest such derivative is 
(ll), in which 
two benzene rings are connected via a carbon-carbon single bond. This 
compound can be prepared by 
from bromobenzene or 
by the 
from benzenediazonium sulfate in the presence 
of ethanol and copper (Scheme 3.9), although yields are poor. Biphenyls 
may also be prepared using organometallic coupling (see Chapter 10). 
Br 
2Na 
Fittig 
___t 
CuEtOH 
Gomberg 
P 
Scheme 3.9 
Biphenyl undergoes typical electrophilic substitution reactions. The 
phenyl group is ortholpara directing. For example, the major product of 
mononitration is 4-nitrobiphenyl. Introduction of a second nitro group 
in the molecule occurs in the unsubstituted ring, also, mainly, in the 4'- 
position. This might be unexpected since a nitrophenyl group is electron 
withdrawing, and therefore meta directing. However, irrespective of the 
electronic properties of the mono substituent, electrophilic substitution 
of a second substituent generally occurs in the 4'-position of the unsub- 
stituted ring. The positive charge associated with the carbocation inter- 
mediate from para substitution can be delocalized into the second phenyl 
ring and so is efficiently stabilized. This is not the case with the Wheland 
intermediate from meta attack, which is therefore not the preferred site 
of substitution. You should draw these two possible intermediate cations 
and their resonance structures to confirm this. 

Alkylbenzenes and Arylbenzenes 
45 
The other type of compound considered here is where two benzene 
rings are bonded via a methylene bridge. The simplest such compound 
is diphenylmethane (12), which can be synthesized in a number of ways 
using Friedel-Crafts methodology. The reaction of an excess of benzene 
with dichloromethane in the presence of aluminium chloride results in 
the displacement of both halogen atoms. It can also be prepared from 
benzene and (chloromethyl)benzene, and from benzoyl chloride and ben- 
zene followed by reduction of the carbonyl group of the resulting ben- 
zophenone (Scheme 3.10). 
12 
Scheme 3.10 
Reactions of diphenylmethane are similar to those of biphenyl, since 
the benzyl group, C 6
:
 
H CH,, is also ortholparu directing, although bromi- 
nation results in reaction at the methylene group. 

46 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Phenols 
4.1 
Introduction 
Phenol (hydroxybenzene, 1) has a hydroxyl group attached directly to 
the benzene ring. Phenol is a stable enol and, although there are some 
obvious similarities, the hydroxyl group exhibits sufficiently different 
properties from an alcoholic hydroxyl group to merit a separate 
classification. 
4.2 
Industrial Synthetic Methods 
Although coal tar is still an industrial source of phenol and the three 
cresols (methylphenols), e. g. m-cresol (2), and the dimethyl derivatives 
(xylenols), synthetically manufactured material predominates. 
Most phenol nowadays is obtained from isopropylbenzene (cumene), 
which is oxidized by air in the 
(Scheme 4.1). Acetone 
(propanone) is a valuable by-product of the process and this route is a 
major source of this important solvent. The formation of cumene 
hydroperoxide proceeds by a free radical chain reaction initiated by the 
ready generation of the tertiary benzylic cumyl radical, which is a fur- 
ther illustration of the ease of attack at the benzylic position, especially 
by radicals (see Chapter 3). 
47 

48 
Aromatic Chemistry 
The mechanism is considered to proceed as shown in Scheme 4.1. 
Protonation of the cumene hydroperoxide results in loss of water, gen- 
erating an electron-deficient oxygen atom. A 1,2-shift of the phenyl group 
occurs, probably simultaneously. Finally, the protonated hemiketal 3 is 
hydrolysed under the acidic conditions to produce phenol and acetone. 
(see 
p. 108), is resistant to nucleophilic substitution under normal conditions, 
but in the 
, treatment with sodium hydroxide at 300 "C under 
high pressure is effective. Phenol may also be prepared from chloroben- 
zene by reaction with steam at 450 "C over a catalyst. 
Chlorobenzene, commercially produced by the 
Scheme 4.1 
4.3 
Laboratory Syntheses 
The hydroxyl group cannot be directly substituted into the aromatic ring, 
but is introduced through conversion of other substituents. 
4.3.1 From Arenesulfonic Acids 
S03H 
OH 
I 
I 
Scheme 4.2 
The fusion of alkali metal sulfonates with alkali in the presence of some 
water is used both in the laboratory and in industry (Scheme 4.2). 
4.3.2 From Aryl Halides 
There are two useful ways by which halogen can be displaced by a 
hydroxyl group. As discussed in Chapters 2 and 9, only aryl halides that 
are activated by electron-withdrawing groups are susceptible to nucle- 
ophilic substitution, when even water and aqueous sodium hydroxide 
can be effective reagents. A hydroxyl group can also be introduced by 
conversion of the aryl halide into a Grignard reagent or an aryllithium 
compound and subsequent reaction with oxygen or through the inter- 
mediacy of the boronic acid (see Chapter 10). 

Phenols 
49 
4.3.3 From Amino Compounds 
The amine is converted into a diazonium salt which is then warmed with 
water (see Chapter 8). 
4.3.4 Miscellaneous Methods 
There are a number of less frequently used methods for the preparation 
of phenols that are worthy of mention. The rearrangement of 2-hydroxy- 
benzaldehydes brought about by reaction with alkaline hydrogen per- 
oxide and leading to dihydroxybenzenes (the 
) is discussed 
in Section 4.8. The acid-catalysed rearrangement of phenylhydroxy- 
lamines, known as the 
, is useful for the syn- 
thesis of 4-aminophenols (Scheme 4.3). 
Scheme 4.3 
Scheme 4.4 

50 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 4.5 
4.4 
The Acidity of Phenols 
Phenols are converted into salts with strong alkalis such as sodium 
hydroxide, but not with sodium hydrogen carbonate solution. They are 
therefore stronger acids than alcohols but weaker than carboxylic acids. 
The pKa of phenol is 9.95 compared with 4.20 for benzoic acid and about 
17 for cyclohexanol. 
The acidity of phenols arises from the greater resonance stabilization 
of the phenoxide anion compared with phenol itself (Scheme 4.6). There 
is no energy-demanding separation of charge in the resonance structures 
Scheme 4.6 

Phenols 
51 
for the anion (7-9) as there is for phenol (4-6). Thus, the equilibrium 
between phenol and its anion is displaced towards the latter species, with 
a corresponding increase in acidity. 
The influence of ring substituents on the acidity of the phenolic group 
is dependent on the electronic properties of the substituent and its posi- 
tion in the ring relative to the hydroxyl group, Consider first the three 
mononitrophenols. In all cases, the electron-withdrawing inductive effect 
(-I) of the nitro group will cause an increase in acidity. However, the 
nitro group can also interact mesomerically with the hydroxyl group 
when it is in the 2- and 4-positions. The increased stabilization arising 
from the -M effect, illustrated by the contributing structure 10, has a 
marked effect on the acidity. Thus, both 2- and 4-nitrophenols (pK, 7.23 
and 7.15, respectively) are approximately 1000 times stronger acids than 
phenol. They are more than 10 times stronger than 3-nitrophenol (pKa 
8.40) in which the -M effect cannot operate. 
On the other hand, a methyl group exerts a weak +I effect and thus 
the methylphenols are slightly less acidic than phenol (e.g. 4-methylphe- 
nol, pK;, 10.14). 
4.5 
Reactions of the Hydroxy Group 
4.5.1 Ester Formation and Fries Rearrangement 
When treated with acid chlorides and acid anhydrides, phenols form 
esters. Under Friedel-Crafts conditions, phenolic esters undergo a 
in which the acyl group migrates to the 2- and 4-posi- 
tions. Thus, treatment of the ester 11 with aluminium chloride in an inert 
solvent gives a mixture of 2- and 4-hydroxyacetophenones [(hydroxy- 
pheny1)ethanonesl; C-acylation has occurred (Scheme 4.7). The two iso- 
mers are separable and this is a useful method for the production of 
phenolic ketones. The mechanism remains uncertain, but it would appear 
that the acylium ion (RCO+) is generated and that a Friedel-Crafts mech- 
anism operates. 
OH 
OCOMe 
OH 
OH 
11 
I 
COMe 
Scheme 4.7 

52 
Aromatic Chemistry 
4.5.2 Ether Formation 
When the sodium salt of a phenol is treated with an alkyl halide or an 
alkyl sulfate, 0-alkylation occurs and an ether is formed, usually in good 
yield. Methyl ethers such as anisole (methoxybenzene) can also be formed 
in excellent yield by treatment of a phenol with diazomethane (Scheme 
4.8). 
OH 
O-Na' 
OMe 
I 
I 
I 
Scheme 4.8 
A reaction peculiar to allyl aryl ethers is their rearrangement to 
allylphenols when heated. In this 
, the allyl group 
migrates to the 2-position. It is an example of a 
and 
proceeds through a cyclic, six-membered transition state (Scheme 4.9). 
The reaction has been investigated by labelling the y-carbon atom with 
the isotope 14C, marked with an asterisk in the scheme. The remote 
labelled carbon atom in the original allylphenol becomes the a-carbon 
attached to the ring in the product. If both ortho positions are occupied, 
then migration to the para position occurs in two stages and the label 
occupies the y-position as in the starting material. 
Scheme 4.9 

Phenols 
53 
Scheme 4.10 
Scheme 4.1 1 
4.6 
Reactions of the Ring 
4.6.1 Electrophilic Substitution 
Phenols are highly activated towards electrophilic attack, which occurs 
readily at the 2- and 4-positions. For example, phenol reacts with 
bromine at room temperature in ethanol and in the absence of a cata- 
lyst to give 2,4,6-tribromophenol. Other electrophilic substitution reac- 
tions such as nitration, sulfonation, Friedel-Crafts, chlorination and 
nitrosation also proceed readily and hence care is needed to ensure multi- 
substitution does not occur. Protection of specific ring positions can also 
prevent unwanted substitution. Relatively mild conditions are usually 
employed. 

54 
Aromatic Chemistry 
4.6.2 Reactions of the Phenoxide Ion 
Under alkaline conditions, the phenoxide ion is formed, which is even 
more nucleophilic than phenol and hence more reactive. A number of 
C-C bond-forming reactions take place under these conditions. 
An important reaction of phenols is the attack by weakly electrophilic 
arenediazonium salts in aqueous alkaline solution at below 5 "C to form 
azo dyes. This coupling reaction is discussed in Chapter 8. 
The Reimer-Tiemann Reaction 
Treatment of a phenol with chloroform (trichloromethane) in the pres- 
ence of hydroxide ion results in the synthesis of a 2-hydroxybenzalde- 
hyde through C-formylation. Dichlorocarbene, :CCl,, is generated by the 
action of base on chloroform and this highly reactive electrophile then 
attacks the phenoxide. The mechanism of the 
is given in Scheme 4.12. 
Scheme 4.12 
The Kolbe-Schmidt Reaction 
The phenoxide ion is sufficiently nucleophilic to be attacked by carbon 
dioxide, providing a useful method for the introduction of a carboxylic 
acid group; ortho carboxylation takes place at 120-140 "C. The product 
of the 
on phenol is 2-hydroxybenzoic acid (sal- 
icylic acid) (Scheme 4.13). 
Scheme 4.13 

Phenols 
55 
With Formaldehyde 
In aqueous alkaline solution, phenol reacts with formaldehyde 
(methanal) at low temperatures to form a mixture of 2- and 4-hydroxy- 
benzyl alcohols. This 
is another example of 
electrophilic attack which results in the formation of a new C-C bond. 
The mechanism is illustrated in Scheme 4.14. These products readily lose 
water to form quinomethanes (methylenecyclohexadienones), which 
react with more phenoxide. This process is repeated over and over again 
to produce a cross-linked polymer or phenol-formaldehyde resin (e. g. 
Bakelite) in which the aromatic rings are linked to methylene bridges. 
Reaction of 2,4,5-trichlorophenol (the antiseptic TCP) with HCHO 
yields hexachlorophene, a widely used germicide. 
4.7 
Dihydroxybenzenes 
Scheme 4.14 
The dihydroxybenzenes or dihydric phenols 15-17 have trivial names as 
shown. 
OH 
I 
OH 
&OH 
OH 
c i  
OH 
OH 
15 1,2-Dihydroxybenzene 
16 1,3-Dihydroxybenzene 
17 1,4-Dihydroxybenzene 
(catechol) 
(resorcinol) 
(hydroquinone) 
1,2-Dihydroxybenzene may be prepared from 2-hydroxybenzaldehyde 
by the 
which involves oxidation in alkaline solution by 
hydrogen peroxide (Scheme 4.15). The reaction involves a 1,2-shift to an 
electron-deficient oxygen and is similar to the cumene process used to 
synthesize phenol (Section 4.2). 
1,3-Dihydroxybenzene is prepared industrially by the alkali fusion of 
benzene- 1,3-disulfonic acid. 1,4-Dihydroxybenzene is prepared in large 
quantities for use as a photographic developer, one process being by the 
oxidation of aniline with manganese dioxide [manganese(IV) oxide] in 
sulfuric acid to give benzo-1,4-quinone, which is then reduced to 1,4- 
dihydroxybenzene (hydroquinone, quinol). 

56 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 4.15 

Phenols 
57 

Aromatic Acids 
5.1 
Introduction 
Both the sulfonic acid (-S0,H) and the carboxylic acid (-C0,H) groups 
are encountered in aromatic molecules. Introduction of one sulfonic acid 
group into the benzene ring gives 
(l), derivatives of 
which are named as the substituted benzenesulfonic acid. The corre- 
sponding carboxylic acid is 
(2) - 
5.2 
Introduction of Acidic Groups 
The methods of introducing the two groups are quite different. Sulfonic acids 
are usually obtained by direct electrophilic substitution, whilst carboxylic 
acids are produced through the conversion of another functional group. 
5.2.1 Introduction of the Sulfonic Acid Group 
Benzene reacts slowly with hot sulfuric acid to produce benzenesulfonic 
acid. The attacking electrophile, the cation 4, is generated by the self- 
protonation of sulfuric acid and reacts with the benzene ring in the nor- 
mal manner (Scheme 5.1). 

Aromatic Acids 
59 
Scheme 5.1 
Dissolving sulfur trioxide, SO,, in sulfuric acid forms the same cation 
and these solutions, known as oleum or fuming sulfuric acid, readily sul- 
fonate benzene and even less reactive aromatic systems. 
There is some evidence from kinetic studies that the electron-deficient 
and therefore electrophilic sulfur trioxide is itself the attacking species, 
when the mechanistic pathway follows that illustrated in Scheme 5.2. 
Chlorosulfonic acid also effects direct sulfonation, although when 
used in excess the product is the sulfonyl chloride; subsequent hydroly- 
sis leads to the acid (Scheme 5.3). 
Scheme 5.2 
S03H 
SO2Cl 
8 
ClS03H, 0 
ClSORH* 6 
H30+, 
Scheme 5.3 
5.2.2 Introduction of the Carboxylic Acid Group 
Oxidative Methods 
A variety of oxidizing agents, including potassium permanganate 
[potassium manganate(VII)], chromium trioxide [chromium(VI) oxide] 
in sulfuric acid, potassium dichromate and hydrogen peroxide, convert 
alcohols, aldehydes, alkyl and halogenated alkyl groups to carboxylic 
acids (Scheme 5.4). For instance, benzaldehyde is readily oxidized to 
benzoic acid in good yield by potassium permanganate. 

60 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 5.4 
[OI 
ArCH20H - 
ArCHO 
[OI 
P I  
[OI 
1 [OI 
ArCH2Cl - 
ArCH20H - 
ArC02H - 
ArCH3 
Hydrolytic Methods 
Hydrolysis of acid chlorides, acid anhydrides, esters and carboxamides 
leads to the carboxylic acid, although these compounds are often derived 
from a carboxylic acid group in the first place (Scheme 5.5). Nitriles are 
usually derived from amines via diazotization and reaction with copper(1) 
cyanide (see Chapter 8) and so the hydrolysis of a nitrile group is of 
more value. In all cases, alkaline hydrolysis gives the salt of the acid, 
from which the free acid is obtained by addition of mineral acid. 
OH- 
7 
ArCoC1 
ArCN - 
ArC02Na 
ArCONH2 
< 
Scheme 5.5 
Miscellaneous Methods 
Aromatic carboxylic acids are readily prepared from aryl halides by con- 
version to the Grignard reagent or aryllithium compound and subse- 
quent reaction with carbon dioxide (see Chapter 10). 
Benzoic acid is prepared industrially by the oxidation of toluene using 
air at 170 "C over a catalyst of cobalt and manganese acetate. An alter- 
native route involves the hydrolysis of (trichloromethy1)benzene using 
aqueous calcium hydroxide in the presence of iron powder as catalyst; 
PhCCl, is prepared by chlorination of toluene in the presence of light. 
5.3 
Reactions of Aromatic Acids 
5.3.1 Reactions of the Acid Group 
Sulfonic acids and carboxylic acids can be converted into their acid chlo- 
rides by treatment with phosphorus pentachloride or phosphorus oxy- 
chloride. Thionyl chloride, SOCl,, is effective for the synthesis of acyl 
chlorides, and sulfonyl chlorides can be prepared directly from the aro- 
matic compound by reaction with an excess of chlorosulfonic acid. The 
acid chlorides are efficient Friedel-Crafts acylating agents, yielding sul- 

Aromatic Acids 
61 
fones, ArSO,Ph, and ketones, ArCOPh. They react readily with alcohols 
to form esters and with ammonia or amines to form sulfonamides or car- 
boxamides (Scheme 5.6). The reaction of benzoyl chloride, PhCOCl, with 
amines in the presence of aqueous sodium hydroxide is known as the 
and has been used to characterize amines. 
ClS03H 
> 
ArS02NHR 
SOCl* 
RNH2 
ArC02H - 
ArCOCl - 
ArCONHR 
ArS03H 7 
ArS02Cl 
POC13 
ArS020R 
1 ROH 
I - 
ArC02R 
ROH, catalyst 
Scheme 5.6 
Scheme 5.7 
Scheme 5.8 

62 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Benzoic acid anhydride is formed by the reaction of sodium benzoate 
with benzoyl chloride. Dibenzoyl peroxide and peroxybenzoic acid can 
be prepared from the acid chloride by reaction with hydrogen peroxide 
(Scheme 5.9). 
Scheme 5.9 
5.3.2 Displacement Reactions of the Sulfonic Acid 
Group 
The sulfonation reaction is reversible and benzenesulfonic acid may be 
desulfonated by treatment with dilute acid at 150 "C. The group can be 
displaced by fusion of its salt with sodamide to give the corresponding 
amine, with sodium hydroxide to give the phenol, sodium cyanide to give 
the nitrile, and potassium hydrogen sulfide to give the benzenethiol 
(Scheme 5.10). 
c$ 
Scheme 5.1 0 
The sulfonic acid group can undergo @so substitution (see Chapter 2) 
with nitric acid, resulting in the introduction of a nitro group. 
5.3.3 Reactions of the Ring 
Both the sulfonic acid group and the carboxylic acid group are deacti- 
vating and meta directing. Thus further electrophilic attack requires rel- 
atively forcing conditions. 

Aromatic Acids 
63 
5.4 
Acidity of Aromatic Acids 
Aromatic sulfonic acids are strong acids, of similar strength to sulfuric 
acid. p-Toluenesulfonic acid (4-TsOH) is used as an acid catalyst in var- 
ious reactions. 
Benzoic acids are weaker than sulfonic acids, benzoic acid itself hav- 
ing a pK, of 4.17. 
Any feature that stabilizes the anion relative to the parent acid will 
force the equilibrium below towards the anion and thus increase the 
acidity: 
RCOOH + H,O + RCOO- + H,O+ 
The carboxyl group withdraws electron density from the aromatic ring, 
which implies that the ring donates electrons to the carboxyl group as 
illustrated by structures 5 and 6 in Scheme 5.1 1. Such behaviour is acid 
weakening and benzoic acid (pK, 4.17) is weaker than formic acid 
(methanoic acid, HC0,H; pKa 3.75). Note that electron donation by the 
phenyl group is apparently less than that of a methyl group, since acetic 
acid (ethanoic acid; pK, 4.76) is a weaker acid than benzoic acid. 
Scheme 5.11 
Substituents in the 3- and 4-positions of the phenyl ring influence the 
acidity of benzoic acids in accordance with their ability to donate or 
withdraw electron density from the carboxyl function. Electron-donating 
substituents decrease the acidity through their +I and +M effects; this 
effect is quite small, as can be seen from the data in Table 5.1. 
Groups that reduce the electron density at the carbon atom to which 
the carboxylic acid group is attached assist proton release and increase 
the acidity. In cases where the substituent can exert both -I and -M 
effects, the 4-isomer is a stronger acid than the 3-substituted compound, 
for which only inductive withdrawal can operate. Thus, 4-nitrobenzoic 
acid is a stronger acid than 3-nitrobenzoic acid, but both are stronger 
than benzoic acid. The converse applies for a -I/+M substituents such 
as methoxy, since the mesomeric effect decreases the acidity of 4- 
methoxybenzoic acid (pK, 4.47), whereas the electron-withdrawing 

64 
Aromatic Chemistry 
aco2H 
8 C02H 
@: 
\ 
0 
9 
0 
10 
Table 5.1 Acidity of some substituted benzoic acids 
H 
Me 
OMe 
OH 
CI 
NO2 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
ortho 
meta 
para 
4.17 
4.17 
4.17 
3.91 
4.27 
4.37 
4.09 
4.09 
4.47 
2.98 
4.08 
4.58 
2.17 
3.49 
3.43 
2.94 
3.83 
3.98 
inductive effect alone operates in 3-methoxybenzoic acid, making it a 
slightly stronger acid (pK, 4.09) than benzoic acid. 
It is less easy to predict the influence that 2-substituents have on the 
acidity of benzoic acids because other effects may operate as a result of 
the closeness of the two functions. Intramolecular hydrogen bonding 
between the carboxy carbonyl group and a 2-substituent markedly 
increases the acidity through the greater stabilization of the anion. For 
example, 2-hydroxybenzoic acid (salicylic acid, pKa 2.98) is a stronger 
acid than the two isomeric hydroxybenzoic acids because of the efficient 
stabilization of the anion 7. An ortho substituent may also exert a steric 
effect that reduces the co-planarity of the carboxyl group with the aro- 
matic ring, thereby decreasing electron donation by the ring and so 
increasing the acidity. 
In summary, electron-withdrawing groups increase acidity and elec- 
tron-donating systems decrease acidity when in the 3- and 4-positions. 
2-Substituents generally increase acidity. 
5.5 
Compounds with More Than One Acidic Group 
The benzenedisulfonic acids are of little interest, except that benzene- 1,3- 
disulfonic acid is a source of 1,3-dihydroxybenzene (see Chapter 4). The 
benzene dicarboxylic acids are more important. Benzene- 1,2-dicarboxylic 
acid (phthalic acid, 8) can be converted into phthalic anhydride (9), which 
is a typical acid anhydride, reacting with amines and alcohols and also 
taking part in Friedel-Crafts reactions. Phthalimide (lo), produced by 
reaction of the anhydride with ammonia, is weakly acidic and forms a 
potassium salt with ethanolic potassium hydroxide. 
of primary amines, potassium phthalimide is 
reacted with an alkyl halide and the resulting N-alkylphthalimide is 
hydrolysed to release the amine and phthalic acid (Scheme 5.12). This 
route is also used in the synthesis of amino acids. 
1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid is used as its dimethyl ester in the syn- 
In 

Aromatic Acids 
65 
thesis of poly(ethy1ene terephthalate) (PET), two commercial names of 
Scheme 5.12 
which are Terylene and Dacron, used in the manufacture of clothing, 
carpets and drinks bottles. 
5.6 
Side-chain Acids 
Phenylacetic acid (phenylethanoic acid, 1 l), the simplest example of this 
type of compound, is prepared from benzyl chloride by the S, displace- 
ment of chloride by cyanide ion and subsequent hydrolysis to the acid 
(Scheme 5.1 3). 
KCN 
aq. HCI 
PhCH2Cl - 
PhCH2CN 
PhCH2C02H 
retlux 
I 
I 
Scheme 5.13 
Unsaturated side-chains are present in the cinnamic acids, some of 
which occur naturally in the trans form 12. Syntheses of the acids and 
their esters by the Claisen condensation and the Perkin and Knoevenagel 
reactions are discussed in Chapter 6. 
11 
Ph 
H 
,c=c \ 
H 
C02H 
12 
3-Phenylpropynoic acid (13) can be prepared from cinnamic acid 
esters by the addition of bromine to the double bond followed by dehy- 
drobromination with alcoholic potassium hydroxide (Scheme 5.14). 
Br2 
1 .  KOH, EtOH 
PhCH=CHC02Et - 
PhCHBrCHBrC02Et 
PhC=CC02H 
2. H+ 
13 
Scheme 5.14 

66 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Aromatic Aldehydes, Ketones 
and Alcohols 
6.1 
Introduction 
Aromatic aldehydes and ketones show the usual reactions associated with 
a carbonyl group, but they display further reactions arising from the 
influence of the aromatic environment. This chapter describes synthetic 
routes to and the chemistries of benzaldehyde (1) and acetophenone 
(phenylethanone, 2) and their derivatives. 
In aromatic alcohols, of which the simplest example is benzyl alcohol 
(phenylmethanol, 3), the hydroxyl group is present in an aliphatic side 
chain. Hence they are best regarded as aryl-substituted alcohols. Their 
properties are significantly different from those of phenols, but are typ- 
ical of alcohols. 
6.2 
Aromatic Alcohols 
6.2.1 Synthesis of Aromatic Alcohols 
Benzyl alcohol (3) can be synthesized by the hydrolysis of 
(chloromethy1)benzene (benzyl chloride) (see Chapter 9) and by the 
67 

68 
Aromatic Chemistry 
reduction of benzaldehyde with sodium borohydride [sodium tetrahy- 
dridoborate(III)] (Scheme 6.1). 
NaOH 
NaBH4 
PhCH2C1 - 
PhCHzOH - 
PhCHO 
Scheme 6.1 
Reduction of the carbonyl function in acetophenones using sodium in 
ethanol also produces an alcohol. More complex aromatic alcohols may 
be prepared from carbonyl compounds by reaction with Grignard 
reagents followed by hydrolysis (see Chapter 10). 
6.2.2 Reactions of Aromatic Alcohols 
The typical reactions of the alcohol group include their conversion to 
ethers and esters by reaction with alkyl halides and with acid chlorides 
or anhydrides, respectively (Scheme 6.2). The benzyl ether group is 
readily cleaved by hydrogenolysis and is often used as a protecting group 
for alcohols. Primary alcohols are oxidized initially to the aldehyde and 
then to the carboxylic acid. 
Scheme 6.2 
1. Na 
[OI 
[OI 
PhCHzOCH2Ph + 
PhCHzOH - 
PhCHO - 
PhCOzH 
2. PhCHzCI 
1 AcCl 
PhCH20Ac 
The CH,OH group is ortholpara directing towards electrophilic attack. 
Nitration and sulfonation are possible, but care must be taken to avoid 
interaction with the hydroxyl group. It is sometimes preferable to carry 
out the electrophilic substitution reaction on the appropriate benzyl 
halide and then to hydrolyse the product to the substituted alcohol. 
6.3 
Aromatic Aldehydes 
6.3.1 Introduction of the Aldehyde Group 
Benzaldehyde is prepared by the hydrolysis of (dichloromethy1)benzene 
(benzal chloride) in either aqueous acid or aqueous alkali and by the 
oxidation of toluene with chromium trioxide in acetic anhydride (Scheme 
6.3). In the latter synthesis, as the benzaldehyde is formed, it is converted 
into its diacetate by the acetic anhydride, so preventing further oxida- 
tion; subsequent hydrolysis generates the aldehyde group. The ben- 
zaldehyde has thus been protected from oxidation. Benzyl alcohol can 

Aromatic Aldehydes, Ketones and Alcohols 
69 
also be oxidized to benzaldehyde using chromium trioxide in acetic 
anhydride. 
OH- 
H+ 
Cr03, Ac2O 
PhCHC12 - 
PhCHO - 
PhCH(0Ac)Z 
PhMe 
Cr03, Ac20 
PhCH20H 
Scheme 6.3 
There are several methods for the direct introduction of an aldehyde 
group into an aromatic compound. In the 
7 
activated aromatic systems such as aryl ethers and dialkylanilines are 
formylated by a mixture of dimethylformamide, HCONMe,, and phos- 
phorus oxychloride, POCl,, (Scheme 6.4). The yrocess involves elec- 
trophilic attack by a chloroiminium ion, Me,N=CHCl, formed by 
interaction of dimethylformamide 
and phosphorus 
oxychloride. 
Hydrolysis of the dimethyl imine completes the synthesis. 
Scheme 6.4 
The 
, in which carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen chloride are bubbled through a solution containing benzene 
and aluminium chloride, is a furtFer example of direct formylation 
(Scheme 6.5). The formyl cation, HC=O, is thought to be the attacking 
electrophile, though it is probably complexed to Al. 

70 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 6.5 
Scheme 6.6 
Scheme 6.7 
I 
I 
In a related reaction, the 
, the carbon 
monoxide of the previous reaction is replaced by hydrogen cyanide 
(Scheme 6.6). This reaction gives poor yields with benzene itself, but is 
successful with activated species such as aryl ethers and phenols. The 
reaction proceeds via an aryl imine and the mechanism is not dissimilar 
to that of the Vilsmeier-Haack reaction. 
AlCI3 
HC1+ HCN - 
HN=CHCl 
HC=NH 
CHO 
The synthesis of aldehydes by the 
, the 
and the 
all involve the conversion of a group 
already present in the molecule. The Rosenmund reduction (Scheme 6.7) is 
the catalytic hydrogenation of a benzoyl chloride in the presence of a cata- 
lyst poison, quinolinelsulfur, which prevents over-reduction to the alcohol. 
In the Stephens reaction (Scheme 6.7), a nitrile group is reduced by tin(T1) 
chloride and hydrochloric acid to an imine salt, which is then hydrolysed. 
The Sommelet reaction (Scheme 6.8) involves refluxing (chloromethy1)- 
benzene in aqueous ethanolic solution with hexamethylenetetramine 
followed by acidification. 

Aromatic Aldehydes, Ketones and Alcohols 
71 
6.3.2 Reactions of Aldehydes 
Reactions at Ring Carbon 
The aldehyde group deactivates the ring and is meta directing. There are 
few useful examples, since not only is electrophilic attack more difficult 
than for benzene, but also the aldehyde group is prone to oxidation 
during the attack. Substituted benzaldehydes are therefore usually syn- 
thesized by functional group transformations or by direct formylation. 
Reactions of the Aldehyde Group 
The carbonyl group is a reactive function and, although aromatic 
aldehydes are somewhat less reactive than their aliphatic counterparts, 
benzaldehydes have an extensive chemistry. Many reactions replicate 
those of aliphatic aldehydes, but are mentioned here for completeness. 
Thus, oxidation of the carbonyl group leads to carboxylic acids and 
reduction gives alcohols. The aldehyde group reacts with a range of N- 
nucleophiles (Scheme 6.9). Imines (Schiff bases) are formed with amines 
and hydrazones with hydrazines. Semicarbazide gives semicarbazones 
and hydroxylamine forms oximes. 
Scheme 6.8 
Scheme 6.9 
The mechanism proceeds by nucleophilic attack of the nitrogen lone 
pair at the electron-deficient carbonyl carbon atom; protonation and 
elimination of water complete the reaction (Scheme 6.10). 
It is not uncommon to add a trace of acid to promote these reactions. 

72 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 6.10 
Under these conditions, the carbonyl group is protonated, effectively 
increasing the electron deficiency of the carbon atom. 
Aromatic aldehydes react with sodium hydrogen sulfite to yield 
compounds. Further reaction with sodium cyanide forms the 
hydroxynitrile (cyanohydrin), which can sometimes be formed directly 
from the aldehyde by reaction with hydrogen cyanide (Scheme 6.1 1). 
n 
H 
OH 
n 
I 
H 
S03Na 
CN 
H 
Scheme 6.11 
Aromatic aldehydes generally do not produce cyanohydrins on reaction 
with hydrogen cyanide, but undergo the 
(Scheme 
6.12). The initial product from nucleophilic attack by cyanide ion is depro- 
tonated to form a resonance-stabilized carbanion, which attacks a second 
molecule of the aldehyde. Elimination of HCN leads to an a-hydroxy 
ketone, benzoin (2-hydroxy- 1,2-diphenylethanone). The benzoin conden- 
sation is catalysed specifically by cyanide ion, which assists in both the for- 
mation and stabilization of the carbanion. The reaction is limited to 
aromatic aldehydes, since the aryl ring also stabilizes the anion. 
Scheme 6.12 
In the presence of sodium hydroxide, benzaldehyde undergoes the 
in which two molecules of the aldehyde react to pro- 
duce one molecule of benzoic acid and one molecule of benzyl alcohol 
(Scheme 6.13). The mechanism involves initial attack by a nucleophile, 
OH- in this case, followed by hydride ion transfer. 

Aromatic Aldehydes, Ketones and Alcohols 
73 
Scheme 6.13 
A major structural difference between aromatic aldehydes and most 
aliphatic analogues is that the former lack an a-hydrogen atom. As a 
consequence, they are unable to enolize and so enolateslcarbanions 
cannot be generated from them. Nevertheless, aromatic aldehydes can 
react with carbanions derived from, for example, aldehydes, ketones, 
esters and anhydrides, and so undergo a range of condensation reactions. 
Scheme 6.14 
Scheme 6.15 

74 
Aromatic Chemistry 
In the 
, aliphatic aldehydes and ketones are the 
sources of the carbanion and the products are unsaturated aldehydes and 
ketones. In the reaction with acetaldehyde (ethanal), cinnamaldehyde (3- 
phenylpropenal) is formed. With acetone, 4-phenylbut-3-enone (benzyli- 
deneacetone) is the product (Scheme 6.18). The reaction is generally 
applicable and a large variety of products have been obtained in this 
way, some of which are used in perfumery. 
Scheme 6.19 
MeCOMe 
MeCHO 
NaOH 
ArCHO 
ArCH=CHCHO 
ArCH=CHCOMe * NaOH 
~~ 
~ 
Scheme 6.18 
The synthesis of ethyl cinnamates (ethyl 3-phenylpropenoates) by the 
involves generation of a carbanion, :CH7C0,Et, 
from ethyl acetate or other ester (Scheme 6.19). 
NaOEt 
ArCHO + MeC02Et - 
ArCH=CHC02Et 

Aromatic Aldehydes, Ketones and Alcohols 
75 
The 
(Scheme 6.20) involves the reaction of aro- 
matic aldehydes with a variety of molecules CH,XY. The groups X and 
Y may be the same or different, but are invariably electron withdraw- 
ing, so creating an activated methylene group from which the carbanion 
:CHXY is produced. The reaction is usually carried out in pyridine solu- 
tion, with piperidine as the basic catalyst. The reactions of benzaldehyde 
with propane- 1,3-dinitrile [malononitrile, CH,(CN),] 
and diethyl 
propane- 1,3-dioate [diethyl malonate, CH,(CO,Et),] are illustrative. In 
both cases, manipulation of the CH=CX, group in the product allows 
the synthesis of other compounds. 
base 
PhCHO + CH2(CN)2 - 
PhCH=C(CN)2 
Scheme 6.20 
Scheme 6.21 
In the 
, the carbanion is generated by abstraction of 
an a-hydrogen from an acid anhydride, with the anion of the corre- 
sponding acid acting as the base, For example, reaction of benzaldehyde 
with acetic anhydride in the presence of sodium acetate at high temper- 
ature yields 3-phenylpropenoic acid (Scheme 6.22). Although the mech- 

76 
Aromatic Chemistry 
anism follows the general pathway, in this instance a cyclic intermediate 
is involved. 
Scheme 6.22 
6.4 
Aromatic Ketones 
6.4.1 Introduction 
Aromatic ketones may contain one aryl ring and one alkyl chain, such 
as acetophenone (2), or two aryl rings such as benzophenone (diphenyl- 
methanone, 4). Molecules containing a carbonyl group in a side chain 
show normal aliphatic behaviour and are not considered here. Aromatic 
ketones generally behave in a similar manner to aldehydes (see Scheme 
6.9) but are slightly less reactive. 
6.4.2 Introduction of the Ketone Group 
Both acyl and aroyl halides and anhydrides react with aromatic com- 
pounds under Friedel--Crafts conditions to yield aromatic ketones 
(Scheme 6.23). 
Scheme 6.23 
1 
AIC1-j 
ArH + RCOCl - 
ArCOR 
__ 
Highly activated aromatic compounds such as dihydric phenols can be 
acylated by reaction with an aliphatic nitrile in the presence of a Lewis acid, 
usually zinc chloride, and hydrogen chloride (Scheme 6.24). The 
is a variation of the Gattermann formylation and proceeds 
via an iminium salt, which is isolated and subsequently hydrolysed. 

Aromatic Aldehydes, Ketones and Alcohols 
77 
Scheme 6.24 

78 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Nitro Compounds 
7.1 
Introduction 
The nitration of benzene was discussed briefly as an example of elec- 
trophilic substitution in Chapter 2, when the 
(NO2+) was 
highlighted as the attacking electrophile. This reaction has probably 
received more mechanistic study than any other single reaction in aro- 
matic chemistry. It is an important means of introducing functionality 
into the aromatic ring because the nitro group can readily be reduced to 
the amino group, thus providing access to many other functional groups, 
as described in Chapter 8. 
7.2 
Introduction of the Nitro Group 
7.2.1 Direct Nitration 
The most common method of introducing a nitro group into an aro- 
matic compound is by direct nitration and a variety of reagents have 
been used to achieve this. The choice of experimental conditions for the 
nitration of a substituted aromatic compound is based on the nature of 
the substituent. Thus, compounds containing an electron-withdrawing 
group generally require more forcing conditions and give the 3-nitro 
79 

80 
Aromatic Chemistry 
derivative, as described in Chapter 2, whereas those substituted with an 
electron donor are more easily nitrated than is benzene and produce a 
mixture of the 2- and 4-isomers. Note that some substituents are sensi- 
tive to the oxidizing power of nitric acid. 
The standard method of nitration uses a mixture of concentrated nitric 
acid and concentrated sulfuric acid, but when stronger conditions are 
required, fuming nitric acid can replace the concentrated reagent. For 
example, benzene is readily nitrated by mixed acid, but nitration of 
nitrobenzene requires fuming nitric acid in concentrated sulfuric acid 
(Scheme 7.1). 
Scheme 7.1 
Nitric acid alone fails to nitrate benzene and sulfuric acid also does 
not readily react with it, yet the mixed acid is an efficient nitrating 
reagent. Solutions of nitric acid in sulfuric acid show an approximately 
four-fold molar freezing-point depression and this has been attributed 
to the generation of four ions, as shown in equation (1): 
HNO, + 2H2S0, + NO,+ + H,O' + 2HS0,- 
(1) 
The formation of the nitronium ion is critical to the success of nitration. 
The purpose of the sulfuric acid is to generate the nitronium ion; other 
acids such as perchloric acid, hydrogen fluoride and boron trifluoride are 
also effective. Nitric acid alone contains only relatively small concen- 
trations of nitronium ion and hence is not an effective nitrating agent, 
except with very reactive substrates. 
The evidence for the existence of the nitronium ion is compelling. 
Salts such as nitronium perchlorate, N02+C10,-, and nitronium 
tetrafluoroborate, NO,+BF,, have been isolated and successfully used as 
nitrating agents. A line in the Raman spectrum at 1400 cm I that 
originates from a linear triatomic species, which NO2+ is, provides spec- 
troscopic confirmation. 
When the nitration of (trifluoromethy1)benzene was carried out 
with nitronium tetrafluoroborate at -80 "C, Olah was able to isolate 
the 
1 (Scheme 7.2). Subsequent warming result- 
ed in the formation of 1 -nitro-3-(trifluoromethyl)benzene. 
It is possible to nitrate highly activated aromatic compounds such as 
phenols using dilute nitric acid. The nitrating species is considered to be 

Nitro Compounds 
81 
1 
“ - L  
1 
Scheme 7.2 
the 
acid as in equation (2): 
, formed by interaction of two molecules of nitric 
+ 
2HN0, + H,O-NO, + NO,- 
(2) 
Alternatively, the reaction may proceed through nitrosation by the 
, NO+, and subsequent oxidation of the nitroso com- 
pound by nitric acid (Scheme 7.3). There is only a small concentration 
of NO+ in dilute nitric acid and so catalytic amounts of sodium nitrite 
are sometimes added to increase the quantity. This technique is a useful 
means of effecting smooth, low-temperature nitrations. 
Scheme 7.3 
HNO, + 2HN03 
H30+ + 2N0,- + NO+ 
Solutions of nitric acid in acetic acid or acetic anhydride are effective 
nitrating agents, generating acetyl nitrate. The exact nature of the nitrat- 
ing agent has not been confirmed, but it is suggested that, of the possi- 
ble species involved, N20S and the nitronium ion are the most likely, A 
high proportion of 2-substitution occurs when this reagent is used with 
substrates containing a functional group bonded to the ring through a 
heteroatom. An example is the nitration of methoxybenzene, in which 
70% of the 2-nitro isomer is formed. It is proposed, in this instance, that 
the nitrating species is dinitrogen pentoxide and that the mechanism 
involves a six-centre cyclic rearrangement (Scheme 7.4). 

82 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 7.4 
7.2.2 Indirect Methods of Introducing the Nitro Group 
The conversion of an amino group into a nitro group can be useful 
when specific substitution patterns are required. The synthesis of 1,4- 
dinitrobenzene from 4-nitroaniline is il!ustrative (Scheme 7.5). Oxidation 
can be accomplished directly using peroxytrifluoroacetic acid or in two 
steps using H,SO, (monoperoxysulfuric acid) and oxidation of the result- 
ing nitroso compound with hydrogen peroxide. Alternatively, the amine 
can be diazotized in fluoroboric acid and then reacted with sodium nitrite 
in the presence of copper powder. 

Nitro Compounds 
83 
I 
I 
:j 
\ 
7.3 
Charge Transfer Complexes 
Polynitro compounds form charge transfer or n-complexes with certain 
aromatic hydrocarbons. The presence of electron-withdrawing groups 
in the ring of the electron acceptor and electron-donating groups in the 
ring of the electron donor are essential for the formation of these 
complexes. Such a complex is formed between 1,3,5trimethylbenzene 
(mesitylene) and 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene. In mesitylene, the three methyl 
groups exert a +I effect to enhance the electron density of the n-electron 
cloud, but in 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene the opposite effect occurs and the n- 
electron cloud is relatively electron deficient. The result is the formation 
of the charge transfer complex 2, in which the two rings lie in approxi- 
mately parallel planes, and a weakly bonded, coloured compound results, 
7.4 
Reactions of Nitro Compounds 
7.4.1 Reactions of the Ring 
The nitro group is strongly electron withdrawing and as such is meta 
directing and deactivating towards further electrophilic attack. 
Conversely, this electron withdrawal activates the ring to nucleophilic 
attack and progressive introduction of nitro groups into aryl halides 
makes the displacement of halogen by nucleophiles easier (see Chapter 
9). 
Scheme 7.5 

84 
Aromatic Chemistry 
7.4.2 Reactions of the Nitro Group 
Reduction of a nitro group to an amino group is one of the most 
important reactions in aromatic chemistry and there are many methods 
available to achieve this transformation. 
The method of choice in industry is 
under 
pressure. The nitro compound, dissolved in an alcohol such as propan- 
2-01, and in the presence of a finely divided metal catalyst, is maintained 
in an atmosphere of hydrogen gas, usually under pressure in an auto- 
clave. On completion of the reaction, the vessel is vented and the cata- 
lyst is filtered off, leaving simply the product in the solvent. The catalysts 
used are usually either finely divided platinum or palladium suspended 
on carbon or alumina, or the Raney catalysts which are finely divided 
nickel or, more recently, copper and cobalt. The efficiency of these 
catalysts can be seriously reduced by poisoning and care has to be taken 
to ensure that sulfur compounds and other poisons are excluded from 
the reaction mixture. Raney nickel is less susceptible to sulfur poisoning. 
The choice of catalyst and reaction conditions are important. For exam- 
ple, the reduction of halonitro compounds with Raney nickel can result 
in significant dehalogenation as well as reduction of the nitro group, but 
the use of platinum on carbon effectively eliminates this problem. 
Catalytic hydrogenation is a heterogeneous reaction which occurs at 
the surface of the catalyst. The mechanism is complex and proceeds 
through the nitroso and hydroxylamine derivatives; minor by-products 
such as the azo and azoxy compounds occasionally appear. 
In the absence of a laboratory or industrial pressure vessel, 
transfer is a viable alternative. Here, the nitro compound is 
stirred in a solvent with a catalyst, commonly 1% platinum on carbon, 
in the presence of a hydrogen donor such as hydrazine, sodium formate 
(sodium methanoate) or methylcyclohexene (Scheme 7.6). In the case of 
hydrazine, interaction at the catalyst surface produces the reductant, 
hydrogen, and nitrogen. Toluene is the by-product when methylcyclo- 
hexene is used. 
Scheme 7.6 
Various combinations of 
reduce nitro groups and this 
method lends itself to both small-scale laboratory work and industrial 
conditions. Tin and hydrochloric acid are used when small quantities 
are involved, but work-up requires basification to destroy the 

Nitro Compounds 
85 
amine-chlorostannate complex. Tin is also an expensive metal. The use 
of zinc and hydrochloric acid also requires a basic work-up. In both 
cases the disposal and handling of large amounts of residues present an 
environmental problem which industry seeks to avoid, Reduction by 
iron and HC1 or acetic acid is suitable for most applications and offers 
the advantage that often only a catalytic amount of acid is required. 
The iron(II1) oxide by-product precipitates and so is easy to remove. 
Other reducing agents such as sodium hydrosulfite (sodium dithion- 
ite, Na,S204) and sodium sulfide have also been used. For example, the 
latter reduces one of the nitro groups in polynitro compounds selectively; 
1,3-dinitrobenzene gives 3-nitroaniline in this way (Scheme 7.7). Tin(I1) 
chloride reduces nitro groups selectively in the presence of carbonyl 
groups under acidic conditions. 
Scheme 7.7 
7.5 
Nitrosobenzene and Phenylhydroxylamine 
Nitroso compounds are of relatively limited importance in aromatic 
chemistry. However, since the nitroso group is easily reduced to an amino 
group, they do offer an indirect route to aromatic amines. The nitrosa- 
tion of phenols and dialkylanilines and the subsequent reduction are per- 
tinent examples. The nitroso group is also readily oxidized to a nitro 
group. 

86 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 7.8 
Scheme 7.9 
Nitrosobenzene (3) can be prepared by oxidation of aniline by H,SO, 
(see Section 7.2.2) and by oxidation of phenylhydroxylamine (4) with 
potassium dichromate. Phenylhydroxylamine is available from nitroben- 
zene by reduction with zinc dust and aqueous ammonium chloride 
(Scheme 7.10). 
Scheme 7.10 
NO 
NHOH 
NO2 
I 
I 
I 
NH2 
I 
3 
4 

Nitro Compounds 
87 

Aromatic Amines and 
Diazonium Salts 
8.1 
Introduction 
Aromatic amines fall into two categories: those in which the amino group 
is directly attached to the aromatic ring and those where an amino group 
is part of a side chain, This chapter concentrates on the former group 
and deals with compounds such as 
(phenylamine, benzenamine 
I), rather than benzylamine (phenylmethanamine, 2) and similar com- 
pounds in which the amino group exhibits the reactions of an aliphatic 
amine. 
, ArNH,, such 
as aniline, 
, ArNHR, in which the amino group has 
been monoalkylated and typified by N-methylaniline (N-methyl-N- 
phenylamine, 3), and 
, ArNR,, such as N,N-dimethyl- 
ani 1 ine ( N ,  N-d ime t h y 1- N- p hen y 1 amine , 4). 
Aromatic amines are subdivided into 
88 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
89 
8.2 
Introduction of the Amino Group 
8.2.1 Reductive Methods 
In Chapter 7, the reduction of the nitro group to produce aromatic 
amines was discussed in some detail. This is the most important method 
for synthesizing amines. 
8.2.2 Molecular Rearrangements 
There is a series of related reactions in which the common theme is a 
1,2-shift of an aryl fragment from C to an electron-deficient nitrogen 
atom. These named reactions provide a useful means of introducing an 
amino group. The general mechanistic picture for these reactions is 
shown in Scheme 8.1. An actual intermediate, a nitrene, in which a nitro- 
gen atom has only a sextet of electrons, is not proposed, but rather the 
shift of the arene portion R to the nitrogen atom is concerted with the 
departure of an electron-rich leaving group X from the nitrogen. 
Scheme 8.1 
The individual named reactions are summarized in Table 8.1, but two 
examples are particularly useful and are discussed in detail. 
Table 8.1 Synthesis of aromatic amines by rearrangements involving migration from 
C to an electron-deficient N atom 
Reaction name 
Conditions 
Leaving group 
fx! 
Hofmann 
ArCONH, + BrJNaOH + ArNH, 
B r  
Curtius 
ArCONHNH, + HONO + ArNHCOMe 
N, 
Lossen 
ArCONHOH + HCI + ArNH, 
H,O 
Schmidt 
ArC0,H 
+ HN, + ArNH, 
N, 
Beckmann 
Ar(Me)C=NOH + H' + ArNHCOMe 
H,O 
In the 
(Scheme 8.2), an amide is treated with a 
halogen, usually bromine, in alkali in which the reactive species is the 
hypohalite ion (XO--). This reaction, which applies to aliphatic as well 
a5 aromatic amides, has been thoroughly studied. Evidence supporting 

90 
Aromatic Chemistry 
the mechanism includes the isolation and identification of the inter- 
mediate N-bromoamide and the isocyanate. A key feature of the mech- 
anism is the role of the halogen. It not only increases the acidity of the 
amide proton, but also acts as a good leaving group, prompting 
the rearrangement. The isocyanate reacts with water and the resulting 
unstable carbamic acid spontaneously decarboxylates to the amine. 
Scheme 8.2 
Probably the best-known rearrangement in which an aryl group 
migrates from carbon to nitrogen is the 
. Here, 
ketoximes are converted to N-substituted amides when treated with an 
acidic reagent, such as sulfuric or polyphosphoric acid, phosphorus pen- 
tachloride or thionyl chloride (SOClJ. In the context of this chapter, the 
amides are hydrolysed to liberate the amine. The mechanism in acid 
media is believed to proceed as illustrated in Scheme 8.3, where the 1,2- 
shift from carbon to nitrogen is noted as the key step. 
Oximes can exist as geometrical isomers, although only one isomer is 
usually formed during their synthesis. The Beckmann rearrangement is 
stereospecific and only the group (Ar) that is anti to the leaving group, 
the hydroxy function, migrates. Thus, acetophenone oxime (Ar = Ph) 
rearranges only to acetanilide. 
Scheme 8.3 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
91 
Scheme 8.4 
0.2.3 Miscellaneous Methods 
Aryl halides in which electron-withdrawing groups activate the halogen 
atom to nucleophilic displacement react directly with ammonia to pro- 
duce amines. Non-activated aryl halides yield amines on reaction with 
sodamide through the intermediacy of an aryne intermediate (see 
Chapter 9). 
8.3 
Reactions of Aromatic Amines 
8.3.1 Reactions of the Ring 
The amino group is strongly electron donating and directs substitution 
to the ortho and para positions. This is illustrated by the addition of 
chlorine or bromine water to aniline, which results in immediate reac- 
tion and the precipitation of the 2,4,6-trihalogenated derivative. 
0.3.2 Reactions of the Amino Group 
The amino group is a reactive species and undergoes some important 
reactions. 

92 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Acetanilide can be prepared by reaction of aniline with acetic anhy- 
dride or acetyl chloride (Scheme 8.5). This reaction occurs with most 
anhydrides and acyl chlorides to produce anilides. 
The electron-donating ability of an amino group is moderated by 
acetylation. Only monobromination of acetanilide occurs on reaction 
with bromine in acetic acid (Scheme 8.5). Acetanilide behaves similarly 
on nitration. 
e 
NHCOMe 
mNH2 
Ac20 fi 
Brz, AcOH 
- 
Scheme 8.5 
Scheme 8.6 
Acylation is a means of controlling isomer formation and of moder- 
ating the electron-donating capacity of the group and so preventing poly- 
substitution. The carbonyl function attracts the nitrogen lone pair of 
electrons, which is therefore less available for resonance interaction with 
the x-system of the ring. This also accounts for the lack of carbonyl 
group reactions in amides. 
The amino group can be N-alkylated with iodomethane (Scheme 8.6) 
to give initially N-methylaniline and then N,N-dimethylaniline. The final 
product is the trimethylammonium salt, which is formed by quaterniza- 
tion of the nitrogen. 
Me1 
Me1 
Me1 
+ 
ArNH2 - 
ArNHMe - 
ArNMeZ - 
ArNMe3 I- 
Amines can be reductively alkylated by aldehydes and ketones in the 
presence of hydrogen and a hydrogenation catalyst. 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
93 
Scheme 8.7 
The reaction of aromatic amines with nitrous acid is of considerable 
importance and the formation of diazonium salts from the primary 
amines is discussed in detail in Section 8.6. Reaction of nitrous acid with 
secondary amines does not give diazonium salts, but results instead in 
N-nitrosation. Tertiary amines such as N,N-dimethylaniline do not N- 
nitrosate, but undergo electrophilic substitution by the nitrosonium 
cation (NO+) to give N,N-dimethyl-4-nitrosoaniline (Scheme 8.8). 
NO 
8.4 
Related Compounds 
There are several compounds which require different methods of syn- 
thesis or which show special reactions. 
(7) is prepared industrially either by heating aniline 
with aniline hydrochloride at 140 "C under pressure, or by heating ani- 
line with phenol at 260 "C in the presence of zinc chloride. The most 
convenient laboratory synthesis uses the 
(Scheme 8.9) 
(see Chapter lo), in which acetanilide is refluxed with bromobenzene in 
the presence of potassium carbonate and copper powder in nitrobenzene 
solvent. Triphenylamine is similarly prepared from diphenylamine and 
iodobenzene. 
Scheme 8.8 
I 
Scheme 8.9 

94 
Aromatic Chemistry 
I 
(2), which behaves as an aliphatic amine, may be pre- 
pared by the reduction of benzonitrile or benzaldoxime (Scheme 8.10). 
Scheme 8.10 
aNxR 
N
R
 
9 
H 
10 
CN 
CHzNH2 
CH=NOH 
I 
I 
I 
2 
The diaminobenzenes (phenylenediamines) are prepared by reduction 
of 1,3-dinitrobenzene and 2- and 4-nitroanilines. o-Phenylenediamine is 
of value in the synthesis of a range of nitrogen heterocycles. Thus reac- 
tion with organic acids produces benzimidazoles (8). With 1,2-dicarbonyl 
compounds, quinoxalines (9) are produced. Treatment with nitrous acid 
results in diazotization of one amino group followed by immediate 
cyclization to give benzotriazole (10). 
8.5 
Basicity of Amines 
Aniline is a weaker base than aliphatic amines because the lone pair of 
electrons is conjugated with the 7r-system of the aromatic ring and struc- 
tures such as 11-13 contribute to the actual structure of aniline. Thus, 
the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom is less available for coor- 
dination to a proton, The effect is considerable and aniline has a pKa of 
4.6 compared to methylamine's pK, of 10.6; it thus reduces the basicity 
a million-fold. 
Electron-donating substituents increase the basicity of aromatic 
amines, although the effect is not very great as can be seen from the data 
presented in Table 8.2 for the methyl group. Electron-withdrawing 
groups have a more pronounced weakening influence on basicity. In both 
cases, the position of the substituent and its ability to enter into reso- 
nance with the amino group also has an effect on the base strength. For 
example, the nitroanilines are all weaker bases than aniline itself because 
of the strong mesomeric (-M) and inductive (-I) electron-withdrawing 
effects of the nitro group. In the 2- and 4-positions, both effects are oper- 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
95 
ative. Canonical forms such as 14 and 15 contribute to the structure and 
illustrate the involvement of the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen 
atom with the n-system of the aromatic ring and with the nitro group. 
The -M effect cannot operate in the case of 3-nitroaniline, but this is 
still a weaker base than aniline because of the -I effect, although not as 
weak as the 2- and 4-isomers (Table 8.2). A second nitro group enhances 
these effects and 2,4-dinitroaniline is so weak a base that it does not dis- 
solve in dilute hydrochloric acid. 
Table 8.2 pK, values of some substituted anilines 
Subs tituen t 
2- 
3- 
4- 
Me 
Me0 
CI 
NO* 
4.39 
4.69 
-0.29 
2.50 
4.49 
4.20 
2.64 
3.34 
5.1 2 
1.02 
5.29 
3.98 
The methoxy group is somewhat unusual in that in the 4-position its 
+M effect increases basicity, but only a -I effect operates in the 3-posi- 
tion and this decreases the basicity. 
Substituents in the ortho position may exert a steric effect on the amino 
group, twisting it out of the plane of the ring and so reducing mesomer- 
ic interaction between the nitrogen lone pair and the ring. The lone pair 
is more available for donation to a proton and the basicity is therefore 
greater. 
8.6 
Diazonium Salts 
Treatment of a primary aromatic amine, such as aniline, dissolved or 
suspended in an aqueous mineral acid, with aqueous sodium nitrite solu- 
tion whilst the temperature is maintained below 5 O C ,  produces the rel- 
atively unstable diazonium salt (Scheme 8.1 1). 
I 
1 
Scheme 8.11 
The mechanism of diazotization involves generation of the elec- 
trophilic nitrosonium cation (NO+), which nitrosates the nucleophilic 
amine at the nitrogen atom (Scheme 8.12). Loss of water after a series 
of prototropic shifts produces the diazonium salt. 

96 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 8.12 
The conditions for successful diazotization depend upon the basicity 
of the amino group. Relatively highly basic amines such as aniline and 
the toluidines dissolve in aqueous hydrochloric acid. Treatment with 
aqueous sodium nitrite solution at 0-5 "C then very rapidly converts the 
amino group into the diazonium compound. Addition of nitrite is con- 
tinued until there is a slight excess of nitrous acid, which is indicated by 
an instant dark blue colour with potassium iodidehtarch paper. 
The synthesis of diazonium salts of less basic amines does not pro- 
ceed satisfactorily under the above conditions because of the reduced 
nucleophilic nature of the amino group and the reaction is usually car- 
ried out in concentrated sulfuric acid. The addition of sodium nitrite to 
concentrated sulfuric acid produces the stable nitrosylsulfuric acid, 
(NOHSO,). Diazotization of the most weakly basic amines is carried out 
using nitrosylsulfuric acid in a mixture of one part of propionic acid in 
five parts of acetic acid at 0-5 "C. The propionic acid prevents the mix- 
ture from freezing. 
The diazonium group is one of the most versatile functional groups in 
aromatic chemistry, a feature that is a consequence of the presence of a 
stable leaving group, a nitrogen molecule. Solid diazonium salts can lose 
nitrogen in an explosive manner and it is dangerous to prepare them in 
this state. The salts also decompose gently in solution above about 10 "C. 
Aliphatic amines can also be diazotized, but the products are too 
unstable to be isolated and rapidly evolve nitrogen gas. The relative sta- 
bility of aromatic diazonium salts is a result of delocalization of the pos- 
itive charge on nitrogen into the n;-system of the ring, as illustrated by 
the canonical forms 16-18. 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
97 
The synthetically useful reactions of the diazonium compounds fall 
into two categories: those where the nitrogen atoms are eliminated and 
those where they are retained. However, from a mechanistic point of 
view, three different types of reaction have been recognized: 
1. Loss of nitrogen and generation of an aryl cation in an S,l reaction: 
2. Loss of nitrogen and generation of an aryl radical through a one- 
electron reduction: 
e- 
Ar-fi=N - 
Ar' + N2 
3. Nucleophilic attack at nitrogen: 
8.6.1 Reactions in which Nitrogen is Eliminated 
Replacement of the diazonium group by a variety of other functional 
groups is facilitated by the presence of one of chemistry's best leaving 
groups, the nitrogen molecule. 
Replacement by Hydrogen 
It can be useful to replace an amino group with hydrogen, since this can 
offer a route to compounds difficult to prepare by other direct methods. 
The most reliable means of achieving this is by conversion to the diazo- 
nium salt and subsequent reaction with phosphinic acid (hypophospho- 
rous acid, H,PO,), catalysed by copper(1) salts. A free-radical mechanism 
is proposed, in which copper(1) ion acts as a one-electron reducing agent 
and initiates a chain reaction (Scheme 8.13). 
ArN2+ + Cu+ - 
Arm +N2 + Cu2+ 
H 
H 
I 
I 
I 
I 
OH 
OH 
H 
H 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Ar' + H-P=O - 
ArH + 'P=O 
ArN2+ + 'P=O - 
Ar' + N2 + + p = O  
I 
OH 
OH 
Scheme 8.13 
Diazotization of the amine in ethanol and sulfuric acid and heating 
the resultant solution also effects the replacement by hydrogen, but other 

98 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 8.14 
products arising from interception of the aryl cation by different nucleo- 
philes are also formed (Scheme 8.14). 
ArH +MeCHO 
EtOH 
/ 
ArN*+HS04- - 
[Ar'] 
ArOEt 
Replacement by a Hydroxyl Group 
Phenols are formed when a diazonium salt is heated in boiling water. 
Nitrogen is evolved and the aryl cation reacts rapidly with water (Scheme 
8.15). Since this is a nucleophilic displacement, it is preferable to use 
acidic conditions to ensure that no phenoxide ions are present, since this 
could react with unchanged diazonium salt. Sulfuric acid rather than 
hydrochloric acid is preferred for the diazotization to avoid trapping the 
highly reactive carbocation with chloride ion. 
Scheme 8.15 
Replacement by Halogen 
The replacement of the diazonium group by chlorine or bromine is 
accomplished using the 
. Replacement with fluorine 
and iodine can be achieved by variations of this reaction. 
In the Sandmeyer reaction, the cold diazonium salt solution is run 
into a solution of the copper(1) halide dissolved in the halogen acid. The 
complex, which usually separates, is decomposed to the aryl halide by 
heating the reaction mixture. The mechanism (Scheme 8.16) involves gen- 
eration of an aryl radical by electron transfer from Cu(I), which then 
reacts with the halide ion. 
Cl- 
ArN2+ + Cu' - 
Ar' + N2 + Cu2+ - 
ArCl 
Scheme 8.16 
Copper(1) iodide is unsatisfactory for use in the Sandmeyer reaction 
because of its insolubility. The iodo group is introduced by warming the 
diazonium salt solution in aqueous potassium iodide solution (Scheme 
8.17). This method is one of the best means of introducing iodine into 
an aromatic ring. A one-electron reduction by the iodide ion is thought 
to initiate a radical reaction in a similar way to the Cu(1) ion. 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
99 
Introduction of a fluorine atom is achieved using the 
. Originally, the reaction involved gently heating the solid dia- 
zonium fluoroborate (Scheme 8. l 8), but improved yields result from the 
thermal decomposition the hexafluorophosphate, ArN,+PF6-, or hexa- 
fluoroantimonate, ArN2+SbF,, salts. 
heat 
ArN2+Cl- + HBF4 - 
ArN2+BF4- - 
Ar+ + BF4- - 
ArF + BF3 
-N2 
Replacement by Nitrile 
Introduction of the cyano group by the Sandmeyer reaction involves 
treatment of a diazonium solution with a solution of copper(1) cyanide 
in aqueous potassium cyanide (Scheme 8.19). 
Replacement by Aryl 
Only moderate yields of biphenyls result from the 
, in 
which an acidic solution of a diazonium salt is made alkaline with sodium 
hydroxide solution in a two-phase mixture with an aromatic hydrocarbon 
such as benzene (Scheme 8.20). A variation of this reaction uses a copper 
catalyst. The reaction is more successful in the intramolecular version 
and the Pschorr reaction (discussed in Chapter 12) offers a useful route 
to phenanthrene. 
Scheme 8.17 
Scheme 8.18 
Cu(I)CN 
aq. KCN 
ArN2'Cl- - 
ArCN 
Scheme 8.19 
Scheme 8.20 

I00 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 8.21 
Scheme 8.22 
Replacement by Other Groups 
Generation of an aryl radical and an aryl cation from a diazonium salt 
are easy processes. Both species are very reactive and are readily trapped 
by a wide variety of nucleophiles. Conversion of an amino group into a 
nitro group involves reaction of a diazonium fluoroborate with aqueous 
sodium nitrite solution in the presence of copper powder (Scheme 8.22). 
The thiol (SH) group is introduced by reaction with potassium ethyl 
xanthate followed by acid hydrolysis. The phenylsulfanyl (phenylthio, 
SPh) group results from reaction with benzenethiolate ion. Sodium disul- 
fide, Na,S,, yields diary1 disulfides. The arsonic acid group is introduced 
using 
, in which a diazonium salt is reacted with sodium 
arsenite in the presence of a Cu(I1) salt (Scheme 8.23). 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
101 
H+ 
Na3As03 
ArAs03Na2 - 
ArAs03H2 
H+ 
/ 
EtOCS2-K+ 
ArN2+C1- 
* ArS2COEt - 
ArSH 
ArS-SAr 
8.6.2 Reactions with Retention of Nitrogen 
Reduction to Hydrazines 
Aryl hydrazines are formed by the reduction of diazonium salts with 
tin(I1) chloride in hydrochloric acid (Scheme 8.24). The reduction can 
also be achieved by treatment with sodium sulfite solution. 
Scheme 8.23 
nNH2 
N Z ?  DN2+"- 
SnC12 nNH
HCl 
Me 
Me 
Me 
Scheme 8.24 
Coupling Reactions 
A common use of diazonium salts is in the synthesis of azo dyes. In 
dyestuffs chemistry, the amine that is diazotized is referred to as the dia- 
zonium component and the compound it reacts with is known as the 
coupling component. The whole reaction is known as azo coupling. 
About 50%) of all commercial dyestuffs, of which two examples are shown 
in 19 and 20, contain the azo group. 
Br 
MeCONH 
19 Disperse Blue 79 
20 Disperse Yellow 16 
Diazonium salts are relatively weak electrophiles. Consequently, they 
only react with aromatic systems which are strongly activated by the 
presence of powerful electron-donating groups or compounds containing 

102 
Aromatic Chemistry 
an “active” methylene group. The most common coupling components 
are phenols, naphthols, dialkylanilines, pyrazolones and pyridones. 
Reaction with phenols and naphthols are usually carried out in the 
pH range 8-1 1, when the coupling species is the phenoxide ion. A cold, 
acidic solution of the diazonium salt is added to an alkaline solution of 
the phenol, when a fast electrophilic aromatic substitution occurs at the 
4-position (Scheme 8.25). If this position is already occupied, attack 
occurs at the 2-position. 2-Naphthol couples at the 1 -position. 
Scheme 8.25 
Tertiary amines react in a similar manner over the pH range 4-10. An 
example is the reaction between diazotized aniline and N,N-diethylani- 
line (Scheme 8.26). 
Scheme 8.26 
However, primary and secondary amines usually react at the nitrogen 
atom rather than at carbon. Aniline, for instance, gives 4-aminoazoben- 
zene [(4-aminophenyl)phenyldiazene] in acetate-buffered hydrochloric 
acid solution (Scheme 8.27). In strongly acidic solution, the N-coupled 
products rearrange to the C-coupled compound. Coupling conditions 
can be chosen which allow the C-coupled product to be obtained directly. 
Scheme 8.27 

Aromatic Amines and Diazonium Salts 
103 

Aromatic Halogen Compounds 
9.1 
Introduction 
There are two distinct classes of aromatic halogen compounds. 
are those compounds where the halogen is directly bonded to the 
aromatic ring, as in chlorobenzene (1). Compounds where the halogen 
is present in an aliphatic side-chain, the 
such as benzyl 
chloride [(chloromethyl)benzene, 21, will also be considered. The reac- 
tivity of these two categories of halogen compounds are quite different, 
because they are bonded to sp’ and sp3 hybridized carbon atoms, 
respectively. As we saw in Chapter 2, the aryl halides are significantly 
less reactive towards nucleophilic substitution than the benzylic halides. 
The latter resemble alkyl halides or, even more, allylic halides 
(CH,=CHCH,X) in their reactions. 
Under certain conditions, benzene can react with halogens by 
rather than by substitution. In the presence of sunlight, a 
takes place with chlorine that leads to addition products in 
which the aromatic character has been lost. The final product is hexa- 
chlorocyclohexane (benzene hexachloride), which can exist in eight pos- 
sible stereoisomeric forms. The process starts with the photolytic 
dissociation of chlorine. Free-radical addition to the x-electron system 
of the aromatic ring follows and a chain reaction ensues (Scheme 9.1). 
104 

Aromatic Halogen Compounds 
105 
C12 + hv - 
2C1' 
H 
c1 
C1' 
H 
several steps 
C1 
+ C1' - 
c1 
C1 
H 
Scheme 9.1 
9.2 
Synthesis of Aryl Halides 
9.2.1 Direct Halogenation 
The differing chemical nature and the significantly different reactivity of 
the halogen molecules means that various methods are necessary for their 
direct introduction into the benzene ring. Their reactivity increases in the 
order I, < Br, < C1, < F,. Fluorine is too reactive to allow its direct 
introduction, reacting explosively with benzene, and indirect methods 
have to be used (see Chapter 8). In practice, bromination and chlorina- 
tion can be achieved effectively at moderate temperatures in the pres- 
ence of a Lewis acid catalyst. The role of the Lewis acid, typically 
iron(II1) chloride or aluminium chloride for chlorination, is to increase 
the electrophilic nature of the halogen through its polarization and 
conversion into a complex which then reacts with the n-system of the 
aromatic ring. Subsequent deprotonation regenerates both the aromatic 
n-system and the Lewis acid, which is therefore truly catalytic in 
behaviour (Scheme 9.2). 
Cl-C1 
+ FeC13 
[C1-6l-kC13] 
[complex] 
H C1 
/ /  
c1 
I 
i 
Scheme 9.2 

106 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 9.3 
Greater activation is needed to achieve direct iodination because of the 
lower reactivity of iodine. Oxidizing agents such as nitric acid and hydro- 
gen peroxide convert the halogen into a more reactive electrophilic 
species. The I,/HNO, mixture, perhaps containing HNO,I+, will iodinate 
benzene directly. 
Increasing the reaction temperature and the amount of halogen used 
results in the introduction of further halogen atoms. It was noted in 
Chapter 2 that the halogen atom in chlorobenzene is ortholparu direct- 
ing, but deactivating to electrophilic substitution as a result of opposing 
mesomeric (+M) and inductive (-I) effects. Consequently, disubstitution 
leads to a mixture of the 1,2- and, mainly, 1,4-isomers under conditions 
similar to those required to attack benzene. 
Aromatic systems substituted with electron-donating groups are more 
readily halogenated than benzene. Consequently, other synthetic routes or 
reagents are sometimes used to avoid polyhalogenation and the formation 
of isomeric mixtures. For example, the iodination of toluene gives a mix- 
ture of 2- and 4-iodotoluenes; each isomer can be prepared individually 
from the appropriate toluidine via the diazonium salt (see Chapter 8). 
In the case of aromatic systems activated towards electrophilic attack 
by strongly electron-donating substituents, a catalyst may not be 
required. For instance, both phenol and aniline are tribrominated by 
bromine at room temperature. Even iodine attacks aniline in the pres- 
ence of only a scavenger for the liberated hydrogen iodide. 

Aromatic Halogen Compounds 
107 
Scheme 9.4 
9.2.2 From Amines 
As described in Chapter 8, the indirect replacement of an amino group 
by a halogen via diazotization of a primary aromatic amine is a valu- 
able route to aryl halides. The chemistry of these processes covering the 
introduction of all the main halogens can be found in that chapter. 
9.2.3 From Carboxylic Acids 
The 
, in which the silver salt of a benzoic acid is 
thermally decarboxylated in the presence of bromine, gives moderate 
yields of aryl bromides. The mechanism is uncertain, but may involve 
the generation of aryl radicals (Scheme 9.5). 

108 
Aromatic Chemistry 
ArC02Ag +Br2 - 
ArC02Br +AgBr 
ArC02Br - 
Br' + ArC02' - 
Are + CO2 
Ar' + Br2 - 
ArBr + Br' 
Ar' + ArC02Br - 
ArBr + ArC02' 
Scheme 9.5 
9.2.4 Commercial Synthesis of Chlorobenzene 
Chlorobenzene is an important commercial solvent, although it is less 
used nowadays because of environmental concerns. It is produced cam- 
mercially by the 
, in which a mixture of benzene vapour, 
air and hydrogen chloride is passed over a copper chloride catalyst. 
9.3 Reactions of Aryl Halides 
This section is concerned with reactions of the C-halogen group itself. It 
is generally true that aryl halides are less reactive than alkyl halides, but 
the former compounds do undergo a number of useful reactions. 
9.3.1 Nucleophilic Substitution 
Nucleophilic substitution of aryl halogen atoms requires significant 
energy input. Thus, in the 
for the synthesis of phenol from 
chlorobenzene, the chlorine atom is only successfully hydrolysed by 
aqueous sodium hydroxide at 300 "C under pressure. Displacement 
by ammonia is achieved at 200 "C over copper(1) oxide and conversion 
to benzonitrile occurs using copper( I) cyanide in boiling dimethylfor- 
mamide, HCONMe,. 
However, nucleophilic substitution is helped by the presence of 
electron-withdrawing groups in the molecule. Consequently, 1 -chloro-4- 
nitrobenzene is hydrolysed to 4-nitrophenol at 200 "C and 4-nitroaniline 
can be produced using ammonia in ethanol at 150 "C. The presence of 
two nitro groups further activates the halogen and l-chloro-2,4- 
dinitrobenzene reacts easily with a variety of nucleophiles. 
Not surprisingly, three nitro groups have an even greater influence on 
the reactivity of the halogen and 1 -chloro-2,4,6-trinitrobenzene (picryl 
chloride) is hydrolysed to 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (picric acid) in boiling 
water. The trivial names tell us that this aryl halide behaves as an acyl 
halide and the phenol as an acid. 
A nitro group deactivates an aromatic ring to electrophilic attack, but 
it activates the ring towards nucleophilic substitution. 
The electron-withdrawing nature of the halogen is supported by the 
powerful effect of an ortho- and/or a para-nitro group, so that the carbon 

Aromatic Halogen Compounds 
I09 
atom to which the halogen is attached is sufficiently electron deficient to 
promote attack by the nucleophile. The resulting intermediate is 
stabilized by the nitro group(s). Elimination of halide ion restores the 
aromatic system and completes the bimolecular process, which overall is 
a further example of an addition-elimination sequence (Scheme 9.6). It 
is emphasized that electron-withdrawing groups other than a nitro group 
exert similar activating effects towards nucleophilic attack. 
When chlorobenzene is treated with the strong base sodamide, 
NaNH,, aniline is formed. This reaction is more complex than it appears, 
since if the chlorobenzene is labelled at C-1 with the isotope 14C (indi- 
cated by an asterisk), then the product consists of equal amounts of ani- 
line with the label at C-1 and C-2. The reaction proceeds by abstraction 
of the weakly acidic hydrogen atom on the carbon atom next to the 
C-halogen group by the strong base, NH;, 
followed by loss of halide 
ion. Ammonia then adds to the apparent triple bond of the resulting 
reactive intermediate, 
. The mechanism 
involves an elimination-addition sequence. However, the entering group 
does not necessarily occupy the same position as the leaving group. The 
process is sometimes referred to as 
Scheme 9.6 
(Scheme 9.7). 
Scheme 9.7 

1 10 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 9.8 
Evidence for the benzyne intermediate is extensive. The most compelling 
is its capture in a 
by a diene such as furan, illustrated 
by the reaction of 1-bromo-2-fluorobenzene with lithium amalgam in the 
presence of furan (Scheme 9.9). 
. 
Scheme 9.9 
Probably the most important reaction of aryl halides is the formation 
of 
and 
i, both of which are 
widely used in synthesis. These reactions are covered in Chapter 10. 

Aromatic Halogen Compounds 
11 1 
9.3.2 Reactions at Ring Carbon Atoms 
Halogen atoms such as chlorine and bromine deactivate the ring to elec- 
trophilic substitution by the inductive (-I) effect, but the mesomeric (+M) 
donation of electrons directs substitution to the ortho and para positions. 
9.4 
Aromatic Halogen Compounds Substituted in 
the Side Chain 
In the absence of a Lewis acid, halogenation of toluene at its boiling 
point with bromine or chlorine and under UV irradiation (e.g. sunlight) 
occurs in the side chain. The reaction proceeds by a free-radical 
mechanism that is initiated by the photolytic dissociation of a chlorine 
molecule (Scheme 9.10). The benzyl radical is stabilized by resonance 
(see Chapter 3). 
Scheme 9.10 
It is possible to replace all three hydrogen atoms of the methyl group 
of toluene sequentially by chlorine leading to (chloromethy1)benzene (4), 
(dichloroniethy1)benzene (5) and (trichloromethy1)benzene (6). Intro- 
duction of the first chlorine atom proceeds at a much faster rate than 
the second and so it is possible to prepare (chloromethy1)benzene selec- 
tively. In order to achieve the required degree of chlorination, chlorine 
gas is passed into the reaction mixture until the mass gain corresponds 
to the appropriate level of substitution. 
The higher homologues of toluene such as ethylbenzene are not usually 
halogenated selectively and mixtures are often produced (see Chapter 3). 
In the case of ethylbenzene itself, the major product of chlorination is 
the 1-substituted product (56%). Bromine is more selective and the 
I-bromo derivative 7 is formed exclusively. 
N-Bromosuccinimide (8) can also be used to bring about side-chain 
bromination, toluene yielding (bromomethy1)benzene for example. 
CHBrMe 0 
4 N - B r  
(Chloromethy1)benzene behaves like an alkyl halide towards nucleo- 
philes, although it is more reactive than alkyl halides in both SN1 and 
SN2 reactions. In the former case, the intermediate carbocation is 
/ 
7 
0 
8 

I 12 
Aromatic Chemistry 
stabilized by resonance with the aromatic ring (Scheme 9.11). Hydrolysis 
of these side-chain halides is generally easy, especially if there is an 
electron-withdrawing substituent in the ring. Many are lachrymatory, 
contact of the vapour with moisture on the eye resulting in hydrolysis 
and liberation of HX. This irritates the eye and tears are produced. An 
industrial route to benzaldehyde from toluene involves hydrolysis of the 
intermediate product PhCHCl,. 
Scheme 9.11 

Aromatic Halogen Compounds 
113 

Organometallic Reactions 
10.1 
Grignard and Organolithium Reagents 
10.1.1 Preparation 
Aryl bromides and iodides react with magnesium and lithium to form 
(ArMgX) and 
(ArLi), respec- 
tively (Scheme 10.1). The analogous chloro compounds behave similar- 
ly, but are less reactive. The normal method of preparing these highly 
reactive species is to add the aryl halide slowly to a stirred suspension 
of either magnesium turnings or finely divided lithium pieces in an anhy- 
drous solvent such as tetrahydrofuran (THF) or diethyl ether. The species 
are probably formed by an electron transfer mechanism. 
It is sometimes more convenient to prepare organolithium reagents by 
halogen-lithium 
exchange between an aryl halide and butyllithium 
(BuLi). The reaction takes place because the aryllithium is more stable 
than butyllithium; an sp' carbon is better able to stabilize a negative 
charge than an sp3 carbon (Scheme 10.2). Butyllithium is available com- 
mercially in bulk quantities. 
114 

Organometallic Reactions 
115 
+ M g  - aMgBr 
aBr+ 
2Li - 
-LiBr 
Scheme 10.1 
BuLi 
PhBr 
PhLi + BuBr 
I 
I 
Scheme 10.2 
10.1.2 Directed Orthometallation 
It might be expected that strongly basic alkyllithium reagents (RLi) 
would deprotonate an arene (ArH) directly to form the aryllithium 
(ArLi) and the alkane (RH). Although this reaction does occur, it is usu- 
ally extremely slow and side reactions may compete. In addition, depro- 
tonation of most substituted benzenes will probably occur in a random 
manner rather than at a particular position in the benzene ring. 
However, certain substituents can make the process feasible because 
they are able to stabilize the aryllithium. For instance, treatment of 
methoxybenzene with BuLi leads readily to the 2-lithio derivative 1 
(Scheme 10.3). ooMe 
___) 
BuLi aoMe 
Li 
1 - 
Scheme 10.3 
Me 
The ortho substituent stabilizes the molecule by coordination to the 
lithium as shown in 2. This process is only possible when the lithium 
occupies the 2-position and so lithiation occurs exclusively at this site. 
Substituents that can behave in this way are known as 
and hence their effectiveness in directing metallation to the ortho posi- 
tion is variable. The process is known as 
and 
is a significant development in the field of aromatic chemistry. 
We have seen in Chapter 2 that electrophilic attack of methoxyben- 
zene gives a mixture of the 2- and 4-isomers. The significance of the 
orthometallation process is the ease with which the 2-substituted com- 
pound can be obtained exclusively through reaction of the organolithi- 
um product with a variety of electrophiles (Scheme 10.4). 
6Li
(DMG). The coordinating ability of a substituent varies 
2 

1 16 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 10.4 
OMe 
OMe 
OMe 
OMe 
traditional 
/ electrophilic 
subs t i 61 ti on 
I 
13 
I 
10.1.3 Reactions of Grignard and Aryllithium Reagents 
The reactions of arylmagnesium and aryllithium compounds are similar 
and are analogous to the reactions of the corresponding alkyl species. 
These reagents are strong bases, particularly the lithium compounds, and 
react rapidly with weak acids such as water and alcohols to form the 
arene. It is therefore important when using these reagents that reactants, 
solvents and apparatus are dry and free of acid. 
The aryl unit of these species shows carbanionic properties and con- 
sequently reacts with electrophiles. As a result, these organometallic 
reagents are of great value for the synthesis of a wide range of aromatic 
compounds. In particular, reaction with carbon electrophiles such as 
carbonyl compounds and nitriles results in the formation of a new 
carbon-carbon bond. 
can be prepared by reaction with formaldehyde gas 
or more conveniently with paraformaldehyde (polymethanal) (Scheme 
10.5), but reaction with other aldehydes yields 
Scheme 10.5 
Reaction with the carbonyl group of a ketone yields 
(Scheme 10.6) and these can also be formed from the reaction of two 
equivalents of the organometallic reagent with an ester. 

Organometallic Reactions 
11 7 
OH 
0 
I 
OH 
0 
I
.
 
0 *& 
2cTLi 
HKoEt 
/ 
\ 
Scheme 10.6 
Scheme 10.7 

1 18 
Aromatic Chemistry 
can be prepared by the reaction of Grignard reagents with 
nitriles. The initial product is a ketimine, which does not react further 
with the Grignard reagent, thereby preventing formation of the tertiary 
alcohol. Subsequent hydrolysis gives the ketone (Scheme 10.8). 
Scheme 10.8 
are prepared by reaction of a Grignard 
reagent with carbon dioxide, as either the solid or gas (Scheme 10.9). 
coz 
ArMgBr - 
ArC02H 
Scheme 10.9 
10.2 
Electrophilic Metallation 
Salts of 
and 
, such as mercury(I1) acetate, 
Hg(OAc),, and thallium trifluoroacetate, Tl(OCOCF,),, are reactive elec- 
trophilic metallating species which attack benzene directly. Electron- 
donating groups in the aromatic ring accelerate the reaction in the 
conventional manner and direct attack to the ortho and paru positions. 
In addition, metal-chelating substituents, such as amide, promote the 
reaction and direct attack to the 2-position in a manner similar to that 
seen in the directed orthometallation reaction. 
The 
formed in such reactions are not of 
great synthetic importance, although they do undergo nitrosation reac- 
tions with nitrosyl chloride, NOCl. They can also be used as the 
organometallic component 
processes. 
sium iodide and potassium 
respectively (Scheme 10.10) 
um chemistry (see Chapter 
groups. 
in certain palladium-mediated coupling 
are useful because they react with potas- 
cyanide to afford aryl iodides and nitriles, 
This route offers an alternative to diazoni- 
8) for the introduction of these functional 

Organometallic Reactions 
1 19 
I- 
2 
Scheme 10.10 
10.3 
Transition Metal Mediated Processes 
Transition metal complexes are widely used in aromatic chemistry and 
organic synthesis in general. They are of particular value because com- 
plexation of an organic molecule to a metal centre often modifies its reac- 
tivity. The metal can subsequently be removed. After discussing the ways 
by which these complexes react, we will discuss their use in the synthe- 
sis of aromatic compounds. 
The chemistry of organometallic transition metal o-complexes can 
largely be explained by the operation of fundamental processes such as 
oxidative addition, reductive elimination and p-elimination. 
10.3.1 Oxidative Addition 
Oxidative addition is the process by which a metal atom inserts into an 
existing bond. The metal is thus acting simultaneously as a Lewis acid 
and Lewis base (Scheme 10. I 1). 
Scheme 10.1 1 
In general, the process is easy for coordinatively unsaturated metal 
PPh3 
species, in particular 16-electron (d8 and d"') metals [Ni(O), Pd(O)], since 
these can attain a stable 18-electron configuration as a consequence. 
Additionally, two metal oxidation states must be sufficiently stable. For 
example, tetra kis( tripheny1phosphine)palladium inserts readily at 80 "C 
into the C-Br bond of bromobenzene to give the organometallic com- 
plex PhPd( PPh,),Br. 
In the context of organic synthesis, the process is mainly confined to 
the insertion of metals [mainly Pd(0) but to a lesser extent Ni(O)] into a 
C-X bond, where X is a leaving group such as a halide or triflate 
(CF,SO, ). The order of reactivity is: I > Br = CF3S03 > C1 > F. 
Reactions of iodides and bromides can often be carried out selectively 
in the presence of chloride and fluoride substituents. 
Br, 
I ,PPh 

120 
Aromatic Chemistry 
10.3.2 Reductive Elimination 
Reductive elimination is the converse of oxidative addition and involves 
the elimination of a molecule A-B from a complex in which the groups 
A and B are separately bonded to the metal in a cis relationship (Scheme 
10.12). The process involves a decrease in metal oxidation state and coor- 
dination number by two units. 
Scheme 10.12 
10.3.3 P-Elimination 
In general, transition metal organometallic species that contain an sp3 
carbon bearing a hydrogen atom p to the metal will rapidly eliminate 
the P-hydrogen to form an alkene and a metal hydride (Scheme 10.13). 
Scheme 10.13 
Although the process, which is called P-hydride elimination or simply 
p-elimination, is useful in organic synthesis, it competes with other reac- 
tions, thereby limiting its value. In general, since p-elimination is rapid, 
transition metal mediated reactions of species bearing P-hydrogens often 
fail. 
10.3.4 Transmetallation 
R-ML, 
+ X-M’L’, 
When treated with a second metal complex, certain organometallic 
species undergo a process in which the organic ligand is transferred from 
one metal to the other. This is known as transmetallation (Scheme 10.14). 
The mechanism by which this occurs is not fully understood, but it 
may be metal and ligand dependent. A simple representation is as a con- 
certed process. 
R-M’L’,. 
+ XML, 
1 
.
,
Scheme 10.14 
10.3.5 Insertion Reactions 
Some transition metal organometallic compounds undergo addition 
reactions to carbon<arbon multiple bonds. The process involves a syn 

Organometallic Reactions 
121 
1,2-insertion and proceeds via the intermediacy of a x-complex. The com- 
plex is best represented as a hybrid of the ncomplex and the metalla- 
cyclopropane (Scheme 10.15). Its true nature lies somewhere between the 
two extreme forms. 
Scheme 10.15 
Complexation to a metal activates a double bond towards the addi- 
tion of a nucleophilic species (Scheme 10.16). The metal has modified 
the behaviour of the alkene, which would normally undergo addition 
reactions with electrophiles. 
Scheme 10.16 
I 
0.4 
Aryl Coupling Reactions 
10.4.1 The Ullmann Coupling 
Symmetrical biaryls can be formed by the coupling of two molecules of 
an aryl halide in the presence of copper metal (Scheme 10.17). 
I 
I 
Scheme 10.17 
This reaction is known as the 
, It is believed to 
involve the intermediacy of aryl copper complexes rather than radical 
species. The reaction is best suited to the preparation of symmetrical 
biaryls ("homo-coupled" products). Attempts to couple two different 
halides (Ar'X and Ar2X) in this way can lead to mixtures of the desired 
cross-coupled product (Ar1-Ar2) and the two homo-coupled species 
(Ar I-Ar' and Ar2-Ar2). 

122 
Aromatic Chemistry 
first to be developed extensively was the 
, which specifi- 
tally involves the coupling of an arylstannane with an aryl halide or 
triflate under the action of palladium catalysis (Scheme 10.19). 
ArSnR3 + A ~ ’ x  -Ar--Ar’ 
10.4.2 The Stille and Related Reactions 
The synthesis of unsymmetrical biaryls 8 from two monoaryl species 
involves the coupling of a metallated aromatic molecule 6 with an aryl 
halide or triflate 4 under the action of palladium(0) catalysis. The reac- 
tion involves a catalytic cycle in which palladium(0) inserts into the 
C-halogen 
bond 
viu an oxidative 
addition 
to 
generate 
an 
arylpalladium(I1) species 5 (Scheme 10.18). This undergoes a trans- 
metallation with the metallated component, producing a biarylpalladi- 
um(I1) complex 7. The biaryl product is formed by reductive elimination. 
In the process, Pd(0) is regenerated and this can then react with a second 
molecule of aryl halide. Pd(0) is therefore a catalyst for the reaction. 
Scheme 10.18 

Organometallic Reactions 
123 
R 
A 
Scheme 10.20 
(Scheme 10.21). It is quite common to use M to designate a metallic 
function. In Scheme 10.21, M represents tin and boron functions. The 
mechanism is analogous to that described previously. 
The reactions may also be carried out under an atmosphere of car- 
bon monoxide, CO (Scheme 10.22), when the usual catalytic cycle occurs. 
CO inserts easily into the palladium complex Ar-Pd'I-X. 
The aryl 
ligand migrates on to the carbonyl group to form a metal-acyl species, 
X-Pd"-C(0)Ar. 
A transmetallation-reductive elimination sequence fol- 
lows, forming the ketone and regenerating the PdO catalyst. 
Scheme 10.21 
0 
I 
I- 
I 
Scheme 10.22 
10.4.3 The Heck Reaction 
The direct coupling of an aryl halide with an alkene to produce a 
phenylethene is known as the 
(Scheme 10.23). The mech- 
anism involves coordination of the alkene to the palladium to form a 7c- 
complex 9 with which the arene ligand can react. A variety of substituents 
on the alkene is compatible with the reaction. 

124 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 10.23 
10.4.4 Amination Reactions 
An aryl halide can also be coupled to an amine using metal catalysis. 
The reaction represents an alternative to the classical methods for the 
synthesis of aryl amines, such as reduction of nitro groups and nucleo- 
philic aromatic substitution (see Chapter 8). 
The reaction is particularly useful for the synthesis of biaryl amines, 
some of which are of value as drugs, dyes and agrochemicals, and which 
are often inaccessible directly by other methods. 
An amine can be coupled with an aryl bromide, iodide or triflate in 
the presence of a palladium catalyst, a base, typically KOBu' or CsCO,, 
and a ligand such as the bidentate phosphine BINAP. These reactions 
are known as 
or 
(Scheme 10.24). 
A catalytic cycle is again inyolved, with the amine displacing X from 
Ar-Pd"-X to form Ar-Pd"-NHR,. 
Abstraction of a proton by the base 
produces Ar-Pd"-NR,, 
which undergoes a reductive elimination. 
Scheme 10.24 

Organometallic Reactions 
125 
Scheme 10.25 
Scheme 10.26 
10.5 
Arene-Chromium Tricarbonyl Complexes 
Arenes form $-complexes with a number of transition metals (e.g. Cr, 
Mo, W, Fe). Complexes of chromium have found widespread applica- 
tion because of their ease of synthesis, stability, easy removal of the 
ligands and usefulness in synthesis. 
hapticity number. 
10.5.1 Preparation and Structure 
They may be prepared by heating Cr(CO), or Cr(CO),(NH,), in the 
arene as solvent (Scheme 10.27) or, when use of excess arene is undesir- 
able, by exchange with the naphthalene complex 10. The procedure 
works well for electron-rich arenes, but is of no value for electron- 
deficient aromatic compounds. Decomplexation can subsequently be 

126 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Scheme 10.27 
Scheme 10.28 
achieved by treatment with mild oxidants such as I,, FeIII, Ce"' or even 
by air oxidation. 
I 
I 
Complexation has a marked effect on reactivity because it removes 
electron density from the n-cloud. This makes both the ring and the side 
chain of the arene acidic and therefore susceptible to nucleophilic attack. 
The electron-withdrawing effect of the chromium is comparable to that 
of a nitro group (see Chapter 7). 
10.5.2 Reaction with Organolithium Reagents 
Treatment of the Cr complex with MeLi or BuLi usually leads to depro- 
tonation as a consequence of the acidity of the ring. The lithiated species 
reacts with electrophiles in the usual manner (see Section 10.1.3) (Scheme 
10.28). This route is another means of deprotonation of aromatic rings 
and may sometimes be more convenient than directed metallation or 
halogen-metal exchange, especially if the precursors to such species are 
not readily accessible. 
Complexed aryl halides undergo ready displacement of the halide by 
nucleophiles such as alkoxides, amines and stabilized carbanions to form 
substituted benzenes (Scheme 10.29). 

Organometallic Reactions 
127 
Scheme 10.29 
10.5.3 The Dotz Reaction 
A further application of chromium complexes in aromatic chemistry 
allows the construction of a new aromatic ring. In the 
, an alkyne adds to an unsaturated alkoxychromium carbene 11 to 
give a hydroquinone-chromium complex 12. Decomplexation yields the 
aromatic compound (Scheme 10.30). 
Scheme 10.30 
The annulation reaction is formally a [3 + 2 + 11 cycloaddition of the 
carbene, alkyne and a CO molecule. The connectivity is shown in 13. 
13 

128 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Oxidation and Reduction of 
Aromatic Compounds 
11 .I Introduction 
The unusual stability of the aromatic sextet suggests that benzene will 
be resistant to oxidation and reduction of the ring, since both processes 
will destroy the aromaticity. Although this is generally the case, both 
types of reaction are possible under certain conditions. This chapter is 
restricted to benzene and its derivatives, but other aromatic systems are 
more easily oxidized and reduced (see Chapter 12). 
1 I .2 Reduction of the Benzene Ring 
11 1211 Hydrogenation 
We have seen in Chapter 1 that benzene may be hydrogenated to cyclo- 
hexane, although the associated loss of resonance energy makes this 
process more difficult than for simple alkenes. Moreover, because the 
initial product, cyclohexadiene, is reduced more rapidly than benzene, 
hydrogenation results in complete rather than partial reduction (Scheme 
11.1). 
Scheme 11.1 
Cyclohexane, cyclohexene and cyclohexadiene are used as hydrogen 
sources in the hydrogenation of alkenes to alkanes, when they are them- 
selves oxidized to benzene. In these reactions, the driving force is the for- 
mation of the aromatic ring. 
129 

130 
Aromatic Chemistry 
1 I .2.2 Alkali Metal-Ammonia Reduction 
Scheme 11.2 
The partial reduction of arenes can be achieved using the 
An alkali metal (lithium, sodium or potassium) is dissolved in 
liquid ammonia in the presence of the arene, an alcohol, such as 
2-methylpropan-2-01 (tert-butyl alcohol) and a co-solvent to assist 
solubility. 
A solution of sodium in ammonia may be considered as a source of 
solvated electrons. The alcohol functions as a proton source. The aro- 
matic molecule accepts an electron from the solution to form a radical 
anion 1, protonation of which by the alcohol forms the radical 2 (Scheme 
1 1.2). Acceptance of a second electron generates a new carbanion, which 
is also protonated and gives the 1,4-diene 3. The overall transformation 
is reduction of the aromatic compound to the 1,4-diene. 
H
H
 
NH3, ROH 
H 
H
H
 
1 
2 
3 
It might be expected that the more reactive metals would be those 
with the lower ionization potential, but in practice lithium is the most 
reactive and potassium the least in the reduction of benzene. This 
behaviour may be a consequence of the greater solubility of lithium in 
ammonia. 
Substituted arenes also undergo Birch reduction. In general, electron- 
withdrawing substituents make the arene more susceptible to reduction, 
while the opposite applies for electron-donating substituents. The pres- 
ence of a substituent can lead to two isomeric products, in which the 
substituent is either of a vinylic or an allylic type. In general, electron- 
withdrawing groups lead to the allylic product 4 and electron-donating 
substituents give the vinylic product 5 (Scheme 11.3). 
This observed selectivity is attributed to the relative stabilities of 
the intermediate radical anions. With an electron-withdrawing group 
present, the anion is most stable when localized on the carbon bearing 
the substituents, because of the additional stabilization by the sub- 
stituent. This is illustrated in Scheme 11 -4 for an ester substituent. The 
anion is stabilized by delocalization in an analogous manner to an 
enolate (see Chapter 6). 

Oxidation and Reduction of Aromatic Compounds 
131 
4 
5 
X = C02H, C02R, CHO, COR, CONR2 
X = OH, OR, R, NR2, SiR3 
In contrast, an electron-donating group (EDG) would destabilize such 
an anion and so the negative charge is localized at C-2 in order to 
minimize the high-energy interaction between two adjacent electron-rich 
sites. Thus 6 is more stable than 7. 
The intermediate anions may be trapped by other electrophiles 
besides a proton. For instance, treatment of methyl benzoate with 
sodium-ammonia gives the enolate 8, which is alkylated by iodomethane 
to give the reduced compound 9 (Scheme 11.5). The methyl group is 
located a to the electron-withdrawing ester group as predicted above. 
Scheme 11.3 
Scheme 11.4 
EDG 
EDG 
H b 
H 
.H Q 
H
H
 
6 
7 
Scheme 11.5 
11.3 Oxidation of the Benzene Rinq 
11.3.1 Quinones 
Except under extreme conditions, oxidation of the benzene ring requires 
the presence of strongly electron-donating groups such as hydroxyl or 
amino. These groups are simultaneously oxidized. The best known 
products of this oxidation process are the quinones 
(p-benzoquinone, cyclohexadiene- 1,4-dione, 10) and 
(o-benzoquinone, cyclohexadiene- 1,2-dione, 11). 
In both of these molecules the aromaticity has been lost. However, 
regeneration of the aromatic ring is readily achieved. The easy reduction 
of benzoquinone makes it useful as an oxidizing agent. Restoration of 
aromaticity is the driving force in the reaction. Such quinone-hydro- 
quinone redox systems play an important role in biological systems, 
besides having significant commercial value. The substituted derivatives 

132 
Aromatic Chemistry 
0 
0 
10 
11 
12 
13 
tetrachlorobenzo- 1,4-quinone (chloranil, 12) and 2,3-dichloro-5,6- 
dicyanobenzo- 1,4-quinone (DDQ, 13) are stronger oxidizing agents 
which are frequently used in synthesis. 
Quinones can be prepared by the oxidation of phenols, dihydroxy- 
benzenes, dimethoxybenzenes and anilines. For example, 1,4-dihydroxy- 
benzene (hydroquinone) can be oxidized in good yield using sodium 
chlorate in dilute sulfuric acid in the presence of vanadium pentoxide 
and also by manganese dioxide and sulfuric acid and by chromic acid. 
Other reagents which convert hydroquinones to quinones include 
Fremy's salt [potassium nitrosodisulfonate, (KSO,),NO] and cerium(1V) 
ammonium nitrate [CAN, Ce(NH,),(NO,),]. 
NH2 
I 
0 
II 
OH 
I 
0 
OH 
Scheme 11.8 
The commercial route to hydroquinone from aniline (see Chapter 4) 
proceeds via the isolated intermediate benzo- 1,4-quinone (Scheme 1 1.6). 
Benzo- 1,2-quinone (1 1) is prepared by the oxidation of 1,2-dihydrox- 
ybenzene (catechol) with silver(1) oxide in diethyl ether. This compound 
is not very stable and is also an oxidizing agent. 
11.3.2 Microbial Oxidation 
Microbial oxidation of arenes is a feasible process. An example is the 
conversion of benzene to cylohexa-3,5-diene-l,2-diol 
(14, R = H) by the 
bacterium Pseudomonas putida (P. putida). The process is stereoselective 
and with substituted benzenes (14, R # H) a single enantiomer is pro- 
duced (Scheme 1 1.7). Such compounds are useful starting materials for 
natural product synthesis. 

Oxidation and Reduction of Aromatic Compounds 
133 
R 
R 
6 - 
P.putida eH 
' 
OH 
14 
Scheme 11.7 
Scheme 11.8 

134 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Polycyclic Aromatic 
Hydrocarbons 
8 
1 
5 
4 
1 
2 
1 2 m l  Introduction 
The term polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon is usually applied to com- 
pounds where the rings are fused together as in the case of 
(1), 
(2) and 
(3). This chapter will concentrate 
on the synthesis and reactions of these molecules. 
Compounds such as the biphenyls and diphenylmethane are some- 
times referred to as polycyclic systems, but a brief description of the 
chemistry of these compounds has already been given in Chapter 3. 
12.2 Chemistry of Naphthalene 
12.2.1 Introduction 
Naphthalene (1) is the largest single component of coal tar at 9% and 
this still remains a source, although it is also produced from petroleum 
fractions at high temperature. Not all positions on the naphthalene ring 
are equivalent and the numbering of the ring is as shown in structure 1. 
The positions 1 and 2 are also called the a- and P-positions. 
135 

136 
Aromatic Chemistry 
In contrast to benzene, the bond lengths in naphthalene are not 
all equal, as illustrated in 4. The resonance energy of naphthalene is 
255 kJ mol-*, which is higher than, though not twice that of, benzene 
(151 kJ mol-l). In the canonical forms 5 and 7 that contribute to the 
valence bond structure for naphthalene, only one of the two rings is fully 
benzenoid. Naphthalene is less aromatic than benzene, which accounts 
for its higher reactivity towards electrophilic attack compared with ben- 
~ 
Pm 14'pm 
zene. 
- 
141 pm 
C !  benzene 
142 pm 
4 
(JJ-a-a
/ /  
\ \  
5 
6 
7 
12.2.2 Synthesis of Naphthalene 
There are two main synthetic routes to naphthalene: the Haworth syn- 
thesis and a Diels-Alder approach. In the 
(Scheme 
12. l), benzene is reacted under Friedel-Crafts conditions with succinic 
anhydride (butanedioic anhydride) to produce 4-0x0-4-phenylbutanoic 
acid, which is reduced with either amalgamated zinc and HCl (the 
Clemmensen reduction) or hydrazine, ethane- 1,2-diol and potassium 
hydroxide (the Wolff-Kischner reaction) to 4-phenylbutanoic acid. 
Ring closure is achieved by heating in polyphosphoric acid (PPA). The 
product is 1-tetralone and reduction of the carbonyl group then gives 
1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene (tetralin). Aromatization is achieved by 
dehydrogenation over a palladium catalyst. 
This route to naphthalenes is versatile. Alkyl and aryl substituents can 
be introduced into the 1-position through reaction of 1-tetralone with a 
Scheme 12.1 

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
137 
Grignard reagent (see Chapter lo), followed by dehydration and arom- 
atization (Scheme 12.2). The use of substituted benzenes in the first stage 
of the sequence enables variously substituted derivatives of naphthalene 
to be obtained. Of course, the substituents should not interfere with the 
Friedel-Crafts reaction with succinic anhydride. 
Scheme 12.2 
The 
reaction of benzo- 1,4-quinone with 1,3-dienes pro- 
duces adducts that may be converted to naphtho- 1,4-quinones via enol- 
ization and oxidation (Scheme 12.3). 
Scheme 12.3 
12.2.3 Reactions of Naphthalene 
Naphthalene is readily hydrogenated to tetrahydronaphthalene, which is 
used as a paint solvent, but further reduction to produce decahydro- 
naphthalene (decalin) requires forcing conditions (Raney nickel catalyst 
at 200 "C:). The first step in the reduction of naphthalene can be achieved 
by reaction with sodium in boiling ethanol, which produces 1,4-dihy- 
dronaphthalene. The tetrahydro compound is formed in the higher-boil- 
ing 3-methylbutanol (isopentyl alcohol) (Scheme 12.4). 
I 
Scheme 12.4 
In Chapter 2, electrophilic substitution in naphthalene was discussed, 
when consideration of the stability of the cationic intermediates arising 

138 
Aromatic Chemistry 
13 
from attack at the 1- and 2-positions indicated that the former is 
favoured. Nevertheless, the energy of the two intermediates is not vastly 
different and under more forcing conditions attack may occur at the 
2-position. Naphthalene is more reactive towards electrophiles than is 
benzene and hence milder conditions are generally employed. 
In the case of Friedel-Crafts reactions, mild conditions are essential, 
since binaphthyls are formed under vigorous conditions. Reaction with 
acetyl chloride in tetrachloroethane in the presence of aluminium chlo- 
ride gives 1 -acetylnaphthalene (Scheme 12.5), although in nitrobenzene 
the 2-acetyl derivative 11 is the major product. Attack at the less hin- 
dered 2-position is preferred in the latter case because of the larger size 
of the solvated acylating species. 
dsa=m 
i 
VOMe 
Scheme 12.5 

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
139 
stable, probably because there is less steric hindrance between the bulky 
sulfonic acid group and the adjacent ortho H atoms (H-1 and H-3) than 
between the 1-sulfonic acid and the peri H-8 atom. 
This process illustrates the concept of kinetic versus thermodynamic 
control of a reaction, with naphthalene- 1 -sulfonic acid being the kinet- 
ic product and the 2-sulfonic acid the thermodynamic product. The ener- 
gy changes associated with these processes are illustrated in Figure 12.1. 
The orientation of disubstitution in naphthalene follows a similar pat- 
tern to that encountered in benzene: 
Electron-donating substituents at the 1-position activate the 2- and 
4-posi tions 
Electron-donating substituents at the 2-position activate the 
1 -position 
Electron-withdrawing substituents direct attack to the second ring 
With an electron-donating substituent at C-2, attack at C-1 is preferred 
since attack at C-3 would produce a Wheland intermediate in which the 
aromaticity in the second ring is disturbed (Figure 12.2). 
, are readily acces- 
sible from the naphthalenesulfonic acids by heating them to fusion with 
solid alkali. They are also available from coal tar. 
The reactions of both 1-naphthol and 2-naphthol closely resemble 
those of phenols. For example, both can be acylated and alkylated. 2- 
Naphthol is more reactive than 1-naphthol. The hydroxyl group acti- 
vates the ring to electrophilic substitution. Thus, in addition to attack 
by the usual electrophiles, reaction with weaker electrophiles can occur, 
Hydroxynaphthalenes, which are called 
Figure 12.1 Energy profile for 
the sulfonation of naphthalene. 
AG, = energy of activation for 1- 
substitution; AG, = energy of 
activation for 2-substitution; AG, 
< AG2, so naphthalene-1 -sulfonic 
acid is the more easily formed 
and is the kinetic product. AG3 = 
energy required to reverse forma- 
tion of naphthalene-l -sulfonic 
acid; AG4 = energy required to 
reverse formation of naphthalene- 
2-sulfonic acid; AG4 > AG3, so 
naphthalene-2-sulfonic acid is 
thermodynamically more stable 
than the 1-sulfonic acid 

140 
Aromatic Chemistry 
Figure 12.2 
as exemplified by azo coupling and nitrosation. 1-Naphthol couples with 
benzenediazonium chloride at the 4-position (Scheme 12.7): 2-naphthol 
couples at the 1-position. 
+ ArN2+Cl- - 
NaOH @ 
N=NAr 
Scheme 12.7 
Treatment of 1- and 2-naphthol with nitrous acid results in the intro- 
duction of a nitroso group at the expected positions. The products exist 
as a mixture of the nitroso and oxime tautomers, conjugated with the 
enol and keto functions, respectively (Scheme 12.8). 
Scheme 12.8 
The 
may be prepared by reduction of the correspon- 
ding nitro compound, but they are readily accessible from naphthols by 
the 
. The naphthol is heated, preferably under pressure 
in an autoclave, with ammonia and aqueous sodium hydrogen sulfite 
solution, when an addition-elimination sequence occurs. The detailed 
mechanism is not completely elucidated, but the Bucherer reaction is 
restricted to those phenols that show a tendency to tautomerize to the 
keto form, such as the naphthols and 1,3-dihydroxybenzene (resorcinol). 
Using 1-naphthol for illustration, the first step is addition of the hydro- 
sulfite across the 3,4-double bond of either the enol or keto tautomer 
(Scheme 12.9). Nucleophilic attack by ammonia at the carbonyl group 

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
141 
is followed by elimination of water. The sequence is completed by 
tautomerization of the imine to the naphthylamine and elimination of 
hydrosulfite. The Bucherer reaction is fully reversible and naphthy- 
lamines may be converted into naphthols by treatment with aqueous 
sodium hydrogen sulfite. 
S03Na 
The amino group of the naphthylamines exhibits reactions typical of 
Scheme 12.9 
aniline. As with aniline, it is advantageous to acetylate the group prior 
to further electrophilic substitution. 
12.3 Chemistry of Anthracene 
12.3.1 Introduction 
Valence bond theory considers that anthracene is best regarded as a res- 
onance hybrid of the four structures 15-18. The resonance energy of 
anthracene is 351 kJ mol-I. Examination of the canonical forms indicates 
that the three rings cannot all be benzenoid at the same time. It can also 
be seen that the central ring contains a four-carbon fragment with a rel- 
atively high degree of double bond character. The numbering system, 
shown in 15, is a little unusual and was introduced during early chemical 
studies to indicate the special character associated with the 9- and 10- 
positions. 
10 
4 
15 
16 
17 
18 

142 
Aromatic Chemistry 
12.3.2 Synthesis of Anthracene 
Scheme 12.10 
Although it is possible to synthesize anthracene in a number of ways 
using Friedel-Crafts methodology, the usual routes involve either an 
adaptation of the 
of naphthalene or a 
using naphtho- 1,4-quinone as the dienophile. 
Friedel-Crafts reaction of phthalic anhydride with benzene in the pres- 
ence of aluminium chloride followed by cyclization under acidic condi- 
tions gives anthra-9,lO-quinone (Scheme 12.10). Distillation over zinc 
dust gives anthracene. 
Anthra-9,lO-quinone is the eventual product from the cycloaddition 
of buta- 1,3-diene to naphtho- 1,4-quinone after oxidation of the tetrahy- 
droanthraquinone adduct. 
12.3.3 Reactions of Anthracene 
Much of the chemistry of anthracene is associated with the special char- 
acter of the central fragment of the system. Thus anthracene is easily 
oxidized to form anthra-9,lO-quinone. Reduction to 9,lO-dihydroan- 
thracene is readily achieved with Na/EtOH. In both cases the product 
contains two fully non-conjugated benzenoid rings. 
Similarly, halogenation of anthracene involves addition at the 9,lO- 
positions, giving 9,1O-dichloro-9,1O-dihydroanthracene 
which on heating 
loses HCl to form 9-chloroanthracene. 
Anthracene cannot be nitrated with nitric acid because of its easy oxi- 
dation to anthraquinone, although 9-nitroanthracene can be isolated 
from nitration in acetic anhydride at room temperature. 
The dienic character of the central ring is illustrated by the reaction 
of anthracene with dienophiles in Diels-Alder reactions. For example, 
cis-butenedioic anhydride (maleic anhydride) reacts readily; when 
benzyne is generated in the presence of anthracene, triptycene (19) is 
produced. 
Derivatives of anthraquinone are important as dyestuffs for the col- 
oration of a variety of fabrics. 
\ m 

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
143 
12.4 Chemistry of Phenanthrene 
12.4.1 Introduction 
Phenanthrene is best represented as a hybrid of the five canonical forms 
20-24. It has a resonance energy of 380 kJ mol and is more stable than 
anthracene. In four of the five resonance structures, the 9,lO-bond is 
double and its length is about the same as an alkenic C=C bond. The 
numbering system for phenanthrene is shown in 20. Five different mono- 
substituted products are possible. 
23 
24 
12.4.2 Synthesis of Phenanthrene 
There are two major routes to phenanthrene, both of which can be used 
to prepare substituted derivatives. In the 
(Scheme 
12.1 l), reaction of naphthalene with succinic anhydride yields an oxobut- 
anoic acid which is reduced under Clemmensen conditions to the 
butanoic acid. Cyclization in sulfuric acid and reduction of the resulting 
ketone is followed by dehydrogenation over palladium-on-carbon to 
phenanthrene. Alkyl or aryl derivatives can be obtained by treatment of 
the intermediate ketone with a Grignard reagent prior to dehydration 
and oxidation. 
In the 
(Scheme 12.12), a Perkin reaction (see 
Chapter 6) between 2-nitrobenzaldehyde and sodium phenylacetate in 
the presence of acetic anhydride yields 3-(2-nitrophenyl)-2-phenyl- 
propenoic acid. Reduction of the nitro group and deamination of the 
resulting amine via its diazonium salt (see Chapter 8) is accompanied by 
cyclization. Thermal decarboxylation completes the sequence. 

144 
Aromatic Chemistry 
0 
Scheme 12.1 1 
Scheme 12.12 
25 
26 
C02H 
/ 
1. [HI 
2. NaN02, H2SO4 
HC- IC02H 
12.4.3 Reactions of Phenanthrene 
Both reduction (H2, Pt catalyst) and oxidation (CrO,, AcOH) of the 9,lO- 
bond are readily accomplished, yielding 9,lO-dihydrophenanthrene (25) 
and phenanthra-9,lO-quinone (26), respectively. 
In acetic acid solution, phenanthrene undergoes addition of chlorine 
to give a mixture of cis- and trans-9,10-dich1oro-9,10-dihydrophenan- 
threnes (Scheme 12.13). The accompanying formation of an acetoxy deriv- 
ative suggests that the normal electrophilic addition to a double bond is 
occurring. The dichloro addition compound eliminates hydrogen chloride 
to give 9-chlorophenanthrene. However, reaction with bromine in reflux- 
ing tetrachloromethane produces 9-bromophenanthrene and an alterna- 
tive mechanism is probably operating. Other electrophilic substitution 
reactions of phenanthrene lead to mixtures of products. 

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
145 
AcO 
Scheme 12.13 

Answers to Problems 
140 

Answers to Problems 
149 

150 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
151 

152 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
153 

154 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
155 

156 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
157 

158 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
159 

160 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
161 

162 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
163 

164 
Aromatic Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
165 

