Polymers 
Properties and Applications 
Editorial Board: 
Prof. Hans-Joachim Cantow 
Institut fUr Makromolekulare Chemie der Universitiit 
Stefan-Meier-StraBe 31, 
7800 Freiburg/Federal Republic of Germany 
Prof. H. James Harwood 
Institute of Polymer Science, The University of Akron 
Akron, OH 44325/USA 
Prof. Joseph P. Kennedy 
Institute of Polymer Science, The University of Akron 
Akron, OH 44325/USA 
Prof. Anthony Ledwith 
Pilkington Brothers pic., R&D Laboratories 
Lathom Ormskirk 
Lancashire UO 5UF/UK 
Prof. Joachim MeifJner 
Eidgentissische Technische Hochschule Zurich 
Institut fUr Polymere, ETH-Zentrum 
CH-8092 Zurich 
Prof. Seizo Okamura 
No. 24 Minami-Goshomachi 
Okazaki 
Sakyo-ku, 606 Kyoto, Japan 
Dr. G. Henrici-Olivet Prof. S. OIM 
1332 Neal Road 
Cantonment, FL 32533/USA 
13 

L. T. Fan, S. K. Singh 
Controlled Release 
A Quantitative Treatment 
With 81 Figures 
Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg New York 
London Paris Tokyo Hong Kong 

Professor Liang-tseng Fan 
Department of Chemical Engineering 
Kansas State University 
Durland Hall 
Manhattan, KS 66506jUSA 
Dr. Sat ish Kumar Singh 
Kabi Pharma 
Giirdsvagen 6 
Box 1828 
S-171 26 Solna, Sweden 
ISBN-13: 978-3-642-74509-6 
e-ISBN-13: 978-3-642-74507-2 
DOl: 10.1007/978-3-642-74507-2 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Fan, L. T. (Liang-tseng), 1929 
Controlled release: a quantitative treatment 1 L. T. Fan, S. K. Singh, p. cm. -
(Polymers, properties and applications; 13) Includes index. 
1. Controlled release technology. 1. Singh, S. K. II. Title. III. Series. 
TP 156.C64F36 1989 660.2 - dc 19 89-4323 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifi-
cally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in 
other ways, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is only permitted under the provi-
sions of the German Copyright Law of September 9,1965, in its version of June 24, 1985, and a copyright fee must always 
be paid. Violations fall under the prosecution act of the German Copyright Law. 
© Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg 1989 
Solkover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1989 
The use of registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in tbe absence of a specific state-
ment, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
2152/3020-543210 

To the Memory of 
Professor Takeru Higuchi 
Father of 
Modem Controlled-Release Technology 

Preface 
The concept of controlled release has attracted increasing attention over the last two 
decades, with the applications of this technology proliferating in diverse fields in-
cluding medicine, agriculture and biotechnology. Research and developmental 
efforts related to controlled release are multiplying in both industry and academia. 
The reason for this phenomenal growth is obvious. The use of a variety of 
biologically active agents, such as drugs, fertilizers and pesticides, has become an 
integral part of modern society. Along with the use of these reagents has evolved an 
awareness that their uncontrolled application almost inevitably induces harmful 
effects on the health of humans and their surrounding environments. To eliminate 
or minimize these harmful effects necessitates the controlled release of these 
chemicals. Moreover, the controlled release of substances, not usually considered 
toxic or hazardous, e.g., some catalysts and nutrients, can enhance their effectiveness. 
The number and variety of controlled release systems, differing in their physical 
and chemical makeup, are increasing rapidly. Proliferation almost always demands 
correlation, generalization and unification; it requires both the development of 
underlying theories of their behavior and the mechanistic interpretation of their 
performance. This, in turn, requires a statistical and mathematical (quantitative) 
treatment of the scientific information and technical data pertaining to them. 
A quantitative treatment can also facilitate the formulation of procedures for 
computer-aided design of these systems through a priori prediction of their per-
formance for a variety of design parameters. 
Various controlled release systems are treated in this monograph; these systems 
are classified on the basis of the release mechanisms. A discussion is given of the 
release mechanisms and of the factors governing the release profile. This is followed 
by a review of major mathematical models that are .applicable to the systems. 
These mathematical models are classified on the basis of the assumptions involved. 
The majority of the models are of the deterministic type; however, the hetero-
geneous or meso scopic nature of some of the systems requires that a stochastic 
approach be employed. Thus a fairly extensive treatment of this approach to 
the modeling of diffusion is included at the end. 
Acknowledgement 
The authors' research, supported for several years by the Kansas Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Kansas State University, has culminated in the present mono-
VII 

Preface 
graph. The manuscript was ably typed mainly by Janet Vinduska and Peggy Hanes. 
The first author (LTF) also wishes to acknowledge the aid of his wife, Eva, in 
preparing the manuscript. 
March 1989 
VIII 
L. T. Fan 
S. K. Singh 

Table of Contents 
1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . 
1.1 Diffusion-Controlled Systems . 
1.1.1 Reservoir Devices . . . 
1.1.2 Monolithic Devices. . . 
1.2 Erosion or Chemical Reaction Controlled Systems 
1.2.1 Erosion-Controlled Devices . . . . . 
1.2.2 Chemical Reaction Controlled Devices 
1.3 Swelling-Controlled Release Systems. 
1.4 Osmotic Pumping Systems 
References. . . . . . . . 
2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
2.1 Diffusion in Polymers . 
2.1.1 Estimation of Diffusion Coefficients 
2.1.2 Factors Influencing Diffusional Release. 
2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems . 
2.2.1 Reservoir Devices . 
2.2.2 Monolithic Devices. 
2.2.3 Porous Devices 
References. . . . . . . 
3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release . . . . . . 
3.1 Physically Immobilized Active Agent Systems . 
3.2 Chemically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
3.3 Models for Physically Immobilized Erosion-Activated Systems 
References. . . . . . . . 
4 Swelling-Controlled Release . 
4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
4.1.1 Transport of Penetrants in Polymers . . . . . . . . . 
4.1.2 Models for Transport of Penetrants in Glassy Polymers . 
I 
3 
3 
4 
5 
5 
6 
6 
6 
7 
9 
II 
14 
20 
44 
49 
61 
79 
83 
89 
90 
94 
102 
107 
110 
111 
112 
120 
IX 

Table of Contents 
4.2 Active Agent Release from Swell able Polymers 
4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems. 
125 
130 
4.3.1 One-Region Models 
4.3.2 Two-Region Models 
References. . . . . . . . . 
131 
136 
152 
5 Special Controlled-Release Systems 
5.1 Osmotic Pumping Devices . . 
157 
157 
162 
164 
5.2 Osmotically Activated Monolithic Devices 
5.3 Externally Modulated Devices 
References. . . . . . . . . . . 
166 
6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous 
or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix. . . 
167 
6.1 Derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170 
6.1.1 Statistical Model for the Porous! 
Heterogeneous-Polymer Matrix. . 
170 
6.1.2 State of the Diffusing Molecule and State Transitions. 
172 
6.1.3 Derivation of the Master Equation . . . . . 
175 
6.1.4 Recovery of the Diffusion Equation 
177 
6.2 Transport Coefficients from the Diffusion Equation 
184 
6.2.1 Mean or Effective Diffusion Coefficient . 
185 
6.2.2 Drift or Convective Velocity. . . . 
187 
6.3 Transport Coefficients in Specific Systems . . 
188 
6.3.1 Mean or Effective Diffusion Coefficient. 
188 
6.3.2 Drift or Convective Velocity. . . . . . 
191 
6.4 Monte Carlo Simulations of Transport in Porous Media 
192 
6.4.1 Procedure. . . 
193 
6.4.2 Results . . . . 
195 
6.5 Concluding Remarks. 
197 
References. . . . . . . 
200 
Appendix 6A. Conversion of Probability to Number Concentration 
202 
Appendix 6B. Derivation of Equation (6.39) from Equation (6.37). 
204 
Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code for Monte Carlo 
Simulation of Transport in Porous Networks 
206 
7 Epilogue. . 
225 
References . 
226 
Author Index . 
227 
Subject Index . 
231 
x 

1. Introduction 
In the search for safe, economical, and efficient means of providing for the 
health and well-being of mankind, modern science has produced numerous active 
agents that manipulate the biological environment around and within us. Never-
theless, the use of these active agents is fraught with inefficiencies stemming from 
an inability to deliver these agents to their targets at the right time and in 
the right amounts. This results in their loss and in undesirable side effects and 
leads to a regimen requiring repeated treatment to produce and sustain the desired 
effect. With drugs, periodic dosage produces peaks and valleys in the concentration 
of the drug in the blood stream, possibly between harmful and ineffective levels 
(see Fig. 1.1). Agricultural chemicals such as pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides, 
and fumigants create the same problems when applied directly. To counter these 
problems, scientists have conventionally looked to altering the persistency and 
effectiveness of the reagents through modification of the reagents themselves. 
However, this approach tends to be difficult, time consuming, and expensive. 
-c 
o o 
..c 
c: 
c: 
o -
o 
L. -
c: 
'" 
u 
c: 
o 
u 
0> 
::::J 
L. 
Cl 
t----;;P-'\~--....!.lo;:------------- Tox i c I eve I 
--.... , (dl 
" \ 
\ 
\ 
t'fI-:f-----T---4~------.....:\ 
........ - Mi n i mum effect i ve 
Time 
\ 
\ 
level 
Fig. 1.1. Typical drug level in blood vs. time profiles for various modes of delivery. 
a standard oral dose, b oral overdose, c intraveneous injection, d controlled release dose 

1 Introduction 
In recent years, increasing attention has been given to methods by which active 
reagents or chemicals are administered, giving rise to the field of controlled release. 
Controlled release may be defined as a technique by which active chemicals are 
made available to a target at a rate and duration so as to produce a desired effect. 
The objective of the technique is the maintenance of this desired rate or concentration 
level (Kydonieus, 1980). Among the advantages of this technique are more efficient 
utilization of the active agent, possibility of targeting, less frequent administration, 
and reduction in side effects. These advantages can sometimes make an otherwise 
unsuitable active agent attractive. This is especially true in pharmaceutics. New 
and powerful macromolecular drugs are being discovered or "engineered" at 
a rapid rate. Nevertheless, these drugs can be cumbersome to administer and 
often produce side effects. Controlled release can alleviate these difficulties. 
In medicine, the approach of sustained-release has been utilized for a long 
time. This approach comprises the formulation of drug complexes, enteric formula-
tions, suspensions, emulsions, and compressed tablets, to retard the drug's rate of 
availability to the body. The formulations, however, are strongly influenced by 
the environmental conditions and are not true controlled-release systems. Controlled 
release implies a predictible and reproducible release profile relatively independent 
of environment; this gives rise to a higher degree of control than achieved in 
sustained release formulations. 
The basic controlled-release formulation consists of an active agent (the drug, 
fertilizer etc.) and a carrier (commonly a polymeric material) arranged so as to 
allow the active agent to be released at the target over a period of time at 
a controlled rate. Numerous design variations towards this objective have been 
proposed. Some of the common ones are (see, e.g., Cowsar, 1974; Kydonieus, 
1980) : 
1. A capsule of polymeric material filled with the active agent in either the 
solid, liquid or solution form, release being controlled by diffusion through the 
capsule wall (reservoir deviCes). 
2. A heterogeneous dispersion or homogeneous solution of the active agent in 
a polymeric matrix, release being controlled by diffusion through and/or erosion 
of the polymer (monolithic devices). 
3. A laminate of the active agent and polymer forming a "sandwich", release being 
controlled by diffusion, erosion or both. 
4. A swellable polymeric matrix with the active agent dispersed and/or dissolved in 
the polymer, release occurring as a result of swelling (or gelatinization) of the 
polymer in the environmental fluid and the consequent diffusion of the active 
agent. 
5. Liquid-liquid encapsulation of the active agent in a viscous solution, release 
being controlled by diffusion or dilution. 
6. Chemical bonding of the active agent to a polymeric backbone and subsequent 
release by controlled bond cleavage in the target environment. 
7. Macromolecular structures of the active agent formed via ionic or covalent 
linkages with release controlled by hydrolysis, thermodynamic dissociation, 
or microbial or enzymatic degradation. 
8. A capsule of active agent-impermeable polymer membrane, with release occurring 
2 

1.1 Diffusion-Controlled Systems 
through an orifice due to osmotic pressure created by the permeation of 
environmental fluids. 
Examples of the various kinds of devices in use can be found elsewhere (Kydonieus, 
1980; Baker, 1987) 
The preceding classification of controlled release systems is based on the physical 
design. Controlled release systems can also be classified according to their major 
rate controlling mechanism. This classification is more meaningful from the view 
point of the technologist or designer; it broadly divides the systems into those 
controlled by: 
I. Diffusion 
2. Erosion or chemical reactions 
3. Swelling 
4. Osmosis 
The classification of a device into any of these categories is determined by 
the nature of interaction between the polymer and environmental fluid. Depending 
on the extent of this interaction, the polymer forming the device may remain 
unchanged or it may undergo erosion or swelling. If the polymer remains unaffected 
and release occurs solely through diffusion, the device falls in the category of 
diffusion-controlled systems. If the polymer releases the active agent by erosion of 
the polymer itself or a bond between the active agent and the polymer, the 
device may be categorized as erosion or chemical reaction-controlled. If release 
occurs due to swelling of the polymer caused by absorption of the environmental 
fluid, the device falls in the category of swelling-controlled systems. Devices 
activated by osmosis utilize osmotic pressure as the driving force. It must be 
noted that two or more of these mechanisms may be simultaneously active in 
some devices. Furthermore, the above classification includes only the broad and 
general mechanisms. Specialized devices utilizing magnets, ultrasound, and Ii po-
somes have also been created (see, e.g., Langer, 1980; Van Brunt, 1986). 
1.1 Diffusion-Controlled Systems 
A device is considered diffusion-controlled when the diffusion of active agent 
through any part of the device controls the release rate. The major types of 
diffusion-controlled devices are reservoir devices and monolithic devices. 
1.1.1 Reservoir Devices 
These devices consist of a core of the active agent surrounded by a polymeric 
membrane. Diffusion through the polymer is the rate limiting step. Figure 1.2 
illustrates a cross-section of a spherical or cylindrical reservoir device. Among the 
polymers employed in the preparation of such systems are silicone rubber, ethylene-
vinyl acetate copolymers, polyurethane, and polyethylene. The simplest method of 
preparation of such a device is to take a length of tube of the appropriate 
3 

I Introduction 
• • • 
• 
• 
POLYMER 
POLYMER 
(MEMBRANE) 
• 
• 
• 
DRUG 
DRUG 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
TIME 0 
TIME T 
Fig. 1.2. Schematic of the cross-section of a spherical or cylindrical reservoir type diffusion-
controlled release device (adapted from Langer, 1980) 
polymeric material and dimensions, fill it with the active agent, and seal off the 
ends. More recently, growing interest in micro-, macro- and nanocapsules, has led to 
their utilization for drug release. Liposomes are also being explored for this 
purpose. These systems can also be looked upon as reservoir devices although these 
are never employed singly but as a population. The techniques of microencapsulation, 
such as coacervation, spray encapsulation and nanoencapsulation are well developed 
for their preparation (see, e.g., Speiser, 1976). 
1.1.2 Monolithic Devices 
Monolithic or matrix devices constitute the other major category of diffusion-
controlled release devices. In these, the active agent is distributed in a polymer 
matrix (see Fig. 1.3). It can either be dispersed as a separate phase or be 
dissolved in the polymer. Release occurs by diffusion through the polymer; 
moreover, the environmental fluid may leach the active agent out of the matrix 
if the polymer is permeable to the fluid. If a soluble additive is mixed in the 
polymer matrix, fluid will enter the matrix by dissolving the additive and forming 
interconnected channels in the matrix. There are numerous simple ways of formulating 
monolithic devices. A dissolved active agent system may be obtained by soaking the 
polymer in a solution of the active agent and allowing it to equilibriate. Com-
pression molding of powdered active agent and polymer will produce a dispersed 
• • • • 
• 
• 
+--+-- DRUG DISPERSED 
.... =--+- DRUG DISPERSED 
in POLYMER 
• in POLYMER 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
TIME 0 
TIME T 
Fig. 1.3. Schematic of a typical monolithic type diffusion-controlled release device (adapted 
from Langer, 1980) 
4 

1.2 Erosion or Chemical Reaction Controlled Systems 
active agent system. Mixing the active agent with the monomer and then forming the 
polymer will give rise to a dissolved and/or dispersed active agent system depending 
on the solubility. Other techniques include solvent-casting and low-temperature 
casting (Langer, 1980). Polymers used as the basis for monolithic devices are 
mainly the same as employed for reservoir devices, such as polydimethylsiloxane 
(silicone rubber), ethyl cellulose, and hydroxypropyl cellulose. 
1.2 Erosion or Chemical Reaction Controlled Systems 
Erosion or reaction controlled release systems are delivery systems in which the 
polymer is not merely a passive carrier but an active participant in the release 
process. 
1.2.1 Erosion-Controlled Devices 
The active agent in these devices is physically immobilized in the polymer and 
is only released by erosion of the polymer as shown in the ideal erosion-
controlled device in Fig. 1.4. While these devices can be made in both the 
reservoir and monolithic forms, the latter is more suitable for this purpose. In 
an ideal system, the polymeric carrier would undergo surface erosion, releasing the 
active agent at a rate proportional to the erosion rate. If the erosion rate is 
a constant and the matrix geometry is constant (e.g., slab), such systems would 
produce zero-order (constant) release rates. However, erosion in practical systems 
is seldom solely from the surface inwards. Bulk erosion leading to a loss of 
physical integrity of the matrix and its eventual collapse, is frequently observed. 
Various polymers have been utilized in forming erodible devices, including poly-
(vinyl pyrrolidone), partially esterified copolymers of methyl vinyl ether and maleic 
anhydride, and copolymers of lactic and glycolic acid. Recently, it has been 
reported that polyanhydrides, such as poly[bis (p-carboxy-phenoxy) propane an-
hydride] and poly[terepthalic acid anhydride], undergo surface erosion (Leong et ai., 
1985, 1986; Van Brunt, 1986). Bioerodible polymer remains a very active research 
area. 
~=-'--+-DRUG DISPERSED 
in POLYMER 
TIME 0 
• •• 
• 
• 
• • • • 
• 
· @t ... 
• 
•• 
.. ~.. . . 
• 
•• 
• •• • • 
• 
• 
• • 
TIME T 
DRUG DISPERSED 
in POLYMER 
Fig. 1.4. Schematic of an ideal erosion-controlled release device (adapted from Langer, 1980) 
5 

I Introduction 
1.2.2 Chemical Reaction Controlled Devices 
In this type of system, the active agent itself is chemically bound to the polymeric 
backbone. Release occurs by hydrolytic or enzymatic cleavage of this bond. The 
polymer itself may be degradable in these systems. Such pendant chain complexes 
have been created with both pharmaceutical and agricultural active agents (see, e.g., 
Harris et aI., 1976; Duncan and Kopacek, 1984). 
1.3 Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
Swelling-controlled systems are formed by dissolving or dispersing the active agent 
in a polymeric matrix in which it is unable to diffuse to any significant extent. 
When this matrix is placed in an environmental fluid thermodynamically compatible 
with the polymer, the fluid is absorbed into the polymer, causing it to swell. 
The active agent in the swollen part of the matrix can then diffuse out. A schematic 
of an idealized swelling-controlled release system is shown in Fig. 1.5. Glassy 
polymers whose glass-transition temperature is lowered by the fluid will undergo 
a glass-to-gel transition and swell, and can be employed to form such systems. The 
idealized-rate of release from such systems is equal to the product of the surface area 
and a rate factor corresponding to the rate of advance of the boundary separating 
the outer swollen shell from the unswollen core. If the rate of advance of this 
boundary is constant, zero-order release will be obtained. A class of polymers 
called hydrogels [e.g., poly(hydroxy methyl methacrylate), acrylamide, and poly-
(ethylene glycols)] are considered suitable for such systems (see, e.g., Roorda et aI., 
1986). 
G
DRUG DISSOLVED 
in POLYMER 
(GLASSY) 
TIME 0 
TIME T 
DRUG DISSOLVED 
in POLYMER 
(GLASSY) 
SWOLLEN POLYMER (GEL) 
from which DRUG 
has been RELEASED 
Fig. 1.5. Schematic of an idealized swelling-controlled release device (adapted from Langer, 
1980) 
1.4 Osmotic Pumping Systems 
An osmotic pump releases its active agent at a controlled rate by utilizing osmotic 
pressure as the driving force. A simple osmotic pump consists of a core of 
compacted, solid, water-soluble active agent. The core is enclosed in a selectively 
water-permeable but active agent-impermeable polymer membrane with a small 
6 

Drug 
'*'''''''"''''''''1-- W ate r 
Osm ot i c core 
containing drug 
References 
Fig. 1.6. Schematic of a sim-
ple osmotic pump (Theeu-
wes, 1975) 
orifice. In an aqueous environment, water is transported into the core by permeation. 
A nonextensible polymer facilitates the build-up of hydrostatic pressure in the core, 
and the solution of the active agent and water is then pumped out through the 
orifice. Figure 1.6 illustrates a simple osmotic pump. 
Numerous experimental studies are reported every year on devices of the types de-
scribed above. Furthermore, new, specialized systems are being developed utilizing 
"exotic" concepts or techniques, such as magnetic or ultrasound modulation, 
viable-cell immobilization, micro spheres and nanoparticles, liposomes, targeted 
delivery, and prodrugs. The proliferation of experimental studies requires generaliza-
tion and unification through a statistical and mathematical treatment of quantitative 
information and technical data. In addition, a quantitative treatment can facilitate 
the formulation of procedures for computer-aided design of these systems through 
a priori prediction of their performance for a variety of design parameters. Towards 
this end, the present monograph attempts to broadly survey the existing mathematical 
models of all degrees of complexity and to categorize them. This can assist 
a researcher to select the optimum model for the system under study, and also 
assist in identifying lacunae. By necessity, the coverage presented here is less 
than comprehensive; thus the emphasis is on those systems that are most commonly 
encountered. 
References 
Baker, R. W.: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, pp. 1-83, John Wiley and 
Sons, New York (1987) 
Cowsar, D. R.: Introduction to Controlled Release, pp. 1-13. In: Controlled Release of 
Biologically Active Agents, A. C. Tanquary and R. E. Lacey (Eds.), Plenum Press, New York 
(1974) 
Duncan, R., Kopacek, J.: Soluble Synthetic Polymers as Potential Drug Carriers, Adv. in Pol. 
Sci. 57, 51-101 (1984) 
7 

I Introduction 
Harris, F. W., Aulabaugh, A. E., Case, R. D., Dykes, M. K., Feld, W. A.: Polymers Containing 
Pendent Herbicide Substituents: Preliminary Hydrolysis Studies, pp. 222-230. In: Controlled 
Release Polymeric Formulations. D. R. Paul and F. W. Harris (Eds.), ACS Symposium 
Series 33, ACS Washington, D.C. (1976) 
Kydonieus, A. F.: Fundamental Concepts of Controlled Release, pp. 1-19. In: Controlled 
Release Technologies: Methods, Theory, and Applications, Vol. I, A. F. Kydonieus (Ed.), 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (1980) 
Langer, R.: Polymeric Delivery Systems for Controlled Drug Release. Chern. Eng. Commun. 
6, 1--48 (1980) 
Leong, K. W., Amore, P. D., MarIetta, M., Langer, R.: Bioerodible polyanhydrides as 
Drug-Carrier Matrices. II. Biocompatibility and Chemical Activity, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
20,51-64 (1986) 
Leong, K. W., Brott, B. C., Langer, R.: Bioerodible Polyanhydrides as Drug-Carrier Matrices. 
I: Characterization, Degradation, and Release Characteristics, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
19,941-955 (1985) 
Roorda, W. E., Bodde, H. E., De Boer, A. G., Junginger, H. E.: Synthetic Hydrogels as Drug 
Delivery Systems, Pharmaceutisch Weekblad, Scientific Edition 8, 165-189 (1986) 
Speiser, P.: Microencapsulation by Coacervation, Spray Encapsulation, and Nanoencapsula-
tion,pp. 1-11. In: Microencapsulation, J. R. Nixon (Ed.), Marcel Dekker Inc., New York 
(1976) 
Theeuwes, F.: Elementary Osmotic Pump, J. Pharm. Sci. 64,1987-1991 (1975) 
Van Brunt, J.: Perfecting Polymers to Release Drugs, Bio/Technology 4,756 (1986) 
8 

2. Diffusion-Controlled Release 
Molecular diffusion through polymers and synthetic membranes is an effective, 
simple and yet reliable means of attaining the controlled release of a variety of 
active agents. The principal devices utilizing this phenomenon are of the reservoir 
and monolithic types. In a reservoir device, the active agent is contained within 
the rate-controlling membrane, while in a monolithic device, the active agent is 
homogeneously dissolved or dispersed throughout the polymer matrix. 
The principal steps in the release of an active agent from a reservoir device 
are illustrated in Fig. 2.1. These are diffusion within the reservoir (if not well 
mixed), dissolution or partition between the reservoir carrier fluid and membrane, 
diffusion through the membrane, partition between the membrane and elution 
medium, and finally, transport away from the device surface. If the reservoir 
contains an excess of the active agent, a steady-state concentration profile, as 
shown in Fig. 2.1 a, can be maintained. However, after depletion of the reservoir, 
the concentration profile will change, either in the pseudo-steady-state fashion shown 
in Fig. 2.1 b or in an unsteady fashion. 
The principal steps in the release of the active agent from a monolithic device are 
exhibited in Fig. 2.2. The first step in the process varies depending on whether 
the active agent is dispersed as a separate phase or dissolved in the matrix 
(polymer). If it is dissolved in the matrix, the steps involved are diffusion to 
the surface of the matrix, partition between the matrix and elution medium, and 
transport away from the device surface (Fig. 2.2a). If the active agent is dispersed 
as a separate phase, it must first dissolve into the matrix continuum before being 
able to diffuse to the surface (Fig. 2.2b). This is termed the "solution-diffusion" 
mechanism. 
The rate controlling step in both types of devices is diffusion within the polymer, 
although the overall release rate itself is affected by the other steps. The steps 
described in the preceding paragraphs assume that molecules of the active agent 
diffuse through the polymer continuum. However, there can be instances in which 
the membrane or matrix is porous, and the pores are permeated by fluid of the 
elution medium. In these instances, release occurs by dissolution and diffusion in 
this fluid. Nevertheless, the principal steps in the release mechanism remain the 
same. 
While the reservoir and monolithic type devices are the ones primarily classified 
as diffusion controlled, diffusion through polymers plays a significant role in 
other devices or systems as well, e.g., swelling-controlled or erodible systems. Modifi-
cation or design of these systems requires an understanding of the chemical 
and physical characteristics of diffusion in polymeric materials. 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
System: 
Mechanisms: 
Concentration 
profiles: 
a 
System: 
Mechanisms: 
Concentration 
profiles: 
b 
10 
Reservoir 
Membrane 
Elution 
I 
medium 
Diffusion 
Diffusion 
Diffusion 
Dissolution/ 
Partition 
Partition 
c: o :s 
.:: 
c: 
Q) 
<.l c: o 
u 
1 
Distance 
Reservoir 
Membrane 
Elution 
medium 
Diffusion I Diffusion 
Diffusion 
c: o .... 
c 
~ 
.... 
c: 
Q) 
<.l 
c: o 
U 
Dissolution / 
Partition 
Partition 
Distance 
1 
Increasing 
Time 
Fig. 2.1 a, b. Schematic re-
presentation of the func-
tioning of a reservoir device. 
a Reservoir device with ex-
cess active agent, b Reservoir 
device without excess active 
agent (adapted from Baker, 
1987) 

a 
Matrix 
Diffusio n 
Elution 
medium 
Diffusion 
Partition 
Distance 
Increasing 
Time 
:System: 
:Mechanism: 
: Concentration 
profiles: 
b 
2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
Matrix 
Elution 
medium 
Diffusion I Diffusion 
Dissolution 
Partition 
I 
I 
c· 
~I 
o. 
~I 
"'. 
~I 
o· 
.... +--+-+-Increasing 
Time 
Distance 
Fig. 2.2a, b. Schematic representation of the functioning of a monolithic device. a Mono-
lithic device with dissolved active agent, b Monolithic device with dispersed active agent 
(adapted from Baker, 1987) 
2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
Diffusion of any molecule in a polymer depends on various structural and morpholo-
gical parameters. However, irrespective of the actual mechanism, diffusion can be 
analyzed, macroscopically, in terms of Fick's first law in which the diffusive 
flux, j, is proportional to the concentration gradient, VC, 
(2.1) 
where 
i; = flux of diffusing component i with respect to the mass average velocity of the 
system, 
C; = concentration of diffusing component i, and 
D; = diffusivity of component i in the polymer-active agent phase. 
By measuring the flux relative to the mass average velocity (i.e., the rate of 
transfer across a section moving in such a way that no mass flows through 
it), the diffusivity defined above represents the intrinsic diffusion coefficient of 
species i (Rogers, 1965). 
The diffusivity or diffusion coefficient in equation (2.1) is a constant of propor-
tionality; it may be a function of concentration and other physical variables. 
The equation assumes that the driving force of diffusion is the concentration 
gradient. Considerations based on the thermodynamics of irreversible processes 
indicate that a more fundamental driving force is the gradient of chemical 
11 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
potential of each component (see, e.g., DeGroot, 1959). In a binary mixture, 
the driving force is proportional to the negative chemical potential gradient, 
( - V Ji')' where f.J. is the chemical potential and can be written in terms of activity 
(Xi as 
(2.2) 
The total force on all molecules of the component at any given point is propor-
tional to (-Ci V f.J.), and the resultant pure diffusional flux is (Rogers, 1965) 
The quantity B; is the intrinsic mobility of a molecule of component i, 
N is the Avogadro number. Substituting for Vf.J.; from Eq. (2.2) into Eq. (2.3), 
(2.3) 
and 
(2.4) 
The activity, (X;, can be expressed, in turn, as a function of the activity coefficient, 
Vj, as 
(2.5) 
Thus, we have 
(2.6) 
Comparing Eqs. (2.1) and (2.6), we obtain 
D.=D. 1+--
* [ 
0 In V;] 
I 
'oIn C; 
(2.7 a) 
or 
D·-D. --
_ * [0 In rJ.;] 
I 
I 
0 InC; 
(2.7 b) 
where 
D·= --
* (B;RT) 
I 
N 
(2.7 c) 
Dr is the activity-based diffusion coefficient, also termed the self-diffusion coefficient; 
in general, it is much less concentration dependent than D;, the intrinsic diffusion 
coefficient (Lightfoot, 1974). When the active agent-polymer solution is ideal, 
e In vde In C; is zero, and the expressions in Eqs. (2.1) and (2.6) become equivalent. 
12 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
The self-diffusion coefficient, Dr, characterizes the rate of diffusion of component i 
in a mixture of uniform chemical composition. In a single component system, 
it represents the diffusivity of isotopically or radioactively tagged molecules among 
unlabelled ones. 
The flux in Eq. (2.1) is defined with respect to a frame of reference moving 
along with the mass average velocity of the system. However, it is usually 
extremely difficult, if not impossible, to determine this reference section experimen-
tally. A more practical frame of reference is one fixed in the laboratory; it 
is particularly useful in systems exhibiting no volume change on mixing. Consider 
the simplest non-trivial case of a binary system. If the diffusing species are 
not of identical mass and size, pure diffusion of one species will be faster than 
that of the other. To compensate for the build-up of hydrostatic pressure on 
one side due to this unequal diffusion, a compensating convective flow is generated. 
The total rate of transfer of a component can therefore be separated into two 
components, one due to pure diffusion, (-D j VCj), and the other due to countering 
convective flow, (CD, where f is the mean convective velocity related to the 
rate of movement of the reference plane defining the intrinsic diffusion coefficient. 
Thus, the total rate of transfer along the volume-fixed reference plane is given 
by 
or 
(2.8 b) 
where Vj and Vj are partial specific volumes and Dij is the mutual (binary) inter-
diffusion coefficient. A single mutual diffusion coefficient is required for a binary 
system (Crank, 1975). For diffusion in solids of unchanging size or for diffusion 
in stationary liquids, the mutual and intrinsic diffusion coefficients are identical. 
Incorporation of this flux into the continuity equation yields a complete description 
of mass transfer in the polymer. The resultant continuity equation can be written in 
a generalized form as (Bird et aI., 1960) 
where 
ac. 
-'+(V·N.)=R. 
at 
" 
R j = molar rate of "production" of component i. 
(2.9) 
The "production" term accounts for any mechanism by which the ith component 
is made available for diffusion in the system; dissolution of the dispersed ~ctive 
agent in a monolithic system is a typical example. Substituting for N j from 
Eq. (2.8) into Eq. (2.9) gives 
(2.10) 
\3 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
For a constant-volume system where the "production" term is absent, the familiar 
expression for Fick's second law is obtained as 
ac. 
a/ - V . (Dij VC;) = 0 . 
(2.11 ) 
A detailed discussion of the relation between the mutual and intrinsic diffusion 
coefficients is given by Crank (1975). 
So far, we have considered diffusion as being induced by the concentration 
(or activity) gradient. A generalized form of the Fickian diffusion equation for 
diffusion induced by electrostatic potential and/or pressure gradient, is available 
(Lightfoot, 1974); for an electrically neutral system, it is 
where 
Vi = partial specific volume of component i, 
Wi = ionic charge of component i, 
([J = electrostatic potential, 
P = fluid pressure, and 
F = Faraday constant. 
(2.12) 
With this definition of flux, substitution of Eq. (2.12) for a constant-volume system 
into Eq. (2.9) yields the more general continuity expression 
aCi 
Ci 
2 
-
2 
2 
-
= D .. -
[V II. + V. V P + w.F V ([J] 
at 
'J RT 
r" 
, 
(2.13) 
which is the generalized form of Fick's second law of diffusion. 
Equation (2.11), [or its more general versions, Eqs. (2.10) and (2.13)] may be 
solved to predict the release rate from a diffusion-controlled system. The information 
required for solution of this partial differential equation includes knowledge about 
the initial and boundary conditions and about the system parameter, Dij' As stated 
earlier, this coefficient is dependent on various structural and morphological 
parameters. Experimental techniques to measure this parameter are well developed 
(see, e.g., Geddes and Pontius, 1959; Crank and Park, 1968; Felder and Huvard, 
1980). Various models have been proposed to predict diffusion coefficients in polymers. 
Some of these models will be briefly examined below; along with a discussion of the 
influence of polymer morphological factors. 
2.1.1 Estimation of Diffusion Coefficients 
The structure of a solid phase may have a pronounced effect on mass transfer 
processes within and through this phase. Mikulecky and Caplan (1966) make a distinc-
tion between two types of situations with respect to diffusion in polymeric 
membranes. 
14 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
1. The membrane pores are smaller than or of the same order of magnitude as the 
mean free path (or average jump distance) of the permeating molecules. The 
molecular network constituting the membrane takes part at the molecular level 
in frictional interactions with all of the permeating components. The membrane 
molecules, therefore, represent a true component of the system and must be 
included in the thermodynamic diffusion equations (McGregor, 1974). 
11. The membrane pores are much larger than the mean free path of the diffusing 
molecules. The system containing these membrane pores may be regarded as 
comprising two phases, of which the membrane phase represents little more than 
a solid "container" for the permeating fluid phase within which the transport 
process occurs. The membrane phase only serves to define the geometry of the 
permeation channels (McGregor, 1974). 
Membranes of the first (small pore) type can be considered as "continuous" 
systems. Macroscopically homogeneous polymers may be included in this classifi-
cation even though in this case the "pores" consist of nearly continuous pathways 
through the less ordered regions of the polymer and their dimensions may be subject 
to local thermal fluctuations. Langer and Peppas (1983) have classified these polymer 
systems as nonporous (gel) membranes where the pores are of a molecular level. 
Capillary models have been employed to describe permeation through "small-
pore" membranes (McGregor, 1974). However, in systems with pores having apparent 
radii of the order of 10 A to 50 A, the membrane molecule will take part in 
intimate molecular interactions with the permeating species. A capillary model is 
clearly a simplification in such a situation. For our purposes, the "small-pore" and 
"molecular" membranes will be analyzed as homogeneous polymer systems. 
Membranes of the "large-pore" type may be more profitably analyzed by 
resorting to pore or capillary models. These large-pore membranes have further 
been divided into macroporous (0.1 11m to 1.0llm) and microporous (100 A 
to 500 A) membranes by Langer and Peppas (1983). This distinction becomes 
important for diffusing species that are adsorbed from the permeating fluid to the 
polymer matrix inside the pores (Furusawa and Smith, 1973; Satterfield et aI., 1973). 
In this work, the pore models and the polymeric systems to which they are 
applicable are analyzed with respect to heterogeneous polymer systems. 
Although we have classified polymeric membranes into two main types on the 
basis of "pore" sizes, a real system can possess a wide distribution of pore sizes 
spanning both types. Transport may thus occur through both the polymer conti-
nuum (homogeneous polymer) and actual porous regions permeated by the bulk fluid 
(heterogeneous polymer). 
We shall limit our treatment of membrane transport to passive transport of 
non-electrolytes only. Thus, electrokinetic phenomena such as electro-osmosis and 
electrophoresis, thermal gradients, facilitated transport and activated transport will 
not be considered. 
a) Homogeneous polymer systems. The rate of diffusion of small molecules in a poly-
mer is a complex function of a variety of factors, such as the polymer morphology, 
composition, and molecular weight, and of the solute concentration and size. 
Another important factor is temperature relative to the glass transition temperature, 
Tq, of the polymer. Molecular motions in polymers do not entirely cease below Tg; 
15 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
the glassy polymers tend to be in a "frozen-in" non-equilibrium state. Diffusion in 
such systems is influenced, therefore, by the slow relaxation of this internal order. 
In the vicinity of Tg, the relaxation process occurs at rates comparable with those of 
the diffusion process, and the behavior becomes extremely complex (Park, 1968; 
Wang et a!., 1969). At temperatures well above Tq of the system, polymer molecules 
in the accessible regions through which permeation occurs may participate intimately 
in frictional interactions with the diffusing species. The diffusion process follows 
the classical diffusion theory since the polymer can be analyzed as a homogeneous 
medium, and the basic parameter to describe mass transport is the diffusion 
coefficient (Duda, 1985). Of concern here are systems in their equilibrium states 
above their glass transition temperatures, i.e., systems with time-independent struc-
tures; anomalous behavior will be discussed elsewhere. 
The polymer matrix has a strong influence on the diffusivity, since the motion of 
a small molecule is restricted by the three-dimensional network of polymer 
chains. The extent of this interaction is dependent on the concentration of the 
polymer-active agent system. Since a polymer employed for controlled release would 
be expected to be mechanically stable, the theories of interest will be the ones 
applicable in the concentrated polymer region. Among these theories are the 
approximate molecular theories (see, e.g., DiBenedetto, 1963a, 1963b; Pace and 
Datyner, 1979a, 1979b) or the free-volume theories (see, e.g., Fujita, 1961). Since 
the free-volume theories have a wider range of applicability (Duda, 1985), they will 
be briefly considered here. 
The free-volume concept was originally employed by Cohen and Turnbull (1959) 
for self-diffusion in hard-sphere liquids; it considers diffusion to occur due to local 
density fluctuations in the liquid. These fluctuations periodically open voids of 
molecular dimensions into which a diffusing molecule may jump. The frequency of 
diffusion jumps depends on the probability of occurrence of a local void, greater in 
volume than a certain minimum volume. Cohen and Turnbull (1959) have proposed 
that the volume of a liquid is composed of two components. The first is the actual 
volume of the molecules and the second is the free volume, redistributed 
continuously by the random thermal fluctuations of the fluid. Volume changes 
associated with temperature variations are related to changes in this free volume, 
while the occupied volume is independent of the temperature (equal to the total 
volume at the absolute zero). Diffusion of a molecule requires that a free-volume 
hole of sufficient size appear adjacent to the molecule. The original theory has been 
modified (see, e.g., Fujita, 1961; Macedo and Litovitz, 1965) and extensively applied 
by Vrentas and Duda (1977, 1979) and others to polymer-solvent systems. 
Vrentas and Duda (1979) have suggested that the free volume in a polymer comprises 
two parts, an interstitial free volume and a hole free volume. Only the hole free 
volume is considered to be capable of being redistributed without energy constraints 
and is, therefore, available for molecular migration. Based on this definition of 
free volume, Vrentas and Duda (1977) have proposed an expression for self-
diffusion coefficient of a solvent molecule in a polymer as 
(2.14) 
where vt is the specific critical hole free volume required for the jump of component i 
(i = I, solvent; i = 2, polymer), Wi the mass fraction of component i, y an overlap 
16 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
factor since the same free volume is available to more than one molecule, 
VFH the average hole free volume per gram of mixture, and E the energy per mole 
that a molecule requires to overcome the attractive forces holding it to its neighbors. 
At temperatures not significantly above Tg, the specific hole free volume is small. 
Consequently, the probability of obtaining a hole of sufficient size is significantly 
less than that for acquiring the necessary energy. The energy term may be absorbed 
into the pre-exponential factor of the self-diffusion coefficient, yielding (Vrentas and 
Duda, 1977) 
(2.15) 
A similar expression can be written for the polymer self-diffusion coefficient. 
Mutual diffusion coefficients may then be obtained from the self-diffusion coefficient, 
utilizing friction factors for the system. However, for small values of wI' a simplified 
relation 
(2.16) 
may be utilized (Vrentas and Duda, 1979). In this expression, Xl is the mole fraction 
of diffusing small molecular species, and x 2 is the mole fraction of polymer in the 
mixture. Under the assumption of additivity of free volumes, the parameters required 
to predict the hole free volume can be obtained from correlations of the viscosity 
and density data of pure components (Duda, 1985). 
Since the critical free volume required for diffusion of molecules is dependent on 
their size, its value relative to the average free volume of the polymer-solvent system 
is of consequence. For very small diffusing molecules, only a few chain segments 
will be involved in the creation of void spaces. This class of behavior, called the type A 
Fickian diffusion (Frisch, 1965), is characterized by ideally dilute sorption behavior, 
a concentration-independent diffusion coefficient, and an apparent activation energy 
independent of temperature and concentration. The type B Fickian diffusion, 
observed with large organic molecules, is generally characterized by concentration-
dependent diffusion coefficients, temperature-dependent activation energies, and 
strong polymer-penetrant interactions, as evidenced by high penetrant solubility 
(Frisch, 1965). 
b) Heterogeneous polymer systems. Semicrystalline polymers contain regions of 
crystalline morphology interspersed between amorphous regions. These crystalline 
regions have low segmental chain mobility and can be considered virtually imperme-
able to a diffusing molecule. Therefore, it is necessary that the molecule follow 
a tortuous path around these regions. In this respect, crystallites behave in a fashion 
similar to impermeable filler particles, serving only to obstruct diffusion. 
Analogously, a highly swollen polymeric gel, above its glass transition temperature, 
can be regarded as a randomly cross-linked molecular network permeated by a fluid 
in which diffusion may occur. As the degree of swelling increases, an increasing 
portion of this internal fluid will possess essentially the same properties as the bulk 
fluid. If a diffusing molecule does not interact significantly with the polymer chains, 
17 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
the effect of the polymer matrix on the diffusion process may be simply one of 
geometrical obstruction. The average cross-sectional area available for diffusion 
will be less than in the bulk fluid, and in general, the paths of the diffusing 
molecules will also be more tortuous. Furthermore, at least in very highly swollen 
gels these paths would be interconnected (McGregor, 1974). 
The effect of obstruction can be empirically related to the volume fraction 
of amorphous regions or volume fraction of the fluid in the gel (= <P), i.e., 
Deff = f(<P) . 
(2.17) 
Nevertheless, the possible effect of an ordered array of obstructing particles or 
impermeable regions on the effective diffusivity, Deff, can be calculated based on the 
external dimensions of the array of the particles (Barrer, 1968). If the system is very 
dilute in these particles (e.g., in low-crystallinity polymers or in highly swollen 
gels), the dependence on the particle geometry or on the nature of their distribution 
is slight. For<P ~ 1, 
Deff = D (_2 ) 
3 -
<P 
(2.18) 
where D is the (mutual) diffusivity in the amorphous polymer or in the fluid in the 
gel. A generalization of this relation to include the effect of particle geometry, though 
only valid for dilute systems, is 
x 
Deff = D -,------:-:---
(x -
1) -
<P 
(2.19) 
where the shape factor, x, ranges from 2 for random spheres to 1.1 for oblate 
spheroids with an axial ratio of 4: I. If the obstructions are densely packed, 
the detailed dimensions and geometry become increasingly important, and the void 
volume alone is insufficient to describe the behavior. In general, it is not possible to 
construct more than semiempirical relationships between the quantities Deff, D, 
<P, and x. If the constructed relationship is correct and if there are no specific 
interactions. Deff should exhibit the same temperature dependence as D (McGregor, 
1974). 
Another approach is to consider these semi crystalline or highly swollen gel 
systems as analogous to porous media with the permeable regions serving as the 
pores and the impermeable regions as the walls. A vast amount of literature 
exists on diffusion in porous media especially in catalysis, which can be adopted 
here. The obstruction effect is generally accounted for by the "porosity e", and the 
tortuosity of the paths, by an empirical "tortuosity r", to yield the effective 
diffusivity as 
D 
Deff = E-. 
r 
(2.20) 
The porosity can be equated to the volume fraction of amorphous regions or 
that of the fluid in the gel, <P, i.e., the fractional permeable space. [In an alternative 
18 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
though similar approach, Michaels et al. (1964) have defined effective diffusivity 
in amorphous polymers as 
DI{! 
Deff = T 
(2.21) 
where I{! (~ I) is the "detour" ratio, and f3 (~ I) the "blocking" factor measuring the 
reduction in mobility caused by the narrowness of the amorphous regions. The 
detour ratio is proportional to a power of the amorphous polymer volume fraction; 
f3 depends on the size of the diffusing species (Michaels et al. 1964, Peterlin, 
1979).] When simple models are visualized for the configuration of the pore 
structure, r can be related to a geometrical factor; nevertheless, in general, it 
is a "fudge factor" of greater or lesser sophistication (Aris, 1975). 
Theoretical models of pores with constrictions have been proposed by Petersen 
(1958), Michaels (1959), and Currie (1960). Petersen depicts the pores as a series of 
hyperbolas of revolution with constrictions at the vertices. Currie considers the 
pores as tubes of sinusoidal form. Michaels portrays the pores as consisting of 
two cylindrical capillaries of different diameters and lengths, joined in series. 
This model was evaluated by Rowe et al. (1972) to predict potassium chloride 
release from tablets made by compression of varying amounts of potassium chloride 
with a vinyl chloride/vinyl acetate copolymer. The model has been found to predict 
the release data well. 
Johnson and Stewart (1965) have visualized the pore structure as comprising an 
array of parallel cylindrical pores having the pore size distribution found experimen-
tally. The effective flux is predicted by applying the relevant equations of mass 
transport to each pore size and summing the individual contributions over the 
complete pore size distribution. A general version of this model where the pores 
are not parallel has also been discussed by Aris (1975). 
A model has been proposed for the bidisperse porous structure produced by 
pressing together particles that are themselves porous (Wakao and Smith, 1962). 
The diffusion flux comprises the fluxes through macropores and micropores, and 
the flux by series diffusion through both. 
A computational model by Foster and Butt (1966) describes the tortuosities 
and constrictions of pores via the notion of a major pore composed of minor 
pores. Evans et al. (1961) have approached this problem on the basis of the 
so-called "dusty gas" model, in which the porous medium is visualized as an array 
of dust particles held stationary in space. The presence of gas-surface interactions 
is then incorporated into it by treating the dust particles as giant molecules in terms 
of the classical kinetic theory of gases. 
Network models have been proposed that attempt to describe the porous medium 
as being composed of random structural elements (pores), chaotically connected 
with each other (Haring and Greenkorn, 1970; Pismen, 1974). Periodic capillary 
models of varying degrees of complexity have been proposed by Wakad and Nardse 
(1974) and Gavalas and Kim (1981). 
Among the more recent approaches, Zygourakis (1987) has described release of 
bioactive agents from hydrophobic polymers by modeling the pore structure on 
a network of large spherical cavities interconnected via smaller cylindrical neck 
19 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
pores. Balazs et al. (1985) and Siegel and Langer (1986) have adopted Monte 
Carlo techniques to describe diffusion in constricted pore geometries. Percolation 
theories are also increasingly being employed, (see, e.g., Leuenberger et aI., 1987; 
Saltzman and Langer, 1987). 
When the preceding models for porous media are applied to highly swollen gels, 
an implicit assumption is that the active agent in the fluid permeating the gel 
does not adsorb on the polymer inside the pores. While adsorption on the walls of 
macropores is insignificant, this factor may become significant for micropores 
(Furusawa and Smith, 1973). In this case, 
E 
Deff = D - Kr 
r 
(2.22) 
where Kr is the fractional reduction in the diffusivity within the pore when the 
solute and pore size are of comparable magnitude (Satterfield et aI., 1973). The 
effect of solute partitioning between the exterior and interior of pores at equilibrium 
must be accounted for by an equilibrium partition coefficient. 
In any of the preceding models, the diffusivity in the amorphous polymer, D, 
itself can be variously obtained from the available theories for homogeneous 
polymers, discussed earlier. For swollen gels, this can be taken to be equal to 
diffusivity in the bulk fluid. 
The analysis presented above for semi-crystalline polymers is based on the 
two-phase model where the amorphous and crystalline regions do not interact except 
in a geometrical fashion (characterized by crystallinity, crystallite geometry, dimen-
sions, and orientation-distribution). However, the crystalline regions also influence 
the amorphous regions with respect to the density and orientation of polymer segments. 
This is because macromolecules need not either belong completely to a crystallite 
or lie completely in the noncrystalline regions. The dynamic and conformative 
flexibility of macromolecules in the amorphous regions of a semicrystalline polymer 
is, therefore, smaller than in the undercooled melt (no crystalline region) at the same 
temperature and pressure. The two-phase model must therefore be considered as 
a first approximation. A more extended model postulates a third phase containing 
polymer segments and diffusing molecules of mobility lower than that of those in 
the rest of the amorphous regions. Some aspects of this model have been discussed 
by Fuhrmann (1979). 
2.1.2 Factors Influencing Diffusional Release 
The in vitro performance of a diffusion-controlled release device is determined by 
a number of factors. Some of these factors are properties of the polymer-active 
agent system, such as the diffusivity, partition coefficient and solubility; others are 
design factors such as active agent loading, device geometry and barrier thickness, 
that may be controlled independently. 
a) Diffusivity of active agent in polymer. As outlined in the preceding subsection, 
except for highly swollen gels in which molecules of the solute or active agent diffuse 
20 

"'", 
N 
E 
u 
c: 
o 
(Jl 
+ 
o 
Ol 
o 
--1 
.. en 
N E 
<.> 
CD 0 
>< 
0 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
300 
100 
30 
10 
3 
Ar 
Tg , 
0.32 
0.33 
0.34 
0.35 
0.36 
Ne 
2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
Fig. 2.3. Temperature dependence of the 
diffusivities of argon and oxygen in poly-
(vinyl acetate) (Meares, 1954) 
Fig. 2.4. Temperature depend-
ence of the diffusivities of va-
riOUS 
gases 
in 
poly(ethyl 
methacrylate) 
(Stannett 
and 
Williams, 1965) 
2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
3.0 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
I/T xl 0 3 ( K-1 ) 
21 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
in the permeating fluid, diffusion in polymers occurs through the amorphous 
polymetric regions. The diffusivity is related to the mobility of the polymer chains 
and, thereby, to the free volume of the system. The free volume is, in turn, 
dependent upon a number of factors, the most prominent being the temperature 
of the system relative to the glass transition temperature Tg• As the system 
temperature is lowered and approaches Tg, the free volume available for diffusion 
decreases, thereby decreasing the diffusivity. Experimental studies have shown that 
the diffusivity can exhibit either a continuous change or a discontinuous jump 
at Tg • This is illustrated in Fig. 2.3 for diffusion of argon and oxygen in 
poly(vinyl acetate) (Meares, 1954) and in Fig. 2.4 for various gases in poly-
(ethyi methacrylate) (Stannett and Williams, 1965). The plots in Fig. 2.3 show 
a distinct change in slope with a lower activation energy below Tg• However, the 
corresponding plots for poly(ethyl methacrylate) in Fig. 2.4 do not show any 
inflection. The explanation lies in the size of the diffusing species relative to the 
average void size in the polymer (Frisch, 1965). For small diffusing molecules, 
much smaller than the average void size, diffusion occurs by localized activated 
jumps from one pre-existing cavity to another; only a few contiguous monomer 
segments are involved. With larger diffusing species, pre-existing cavities may be 
unable to accommodate the diffusing molecules. Therefore, larger numbers of 
monomer segments must be rearranged to allow the molecules to diffuse. The 
process thus becomes dependent on the macroscopic free volume of the polymer. 
Presumably, poly(ethyl methacrylate) has a larger cavity size, and so involves the 
first mode of diffusion for the gases studied, while the gaseous molecules in 
poly(vinyl acetate) appear to follow the second mechanism (Stannett, 1968). 
A somewhat similar explanation for diffusivity behavior at and below Tg has 
been given by Duda (1985) and illustrated in Fig. 2.5. The nature of the observed 
behavior depends on the amount of free volume trapped in the system as the 
22 
Tg 
Temperature 
Fig. 2.S. Schematic of the tem-
perature dependence of diffu-
sivity of a solvent molecule in 
a polymer in the vicinity of the 
glass transition temperature (Tg) 
as predicted by the free-volume 
theory; a is the fraction of free 
volume at Tg which is available 
for molecular transport in the 
glassy polymer (Duda, \985) 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
temperature is lowered below Tg• If the amount of hole free volume is maintained 
at the same level as at Tg (e.g., by rapid cooling), the diffusion coefficient would be 
a constant. At the other extreme, if no extra free volume exists below Tg 
(equilibrium cooling), the diffusion coefficient would follow the relationship de-
scribing diffusion in an equilibrium liquid. Thus the free-volume theory predicts that 
a break will occur in the diffusivity versus temperature relationship in the vicinity 
of Tg (Duda, 1985), depending on the nature of the glassy state. Furthermore, 
it shows that molecular motion does not cease below Tg• 
While the temperature during application of a controlled release device is 
generally predetermined, a more practical method of adjusting the diffusivity of a given 
polymer system is via crosslinking. Increasing the degree of crosslinking restricts 
the freedom of movement of the polymer segments, thus decreasing diffusivity. 
This effect is illustrated in Fig. 2.6 through different degrees of vulcanization 
of rubber (Barrer and Skirrow, 1948). The diffusion coefficients decrease sharply 
with increasing sulfur content. A parallel increase in the glass transition temperature 
has also been observed (Boyer and Spencer 1946); this agrees with the free-
volume concept of diffusion. 
The addition of plasticizers to the polymer has .an influence opposite to th'l! 
of crosslinking; it serves to loosen up the polymer matrix, thereby increasing 
chain mobility. Plasticizer, at low concentration, influences the free volume by 
reducing interchain interactions. At a higher concentration, it can be considered 
U 
100 
0 
~ 
80 
.2 
~ 
Q) 
60 
a. 
E 
'If) 
~ 
NE 
u 
40 
co 
0 
~ 
0 
10-7 
20 
If) 
co 
~ 
0 
If) 
If) 
0 
-20 
<.9 
Fig. 2.6. Effect of combined sulfur 
content of vulcanized natural rub-
-40 
ber upon the diffusivity of various 
gases at 50°C (Barrer and Skirrow, 
- 60 
1948) and upon the glass transition 
temperature (Boyer and Spencer 
-80 
1946; van Amerongen, 1964) 
14 
Combined sulfur 
(%) 
23 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
Plasticizer DEHP content (%r 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
0.04 
-10 
... ., 
'" E 
-14 
n-heptane 
u 
.= 
0 
0 
-18 
c> 
0 
~ 
-22 
Fig. 2.7. Diffusivity of plasticizer (dioctylphthalate) and n-heptane in poly(vinyl chloride) 
sheets as a function of plasticizer content (Taverdet and Vergnaud, 1984) 
a diluent, thereby contributing its free volume to that of the polymer. The net 
effect is an increase in the free volume with a corresponding increase in the 
diffusivity (Flynn, 1974). This is illustrated in Fig. 2.7, which shows the diffusivities 
of plasticizer, dioctylphthalate, and solute, n-heptane in poly(vinyl chloride} for 
various concentrations of the plasticizer (Taverdet and Vergnaud, 1984; also see 
Hellwege et aI., 1961). An increase in Tg corresponding to an increase in plasticizer 
content can be seen in Fig. 2.8 for diethylphthalate in poly(methyl methacrylate} 
(Kelley and Bueche, 1961). 
In contrast to pl~sticizers, fillers incorporated into polymers reduce the diffusivity 
by serving as geometric obstructions and increasing tortuosity of the diffusion 
path. Furthermore, finely dispersed filler particles can act as effective crosslinks by 
adsorbing and immobilizing polymer segments (Flynn, 1974). Observed permeation 
rates can be further decreased by the stronger adsorption of the diffusing species on 
the fillers. However, this effect should not be significant in a controlled release device 
where the polymer (and filler) is saturated with the active agent. The influence 
of filler content on the diffusion is illustrated in Fig. 2.9 (Barrer et aI., 1963). 
While the general influence of fillers is to reduce the diffusivity, the exact 
nature of the effect is dependent on the type of filler, porosity, geometry, 
orientation, and spatial and particle-size distribution of filler particles. Van Ameron-
gen (1964) has discussed some of these factors in detail. 
Crystallites in polymer exert an influence similar to that of fillers in that they 
serve to increase the tortuosity of the paths and also serve as crosslinks. A randomly 
dispersed copolymer can disrupt the formation of crystallites, thus reducing Tg and 
increasing D. However, block copolymers can have an opposite effect depending on 
the length of the blocks. In addition, the hydrophilic/hydrophobic nature of 
a comonomer influences the release with hydrophilic comonomers increasing the 
release rate (Halpern et aI., 1976). 
Controlled graft copolymerization procedures can also alter the polymer permeation 
characteristics. The dominant effect of grafting is to impede the migration of the 
24 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
U 
100 
0 
~ 
:l 
'0 
Q; 
a. 
E 
~ 
50 
c 
~ 
'iii 
c 
~ 
0 
'" '" 
.2 
0 
0 
o 
20 
40 
60 
Plasticizer 
DEP content (vol %) 
Fig. 2.S. Effect of plasticizer (diethylphthalate) on glass transition of poly(methyl metha-
crylate) (Kelley and Bueche, 1961) 
60r---------------------------------------------, 
55 
"", 
N 
50 
E 
u 
to-
0 
45 
~ 
" 
0 
40 
35 L-__ ~ 
__ _L __ ~L_ 
__ ~ 
__ _L __ ~ 
____ ~ 
__ _L __ ~ 
__ ~ 
o 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
ZnO filler content (vol %) 
Fig. 2.9. Diffusivity of propane at 40°C in natural rubber containing zinc oxide filler as 
a function of filler content (Barrer et aI., 1963) 
diffusing molecules; it does not cause a variation in the equilibrium content or 
distribution of these molecules in the polymer. Short graft chains act as more 
effective inert fillers than longer graft chains since their distribution along the 
backbone chain allows more efficient packing and structural densification than the 
relatively isolated long chains (Rogers, 1976). 
25 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
~ 
.0 
o 
<Il 
E 
... 
<Il 
0. 
<Il 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
c 
0.4 
\: 
.0 
E 
<Il 
:2: 
0.2 
a 
I 
1\ 
I---___ 
T 
a 
20 40 60 
80 100 120 140 160 
a 
Heating time at 100 °C (hours) 
1.0 
0.8 
.~ 
:0 
~ 
0.6 
E 
... 
<Il 
0. 
~ 
0.4 
\: 
.0 
E 
<Il 
:2: 
0.2 
a 
I 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
200 
b 
I Hour pretreatment 
temp (OC) 
Fig. 2.10. a Effect oftime of heating 
(at 100°C) on permeability of poly-
(vinyl 
alcohol) 
membrane 
to 
methylene blue at 37°C (Byron 
and Dalby, 1987), b effect of pre-
treatment temperature on perme-
ability of poly(vinyl alcohol) mem-
brane to methylene blue at 37°C 
(Byron and Dalby, 1987) 
The thermal history of polymer affects its transport properties. An example 
is portrayed in Fig. 2.10 (a, b) (Byron and Dalby, 1987), for poly(vinyl alcohol) 
films preheated at various temperatures for different durations. While the permeability 
(= product of diffusivity and partition coefficient) may be partially reduced as 
a result of changes in the partition coefficient, the diffusivity is also expected 
26 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
to decrease due to geometric obstruction caused by crystallites; heat treatment of 
poly(vinyl alcohol) has been reported to increase its degree of crystallinity (Kojima 
et aI., 1983, 1984). 
Another pretreatment effect besides thermal history is the molecular orientation 
of polymer chains and their directions relative to the direction of diffusive flow. 
The rate of penetration parallel to the orientation axis is less than the rate in 
a randomly oriented sample, which is, in turn, less than the rate perpendicular 
to the orientation axis. Orientation by stretching of a polymer, well above its 
Tg, does not appreciably reduce the diffusivity until such time as elongation 
results in crystallization. The magnitude of this effect is, therefore, dependent 
on the initial degree of crystallinity (Rogers, 1965). 
The factors discussed so far have mainly been characteristics of the polymer. 
However, the diffusivity of the active agent is also a function of active agent 
characteristics. The most significant of these is the molecular weight (and thus, 
size) of the diffusing species, with bigger molecules diffusing slowly (Fig. 2.11) 
(Baker, 1987). The effects of shape and size of the molecule on the diffusivity 
are illustrated in Fig. 2.12 for a homologous series of n- and iso-paraffins in 
polyisobutylene (van Amerongen, 1964). The diffusivity of linear hydrocarbons seems 
to level off at about 5 carbons whereas the branched and cyclic compounds 
have lower values. The leveling-off may be a result of the diffusion of the 
-4 
-5 
-6 
-7 
... ", 
-8 
N 
E 
0 
-9 
.: 
0 
0 
-10 
01 
0 
-11 
..J 
-12 
-13 
-14 
-15 
Polystyrene 
0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Log of molecular weight 
6 
Fig. 2.11. Diffusivity of various solutes 
in water, silicone rubber, natural rubber, 
and polystyrene as a function of the 
molecular weight of the solute (Baker and 
Lonsdale, 1974; Baker, 1987) 
27 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
108 r------------------------------------, 
"1/1 
N 
E 
u 
0" 
9 
10-
l-
OU 
"" x"" 
X'--X_X_X_X- n-Paraffins 
2-MethylpentoneO 
MethylcyclopentaneQ 
Cyclohexane6 
Q Methylcyclahexane 
~ 
2,2,5-T"m~hylh"'" 
iso-Paraffins 
1~O~~ 
__ -L __ -L __ ~ 
__ ~ 
__ ~ 
__ ~ 
__ ~ 
__ ~~ 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Number of carbon atoms in chain 
Fig. 2.12. Dependence of diffusivity at 35°C for simple paraffins in polyisobutylene on 
the number of carbon atoms in the paraffin chain (van Amerongen, 1964) 
linear molecules occurring preferentially along the direction of their length: 
a linear molecule penetrates the polymer like a needle (van Amerongen, 1964). 
The importance of structure has been demonstrated in another study (Lacey 
and Cowsar, 1974). In this study, the diffusivity of steroids through poly(dimethyl 
siloxane) membrane was determined. Small modifications in the structure of the 
steroids have altered the observed diffusion coefficients significantly; this is caused 
by alteration in their steric requirements. 
b) Solubility of active agent in polymer. The rate of transport of the active 
agent within a polymer is proportional to the concentration gradient within the 
polymer. This concentration gradient in the amorphous phase of the polymer is 
dependent on t~e solubility of the active agent in the void spaces among the 
polymer chains. Two facets of solubility are salient for controlled release. In 
a reservoir device, it determines the partition of the active agent between the 
reservoir fluid and polymer and between the elution medium fluid and polymer, 
which moreover applies to monolithic devices. In a monolithic device, where 
the active agent is dispersed within the polymer, it is the absolute solubility (of 
the active agent) that is important. We shall concern ourselves with the latter 
case here; the partition coefficients will be examined in the next subsection. 
The process of dissolution of the active agent from its matrix-dispersed phase 
into the polymer phase requires the active-agent molecule to dissociate itself from 
its crystal cell. Solubility is, therefore, dependent on the active-agent crystal 
energetics, balanced against the free energy of mixing and other enthalpic and 
entropic processes occurring during the solution process (Flynn, 1974). 
28 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
The process of dissociation requires a dissociation energy that is dependent on 
the melting point of the crystals. The subsequent process of solubilization of the 
molecule into the polymer is more complicated and is dependent on the chemical 
natures of the polymer and active agent, as well as on the temperature of the 
system. A general rule is that compounds similar in polarity to the polymer phase 
will solubilize more readily (Chien, 1976). 
Among the theories employed to predict solubilities is the "solubility parameter" 
concept (Hildebrand and Scott, 1964), relating the solubility parameter to the 
cohesive energy density of the material. A polymer will most efficiently dissolve 
a material having a solubility parameter close to its own. Solubility parameters are 
a convenient measure of compatibility between a chemical and a polymer, and 
extensive compilations are available (see, e.g., Burrell, 1975). However, the solubility 
parameter approach is not useful in a system with polar phases involving hydrogen 
bonding or hydrophobic association (Flynn, 1974). 
Chien (1976) has correlated the solubilities of closely related molecules to their 
melting point through 
-
,1Hm 
InC = k---
P 
RTm 
2.4 
2.0 
1.6 
0 
0 
1.2 
(;] 
0 
0 
19 
·8 
0.8 
(;]0 
(;] 8 
v 
+ 
luCl. 
0.4 
8 
0> 
0 
8 
-I 
0.0 
0 
(;] 
-0.4 
(;] 
-0.8 
(;] 
-1.2 
1.6 
1.8 
2.0 
2.2 
2.4 
1000/Tm (K-') 
0 
~ 
0 
(;] 
0 
2.6 
2.8 
(2.23) 
Fig. 2.13. Relationship be-
tween mole fraction solu-
bility of testosterone, pro-
gesterone, and estradiol de-
rivatives in silicone polymer 
and the reciprocal of the 
melting point temperature 
of the derivative compound 
(Chien, 1976) 
29 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
where Cp is the mole fraction solubility, t1Hm the enthalpy of melting and Tm the 
melting point of the active-agent crystal. This is demonstrated in Fig. 2.13 for 
a set of steroid derivatives in silicone rubber. 
Michaels et al. (1975) have applied the solubility theories of Hildebrand and of 
Flory-Huggins to the solubility of steroids in polymers. A predictive correlation 
has been derived between the polymer permeability (= product of diffusivity and 
solubility) and steroid crystalline melting temperature. This correlation is illustrated 
in Fig. 2.14 for a set of eleven steroids in six rubbery polymers. Other correlating 
parameters are entropy of fusion of the steroid and computed solubility parameters 
of steroid and polymer. 
Studies on the solubility of gases in rubber has indicated that the solubility depends 
on critical temperature or boiling point of gas and on the temperature of the 
system. In addition, it varies with the nature of gas and rubber, polar gases being 
more soluble in rubber containing polar groups, non-polar gases in non-polar 
rubber. The presence of fillers has an added effect because of adsorption of gas 
in the filler material (van Amerongen, 1964). 
In summary, the similarity-dissimilarity in the chemical and physical nature of 
the polymer and active agent, and the melting enthalpy and temperature of the 
active agent, are the principal factors determining the solubility. Thus, solubility 
can be manipulated by utilizing metastable (high energy) or polymorphic crystalline 
forms of the active agent. Furthermore, analogs or homologs of the original active 
agent can exhibit altered solubility characteristics and may be substituted if they 
-2 
10 
-4 
'w 
10 
"E 
u 
0-
~ 
c: 
-6 
0 
10 
:;:: 
u c: 
:> -
~ 
:0 
0 
Q) 
-8 
E 
10 
... 
Q) 
n.. 
-10 
10 
0 
30 
8p ; 7.6 
0 
8p ; 8.5 
8p ; 8.2,10 
8p ; 8.0 
8p ; 7.9 
• 
o Medical Grade Silastic@ 
• LOPE 
8 EVA(9wf%VA) 
e EVA (J8wf % VA) 
G EVA(40wf%VA) 
• Pellethane@2103-80A 
20 
40 
60 
(Tm /310-1) x 10 , ( Tm in K) 
• 
80 
Fig. 2.14. Correlation of per-
meabilities of some steroids 
in various polymers with 
steroid 
melting 
point 
(Michaels et al., 1975) 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
1.0 
N 'E 
u 
CI 
0.8 
E 
0.5 -12 fL 
-a 
CI) 
0.6 
III 
c 
CI) 
Qj ... -
0.4 
c: 
::l 
100-300fL 
C 
E 
« 
0.2 
0.0 
0 
80 
160 
240 
Time (hours) 
Fig. 2.15. Release of chlormadinone acetate from 10 wt % dispersions in silicone elastomer 
matrices prepared with micro-sized and macro-sized particles (Haleblian et aI., 1971) 
exhibit the desired biological activity. Solubilization rates, however, can be more 
simply manipulated by utilizing particles of different sizes, thus altering performance 
characteristics of a monolithic device. This is illustrated in Fig. 2.15 for release of 
chlormadinone acetate from silicone elastomer matrices loaded to 10% with micro-
sized (0.5-12 J.l) or macro-sized (100-300 J.l) particles (Haleblian et aI., 1971). 
The higher surface area of micro-particles leads to a higher rate of availability of 
chlormadinone acetate for solubilization and diffusion; this leads to a higher 
release rate. Similar particle-size effects have been demonstrated by a number of 
investigators for various drugs (see, e.g., Roseman and Cardarelli, 1980). 
c) Partition coefficient between medium and polymer. The second important aspect 
of the solubility of active agent is its distribution between the carrier/elution fluid 
and polymer phases. This distribution is determined by the requirement for equili-
brium between the two phases, given by 
IX'I 
= IX-I 
I polymer 
I elution medium 
(2.24) 
where IX; is the activity of the active agent in the indicated phases. The activity may be 
replaced by the product of activity coefficient (v) and concentration (C) so that 
(2.25) 
or 
C.I 
I polymer 
v-I 
I elution medium == K 
V-I 
I polymer 
C.I 
' elution medium 
(2.26) 
31 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
4.0 
3.5 
N 
'E 
3.0 
u 
0> 
E 
.., 
2.5 
OJ 
en 
0 
~ 
~ 
2.0 
c: 
::> 
0 
E 
« 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
o 
2 
4 
6 
Time (days) 
8 
10 
Fig. 2.16. Release of ethynodiol 
diacetate from a unit area of 
silicone elastomer matrices into 
poly(ethylene 
glycol) 
(PEG) 
400-water media containing 
varying amounts of PEG 400; 
partition coefficient of ethyno-
diol diacetate between polymer 
and elution media varies with 
PEG 400 content in the media 
(Chien and Lambert, 1974) 
where K is the partition coefficient and defined as the ratio of solubility of the 
active agent in the polymer to its solubility in the medium. 
The most general approach to the distribution phenomena is to treat the partition 
law as an extension of Henry's law. In the ideal case, the concentrations of any 
single molecular species in two phases in equilibrium with each other will 
bear a constant ratio to each other, as long as the activity coefficients remain 
relatively constant. This definition assumes no significant solute-solute interactions 
and also no strong specific solute-solvent interactions (Leo et a!., 1971). 
An example of the influence of the partition coefficient on release characteristics 
is given in Fig. 2.16 for release of micro-sized ethynodiol diacetate from silicone elasto-
mer matrix devices to an elution medium containing poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) 
400. The partition coefficient is seen to significantly affect the rate of release. 
The partition coefficients themselves were varied by altering the solubility of 
ethynodiol diacetate in water with the addition of the PEG 400 (Chien and 
Lambert, 1974; also, see Tojo et a!., 1985b). Variation of the partition coefficient 
over a relatively small range (0.1 to 1) also has resulted in a change in the 
rate controlling mechanism from the matrix-diffusion controlled to the elution 
medium-polymer partition controlled (Chien and Lambert, 1974). 
As with absolute solubility, the partition coefficient is a function of the chemical 
nature of the active agent and polymer. In one study, Tojo et a!. (1987) examined 
32 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
Drug 
o 
R21 
R" 
RI7 
H 
H 
H 
OH 
H 
H 
H 
OH 
H 
H 
H 
OH 
OH 
OH 
H 
OH 
H 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
Fig. 2.17. Effect of the number and position of OH groups in progesterone derivatives on 
the solubility of drug in the skin (Tojo et aI., 1987) 
the influence of varying the number and position of OH groups in progesterone on 
its partitioning between a saline-PEG 400 medium and skin. The results are 
shown in Fig. 2.17 as solubility in the skin versus the progesterone derivatives, and 
the effect is significant. 
The importance of the size of a solute molecule is evident in the plot of 
solubility against the molar volume of the condensed vapor for sorption in poly-
ethylene (Fig. 2.18) (Rogers et aI., 1960). Moreover, two general classes of 
behavior can be distinguished on the basis of shape of the molecules: the straight 
chain paraffins in one group, and the aromatic and halogenated compounds in 
the other. The pH of the medium has been shown to influence the partition 
due to the effect of pH on the integrity of the polymer, as demonstrated in 
Fig. 2.19 for distribution of p-toluene sulfonic acid between an aqueous solution 
containing the acid and a nylon film immersed in the solution (Wirbrant and 
Sundel6f, 1983). 
An extensive compilation of partition coefficients has been provided by Leo 
et aI. (1971). 
33 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
0> 
10.1 
J: 
orE 
0 
u 
"-
Aromatic 
CI> 
hydroca bons 
e 
>. 
and 
(5 
halogenat e d 
Q. 
"e 
10.2 
hydrocabons 
0> 
~ 
0 
::J 
(5 
'" 
n- Paraf fins 
e 
0 
0> 
0 
163 
" 
u 
(f) 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
Molar volume of penetrant 
Fig. 2.18. Dependence of the solubility of various permeants in polyethylene at 25°C on 
the molar volume of the condensed vapor of the permeant (Rogers et aI., 1960) 
c 
3 
o >. 
c 
.= 
c 
2 
o 
~ 
C 
~ 1 
c o 
U 
a 
pH 
K 
I. 8 3 
lEI 
2.33 
e 
2.82 
e. 
3.75 
• 5.94 
0 
7. 13 
e 10.74 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
Concentration in aqueous phase (163M) 
Fig. 2.19. Dependence of the solubility of p-toluene sulfonic acid in nylon films on the 
concentration of acid in, and pH of, the aqueous phase (Wibrant and Sundelof, 1983) 
d) Active agent loading and other design factors. Apart from the factors discussed 
in the preceding subsections, which are in the most part fixed, once the choice 
of the polymer-active agent system has been made, there exist some additional 
parameters that can affect the release characteristics but which can be altered 
independent of the choice of the system. The first of these is the active agent 
34 

70 
60 
50 
~ 
"'0 
40 
'" 
II) 
0 
'" 
~ 
30 
Q. 
> 
0 
20 
0 
10 
0 
DDVP 
0 
10 
20 
30 
Time (days) 
40 
50 
20% 
15% 
10% 
5% 
2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
60 
Fig. 2.20. a. Effect of initial loading on amount of O-,O-dimethyl-2,2-dichlorovinyl phosphate 
(DDVP) pesticide released from poly(vinyl chloride) matrices containing the dissolved 
pesticide (Gillett et aI., 1972) 
40% 
1.8 
1.6 
N 
'E 
1.4 
u 
CI 
E 
1.2 
"0 
G> 
en 
1.0 
0 
G> 
~ 
.... 
0.8 
C 
:::> 
0 
0.6 
E 
« 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
80 
160 
240 
Time (hours) 
Fig. 2.20. b. Effect of initial loading on amount of chlormadinone acetate released from 
silicone elastomer matrices containing micro-sized dispersions of the drug (Haleblian et aI., 
1971) 
35 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
1.4 
N 
'E 
1.2 
u 
C> 
E 
1.0 
"0 
Q) 
1/1 
0 
0.8 
Q) 
Qj ... -
0.6 
c: 
:J 
0 
E 
0.4 
<[ 
0.2 
0.0 
0 
2 
4 
Square 
6 
8 
root of 
10 
time 
12 
14 
16 
~2 
(hours ) 
Fig. 2.20.c. Release of chlormadinone acetate as a function of square root of time from 
silicone elastomer matrices containing micro-sized dispersion of the drug in various initial 
concentrations (Haleblian et aI., 1971) 
loading, signifying the amount of active agent incorporated in the reservoir or 
dissolved/dispersed in the matrix. For a reservoir device, the loading primarily 
determines the life-time of the device and the length of the zero-order release period, 
since the diffusion barrier layer is of a fixed thickness. A reservoir loaded with 
an excess of the active agent will keep the inner surface of the membrane saturated 
and lead to a steady state concentration profile and a zero-order release. Once 
the concentration in the reservoir falls below the level required for saturation 
of the inner surface of the membrane, the release rate will drop continuously. 
In contrast to reservoir devices, the average distance the active agent molecules 
must diffuse before release from a monolithic device changes with time as the 
active agent is depleted. For monolithic devices containing only dissolved active agent, 
the release rate is initially proportional to r 1/2 and falls exponentially after 
approximately 60 % of the active agent has been released. Figure 2.20a shows the 
release of pesticide from one such device (Gillett et ai., 1972). If increasing amounts 
of the active agent are incorporated into the polymer, a dispersion of the 
active agent is obtained after the polymer is saturated. The release rate is still 
proportional to r 1/2; however, the release rate changes over a smaller range than 
in the case of dissolved active agent devices since the dispersions serve as reservoirs 
of the active agent. The performance of a dispersed active-agent device is illustrated 
in Fig. 2.20b for release of micro-sized chlormadinone acetate from silicone elastomer 
matrices (Haleblian et ai., 1971). The dispersions slow the increase in diffusional 
path by dissolving, thus providing more diffusible active agent at all points in the 
36 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
matrix than would be possible if the polymer were simply saturated with the 
active agent. However, the loading level in a dispersed active agent monolithic 
device has another more complex effect on the release mechanism. 
At a low (volumetric) loading level (0-5 vol. %), the active agent is widely 
dispersed in the polymer. The mechanism of release is dissolution into the polymer 
continuum followed by diffusion to the surface. A pseudo-steady state analysis of this 
type of system yields a release rate proportional to t- 1/2 , and devices of this 
type have been called "simple monolithic dispersions". At slightly higher loading 
levels (5-10 vol. %), the release mechanism becomes more complex. The cavities 
arising from loss of the active agent near the surface are filled with the elution 
medium fluid and provide short-cuts for the remaining active agent to diffuse. The 
cavities do not form continuous pathways at these loading levels; however, they 
enhance the effective release rate. These devices have been called "complex mono-
3.0 
.. 
2.5 
~ 
-B 
....... 
2.0 
~ 
"0 
<I> 
1.5 
0 ... 
<I> 
III 
1.0 
0 
<I> 
~ 
a: 
0.5 
0 
0 
Slob: 
Cylinder: 
Sphere: 
4 
B 
12 
16 
20 
24 
Membrane thickness, (r2 Ir, ) or 8 
(dM t , = 
'\ dt Ir 
(dM t , = 
'\ dt Jr 
ADKCsm 
8 
{ADKCsm = I} 
27ThDKCsm 
In(r2 /r,) , (27ThDKCsm=f) 
200 
Fig. 2.21. Steady state release rate as a function of membrane thickness for reservoir 
devices of various geometries (Baker and Lonsdale, 1974) 
37 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
lithic dispersions". Finally, at loading levels greater than 20 vol. %, the cavities 
become sufficiently numerous to allow formation of continuous channels where 
release can then occur by a leaching mechanism. These devices have been called 
"monolithic matrix systems" (Baker, 1987). 
The effects discussed in the preceding paragraph have been observed in various 
experimental systems. In Fig. 2.20c, 'the data for 0.2 and 2 wt % loading appear to 
follow the behavior typical for "simple monolithic dispersions". However, the 
mechanism for the 10, 20, and 40 wt % loadings is different since they exhibit some-
what higher release rates. Studies on release of proteins from polymeric matrices 
have shown high release rates that have been explained by the concepts of percolation 
theory (Rhine et aI., 1980a; Saltzman and Langer, 1987). An indication is that the 
percolation thresholds (creation of continuous channels) for macromolecular drugs 
are possibly approached at relatively low loadings. 
To counter the decrease in the release rate due to an increase in the diffusional 
path, monolithic devices have been covered by a rate-controlling barrier, making 
them analogous to reservoir devices (see, e.g., Lee et aI., 1980; Zimmerman, 1986). 
The thickness of the rate-controlling membrane is crucial in determining the steady-
state release rate in a reservoir device, although the dependence is a function 
of the geometry of the device. For slab geometries, the release rate is inversely 
proportional to the membrane thickness, while for cylindrical and spherical geometries, 
the increase in the membrane thickness beyond a certain point does not influence 
the release rate significantly (Fig. 2.21; Baker, 1987). An example of the influence of 
this membrane thickness is displayed in Fig. 2.22 for release of testosterone from 
silicone elastomer capsules of cylindrical geometry (Shippy et aI., 1973). 
The three most common geometries are slab, cylinder, and sphere. The effect 
of reservoir device geometry for the same active agent load can be seen in Fig. 2.23 
for cylinders and spheres. For monolithic devices, the effect of geometry is 
Q) -
600 
c 
~ 
Q) 
500 
III 
C 
~ 
~ '>. 
Q) 
c 
400 
~ ~ 
Q) 
N 
c: 'E 
300 
0 
u 
~ 
Q) 
CI - E 
200 
III 
0 -
III 
Q) 
100 
I-
0 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
110 
120 
Time (days) 
Fig. 2.22. Release rate of testosterone from cylindrical reservoir devices of different mem-
brane thickness made from silicone rubber (Shippy et aI., 1973) 
. 
38 

Q> 
~ 
Q> 
'" 
0 
Q> 
~ 
"0 
Q> 
.~ 
o 
E 
... 
o 
Z 
0 
C! 
C\I 
0 
C! 
~ 
0 
C! 
(I) 
o 
C! 
C\I 
Cylinder 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\\ 
I----'-"" ... ::::. _____ 
~---=:......-=,-----
o 
o~-----r_--~r-~-~---_.----~ 
0 0.00 
0.20 
0.40 
0.60 
0.80 
1.00 
Membrane thickness r1 /rZ 
Sphere: 
(dMt) = 
r2 r1 
47TDK =1 
47TDKCsm--
; 
dt r 
rz- r1 
Cylinder: 
(dMt) 
h 
27TDK = 112 
--
= 2 7T DKCsm--
dt r 
In(r2/r1) 
2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
Fig. 2.23. Normalized steady-state release rate as a function of membrane· thickness for 
spherical and cylindrical reservoir devices containing the same amount of active agent; 
normalization has been performed with respect to release rate from a spherical device with 
(r1/r2) = 0.5 
dependent on whether the active agent is simply dissolved (Fig. 2.24a) or dispersed 
in the matrix (Fig. 2.24 b; simple monolithic dispersions only). In addition to the 
three common geometries, special geometries have been devised to obtain constant 
release rates. These include hemispherical (Rhine et aI., 1980b) and sectioned-cylinder 
(Brooke and Washkuhn, 1977) geometries. The objective of the special geometries 
is to create an increasing area over which the active agent dissolves into the 
polymer as the diffusion distance increases (Fig. 2.25a, b). 
A final factor important for reservoir devices is the nature of the reservoir fluid. 
If the active agent is in the form of dry particulate matter, the lack of a good 
contact with the membrane will lead to non-constant and possibly irreproducible 
release rates. The active agent, therefore, is frequently suspended in a carrier 
39 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
fluid in which it is highly permeable. Liquid carriers can provide for good 
contact with the membrane due to bulk movement of the liquid. However, 
care need be taken that the carrier liquid itself does not diffuse out of the 
membrane along with the active agent. An example of the improvement with 
a carrier fluid is demonstrated in Fig. 2.26, in which is displayed the release rate 
of a series of devices loaded with different amounts of estriol (Baker et aI., 
1979). Devices loaded with dry powdered drug showed release rates proportional to 
their loading level. When the device was loaded with cocoa butter as the carrier, the 
release rate remained unchanged until almost 95 % of the original drug load had 
been released. This problem of lack of contact is significantly smaller for liquid 
active agents. 
e) Hydrodynamic diffusion layer. A factor not controlled by the designer of 
a controlled release system, but which nevertheless may have a significant influence 
on the release rate is the presence of a boundary layer on the surface of the 
1.0 
8 
:2 
0.6 
...... 
.. -
.... 
:2 
..--.. -
0.6 
...--
"0 
./". 
Q) 
rJ> 
./" 
0 
/' 
Q) 
0.4 
~ 
--- Sphere 
"E 
--- Cylinder 
::J 
0.2 
-··-Slab 
0 
E 
<:t: 
0 
... 
..--.. 
.... 
"0 
...... 
4 
8 
:2 
...... 
3 
:2 
"0 
.2? 
2 
0 ... 
Q) 
rJ> 
0 
Q) 
Q) 
0::: 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
Time 
Fig. 2.24. a Theoretical fractional release and release rate as a function of time from mono-
lithic devices of various geometries containing active agent in the dissolved state (Baker and 
Lonsdale, 1974) 
40 

1.0 
8 
~ 0.8 
-:f" 
"0 
0.6 
CI) 
VI 
o 
CI) 
CI) 
0.4 
.... 
"E g 0.2 
E 
<t 
-
"0 
...... 
Q) 
"0 
.... 
Q) 
VI 
o 
CI) 
Q) 
a:: 
o 
2.0 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
o 
o 
--
.' 
--
?"" 
......... ' 
// /"" 
/' 
. 
/ 
./ 
/ 
.' 
j 
/ 
-- Sphere 
/ 
.' 
j 
/ 
--- Cylinder 
-.,- Slob 
/ 
.-
I? 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
Time 
2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
1.0 
Fig. 2.24. b Theoretical fractional release and release rate as a function of time from monolithic 
devices of various geometries containing active agent in the dispersed state (Baker and 
Lonsdale, 1974) 
device. The boundary layer serves as an extra diffusional resistance and can restrict. 
or slow the transport of an active agent away from the device. In an extreme 
case, especially with an active agent of low solubility, a stagnant boundary layer 
can become saturated with the active agent and stop its release from the device 
(Baker and Lonsdale, 1974). 
While experimental studies in the laboratory are frequently performed under 
well-stirred infinite sink conditions, such conditions often do not reflect the in vivo 
situation. An example is shown in Fig. 2.27 for release of medroxyprogesterone 
from vaginal rings containing excess drug in suspension, both in vitro and in vivo 
(Roseman and Yalkowsky, 1976). An initial period oflinear release is obtained during 
the first 21 days and then a gradual decrease occurs. A high initial rate of release 
from the ring will shift the controlling resistance to the boundary layer and lead to 
a constant effective delivery rate. However, as the release rate from the ring drops, 
the matrix diffusion resistance becomes controlling and the release rate drops. 
Similar results were observed by Wood et al. (1984) who found that increasing the 
41 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
a 
b 
42 
Top view 
t = 0 
Side view 
c ross sect ion 
1=0 
Slice, side view 
cross section 
ot lime I 
r2 
1--1 
I r 
I 
1 
: 
1 
1 
1 r, I I 1 
O :-::: 
~ 
Inwardly-releasing hemisphere 
Cross-section at t = 0 
Sink 
Aclive agent 
Cross-section at time t 
Inwardly-releasing-section cylinder 
Fig. 2.25. a Inwardly releas-
ing hemispherical mono-
lithic device (Rhine et aI., 
1980 b), b Inwardly releasing 
sectioned cylindrical mono-
lithic device (Brooke and 
Washkuhn, 1977) 

2.1 Diffusion in Polymers 
~ 
80 
~ 
Q) 
~ 
60 
Q) 
If) 
0 
~ 
~ 
40 
drUg~ 
Q) 
.~ 
Powdered 
-
0 
Q) 
a:: 
20 
• 
o L-____ ~ 
______ ~ 
______ ~ 
______ _L ____ ~~ 
o 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Drug depleted (%) 
Fig. 2.26. Release rate of estriol from various partially loaded polyurethane devices as 
influenced by carrier fluid for the drug (Baker et aI., 1979) 
01 
c: ... ... 
100 
~ 75 
01 
E 
"0 
Q) 
(/) 
50 
o 
Q) 
Qj ... 
C 
::> o 
25 
E 
« 
25 
50 
75 
100 
125 
Time (days) 
Fig. 2.27. In vitro and in vivo release of medroxyprogesterone acetate from vaginal rings 
(Roseman and Yalkowsky, 1976) 
43 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
N 
'E 
u 
01 
E 
"0 
Q) 
I/) c 
Q) 
Q; ... 
C 
::I 
0 
E 
<{ 
12.0 r-------------------------------------------, 
10.0 
8.0 
6.0 
4.0 
2.0 
0.0 
0 
Q------
.e--I:T"- . 
-"1--
_.e-----
&---1:1""-
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
~ 
Square root of time (days 2) 
o rpm 
Fig. 2.28. Release of ethynodiol diacetate into a poly(ethylene glycol) 400-water medium as 
a function of square root of time and agitation speed (Chien et aI., 1975) 
crosslinker content (ethylene glycol dimethacrylate) in a poly(2-hydroxyethylmetha-
crylate) gel resulted in a closer agreement between in vivo and in vitro release rates. 
In in vitro studies, reservoir devices that show the release rate to be independent 
of the thickness of the membrane but proportional to the membrane surface area, 
indicate the existence of a controlling hydrodynamic diffusion layer. An in vitro 
technique for estimating the significance of this resistance is to change the agitation 
rate in release studies. Chien et al. (1975) observed that the release rate of ethynodiol 
diacetate from silicone matrices was strongly dependent on the agitation rate 
(Fig. 2.28). 
The boundary-layer diffusional resistance can alter the release characteristics of 
a device, as evident from Figs. 2.27 and 2.28. It can upset the performance of an 
otherwise well-designed device and therefore must be considered during the design 
process itself. 
2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
A device is categorized as diffusion controlled when the release rate is determined 
only by the rate of diffusion of the active agent. As mentioned earlier, the basic 
controlled-release mechanism in any of these devices is diffusion through one or more 
of the structural components of the device, such as the membrane, matrix and 
44 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
pores or the surface boundary layers surrounding the device. The basic governing 
equation of a model for this type of device, whether reservoir or monolithic, is 
aCim 
("C ) 
at = V' Dim V 
im 
(2.27) 
where the subscripts "im" refer to species i in the membrane/matrix. The subscript i 
has been dropped in the subsequent discussion for simplicity since a single 
active agent species will be considered. However, in the absence of cross-diffusion 
effects, the discussion is valid for the case of mUltiple active agents also. 
Equation (2.27) has been solved, subject to various boundary conditions depending 
on the characteristics of the device and environmental conditions. The release rate 
(dM,/dt), at any instant t, is given by 
(dM,) 
--
= (external surface area) x flux lexternal surface' 
dt 
, 
This general category of devices can be divided into reservoir, monolithic and porous 
devices according to their physical structure or construction, as discussed earlier. 
The models for these systems discussed here have also been summarized in 
Tables 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3. (In these tables, PSSA = pseudo steady-state analysis.) 
Table 2.1. Non-erodible reservoir devices 
Controlling 
resistances 
Membrane mass 
transfer 
resistance 
System description 
Infinite source, 
Infinite well-
agitated sink 
Infinite source, 
finite well-agitated 
activated agent 
Model description 
and solution type 
Rectangular reservoir 
no end effects, 
time-lag and 
burst effects, 
analytic 
Cylindrical reservoir 
no end effects, 
time-lag and 
burst effects, 
analytic 
Spherical reservoir 
time-lag and burst 
effects, analytic 
Rectangular reservoir 
PSSA, analytic 
Spherical reservoir 
time-lag, effect of 
a number of pellets 
of same size in the 
sink, analytic 
Reference 
Baker and Lonsdale 
(1974), 
Flynn et al. (1974), 
Crank (1975) 
Crank (1975) 
Crank (1975) 
Flynn et al. (1974) 
Christensen et al. 
(1982) 
45 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
Table 2.1 (continued) 
Controlling 
System description 
Model description 
Reference 
resistances 
and solution type 
Membrane mass 
Finite source, finite 
Rectangular reservoir 
Baker and Lonsdale 
transfer 
well-agitated sink 
PSSA, analytic 
(1974) 
resistance 
Flynn et al. (1974) 
Unsteady state, 
Spacek and Kubin 
time-lag analytic 
(1967) 
Finite source, finite 
Spherical reservoir 
Christensen et al. 
well-agitated sink 
time-lag, effect of 
(1982) 
a number of pellets 
of same/different 
sizes in the sink, 
analytic 
Finite source, 
Rectangular reservoir 
Flynn et al. (1974) 
infinite 
PSSA, analytic 
well-agitated sink 
Spherical reservoir 
Christensen et al. 
time-lag, effect 
(1982) 
ofa number 
of pellets of same 
size in the sink, 
analytic 
Membrane and 
Infinite source, 
Rectangular reservoir 
Flynn et al. (1974) 
laminates mass 
infinite 
PSSA, analytic 
transfer resistance 
sink 
Unsteady state, 
Barrie et al. (1963) 
analytic 
Rectangular reservoir 
Flynn et al. (1972) 
PSSA, analytic 
Membrane and 
Infinite source, 
Cylindrical reservoir 
Carslaw and Jaeger 
boundary layer 
infinite sink 
unsteady state, 
(1959) 
mass transfer 
analytic 
resistance 
Spherical reservoir 
Carslaw and Jaeger 
unsteady state, 
(1959) 
analytic 
Reservoir, 
Finite source, 
Spherical reservoir 
Fan et al. (1978), 
membrane and 
infinite sink 
unsteady state, 
Fan et al. (1979), 
boundary layer 
time-lag, burst, 
Tojo and Fan (1981), 
mass transfer 
and general initial 
Tojo et al. (1983) 
resistance 
conditions, active 
agent decay, 
membrane properties 
and temperature 
effects, numerical 
46 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
Table 2.2. Non-erodible monolithic devices 
Controlling 
System description 
Model description and 
Reference 
resistances 
solution type 
Diffusive mass 
Infinite well-
Rectangular geometry 
Crank (1975) 
transfer in 
agitated sink, 
short/long time 
Paul and McSpadden 
polymer matrix 
active agent 
approx, analytic; 
(1976) 
dissolved in polymer 
semi-infinite slab, 
Jaeger and Clarke 
(CaO ;£ Cas) 
analytic; numerical 
(1947) 
Cylindrical geometry 
Fu et al. (1976) 
analytic; 
Crank (1975) 
no end effects, 
Jaeger (1942) 
short/long 
time approximation, 
analytic; numerical 
Finite well-agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Crank (1975) 
sink, active agent 
analytic; 
Lee (l980a) 
dissolved in polymer 
approximate analytic 
(CaO ;£ Cas) 
Cylindrical geometry 
Crank (1975) 
analytic; 
Lee (l980b) 
approximate analytic 
Spherical geometry 
Crank (1975) 
analytic; 
Lee (l980b) 
approximate analytic 
Diffusive mass 
Infinite sink with 
Rectangular geometry 
Crank (1975) 
transfer in 
boundary layer, 
analytic; 
polymer matrix and 
active agent 
phase transfer 
Somasekharan and 
boundary layer 
dissolved in polymer 
resistance at 
Subramaniam (\ 980) 
resistance 
(CaO ;£ Cas) 
source-sink 
interface, analytic 
Cylindrical geometry 
Crank (\975) 
analytic solution 
Spherical geometry 
Crank (1975) 
analytic solution 
Diffusive mass 
Infinite un agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Somasekharan and 
transfer in 
sink, active agent 
analytic solution 
Subramaniam (1980) 
polymer matrix 
dissolved in polymer 
and sink 
(CaO ;£ Cas) 
Diffusive mass 
Infinite well-agitated Rectangular geometry 
Gienger et al. (1984) 
transfer in polymer 
sink, active agent 
diffusivity in matrix 
matrix, micro-
dissolved in polymer 
and partition 
porous membrane, 
(CaO ;£ Cas) 
coefficient across 
adhesive layer, 
matrix and 
and skin 
membrane first-order 
rate functions 
of time, 
numerical 
47 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
Table 2.2 (continued) 
Controlling 
System description 
Model description and 
Reference 
resistances 
solution type 
Diffusive mass 
Infinite well-
Rectangular geometry 
Higuchi (1961), 
transfer 
agitated sink, 
PSSA; no end 
Roseman and 
resistance in 
active agent 
effects, analytic; 
Higuchi (1970) 
polymer matrix 
dispersed in 
exact analytic; 
Paul andMcSpadden 
polymer 
approximate 
(1976) 
(C.o > Ca.) 
analytic 
Lee (I980a) 
Cylindrical geometry 
Cobby (1974) 
PSSA with end 
effects 
Spherical geometry 
Cobby (1974) 
PSSA, analytic; 
Lee (1980a) 
approximate 
analytic 
General geometry, 
Cobby (1974) 
PSSA, Biconvex 
Rhine et al. (1980) 
Inwardly releasing 
Brooke and 
hemispheres; 
Washkuhn (1977) 
Sector of a cylinder 
Kuu and Yalkowsky 
MUltiple holes 
(1985) 
in rectangular 
matrix 
Diffusive mass 
Infinite agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Roseman and 
transfer 
sink, active agent 
PSSA, analytic; 
Higuchi (1970) 
resistance in 
dispersed in polymer 
exact analytic 
Tojo (1985) 
polymer matrix, 
(CoO> Ca.) 
Paul and McSpadden 
and boundary-
(1976) 
layer resistance 
Cylindrical geometry 
Roseman and Higuchi 
PSSA, analytic 
(1970) 
Finite agitated sink, 
Spherical geometry 
Gupta and Sparks 
active agent 
PSSA, analytic 
(1980) 
dispersed in polymer 
(CoO> Ca.) 
Diffusive mass 
Infinite 
Cylindrical geometry 
Lee et al. (1980) 
transfer resistance 
well-agitated sink, 
PSSA, analytic 
in polymer, and 
active agent 
laminate layer 
dispersed in polymer 
(CaO > Ca.) 
Dissolution of 
Infinite 
Rectangular geometry 
Ayers and Lindstrom 
active agent, 
well-agitated sink, 
analytic, numerical; 
(1977) 
and diffusive 
active agent 
semi-infinite 
Lindstrom and Ayers 
mass transfer 
dispersed in polymer 
geometry, 
(1977) 
resistance in 
(CoO> Cas) 
analytic solution, 
Chandrasekaran and 
polymer and barrier 
valid while 
Paul (1982) 
layer 
concentration in 
matrix> Ca. 
everywhere. 
48 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
Table 2.3. Porous Devices 
Controlling 
resistances 
Pore diffusion 
resistance 
System description 
Reservoir device, 
infinite source and 
sink 
Monolithic device, 
infinite 
well-agitated sink, 
dispersed active 
agent (CoO> E Cb,) 
Monolithic device, 
infinite well-
agitated sink, 
dissolved active agent 
(CaO ~ Cbs) 
2.2.1 Reservoir Devices 
Model description and 
solution type 
Hollow fiber 
PSSA, analytic 
Rectangular geometry 
PSSA, analytic; 
diffusion-dissolution 
mechanism, 
analytic; 
diffusion only in 
continuously 
forming pores, 
analytic 
Cylindrical geometry 
PSSA, analytic 
Spherical geometry 
PSSA, analytic 
Rectangular geometry 
PSSA, analytic 
Reference 
Ashare et al. (1976) 
Higuchi (1963) 
Peppas (1983) 
Miller and Peppas 
(1983) 
Roseman and Higuchi 
(1970) 
Higuchi (1963) 
Fessi et al. (\ 982) 
By assuming a constant level of activity of the active agent throughout the release 
period, a simple model can be derived for a reservoir device. This assumption 
essentially corresponds to an infinite source and can theoretically be achieved by 
loading the reservoir with the active agent such that its concentration is much greater 
than its solubility in the polymeric membrane. The steady-state behavior of this 
device can be characterized by the expression for flux of the active agent, i.e. 
oCm 
J=-D -
m ox 
where Cm is the active agent concentration in the membrane. 
(2.28) 
For such an infinite source in a rectangular device with negligible end effects and 
membrane thickness, <5, integration of Eq. (2.28) yields 
(2.29) 
The subscript "I" refers to the reservoir side of the membrane, while "2" refers 
to the sink side. For the device with total external area (both surfaces), A, 
49 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
placed in an infinite well-agitated sink, the steady-state release rate can thus be 
written as 
or 
( dM t) 
_ 
C",! -
Cm 
--
- ADm----
dt 
r 
<5 
( dM t ) _C 
__ 
!-_C_2 
--
- AD",K 
dt 
r 
<5 
The total amount released up to time t is then 
C -C 
M =AD K! 
2 t 
t 
m 
<5 
(2.30) 
(2.31 ) 
(2.32) 
where C! and C2 are the concentrations in the reservoir and sink (assumed constant 
and uniform), respectively, and the product of Dm and K, i.e., DmK, is the per-
meability. 
A similar expression can be obtained for an infinite source in a cylindrial device 
of length, h, with negligible end effects and with internal and external radii, rl and r2 , 
respectively. The steady-state release rate is 
( dM t) 
dt 
r 
2nhD",K( C! - C 2) 
In (r2/1" I) 
(2.33) 
The corresponding expression for a spherical device with internal and external 
radii, r l and r2 , respectively, is 
( dM t ) 
dt 
r 
41tDmK(C! - C 2) 
(r2 - rtl/rlr2 
(2.34) 
Apart from the assumptions of infinite well-agitated source (which implies 
a constant CI ) and constant Dm, the above constant activity source model also 
assumes that the distribution coefficient is independent of concentration (constant K); 
that the medium on both sides of membrane (reservoir and sink) is the same 
(K same on both sides); and that the sink is infinite and well-agitated (no 
boundary layer, unchanging C2 ). For a simple model, none of these assumptions is 
particularly restrictive except for the assumption of similar reservoir and sink media, 
which would appear to be rare in actual situations. By resorting to the use of the 
parameter "transference t" instead of "permeability DmK", the restriction about 
the medium can be lifted (Theeuwes et aI., 1976). The transference, t, is independent 
of the medium, unless there is medium-membrane interaction, and is a function only 
of the active agent and membrane combination. The permeability, on the other hand, 
depends on all three, irrespective of whether medium-membrane interaction exists 
or not. t is defined as 
(2.35) 
50 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
where 
i sat = steady-state flux through the membrane from a saturated source to a pure 
sink (zero concentration), both comprised of the same medium, 
tJ 
= thickness of the membrane, 
Cs 
= saturation active agent concentration in the source medium, and 
Csm = saturation active agent concentration in the membrane at equilibrium. 
When saturated active agent solutions in different media are in equilibrium with 
the same membrane material, the following equation holds in the absence of 
medium-membrane interactions. 
(2.36) 
where the subscripts 1, 2, ... , denote different media. Thus, when K is independent of 
concentration in the membrane, Eqs. (2.35) and (2.36) can be used in rewriting 
Eqs. (2.31), (2.33), and (2.34) for the case when the source and sink media are not the 
same (and in the absence of medium-membrane interactions). This gives, respectively, 
for a rectangular device, 
( dM t ) 
= 2nhT(C 1/Csl -
C 21Cd 
dt 
r 
In (r2lr I) 
for a cylindrical reservoir device, and 
( dM t ) 
dt 
r 
4nT(C 1/C Sl -
C2IC.z) 
(r2 - rtl/r l r2 
for a spherical reservoir device. 
(2.37) 
(2.38) 
(2.39) 
These constant activity sources modeled above have the characteristic that after 
an initial transition period, the release rate reaches the steady state values given 
by Eqs. (2.31), (2.33), (2.34) or (2.37), (2.38), and (2.39). This very desirable 
feature is commonly termed the "zero-order release". 
In actual devices, many of the assumptions in the above model would be violated, 
leading to less-than-ideal release characteristics. The model presented assumes 
a steady-state profile in the membrane but does not account for the time it may take 
to attain the steady state. The performance of a real device would depend on, 
among other factors, its age. If the device is applied immediately after its reservoir 
is loaded with the active agent, it will require time to establish a concentration profile 
in the membrane. This is called the "time-lag". On the other hand, if the device 
is stored before usage, the membrane will become saturated with the active agent 
during storage and produce a "burst effect" on application. Solutions for these two 
initial conditions are available for an infinite source and infinite, well-agitated sink 
(Baker and Lonsdale, 1974; Crank, 1975). 
51 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
When the initial concentration in a rectangular membrane is C::' the resultant 
concentration profile in it is 
2 ~ Cm2 cos mr - Cml 
. 
mrx 
2 2/-'2 
+ -
L... 
sm -
exp (-Dm" n t u ) 
nn;l" 
b 
4C! 
co 
I 
(2m + I) nx 
+ -
L -- sin 
exp [-Dm(2m + 1)2 n 2t/b 2] 
n 
m;O 2m + I 
b 
(2.40 a) 
and the amount released by time t is 
M t 
DIII(Cml -
Cm2) t 
2b ~ Cml cos "n - Cm2 
2 2 
., 
-
= 
+""'2 L... 
2 
[1- exp (-Dm" n t/c')-)] 
A 
b 
n n; I 
" 
4C*b 
co 
1 
+ ---T- L 
2 {I - exp [-Dm(2m + 1)2 n 2t/b2 ]}. 
(2.40 b) 
n 
m;O (2m + I) 
A is the total area of exchange surface. For the "time-lag" case, 
and thus the, amount released by time t with Cm2 = 0 IS given by (Crank, 
1975), 
After a long period, the transient term vanishes, giving the steady-state release 
rate of 
( dM t) 
= ADIIICml • 
dt 
r 
b 
(2.42) 
The corresponding release equation for the "burst case" with 
is (Baker and Lonsdale, 1974), 
(2.43) 
52 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
The steady-state release rate, after the transient tenn vanishes is 
( dMt) 
dt 
r 
(2.44) 
Equations (2.42) and (2.44) are equivalent to the solution obtained by the steady 
state analysis, Eq. (2.30) for Cm2 = 0; however, a similar reduction is possible with 
Cm2 #- o. 
The solution for release rates from cylindrical and spherical devices for the "time 
lag" and "burst case" can be found in numerous treatises on diffusion (see, 
e.g., Crank, 1975). The more general case where the initial concentration profile is 
a function of position in the membrane has also been briefly considered by Crank 
(1975). Numerical solutions for some of the general initial condition cases have been 
presented by Tojo et aI. (1983). 
The preceding analysis still has some restricting assumptions including those of an 
infinite source (constant activity); infinite sink; and well-agitated sink and well-
mixed source (no boundary layers and no concentration profiles in either source 
or sink). 
Relaxing the assumptions of infinite source and sink would result in a non-
constant concentration of the active agent in each of them. Even if a reservoir 
is initially loaded with a high concentration of the active agent resulting in 
a period of zero-order-release (such as from constant activity sources), depletion 
of the active agent will eventually result in the reservoir concentration declining with 
time. The concentration of active agent in a finite sink will also increase. A simple 
analysis of this case involves the assumption of a linear concentration gradient in the 
membrane at all times (Baker and Lonsdale, 1974; Flynn et aI., 1974). Based on this 
pseudo steady-state assumption, the flux in a rectangular device of exchange area A, 
may be written as 
J = -D Cm2 -
Cm! 
m 
{) 
(2.45) 
where active agent concentrations in membrane, (Cml and Cm2), are related to 
the reservoir and sink conditions (CI and C2 respectively) through the distribution 
coefficient K. These reservoir and sink conditions at time t can be represented as 
(2.46 a) 
(2.46 b) 
where 
M I , M2 = total initial amounts of active agent in the reservoir and sink, respectively, 
VI' V2 
= volumes of the reservoir and sink, respectively, 
M t 
= net amount of the active agent exhanged in time t. 
53 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
Equations (2.46a) and (2.46b) hold only for cases where the amount of active 
agent hold-up in the membrane is negligibly small compared to that in the reservoir 
and sink. Combining Eqs. (2.45), (2.46 a), and (2.46 b) and integrating yield 
(Flynn et aI., 1974) 
(2.47) 
Variations of this analysis for the case of finite source and infinite sink and for the 
case of infinite source and finite sink can be easily accomplished. In the first case 
(finite source and infinite sink), V2 may be assumed infinite (very large with 
respect to Vi)' thereby reducing Eq. (2.47) to (Flynn et aI., 1974) 
M
t = Mi [1 - exp [- A~;~ t]]. 
(2.48) 
Similarly, for the second case (infinite source and finite sink), Eq. (2.47) may be 
rewritten as (Flynn et aI., 1974) 
(2.49) 
It should be noted that one of the assumptions of this analysis is the instantaneous 
equilibriation of the membrane with the changing external conditions, thus instan-
taneously establishing a linear (pseudo steady-state) concentration profile in mem-
brane. This and the earlier stated assumption of negligible membrane hold-up, 
require that the membrane be sufficiently thin. 
Spacek and Kubin (1967) have treated the same problem in describing a method 
to determine the diffusion and partition coefficients of solutes in membranes. Their 
analysis has yielded a solution for the unsteady state diffusion from a finite 
well-stirred source into another well-stirred finite sink, through area A, subject to the 
conditions 
t = 0; 
Cm = 0, 
0+ ~ X ~ {)-
(time lag) 
(2.50) 
t ~ 0; 
Cm = KCi , 
X = {)-
(reservoir) 
(2.51 a) 
t ~ 0; 
Cm = KC2 , 
X = 0+ 
(sink) 
(2.51 b) 
(DmA) ft ac m I 
C2 = --
--
dt 
Vz 
ax x=o 
(2.51 c) 
o 
(2.51 d) 
54 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
where Co is the initial concentration of the active agent in the reservoir. The 
resultant concentration profiles are 
where 
and 
ir:x2C 
D=--. 
q 
In these expressions, 
00 
S(x, p) = !/! {C",(x, t)} = p J C",(x, t) exp (-pt) dt 
o 
00 
Sl(P) = !/!{C 1(t)} = p J C 1(t) exp (-pt) dt 
o 
00 
S2(P) = !/! [C it)} = p J C 2(t) exp (- pt) dt 
o 
. 
( P )1/2 
lq=b -
Dm 
and 
(2.52a) 
(2.52 b) 
(2.52c) 
(2.53a) 
(2.53b) 
(2.54a) 
(2.54b) 
(2.54c) 
(2.55a) 
(2.55b) 
(2.55c) 
The above system of equations can be used to evaluate the unsteady state 
concentration of active agent in finite volume source and sink and also the 
concentration profile in the membrane. Under the condition that the source and 
55 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
sink volumes, VI and V2 , are almost the same, the total amount of active agent 
released by time t is given by (Spacek and Kubin, 1967) 
where 
K(5A 
IJ(=--
V ' 
and qi are the positive roots of the characteristic equation 
21J(q 
tan q = 
2 
2' 
(q -
IJ() 
(2.56) 
(2.57 a) 
(2.57b) 
(2.57 c) 
The next assumption to be removed is that of a well-agitated sink and a well-mixed 
source, leading to the consideration of boundary layer resistances on the surfaces of 
the membrane. Boundary layers will exist even in well-agitated real systems, giving 
rise to a small but appreciable resistance. The resistances can be treated by 
resorting to film mass transfer coefficients, kl and k 2 , for the two surfaces of the 
membrane; one at the reservoir and the other at the sink. 
Introduction of an extra resistance renders the consideration of relative rates 
important. If the characteristic time of diffusion through the membrane is larger than 
that of mass transfer across the boundary layers, the system is essentially membrane-
diffusion controlled. If, on the other hand, the boundary layer mass-transfer controls 
the release rate, the concentration profiles in the membrane are assumed to be always 
at steady state (quasi steady-state assumption). 
Boundary conditions for the general boundary-layer problem for an infinite activity 
reservoir and sink are: 
t = 0 ; 
t ~ 0 ; 
t ~ 0 ; 
t ~ 0 ; 
t ~ 0 ; 
56 
Cm = f(x) , 
-(5/2 ~ x ~ +(5/2 
Cml = KC1 ' 
X = -(5/2 (reservoir) 
x = +(5/2 
(sink) 
k [C -
0] = -D oCm 
22m ox ' 
(5 
x = -
-
(reservoir) 
2 
(5 
x = + 2: 
(sink) 
(2.58a) 
(2.58b) 
(2.58 c) 
(2.58d) 
(2.58 e) 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
where C100 is the concentration of the active agent in the bulk of the reservoir; 
the active agent concentration in the bulk of the sink remains zero for all times. 
Solution to the above problem can be found by analogy with the corresponding 
heat transfer problem for kl = k2 = ka and f(x) = 0 (Carslaw and Jaeger, 1959). 
Their solution in terms of the concentration profile in the membrane is 
where 
In Eq. (2.59), IX" and [3" are the roots of 
and 
1X(j 
IX tan -
-
h = 0 
2 
[3(j 
[3 cot 2 + h = 0 , 
(2.60) 
(2.61 a) 
(2.61 b) 
respectively. With the magnitude of Cm at x = ± (jj2 known, the flux or release 
rate can be determined from 
(2.62) 
The steady-state release rate is 
(d_M_r) = ~ Ak C [I ___ 
ka_«(j_/2_)_J 
dt 
r 
2 
a 
100 
KDm + ka«(j12) 
(2.63) 
where A is the total area of the exchange surface. When the membrane diffusion 
controls the process, i.e., «(jj2) ka ~ KDm, the steady-state release rate becomes 
(dMr) 
dt 
r 
(2.64) 
57 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
which is similar to Eq. (2.31) for C2 = O. When the boundary-layer diffusion controls 
the process, i.e., when (bj2) ka ~ KDm, the corresponding expression is 
(dM,) = ~ AkaC 100. 
dt 
r 
2 
(2.65) 
The expression of Eq. (2.65) is identical to that obtained by Flynn et al. (1972) 
by a pseudo steady-state analysis for the same case assuming a constant concentration 
(negligible resistance) in the membrane. They have also given a pseudo steady-state 
solution for the boundary-layer diffusion-controlled case when the partition and 
mass transfer coefficients differed for the two sides of the membrane. Thus for 
partition coefficients, KI and K2 , and the mass transfer coefficients, kl and k 2 , on the 
reservoir and sink side respectively, the expression for M, is (under the assumptions 
that the concentration profiles in the boundary layers are always at steady state 
with respect to the membrane interface concentrations, and that there exists no 
concentration gradient across the membrane) 
(2.66) 
where 
(2.67 a) 
and 
(2.67b) 
For large t, Eq. (2.66) reduces to the well-known form in terms of resistance 
M= 
, 
ACloot 
1 
K2 
-+--
kl 
Klk2 
(2.67 c) 
Introduction of a steady-state membrane diffusion resistance into the above equation 
leads to another familiar form (see, e.g., Tojo et aI., 1985 a) 
(2.67d) 
A variation to the case of boundary-layer diffusion control is the case of multiple 
resistances-in-series in a laminated membrane device formed by using two or more 
58 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
different membranes in layers. For laminated devices, where the resistances in each 
lamina is independent of the concentration of the active agent, the diffusional 
resistance R; in the ith lamina can be expressed as (Flynn et aI., 1974) 
(2.68) 
where P; is the permeability of the ith lamina, and b; and Dm; are the thickness and 
diffusivity for this lamina, respectively. K; is the partition coefficient for the ith 
lamina based on the reservoir and sink media which are assumed to be of the same 
composition. The overall diffusional resistance for n laminae is then given by 
bT 
b, 
b2 
bn 
RT = -
= -- + -- + ... + --. 
PT 
Dm,K, 
Dm2K2 
DmnKn 
(2.69) 
The composite permeability coefficient PT can thus be obtained from knowledge 
of the thickness of each lamina, the diffusivity of active agent in each lamina, and the 
distribution coefficient between each lamina and the external medium. The release 
rate of active agent is obtained as 
( dM t ) 
dt 
r 
(i) 
(2.70) 
Equation (2.70) gives the steady-state release rate from an infinite source at C, to an 
infinite sink at C2 when both the reservoir and sink are comprised of the same 
medium and are well mixed. This expression reduces to Eq. (2.31) when the 
resistance in anyone layer becomes controlling. It is evident from Eq. (2.70) that the 
order of arrangement of the laminates is immaterial in determining the performance -
a consequence of the assumption of independence of resistances from the concentra-
tion. An analysis of the type made above has been utilized by Berner (1985) to 
determine the pharmacokinetics of transdermal drug delivery (the steady-state flux 
and the pharmacokinetic time lag). The skin serves as an extra lamina in the 
transdermal drug delivery from a reservoir-type (patch) device. 
While the steady-state flux can be determined by evaluating the compound 
permeability coefficient, Pro from Eq. (2.69), the unsteady-state flux is more difficult 
to compute. Barrie et ai. (1963) have presented an expression which shows that the 
unsteady .. state flux is dependent on the order of placement of the laminae. 
The models considered so far are limited mainly to rectangular geometries with 
no edge effects. This represents the simplest geometry for which analytic solutions 
can be given. Solutions for the corresponding cylindrical and spherical systems, for 
all but the simplest cases, are often substantially more difficult. Solutions for some 
analogous heat transfer problems can be found in Carslaw and Jaeger (1959), 
including the following cases: 
a. Finite hollow cylinder a ~ r ~ b, 0 ~ z ~ L; the reservoir-membrane interphase-
at r = a maintained atf(z); sink at zero concentration (constant activity source, 
well-agitated infinite sink). 
59 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
b. Finite hollow cylinder a ~ r ~ b, 0 ~ z ~ L; the reservoir at r = a kept at 
J(z); boundary layer at external surface; sink at zero concentration (well-agitated 
constant activity source, boundary layer at infinite sink). 
c. Hollow sphere a ~ r ~ b; the face at r = a maintained at C1 ; boundary layer 
at r = b; sink at C2 (well-agitated constant activity source, infinite sink with 
boundary layer). 
d. Hollow sphere a ~ r ~ b; boundary layers at r = a and b; source at C1 and 
sink at C2 (constant activity source, infinite sink, boundary layers at both source 
and sink). 
Christensen et al. (1982) have analyzed finite and infinite reservoir spherical 
devices (pellets) under both finite and infinite well-agitated sink conditions. The 
governing differential equation for transport in the membrane has been solved by the 
method of Laplace transform. They have included the effect of having a number 
of pellets of different sizes releasing into the same sink. This is trivial only if the sink 
is infinite and well agitated, since under that condition, the release from each pellet 
is independent of others. In such a case, the total release is equal to the 
sum of the individual releases. The equations for the amount released are 
quite complicated, especially for the case of pellets of different size with variable 
reservoir and sink concentrations. Numerical evaluation of matrix equations is 
required. 
Models in which fewer assumptions are made can be very difficult to solve 
analytically; numerical solution may be the only approach to these. A case in point 
is a spherical geometry, non-constant activity source, finite sink, boundary layer in 
sink, and an unstirred source leading to concentration profiles in the reservoir. 
This may well represent a more realistic model and may be further complicated by 
reaction/temperature effects. The only approach to solution of these coupled partial 
differential equations may be to evaluate them numerically. 
A fairly comprehensive model for reservoir devices has been presented in a series 
of papers including Fan et al. (1978), Fan et aI., (1979), Tojo and Fan (1981), and 
Tojo et al. (1983). The model presented in these papers involves mass and heat balances 
around both the reservoir and membrane. The governing equations of the model are 
~(::c) = ~ ~ (D Xl ac) _ - _-
'" 
A a 
III 
a 
l' A 
I's 
l'I 
X 
X 
X 
(2.71) 
and 
(2.72) 
where 
A 
= 0, 1 or 2 for a slab, cylindrical or spherical geometry, respectively, 
YA 
= rate of spontaneous decay of active agent having a hyperbolic rate form, 
I's 
= rate of sublimation or dissolution of active agent existing as a solid phase, 
iJH1 = heat of reaction for decay of active agent, and 
iJH2 = heat of dissolution of active agent. 
60 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
The boundary conditions involve an infinite sink with boundary-layer transport at 
the surface; solutions are given for the "time lag", "burst effect" and more general 
initial conditions. Variations of the different physical parameters in the model, such 
as the mass and heat transport properties, heat capacity, and temperature dependence 
of the specific rate of decay of active agent have been considered by the authors. 
They have resorted to the method of lines to solve the coupled non-linear partial 
differential equations for the spherical geometry case. 
Analysis is also given for the effect of heat and mass transfer coefficients, 
diffusivity, thermal conductivity, membrane thickness, void fraction of the mem-
brane, perturbations in surrounding temperature, and heat of reaction on the concen-
tration profile, temperature profile, and release rate (Fan et aI., 1978). Dynamic 
characteristics of a device, which is exposed to a sinusoidal perturbation in the sur-
rounding temperature, are presented in Fan et al. (1979). Both isothermal and non-
isothermal systems have been explored in Tojo and Fan (1981). Effects of the void 
fraction, membrane thickness, concentration dependence of diffusivity, and step 
change in environment temperature on the release rate are studied. Results are 
compared to those obtained by making the quasi steady-state assumption. Optimi-
zation of the controlled release in terms of the membrane thickness and void fraction 
is also discussed in their works. The effects of the storage period of the product 
and of the environment temperature on both the transient and steady-state release 
rate are elucidated in the work by Tojo et al. (1983). The model has also been 
employed to describe an experimentally determined release pattern of an active 
agent through a bioerodible membrane. The effect of temperature on the release 
rate are also considered. 
In conclusion, it seems that a whole spectrum of models is available for the 
reservoir devices in diffusion-controlled systems. The models range from the simple 
to the very complicated. Analytic solutions are available in many cases and the 
coverage is fairly comprehensive. While the majority of the models consider only 
the isothermal cases, non-isothermal cases have also been solved. 
2.2.2 Monolithic Devices 
Monolithic devices are manufactured by blending the active agent in the polymeric 
matrix such that the active agent forms a solution with the polymer. Depending on the 
concentration of the active agent, it may be simply dissolved in the matrix or it may 
also exist as a dispersion (supersaturation). The performance and release characteristics 
are different in these two cases. With appropriate boundary conditions, the govern-
ing differential equation for both cases is 
(2.73) 
a) Dissolved active agent case. This type of device is created when the active 
agent is dissolved in the polymer at or below saturation level (eao ~ ea.). 
For such a planar matrix of thickness b and negligible end effects, immersed in a well-
61 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
agitated infinite medium, the amount of active agent released by time t is given by 
(Crank, 1975) 
(2.74) 
where Moo is the amount released at infinite time; it is equal to the initial active 
agent loading less the amount in the device which is in equilibrium with the medium 
at infinite time. The corresponding result for a cylindrical device with negligible 
end effects is 
M, 
~ 
4 
2 
-- = 1 -
L. 22 exp [-Dm(Xn t] 
M <X) 
II; 1 (/ (Xn 
(2.75) 
where (/ is the radius of the cylinder and (Xn are the positive roots of 
(2.76) 
where Jo(x) is the Bessel function of the first kind of order zero. Similarly, for 
a sphere of radius a in a well-stirred infinite medium, 
(2.77) 
Simplified expressions for short- and long-time approximations in the above cases 
are also available. For the slab, the expression for the initial stages of release is 
(Baker and Lonsdale, 1974; Crank, 1975) 
~ 
= 4 (Dmt) 1/2 
Moo 
7rlF 
M 
for 0 ~ -' ~ 0.6 
- Moo-
and the long-time approximation is 
(2.78a) 
(2.78b) 
The release rate thus varies as t -1/2 during the early stages of release and then 
decays exponentially. The same variation of release rate with time of release is 
observed for cylindrical and spherical geometries also (Baker and Lonsdale, 1974). 
Solutions for many other cases can be found through analogy to the corresponding 
heat-transfer problems (see e.g., Jaeger, 1942; Carslaw and Jaeger, 1959). Some of 
them are: 
a. A system with a general initial distribution CaO(x) of the active agent in 
a rectangular slab. The sink is infinite at zero concentration and a boundary 
layer exists at the surface. 
b. A rectangular slab with only one face in contact with a finite sink at zero initial 
concentration. 
62 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
Solution for the active agent release from a long cylinder into an unstirred infinite 
medium can be obtained from the work of Tranter (1947). Numerical solutions 
for release from rectangular slabs for various surface conditions can be obtained in 
Jaeger and Clarke (1947). 
In order to have a model applicable to devices that range from a flat disk 
(radius ~ thickness) to a cylindrical rod (radius ~ thickness), the diffusion equation 
must be solved in cylindrical coordinates in three dimensions. This also removes the 
restriction of negligible end effects. For such a polymer-active agent composite in 
a well-stirred infinite medium of zero initial concentration, the fraction of active agent 
released by time t is given by (Fu et ai., 1976) 
(2.79) 
where I is the half-length of the cylindrical tablet and a is its radius; Ci.k are the 
zeroes of 
(2.80a) 
and Pk is defined as 
(2k + I)n 
Pk = 
21 
. 
(2.80b) 
The authors have suggested that for most purposes, IO terms in each series III 
Eq. (2.79), is sufficient. 
When an infinitely long planar matrix of thickness tJ (no end effects) is immersed 
in an agitated infinite medium, a boundary-layer mass-transfer resistance may exist 
at the surface. The boundary condition at the surfaces (x = ± tJ/2) is then given by 
aCm 
h 
) 
-D -
= 
(C -KC 
m ax 
m 
00 
(2.8 I) 
where h is the mass transfer coefficient in the boundary layer. The total amount of 
active agent, M I , diffusing out of the matrix is given by (Crank, 1975) 
where Pn are the positive roots of 
P tan P = L 
and 
tJ h 
L=--. 
2 Dm 
(2.82) 
(2.83a) 
(2.83 b) 
63 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
The corresponding solution for an infinite cylinder of radius a is (Crank, 1975) 
where f3n are the roots of 
and 
ah 
L=-
Dm 
(2.84) 
(2.85a) 
(2.85 b) 
where J I (x) and Jo(x) are Bessel functions of the first kind of first- and zero-order, 
respectively. 
F or a sphere of radius a with a boundary layer at its surface, the amount of active 
agent released at time t is (Crank, 1975) 
where f3n are the roots of 
and 
f3n cot f3n + L -
I = 0 
ah 
L=-. 
Dm 
(2.86) 
(2.87 a) 
(2.87 b) 
Application of monolithic devices often involves their introduction into an external 
medium or sink with a limited volume and thus the assumption of a constant 
medium concentration, made in the previous analyses, does not hold. The concen-
tration of the medium rises as an increasing amount of the active agent is released, 
resulting in a lowering of the release rate; the system eventually approaches an 
equilibrium. The final uptake of the active agent by the medium (M "') is obtained by 
a mass balance on the system and is given by (Crank, 1975) 
where 
M\ 
M"'=----
I + (_V~_~) 
MI = initial active agent loading in the device, 
VI = volume of the device, and 
V2 = volume of the sink (medIUm). 
64 
(2.88) 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
F or a planar device of thickness b (neglecting end effects) placed symmetrically in the 
center of an agitated sink (Crank, 1975), the boundary condition representing the 
changing condition of the medium for a unit area of exchange at each surface, 
is given by 
V2 aCm = +-D acm . 
2K at 
m ax ' 
x = ±bj2, 
t> O. 
The amount of active agent released by time t is then given by 
~ 
= I - I 
2a(1 + a; 2 exp (_ 4D,,~q~t) 
Moo 
"=ll+a+aqn 
b 
where q" are the non-zero positive roots of 
tan q = -aq 
and 
(2.89a) 
(2.89 b) 
(2.90a) 
(2.90b) 
Similarly for a cylindrical device of radius a placed in a finite sink with negligible end 
effects, (Crank, 1975) 
M, 
00 
4a(l+a) 
c 
2 
-- - = 1 - L 
2 2 exp (-D",Cfllt/a ) 
M 
II~ 1 4 + 4a + a Cfll 
(2.91 ) 
where q" are the non-zero positive roots of 
(2.92) 
and a is defined as in Eq. (2.90b). For a spherical device of radius a immersed 
in a limited volume agitated bath, the amount released by time t is (Crank, 
1975) 
M, 
~ 
6a(a + I) 
, 
, 
-
= 1 -
L. 
2 c exp (-D",Cf,;t/a-) 
M J~ 
,,-- 1 9 + 9a + Cf" a 
(2.93) 
where q" are the non-zero roots of 
3q 
tan q = 3 
2 
+ aq 
(2.94) 
and a is defined as in Eq. (2.90b). 
The solution for the case of a semi-infinite matrix, of exposed surface area 2A, 
immersed in an unagitated finite medium is also available (Reid et aI., 1980). 
65 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
When the mass transfer in the medium is diffusive, the amount of active agent 
released by time t is given by 
M, _ 2Cao/3 (DIIl)112 
----
-
2A 
I + /3 
7t 
X 1--- L ---
exp(-n 2W 2)[I-E(nW)] 
{ 
2 
co [ 
(1 - fJ)Jn-1 
} 
l+fJn=l 
(l+fJ) 
(2.95) 
where 
(2.96a) 
(2.96 b) 
and 
(2.96 c) 
In the above equations, Db is the diffusivity in the unagitated medium, and ~b the 
volume of medium per unit area of transfer surface. 
It is evident that the exact solutions of even the simple cases considered so far, 
are quite cumbersome; however, approximate analytic solutions have been achieved 
for some systems, by means of a refined heat balance integral method (Lee, 1980 a). 
The resultant solutions are easier to evaluate than the exact solutions presented 
earlier. The method involves double integration of the transient diffusion equation 
with respect to the space coordinate which eliminates spatial derivatives in the 
integral equation. The concentration distribution is then approximated by a quadratic 
function. Resorting to this technique, the amount of active agent released from 
a planar matrix of thickness ~ placed in a well-agitated finite sink of volume V2 
(neglecting end effects), is given by (Lee, 1980a) 
M 
-' = (1 + A) (1 -
e,) 
Moo 
(2.97) 
where A is defined as 
(2.98 a) 
and eb is defined implicitly through the expression 
(2.98 b) 
66 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
In Eq. (2.98 a), A is the surface area of each face of the planar matrix. The 
solution agrees well with the exact numerical solution especially for small A and small t. 
Deviations became appreciable at the tail end of the release process. 
For a cylindrical device of radius a and length h (neglecting end effects) in 
a well-agitated finite sink of volume V2 (Lee, 1980 b) 
(2.99a) 
where A is defined as 
(2.99 b) 
and e b is defined by the expression 
Dmt = ~ A3 (_1 _ 1)3 + 3(3A + 5) A2 (~_ 1)2 
a2 
40 
e b 
160 
e b 
+ 3A2(5 - 3A) (_1 _ 1) _ 3A2(5 -
3A) In (~). 
W 
e b 
W 
e b 
(2.99c) 
The corresponding solution for a device of spherical geometry with radius a 
(in a well-agitated finite sink of volume V2 ) is (Lee, 1980 a) 
M, 
. [ 
4A 
J 
!vi: O~ (I + /.) 
I -
4( 1 + l) + (2 _ [3)2 
(2.100) 
where [3 is defined through the expression 
Dmt = _ t _ (A + 2) In [4A + 4 - ([3 - 2)2J 
a2 
3 
3 
4A 
+ ~ (1 + A)a.s In {[2(1 + A)a.s + ([3 - 2)] [(I + At· s + I]} 
3 
[2(1 + A)a.s -
([3 - 2)] [(1 + A)a.s - 1] 
(2.101a) 
and A is given by 
(2.101 b) 
The solutions for the cylindrical and spherical cases are in better agreement with the 
corresponding exact solutions than are the solutions of the planar case. As A becomes 
larger, deviation appears for the tail end of the release. It is recommended that 
the solution for the infinite sink condition be used when A ~ 10, for all geometries 
(Lee, 1980a, 1980b). 
67 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
Apart from the diffusional resistances in the matrix and the boundary layer, 
a third matrix-medium interface mass transfer resistance has also been incorporated 
into models presented by Somasekharan and Subramanian (1980). The interface 
mass transfer resistance is accounted for by a first-order rate expression 
flux at interface = kiCmhnterface 
where k i is the interface mass transfer coefficient. Models representing three different 
combinations of conditions have been presented for a semi-infinite matrix of 
cross-sectional area, 2A, immersed in an infinite medium. 
The first model (N-R-S) considers unsteady-state diffusion in the matrix, a matrix-
medium interface mass transfer resistance, and a steady-state boundary-layer 
resistance. Combining these three resistances in series, the release rate is obtained 
as (Somasekharan and Subramanian, 1980) 
I (dMr) 
2A 
dt 
r 
(2.102) 
where Db and Db are the diffusivity in, and thickness of, the boundary layer, 
respectively. 
The second model (N-E-S) considers unsteady state diffusion in the matrix, 
equilibrium at the matrix-medium interface, and a steady-state boundary-layer 
resistance at the surface. The expression for release rate is 
(2.103) 
where 
k = Db/Db 
2 
D K 
m 
(2.104) 
and Cab is the bulk medium concentration of the active agent. 
The third model (N-E-N) considers unsteady-state diffusion in the matrix, 
equilibrium at the matrix-medium interface, and unsteady-state diffusion in the 
medium (unagitated medium). The resultant release rate is 
~ (dM,) 
2A 
dt 
r 
D:';2 
KC ab -
CaO 
(nt)1/2 1 + K(Dn,/Db)1/2 
(2.105) 
When a monolithic device is employed to deliver active agent through the skin 
(transdermal drug delivery), the skin layer also acts as a laminate. Gienger et al. 
(1984) have modeled and studied such a system involving transport through a series 
of resistances including: the matrix, the microporous membrane covering the matrix, 
the adhesive layer, and the skin. The geometry considered is rectangular (slab); 
the sink (blood capillary) is considered infinite and well stirred. The model comprises 
unsteady-state Fickian diffusion equations for the four layers. Equilibrium, charac-
terized by partition coefficients, is assumed at each interface. The diffusivity of active 
68 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
agent in the matrix, and its partition coefficient between the matrix and the 
micro porous membrane, are taken to be first-order rate functions of time. The 
system of four governing partial differential equations has been solved numerically, 
and the concentration profiles within each layer are presented as functions of time. 
F or the values of parameters assumed by the authors, significant mass transfer 
resistances are found only in the matrix and skin. The effect oftime-dependent changes 
of the diffusivity and partition coefficient is such that the concentration gradient within 
the skin remains essentially unchanged with time. The system, therefore, comes close 
to the desired zero-order release (Gienger et aI., 1984). 
b) Dispersed active agent case. When the initial active agent loading in the polymer 
(CaO) exceeds its solubility in the polymer (Cas)' the excess, (CaO -
Cas)' gives rise to 
a separate phase at equilibrium. This phase is dispersed in the polymer and causes 
the release characteristics to be different from the dissolved active agent (CaO ~ Cas) 
case. 
Higuchi (1961) offered the first conceptual model for this type of device. This 
model postulates that the active agent is first extracted from the surface layer; 
after this layer has been depleted to the saturation level, extraction is initiated at the 
n~xt layer, leading to a concentration discontinuity at a well-defined, extraction 
boundary (see Fig. 2.2b). The mechanism of extraction is the "solution-diffusion" 
process discussed earlier. [A more rigorous description of this mechanism has been 
given by Chein (1976). He visualizes the process as consisting of three energy-
activated steps: (a) dissociation of active agent molecules from their crystal lattice 
at the extraction boundary, (b) solvation of these dissociated molecules into the 
polymer matrix at the extraction boundary, and (c) diffusion of these dissolved active 
agent molecules through the polymer continuum. The majority of the models negelect 
the influence of the first two steps on the release rate; the release is assumed to be 
"diffusion controlled"]. Higuchi's analysis is based on the pseudo steady-state 
assumption that the concentration profile in the extracted region is always at steady 
state with respect to the movement of the extraction front. He also assumes that 
dissolution of active agent in the polymer does not influence the rate, i.e., the 
release is diffusion controlled with dissolution being relatively rapid. 
For an infinite rectangular slab (or a rectangular slab with end effects neglected) 
of thickness b, in a well-stirred infinite medium, the release rate at the surfaces 
of the polymer can be written as (under the pseudo steady-state assumption) 
( dM t ) 
dt 
r 
(2.106) 
when the extraction front is at x; Cai is the concentration of the active agent in the 
polymer at the matrix-medium interface and A is the cross-sectional area of each 
face of the matrix. A mass balance on the active agent gives 
M + 2A __ x 
as + ai 
( 6 
) C 
C 
t 
2 
2 
((i/2 -
x) 
(b /2) 
(2.107) 
69 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
Combining the above two equations, we have 
(2.108) 
Integrating this expression, 
(2.109) 
This, in turn, leads to 
(2.110) 
since 
(2.lll) 
For an infinite medium with a negligible concentration of the active agent 
(Cab = 0, i.e., Cai = 0), the above expression reduces to 
(2.112) 
and for Cao ~ Ca .. it further simplifies to 
(2.113) 
Comparing the above expression with that for the corresponding dissolved active 
agent case (Cal) ~ Cas' rectangular slab in infinite well-agitated medium), it is 
apparent that the initial release in both systems is a function of (1/2 [Eqs. 
(2.78a) and (2.113)]. For the dissolved active agent case, this dependence changes 
at long extraction times [Eq. (2.78 b)], but in the dispersed active agent case, Eq. (2.113) 
holds until the concentration at the center of the matrix falls below saturation 
level. 
This pseudo steady-state approach can also be applied to other geometries. 
For Cao ~ Cas and Cab = 0, the fractional active agent loss from a cylinder of 
radius a with negligible end effects, can be obtained from (Roseman and Higuchi, 
1970; Baker and Lonsdale, 1974) 
( 
Mr) ( 
Mr) 
Mr 
4CasDm 
I -
-
In 
I -
-
+ -
= ---2 t. 
Moo 
Moo 
Moo 
Caoa 
(2.114) 
70 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
For a sphere of radius a, the corresponding expression is (Baker and Lonsdale, 
1974) 
(2.115) 
It must be noted that apart from requiring the process to be diffusion controlled, 
the pseudo steady-state approach also assumes that C~ ~ Cas; the rate of move-
ment of the extraction front is then much slower than the rate of removal of the 
active agent, thus enabling a steady-state (linear) concentration profile to be established 
with respect to the (moving) extraction front. This analysis must, therefore, be 
restricted to devices in which C~ exceeds Cas by a factor of at least three or four. 
By combining Eqs. (2.111) and (2.112), the fractional amount released from a slab 
with CoO > Cas' under the pseudo steady-state assumption, is obtained as 
~ 
= 
[2D I1ICas ( CaO - C~s) tJI/2 
2 
2 
' 
Moo 
b C~o 
For CoO -> Cas' this equation reduces to 
M, _ 
(Dl1It)1/2 
--2 -
Moo 
b2 
(2.116) 
(2.117) 
For the dissolved active agent case (CoO ~ Cas' rectangular slab in infinite agitated 
medium) Eq. (2.78a) holds in the limit CoO -> Cas. However, it can be seen that 
Eq. (2.78 a) for the case of CoO ~ Ca., and Eq. (2.117) for the case of CoO> Ca., do 
not lead to the same expression in the limit of CoO -> CaS" This discrepancy can be 
resolved by not resorting to the pseudo steady-state assumption (Paul and McSpadden, 
1976). The exact ~xpression for the amount of the active agent released by time t 
from a semi-infinite slab of exposed surface area, 2A, is 
M, _ 
2Cus (Dl1It)1/2 
2A -
err (r,*) --;-
(2.118) 
where r,* is a dimensionless parameter for the position of the extraction front, defined 
through the following relationship; 
(2.119) 
Equation (2.118) indicates that M, is linear in t l/2 as is the case for the other 
geometries. When C~ -> Cas, the right-hand side of Eq. (2.119) approaches 00, im-
plying that '1* becomes very large and thus erf ('1*) approaches unity; hence, 
-=2C 
-
M, 
[Dl1ItJ1/2 
2A 
as 
7r 
(2.120) 
71 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
which is the same as the exact solution for semi-infinite slab with CaO ~ Cas in 
the limit CaO -> Cas (Crank, 1975). Similarly, when CaO ~ Co., Eq. (2.11S) (obtained 
from exact analysis) reduces to Eq. (2.113) obtained from pseudo steady-state ana-
lysis, thus defining the region of applicability of the pseudo steady-state approach. 
An approximate analytic solution is also available for the diffusion from a poly-
meric matrix for CaO > Cas (Lee, 19S0a). This solution is not only more accurate than 
that obtained from the pseudo steady-state analysis, but is also easier to evaluate than 
the exact solution due to Paul and McSpadden (1976), discussed above. For the planar 
matrix with CaO > Cas' immersed in an infinite agitated sink of negligible active 
agent concentration (Lee, 19S0a) 
(2.121 ) 
where 
H=5~-4+ ~ -I 
C 
[(C)2 
JI/2 
Cas 
Cas 
(2.122) 
The linear relation between M, at tl/2 is observed in this solution too. In the 
limit CaD -> Ca .. this solution differs by only 2.3 % from the exact solution in 
Eq. (2.llS), as compared to Higuchi's solution [Eq. (2.113)] which is 11.4 % too 
small. The solution is also applicable for (CaO/Cas) ratios near unity, unlike 
Eq. (2.113). 
The approximate analytic solution for a spherical matrix (with CaO > Cas) of 
radius a in an infinite agitated sink is (Lee, 1980a) 
(2.123) 
where [3 is defined from 
D t 
1 [ 
C 
J 
1 (C 
) 
-";-=) 6~-4-a3 {f--
~-I [33 
a-
L 
Cas 
3 
Cas 
(2.124a) 
and 
(2.124b) 
(2.124c) 
and 
72 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
The situation where an external mass transfer resistance exists in the form of 
a boundary layer has also been subjected to a pseudo steady-state analysis (Roseman 
and Higuchi, 1970). For a planar matrix of total exposed surface area, 2A, in an 
infinite sink with a bulk concentration of zero and CaD ~ Cas 
M, 
-
= CaDI 
2A 
(2.125) 
where I is the distance between the extraction boundary and the surface; it 
is determined from 
(2.126) 
Db and c5b are the diffusion coefficient of active agent in, and thickness of, the 
boundary layer, respectively. The pseudo steady-state assumption has been applied 
to both the matrix and the boundary layer in this analysis. 
The above solution is valid only when CaD ~ Cas. The more complete solution 
for cases when CaD > Cas' under the pseudo steady-state assumption (applied to 
both the matrix and the boundary layer) is (Tojo, 1985) 
[
Dm(f3 -
1)" 
[( 2 
2Casa2t 
)1/2 
] 
f3Dm] 
+ 
log 
f3 + 
+ 1 -
f3 --
C( 
(Cas) 
C( 
Dm 
CaD - 2 
X 
C --
(
Cas) 
aD 
2 
(2.127) 
where 
(2.128a) 
and 
CliO -
Cas 
#= 
. 
Cas 
C --
aD 
2 
(2.128d) 
For CaD ~ Cas' the above expression reduces to 
M, 
[(f3Dm)2 ( 
Cas)2 
( 
Cas)·· 
JI /2 
2A = 
-C(-
CaD - 2 
+ 2Dm 
CaD - 2 
Cast 
_ Dmf3 (CaD _ Cas). 
C( 
2 
(2.129) 
73 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
In the limit of C aO ~ (CasI2), Eqs. (2. 125) and (2. I 29) can be shown to be identical. 
For a cylindrical matrix with Cd) ~ Cas (radius a, height h, no end effects), 
the total amount released by time t is (Roseman and Higuchi, 1970) 
(2.130) 
where r is the position of the extraction front and is given by 
(2.131 ) 
A discrepancy exists between the exact solution for C aO < Gs with appreciable 
boundary-layer resistance, and the solution based on the pseudo steady-state 
approach for CaO > Cas (with boundary-layer resistance), in the limit of CaO -+ Cas. 
The amount released from a semi-infinite slab of cross-sectional area, 2A, in an 
infinite sink (Cbu1k = 0) with Cd) ~ Cas for large values of t is (Crank, 1975) 
M, = 2C 
[DmtJ1/2 _
_ C_ao_D_", 
2A 
aO 
n 
(hb/ K) 
(2.132) 
where hb is the mass transfer coefficient in the boundary layer. The above expression 
also holds in the limit as Cd) -+ Cas. For Cd) > Cas' under the pseudo steady-state 
assumption, the solution at large 1 is (Paul and McSpadden, 1976) 
-
-
2D C 
C 
- -
t 
- --
M, 
[ 
( 
Cas) JI /2 
CaODm 
2A -
m as 
aO 
2 
(hb/ K) , 
(2.133) 
which, in the limit Cd) -+ Cas, reduces to 
M, = C (D 1)1/2 _ Cd)Dm • 
2A 
aO 
m 
(hbl K) 
(2. I 34) 
Thus, the solutions in Eqs. (2.132) and (2.134) do not agree with each other. 
This discrepancy can again be eliminated by employing the exact solution for 
Cd) > Cas· For a semi-infinite slab of cross section, 2A, immersed in an infinite 
sink (Cbu1k = 0) with a boundary layer on the surface (Paul and McSpadden, 
1976) 
where 
M, _ 
2Cas 
[D",tJI /2 
CaOD", 
2A - err (/1*) 
----;-
-
(hh/ K) 
(2.135) 
(2.136) 
As CaO -+ Ca., erf(I'/*) -+ 1 and Eq. (2.135) becomes equivalent to Eq. (2.132). 
74 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
An additional complication is introduced in the analysis when the sink is 
considered to be finite. Under the assumption that pseudo steady-states exists 
in both the boundary layer and the extraction zone, the following solution is 
obtained for a spherical matrix of radius a (Gupta and Sparks, 1980) 
(2.137) 
where L is the weight of the device, g is the density, and r the position of 
the extraction front given through the relation 
gV1a3 
[ 
-1 (2a + Y) 
-1 (2r + Y)] 
+ 
tan 
---
- tan 
--
1.732KD",Ly 
1.732y 
1.732y 
(2.138 a) 
and y by 
(2.138 b) 
When matrix diffusion controls the release rate (in case of well-agitated external 
medium) 
D m 
~O 
(Db/bb) ~ , 
and Eq. (2.137) reduces to 
( dM') _ 
4nr 
[ 
2 
D",KLCao 
3 
.3 J 
-
-
1 
C"sD",a + 
(a -
1 ) 
• 
dt 
r 
(a -ar) 
gVza 
(2.139) 
It is apparent that the mathematics for describing the behavior of a device, of 
even the simplest geometry, becomes quite complicated as various assumptions 
are dropped. When finite-size devices and sinks are considered instead of semi-
infinite or infinite geometries, the analysis of anything but the simplest cases is 
quite involved. A kinetic expression, having cubic form, that relates the fraction of 
75 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
active agent released to time elapsed, has been derived by a pseudo steady-state 
approach: 
M -' = a K (1/2 -
a (K (1/2)2 + a (K (1IZ)3 
M 
lr 
Zr 
3r· 
00 
(2.140) 
a1, az, a3 are shape factors, values for which are available for spherical cylindrical, 
and biconvex shaped matrices (Cobby et aI., 1974; Cobby, 1978). Kr is the release 
rate constant dependent only on characteristics of the matrix and is given by 
(2.141) 
where r 0 is a characteristic radius of the device. 
One of the motives for the mathematical modeling of the controlled-release 
devices is to provide guidelines for design of better devices. A preferred release pattern 
is the zero-order release where the rate remains a constant over the major 
portion of the release period. Many ingenious shapes have been studied for this 
purpose. Most of the common shapes have release rates that are linear with 
respect to (-l/Z. This is due to the fact that the distance through which the 
active agent has to diffuse increases with time, and the release rate is inversely 
proportional to this djstance. When the area of the active agent core within 
the matrix decreases, a further complication is added. The main requirement for 
obtaining zero-order release is therefore to keep the ratio between diffusion 
distance and core area a constant. 
One shape satisfying the above criterion is a section from a cylinder with an 
opening at the center to release the drug (an inwardly-releasing sectioned-cylinder; 
Fig. 2.25b) (Brooke and Washkuhn, 1977). With the pseudo steady-state assumption, 
it has been shown that an ideal device of such a geometry would produce a zero-
order release rate. The ideal device has an infinitely small opening but one 
which presents no barrier to diffusion. Thus, in a device of finite dimensions, 
the zero-order phase develops only after the length of the diffusion path becomes 
substantially larger than the discharge slit width. A small portion of the active 
agent within the device thus would be released quickly but the major part 
would diffuse out at a rate approximating zero-order (Lipper and Higuchi, 1977). 
Another geometry which keeps the ratio between diffusion distance and core 
area constant is an inwardly releasing hemisphere shown in Fig. 2.25 a (Rhine et aI., 
1980 b). An active-agent-Ioaded hemispherical matrix is covered with an impermeable 
membrane. The active agent escapes only through a concave opening in the 
membrane on the flat surface. Comparison of the performances of inwardly releasing 
hemisphere and the inwardly releasing cylindrical section shows that the hemisphere 
approaches the zero-order more closely. Experimental evidence for zero-order 
release from such a device has been obtained, for both micro- and macro-
molecules, by Hsieh et al. (1983). 
The above inwardly-releasing-hemisphere concept has been extended by Kuu and 
Yalkowsky (1985) to one of mUltiple holes in a rectangular matrix covered by 
an impermeable membrane. Three basic designs have been proposed based on the 
76 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
thickness of matrix being comparable to, much less than, or much greater than, the 
distance between the holes. The device may have perforations on one or both faces. 
The rate of active agent release depends on the number of holes, the distance 
between the holes, the size of the holes, the hole configuration, and the initial 
active agent loading. The device has been analyzed by applying the pseudo steady-
state assumption to the extracted region of the matrix. Zero-order release rates are 
expected from devices where the thickness of the matrix is approximately equal to 
or much less than the distance between holes (Kuu and Yalkowsky, 1985). 
The zero-order release rate can also be produced by surrounding monolithic device 
with a rate limiting barrier (Lee et aI., 1980). The diffusion path controlling 
the process (thickness of barrier) is thus a constant and so is the area of 
·release. A constant concentration gradient is produced in the barrier at steady state. 
Based on the pseudo steady-state analysis of Roseman and Higuchi (1970), 
the release rate from a cylindrical device with a rate liJniting barrier into an infinite 
well-stirred medium is 
(2.142a) 
where a and h are radius and height of cylindrical core, and r is the positIOn 
of the extraction front. C B is the solubility of the active agent (corresponding to 
Ca,), and DB its diffusivity, in the barrier layer of thickness bB. When barrier diffusion 
controls, i.e., DB ~ Dm' the above equation reduces to (Lee et a!., 1980) 
(2.142 b) 
Zero-order release is thus obtained when the external barrier controls the diffusion 
process. [A condition, implicity assumed in the derivation of Eq. (2.142a) by 
Roseman and Higuchi (1970) and therefore required Eq. (2.142b), is that bB ~ a]. 
Such devices can be manufactured by covering a monolithic matrix with a membrane. 
Such a device has been tested experimentally by Lee et a!. (1980) and the 
result indicated that a zero-order release rate was obtainable from this design. 
Another interesting approach to attaining zero-order release may be obtained from 
the transdermal transport model of Gienger et a!. (1984). According to their 
model, time varying diffusivity and partition coefficients may render the concentration 
gradient essentially constant in the external laminate. This can lead to near zero-order 
rates; however, this approach may be difficult to implement. 
As stated earlier, all the models reviewed in this subsection have been derived 
under the assumption that the active agent dissolution step at the extraction 
boundary does not influence the rate. These "diffusion-controlled" models have 
been found to be quite suitable for a number of experimental situations. However, 
when the dissolution rate is inadequate, both the dissolution and diffusion steps must 
be accounted for (Chandrasekaran and Paul, 1982). In such a situation, a sharp 
well-defined extraction boundary is not observed; the dissolution process occurs 
77 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
at all points over the region being extracted where the concentration is greater 
than Cas' The dissolution step then appears as a source term in the governing 
differential equation. Approximating this step by a first-order rate term, the 
differential equation describing transport of active agent in the matrix becomes 
(2.143) 
where k' is the dissolution constant. Chandrasekaran and Paul (1982) have solved 
the above equation for a semi-infinite matrix immersed in a well-stirred infinite 
medium (Cbu1k = 0). The amount of active agent released, while there is undissolved 
active agent at all points in the matrix, is obtained as 
M 
(D )1/2 [( 
I) 
(k't)I/2 
] 
2~ = Cas. k':' 
k't + 2" erf (Vk't) + ---;-
exp (-k't) 
(2.144) 
where 2A is the cross-sectional area of exposed face. The above equation is only 
valid for time t such that 
(2.145) 
Approximating the matrix by a slab of thickness (j (for large (j) and a cross-
sectional area of A, the fraction release may be written as 
_I = 2 ---"-!..,; 
k't + -
erf (Vk't) + -
exp (-k't) . 
M 
e (D )1/2 [( 
I) 
-
(k't)I/2 
] 
Moo 
eao 
k (j 
2 
n 
(2.146) 
In the dissolution-controlled regime (large k't), the above equation reduces to 
(2.147) 
indicating a zero-order release rate. When controlled by diffusion (small k't), the 
fractional release is given by 
(2.148) 
This equation may be compared to Eq. (2.120). 
The above described diffusion-dissolution process has also been comprehensively 
analyzed by Ayers and Lindstrom (1977) and Lindstrom and Ayers (1977). They 
have considered a rectangular monolithic device releasing active agent from one 
face to an unagitated sink. The model is quite general; however, numerical techni-
ques are required for the evaluation of their analytic solutions. 
Monolithic devices form a very important class of controlled-release devices due 
to the ease with which they can be manufactured. They have been the subject of 
78 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
a whole spectrum of models. The effect of temperature on the release has also been 
studied by Chien (1976) based on the activation energies of the dissolution and 
diffusion steps. However, heat transport effects have not been considered in any 
model. Temperature may be an important factor for monolithic devices especially 
when used for pesticide/fertilizer delivery where diurnal or even seasonal temperature 
changes may influence the performance through the decaying of the active agent. 
2.2.3 Porous Devices 
In the cases considered earlier, transport of the active agent was assumed to 
occur through the polymer continuum itself, by the "solution-diffusion" mechanism. 
In this mechanism, the active agent dissolves in the polymer and then diffuses through 
it. Diffusion in pores was' assumed negligible. This condition may not be true 
in some formulations where pore transport may playa larger role. 
Porous devices may also be divided into the two categories mentioned earlier, 
the reservoir-membrane systems and the monolithic systems, by virtue of the technique 
employed for loading the active agent. The major difference from devices considered 
previously is that polymer and active agent interaction is not quite as strong 
in porous devices, as it is in devices where the solution-diffusion mechanism is 
applicable. 
Hollow fibers are the simplest types of porous reservoir type devices. Ashare et al. 
(1976) analyzed such a system for dispensing volatile materials from capillary 
channels. The mechanism of release has three steps: evaporation at the vapor-
liquid interface, diffusion from the interface to the open end of hollow fiber, and 
convection away from the open end. By taking diffusion to be the rate controlling 
step, a simple analysis leads to 
--
= nr2 
-
In 1 _ --
t- 1/2 
( dMt ) 
[mCaDb(l 
( 
p~ap)JI/2 
dt 
r 
2 
p 
where 
m = molecular weight of the volatile liquid, 
Db = diffusivity in the ambient fluid, 
p~ap = vapor pressure of the liquid, 
p 
= ambient pressure, 
r 
= radius of hollow fiber, 
(l 
= density of the liquid, and 
Ca 
= molar density of the vapor. 
(2.149) 
The analysis assumes vapor-liquid equilibrium at interface and a perfect sink (zero 
bulk concentration at the open end). The liquid being dispensed must be pure 
active agent. 
Other porous devices can be constructed by impregnation of porous plastics, 
hydrogels, etc. These can be analyzed by methods analogous to those used for 
monolithic systems. A pseudo steady-state analysis similar to that employed for 
79 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
monolithic systems with CaO ~ Cas gives an expression for amount released from 
a granular matrix as (Higuchi, 1963) 
[ DbE 
J1/2 
M, = -,- C bs(2C aO -
r,C bs) t 
(2.1 SO) 
where E and , are the porosity and tortuosity of the matrix and Cbs is the 
solubility of active agent in the ambient fluid. Db is the difTusivity in the 
ambient fluid. The mechanism of release in such systems is leaching, wherein 
the ambient fluid enters the pores and dissolves the active agent. Similar 
expressions can be written by analogy from Higuchi (1963) for spherical pellets 
and from Roseman and Higuchi (1970) for cylindrical pellets. For cylindrical 
pellets of radius a (Roseman and Higuchi, 1970) 
and for spherical pellets of radius a (Higuchi, 1963) 
where 
ECbs 
IX =--
CaO 
(2.151) 
(2.152) 
(2.153) 
Equations (2.150-152) have been derived on the assumption that the active 
agent particles are quite small relative to the diffusion distance and are uniformly 
distributed through the matrix. Futhermore, the pseudo steady-state condition 
will hold only if CaO ~ ECbs. 
In order to account for the change in porosity as the active agent is leached out, 
we may substitute 
into Eqs. (2.150-152). ga is the density of the active agent and the above relation 
assumes negligible initial porosity. The relation may also be used if the fraction of 
matrix volume occupied by the active agent is large. 
A moving boundary approach has been employed by Miller and Peppas (1983) 
for diffusional release from a polymer with continuously forming porous structure. 
The active agent is assumed to be loaded in the pores at levels higher than 
80 

2.2 Models for Diffusion-Controlled Release Systems 
its solubility in the external medium (C aO > eCbs)' The active agent dissolves into the 
medium at the interface which moves into the pore as the dissolution progresses; 
however, the kinetics of dissolution are neglected. Defining the position of medium-
solid active agent interface by 
the release rate of active agent from the device IS obtained as (Miller and 
Peppas, 1983) 
( dM t ) 
= e2 / 3 ACbs (Db)I/2 
dt 
r 
erf (a) 
Tnt 
a is obtained from the transcedental equation 
where (la is the density of the solid active agent. 
(2.154) 
(2.155) 
The above analysis does not account for the bulk motion of the pore fluid 
as increasing amounts of pore volume are created. This convection effect may be 
significant if the end of the pore moves rapidly, i.e., when (la -
Cbs' Convection 
currents created in the pore fluid due to density differences resulting from concen-
tration differences may, however, be neglected due to the small cross-sectional 
area of the horizontal pore in question. 
In all the models for porous monolithic devices reviewed, the active agent 
loading is assumed to be quite high, i.e., CaO > eCbs' The release rate is found to 
be a function of (1/2. However, Fessi et al. (1982) showed the same (1/2 
dependence for a matrix with CaO < eCbs' The result is based on the pseudo 
steady-state analysis (linear concentration profile in pore fluid) of transport in 
a constantly increasing linear pore. Dissolution of active agent at the end of the 
pore is assumed instantaneous. The release rate per unit cross-sectional is deter-
mined to be independent of porosity and solubility, being directly proportional 
to the initial active agent loading C aO 
~ (dM t ) 
A 
dt 
r 
(2.156) 
The validity of the pseudo steady-state assumption made above, depends on the 
requirement that the end of the pore moves much slower than the rate at which 
the active agent diffuses in the pore fluid. This enables the (linear) steady-state 
concentration profile to be established in the pore. When the loading of active 
agent CaO is much greater than eCb., this condition is satisfied, since the excess 
loading (CaO -
eCbs) has to be dissolved at one layer before the extraction 
from the next layer begins (consequently advancing the pore). If CaO < eCbs' this 
assumption cannot be expected to hold. However, the moving-boundary analysis 
of Miller and Peppas (1983) reviewed above, can be employed in this case, 
81 

2 Diffusion-Controlled Release 
under the assumption that dissolution in the pore fluid is not rate limiting. The 
rate of release from a single pore may then be given as 
1 (dM t ) 
2CbO (Db)1/2 
-
-
= --
-
exp (-ct2 ) 
A 
dt 
r 
erf (ct) 
nt 
(2.157) 
where ct is obtained from 
(2.158) 
(!a is the bulk density of the solid active agent in the pore and CbO is the 
equilibrium solubility of the active agent in the pore fluid corresponding to the 
loading CaO(CbO < Cbs). The release rate is seen to be a function of tl/2 again. 
Peppas (1983) has presented a model for dissolution-controlled active agent 
release from porous monolithic systems based on a diffusion-dissolution model. 
For high active agent loading (CaQ > eCbs)' transport in the pore fluid is governed by 
the following differential equation 
(2.159) 
where k' is a dissolution constant and r p is the radius of the pore. Cbs is 
the saturation concentration of active agent at the pore wall-dissolution medium 
interface. The second term on the right-hand side thus represents an active 
agent dissolution source term; the active agent dissolves in the pore fluid throughout 
the perimeter of the pore. This term drops out when concentration of active 
agent in the matrix drops below eCbs. A solution to Eq. (2.159) has been 
presented (employing rp = rp as a first approximation); the release rate at long 
times from a slab of thickness (and therefore pore length) fl, and unit area in a 
well-stirred infinite medium has been obtained as (Peppas, 1983) 
( dM t ) 
_ 
2/3 
(2k'Derr)1/2 
[fl ( 2k' )1/2J 
--
- e 
Cb ---
tanh - --
dt 
r 
s 
rp 
2 rpDerr 
(2.160) 
where rp is the average pore radius over the release period. Evidently, a zero-
order release rate may be obtained in the dissolution-controlled regime. Plots have 
also been presented showing the effect of the dissolution constant, active agent 
solubility, porosity, and slab thickness on the release rate (also see, Korsmeyer et aI., 
1983). 
To adequately account for pore-size distributions as they relate to diffusivity 
in the matrix, principles of percolation theory would have to be used (Langer and 
Peppas, 1983; Peppas, 1984). Specific attempts at modeling controlled release 
with such theories are limited (see, e.g., Saltzman and Langer, 1987) although the 
literature on adsorption and diffusion in porous media is extensive. Porous 
devices are difficult to characterize and their performance difficult to predict due 
to the wide range of pore sizes possible in a single device. 
82 

References 
References 
Aris, R.: The Mathematical Theory of Diffusion and Reaction in Permeable Catalysts, 
Vol. I, The Theory of the Steady State, pp. 18-30, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1975) 
Ashare, E., Brooks, T. W., Swenson, D. W.: Controlled Release from Hollow Fibers. In: 
Preprints of papers presented of the 171st meeting, ACS, Division of Organic Coatings 
and Plastics Chemistry 36 (I), 453--457 (1976) 
Ayres, J. W., Lindstrom, F. T.: Diffusion Model for Drug Release from Suspensions. 
I: Theoretical Considerations, J. Pharm. Sci. 66, 654--662 (1977) 
Baker, R. W.: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, pp. 1-83, John Wiley and 
Sons, New York (1987) 
Baker, R. W., Lonsdale, H. K.: Controlled Release: Mechanisms and Rates, pp. 15-71. 
In: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, A. C. Tanquary and R. E. Lacey 
(Eds.), Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
Baker, R. W., Tuttle, M. E., Lonsdale, H. K., Ayres, J. W.: Development of an Estriol-
Releasing Intrauterine Device, J. Pharm. Sci. 68, 20-26 (1979) 
Balazs, A. c., Calef, D. F., Deutch, J. M., Siegel, R. A., Langer, R.: The Role of 
Polymer Matrix Structure and Interparticle Interactions in Diffusion-Limited Drug Release, 
pp. 87-102. In: Polymeric Materials in Medication, C. G. Gebelein and C. E. Carraher, 
Jr. (Eds.), Plenum Press, New York (1985) 
Barrer, R. M.: Diffusion and Permeation in Heterogeneous Media, pp. 165-217. In: Diffusion 
in Polymers, J. Crank and G. S. Park (Eds.), Academic Press, London (1968) 
Barrer, R. M., Skirrow, G.: Transport and Equilibrium Phenomena in Gas-Elastomer System. 
II. Equilibrium Phenomena, J. Polym. Sci. 3, 564--575, (1948) 
Barrer, R. M., Barrie, J. A., Rogers, M. G.: Heterogeneous Membranes: Diffusion in 
Filled Rubbers, J. Polym. Sci. AI, 2565-2586 (1963) 
Barrie, J. A., Levine, J. D., Michaels, A. S., Wong, P.: Diffusion and Solution of Gases 
in Composite Rubber Membranes, Trans. Faraday Soc. 59, 869-878 (1963) 
Berner, B.: Pharmacokinetics of Transdermal Drug Delivery, J. Pharm. Sci. 74, 718-721 
(1985) 
Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E., Lightfoot, E. N.: Transport Phenomena, pp. 554--563, John 
Wiley and Sons, New York (1960) 
Boyer, R. F., Spencer, R. S.: Second-Order Transition Effects in Rubber and Other 
High Polymers, Advances in Colloid Science, Vol. II, pp. I-55, H. Mark and G. S. Whitby 
(Eds.), John Wiley and Sons, New York (1946) 
Brooke, D., Washkuhn, R. J.: Zero-Order Drug Delivery System: Theory and Preliminary 
Testing, J. Pharm. Sci. 66, 159-162 (1977) 
Burrell, H.: Solubility Parameter Values, pp. IV.337-IV.360. In: Polymer Handbook, J. 
Brandrup and E. H. Immergut (Eds.), John Wiley and Sons, New York (1975) 
Byron, P. R., Dalby, R. N.: Effects of Heat Treatment on the Permeability of Polyvinyl 
Alcohol Films to a Hydrophilic Solute, J. Pharm. Sci. 76, 65-67 (1987) 
Carslaw, H. S." Jaeger, J. c.: Conduction of Heat in Solids, Oxford University Press, 
London (1959) 
Chandrasekaran, S. K., Paul, D. R.: Dissolution-Controlled Transport from Dispersed 
Matrixes, J. Pharm. Sci. 71, 1399-1402 (1982) 
Chien, Y. W.: Thermodynamics of Controlled Drug Release from Polymeric Delivery Devices. 
In: Controlled Release Polymeric Formulations, D. R. Paul and F. W. Harris (Eds.), ACS 
Symposium Series 33, 53-71 (1976) 
Chien, Y. W., Lambert, H. J.: Controlled Drug Release from Polymeric Delivery Devices II: 
Differentiation between Partition-Controlled and Matrix-Controlled Drug Release Mecha-
nisms, J. Pharm. Sci. 63, 515-519 (1974) 
Chien, Y. W., Mares, S. F., Berg, J., Huber, S., Lambert, H. J., King, K. F.: Controlled Drug 
Release from Polymeric Devices III: In Vitro-In Vivo Correlation for Intravaginal Release 
of Ethynodiol Diacetate from Silicon Devices in Rabbits, J. Pharm. Sci. 64,1776-1781 (1975) 
Christensen, F. N., Hansen, F. Y., Bechgaard, H.: Mathematical Model for In-Vitro Drug 
Release from Controlled Release Dosage Forms Applied to Propoxyphene Hydrochloride 
Pellets, J. Pharm. Sci. 71, 694--699 (1982) 
83 

References 
Cobby, J., Mayersohn, M., Walker, G. c.: Influence of Shape Factors on Kinetics of Drug 
Release from Matrix Tablets. I: Theoretical, J. Pharm. Sci. 63, 725-732 (1974) 
Cobby, J.: Mathematical Models for the Release of Drugs from Matrix Tablets, J. Biomed. 
Mater. Res. 12,627-634 (1978) 
Cohen, M. H., Turnbull, D.: Molecular Transport in Liquids and Glasses, J. Chern. Phys. 
31,1164-1169 (1959) 
Crank, J.: The Mathematics of Diffusion, Oxford University Press, London (1975) 
Crank, J., Park, G. S.: Methods of Measurement, pp. 1-39. In: Diffusion in Polymers, J. Crank 
and G. S. Park (Eds.), Academic Press, London (1968) 
Currie, J. A.: Gaseous Diffusion in Porous Media. Part II. Dry Granular Media, Brit. J. 
Appl. Phys. 1l, 318-324 (1960) 
DeGroot, S. R.: Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes, North-Holland, Amsterdam (1959) 
DiBenedetto, A. T.: Molecular Properties of Amorphous High Polymers. I. A Cell Theory 
for Amorphous High Polymers, J. Polym. Sci. AI, 3459-3476 (1963 a) 
DiBenedetto, A. T.: Molecular Properties of Amorphous High Polymers. II. An Inter-
pretation of Gaseous Diffusion Through Polymers, J. Polym. Sci. AI, 3477-3487 (1963b) 
Duda, J. L.: Molecular Diffusion in Polymeric Systems, Pure & Appl. Chern. 57, 1681-1690 
(1985) 
Evans, III, R. B., Watson, G. M., Mason, E. A.: Gaseous Diffusion in Porous Media at 
Uniform Pressure, J. Chern. Phys. 35, 2076--2083 (1961) 
Fan, L. T., Fan, L. S., Tojo, K., Miyanami, K.: Dynamics of a Membrane-Moderated 
Controlled Release, Mathematical Biosciences 39,213-234 (1978) 
Fan, L. S., Tojo, K., Fan, L. T.: Cyclic Dynamics of a Nonisothermal Controlled Release, 
Mathematical Biosciences 45,69-94 (1979) 
Felder, R. M., Huvard, G. S.: Permeation, Diffusion, and Sorption of Gases and Vapors, 
pp. 315-376. In: Methods of Experimental Physics, L. Marton and C. Marton, Eds.-in-Chief, 
Vol. 16c, R. A. Fava (Ed.), Academic Press, New York (1980) 
Fessi, H., Marty, J. P., Puisieux, F., Carstensen, J. T.: Square Root of Time Dependence of 
Matrix Formulations with Low Drug Content, J. Pharm. Sci. 71,749-752 (1982) 
Flynn, G. L.: Influence of Physico-Chemical Properties of Drug and System on Release of 
Drugs from Inert Matrices, pp. 73-98. In: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, 
A. C. Tanquary and R. E. Lacey (Eds.), Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
Flynn, G. L., Carpenter, O. S., Yalkowsky, S. H.: Total Mathematical Resolution of Diffusion 
Layer Control of Barrier Flux, J. Pharm. Sci 61,312-314 (1972) 
Flynn, G. L., Yalkowsky, S. H., Roseman, T. J.: Mass Transport Phenomena and Models: 
Theoretical Concepts, J. Pharm. Sci. 63, 479-510 (1974) 
Foster, R. N., Butt, J. B.: A Computational Model for the Structure of Porous Materials 
Employed in Catalysis, AIChE J. 12, 180-185 (1968) 
Frisch, H. L.: Mechanisms for Fickian Diffusion of Penetrants in Polymers, J. Polym. Sci. 
Polym. Letters, 3,13-16 (1965) 
Fu, J. C., Hagemeir, c., Moyer, D. L.: A Unified Mathematical Model for Diffusion from 
Drug-Polymer Composite Tablets, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 10,743-758 (1976) 
Fuhrmann, J.: Diffusion in Semi-Crystalline Polymers and Polymer Networks, Ber. Bunsenges. 
Phys. Chern. 83, 303-309 (1979) 
Fujita, M.: Diffusion in Polymer-Diluent Systems. Fortschritte Der Hochpolymeren-Forschung 
(Adv. in Pol. Sci.) 3, 1-43 (1961) 
Furusawa, T., Smith, J. M.: Diffusivities from Dynamic Adsorption Data, AIChE J. 19 
401-403 (1973) 
Gavalas, G. R., Kim, S.: Periodic Capillary Diffusion in Porous Solids, Chern. Eng. Sci. 
36,1111-1122(1981) 
Geddes, A. L., Pontius, R. B.: Determination of Diffusivity, pp. 895--1005. In: Technique of 
Organic Chemistry, A. Weissberg (Ed.), Vol. I. Physical Methods of Organic Chemistry, 
Part 2, Interscience, New York (1959) 
Gienger, G., Knoch, A., Merkle, H. P.: Modelling and Numerical Computation of Drug 
Transport in Laminates: Model Case Evaluation of Transdermal Delivery System, preprint 
no. 283, Sonderforschungsbereich 123, Stochastische Mathematische Modelle, Universitat 
Heidelberg, D-6900 Heidelberg I (1984) 
84 

References 
Gillett, J. W., Harr, J. R., Lindstrom, F. T., Mount, D. A., St. Clair, A. D., Weber, L. J.: Evalua-
tion of Human Health Hazards on Use of Dichlorovos (DDVP), Especially in Resin Strips, 
Residue Reviews, 44, 115-159 (1972) 
Gupta, D. V. S., Sparks, R. E.: Mathematical Model for Progesterone Release from 
Injectible Poly(Lactic Acid) Microcapsules in vitro, pp. 189-212. In: Controlled Release of 
Bioactive Materials, R. Baker (Ed.), AcadeIl!ic Press, New York (1980) 
Haleblian, J., Runkel, R., Mueller, N., Christopherson, J., Ng, K.: Steroid Release from 
Silicone Elastomer Containing Excess Drug in Suspension, J. Pharm. Sci. 60, 541-545 
(1971) 
Halpern, B. D., Solomon, 0., Kopec, L., Korostoff, E., Ackerman, J. L.: Release of 
Inorganic Fluoride Ion from Rigid Polymer Matrices. In: Controlled Release Polymeric 
Formulations, D. R. Paul and F. W. Harris (Eds.), ACS Symposium Series 33, 135-145 
(1976) 
Haring, R. E., Greenkorn, R. A.: A Statistical Model of a Porous Medium with Nonuniform 
Pores, AIChE J. 16,477-483 (1970) 
Hellwege, Von K.-H., Knappe, W., Lohe, P.: Die Konzentrationsabhiingigkeit des Diffusions-
koeffizienten von Weichmachern in Polyvinylchlorid, Kolloid-Z. 179,40-49 (1961) 
Higuchi, T. : Rate of Release of Medicaments from Ointment Bases Containing Drugs in Suspen-
sion, J. Pharm. Sci. 50, 874-875 (1961) 
Higuchi, T.: Mechanism of Sustained-Action Medication, Theoretical Analysis of Rate of 
Release of Solid Drugs Dispersed in Solid Matrices, J. Pharm. Sci. 52, 1145-1149 
(1963) 
Hildebrand, J. H., Scott, R. L.: The Solubility of Nonelectrolytes, Dover Publications, New 
York (1964) 
Hsieh, D. S. T., Rhine, W. D., Langer R.: Zero-Order Controlled-Release Polymer Matrices 
for Micro- and Macromolecules, J. Pharm. Sci. 72,17-22 (1983) 
Jaeger, J. C.: Heat flow in the Region Bounded Internally by a Circular Cylinder, Proc. R. Soc. 
Edinb. 61A, 223-229 (1942). 
Jaeger, J. c., Clarke, M.: Numerical Results for Some Problems on Conduction of Heat in 
Slabs with Various Surface Conditions, Phil. Mag. 38, 504-515 (1947) 
Johnson, M. F. L., Stewart, W. E.: Pore Structure and Gaseous Diffusion in Solid Catalysts, 
J. Catalysis 4,248-252 (1965) 
Kelley, F. N., Bueche, F.: Viscosity and Glass Temperature Relations for Polymer-Diluent 
Systems, J. Polym. Sci. 50,549-556 (1961) 
Kojima, Y., Furuhata, K., Miyasaka, K.: Hydralic Permeability of Water in Poly(vinyl Alcohol) 
Membranes as it Function of the Degree of Hydration, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 28, 2401-2410 
(1983) 
Kojima, Y., Furuhata, K., Miyasaka, K.: Diffusive Permeability of Solutes in Poly(vinyl 
Alcohol) Membranes as a Function of the Degree of Hydration, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
29,533-546 (1984) 
Korsmeyer, R. W., Gurny, R., Doelker, E., Buri, P., Peppas, N. A.: Mechanisms of Solute 
Release from Porous Hydrophilic Polymers, Int. J. Pharm. 15,25-35 (1983) 
Kuu, W. Y., Yalkowsky, S. H.: Multiple-Hole Approach to Zero-Order Release, J. Pharm. Sci. 
74,926-933 (1985) 
Lacey, R. E., Cowsar, D. R.: Factors Affecting Release of Steroids from Silicones, pp. 117-144. 
In: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, A. C. Tanquary and R. E. Lacey (Eds.), 
Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
Langer, R., Peppas, N.: Chemical and Physical Structure of Polymers as Carriers for Controlled 
Release of Bioactive Agents: A Review. J. Macromol. Sci.-Rev. Macromol. Chern. Phys. 
e23, 61-126 (1983) 
Lee, P. 1.: Diffusional Release of a Solute from a Polymeric Matrix-Approximate Analytical 
Solutions, J. Membrane Sci. 7,255-275 (l980a) 
Lee, P. 1.: Determination of Diffusion Coefficients by Sorption from a Constant, Finite Volume, 
pp. 135-153. In: Controlled Release of Bioactive Materials, R. Baker (Ed.), Academic Press, 
New York (l980b) 
Lee, E. S., Kim, S. W., Kim, S. H., Cardinal, J. R., Jacobs, H.: Drug Release from Hydrogel 
Devices with Rate Controlling Barriers, J. Membrane Sci. 7,293-303 (1980) 
85 

References 
Leo, A., Hansch, C., Elking, D.: Partition Coefficients and Their Uses, Chern. Rev. 71, 
525-616 (1971) 
Leuenberger, H., Haas, Ch., Imanidis, G., Usteri, M., Winzap, S.: Percolation Theory and 
Fractal Geometry-Important Factors in the Design of Controlled Release Systems, 
pp. 33--34. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Controlled Release of 
Bioactive Materials, P. I. Lee and B. A. Leonhardt (Eds.), Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 
August 2-5 (1987) 
Lightfoot, E. N.: Transport Phenomena and Living Systems, pp. 236--266, John Wiley and Sons, 
New York (1974) 
Lindstrom, F. T., Ayers, J. W.: Diffusion Model for Drug Release from Suspensions. II: 
Release to a Perfect Sink, J. Pharm. Sci. 66, 662-668 (1977) 
Lipper, R. A., Higuchi, W. I.: Analysis of Theoretical Behavior of a Proposed Zero-Order 
Drug Delivery System, J. Pharm. Sci. 66, 163-164 (1977) 
Macedo, P. B., Litovitz, T. A.: On the Relative Roles of Free Volume and Activation Energy 
in the Viscosity of Liquids, J. Chern. Phys. 42, 245-256 (1965) 
McGregor, R.: Diffusion and Sorption in Fibers and Films, Vol. I, An Introduction with 
Particular Reference to Dyes, pp. 147-220, Academic Press, London (1974) 
Meares, P.: The Diffusion of Gases Through Polyvinyl Acetate, J. Am. Chern. Soc. 76, 
3415--3422 (1954) 
Michaels, A. S.: Diffusion in a Pore of Irregular Cross Section -
A Simplified Treatment, 
AIChE J. 5, 270--271 (1959) 
Michaels, A. S., Vieth, W. R., Bixler, H. J.: Gas Permeability of Highly Oriented Dibutyl 
Maleate-Ethylene Copolymer Films, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 8, 2735-2750 (1964) 
Michaels, A. S., Wong, P. S. L., Prather, R., Gale, R. M.: A Thermodynamic Method of 
Predicting the Transport of Steroids in Polymer Matrices, AIChE J. 21,1073-\080 (\975) 
Mikulecky, D. c., Caplan, S. R.: The Choice of Reference Frame in the Treatment of Membrane 
Transport by Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics, J. Phys. Chern. 70,3049-3056 (1966) 
Miller, E. S., Peppas, N. A.: Diffusional Release of Water-Soluble Bioactive Agents from 
Ethylene-Vinyl Acetate Copolymers, Chern. Eng. Commun. 22, 303-315 (1983) 
Pace, R. J., Datyner, A.: Statistical Mechanical Model for Diffusion of Simple Penetrants in 
Polymers. I. Theory, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 17,437--451 (l979a) 
. 
Pace, R. J., Datyner, A. : Statistical Mechanical Model for Diffusion of Complex Penetrants in 
Polymers. I. Theory, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 17, 1675-1692 (l979b) 
Park, G. S.: The Glassy State and Slow Process Anomalies, pp. 141-163. In: Diffusion in 
Polymers, J. Crank and G. S. Park (Eds.), Academic Press, London (1968) 
Paul, D. R., McSpadden, S. K.: Diffusional Release of a Solute from a Polymer Matrix, 
J. Membrane Sci. 1, 33--48 (1976) 
Peppas, N. A.: A Model of Dissolution-Controlled Solute Release from Porous Drug Delivery 
Polymeric Systems, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 17, 1079-1087 (1983) 
Peppas, N. A.: Mathematical Modeling of Diffusion Processes in Drug Delivery Polymeric 
Systems, pp. 206--237. In: Controlled Drug Bioavailability, Vol. I, Drug Product Design 
and Performance, V. F. Smolen and L. A. Ball (Eds.), Wiley, New York (1984) 
Peterlin, A.: Transport Phenomena and Polymer Morphology, Makromol. Chern. Suppl. 
3,215-232 (1979) 
Petersen, E. E.: Diffusion in a Pore of Varying Cross Section, AIChE J. 4, 343-345 
(1958) 
Pismen, L. M.: Diffusion in Porous Media of a Random Structure, Chern. Eng. Sci. 
29,1227-1236 (1974) 
Reid, R. c., Sidman, K. R., Schwope, A. D., Till, D. E.: Loss of Adjuvants from Polymer 
Films to Food or Food Simulants. Effect of the External Phase, Ind. Eng. Chern. Prod. 
Res. Dev. 19,580--587 (1980) 
Rhine, W. D., Hsieh, D. S. T. Langer, R.: Polymers for Sustained Macromolecule Release: 
Procedures to Fabricate Reproducible Delivery Systems and Control Release Kinetics, 
J. Pharm. Sci. 69, 265-270 (l980a) 
Rhine, W. D., Sukhatme, V., Hsieh, D. S. T., Langer, R. S.: A New Approach to 
Achieve Zero-Order Release Kinetics from Diffusion-Controlled Polymer Matrix Systems, 
86 

References 
pp. 177-187. In: Controlled Release of Bioactive Materials, R. Baker (Ed.), Academic Press, 
New York (1980b) 
Rogers, C. E.: Solubility and Diffusivity, pp. 510-635. In: Physics and Chemistry of the 
Organic Solid State, Vol. II, D. Fox, M. M. Labes and A. Weissberger (Eds.), Inter-
science Publishers, New York (1965) 
Rogers, C. E.: Structural Factors Governing Controlled Release. In: Controlled Release 
Polymeric Formulations, D. R. Paul and F. W. Harris (Eds.), ACS Symposium Series 33, 
15-25 (1976) 
Rogers, C. E., Stannett, V., Szwarc, M.: The Sorption, Diffusion, and Permeation of Organic 
Vapors in Polyethylene, J. Polym. Sci. 45, 61-82 (1960) 
Roseman, T. J., Higuchi, W. I.: Release of Medroxyprogesterone Acetate from a Silicone 
Polymer, J. Pharm. Sci. 59,353-357 (1970) 
Roseman, T. J., Yalkowsky, S. H.: Importance of Solute Partitioning on the Kinetics of Drug 
Release from Matrix Systems. In: Controlled Release Polymeric Formulations, D. R. Paul 
and F. W. Harris (Eds.), ACS Symposium Series 33, 33-52 (1976) 
Roseman, T. J., Cardarelli, N. F.: Monolithic Polymer Devices, Section I, pp. 21-54. In: 
Controlled Release Technologies: Methods, Theory, and Applications, Vo!. I, A. F. Kydo-
nieus (Ed.), CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (1980) 
Rowe, R. C., Elworthy, P. H., Ganderton, D.: An Evaluation of a New Pore Model for 
Plastic Matrix Tablets, J. Pharm. Pharmac. Supp!., 24, 137P (1972) 
Saltzman, W. M., Langer, R.: Microstructural Measurments and Percolation Theory for 
Predicting Transport Properties in Porous Polymers, pp. 31-32. In: Proceedings of the 
14th International Symposium on Controlled Release of Bioactive Materials, P. I. Lee and 
B. A. Leonhardt (Eds.), Toronto, Ontario, Canada, August 2-5 (1987) 
Satterfield, C. N., Colton, C. K., Pitcher, W. H. Jr.: Restricted Diffusion in Liquids with 
Fine Pores, AIChE J. 19,628-635 (1973) 
Shippy, R. L., Hwang, S.-T., Bunge, R. G.: Controlled Release of Testosterone Using 
Silicone Rubber, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 7,95-110 (1973) 
Siegel, R. A., Langer, R.: A New Monte Carlo Approach to Diffusion in Constricted Porous 
Geometries, J. Coil. Interf. Sci. 109,426-440 (1986) 
Somasekharan, K. N., Subramanian, R. V.: Mechanism of Release of Organotin from 
Thermoset Polymers, pp. 415-431. In: Controlled Release of Bioactive Materials, R. Baker 
(Ed.), Academic Press, New York (1980) 
Spacek, P., Kubin, M.: Diffusion in Gels, J. Polym. Sci.: Part C, 16, 705-714 (1967) 
Stannett, V.: Simple Gases, pp. 41-73. In: Diffusion in Polymers, J. Crank and G. S. Park 
(Eds.), Academic Press, London (1968) 
Stannett, V., Williams, J. L.: The Permeability of Poly(ethyl Methacrylate) to Gases and 
Water Vapor, J. Polym. Sci. CJO, 45-59 (1965) 
Taverdet, J. L., Vergnaud, J. M.: Study of Transfer Process of Liquid into and Plasticizer 
out of Plasticized PVC by using Short Tests, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 29, 3391-3400 (1984) 
Theeuwes, F., Gale, R. M., Baker, R. W.: Transference: A Comprehensive Parameter Governing 
Permeation of Solutes Through Membranes, J. Membrane Sci. 1, 3-16 (1976) 
Tojo, K.: Intrinsic Release Rate from Matrix-Type Drug Delivery Systems, J. Pharm. Sci. 
74,685-687 (1985) 
Tojo, K., Fan, L. T.: Membrane-Moderated Controlled Release, Mathematical Biosciences 
57,279-300 (1981) 
Tojo, K., Miyanami, K., Fan, L. T.: Mathematical Simulation of Membrane-Moderated 
Controlled Release, Powder Technology 35, 89-96 (1983) 
Tojo, K., Sun, Y., Ghannam, M. M., Chien, Y. W.: Characterization of a Membrane 
Permeation System for Controlled Drug Delivery Studies, AIChE J. 31, 741-746 (1985a) 
Tojo, K., Valia, K. H., Chien, Y. W.: Skin Permeation of Drugs-Diffusion and Partitioning, 
J. Chern. Eng. Japan 18,174-178 (l985b) 
Tojo, K., Chiang, C. C., Chien, Y. W.: Drug Permeation Across the Skin: Effect of Penetrant 
Hydrophilicity, J. Pharm. Sci. 76, 123-126 (1987) 
Tranter, C. J.: Heat flow in an Infinite Medium Heated by a Cylinder, Phil. Mag. 38, 
131-134 (1947) 
87 

References 
van Amerongen, G. J.: Diffusion in Elastomers, Rubber Chemistry and Technology 37, 
1065-1152 (1964) 
Vrentas, J. S., Duda, J. L.: Diffusion in Polymer-Solvent Systems. I. Reexamination of the 
Free-Volume Theory, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. Ed. 15,403-416 (1977) 
Vrentas, J. S., Duda, J. L.: Molecular Diffusion in Polymer Solutions, AIChE J. 25, 1-24 
(1979) 
Wakad, N., Nardse, Y.: Effective Diffusivities and Deadend Pores, Chern. Eng. Sci. 29, 
1304--1306 (1974) 
Wakao, N., Smith, J. M.: Diffusion in Catalyst Pellets, Chern. Eng. Sci. 17, 825-834 
(1962) 
Wang, T. T., Kwei, T. K., Frisch, H. L.: Diffusion in Glassy Polymers. Ill, J. Polym. Sci.: 
Part A-2, 7,2019-2028 (1969) 
Wirbrant, A., Sundelof, L.-O.: Permeant Saturation and Regulation of Membrane Transport, 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 28, 3281-3287 (1983) 
Wood, J. M., Attwood, D., Collett, J. H.: Influence of Gel and Solute Structure on 
In Vitro and In Vivo Release Kinetics from Hydrogels, pp. 347-360. In: Polymers as 
Biomaterials, S. W. Shalaby, A. S. Hoffman, B. D. Ratner and T. A. Horbet (Eds.), 
Plenum Press, New York (1984) 
Zimmermann, I.: Colloid Systems for Depot Dosage Forms, Prog. Colloid & Polymer Sci. 
72,19-27 (1986) 
Zygourakis, K.: Modeling the Controlled Release of Drugs from Hydrophobic Polymers, 
pp. 29-30. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Controlled Release of 
Bioactive Materials, P. 1. Lee and B. A. Leonhardt (Eds.), Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 
August 2-5 (1987) 
88 

3. Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
The polymer utilized in diffusion-controlled release devices or systems plays a relatively 
passive role. It serves simply as a carrier and retards the rate at which the 
active agent is delivered to the target. Nevertheless, some polymeric carriers 
are designed to play a more active role in the release process. These polymers 
undergo chemical reactions at the target site, thereby enabling the active agent to be 
delivered. Such chemically activated systems fall into two broad categories (Langer, 
1980 ; Baker, 1987): 
1. 
Physical immobilization systems, also called erodible or (bio)degradable systems 
in each of which the active agent, physically immobilized within the polymer 
network, is released by erosion of this network (Fig. 3.1 a) 
a 
Erodible or (bioldegradable systems 
Polymer backbone 
111111 
1 I • • • • 
Pendant chain systems 
• • • • • • 
• ••••• 
b 
Po I yagents 
Fig. 3.1 a, b. Chemical reaction-controlled release systems. a Physical immobilization, b Chemical 
immobilization (adapted from Baker, 1987) 
89 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
11. Chemical immobilization systems, in each of which the active agent is either 
chemically bonded to the polymer carrier backbone (pendant chain) or is 
part of the backbone itself (polyagents). Release occurs by hydrolytic or 
enzymatic degradation of the appropriate bonds (Fig. 3.1 b). 
The advantages of an erodible system, especially in pharmaceutical applications, 
are evident. A controlled-release device of this type will eventually disappear 
from the target site after having been implanted or orally ingested, thus obviating 
the need for a surgical removal procedure; however, the degradation products must 
be benign. Pendant chain and polyagent systems offer the possibility of drug 
targeting and reduced drug toxicity. They have been receiving increased attention 
over the past few years. In this chapter, we will examine these two types of 
reaction-controlled systems. Mathematical models for the first type will be dis-
cussed; release from the second type is principally governed by the kinetics of 
degradation of the appropriate bond and is, therefore, system specific. 
3.1 Physically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
An erodible system with physically entrapped active agent(s) can be formulated 
similarly to the two basic forms of diffusion-controlled systems, namely as a reservoir 
or as a monolithic device. If significant during the delivery period, erosion of 
the rate-controlling membrane in reservoir devices can profoundly influence the 
release rates. This offers a possible mechanism for obtaining a range of delivery 
rates by coordinating the rates of erosion and depletion. Nevertheless, an unexpected 
loss of integrity of the membrane through erosion can lead to undesirable 
"catastrophic release" of the active agent. A more practical erodible reservoir 
device would be one in which the erosion process is slow during the delivery 
period and thus does not affect the release rate. However, the slow erosion 
eventually leads to a disappearance of the device from the target site. 
A monolithic device, constructed with erodible polymer, can release the active 
agent through erosion, diffusion, or a combination of the two, contingent upon 
the relative rates of these mechanisms. If erosion is slow, diffusion will govern the 
release rate as described in the preceding chapter; however, the device will 
eventually disappear. If the active agent is effectively (physically) immobile in the 
polymer, its release will be governed purely by the erosion mechanism. Finally, a com-
bination of the two mechanisms is possible if the two rates are comparable. 
Erosion of a polymeric device can occur either from the surface inwards 
(surface or heterogeneous erosion) or more or less homogeneously throughout the 
device (bulk or homogeneous erosion). A polymer that erodes on the surface 
only is highly' desirable. If the diffusion is not significant, such a polymer can 
lead to a zero-order release rate when the surface area remains constant. Loss of 
mechanical integrity of the device is less probable, and the release rate becomes in-
dependent of the chemical and physical properties of the active agent (Langer and 
Peppas, 1983). An idealized system such as this has yet to be developed, and 
most of the available polymers exhibit various degrees of bulk erosion. 
90 

3.1 Physically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
The preferred degradation mechanism in such devices is hydrolytic cleavage of a 
labile bond (Langer and Peppas, 1983), although enzymatic degradation is utilized 
(see, e.g., Kopecek, 1984); in fact, self-contained enzymatically degradable systems 
have also been designed (see, e.g., Heller and Trescony, 1979; Yaacobi et aI., 1986). The 
nature of the dominant hydrolytic erosion mechanism can be predicted from the 
polymer hydrophilicity and morphology. Hydrophobic polymers will exclude water 
from their interior and, therefore, are more likely to erode from the surface inwards; 
in contrast, hydrophilic polymers favor homogeneous erosion. Crystalline regions 
have greater propensity to exclude water than amorphous regions. Thus, the 
degree of crystallinity of the polymer will influence the mechanism of erosion 
(Langer and Peppas, 1983). 
From the chemical point of view, a variety of labile bonds can be employed 
in forming (hydrolytically) erodible polymers. The rates of hydrolysis of some 
of these bonds under neutral conditions estimated from the known hydrolysis rate 
of low-molecular weight analogs are illustrated in Fig. 3.2, which indicates that 
000 
II 
II 
II 
-O-C-O- > -C-O- > -N-C-O- > 
I ? 
-O-CH-O-
o 
\I 
> -C-N-
Polycarbonates 
Polyesters 
Polyurethanes 
Polylorthoesters) 
Polyamides 
Fig. 3.2. Some common labile bonds and ranking of their estimated rates of hydrolysis 
under neutral conditions (Baker, 1987) 
Type I 
-
Type II 
-
Type III ~ 
-
-----
® 
Hydro I yt i co II y unstob I e bond 
® 
Hydrophob i c subst i tuent 
®~ 
H y d r 0 I y sis. ion i Z 0 t ion 0 r pro ton 0 t ion 
Fig. 3.3. Schematic representation of degradation mechanisms (Heller and Baker, 1980) 
91 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
polycarbonates are most labile. However, the rates are affected by factors such as 
morphology, discussed earlier, and the presence and nature of substituent groups. 
Consequently, the comparison in Fig. 3.2 is only approximate (Baker, 1987). 
A polymer, in solid form, can be eroded or solubilized in a number of ways. 
These have been classified into three categories by Heller and Baker (1980) as 
exhibited in Fig. 3.3. The first category (type I) consists of water-soluble polymers 
insolubilized by labile crosslinks. Cleavage of the crosslinks causes these polymers 
to solubilize, thereby yielding high molecular weight polymers as degradation 
products. The resultant matrix is completely permeated by water. Since the active 
agent is in an aqueous environment, its solubility is an important factor; a highly 
soluble compound will leach out rapidly, independent of the erosion rate. Type I 
polymers are useful, therefore, for active agents with low solubility or for macro-
molecular active agents that are entangled in the matrix and cannot be released until 
a significant number of crosslinks have been cleaved (Heller, 1980). An example of 
a system of this type is the entrapment of the enzyme, IX-chymotrypsin, in a poly-
(vinyl pyrrolidone) hydrogel, crosslinked with N,N'-methylenebisacrylamide (Torchi-
lin et ai., 1977). By varying the ratio of the crosslink to the monomer content 
from 0.1 to 2.0 w /w % in the polymerization mixture, a set of polymers with 
dissolution times between several days and virtually insoluble, was obtained. 
Release of the enzyme, however, did not correlate well with the dissolution rate, 
presumably due to diffusional release or due to localization of the enzyme in the 
outer layers of the matrix. 
The second category of erodible polymers (type II in Fig. 3.3) consists of 
polymers initially water-insoluble and rendered soluble by hydrolysis, ionization or 
protonation of substituent hydrophobic pendant groups. The molecular weight of 
the polymer does not change significantly during solubilization. Heller et al. (1978) 
have reported a system of this type, comprising partially esterified copolymers 
of methyl vinyl ether and maleic anhydride. Solubilization occurs by ionization 
100 
100 
o Drug release 
80 
D. Polymer erosion 
80 ~ 
~ 
-,::, 
Q) 
-,::, 
60 
60 
-,::, 
Q) 
0 
VI 
L. 
C 
Q) 
Q) 
Q) 
40 
40 
L. 
Q) 
L. 
E 
CI 
>-
:::J 
20 
20 
0 
L. 
a.. 
Cl 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Time (hours) 
Fig. 3.4. Release of hydrocortisone and polymer erosion for an n-butyl half ester or 
methyl vinyl ether-maleic anhydride copolymer containing a 10 wt % drug dispersion (Heller 
et aI., 1978) 
92 

3.1 Physically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
of the carboxyl side groups. Any of these copolymers characteristically exhibits a pH 
range above which it is soluble and below which, insoluble. This pH range is 
distinct (~O.25 pH units) and changes with the number of carbon atoms in the 
ester side groups. Erosion is largely a surface phenomenon, and films of the 
copolymers containing hydrocortisone have exhibited excellent zero-order kinetics. 
The release rate correlates well with polymer dissolution rate (Fig. 3.4) (Heller et aI., 
1978). 
The third category of erodible polymers (type III in Fig. 3.3) consists of 
water insoluble polymers; the polymers are solubilized by conversion to small, 
water-soluble molecules upon hydrolytic cleavage of their backbone. Thus, the 
labile bonds are part of the polymer backbone. These polymers undergo a combination 
of surface and bulk erosion. Examples of systems undergoing this type of degradation 
mechanism are various (co )polymers of lactic acid and glycolic acid. Y olles et aI. 
(1974) used poly(lactic acid) to deliver cyclazocine. Wise et aI. (1978) resorted 
to copolymers of lactic and glycolic acid to release 3H-Naltrexone base. Altering the 
monomer ratio of the two acids in the mixture was sufficient to obtain a range of 
degradation and release rates. Similar results have been reported by Schindler et aI. 
(1977), for releasing progesterone (see Fig. 3.5). 
Preparation and properties of various classes of erodible polymers such as polyesters, 
poly(orthoesters), polyacetals, polyamides, polyanhydrides, etc. have been extensively 
reviewed by numerous authors (see, e.g., Langer and Peppas, 1983; Pitt and Schindler, 
1983; Baker, 1987) and will not be considered here. 
Labile bonds in a polymeric system can themselves be arranged in a variety of 
ways to form a matrix. These arrangements and the resulting modes of active 
agent immobilization and release have been classified by Pitt and Schindler (1983) 
Copolymers of dl-lactic acid 
80 
and glycolic acid' % glycol ide 
20.8 
Progesterone load' 1 0% 
~ 
1 Xl XO.1cmfilms 
-c 
60 
Q) 
VI 
C 
Q) 
Q) 
40 
L. -
c::: 
:J 
0 
20 
E 
<t 
14.0 7.0 
0 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
!l0 
Time (days) 
Fig. 3.5. Release of progesterone from poly(glycolide-co-dilactide) films containing 10 wt % 
steroid (Schindler et aI., 1977) 
93 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
Type I 
Type II 
Type ill 
Type TIl 
Type "5l. 
-)t--X-X-
-----
@ 
@ 
@ 
@ 
@ 
-x-x-x-
----
iii 
I 
I I 
I 
f @ ~ ~® 
f® ® 
® 
® 
® ® 
® 
2:~-&~ 
~ 
~I 
® 
>r-x-x ~ 
-.-
~ k 
®~ 
~ 
~ 
~/l 
~ ® <1 
-x-®-x-@-
-x--®~ 
@ 
A 
X 
R 
Active ogent 
Hydrolyzoble bond 
Hydrophob i c group 
Fig. 3.6. Classification of possi-
ble active agent immobilization and 
release mechanisms from degrada-
ble polymers (Pitt and Schindler, 
1983) 
(Fig. 3.6). The first type involves insoluble polymers containing labile backbones 
with the active agent trapped between the chains. The second type involves 
systems in which solubilization of the polymer occurs by the loss of hydrophobic 
groups and results in active agent release. The third type involves labile bonds 
along the backbone of soluble polymers that have been insolubilized with crosslinks. 
The above three types correspond closely with degradation mechanisms given by 
Heller and Baker (1980) in Fig. 3.3. The final two classes of systems identified by Pitt 
and Schindler (1983) involve direct chemical bonding of active agent with polymer, 
either in the backbone or as a side chain (Fig. 3.6). These will be examined below 
in the category of chemically immobilized systems. 
3.2 Chemically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
Active agents can be chemically bonded to a polymeric carrier with hydrolytically 
or enzymatically erodible bonds, either within the backbone or on side groups 
(Fig. 3.1 b, Fig. 3.6). Sometimes, the polymer itself can be active; however, our 
consideration here is limited to systems which are biologically active only through 
release of the active agent. The rate-controlling step is the rate of erosion of the 
labile bonds. Such carrier systems can usually achieve higher loadings of the 
active agent as compared to systems in which the active agent is only physically 
incorporated into the polymer. 
It is evident that the mode of attachment to a carrier will be specific for 
each (class of) active agent. However, some general patterns have been recognized 
(see, e.g., Allan et aI., 1980; Duncan and Kopecek, 1984) and have been systematized 
by Baker (1987) into the two general categories illustrated in Fig. 3.7. The first 
94 

3.2 Chemically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
Type TIl A 
-
-fM- M-M-M1: 
I 
I I n 
A 
AA 
A+X -
A-X -
{M-M-M-Mtn -
1M-M-M-Mt. 
I 
I 
n 
Type nz: B 
~ 
X 
I 
A 
A 
Type ~ A 
A+M -
A-M - 1!t 
Type Y B 
A 
-
tA~ 
A 
Active agent 
M 
Po I ymer i zab I e monomer 
X 
Labile group 
Fig. 3.7. Various approaches for synthesis of controlled release polyagents (Baker, 1987) 
involves attachment of the active agent to a (pre)formed polymer backbone (type IV), 
while the second involves co- or homo-polymerization of the active agent or of 
their derivatives themselves (type V). The two categories have. been further sub-
divided into two schemes, each depending on the actual chemistry of preparation 
(Baker, 1987). 
A device of type IV A (Fig. 3.7) is formed with the active agent containing 
a reactive group that can be readily linked to a suitable group on a preformed 
·polymer backbone. Some of the common functional moieties employed are (Duncan 
and Kopecek, 1984; Baker, 1987): 
Ester 
-CO-O-
Amide 
-CO-N ( 
Anhydride 
-0-
Urethane 
-O-CO-N( 
O-Acylhydroxamic acid 
-CO-NH-O-CO-
Hydrazone 
and 
-CO-NH-N=C( 
Thioether 
-CH2-S-CH2 -
The first three types of linkages have been extensively employed by Allan and 
coworkers (see, e.g., Neogi and Allan, 1974; Allan et aI., 1980) and by Harris 
and coworkers (see, e.g., Harris et aI., 1976; Harris, 1980) to link various pesticides 
and herbicides to polymers. Figure 3.8 presents the relationship between the 
duration of effectiveness and amount of active agent in different combinations for 
application of the herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D); it is ester-
linked to Douglas fir bark and to kraft lignin (Neogi and Allan, 1974). Field tests 
with herbicide-polymer combinations have demonstrated enhanced growth rates 
for the treated Douglas fir trees compared to the untreated controls (Allan et al.. 
1980). Examples of the binding of drugs using these linkages are available. 
95 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
UI >-
C 
"C 
UI 
UI 
Ql 
C 
Ql 
180 
150 
> 
120 
..-o 
Ql .... 
.... 
Ql 
C 
"C .-
u 
90 
~ 
60 
Ql 
.c 
.... 
o 
c 
30 
o 
..-c 
~ 
::J 
39% 2,4-01 
Kraft lignin 
• 
2,4-0 
o 
oL-____ ~ 
____ ~~ 
____ ~ 
____ ~ 
o 
10 
100 
1000 
10,000 
Level of application (mg) 
Fig. 3.8. Relationship between dura-
tion of herbicidal effectiveness and 
level of application of chemical com-
binations of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic 
acid (2,4-D) and various polymers 
(Neogi and Allan, 1974) 
Franzmann and Ringsdorf (1976) have bound chlorambucil [4-[4-/bis(2-chlorethyl)-
amino/phenyl]butyric acid] to vinylpyrrolidone and vinylamine copolymers via an 
amide bond as follows: 
vinylpyrrolidone 
vinylamine 
chlorambucil 
96 

3.2 Chemically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
If the active agent and the preformed polymeric carrier do not contain suitable 
reactive groups permitting their direct reaction, one or both of them may need be 
derivatized to effect attachment. Systems of this type have been classified as type 
IV.B by Baker (1987) (Fig. 3.7). McCormick and Fooladi (1977) have created 
a polymer-herbicide system of this type by preparing isocyanate adducts of metri-
buzin and reacting it with the hydroxyl group of poly(vinyl alcohol), as illustrated 
below. Both linear and crosslinked poly(vinyl alcohol) polymers can be linked with 
o 
o 
n (CH ) C- )~N-NH 
33 rrJ 
2 
N 
~ -S-CH 
'N 
3 
n OCN-R-NCO 
H 0 H )~ 
I 
II 
I 
___ 
~~ n OCNR-N-C-N-N~ I-C (CH3 )3 
CH -S- ~ N 
3 
N/ 
Metribuzin 
the herbicide. The linear polymers release the herbicide much faster than the 
crosslinked polymers, because of the longer duration required for water to diffuse 
into the latter to cause hydrolysis. The phytotoxicity to weeds of these compounds 
also reflects this behavior, as indicated by Fig. 3.9. The crosslinked-polymer 
products possess phytotoxicity similar to those of the free herbicide with rapid decay 
of activity while the linear-polymer products are effective over a larger period of 
time. However, it must be noted that the crosslinked products may exhibit phyto-
toxicity at a later stage as the polymer degrades (McCormick and Fooladi, 1977). 
Other systems of this type have been reported by Petersen et al. (1980) who have 
prepared the chloroformate derivative of Norethindrone and then reacted it with 
polY-N-(3-hydroxypropyl)-L-glutamine. 
Type V.A systems (Fig. 3.7; Baker, 1987), involve conversion of the active 
agent into a polymerizable derivative, which can then be co- or homo-polymerized. 
This approach has been widely used in preparing polymer-drug (see, e.g., Duncan 
and Kopecek, 1984) and polymer-pesticide (see, e.g., Harris, 1980) combinations. 
Harris et al. (1976, 1977) have reported the copolymerization of vinyl derivatives of 
the herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-0) with vinyl monomers containing 
hydrophilic residues. The 2-acryloyloxyethyl 2,4-0 and methacrylic acid copolymers 
97 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
o 
L. -
C o 
" 
..... o 
~ --
100 
80 
60 
-g, 
40 
Q) 
~ -
~ 20 
a.. 
Linear 
polymers 
o o 
20 
Free metrlbuzln 
40 
60 
Time (days) 
80 
100 
120 
Fig. 3.9. Phytotoxicity of various herbicidal formulations of metribuzin and poly(vinyl 
alcohol) (McCormick and Fooladi, 1977) 
slowly undergo hydrolysis under slightly alkaline conditions tPH = 8) at 30°C. 
Increasing the percentage of the hydrophilic comonomer (methacrylic acid) in these 
systems has resulted in an increase in the rate of herbicide release (Fig. 3.l0a). 
Copolymerization with trimethylamine methacrylamide has resulted in a relatively 
constant release rate over 200 days (Fig. 3.10b). It is interesting to note that 
homopolymers of 2-acryloyloxyethyl 2,4-D and of other acrylic acid 2,4-D esters do 
not undergo hydrolysis under the same conditions (Harris, 1980). Furthermore, 
increasing the length of the pendant side chain so as to increase the distance 
between the ester linkage and the hydrophobic backbone does not enhance the 
hydrolysis of this linkage in the homopolymer, even though it is less hindered 
sterically. However, incorporation of the hydrophilic comonomer has resulted in 
successful release, as indicated by Figs. 3.lOa, b. 
Other examples of type V.A systems are the acrylate derivatives of fungicides; 
they include pentachlorophenol and 8-hydroxyqinoline, homopolymerized, copoly-
merized with ethyl- or vinylacetate, and terpolymerized with methyl methacrylate 
and n-butyl acrylate (Pittman et aI., 1982). Copolymers and terpolymer latexes 
of pentachlorophenol and 3,4' ,5-tribromosalicylanilide acrylate were tested against 
Auerobasidium pullulans in agar dish accelerated growth studies; they have been 
found to prevent growth. Hoffman et aI. (1979) prepared a polymerizable derivative 
of streptomycine sulfate (Str-CH=O) by reacting the aldehyde group of the drug 
with methacrylic acid hydrazide 
98 

... 
Q) 
E 
>-
0 a. 
0> " 
0> 
E 
"0 
Q) 
rn 
0 
Q) 
Q) ... 
Cl 
I 
.q-
300 
200 
N 
100 
..... o -
C 
=:J o 
E 
<t: 
a 
o 
3.2 Chemically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
2-Acryloyloxethyl 2,4-0 
and Methacryllc acid copolymers 
• 90·10 
o 95'5 
50 
100 
150 
Time (days) 
CH3 
I 
~CH2-CHl---( CHz-Ck-
I In • 
I 
O=T 
COOH 
200 
250 
? 
V-
CH -CH -O-C-CH 0 
~ 
J. 
CI 
2 
2 
II 
2 
~ II 
o 
CI 
300 
Fig. 3.10a. Release of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) from various copolymers 
of 2-acryloyloxyethyl 2,4-D and methacrylic acid by hydrolysis (Harris et aI., 1977) 
CH 3 
I 
CH 2=C-CO-NH-N=CH-Str 
Water soluble copolymers were prepared by copolymerizing this derivative with 
methacrylamide or 2-(methylsulfinyl}ethyl methacrylate. Torchilin et al. (1977), 
in their study on immobilization of a-chymotrypsin prepared acylated derivatives 
of the enzyme and then copolymerized it with N-vinylpyrrolidone and N,N'-
methylenebisacrylamide. Release of a-chymotrypsin from the resulting hydrogels 
has been well correlated with the rate of carrier solubilization. This is in contrast 
to the system in which the enzyme has been mechanically entrapped in the 
polymer (see description of type I systems). 
99 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
.... 
Q) 
E 
>-
0 
c.. 
Cl 
400 
"-
Cl 
E 
"0 
300 
Q) 
'" 
c 
Q) 
Q) 
.... 
200 
o 
I 
2-Acryloyloxyethyl 2,4-0 
and Trimethylamine 
methacry I am ide copol ymer 
o 65.35 
¢ 
0 
N 
100 
-
C 
::::J o 
E 
<t 
o ~~ 
__ ~ 
____ -L ____ ~ 
____ ~ 
______ ~ 
____ -L ____ ~ 
o 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
Time (days) 
b 
Fig, 3.10b. Release of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) from a copolymer of 2-
acryloyloxyethyl 2,4-D and trimethylamine methacrylamide (Harris et al., 1977) 
Each of the systems described thus far contains a backbone polymer that is 
biologically inactive. However, the active agent containing more than one functional 
group can be converted into a polymer entirely composed of the active agent 
(type V.B in Fig. 3.7). A system of this type would release the active agent through 
degradation of the main polymer chain instead of pendant group scission. The 
herbicide picloram [4-Amino-3,5,6-trichloropicolinic acid], can be homopolymerized 
to yield a highly effective product. Other such herbicides include endothall and 
chloramben illustrated below (Allan et al., 1980; Baker, 1987). 
n 
CI 
can be 
* 
homopolymerized 
H2N 
~ I 
C02 H 
.. 
CI 
:::::,.... 
N 
10 form 
4 - amino-3,5,6 -Irichloropicolinic 
CI 
acid (picloram) 
HN*CI ~ __ O 
?"I 
CI 
:::::,.... 
N 
CI 
n 
100 

3.2 Chemically Immobilized Active Agent Systems 
In most of the systems described above, the active agent, when bound directly 
to the polymer chain, exhibits either reduced or zero biological activity. It becomes 
active only after it has been split off. To facilitate cleavage, the active agent bound 
by any of the linkages listed earlier, must be separated from the polymeric 
backbone by a spacer (except in type V.B systems) allowing the cleavage effector 
to access the bond. Furthermore, while all linkages may be hydrolyzed, the rate 
of hydrolysis may vary from fast to insignificant. For instance, uncatalyzed 
hydrolysis of amide bonds is relatively slow; however, it can be increased by the 
introduction of specific groups adjacent to the amide bond (Duncan and Kopecek, 
1984). 
For polymer-drug combinations, the possibility bf enzyme catalyzed hydrolysis 
makes available a relatively wide range of synthetic capabilities. Peptidic, glycosidic 
or phosphate bonds may also be used. Spacer groups can be created, which are cleaved 
specifically by certain enzymes in the target compartment. The relationship between 
the structure of the spacer sequence and its cleavability has been examined in 
detail for copolymers of N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide containing p-nitro-
aniline (NAp) attached by various oligopeptide sequences (Duncan et at., 1983; 
Rejmanova et at., 1983). Release rates from some sequences cleaved by bovine 
spleen cathepsin B indicate that a wide range of release rates is obtainable 
(Fig. 3.11). Besides allowing the labile bond to be accessed by the degradation 
effector, the spacer sequence can be exploited to influence the hydrophilicity of the 
system. 
A drug in combination with a polymeric carrier can also be targeted to a specific 
site within an organism, thus increasing the efficiency of delivery. This targeting can 
be achieved either through the inherent physico-chemical properties of the polymer 
~ 80 
"0 
Q) 
> 
c 
60 
Q) 
(.) 
a. 
<! 
40 
Z -
C 
:::::I 
20 
0 
®-GI yPheLeuG 1 yPhe-NAp 
E 
<! 
0 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Time (days) 
Fig. 3.11. Amount of p-nitroaniline (NAp) cleaved by bovine spleen cathespin B from 
copolymers ofN-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide containing NAp attached by various oligo-
peptide sequences (Rejmanova et aI., 1983) 
101 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
(a) Single Chain Polymeric Carrier 
Soluble/ 
_~ 
___ ~ 
__ ..-r -...._-_-_....--____ ---__ ~ biodegradable 
Spacer-necessary 
to permit enzyme 
access 
Biodegradable 
linkage 
polymer 
Spacer-necessary to 
permit interaction of 
taroeting moiety 
with membrane receptor 
This may lie cell-specific 
or enhance membrane 
interactions 
(b) Crosslinked Polymeric Carrier 
:....-- Soluble/Non-biodegradable low 
molecular weight polymer chain 
linkage 
Fig. 3.12. Essential features of a targeted single-chain and cross-linked polymer-drug carrier 
(Duncan and Kopecek, 1984) 
or through incorporation of specific targeting residues. Figure 3.12 shows a schematic 
of such a single chain or crosslinked polymeric carrier system. Targeting residues are 
groups that bind the specific receptors or antigens on the surface of the targeted cells. 
Carbohydrate moieties and antibodies are examples of such targeting residues (Duncan 
and Kopecek, 1984). 
Various aspects of po~ymeric drug carriers have also been discussed by Ringsdorf 
(1975, 1978), Batz (1977), Kopecek (1984), while polymeric pesticide carriers have 
been extensively examined by Allan et al. (1980) and Harris (1980). 
3.3 Models for Physically Immobilized 
Erosion-Activated Systems 
Erodible devices can be manufactured by incorporating the active agent in a poly-
mer which may undergo degradation when. introduced into the target environment. 
The active agent can be released from such an erodible device either solely by 
erosion (surface detachment) or .by. a combination of diffusion and erosion. 
Expressions are available for the· fractional dissolution rate of a solid tablet in 
which the active agent is held together by inerts and binders (Cooney, 1972). 
102 

3.3 Models for Physically Immobilized Erosion-Activated Systems 
Assuming a surface-detachment controlled process (slow dissolution rate, low 
solubility, and no diffusion resistance in medium), the expression 
(3.1) 
can be utilized to obtain equations for fractional dissolution rate from various geo-
metries into infinite well-agitated sinks. Here, ko is the surface detachment rate 
constant, A is the surface area exposed to the medium, Cbs is the saturation 
concentration of active agent in the medium and Cb is the concentration of active 
agent in the medium. For a solid sphere of initial radius Ro dissolving under 
surface-detachment control 
(dM ) 
[k (C 
- C ) tJz 
dt I r = ko4n(Cbs - Cb) Ro -
0 
bSea b 
(3.2) 
where ea is the amount of active agent per unit volume of the solid. Other 
shapes considered by Cooney were cylinders with various II D ratios, cylinders with 
concentric bores, and spheres with internal cylindrical bores. 
From a similar analysis it has been shown that, for monolithic erodible devices, 
a general expression can be written for a sphere of radius <5, a cylinder of 
radius <5 and a slab of thickness 2<5 (Hopfenberg, 1976) 
(3.3) 
where n is 3 for a sphere, 2 for a cylinder, and 1 for a slab. The expressions 
above are valid for both the case of dissolved active agent and that of dispersed 
active agent since the release is assumed to be surface-detachment controlled. 
Lee (1980, 1981) has used the heat balance integral method to give an approximate 
analytic solution for diffusional release from a surface erodible matrix with CoO > Cas 
in an infinite well-stirred medium. When the eroding front moves at a constant 
velocity, he obtained for a planar matrix of thickness <5, the relations 
(3.4) 
and 
Dmt 1 
[(Cas) J [I 
J 
--Z = -
3 -
- 2 
f3 - -
In (I + 2f3h) 
(<5/2) 
6h 
CaO 
2h 
(3.5a) 
where 
(3.5 b) 
103 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
B is the surface-erosion rate constant having the dimensions of velocity, while 
P(b/2) is the separation between the extraction and erosion fronts. The term 
B(b/2)/Dm is the ratio of erosion rate to matrix permeability and thus measures 
the relative contributions of the erosion and diffusion processes. Analysis of the 
effect of this term on the release shows that release generally starts with a typical 
first-order kinetics and shifts towards zero-order (limiting slope B(b/2)/Dm). The 
larger the value of this term, the sooner the shift towards zero-order occurs 
(Lee, 1981). 
In order to increase the number of controllable design parameters at the disposal 
of a device designer, Thombre and Himmelstein (1984) have proposed the lamination 
of an erodible monolithic device (C aO ~ Cas) with a membrane. Applying the pseudo 
steady-state assumption to both the extraction region and the membrane, they obtain 
the release rate as 
(3.6) 
where dR/dt is the rate of movement of the diffusion front. It is given by the 
relation 
where 
and 
dR 
dt 
(~: -I) [± + Set) -
R(t)] 
Set) = I - [B(b/2)] t , 
Dml 
(3.7) 
(3.8 a) 
(3.8b) 
(3.8c) 
In the above equations, Set) represents the position of the erosion front, while 
Dml = diffusivity of active agent in the eroding matrix, 
Dm2 = diffusivity of active agent in the membrane, 
hm = thickness of the membrane, and 
K 
= partition coefficient between matrix and membrane == 
(Cmatrix/Cmembrane) . 
For hm = 0, Eq. (3.6) simply gives the release rate, based on a pseudo steady-state 
analysis, from an erodible matrix (no lamination). 
Analysis of their results by Thombre and Himmelstein (1984) showed that 
104 

3.3 Models for Physically Immobilized Erosion-Activated Systems 
while the duration of zero-order release is not significantly extended by the 
lamination process, the life of the device is increased. The thickness of the membrane 
controls the time lag before the constant release rate period is realized. 
Release from a monolithic device (CaO < Cas) undergoing (bulk) chemical degrada-
tion due to action of the environmental fluid has been modeled by Thombre 
(1985). The system consists of a poly( ortho ester) matrix undergoing catalytically 
induced hydrolysis by an acid anhydride incorporated in the matrix; the reactions 
occur when the matrix is exposed to water. The active agent is unaffected by the 
reactions and diffuses out of the matrix. The diffusivities of the various species 
(water, acid anhydride, hydrogen ions, and active agent) are taken to be functions of 
the local extent of hydrolysis of the polymer. An infinite well-agitated sink 
is assumed. The system of governing differential equations has been solved by 
means of an implicit finite-difference approximation technique. The results indicate 
three phases in the delivery scheme: a short lag phase, an approximately zero-
order rate phase over which a major part of the active agent is released, and 
a declining rate period at the tail-end of the release (Thombre, 1985). 
In erodible reservoir devices, if diffusion does not contribute to release or is 
relatively slow, the active agent is released only after the membrane has been 
completely eroded. All the active agent is then released at one instant. Various 
release pattern can thus be obtained by varying the wall thickness in a population 
of microcapsules (Baker and Lonsdale, 1976). If, on the other hand, diffusion is faster 
than surface erosion, then the release rate at any time from a rectangular membrane 
is given by (Baker and Lonsdale, 1976) 
-
= 
-
--
for t < £5/ B 
(dM,) (dM,) ( 
£5 
) 
dt 
r 
dt 
0 
£5 -
Bt 
Table 3.1. Erodible reservoir devices 
Controlling 
resistance 
Membrane 
mass transfer 
resistance 
Reservoir, 
membrane, and 
boundary layer 
at sink mass 
transfer resistance 
System description 
Model description 
and solution type 
General; see Table 2.1 Rectangular reservoir: 
Any unerodible 
erosion rate known, 
system whose 
PSSA, analytic 
initial release rate 
solution based on 
is known. 
Initial release rate 
from corresponding 
unerodible device 
(Table 2.1) 
Finite source, 
Spherical reservoir: 
infinite sink 
unsteady state, 
Fickian diffusion 
in reservoir and 
membrane, first-order 
erosion, temperature 
effects, numerical 
(3.9) 
Reference 
Baker and Lonsdale 
(1976) 
Tojo et al. (1983) 
105 

3 Chemical Reaction Controlled Release 
where the subscript 0 denotes initial release rate which can be found from 
the expression for the corresponding non-erodible device case at zero time. {) is the 
thickness of membrane and B is the erosion rate with dimensions of velocity. 
Tojo et al. (1983), in their mathematical simulation of a membrane-moderated 
controlled-release device, also considered the effect of a bioerodible membrane for 
a spherical reservoir device. A first-order degradation mechanism with an Arrhenius 
relationship for the temperature dependency of the rate constant was assumed. 
Numerically simulated results compared favorably with published experimental 
results. This and the models reviewed above are summarized in Tables 3.1 and 3.2. 
Bioerodible polymers have a huge potential as carriers for controlled release. An 
erodible device when placed in the environment would eventually degrade leaving 
no residues and thus creating no pollution or environmental contamination. An 
erodible device, geometrically formulated such that the exposed area remains a con-
stant at all times, can provide zero-order release rates if diffusion of the active-agent 
Table 3.2. Erodible monolithic devices 
Controlling 
resistance 
Surface 
detachment 
process 
Diffusive 
mass transfer 
resistance in 
surface-eroding 
polymer 
Diffusive mass 
transfer 
resistance in 
laminate and 
surface-eroding 
polymer 
Diffusive mass 
transfer 
resistance in 
bulk eroding 
polymer 
106 
System description 
Finite source, infinite 
well-agitated sink, 
all concentrations 
of active agent 
Finite source, infinite 
well-agitated sink, 
active agent dispersed 
in polymer 
(CoO ~ Ca.) 
Finite source, infinite 
well-agitated sink, 
active agent dispersed 
in polymer 
(CoO ~ Ca.) 
Finite source, infinite 
well-agitated sink, 
active agent dissolved 
in polymer 
(CoO ~ Ca.) 
Model description 
and solution type 
Rectangular, 
Cylindrical and 
Spherical geometries 
steady state, analytic 
Cylinders, Spheres 
with internal bores, 
other general shapes 
steady state, analytic 
Rectangular geometry 
constant erosion 
front velocity, 
approximate analytic 
Rectangular geometry 
eroding polymer 
covered with 
a membrane, 
constant erosion 
front velocity, PSSA 
for both polymer 
and laminate, analytic 
Reference 
Hopfenberg (1976) 
Cooney (1972) 
Lee (l980a, 1981) 
Thombreand 
Himmelstein (1984) 
Rectangular geometry 
Thombre (1985) 
erosion due to 
environmental fluid 
permeating polymer, 
diffusion with 
chemical reaction, 
matrix geometry, 
ersosion effect 
only on diffusion, 
numerical 

References 
is negligible (see, e.g. Cooney, 1972). A simpler geometry (sphere or cylinder) 
can also produce zero-order release rate by having an appropriate concentration 
distribution to account for the change in area (no diffusional release case). 
In the light of potential uses of erodible devices, more efforts to model these 
devices are needed. By relating the properties of the polymer to their performance 
under various environmental conditions, better and more efficient devices can be 
produced. 
References 
Allan, G. G., Beer, J. W., Cousin, M. J., Mikels, R. A.: The Biodegradative Controlled 
Release of Pesticides from Polymeric Substrates, pp. 7--62. In: Controlled Release Techno-
logies: Methods, Theory, and Applications, Vol. II, A. F. Kydonieus (Ed.), CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, Florida (1980) 
Baker, R. W.: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, pp. 84-131, John Wiley and 
Sons, New York (1987) 
Baker, R. W., Lonsdale, H. K.: Erodible Controlled Release Systems. In: Preprints of 
papers presented at the 171st meeting, ACS, Division of Organic Coatings and Plastics 
Chemistry 36 (I), 235-242 (1976) 
Batz, H.-G.: Polymeric Drugs, Adv. in Pol. Sci. 23, 25-53 (1977) 
Cooney, D. 0.: Effect of Geometry on the Dissolution of Pharmaceutical Tablets and 
Other Solids: Surface Detachment Kinetics Controlling, AIChE J. 18, 446-449 (1972) 
Duncan, R., Cable, H. c., Lloyd, J. 8., Rejmanova, P., Kopecek, J.: Polymers Containing 
Enzymatically Degradable Bonds, 7. Design of Oligo peptide Side-Chains in Poly [N-(2-
hydroxypropyl)methacrylamidel Copolymers to Promote Efficient Degradation by Lysosomal 
Enzymes, Makromol. Chern. 184, 1997-2008 (1983) 
Duncan, R., Kopecek, J.: Soluble Synthetic Polymers as Potential Drug Carriers, Adv. in 
Pol. Sc. 57, 51-101 (1984) 
Franzmann, G., Ringsdorf, H.: Pharmakologisch Aktive Polymere, 12. Depotformen von 
Chlorambucil durch Kovalente Bindung an Polymere, Makromol. Chern. 177, 2547-2552 
(1977) 
Harris, F. W.: Polymers Containing Pendent Pesticide Substituents, pp. 63--82. In: Controlled 
Release Technologies: Methods, Theory, and Applications, Vol. II, A. F. Kydonieus 
(Ed.), CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (1980) 
Harris, F. W., Aulabaugh, A. E., Case, R. D., Dykes, M. K., Feld, W. A.: Polymers Containing 
Pendent Herbicide Substituents: Preliminary Hydrolysis Studies. In: Controlled Release 
Polymeric Formulations, D. R. Paul and F. W. Harris (Eds.), ACS Symposium Series 33, 
222-230 (1976) 
Harris, F. W., Dykes, M. R., Baker, J. A., Aulabaugh, A. E.: Polymers Containing 
Pendant Herbicide Substitutes: Hydrolysis Studies II. In: Controlled Release Pesticides, 
H. B. Scher (Ed.), ACS Symposium Series 53, 102-111 (1977) 
Heller, J.: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Compounds from Bioerodible Polymers, 
Biomaterials 1, 51-57 (1980) 
Heller, J., Baker, R. W., Gale, R. M., Rodin, J. 0.: Controlled Drug Release by Polymer 
Dissolution. I. Partial Esters of Maleic Anhydride Copolymers -
Properties and Theory, 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 22, 1991-2009 (1978) 
Heller, J., Baker, R. W.: Theory and Practice of Controlled Drug Delivery from Bioerodible 
Polymers, pp. 1-17. In: Controlled Release of Bioactive Materials, R. W. Baker (Ed.), 
Academic Press, New York (1980) 
Heller, J., Trescony, P. V.: Controlled Drug Release by Polymer Dissolution. II: Enzyme-
Mediated Delivery Device, J. Pharm. Sci. 68, 919-921 (1979) 
Hoffman, V., Ringsdorf, H., Seganova, A.: Pharmakologisch-Aktiv Polymere, 19. Polymere 
mit Kovalent Gebundenem Streptomycinsulfat, Makromol. Chern. 180,837-841 (1979) 
107 

References 
Hopfenberg, H. B.: Controlled Release from Erodible Slabs, Cylinders, and Spheres. In: 
Preprints of papers presented at the 171 st meeting, ACS, Division of Organic Coatings 
and Plastics Chemistry 36 (1) 229-234 (1976) 
Kopecek, J.: Controlled Biodegradability of Polymers -
A Key to Drug Delivery Systems, 
Biomaterials 5, 19-25 (1984) 
Langer, R.: Polymeric Delivery Systems for Controlled Drug Release, Chern. Eng. Commun. 
6,1-48 (1980) 
Langer, R., Peppas, N.: Chemical and Physical Structure of Polymers as Carriers for 
Controlled Release of Bioactive Agents: A Review:, J. Macromol. Sci. -
Rev. Macromol. 
Chern. Phys. e23, 61-126 (1983) 
Lee, P. I.: Diffusional Release of a Solute from a Polymeric Matrix -
Approximate 
Analytical Solutions, J. Membrane Sci. 7,255-275 (1980) 
Lee, P. I.: Controlled Drug Release from Polymeric Matrices Involving Moving Boundaries, 
pp. 39-48. In: Controlled Release of Pesticides and Pharmaceuticals, D. H. Lewis (Ed.), 
Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1981) 
McCormick, C. L., Fooladi, M.: Synthesis, Characterization, and Release Mechanisms of 
Polymers Containing Pendant Herbicides. In: Controlled Release Pesticides, H. B. Scher 
(Ed.), ACS Symposium Series 53, 112-125 (1977) 
Neogi, A. N., Allan, G. G.: Controlled-Release Pesticides: Concepts and Realization, pp. 
195-224. In: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, A. C. Tanquary and R. E. 
Lacey (Eds.), Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
Petersen, R. V., Andersen, C. G., Fang, S.-M., Gregonis, D. E., Kim, S. W., Feijen, J., 
Anderson, J. M., Mitra, S.: Controlled Release of Progestins from Poly (IX-Amino Acid) 
Carriers, pp. 45-60. In: Controlled Release of Bioactive Materials, R. Baker (Ed.), Academic 
Press, New York (1980) 
Pitt, C. G., Schindler, A.: The Design of Controlled Drug Delivery Systems Based on 
Biodegradable Polymers, pp. 17-30. In: Biodegradables and Delivery Systems for Contracep-
tion, E. S. I. Hafez and W. A. A. van Os (Eds.), MTP Press, Lancaster, England (1980) 
Pitt, C. G., Schindler, A.: Biodegradation of Polymers, pp. 53-80. In: Controlled Drug Delivery, 
Vol. I, Basic Concepts, S. D. Bruck (Ed.), CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida (1983) 
Pittman, Jr., C. U., Lawyer, K. R., Ramachandran, K. S.: Polymer-Bound Fungicides for 
Paints. In: Biological Activities of Polymers, C. E. Carraher, Jr. and C. G. Gebelein (Eds.), 
ACS Symposium Series 186, 35-53 (1982) 
Rejmanova, P., Kopecek, J., Pohl, J., Baudys, M., Kostka, V.: Polymers Containing 
Enzymatically Degradable Bonds. 8. Degradation of Oligopeptide Sequences in N-(2-hydroxy-
propyl)methacrylamide Copolymers by Bovine Spleen Cathepsin B, Makromol. Chern. 
184,2009-2020(1983) 
Ringsdorf, H.: Structure and Properties of Pharmacologically Active Polymers, J. Polym. 
Sci. Polym. Symp. 51,135-153 (1975) 
Ringsdorf, H.: Synthetic Polymeric Drugs, pp. 197-223. In: Polymeric Delivery Systems, 
R. J. Kostelnik (Ed.), Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, New York (1978) 
Schindler, A., Jeffcoat, R., Kimmel, G. L., Pitt, C. A., Wall, M. E., Zweidinger, R.: 
Biodegradable Polymers for Sustained Drug Delivery, pp. 251-286. In: Contemporary Topics 
in Polymer Science, Vol. 2, E. M. Pearce and J. R. Schaefgen (Eds.), Plenum Press, 
New York (1977) 
Thombre, A. G.: Mechanism and Kinetics of Release from Two Controlled Drug Delivery 
Devices, pp. 9-106, PhD Dissertation, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas (1985) 
Thombre, A. G., Himmelstein, K. J.: Modelling of Drug Release Kinetics from a Laminated 
Device having an Erodible Drug Reservoir, Biomaterials 5,250-254 (1984) 
Tojo, K., Miyanami, K., Fan, L. T.: Mathematical Simulation of Membrane-Moderated 
Controlled Release, Powder Technology 35, 89-96 (1983) 
Torchilin, V. P., Tischenko, E. G., Smirnov, V. N., Chazov, E. I.: Immobilization of 
Enzymes on Slowlv Soluble Carriers, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 11,223-235 (1977) 
Wise, D. L., Schwope, A. D., Harrigan, S. E., McCarthy, D. A., Howes, J. F.: Sustained 
Delivery of a Narcotic Antagonist from Lactic/Glycolic Acid Copolymer Implants, pp. 75-86. 
In: Polymeric Delivery Systems, R. J. Kostelnik (Ed.), Gordon and Breach Science 
Publishers, New York (1978) 
108 

References 
Yaacobi, Y., Lotan, N., Sideman, S.: A Hybrid System for Zero Order Drug Delivery 
Regimen, Polym. Sci. Techno!. 34, 379-386 (1986) 
Yolles, S., Eldridge, J., Leafe, T., Woodland, J. H. R., Blake, D. R., Meyer, F.: Long-Acting 
Delivery Systems for Narcotic Antagonists, pp. 177-193. In: Controlled Release of Bio-
logically Active Agents, A. C. Tanguary and R. E. Lacey (Eds.), Plenum Press, New York 
(1974) 
109 

4. Swelling-Controlled Release 
Consider a monolithic polymeric device contammg an active agent introduced 
into the elution medium. If the elution medium is not thermodynamically compatible 
with the polymer or if the polymer is well above its glass transition temperature, the 
morphological structure is time independent and the device belongs to the diffusion-
controlled category. However, if the elution medium or a constituent component is 
thermodynamically compatible with a polymer in the glassy state, its glass transition 
temperature may be lowered below the system temperature. Subsequently, the 
glassy polymer begins to undergo a glass-to-gel transition. The polymer chains 
in the gel state, being more mobile than those in the glassy state, allow the 
active agent to diffuse (more rapidly) out of the matrix. Such a device in 
which the change of polymer morphology, caused by interaction with the elution 
medium, controls or influences the release is classified as being swelling controlled. 
A distinction has been made between two types of systems formed by such 
swellable polymers (Peppas, 1984). A swellable controlled-release system comprising 
the first type, consists of a hydrophilic polymer that undergoes swelling more or 
less continuously throughout the matrix. This glass-to-gel transition loosens the 
matrix and the active agent is able to diffuse out, with the release rate determined 
by the diffusion process. A swelling-controlled system belonging to the second 
type, comprises a polymeric system exhibiting spatially discontinuous swelling. 
An interface separates the swollen gel region from the inner glassy core. This' 
interface moves into the matrix as gelatinization proceeds. Release occurs by diffusion 
from the gel region; however, diffusivity is governed by the time-dependent macro-
molecular relaxation phenomena in this region and the release rate is, therefore, 
determined by this transition process (Peppas, 1984). This distinction between the 
two types of systems is often not clear-cut since a swellable system -can also 
show time-dependent relaxation behavior, depending on its kinetics. A general re-
presentation of a swelling-controlled device along with the major steps in the release 
process is given in Fig. 4.1. 
If chain relaxation and swelling are not restricted or constrained, the polymer 
matrix will eventually dissolve after completion of the gelatinization process. This 
can be prevented by cross-linking the polymer or using semi-crystalline polymers; 
the cross-links and crystallites act as permanent bonds holding the matrix together. 
However, chemical or enzymatic action by components in the elution medium may 
eventually lead to degradation of these bonds. In these cases, the device can be 
considered as being erodible swelling-controlled (Korsmeyer and Peppas, 1983). 
To understand how the phenomenon of change in the polymer structure influences 
the release of active agent, the polymer relaxation process needs to be examined. In 
llO 

4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
Glassy 
polymer 
Diffusion 
Gel 
Diffusion In 
(penetrantl 
I 
I 
Elution 
medium 
Giass-to-llel 
trans It I on and 
swelllnll 
I partition 
I (active allent. 
I penetrant! 
Diffusion out 
(actl ve allent!· 
x 
x 
Fig. 4.1. Schematic representation 
of the functioning of a swelling-
controlled release device 
the subsequent discussion, the component in the external medium causing the 
change in polymer morphology will be referred to as the penetrant and identified 
by the subscript "e". The active agent will be identified by the subscript "a". The 
term "relaxation" will be used to indicate the transition of polymer chains from 
a glassy state to a gel state. If necessary, a distinction will be made between 
"relaxation without volume change" and "relaxation with volume change". The term 
"swelling" will be considered equivalent to "relaxation with volume change". 
4.1 Penetrant Transport 
and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
The transport of penetrants into polymers has been extensively studied; experimental 
data on various systems abound. The nomenclature used for describing some of the 
observed phenomena can often be confusing because of the large variety of transport 
features possible. Some broad categories have been defined, however. The subsequent 
discussion will focus on a delineation of these categories without dealing with spe-
cific systems; it will be followed by a brief discussion of some models developed to 
explain these features. 
111 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
4.1.1 Transport of Penetrants in Polymers 
Polymers above their glass transition temperature respond rapidly to changes in their 
condition. A rubbery polymer film, when exposed to a constant activity reservoir 
of a smaller molecule capable of diffusing into the film (the penetrant), rapidly achieves 
a constant concentration at the exposed film surface. This sorption equilibrium 
is achieved in times much shorter than the characteristic times involved in the 
diffusion of penetrant (Frisch, 1980). This phenomenon of transport in rubber poly-
mers is Fickian, and can be called either ideal Fickian or non-ideal Fickian on the 
basis of the constancy of the diffusion coefficient (McGregor, 1974). 
The phenomenon of transport in glass polymers is much more complicated than 
that in rubbery polymers, due to significant contribution to the process from the 
characteristically larger times involved in chain mobility. Non-Fickian behavior, 
characterized by (among other factors) significant deviations from the linear 
relationship between the amount absorbed and square-root of time, is often observed 
below the glass transition temperature and also above the glass transition in 
certain cross-linked and crystalline polymers (Park, 1968). (For penetrant molecules 
that are small enough to move through the polymer by filling pre-existing micro-
cavities and, thus, do not require flexibility in the macromolecular chains for their 
diffusion, Fickian diffusion is observed even below the glass transition temperature). 
Certain glassy polymers, undergoing relaxation induced by absorption of a pene-
trant, commonly show a morphological discontinuity. An interface, often sharp, 
separates an inner glassy core from an outer relaxed gel-like region (Fig. 4.1). These 
two regions frequently have been observed in experiments (see, e.g., Kwei and 
Zupko, 1969; Baird et aI., 1971; Thomas and Windle, 1977, 1978a, 1978b; 
Hopfenberg and Hsu, 1978; Franson and Peppas, 1983); nevertheless, the sharpness 
of the front varies. The interface between the two regions moves inwards into the 
glassy polymer as additional polymer undergoes relaxation. This change in the 
polymer's state occurs after a threshold value of the penetrant activity is reached, 
and the swelling is essentially localized at the moving interface (Astarita and Sarti, 
1978; Thomas and Windle, 1978 b; Gostoli and Sarti, 1982). 
A useful classification scheme for the diffusion and sorption associated with poly-
mers has been proposed (Alfrey, 1965; Alfrey et aI., 1966; Frisch, 1980). Three basic 
classes of behavior have been established: case I, case II, and anomalous transport. 
Case I, or Fickian diffusion behavior, is observed when the rate of transport or 
diffusion of the penetrant is much less than that of the relaxation process. A sorption 
equilibrium at the exposed surface of the polymer is rapidly established leading to 
time independent boundary conditions exhibiting no dependence on swelling kinetics 
(Frisch, 1980). The kinetics of this phenomenon can be characterized by a single 
parameter -
the (concentration-dependent) diffusivity; if the phenomenon is 
accompanied by volume expansion, an additional parameter, namely the equilibrium 
swelling factor, must be considered (Alfrey et aI., 1966). An ideal Fickian 
sorption phenomenon leads to a smooth and continuous concentration profile 
in the film; however, sharp advancing boundaries separating a glassy core from tJ;1e 
gel region have been observed for Fickian diffusion with a strongly concentration-
dependent diffusivity (Crank, 1951; Hopfenberg, 1970). 
Case II transport is the other extreme type of behavior; diffusion of the penetrant 
112 

4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
through the gel region is very rapid compared with the relaxation process at the 
gel-glassy polymer interface. The interface marks the innermost limit of penetration 
or dispersal of the penetrant at any moment (Frisch, 1980). The glassy region contains 
almost no penetrant while the diffusivity of penetrant in the gel region is high. 
Therefore, the penetrant concentration profile in the system has a distinct shape; 
it is flat and equal to zero in the glassy core, and flat and equal to the level 
in equilibrium with the external medium in the gel region (Frisch et aI., 1969; 
Thomas and Windle, 1978b; Yilmaz et aI., 1983; Windle, 1985). The interface 
in the case II transport system advances at a constant characteristic velocity, while 
the gel behind the interface is essentially in an equilibrium state (Alfrey et aI., 1966; 
Hopfenberg, 1970). An example of case II transport is illustrated in Fig. 4.2 for 
n-hexane sorption in polystyrene (Hopfenberg et aI., 1975). 
At the end of case II transport, a rapid increase in the penetrant sorption 
rate may sometimes be observed. In this situation, case II transport is said to have 
-.: 
G> e 
>. 
0 
Q. 
>. 
1 5 
... .., 
.... Ie 
'" 
e 
~ 
t\J 
0 
X 
.., 
10 
G> 
..0 ... 
0 ., 
..0 
C -
c: 
c ... -
G> 
100 % Po I ystyrene 
c: 
G> 
5 
Q. 
.... 
0 
Unannealed 
0 .... 
• Annealed 2 hours 
c: 
" 
0 
Do Annealed 24 hours 
e 
« 
o 
20 
40 
60 
Time (minI 
Fig. 4.2. Sorption of n-hexane vapors into annealed and unannealed films of 100 % poly-
styrene at 40°C and 0.98 activity (ratio of n-hexane partial pressure to equilibrium partial 
pressure), showing case II behavior; the films were annealed at 20°C above their glass 
transition temperature (Hopfenberg et aI., 1975) 
113 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
3.0 
-;;, 
2.0 
E 
.", 
CD 
1 .0 
.0 ... 
0 
0.8 
en 
.0 
" 
0.6 
.-c 
" 
... 
0.4 
.-
CD c 
CD a. -
0 
0.2 
-
c 
:> 
0 
E 
« 
0.1 
1 0 
50 
100 
Time (hours) 
1 00% Polystyrene 
Penetrant activity = 0.775 
500 1000 
5000 
Fig. 4.3. Logarithmic plot of the kinetics of n-hexane sorption into polystyrene films 
showing evolution of case II into super case II transport (Jacques et a!., 1974) 
evolved into super case II transport; it is attributed to the expansion forces exerted 
by the swollen gel on the glassy core (Peterlin, 1979). Jacques et aI. (1974), however, 
attribute this evolution to slow case II interface velocity, which allows a Fickian tail to 
develop ahead of the interface. Acceleration of the sorption process is initiated when 
the Fickian tails advancing from both sides of the film meet at the film midplane. 
In Fig. 4.3, the evolution of case II into super case II transport can be seen from the 
logarithmic plot of the kinetics of n-hexane sorption in polystyrene (Jacques et aI., 
1974). 
The last category of transport behavior, termed anomalous transport, occurs when 
diffusion and relaxation rates in the polymer are comparable. Rearrangement of 
polymer chains, occurring slowly and simultaneously along with the diffusion process, 
gives rise to the time-dependent anomalous effects (Frisch, 1980). These effects can 
include: 
i. 
Pseudo-Fickian behavior in which the sorption curve shows an anomalously 
small initial linear region when plotted against the square-root of time, or 
resembles Fickian curves but does not scale according to film thickness. 
ll. Sigmoid behavior of the sorption curve when fractional sorption is plotted 
against the square-root of time. A simple inflection point is generally observed. 
Furthermore, the rate of desorption initially exceeds the rate of sorption; but it 
subsequently becomes slower and the curves intersect. 
iii. Two-stage sorption behavior in which, after an initial period of rapid uptake, 
the sorption curve approaches a quasi-equilibrium followed by a slow approach 
to final equilibrium. 
IV. Time-dependent exposed-surface concentration, related to the characteristic 
surface relaxation time. 
114 

4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
-c 
Q) 
.0 
.... o 
UI 
Q) 
-c 
...... 
-c 
Q) 
.0 
.... o 
UI 
1.0 
.0.8 
-g 
0.4 
c o -
u c .... 
IJ... 
0.0 
o 
Desorpt i on 
120 - Omm 
4 
o - 120mm 
8 
Square root of time (mln1R, 
12 
Fig. 4.4. Anomalous sorption and desorption behavior of acetone in cellulose acetate at 
30°C (Bagley and Long, 1955) 
Sorption and desorption of acetone in cellulose acetate at 30°C exhibit some of these 
features (Fig. 4.4) (Bagley and Long, 1955). 
The three types of behavior of polymer-penetrant systems can be distinguished 
in a rectangular slab geometry by the shape of the fractional sorption-time curves, 
given by (see, e.g., Frisch, 1980) 
where 
M, = amount of penetrant absorbed in the polymer by time t 
Moo = amount of penetrant absorbed at equilibrium, and 
kc' n = system parameters that depend on the mode of sorption. 
For case I diffusion, 
(4.1) 
n = 0.5, and kc is related to the diffusion coefficient, over the initial half of the 
sorption process. 
For case II transport, 
n = 1.0, and kc is directly proportional to the constant velocity of the gel-glassy 
polymer interface. 
Evolution of super case II transport from case II transport leads to 
n> 1.0. 
For anomalous transport, 
0.5 < n < 1.0, and kc reflects both the diffusional and relaxational processes. 
Apart from the above mentioned classes of behavior, an extreme form of case II 
transport involving stress cracking of the polymer during the sorption process is 
sometimes observed (see, e.g., Bernier and Kambour, 1968; Michaels et aI., 1968). 
115 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
This phenomenon, termed "solvent crazing", occurs because the outer gel layer is 
constrained by the inner glassy core. The glassy core (in a cylindrical sample) prevents 
the gel from swelling (axially) and puts a compressive stress on the gel and 
a tensile stress on the core. As the gel-glassy polymer interface moves inward, the 
tensile stress increases until the tensile strength of the glassy core is reached, 
at which point the core cracks (Alfrey, 1965). Studies of the temperature dependence 
of this process have revealed that crazing possibly occurs through both primary bond 
breakage and chain separation (Michaels et aI., 1968; Hopfenberg et aI., 1969). 
Craze networks, which consist of interconnected microvoids, appear to nucleate 
at the case II front and represent localized plastic instability in the polymer; 
their appearance in certain systems, e.g., n-alkane polystyrene, may be associated 
with the propensity of certain polymers to develop highly localized regimes of 
plastic flow such as shear bonds (Windle, 1985). 
For many polymer-penetrant pairs, all the above types of behavior can be 
observed by traversing a sufficiently wide range of temperature, penetrant activity, 
polymer molecular weight, and sample thickness (Hopfenberg et aI., 1969; Astarita 
and Joshi, 1978; Sfirakis and Rogers, 1981). In addition, the' thermomechanical 
history of the polymer also shows a significant effect on the sorption behavior 
(Hopfenberg et aI., 1975). Hopfenberg and Frisch (1969) have attempted to identify 
regions exhibiting various behavioral features of polymer-penetrant transport on 
a plot of temperature against penetrant activity, as shown in Fig. 4.5; the following 
features are revealed: 
i. 
Time-dependent anomalies and case II transport, including solvent crazing, are 
confined to regions of relatively high penetrant activities, with temperatures in the 
vicinity of and below the effective glass transition temperature of the system. 
a> 
L-
~ 
.... 
C 
L-
a> 
Q. 
E 
a> 
I-
Tg 
o 
116 
C"l 
o " 
n 
CD ? .., 
~ 
o 
:;J 
Concentration 
d ependen1 
diffusivity 
Penetrant activity 
1.0 
Fig. 4.5. Polymer-penetrant 
transport features in the va-
rious regions of tempera-
ture-penetrant 
activity 
plane; lines a, b, c, dare 
lines of constant activation 
energy (E) for case II trans-
port 
with 
E. > Eb > Ec 
> Ed 
(Hopfenberg 
and 
Frisch, 1969) 

4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
The effective Tg is represented by the dashed line extending through the anomalous 
diffusion region. 
ll. The region of case II transport is separated from the Fickian diffusion regions 
by a region where both relaxation and diffusion mechanisms are operative, 
thereby giving rise to diffusional anomalies. 
iii. The activation energy characterizing case II transport (from an Arrhenius piot of 
interface velocity as a function of temperature) decreases as the penetrant 
activity is reduced. 
iv. Concen.tration-independent diffusion coefficient is only apparent at very low 
temperatures and/or activities. 
Since the features of the transport behavior are strongly influenced by the molecular 
weight, composition, and orientation of the polymer, additional temperature-activity 
planes would be required for each independent variable of the polymer (for a given 
penetrant) (Hopfenberg, 1970). 
The various regions in the temperature-activity diagram (Fig. 4.5) can be distin-
guished by the ratio of two characteristic times (Vrentas et aI., 1975). This ratio, 
De, of the characteristic relaxation time for the polymer-penetrant system, A, and the 
characteristic diffusion time, e, is called the Deborah number 
A 
De =-. 
e 
(4.2) 
This number represents the relative importance of the rate of diffusion to that pf 
rearrangement of polymer chains in the diffusion process. The characteristic 
diffusion time is given by 
;j2 
e=-
D' 
c 
(4.3) 
where b is the characteristic dimension of the polymer sample, and Dc is a mutual 
diffusion coefficient defined as 
(4.4) 
Xl and x2 represent the mole fractions of the two components, penetrant (1) and 
polymer (2), respectively; Dr and Dt, the corresponding self-diffusion coefficients. 
The characteristic relaxation time is given by 
00 J sG(s) ds 
A = _0_
00-_-
(4.5) 
J G(s) ds 
o 
where G(s) is the shear relaxation modulus. The denominator in the equation 
represents the viscosity at zero shear rate (Vrentas et aI., 1975). 
The general characteristics of mass transport in a polymer-penetrant system can 
II7 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
"-
Zone III 
"-"-
De « I 
>-
"-
Fickian dif·fuslon 
-
> 
"-
-
"-
C) 
"-
co -
Zone II 
"-
c 
De .. Ot I ) 
"-
co ... 
\ 
-., 
\ 
c ., 
IL 
\ 
\ 
\ 
TE 
Tg 
Tv 
Temperature 
a 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Extreme 
I 
>-
anoma I ous 
I 
Anomalous 
Fickian 
> 
effects 
diffusion 
-
diffusion 
<> 
I 
c 
I 
r::: 
I 
c 
I 
L.. -
I 
., 
r::: 
I 
., 
IL 
Lines 
of constant 
De 
Fickien 
I 
I 
diffusion 
I 
0 
T 
Tg 
Tv 
E 
b 
Temperature 
Fig. 4.6. a Classification of polymer-penetrant transport features based on temperature, 
penetrant activity, and Deborah number (Vrentas et aI., 1975), b special from of temperature-
penetrant activity diagram based on Deborah number showing the various types of polymer-
penetrant behavior (Vrentas et aI., 1975) 
be represented in a temperature-activity diagram by lines of constant De, as 
shown in Fig. 4.6a. These lines can be drawn by calculating this dimensionless 
group as a function of temperature and composition for a given pressure, polymer 
molecular weight, and sample thickness. For De ~ 1 (of the order of 10) in zone I, 
the characteristic relaxation time is considerably larger than the characteristic 
118 

4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
diffusion time; effectively, no variation occurs in the polymer structure. The penetrant 
diffuses into an essentially elastic material by a vacancy mechanism; nevertheless, 
the process can be analyzed by the Fickian equation with a diffusion coefficient 
independent of concentration. 
Conversely, in zone III where De ~ 1 (of the order of 0.1), the relaxation process 
is very rapid and appears to take place instantaneously. The penetrant molecules, 
therefore, diffuse in a purely viscous binary mixture (of polymer and penetrant) 
constituting the gel. This diffusion process is classically Fickian and the diffuion 
coefficient is a function of the concentration of penetrant/polymer. 
For a Deborah number of the order of 1 (between 0.1 and 10) in zone II, 
the rearrangement of polymer chains takes place slowly. The penetrant molecules, 
therefore, diffuse in a viscoelastic binary mixture. The relaxation process influences 
the diffusive process, leading to anomalous transport (Vrentas et aI., 1975). 
The Deborah number is dependent, amongst other factors, on the concentration 
of penetrant (Vrentas et aI., 1975). Since each element of the polymer sample can 
experience a range of concentrations during a sorption process, the Deborah number 
can differ from point to point and with time. The utility of a single value 
of this number for any system, therefore, may be limited. However, if the 
concentration change during the diffusion process is small, the value of De, calculated 
based on the average concentration of the polymer-penetrant mixture can indicate 
the general character of the transport process. This can be useful in screening 
polymers for designing specific delivery systems. 
The changing value of the Deborah number also provides an indication of the 
presence of phenomenon such as case II transport. If this number changes 
from a large initial value to a small final value, the permeated part of the 
sample will behave like a viscous substance while the rest will behave like an elastic 
material. Thus, case II transport is observed when the diffusion in the viscous part of 
the sample (low De) is much faster than the polymer relaxation process (high De) 
at the interface between the viscous and elastic regions (Vrentas et aI., 1975). 
When utilizing the Deborah number, special forms of the temperature-activity 
diagrams need be drawn to include effects such as case II transport and solvent 
crazing. One such diagram is illustrated in Fig. 4.6 b. Other diagrams can be drawn 
between sample thickness and temperature with lines of constant De delineating the 
regions of different types of transport (Vrentas et aI., 1975). A good estimate of the 
size of polymer sample needed to observe a specific feature can thus be obtained. 
A procedure for constructing the Deborah number diagram has been demonstrated 
(Vrentas et aI., 1977), and values of the Deborah number have been calculated for 
a poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate-co-methyl methacrylate)-water system (David-
son and Peppas, 1986a, 1986b). 
The phenomenon of transport in polymers and the accompanying structural 
changes have been extensively covered in the literature, e.g., Hopfenberg and 
Frisch (1969), an overview of behavioral features of a polymer-penetrant system as 
functions of polymer activity and temperature; Rebenfeld et al. (1976), a review of the 
polymer-penetrant interactions incorporating the diffusion phenomena, the control-
ling thermodynamic relationships, and the structural arrangements and mechanical 
behavior; Vieth et al. (1976), a review of dual-mode sorption theory; Frisch (1980), 
an overview of transport behavior in polymers and a review and classification of 
119 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
various theoretical models; Astarita and Nicolais (1983), a summary and review of 
the physics and mathematics of mass (and heat) transfer indu_ced structural changes in 
polymeric materials and the kinetics thereof; Nagy (1985), a review ofphenomenolo-
gical and molecular aspects of swelling and mechanical behavior of swollen polymer 
gels; Windle (1985), a review of the various aspects of case II transport and of the 
theoretical models to describe this phenomenon. 
4.1 .. 2 Models for Transport of Penetrants in Glassy Polymers 
A number of models, employing a variety of physicochemical principles, have been 
suggested to explain some or all the features of the transport process described in the 
preceding section. Among the earliest attempts is that of Crank (1953), involving the 
utilization of history-dependent diffusion coefficients. He has suggested that the 
relaxation of polymer chains occurs in two parts: an instantaneous jump reflecting 
a change in the concentration, and a slow drift towards an equilibrium value 
occurring even when the concentration remains invariant. On the basis of this 
assumption and adopting a first-order approach to equilibrium, the total change in 
the diffusion coefficient, Dc' is given by (Crank, 1953) 
(4.6) 
where Dei is the part of Dc that can change instantaneously and is a function of the 
concentration only. Dee is the equilibrium diffusion coefficient, and Ct. is a concentra-
tion-dependent relaxation parameter controlling the approach to equilibrium. 
Dei' Dee' and Ct. are related to the penetrant concentration, Ce, by the expressions 
and 
Dei = DcO exp (aC) 
Dee = DcO exp (bC) 
Ct. = 
Ct.o exp (o-C) 
(4.7 a) 
(4.7 b) 
(4.7 c) 
where Deo, Ct.o, a, band 0- are constants. Solutions of the Fickian diffusion equation 
with the diffusion coefficient given by Eqs. (4.6) and (4.7) could adequately predict 
sorption-desorption curves exhibiting sigmoid and pseudo-Fickian behavior. Experi-
mental results for the methylene chloride-polystyrene system at 25°C have been 
adequately described by this approach (Crank, 1953). 
Another approach was employed by Wang et al. (1969) who modified the Fickian 
diffusion equation by including a convective contribution due to "partial stress" 
of the penetrant. From a consideration of the thermodynamics of irreversible processes, 
the following expression has been obtained for the flux of penetrant in one-
dimension; 
J = -BCe [(all) _ ~ (asxx )] 
ax 
T 
Ce 
ax 
(4.8) 
120 

4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
where B is a mobility coefficient, Il the chemical potential, and Sxx is one component 
of the partial stress tensor of the penetrant. An assumption that sxx is proportional 
to the total uptake of penetrant such that 
x 
sx..(x) = S f Ce(x', t) dx' 
o 
(4.9) 
leads to a generalized diffusion equation 
(4.10) 
where S is a constant. For a constant B, this equation reduces to 
aCe = ~ (D aCe _ VC) 
at 
ax 
e ax 
e 
(4.11) 
where v (= BS) is interpreted as the convective velocity of the penetrant arising as 
a direct consequence of the internal stress (Frisch et aI., 1969; Kwei and Zupko, 
1969). Consequently, it represents a pseudo-convective contribution to the transport 
process. When the stress gradient dominates the process, i.e., 
the differential equation describes the case II mechanism with v as the velocity of the 
gel-glassy polymer interface, also known as the case II velocity. 
A linear form of Eq. (4.11), with constant D and v, has been solved along with the 
approximation that the interface moves according to the relation 
(4.12) 
where k is a constant. The model successfully describes the time dependence of the 
penetration data for trichloroethylene and methyl ethyl ketone in an epoxy polymer 
(Kwei and Zupko, 1969), and the sorption-desorption of acetone in poly(vinyl 
chloride) (Kwei et aI., 1972; Wang and Kwei, 1973). 
In an attempt to account for the internal stresses generated from the differential 
swelling of the outer gel layer on the inner glassy core, Crank (1953) has assumed 
that only the diffusion coefficient is affected and not the surface concentration or 
internal solubility. Diffusion coefficients in the two regions are related to the changes 
in areas of the two regions and simplified to an effective diffusion coefficient that is 
a product of a function of the concentration and a function of time. Solution of the 
Fickian equation with this diffusion coefficient reproduces an experimental (sigmoid) 
sorption curve for methylene chloride in polystyrene, and the change in area with 
time. However, it fails to explain the absence of (M/IM cxJ versus (t 1/215- 1) 
scaling. 
Peterlin (1979) has attempted to explain the case II behavior by postulating the 
121 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
existence of a constant interface velocity, v. A Fickian tail is assumed to extend 
into the glassy polymer ahead of the front, while the concentration gradient in the 
gel region is considered negligible because of the high diffusivity of the penetrant in 
the gel region. The Fickian diffusion equation, therefore, has been solved for the glassy 
region with the interface position being given by the relation, 
x = 1 -
vt. 
(4.13) 
The diffusion process is completed when this boundary reaches the center of 
the polymer. Peterlin (1979) has presented his simulation results for transport 
into spheres and films in terms of the concentration profiles and weight gain, both 
of which are functions of time. 
A phenomenological model for the kinematics of polymer swelling and dissolution 
has been presented by Tu (1977) and Tu and Ouano (1977). They have regarded these 
phenomena as constituting a multiphase Stefan problem with a glassy polymer, 
a gel, and a liquid solution region wherein the dissolved polymer molecules are 
carried away. The penetrant at the gel-liquid interface is characterized by a dissociation 
concentration while its concentration at the gel-glassy polymer interface is given by the 
critical concentration level required for the transition to occur. The position of the 
gel-glassy polymer interface is determined implicitly within the problem. Analytic 
small time solutions have been obtained along with a complete numerical integration 
of this boundary value problem. For small times, the two interfaces move as 
t1/2 • At large times, the gel-glassy polymer interface is found to move at a constant 
rate, explicity determined in terms of the dissociation rate at the surface. The 
model has been found to be able to predict the experimentally measured boundary 
positions with time for a polystyrene-methyl ethyl ketone system (Tu and Ouano, 
1977). No instantaneous case II transport is predicted by this model due to the 
existence of an initial period during which the gel-glassy polymer interface moves 
as t 1/2 • 
A general version of the history-dependence model of Crank (1953) has been 
presented by Cohen (1983, 1984) and Cohen and Stanley (1983). The model explicity 
incorporates the finite relaxation time of a glassy polymer in response to changing 
conditions. The mass conservation equation is written in terms of the dual-sorption 
model, leading to a generalized form in one-dimension as 
(4.14) 
where 
, 
Dc = f K[(t, s, Cc(x, s)] f[Cc(x, s), Cc'(x, s)] ds . 
(4.15) 
o 
R(·) represents a generalized kinetics for the dual-mode sorption process for the 
change from a dry polymer to a fully saturated one, i.e., for all the complex 
processes leading to 
site + molecule ~ site-molecule complex. 
122 

4.1 Penetrant Transport and the Polymer Relaxation Phenomena 
KO is any appropriate delay-kernel representing the history dependence implied 
by the finite relaxation times; a rapid response can be represented by taking the 
kernel as the Dirac function. The model can be reduced to describe several 
phenomena including dual-mode, sigmoid, and strain-dependent sorption. The 
rationale for the choice of kernel, K, and function, f, in various situations has been 
discussed (Cohen, 1983). 
Apart from those discussed above, models attempting to describe certain specific 
features of non-Fickian transport in polymers include, among others: 
the time-dependent surface concentration model of Long and Richman (1960); 
the irreversible thermodynamical models of Frisch (1962) and Neogi (1983); 
the dual-mode sorption model of Vieth and Sladek (1965), Vieth et al. (1976) 
and Ahn et al. (1985); 
the infinitesimal elasticity theory of Alfrey et al. (1966); 
the diffusion-relaxation model of Berens and Hopfenberg (1978); 
the "degrees-of-swelling" model of Joshi and Astarita (1979); 
the moving boundary models of Peppas and Sinclair (1983), Tosun and Yilmaz 
(1982) and Yilmaz et al. (1983); and 
the moving boundary with n-th order relaxation kinetics model of Astarita and 
Sarti (1978) and Astarita and Joshi (1978). 
Models have also been proposed to explain a wide range of polymer-penetrant 
behavior. Some of these models are discussed below. 
The stress-relaxation and history-dependence models of Crank (1953) have been 
combined by Petropoulos and Roussis (1978) to yield a model capable of 
predicting sorption behavior ranging from the Fickian through case II transport to 
super case II transport. The polymer is considered as a linear viscoelastic me-
dium, capable of expanding in the radial direction but constrained in the transverse 
direction, thereby creating a transverse differential swelling stress, f This stress 
influences the diffusion coefficient given by 
(4.16) 
with k2 and k3 being constants. The local transverse stress,f, at any position is a func-
tion of the diffusion and relaxation processes and obtained from analysis of an equi-
valent mechanical model consisting of a Maxwell element in parallel with a spring. The 
mass balance equation (Fickian diffusion equation in polymer-fixed coordinates) 
is solved numerically, along with the force balance equation, to determine sorption-
time curves as well as the distribution of penetrant and transverse swelling stress in 
the polymer. The sorption curves display a marked deviation from the Fickian 
behavior as the effect of stress is increased. They acquire a quasi-linear (case II) 
middle portion, extending upwards concavely (super case II). The super case II 
transport arises from a strong acceleration of the diffusion process during the later 
stages of sorption; this, in turn, results from the more uniform distribution of 
penetrant at this stage, and a consequent reduction of the compressive stresses 
(Petropoulos and Roussis, 1978). The ideal case II behavior, starting from time zero 
is not predicted, however. The concentration-dependence of the diffusion coefficient 
enables a prediction of the formation of the front; in contrast, its rate of propagation 
is determined by the stress-relaxation term. 
123 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
In an extension of their group's work, Gostoli and Sarti (1982) have modeled the 
transport phenomenon as a diffusion problem with a moving interface. The rate of 
movement of the interface is related to the stress exerted on this interface by the 
penetrant, which is considered as the sum of the osmotic tension and the differential 
swelling stress. Consequently, the front velocity is given by 
(4.17) 
where 7r is the osmotic tension, 
(Jg the differential sweliing stress, and 
(Je is 
a threshold uniaxial tensile stress. K is a kinetic constant while the constants a and b 
account for the fact that 7r is isotropic while (J 9 is biaxial. The Fickian diffusion 
equation has been solved numerically for the gel region with Eq. (4.17) and a boundary 
condition representing flux balance at the interface. The diffusive tail in the glassy 
core is neglected. A range of behavior including Fickian diffusion, case II, and 
super case II transport is predicted. The case II transport arises when the process 
is governed by osmotic stress only. When the differential swelling stress becomes 
relevant, an acceleration effect is observed prior to saturation. This effect leads to 
super case II transport for high values of the Deborah number of the gel layer. 
The model of Gostoli and Sarti (1982) assumes, a priori, the existence of the gel-
glassy polymer front and then attempts to generate a suitable constitutive equation 
for the front velocity whereas Thomas and Windle (1982) have formulated a model 
to predict the formation of this front. Thomas and Windle (1982) consider the 
kinetics of swelling as being controlled by the mechanical viscous resistance of the 
polymer against an increase in its volume and a change in its shape in response to the 
osmotic pressure. Transport is considered to occur by diffusion down an activity 
gradient, and is coupled to the time-dependent mechanical deformation of the glassy 
polymer in response to the swelling stress. Thus, the two basic parameters in the 
theory are the diffusion coefficient within the glassy polymer and its flow viscosity; 
the viscosity is assumed to decrease exponentially with penetrant concentration. 
The model involves the numerical solution of a Fickian equation and a parallel 
equation for the concentration variable in terms of the mechanical response to 
swelling. A complete· range of anomalous behavior between Fickian and case II 
extremes is described. The existence and nature of a moving front are determined by 
the magnitude of deformation resistance. The higher the resistance (or the steeper 
the dependence of viscosity on penetrant concentration), the sharper the front and the 
smaller the Fickian tail ahead of the front. The model is versatile, but cumbersome 
to compute. 
It is evident from the preceding review that various approaches, from the 
simple to the complicated, have been adopted to model the phenomenon of transport 
of a penetrant in a glassy polymer. Petropoulos and Roussis (1974) have 
reviewed some of the early modeling efforts; Windle (1985) has examined the 
various aspects of osmotic pressure theories, while Frisch (1980) has compared 
a number of these models and suggested possible directions for further theoretical 
and experimental efforts. 
124 

4.2 Active Agent Release from Swellable Polymers 
4.2 Active Agent Release from Swellable Polymers 
Release of an active agent from a polymer undergoing macromolecular relaxation 
induced by the sorption of a thermodynamically active penetrant, is influenced QY the 
relaxation process as well as the countercurrent transport of the penetrant. Swelling-
controlled devices can be produced by dissolving or dispersing the active agent in 
a polymer solution. The solvent can then be evaporated to produce a glassy polymeric 
matrix (Hopfenberg and Hsu, 1978). The active agent can also be loaded (dis-
solved) into a (copolymerized) polymer sample in the gel state by soaking the gel 
in a solution containing the active agent and allowing the two to equilibrate. 
After loading, the penetrant in the polymeric gel can be evaporated, thereby leaving 
a penetrant-free glassy polymeric matrix loaded with the active agent (Lee, 1984a). 
Other devices may be formed by compressing particles of the solvent-free polymer 
and the active agent, thus producing a porous matrix (Lapidus and Lordi, 1968; 
Bamba et aI., 1979; Korsmeyer et aI., 1983). The active agent is almost immobile in 
the glassy polymer; however, it is able to diffuse out as the glassy polymer is 
converted into the gel. In porous matrices formed by compression, diffusion through 
the gel is accompanied by diffusion through the penetrant-filled pores. 
Among the first investigations of active agent release from swellable polymers was 
that reported by Lapidus and Lordi (1968). They compressed four candidate drugs with 
hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose ether powder to produce hydrophilic matrices that 
undergo swelling upon hydration. This matrix is able to resist erosion by attrition of 
the gel layer. The release rate has been found to be a function of the square-root 
of time, indicating that, effectively, it was diffusion controlled. One of the first 
examples of the true swelling-controlled release system has been formulated from 
poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) hydrogels crosslinked with tetraethyleneglycol 
dimethacrylate and containing tripelennamine-hydrochloride (Good, 1978). A signifi-
1.0 
... 
CD ... 
'" 
CD 
0.8 
CD ... -
c 
CD 
0.6 
"" '" 
CD > -
0.4 
0 
'" -
0 
c 
0.2 
0 -
0 
'" ... 
0.0 
LL 
0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Loading 12.54% w/w 
o 0.0699 em 
• 0.1344 em 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Time (hoursl 
10 
Fig. 4.7. Release of tripelennamine-HCl from poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) sheets of 
various thicknesses immersed in 0.007 N HCl at 37°C (Good, 1978) 
125 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
9 
•• 20° C 
C\J 
8 
60 25° C 
0 
7 
x 
"'" ., 
6 
'" 
c ., ., c; 5 
L 
., 
..... 
L. 
C 
C 
., E 4 
"" 
c ., ... -
> 'E 3 
..... 
u 
u 
"" 
c -
E 
0 
2 
..... 
c 
'" 
0 
E 
4 
0 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Time (hours) 
Fig. 4.8. Release of Sudan Red IV dye from polystyrene films immersed in n-hexane (Hopfen-
berg and Hsu, 1978) 
cant portion of the release data is linear with time, indicating that release in this 
period is not governed by diffusion but by the rate of gelatinization (Fig. 4.7). 
The capability of swelling-controlled release devices to produce zero-order release 
rates has been well demonstrated for release of Sudan Red IV dye from polystyrene 
(Hopfenberg and Hsu, 1978). The matrices are prepared by dissolution of dye and 
polymer in a solution, homogenization, and evaporation of the solvent, trichloro-
ethylene. Constant release rates of the dye are obtained from various film thicknesses 
and loading (Fig. 4.8) when these devices are immersed in n-hexane. The diffusivity 
of dye in the gel layer is very high compared to that in the glassy polymer, and the 
rate of diffusion in the gel faster than the rate of movement of the gel-glassy 
polymer interface. Transport of n-hexane in polystyrene shows simple case II 
behavior unaffected by the presence of the dye. The latter part of some release 
curves in Fig. 4.8 reveals acceleration of the release. This is a consequence of the 
evolution of case II transport (of n-hexane) into super case II transport, thereby 
increasing the rate of gelatinization and consequently the rate of release of the dye. 
Release of the active agent from swellable polymers as a function of time can also 
be expressed in the form analogous to Eq. (4.1) 
(4.18) 
where 
M t 
= amount of active agent released by time t 
126 

4.2 Active Agent Release from Swellable Polymers 
Moo = amount of active agent released at infinite time, theoretically corresponding 
to the total amount of active agent incorporated into the matrix, and 
ka' n = system parameters that depend on the nature of the polymer/penetrant/ 
active agent interaction. 
The parameter n can take a range of values, which indicate the type of active agent 
transport occurring in the matrix. The values of n and the corresponding release 
mechanisms are (Peppas, 1984) 
n = 0.5 ; 
Fickian diffusion 
n = 1.0 ; 
Pseudo-case II transport 
n > 1.0 ; 
Pseudo-super-case II transport 
0.5 < n < 1.0 ; 
Anomalous transport 
Thus, the results of Lapidus and Lordi (1968) correspond to Fickian release, 
those of Good (1978) to release by an anomalous transport mechanism, and those 
of Hopfenberg and Hsu (1978) to the pseudo-case II mechanism. The latter parts 
of some release curves in Fig. 4.8 correspond to the pseudo-super-case II release 
mechanism. 
When the active agent is effectively mobile only in the gel region, its rate of release 
is governed by the rate of gel formation and its diffusivity in the gel. The relative rate 
of gel formation and active agent mobility are characterized by a Pec1et-type 
dimensionless group, called the swelling interface number, defined as (Hopfenberg 
et al.: 1981; Korsmeyer and Peppas, 1981, 1983) 
v'bit) 
Sw=--
Dga 
(4.19) 
where v' is the velocity of the gel-glassy polymer interface, D ga the diffusivity of active 
agent in the gel, and bit) the time-dependent thickness of the gel region. 
When the rate of active agent transport through the gel region is higher than that 
of movement of the gel-glassy polymer interface, we have Sw ~ 1; this corresponds 
to a pseudo-case II active agent transport mechanism. The release rate is then 
independent of time, if v' is a constant (case II). Sw ~ 1 represents the situation where 
the interface advances at a rate higher than the active agent transport rate in the gel. 
Diffusion, Fickian in nature, then occurs through a "quasi-equilibrium" swollen gel. 
For Sw ~ 1, anomalous transport of the active agent is observed (Korsmeyer and 
Peppas, 1983). The swelling interface number must be utilized, however, in combina-
tion with the Deborah number [Eq. (4.2)] to assess the nature of the release 
mechanism from a particular polymer/penetrant/active agent combination (Davidson 
and Peppas, 1986a, 1986b). 
Among the polymers being examined for utilization in swelling-controlled release 
matrices are hydro gels, especially those based on the methacrylate group. Reviews 
of some of these hydrogels and their properties relevant to pharmaceutical application 
are available (Graham and McNeill, 1984; Roorda et al. 1986a; Baker, 1987). 
A series of studies has been made by Peppas and his coworkers on a variety of 
hydrogel and other polymeric systems to assess their performance for controlled 
active agent release (see, e.g., Franson and Peppas, 1983; Peppas and Franson, 1983; 
Korsmeyer and Peppas, 1984; Davidson and Peppas, 1986a, 1986b; Segot-Chicq 
and Peppas, 1986; Urdahl and Peppas, 1987). Korsmeyer and Peppas (1984) reported 
127 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
1 .00 .....--------------------, 
0.80 
.., ., 
III 
0 
0.60 
., ., 
L. 
.... 
C ., 
0> 
0 ., 
0.40 
> 
.... 
u 
HEMA mo I e tract i on 
0 ..-
006\ 0.446 
0 
c 
0.20 
~. \ 
0.707 
0 
.... 
u 
0 
L. 
lL 
0.0 ~--~---~---~--~--~ 
o 
60 
120 
180 
240 
300 
Time 1m i nutes) 
Fig. 4.9. Release of theophylline from poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate-co-N, vinyl pyrrolidone) 
copolymers of varying thicknesses immersed in water at 37 °C (Korsmeyer and Peppas, 
1984) 
that matrices of poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate-co-N, vinyl pyrrolidone) 
[P(HEMA-co-NVP)] exhibit a quasi-zero-order release of theophylline, with the rate 
dependent on the copolymer composition (Fig. 4.9). In an interesting study, Lee 
(1 984a, 1984 b) utilized non-uniform initial active agent distributions to obtain 
zero-order release from crosslinked poly(HEMA) matrices. The theoretical profiles 
illustrating the effect of initial active agent concentration distribution on the 
characteristics of release from spherical matrices are demonstrated in Fig. 4.10. 
A novel approach to the utilization of swellable polymers to achieve zero-order 
release has been reported (Roorda et aI., 1986b). The device does not belong to the 
category of conventional swelling-controlled release systems, but resorts to the solvent 
crazing and rupture phenomena in hydrogels to obtain zero-order release. The 
investigators immobilized oxprenolol-HCl in cross-linked poly(HEMA) matrices. 
On immersion in water, the glass-to-gel transition is initiated' and the device 
begins to rupture. Rupturing increases the surface area available for release, thus 
counteracting the effect of increasing distance of diffusion and leading to near 
zero-order release over certain portions of the release period. The rupture formation 
is a function of the contents of the crosslink and active agent, providing a method 
to manipulate the extent of rupturing and, thus, the release rate. While Roorda et al. 
(l986b) reported good reproducibility, the sensitivity and the extreme nature of the 
phenomenon utilized in this approach could limit its applicability. 
128 

4.2 Active Agent Release from Swellable Polymers 
Concentrat ion 
distribution 
Cumulative 
release 
Release 
rate 
cas~ 1tL----
dM b 
C 
-
~t 
-'-t~ 
a 
M.. 
dt 
o 
o 
~ 
R 
o 
t 
t 
Fig. 4.10. Theoretical profiles illustrating the effect of initial active agent distribution on the 
character of release from spherical matrices (Lee, 1984b) 
An important aspect of the active agent's release is its diffusivity in the polymeric 
gel. The free-volume theory was first applied to its analysis by Yasuda et al. 
(1964, 1969) and Yasuda and Lamaze (1971). The 'active agent (solute) in a gel 
diffuses through the continuous (liquid) phase constituting the gel, with the polymer 
chains serving as a sieve or screen. The ratio of diffusivity of active agent in the 
swollen (hydrated) polymer membrane, Dga, to that in the pure liquid penetrant 
(water) D'a is given as 
Dga = I/t(qa) exp [- B (~) (~- I)J 
D'a 
Vf, 
H 
(4.20) 
where VJ , is the free volume of pure liquid (water), H is the degree of swelling 
(hydration), and B is a porportionality factor between the cross-section, q, and 
the characteristic volu'me of the hole required for movement of the active C agent 
molecule. l/t(qJ represents the "sieve mechanism" by which small molecules are 
permitted to diffuse and larger molecules are not, owing to the absence of holes of 
appropriate size in the networks. Thus, I/t(qa) represents the probability of finding 
a hole of size qa or greater; various distributions can be adopted to determine this 
probability (Yasuda et a!., 1969). An increase in the size of the active agent leads to 
a rapid decrease in the diffusivity. 
129 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
The free-volume theory of Yasuda and his coworkers (1969, 1971) has been 
extended to include the effect of crosslinks and number-average molecular weight 
between crosslinks in determining the size of the mesh or sieve opening (Peppas and 
Reinhart, 1983; Reinhart and Peppas, 1984); the resultant expression is 
-
-* 
z 
Dga=k Mx-Mx ex (-rakz) 
Dla 
I M -
M~ P Q - 1 
(4.21) 
where 
£1 x 
= number-average molecular weight between crosslinks, 
£1 
= number-average molecular weight for the original polymer before cross-
linking, 
£1: 
= value of £1x below which the active agent does not diffuse, 
ra 
= characteristic radius of the active agent, 
Q 
= swelling ratio, given as the reciprocal of the polymer volume fraction in the 
swollen gel, and 
kl' kz = characteristic constants of the system. 
A slightly modified expression has been provided for "moderately" swollen networks 
(Peppas and Moynihan, 1985) 
Dga 
[kzr;~ ] 
-D-
Ia = kl~ exp -
-M-Z-(Q-_-I) 
(4.22) 
where ~ is the mesh size representing the space between four tetrafunctional 
crosslinks or four entanglements in the membrane. 
An experimental study to identify factors influencing the diffusivity of active agent 
in a swollen membrane has been reported (Paul et aI., 1976). An overview of the 
theories of active agent transport in polymeric membranes, including the influence of 
polymer structure on it, has been provided by Peppas and Meadows (1983). 
4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
For convenience, the available models for swelling-controlled systems are classified 
here into one-region and two-region models. A one-region model visualizes the 
polymer as a single phase with two species being transported in it. A two-region 
model portrays the polymer as consisting of distinct gel and glassy regions, the 
diffusivities of the two species being different in each region. The principal 
features of various important models are summarized in Table 4.1. The majority 
of the models consider the transport of both the penetrant and active agent 
as being governed by the Fickian diffusion process. Thus, the general governing 
equations of these models are of the form 
ac. 
-' = V . (D VC) 
at 
' 
(4.23) 
130 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
4.3.1 One-Region Models 
A polymer matrix immersed in a well-stirred infinite medium has been analyzed by 
resorting to the so-called refined heat balance method (Lee, 1981). By assuming that 
diffusion of the penetrant obeys the Fick's law in one dimension, and that 
a linear relationship exists between the change in dimensions of the matrix and the 
extent of penetrant uptake, the position of the moving polymer-medium interface 
is defined by 
S(t) = b/2 + Lt1/2 
(4.24) 
Table 4.1. Swelling-controlled devices 
Controlling 
System description 
Model description and 
Reference 
resistances 
solution type 
Fickian 
Infinite well agitated 
Semi-infinite slab 
Frisch (1978) 
diffusion of 
sink, dissolved active 
no volume change, single 
penetrant 
agent 
polymeric region 
(CoO ~ C ... ) 
diffusivities functions 
of concentration (free 
volume relationships), 
analytic 
Infinite unagitated 
Semi-infinite slab 
Rudolph (1979) 
sink, dissolved active 
no volume change, 
Rudolph (1980) 
agent (CoO ~ C ... ) 
distinct gel-polymer 
regions, analytic; with 
volume change, analytic 
Infinite well-agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Peppas et al. (1980) 
sink, dissolved active 
one face exposed, 
agent (CoO ~ Cas) 
changing volume, 
distinct gel-polymer 
regions, analytic 
Infinite well-agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Wang et al. (1980) 
sink, dissolved active 
one face exposed, 
agent (CoO ~ C ... ) 
changing volume, single 
polymeric region, 
numerical, analytic for 
early part of release 
Infinite well-agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Lee (1981) 
sink, dispersed active 
changing volume, distinct 
agent (CoO> Cas) 
gel-polymer regions, 
approximate analytic 
Infinite well-agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Vrentas et al. (1985) 
sink, dissolved active 
one face impermeable, 
agent (CoO ~ C ... ) 
changing volume, single 
region, diffusivities from 
free volume theory, 
numerical 
Infinite weIl-agitated 
Rectangular geometry 
Korsmeyer et al. 
sink, dissolved active 
changing volume, single 
(1986a) 
agent (CoO ~ Cas) 
region, diffusivities 
functions of concentration 
131 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
Table 4.1 (continued) 
Controlling 
resistances 
Anomalous 
diffusion 
Fickian 
diffusion 
of penetrant 
System description 
Infinite well-agitated 
sink, dissolved active 
agent (CoO ~ C,,.) 
Infinite well-agitated 
sink, dissolved active 
agent (CoO ~ C..,) 
Model description and 
Reference 
solution type 
(free volume relationships), 
one-dimensional 
expansion followed by 
isotropic three-dimensional 
expansion, numerical 
Rectangular geometry, 
Singh and· Fan (1986) 
changing volume, two 
regions, diffusivity step 
function of penetrant 
concentration at critical 
gelatinization 
concentration, 
instantaneous volumetric 
expansion: one-
dimensional followed by 
isotropic three-
dimensional, convective 
drift created by stress, 
reducible to Fickian and 
case II, numerical 
Rectangular geometry 
changing volume, two 
regions, diffusivities 
functions of penetrant 
concentration (free 
volume relationships), 
relaxation-controlled 
volumetric expansion: 
one-dimensional 
followed by isotropic 
three-dimensional, 
position of gel-glassy 
polymer interface based 
on mechanical 
equilibrium criterion, 
numerical 
Lustig and Peppas 
(1987) 
where (b/2) is the half thickness of the matrix, and L, a proportionality constant. 
The equation is obtained from the observation that the amount of penetrant 
absorbed into the polymer is proportional to t 1/2 when transport is governed by 
Fickian diffusion. A change in dimensions of the polymer is assumed to have no 
effect on the properties of the polymer, and thus separate regions are not 
defined. 
Transport of the active agent is also visualized as governed by the one-dimensional 
Fickian diffusion equation (Lee, 1981) 
oCa = !...- (D OCa ) 
at 
ax 
a ax 
(4.25) 
132 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
with the boundary conditions similar to those for a monolithic dispersed active agent 
system (CaO > Cas). Thus at the surface of the matrix, S(t), 
(4.26 a) 
and at the diffusion front, R(t), 
(4.26 b) 
and 
oCa I 
dR(t) 
Da a 
= (C aO - Cas) ----;tt 
X 
R(r) 
(4.26 c) 
where, Dais the diffusi'lity of the active agent in the matrix, C aO the initial 
active agent loading, and Cas the saturation solubility of the active agent in the 
polymer. Solution of these governing equations gives the fraction of active agent 
released to be a function of the square-root of time, i.e. (Lee, 1981), 
~ 
= [P(l- ~ Cas)_(_L )Jvr 
M co 
2 C aO 
2 vn:-
(4.27) 
where 
Cas 
3 
(4.28 a) 
and 
(4.28 b) 
An analysis of the migration of two species (water and monomer) in a plastic 
container wall has been presented by Wang et al. (1980). Results of this analysis 
may be adapted for modeling controlled release by taking water as the penetrant 
and the monomer as the active agent. The model thus describes a planar matrix 
without end effects, with transport of the penetrant into the matrix from the 
surfaces at x' = 0 and x' = L(r). The diffusion fluxes are described by constitutive 
equations for the classical Fickian diffusion. These are 
aYe = (De) o2Ye _ (Vb) aYe 
or 
Da OX'2 
Da ax' 
(4.29) 
133 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
and 
(4.30) 
where Ye and Yo are the mass fraction of penetrant and active agent in the matrix, 
respectively. V is the mass velocity defined by (Wang et aI., 1980) 
V = -
Do [~ + (~) ~J 
(j 
1 -
Yo - Ye 
x' = 0 
(4.31 ) 
and (j is the original thickness of the matrix. Absorption of the penetrant is 
assumed to swell the matrix in proportion to the amount absorbed. Thus the surface 
at x' = L(t) moves at a rate given by 
(4.32) 
The polymer properties, however, are assumed to be unchanged, and thus no internal 
fronts are considered. In the above equations 
x' = -: 
(j 
(4.33 a) 
and 
(4.33 b) 
The equilibrium at each surface of the matrix is characterized by a partItIon 
coefficient for each species. The sink at x' = 0 is considered to be finite and 
well stirred while that at x' = L to be infinite and well stirred. 
The two partial differential equations [(4.29) and (4.30)] have been solved 
by an implicit finite difference technique in conjunction with an iteration method since 
the equations are coupled. An analytic solution has also been presented for the 
early stages of transport by approximating the geometry of the system with 
a semi-infinite slab and considering the boundary condition at x' = 0 to be invariant 
(Wang et aI., 1980). 
Frisch (1978) has considered the simultaneous nonlinear Fickian diffusion of active 
agent and penetrant in a semi-infinite polymer slab. The polymer is assumed to be 
immersed in an infinite well-stirred medium and the volume change due to sorption 
of penetrant is assumed negligible. The two species migrate through purely diffusive 
mechanisms; thus the governing differential equations are 
aCe = ~ (D aCe) 
at 
ax 
e ax 
(4.34) 
134 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
and 
aCa = ~ (D aca). 
at 
ax 
a ax 
(4.35) 
These equations are coupled through the concentration dependence of Dc and Da' 
The expressions for Dc and Da' arising from a "Fujita-like" free-volume treatment 
are 
(4.36a) 
and 
(4.36b) 
Here Ce• is the equilibrium solubility of penetrant in polymer, while D~ and 
(J.D~ are the values of Dc and Da respectively, at x = 0 (Ce = Ce.). Analytic 
solutions for Eqs. (4.34) and (4.35) have been presented (Frisch, 1978) and the effect 
of various simplifications assessed. These include the absence of active agent 
concentration dependence in the diffusion coefficient, the absence of cross diffusion 
terms, and the assumption of well-stirred medium. Numerical simulation results of 
a model employing similar functional forms for diffusivities have also been given by 
Korsmeyer (1983). 
An analysis of a devolatilization scheme to enhance the removal of a volatile 
impurity from polymers has been presented by Vrentas et aI. (1985). The scheme 
involves the introduction of a second solvent (penetrant) into the polymer, thus 
loosening the polymer matrix and promoting more rapid transport of the contaminant 
molecules. By considering the contaminant as an active agent, the analysis can be 
extended to the modeling of controlled release in a polymer-penetrant system. 
The system analyzed consists of a flat polymer matrix (no end effects) with 
one surface impenneable to transport. Migration of the two species is purely 
(Fickian) diffusive; thus the governing differential equations are as given above, 
Eqs. (4.34) and (4.35). Equilibrium at the matrix-medium interface is assumed to be 
instantaneous. The volume-average velocity is taken to be zero everywhere in the 
matrix, and the thickness of the matrix changes in proportion to the amounts absorbed 
and desorbed. Thus, the rate of change of thickness is given by the jump mass 
balance at the interface 
(4.37) 
where Vi is the partial specific molar volume of component i and is taken to be 
equal to the specific molar volume of the pure component. Assuming that the 
concentrations of penetrant and active agent in the matrix are small, the diffusivities 
can be equated to the expressions for their self-diffusion coefficients obtained from 
the free-volume theory of transport (Vrentas et aI., 1985). 
135 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
The model has been simulated numerically and the effect of various parameters 
including the free-volume properties, studied. It is shown that addition of a faster 
diffusing penetrant (solvent) has a very pronounced effect on transport of the active 
agent (contaminant) through an increase in the free volume available in the system 
(Vrentas et aI., 1985). These results can be useful in controlled release since by 
an analysis of the (free volume) transport properties of the active agent, polymer, 
and fluid in the target medium, suitable combinations of polymer-active agent 
may be identified. 
Recently, Korsmeyer et aI., (l986a, 1986b) have presented a model for active 
agent and penetrant diffusion in swellable polymers. The process has been modeled 
as two-component diffusion (non-ideal Fickian) in a continuous medium, with 
structural features of the polymer and non-ideal concentration effects incorporated 
in the diffusio'n coefficients. These diffusion coefficients are given by "Fujita-like" 
free-volume expressions, Eqs. (4.36a) and (4.36b), while the governing differential 
equations are given by Eqs. (4.34) and (4.35). The swelling process is initially 
restricted to one dimension by the glassy core; when the concentration of penetrant 
at the center of the matrix reaches a critical level, the matrix relaxes to an 
isotropically swollen state and further swelling is three-dimensional. These dimensional 
changes are accounted for by allowing each spatial element to expand according to 
the amount of penetrant contained in it, during the simulation (Korsmeyer et aI., 
1986a). 
The model has been simulated numerically by resorting to implicit and explicit 
finite difference techniques. Results have been presented as plots of concentration 
profiles, dimensional changes, fraction penetrant uptake, and fraction active agent 
released as functions of time. The shapes of these plots are quite similar to those 
obtained from swelling experiments on P(HEMA-co-NVP), loaded with theophylline, 
in water. The model has been fitted to the experimental data through adjustment of the 
parameters. The active agent release rate and the extent of swelling cannot be 
simultaneously fitted by a single set of parameters for anyone particular experiment. 
However, the set of parameters rendering the model to fit to the swelling 
behavior, can also describe adequately the active agent release rates if the data 
from all experiments (including those with different copolymer ratios) are pooled 
(Korsmeyer et aI., 1986b). 
4.3.2 Two-Region Models 
Experimental observations have confirmed that two separate regions are often formed 
when a polymer absorbs a thermodynamically compatible penetrant and undergoes 
macromolecular relaxation. These are the relaxed gel-like region and the region of 
unrelaxed glassy polymer (see, e.g. Kwei and Zupko, 1969; Baird et ai., 1971; 
Hopfenberg and Hsu, 1978; Thomas and Windle, 1978 a, 1978 b; Franson and 
Peppas, 1983). Diffusivities of the migrating species may be substantially different 
in the two regions due to the differences in their structure. Anomalous diffusion 
may also be observed due to stress effects that accompany the relaxation phenomena. 
The mathematical treatment of such a system, therefore, involves a moving boundary 
or boundaries. The moving boundary is the gel-glassy polymer interface if relaxation 
136 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
is not accompanied by volume expansion; the moving boundaries are the gel-medium 
and gel-glassy polymer interfaces if volume expansion is significant. A governing 
differential equation need be written for each species in each region under isothermal 
conditions. 
A two-region model is available for a semi-infinite polymer slab in an infinite 
unagitated medium (Rudolph, 1979). The volume of the slab is assumed to be unaffect-
ed by polymer relaxation in this model. Diffusion of the active agent and penetrant 
are described by four partial differential equations. These are: 
0< x ~ X(t) 
for penetrant in the gel; 
aCga = !....- (D acga ) 
at 
ax 
ga ax ' 
0< x ~ X(t) 
for active agent in the gel; 
X(t) < x < 00 
for active agent in glassy polymer; and 
-00 < x < 0 
Elution 
medium 
1 
penetrant--+--
c 
Gel 
9 
active ogent.,--
----.---
"".,..,.. 
a 
/. 
o 
I 
Glassy polymer 
I 
I 
1 
p 
1 
._.-._._. 
1 
./ 
1// 
(" 
·-1 
I 
XUl 
x __ 
Fig. 4.11. Swelling-controlled system modeled by Rudolph (1979) 
(4.38) 
(4.39) 
(4.40) 
(4.41) 
137 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
for active agent in the unagitated medium. In these expressions, X(t) is the position 
of the gel-glassy polymer interface at any time t, the origin being placed on the 
gel-medium interface as shown in Fig. 4.11. Penetrant transport in the glassy polymer 
region is neglected. Diffusivity of active agent in gel, Dga, is taken to· be a function 
of the penetrant concentration, egc. Active agent and penetrant equilibria at the 
gel-glassy polymer and gel-medium interfaces are described by partition coefficients. 
The movement of the gel-glassy polymer interface at X(t) is defined by a penetrant 
mass balance under the assumption that the penetrant does not diffuse in the 
glassy region. Thus 
Dgc acgC I 
= -C: [dX(t)] 
ax 
x=X(t)-
dt 
(4.42 a) 
where C: is the critical concentration of the penetrant at the interface (see Fig. 4.11). 
The active agent mass balance at this interface is given by 
(4.42 b) 
Analytical solutions in terms of concentration of the two species and amount 
of the active agent released are available. Concentration profiles are also given for 
certain special cases. The concentrations of the two species are determined to be 
functions of (X/t I/2 ), and the amount of active agent accumulated in the medium at 
any time is found to be proportional to t 1/2 • 
The above model was extended by Rudolph (1980) to include the effect of 
changing volume of the polymer. The governing differential equations for transport 
of active agent in this system are unchanged from the no-volume-change case above. 
However, the regions over which these are valid differ. Thus 
x A(t) < x < X B(t) 
. (4.43) 
describes transport of active agent in the gel, 
Xit) < x < OCJ 
(4.44) 
for active agent in the glassy polymer, and 
(4.45) 
for active agent in the unagitated medium. At time t = 0, Xit) and XB(t) are 
coincident with the origin, i.e., 
(4.46) 
138 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
No equation is given for the transport of penetrant in gel. However, the 
concentration of penetrant in gel, CgC' is taken to be proportional to (x/t I/2) 
(see, Rudolph, 1979; reviewed above). The penetrant does not diffuse in the glassy 
polymer. Diffusivity of the active agent in gel, Dga, is taken to be a function of the 
concentration of penetrant, Cgc• Active agent equilibria at the gel-medium interface, 
XA(t), and at the gel-glassy polymer interface, Xit), are described by partition 
coefficients. The flux continuity expressions for active agent at the interfaces are 
given by 
(4.47 a) 
and 
(4.47 b) 
The above system of equations have been solved analytically by Rudolph (1980), 
by applying the similarity transform, 
Thus the rate of movement of both boundaries is proportional to t 1/2• The amount 
of active agent released is also proportional to t 1/2. Concentration profiles have been 
presented for certain special cases based on diffusivity values. 
The case of Fickian diffusion in a rectangular matrix which undergoes significant 
volume expansion has been analyzed by Peppas et al. (1980). Only one face on the 
matrix is assumed to be exposed to the well-agitated infinite medium. A set of three 
partial differential equations describes the diffusive transport of the penetrant and 
active agent in the matrix. One is for the penetrant through the gel, one for 
the active agent in the gel, and one for the active agent in glassy polymer; these three 
equations are similar to Eqs. (4.38), (4.39), and (4.40) respectively. The position of 
the gel-glassy polymer interface, X(t), is specified by (see Fig. 4.12) 
-
=0 
acgc \ 
ax 
X=X(f) 
(4.48) 
The gel-medium interface is defined by a volume balance on the penetrant absorbed; 
the volume expansion of polymer is proportional to the volume of penetrant absorbed. 
By assuming that the diffusivity of the active agent in the glassy polymer is 
negligibly small compared to that in gel and thus reducing the problem to one of 
pseudo steady-state, analytic expressions have been obtained for the profile and 
release rate of the active agent. The release rate is again found to be proportional to 
t1/2• The model has been verified experimentally for tablets of KCl dispersed in 
a cellulose derivative, placed in water. 
139 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
Glassy 
polymer 
p 
I 
I 
I 
Gel 
g 
·_·_·_·-l 
I ..................... -._ 
I 
I 
.-._.f-.-
I 
: 
XU) 
"X.-
Elution 
medium 
.t 
penetrant 
c 
active 
-agent 
a 
Fig. 4.12. Swelling-controlled system modeled by Peppas et al. (1980) 
All the models considered so far describe the transport of penetrant and active 
agent by Fickian diffusion. Anomalous transport effects caused by the relaxation 
process have not been considered. One approach to account for these anomalous 
transport effects may be to resort to the generalized one-dimensional equation for 
transport of penetrant presented by Wang et al. (1969). The equation 
(4.10) 
has been obtained by combining the mechanisms of (case I) Fickian and case II 
transport (see the discussion earlier in this chapter). For a constant B, Eq. (4.10) 
reduces to 
oCe = ~ (D oCe _ VC) 
ot 
ox 
e ox 
e 
(4.11 ) 
where v (= BS) is interpreted as the convective velocity of solvent penetration 
arising as a direct consequence of the internal stress (Frisch et al., 1969; Kwei 
and Zupko, 1969; Kwei et al., 1972; Wang and Kwei, 1973). Thus it represents 
a pseudo-convective contribution to the transport process. When stress gradient 
dominates the process, the differential equation describes the case II mechanism 
with v as the velocity of the advancing gel-glassy polymer interface, also known 
as the case II velocity. 
140 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
Equations (4.10) and (4.11) have been derived from consideration of the irreversible 
thermodynamics of transport processes based on the work of Bearman (1958), 
Bearman and Kirkwood (1958), and Frisch (1962). The concept, however, can be 
simply looked upon as one of a force field (internal stresses created by chain 
relaxation) inducing a linear drifting or convection of penetrant which is super-
imposed on its random motion (diffusion) (see, e.g., Feynman et ai., 1963; 
Omar, 1978; Yariv, 1982). An analogous expression may also be obtained by 
stochastically modeling the diffusion process; the resultant Kolmogorov forward 
diffusion (Fokker-Planck) equation is 
(4.49) 
(see, e.g., Bharucha-Reid, 1960; Seinfeld and Lapidus, 1974; Fan, 1979; van Kampen, 
1981). Equation (4.11) is thus a special case of Eq. (4.49) when Dc is position 
invariant. 
A general phenomenological model based on Eq. (4.11) has been proposed to 
describe the release of active agent from a swell able polymer (Singh and Fan, 
1986). The system under consideration involves a rectangular monolithic matrix 
of thickness <5, with negligible end effects (flat plate) placed in a well-stirred 
infinite medium. The active agent "a" is initially dissolved in the polymer with 
a uniform concentration CaO ~ Ca., where Cas is the saturation concentration of 
active agent in the polymer. The system is depicted in Fig. 4.13. Absorption of the 
penetrant "e" from the external medium causes the polymer to undergo a glass to 
I 
Glassy 
Gel 
Elution 
po I ymer 
g 
medium 
I 
p 
.t 
t 
c 
I 
c 
1'-'-
c 
'-
~o 
./' 
'-. 
".....r/ 
I 
-
--
I 
C1 -.-
~penetrant 
gc \ 
c 
"-
I 
I 
"-
-active agent 
I 
/ 
a 
"'-
/ 
" 
/ 
1'---. 
I 
.......... 
/ 
I 
0 
I 
Co 
0 
Xi 
~ 
X2 
'X.-
Fig. 4.13. Swelling-controlled system modeled by Singh and Fan (1986) 
141 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
gel transition, creating two distinct regions in the matrix; the outer relaxed 
polymer or gel region and the inner core of the unrelaxed glassy polymer. 
It has been assumed that a critical concentration of penetrant is required for the 
relaxation to occur (Peppas, 1984), and for the sake of generality the concentration 
of penetrant at the gel-glassy polymer interface is taken to be equal to or 
greater than this critical concentration. The concentration of penetrant on the 
glassy polymer side of the interface is related to that on the gel side through 
an equilibrium partition relationship. The analysis is simplified by restricting the 
relaxation phenomenon to occur only at the interface. The gel region is constrained 
by the glassy polymer core and the volume of the gel region at any instant 
is taken to be equal to its equilibrium volume under the constrained state, i.e., the 
volume change accompanying the glass-to-gel transition is assumed instantaneous. 
The glassy core also restricts the volumetric expansion to one dimension. The 
gel-glassy polymer interface moves inwards into the glassy polymer core as an 
increasing amount of penetrant is absorbed (Singh and Fan, 1986). 
The three regions of the model described in the preceding paragraph are the 
medium (identified by l), the gel (g), and the un swollen polymer (P) as shown in 
Fig. 4.13. The coordinate system is fixed with the origin at the axis of symmetry 
of the matrix. The gel-glassy polymer (g -
p) interface position is defined by 
XI (t), and the gel-medium (g -
l) interface by X2(t). The concentration of species i 
in region j is denoted by Cix, t), and the diffusivity of i in region j by Dji • 
The convection velocity in region j is designated as Vi" The differential equations 
describing the transport of penetrant (i == c) and active agent (i == a) in the 
different regions, as given by Singh and Fan (1986), are: 
Xr ~ x ~ X;:, 
t> 0 
(4.50) 
for transport in the gel region (g), and 
o ~ x ~ Xl' 
t ~ 0 
(4.51 ) 
for transport in the glassy polymer (p). 
At time t = 0, the g -
p and g -
I interface are coincident with the surface 
of the matrix, i.e., 
(4.52) 
The other initial conditions are 
(4.53a) 
and 
(4.53 b) 
142 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
The continuity of diffusing species concentrations on both sides of the g -
p and 
g -
I interface under the condition that they are in equilibrium, characterized by 
the equilibrium relationships, fli and hi, leads to the boundary conditions 
(4.54a) 
and 
(4.54b) 
where Ci is the concentration of diffusing species in the medium and is taken to 
be constant. According to the earlier stated assumption regarding concentration 
of penetrant at the g -
p interface 
where C;c is the critical penetrant concentration for relaxation of polymer to 
occur. The boundary condition given by 
(4.55) 
implies that no transport occurs across the center of the matrix (symmetry 
criterion). Since equilibrium is assumed to prevail at the g -
p interface, as stated 
in connection with Eq. (4.54a) 
(4.56) 
Finally, the continuity of fluxes on both sides of the g - p interface gives rise 
to 
where VI (t) is the velocity of the g - p interface XI (t). Thus, 
(4.58) 
The above set of equations is valid only while the glassy polymer region exists. 
If the time instant when the glassy polymer region vanishes is denoted by t*, 
(4.59) 
Then the equations are valid only for 
t < t* . 
143 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
The above equations are applied to both the penetrant and the active agent, 
thus giving rise to four coupled partial differential equations. To solve these 
equations, however, the convective velocities Vg and Vp needed be related to 
the known parameters of the polymer-penetrant system (Singh and Fan, 1986). 
These velocities have been considered to comprise two terms: a stress-induced 
drift velocity v, created by the constraining effect of the glassy core in the 
region around the 9 -
P interface (Alfrey et aI., 1966; Thomas and Windle, 
1977), and a volume-change-induced drift (bulk) velocity. 
I~ the generalized diffusion equation,. equation (4.11), proposed by Wang et al. 
(1969) and modified by K wei et al. (1972), v is termed the velocity of case II 
transport; its value can be shown to be equal to the constant velocity of the 
9 -
P interface when penetrant transport is governed by the stress gradient only 
(case II transport) (Frisch et aI., 1969). Thus, the stress induced drift velocity v 
has been considered to be characteristic of the polymer-penetrant system, defined 
under the constant volume condition. For the sake of generality, the value of 
this drift velocity has been denoted by vp in the glassy polymer region and by 
Vg in the gel region. The definition of Vg and Vp may then be completed by defining the 
. corresponding volume change-induced drift (bulk) velocities (Singh and Fan, 1986). 
It has been assumed that the initial extent of swelling is the same as the 
equilibrium extent of swelling when the relaxation phenomenon is accompanied by 
a change in volume. This is equivalent to assuming that the volume expansion process 
at the 9 -
P interface occurs instantaneously. The actual rate of volume "generation" 
at the 9 -
P interface (== change in thickness) is then governed only by the 
rate of movement of this interface. The glassy polymer region remains stationary 
with respect to the origin since the volume expansion occurs on the gel side 
of the 9 -
P interface; the velocity of the thickness-change is apparent only in the 
gel region (see Fig. 4.13). This velocity is equal to the rate of outward movement 
of the 9 -
I interface at X2 ; it is denoted by V2(t), i.e., 
(4.60) 
The two drift velocities, v and V2 , have now been defined, independent of 
each other. One is the stress-induced drift velocity under the condition that the 
relaxation process causes no change in volume, and the other is the volume-
change-induced drift velocity based on the movement of the 9 -
I interface. In 
the general system, therefore, both these drift velocities must be accounted for 
when the relaxation phenomenon is accompanied by volume change. In the 
gel region, these two velocities are superimposed on each other; thus the effective 
convective velocity is 
(4.61) 
Since the volume-change-induced drift velocity, V2 , is not apparent in the glassy 
polymer region, 
(4.62) 
144 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
The g -
I interface velocity, V2(t), has also been related to the velocity of the 
g -
p interface, Vi (t), by an overall balance of the polymer mass in the gel 
region. In general, this balance can be written as 
(4.63) 
where (lit) is the time-dependent density of the gel region. However, when the 
volume change is instantaneous, as has been assumed in this model, (lit) is 
equivalent to the equilibrium density of gel constrained by glassy core, i.e., 
Thus, Eq. (4.63) has been rewritten as 
(4.64) 
where IX is the expansion factor, defined as the ratio of density of glassy polymer 
to that of the gel, i.e., 
(4.65) 
Differentiating Eq. (4.64) with respect to time, the relation 
(4.66) 
is obtained. Substituting this relation into Eq. (4.61) gives 
(4.67) 
At this point, two equations representing the overall instantaneous mass balances 
of the penetrant and active agent may be written as follows: 
[ flux of the species at ] 
[rate of accumulation 
] 
the g -
I interface 
= 
of the species in the matrix 
After appropriate substitutions, this has been rewritten as 
This expression is equivalent to Eq. (4.57) if Vp and Vg are substituted into it 
from Eqs. (4.62) and (4.67), respectively. Thus the instantaneous overall mass 
balance equation (4.68) can be employed to validate the jump boundary condition, 
Eq. (4.57), derived from the flux continuity (Singh, 1987). 
145 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
The complete system of governing equations, therefore, comprises the following 
set for each of the diffusing species: the governing partial differential equations, 
Eqs. (4.50), (4.51); and the initial and boundary conditions, Eqs. (4.52) through (4.57) 
along with Eqs. (4.62), (4.64), and (4.67). 
After 
t = t*, 
the entire polymer matrix is converted to gel. From this instant onward, the 
governing partial differential equations revert to simple Fickian diffusion forms. 
However, instead of the one-dimensional linear expansion observed before t*, the 
volumetric expansion subsequent to the isotropic relaxation step at t = t*, is 
three-dimensional. For a unit initial cross-sectional area, the length at t* is 
L* = exb 
(4.69) 
while the cross-sectional area remains unchanged due to the expansion being one-
dimensional. When the gelatinized matrix relaxes to an isotropically swollen state 
at t*, the length of the system will change to L' given by 
L' = (L *)1/3 , 
(4.70) 
the volume of the system thus having been conserved. Further volumetric expansion 
after t* is accounted for by allowing the volume of the system to increase 
uniformly in proportion to the amount of penetrant absorbed. Thus the volume 
at time t > t* is given by (Singh and Fan, 1986) 
or 
where 
volume 1/>1* = volumel /_l* + {[penetranltt· ] 
-
accumu a IOn I 
[ penetrant J} [specific volume 
] 
-
accumulation 1* 
of penetrant in system 
(ex - I) b 
Vc = -L=*1-2-----
2 f CgAx, t*) dx 
o 
In finite difference terms, Eq. (4.71) may be rewritten as 
3 
3 
[ 
2 
aCgCl] 
L (lj+l) = L (ti) -
-2L Dgc --
Lll j · vc. 
ax 
L 
Ii 
The above equation has been used directly in the simulation procedure. 
146 
(4.72) 
(4.73) 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
The governing equations of the model have been reduced to represent various 
special cases based on polymer-penetrant system behavior (Singh and Fan, 1986). 
These are: 
i. Fickian diffusion without volume change: For this type of behavior, the flux 
contribution due to stress gradients has been neglected, i.e., 
Vg = vp == O. 
Due to the unchanged volume, IX = 1. The governing differential equations revert 
to the simple Fickian diffusion form. Since the relaxation and swelling behavior is 
diffusion limited, the concentration of penetrant at the g - p interface has been 
taken to be equal to the minimum required for the glass-to-gel transition to 
occur (= critical concentration). 
Singh and Fan (1986) have compared their equations for this case to those 
presented by Crank (1975) and Rudolph (1979); their equations have been shown to 
reduce to the forms identical to those of Crank and Rudolph. A comparison with the 
equations by Peppas and Sinclair (1983) indicates that the penetrant continuity 
equations at the g - p interface are not in agreement (Singh, 1987). 
ii. Fickian diffusion with volume change: The simplifications for this type of 
behavior are similar to those of the previous case, except IX "# I. Singh and Fan (1986) 
compared their equations for penetrant transport for this case to those by Peppas 
and Sinclair (1983); they have found that the equations for penetrant transport and 
continuity are not in agreement (also see, Singh, 1987). 
iii. Case II transport without volume change: Case II transport is a consequence 
of the fact that diffusion of the penetrant in the gel is much faster than the polymer chain 
relaxation process at the g - p interface (Vrentas et aI., 1975; Frisch, 1980). In the 
case of negligible diffusional resistance in the gel phase, this interface represents the 
innermost limit of dispersal of the penetrant (Frisch et aI., 1969; Frisch, 1980). 
Experimentally observed concentration profiles also indicate little or no penetrant 
in the glassy region for case II transport (Thomas and Windle, 1978 a, 1978 b). 
Consequently, Singh and Fan (1986) have neglected penetrant transport in the 
unrelaxed glassy polymer region (no diffusion or convection). Since no change 
of volume occurs between the glass and gel phases, the value of IX is one. 
The velocities Vg and Vp' therefore, are given by 
and 
The governing differential equations, Eqs. (4.50) and (4.51), become 
[)-
x+ < x <_. 
1 = 
= 
2 ' 
t ~ 0, 
t> 0, 
(4.74 a) 
(4.74b) 
(4.75) 
(4.76) 
147 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
t>O, (4.77) 
aCpa __ ~ (_ 
acpa) 
at -
ax 
Dpa ax ' 
o ~ x ~ xl; 
t;;;O. 
(4.78) 
The penetrant concentration at the g -
p interface is restricted to 
(4.79) 
and 
(4.80) 
The simplifications made to obtain Eqs. (4.74a) and (4.74b) are: a) no penetrant 
flux exists in the glassy polymer region; b) only convective transport occurs in the 
gel region; c) C~c = 0; and d) ex = I. Applying these simplifications to Eq. (4.57) 
for the penetrant, the relation 
(4.81) 
is obtained. Substituting Eq. (4.81) along with Eqs. (4.74a) and (4.74b) into 
Eq. (4.57) for the active agent, the interface active agent flux continuity expression 
becomes 
[ 
aCpa] 
[ 
acga] 
I 
-D --
-
-D -
= v C 
. 
pa ax 
_ 
ga ax 
+ 
9 pa 
XI 
XI 
(4.82) 
iv. Case II transport with volume change: Derivation of the governing differential 
equations for this case is similar to that in the preceding case except that 
11. =f. 1. The appropriate simplifications are: a) no penetrant flux occurs in the 
polymer region; b) penetrant flux in the gel is only due to convective transport; 
and c) C~c == O. Therefore 
(4.83 a) 
and 
(4.83 b) 
A relation between V1(t) and Vg has been derived by applying the simplifications 
presented in the preceding paragraph to Eq. (4.57). The resultant equation is 
(4.84) 
The governing differential equations for this case are similar to those of the 
previous case and may be recovered by substituting (vg/l1.) for Vg in Eqs. (4.75) 
through (4.78) and Eq. (4.82) (Singh and Fan, 1986). 
148 

4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
v. Anomalous transport without volume change: The governing equations, Eqs. 
(4.50) and (4.51), represent the case of anomalous transport with volume change. 
Equations for the case without volume change may, therefore, be recovered by 
substituting ex = 1. 
Singh and Fan (1986) have compared their equations for this case of ex = 1 with 
those presented by Peppas and Sinclair (1983); it has been shown that their 
penetrant flux continuity expression at the 9 -
P interface is not in agreement with 
that by Peppas and Sinclair (also see Singh, 1987). 
The model of Singh and Fan (1986) has been simulated to examine the effect 
of the various parameters. The spatial coordinate in the model has been transformed 
to immobilize the moving boundaries and the simulation started from some small 
t ~ 0+ in order to circumvent the singularity in the system at t = O. Experimental 
data from Korsmeyer (1983), for the swelling and release behavior of P (HEMA-co-
NVP) in water, have been fitted by this model through adjustment of the parameters. 
The results are illustrated in Figure 4.1 4 a-c. The same set of parameters has 
been used to model the swelling and release data from one experiment. Agreement 
between experimental data and the model is good before t*. 
<.0 
"-
:::::! 
.r:. 
'" 
c 
~ 
"0 ., 
N 
"0 
E 
.... 
0 z 
1.4 
1.3 
1.2 
+ + 
1.1 
+ 
+ 
Exper I menta I 
Korsmeyer (1983) 
Calculated 
Singhand Fan(1 986) 
+ + 
1.0 ~ 
__ ~ 
__ L-__ L-__ L-__ L-__ ~ 
__ L-~~ 
__ L-~~~ 
1.00 
1.50 
2.50 
0.0 
0.50 
Dimensionless time 
Fig. 4.14. 3. Axial expansion of P (HEMA-co-NVP) with HEMA monomer fraction of 
0.707, in water at 37°C: Model parameters 0( = 1.31, DgC = 3 X 10- 7 cm2/s, Dpc = 5 X 10- 8 cm2/s, 
v 9 = V. = 0 (Singh and Fan, 1986) 
149 

4 Swelling-Controlled Release 
1.0 
+ 
0.9 
+ 
+ 
0.8 
+ 
_u 
+ 
~ 0.7 
+ 
'-
~ 
..; 
0.6 
OJ 
.Q .. 
0 .. 
.0 
0.5 
0 
C 
~ 
OJ 
0.4 
c 
OJ 
Experimental 
Q. ... 
+ 
0 
0.3 
Korsmeyer (1983) 
c 
0 
Calculated 
U 
Slngh.and Fan(1 986 
0 .. 
1l.. 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.50 
1.00 
1.50 
2.00 
2.50 
o I mens I on less time 
(4tDgC/l) 
Fig. 4:14. b. Fraction of water absorbed by P (HEMA-co-NVP) with HEMA monomer 
fraction of 0.707 at 37°C (Singh and Fan, 1986) 
More recently, Lustig and Peppas (1987) have proposed a model for swelling-
controlled systems which accounts for time-dependent volumetric expansion on the 
basis of a constitutive relation. The rate of polymer specific volume change is 
taken to be proportional to the difference between equilibrium and instantaneous 
specific volumes, Veq• I and VI' i.e., 
(4.85) 
where .Ie is the characteristic relaxation time, defined earlier in Eq. (4.5). The 
Fickian diffusion equation is applied to a rectangular slab kept with its faces exposed 
to the penetrant in an infinite well-stirred sink. The glassy polymer is uniformly loaded 
initially, and equilibrium is maintained at the outer surfaces at all times. 
Diffusivities of penetrant, Dc' and active agent, Da, are given in terms offunctional 
forms derived from the free-volume theory 
150 

1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
~ 0.7 
"-i" 0.6 
..; ., .. 
" ., 
0.5 
., ... -
c:: ., 
0.4 
'" " ., 
~ -" 
0.3 
" -
0 
c:: 
0 
U 
0.2 
~ 
o 
o 
u. 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
o 
o 
o 
00 
o 
0.50 
o 
o 
1.00 
4.3 Models for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems 
o 
o 
o 
Experimental 
60 Korsmeyer (1983) 
Calculated 
Singh and Fan (1986) 
1.50 
2.00 
2.50 
Dimensionless time 
Fig. 4.14. c. Fraction of theophylline released by P (HEMA-co-NVP) with HEMA monomer 
fraction of 0.707, in water at 37°C: Model parameters IX = 1.31, Dgc = 3 X 10-7 cm2js, 
Dpa = 5 X 10- 9 cm2js, Dpc = 5 X 10- 8 cm2js, Vg = Vp = 0 (Singh and Fan, 1986) 
(4.86 a) 
(4.86 b) 
where Cc is penetrant concentrant, Ccs the equilibrium penetrant concentration in 
swollen gel, Des and Das are diffusivities of penetrant and active agent in equilibrium 
swollen gel, and Pc and Pa are material constants. Transport is restricted to 
the gel region and the position of the gel-glassy polymer interface is determined 
to be the point where local elongation is equal to the critical elongation required 
for the gelatinization phenomena, i.e., where local elongation is equal to the 
elongation at mechanical equilibrium swelling. 
The model has been solved numerically using the "method of lines" and the 
seven independent parameters of the model analyzed (Lustig and Peppas, 1987). 
Deborah and swelling interface numbers are also obtained throughout the computation 
151 

References 
period. The main parameter influencing the performance of such a system is Pc, 
the material constant describing penetrant diffusivity as a function of penetrant 
concentration. The nature of solutions obtained in terms of penetrant concentration 
profiles, interface positions, and penetrant uptake is quite similar to that observed 
experimentally. The effect of active agent on penetrant sorption and polymer relaxation 
behavior is neglected due to an absence of coupling between Pa and penetrant 
sorption kinetics; this lack of interaction is true only for low active agent loadings. 
Swelling-controlled release devices have great potential for controlled active 
agent delivery. Numerous experimental studies are being performed to determine 
the conditions leading to zero-order release from polymers undergoing relaxation 
and swelling. Mathematical modeling of these devices has been variously attempted 
by ideal Fickian diffusion (Peppas et ai., 1980; Wang et ai., 1980; Lee, 1981), 
non-ideal Fickian diffusion (Frisch, 1978; Rudolph, 1979, 1980; Vrentas et ai., 
1985; Korsmeyer et ai., 1986a, 1986b; Lustig and Peppas, 1987), and anomalous 
transport (Singh and Fan, 1986). However, all these models isolate active agent 
transport from the penetrant transport and relaxational effects. Incorporation of 
this interaction by coupling of the theories of relaxation and transport with 
those for predicting diffusion coefficients should lead to an improved under-
standing of the behavior of swelling-controlled release devices, which will ultimately 
lead to better designs. Improved models may become intricate and cumbersome 
to use, but that is due to the complicated nature of the phenomenon itself. 
References 
Ahn, B. J., Smith, J. M., Parrish, W. R.: Non-Fickian Diffusion Through Polymer Films, 
AIChE J. 31, 874-876 (1985) 
Alfrey, T.: Glassy Polymer Diffusion is often Tractable. Chern. Eng. News 43 (41), 64-65 
(1965) 
Alfrey, T., Gurnee, E. F., Lloyd, W. G.: Diffusion in Glassy Polymers. J. Polym. Sci.: 
Part C, 12,249-261 (1966) 
Astarita, G., Joshi, S.: Sample-Dimension Effects in the Sorption of Solvents in Polymers -
A Mathematical Model, J. Membrane Sci. 4, 165-182 (1978) 
Astarita, G., Nicolais, L.: Physics and Mathematics of Heat and Mass Transfer in Polymers, 
Pure & Appl. Chern. 55, 727-736 (1983) 
Astarita, G., Sarti, G. C.: A Class of Mathematical Models for Sorption of Swelling 
Solvents in Glassy Polymers, Polym. Eng. Sci. 18,388-395 (1978) 
Bagley, E., Long, F. A.: Two-Stage Sorption and Desorption of Organic Vapors in Cellulose 
Acetate, J. Am. Chern. Soc. 77,2172-2178 (1955) 
Baird, B. R., Hopfenberg, H. B., Stannett, V. T.: The Effect of Molecular Weight and 
Orientation on the Sorption on n-Pentane by Glassy Polystyrene, Polym. Eng. Sci. 11, 
274-283 (l97l) 
Baker, R. W. : Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, pp. 179-184, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York (1987) 
Bamba, M., Puisiuex, F., Marty, J.-P., Carstensen, J. T.: Release Mechanisms in Gel-
forming Sustained Release Preparations, Int. J. Pharm. 2, 307-315 (1979) 
Bearman, R. J.: On the Linear Phenomenological Equations, J. Chern. Phys. 28, 662-664 
(1958) 
Bearman, R. J., Kirkwood, J. G.: Statistical Mechanics of Transport Processes. XI. Equations 
of Transport in Multicomponent Systems, J. Chern. Phys. 28, 136--145 (1958) 
152 

References 
Berens, A. R., Hopfenberg, H. B.: Diffusion and Relaxation in Glassy Polymer Powders: 
2. Separation of Diffusion and Relaxation Parameters, Polymer 19, 489-496 (1978) 
Bernier, G. A., Kambour, R. P.: The Role of Organic Agents in the Stress Crazing and 
Cracking of Poly(2,6-dimethyl-I,4-phenylene oxide), Macromolecules 1, 393-400 (1968) 
Bharucha-Reid, A. T.: Elements of the Theory of Markov Process and Their Applications, 
pp. 129-163, McGraw-Hill, New York (1960) 
Cohen, D. S.: Theoretical Models for Diffusion in Glassy Polymers, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. 
Phys. Ed. 21, 2057-2065 (1983) 
Cohen, D. S.: Diffusive Fronts of Penetrants in Glassy Polymers, Physica 12D, 369-374 
(1984) 
Cohen, D. S., Stanley, E. A.: Gaseous Diffusion in Glassy Polymers, SIAM J. App!. Math. 
43,949-970 (1983) 
Crank, J.: Diffusion in Media with Variable Properties. Part III. Diffusion Coefficients 
which Vary Discontinuously with Concentration, Trans. Farad. Soc. 47, 450-461 (1951) 
Crank, J.: A Theoretical Investigation of the Influence of Molecular Relaxation and Internal 
Stress on Diffusion in Polymers, J. Polym. Sci. XI, 151-168 (1953) 
Crank, J.: The Mathematics of Diffusion, pp. 290-293, Oxford University Press, London 
(1975) 
Davidson III, G. W. R., Peppas, N. A.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in Swellable Polymers. 
V. Relaxation-Controlled Transport in P(HEMA-co-MMA) Copolymers, J. Controlled 
Release 3,243-258 (1986a) 
Davidson III, G. W. R., Peppas, N. A.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in Swellable 
Polymers. VI. The Deborah and Swelling Interface Numbers as Indicators of the Order of 
Biomolecular Release, J. Controlled Release 3,259-271 (1986b) 
Fan, L. T.: Mathematical Modeling and Process Optimization. In: Food Process Engineering, 
Vo!' I, pp. 26-51, Food Processing Systems, P. Linko, Malkki, Y., Olkku, J. (Eds.), 
Applied Science Publishers, London (1979) 
Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R. B., Sands, M.: The Feynman Lectures on Physics, pp. 43-44, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts (1963) 
Franson, N. M., Peppas, N. A.: Influence of Copolymer Composition on Non-Fickian 
Water Transport through Glassy Copolymers, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 28, 1299-1310 (1983) 
Frisch, H. L.: Anomalous Polymer-Penetrant Permeation, J. Chern. Phys. 37, 2408-2413 
(1962) 
Frisch, H. L.: Simultaneous Nonlinear Diffusion of a Solvent and Organic Penetrant in a Poly-
mer, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. Ed. 16, 1651-1664 (1978) 
Frisch, H. L.: Sorption and Transport in Glassy Polymers -
A Review, Polym. Eng. Sci. 20, 
2-13 (1980) 
Frisch, H. L., Wang, T. T., Kwei, T. K.: Diffusion in Glassy Polymers II, J. Polym. Sci.: 
Part A-2, 7, 879-887 (1969) 
Good, W. R.: Diffusion of Water Soluble Drugs from Initially Dry Hydrogels, pp. 139-153. 
In: Polymeric Delivery Systems, Kostelnik, R. J. (Ed.), Gordon and Breach Science Publi-
shers, New York (1978) 
Gostoli, C., Sarti, G. c.: Diffusion and Localized Swelling Resistances in Glassy Polymers, 
Polym. Eng. Sci. 22,1018-1026 (1982) 
Graham, N. B., McNeill, M. E.: Hydrogels for Controlled Drug Delivery, Biomaterials, 
5,27-36 (1984) 
Hopfenberg, H. B.: Anomalous Transport of Penetrants in Polymeric Membranes, pp. 16-32. 
In: Membrane Science and Technology: Industrial, Biological, and Waste Treatment Pro-
cesses, J. E. Flinn (Ed.), Plenum Press, New York (1970) 
Hopfenberg, H. B., Apicella, A., Saleeby, D. E.: Factors Affecting Water Sorption in and 
Solute Release from Glassy Ethylene-Vinyl Alcohol Copolymers, J. Membrane Sci. 8, 
273-282 (1981) 
Hopfenberg, H. B., Frisch., H. L.: Transport of Organic Micromolecules in Amorphous Poly-
mers, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Letters, B7, 405-409 (1969) 
Hopfenberg, H. B., Holley, R. H., Stannett, V.: The Effect of Penetrant Activity and 
Temperature on the Anomalous Diffusion of Hydrocarbons and Solvent Crazing in Poly-
styrene. Part I: Biaxially Oriented Polystyrene, Polym. Eng. Sci. 9, 242-249 (1969) 
153 

References 
Hopfenberg, H. B., Hsu, K. c.: Swelling-Controlled, Constant Rate Delivery Systems. 
Polym. Eng. Sci. 18, 1186-1191 (1978) 
Hopfenberg, H. B., Stannett, V. T., Folk, G. M.: Sorption Kinetics and Equilibria in 
Annealed Glassy Polyblends, Polym. Eng. Sci. 15,261-267 (1975) 
Jacques, C. H. M., Hopfenberg, H. 8., Stannett, V.: Super Case 11 Transport of Organic 
Vapors in Glassy Polymers, pp. 73-86. In: Permeability of Plastic Films and Coatings to 
Gases, Vapors, and Liquids, H. B. Hopfenberg (Ed.), Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
Joshi, S., Astarita, G.: Diffusion-Relaxation Coupling in Polymers which Show Two-Stage 
Sorption Phenomena, Polymer 20,455-458 (1979) 
Korsmeyer, R. W.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in Swell able Polymers, Ph. D. Disser-
tation, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, pp. 28-51 (1983) 
Korsmeyer, R. W., Gurny, R., Doelker, E., Buri, P., Peppas, N. A.: Mechanisms of Solute 
Release from Porous Hydrophilic Polymers, Int. J. Pharm. 15,25-35 (1983) 
Korsmeyer, R. W., Lustig, S. R., Peppas, N. A.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in 
Swellable Polymers. I. Mathematical Modeling, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 24, 
395-408 (1986a) 
Korsmeyer, R. W., Meerwall, E. V., Peppas, N. A.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in 
Swellable Polymers. II. Verification of Theoretical Models, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. 
Ed. 24, 409-434 (1986b) 
Korsmeyer, R. W., Peppas, N. A.: Effect of the Morphology of Hydrophilic Polymeric 
Matrixes on the Diffusion and Release of Water Soluble Drugs, J. Membrane Sci. 9, 
211-227 (1981) 
Korsmeyer, R. W., Peppas, N. A.: Macromolecular and Modeling Aspects of Swelling-
Controlled Systems, pp. 77-90. In: Controlled Release Delivery Systems, Roseman, T. J., 
Mansdorf, S. Z. (Eds.), Marcell Dekker, Inc., New York (1983) 
Korsmeyer, R. W., Peppas, N. A.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in Swellable Polymers. 
III. Drug Release From Glassy Poly(HEMA-co-NVP) Copolymers, J. Controlled Release 
1,89-98 (1984) 
Kwei, T. K., Wang, T. T., Zupko, H. M.: Diffusion in Glassy Polymers. V. Combination of 
Fickian and Case II Mechanisms, Macromolecules 5, 645-646 (1972) 
Kwei, T. K., Zupko, H. M.: Diffusion in Glassy Polymers I, J. Polym. Sci: Part A-2, 7, 
867-877 (1969) 
Lapidus, H., Lordi, N. G.: Drug Release from Compressed Hydrophilic Matrices, J. Pharm. 
Sci. 57, 1292-1301 (1968) 
Lee, P. I.: Controlled Drug Release from Polymeric Matrices Involving Moving Boundaries, 
pp. 39-48. In: Controlled Release of Pesticides and Pharmaceuticals, D. H. Lewis (Ed.), 
Plenum Press, New York (1981) 
Lee, P. I.: Novel Approach to Zero-Order Drug Delivery via Immobilized Nonuniform 
Drug Distribution in Glassy Hydrogels, J. Pharm. Sci. 73, 1344-1347 (1984a) 
Lee, P. I.: Effect of Non-Uniform Initial Drug Concentration Distribution on the Kinetics 
of Drug Release from Glassy Hydrogel Matrices, Polymer 25, 973-978 (1984b) 
Long, F. A., Richman, D.: Concentration Gradients for Diffusion of Vapors in Glassy 
Polymers and their Relation to Time Dependent Diffusion Phenomena, J. Am. Chern. Soc. 
82,513-519(1960) 
Lustig, S. R., Peppas, N. A.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in Swellable Polymers. 
VII. A Free Volume-Based Model with Mechanical Relaxation, J. AppJ. Polym. Sci. 33, 
533-549 (1987) 
McGregor, R.: Diffusion and Sorption in Fibers and Films, Vol. I, An Introduction with 
Particular Reference to Dyes, pp. 210-21 I, Academic Press, New York (1974) 
Michaels, A. S., Bixler, H. J., Hopfenberg, H. B.: Controllably Crazed Polystyrene: 
Morphology and Permeability, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 12,991-1007 (1968) 
Nagy, M.:· Some New Aspects of Research on Polymer Gels, Colloid and Polymer Sci. 
263,245-265(1985) 
Neogi, P.: Anomalous Diffusion of Vapors Through Solid Polymers. Part I. Irreversible 
Thermodynamics of Diffusion and Solution Processes, AIChE J. 29, 829-833 (1983) 
Omar, M. A.: Elementary Solid State Physics: Principles and Applications, p. 143, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts (1978). 
154 

References 
Park, G. S.: The Glassy State and Slow Process Anomalies, pp. 141-163. In: Diffusion 
in Polymers, Crank, J., Parks, G. S. (Eds.), Academic-Press, London (1968) 
Paul, D. R., Garcin, M., Garmon, W. E.: Solute Diffusion Through Swollen Polymer 
Membranes, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 20, 609-625 (1976) 
Peppas, N. A. : Release of Bioactive Agents from Swellable Polymers: Theory and Experiments, 
pp. 279-289. In: Recent Advances in Drug Delivery Systems, Anderson, J. M., Kim, S. W. 
(Eds.), Plenum Publishing Corporation, New York (1984) 
Peppas, N. A., Franson, N. M.: The Swelling Interface Number as a Criterion for 
'Prediction of Diffusional Solute Release Mechanisms in Swellable Polymers, J. Polym. 
Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 21, 983-997 (1983) 
Peppas, N. A, Gurny, R., Doelker, E., Buri, P.: Modelling of Drug Diffusion through 
Swellable Polymeric Systems, J. Membrane Sci. 7,241-253 (1980) 
Peppas, N. A., Meadows, D. L.: Macromolecular Structure and Solute Diffusion in Membranes: 
An Overview of Recent Theories, J. Membrane Sci. 16, 361-377 (1983) 
Peppas, N. A., Moynihan, H. J.: Solute Diffusion in Swollen Membranes. IV. Theories for 
Moderately Swollen Networks, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 30, 2589-2606 (1985) 
Peppas, N. A, Reinhart, C. T.: Solute Diffusion in Swollen Membranes. Part I. A New 
Theory, J. Membrane Sci. 15,275-287 (1983) 
Peppas, N. A, Sinclair, J. L.: Anomalous Transport of Penetrants in Glassy Polymers, 
Colloid and Polymer Sci. 261, 404-408 (1983) 
Peterlin, A.: Diffusion with Discontinuous Swelling. V. Type II Diffusion into Sheets and 
Spheres, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 17, 1741-1756 (1979) 
Petropoulos, J. H., Roussis, P. P.: A Discussion of Theoretical Models of Anomalous 
Diffusion of Vapors in Polymers, pp. 219-232. In: Permeability of Plastic Films and Coatings 
to Gases, Vapors, and Liquids, Hopfenberg, H. B. (Ed.), Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
Petropoulos, J. H., Roussis, P. P.: The Influence of Transverse Differential Swelling Stresses 
on the Kinetics of Sorption of Penetrants by Polymer Membranes. J. Membrane Sci. 3, 
343-356 (1978) 
Rebenfeld, L., Makarewicz, P. J., Weignann, H.-D., Wilkes, G. L.: Interactions Between 
Solvents and Polymers in the Solid State, J. Macromol. Sci.-Rev. Macromol. Chern. C15, 
279-393 (1976) 
Reinhart, C. T., Peppas, N. A: Solute Diffusion in Swollen Membranes. Part II. Influence 
of Crosslinking on Diffusive Properties, J. Membrane Sci. 18,227-239 (1984) 
Roorda, W. E., Bodde, H. E., de Boer, A G., Junginger, H. E.: Synthetic Hydrogels as Drug 
Delivery Systems, Pharmaceutisch Weekblad, Scientific Edition 8,165-189 (1986a) 
Roorda, W. E., de Vries, M. A., Kosho, C., de Leede, L. G. T., de Boer, A. G., 
Junginger, H. E.: Zero-Order Release of Oxprenolol-HCI: A New Approach, pp. 206-207. 
In: Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Controlled Release of Bioactive 
Materials,!' A Chaudry and C. Thies (Eds.), Norfolk, Virginia, August 3-6 (1986b) 
Rudolph, F. B.: Diffusion in a Multicomponent Inhomogeneous System with Moving 
Boundaries. I. Swelling at Constant Volume, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 17, 
1709-1718 (1979) 
Rudolph, F. B.: Diffusion in a Muiticomponent Inhomogeneous Multiphase System with 
Moving Boundaries. II. Increasing or Decreasing Volume (Swelling or Drying), J. Polym. 
Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 18,2323-2336 (1980) 
Segot-Chicq, S., Peppas, N. A.: Solute and Penetrant Diffusion in Swellable Polymers. 
IV. Semicrystalline, Swelling-Controlled Release Systems ofPoly(Ethylene-co-Vinyl Alcohol). 
J. Controlled Release 3, 193-204 (1986) 
Seinfeld, J. H., Lapidus, L.: Mathematical Models in Chemical Engineering, Vol. 3, 
pp. 225-229, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliff, New Jersey (1974) 
Sfirakis, A, Rogers, C. E.: Sorption and Diffusion of Alcohols in Amorphous Polymers, 
Polym. Eng. Sci. 21, 542-547 (1981) 
Singh, S. K.: Analysis and Development of Some Controlled Release Systems, Ph. D. Disser-
tation, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, pp. IV.19-IV.82 (1987) 
Singh, S. K., Fan, L. T.: A Generalized Model for Swelling-Controlled Release Systems, 
Biotechnology Progress 2, 145-156 (1986) 
155 

References 
Thomas, N., Windle, A. H.: Discontinuous Shape Changes Associated with Case II 
Transport of Methanol in Thin Sheets of PMMA, Polymer 18, 1195 (1977) 
Thomas, N., Windle, A. H.: Case II Swelling of PMMA Sheet in Methanol, J. Membrane 
Sci. 3, 337-342 (1978a) 
Thomas, N., Windle, A H.: Transport of Methanol in Poly(Methyl Methacrylate), Polymer 
19,255-265 (1978b) 
Thomas, N. L., Windle, A H.: A Theory of Case II Diffusion, Polymer 23, 529-542 
(1982) 
Tosun, I., Yilmaz, L.: On the Fickian Diffusion of Organic Penetrants in Glassy Polymers, 
Polym. Eng. Sci. 22, 1043-1045 (1982) 
Tu, Y.-O.: A Multi-Phase Stefan Problem Describing the Swelling and the Dissolution of 
Glassy Polymer, Quart. Appl. Math. XXXV, 269-285 (1977) 
Tu, Y.-O., Ouano, A. c.: Model for the Kinematics of Polymer Dissolution, IBM J. Res. 
Develop. 12, 197-208 (1977) 
llrdahl, K. G., Peppas, N. A.: Anomalous Penetrant Transport in Glassy Polymers. V. 
Cyc\ohexane Transport in Polystyrene, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 33, 2669-2687 (1987) 
'Ian Kampen, N. G.: Stochastic Process in Physics and Chemistry, North Holland, Netherlands 
(1981) 
Vieth, W. R., Howell, J. M., Hsieh, J. H.: Dual Sorption Theory, J. Membrane Sci. 1, 
177-220 (1976) 
Vieth, W. R., Sladek, K. J.: A Model for Diffusion in a Glassy Polymer, J. Colloid Sci. 
20,1014-1033 (1965) 
Vrentas, J. S., Duda, J. L.: Diffusion in Polymer-Solvent Systems. III. Construction of 
Deborah Number Diagrams, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. Ed., 15, 441-453 (1977) 
Vrentas, J. S., Duda, J. L., Ling, H. C.: Enhancement of Impurity Removal from Polymer 
Films, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 30, 4499-4516 (1985) 
Vrentas, J. S., Jarzebski, C. M., Duda, J. L.: A Deborah Number for Diffusion in 
Polymer-Solvent Systems, AIChE J. 21, 894-901 (1975) 
Wang, F. H. L., Duda, J. L., Vrentas, J. S.: Analysis of Impurity Migration in Plastic 
Containers, Polym. Eng. Sci. 20, 120--127 (1980) 
Wang, T. T., Kwei, T. K.: Diffusion in Glassy Polymers. Reexamination of Vapor Sorption 
Data, Macromolecules 6, 919-921 (1973) 
Wang, T. T., Kwei, T. K., Frisch, H. L.: Diffusion in Glassy Polymers. III, J. Polym. 
Sci. Part A-2, 7,2019-2028 (1969) 
Windle, A. H.: Case II Sorption, pp. 75-118. In: Polymer Permeability, J. Comyn (Ed.), 
Elsevier Applied Science Publishers, London (1985) 
Yariv, A: An Introduction to Theory and Applications of Quantum Mechanics, pp. 253-259, 
John Wiley and Sons, New York (1982) 
Yasuda, H., Lamaze, C. E.: Permeability of Solutes in Homogeneous Water-Swollen Polymer 
Membranes, J. Macromol. Sci. Phys. 85, 111-134 (1971) 
Yasuda, H., Peterlin, A., Colton, C. K., Smith, K. A., Merril, E. W.: Permeability of 
Solutes Through Hydrated Polymer Membranes. Part III. Theoretical Background for the 
Selectivity of Dialysis Membranes, Die Makromolekulare Chemie 126, 177-186 (1969) 
Yasuda, H., Stannett, V., Frisch, H. L., Peterlin, A.: The Permeability of Strained Polymer 
Films, Die Makromolekulare Chemie 73, 188-202 (1964) 
Yilmaz, L., Tosun, I., Giirkan, T., Giilcat, U.: Anomalous Diffusion of Liquids in Glassy 
Polymers, Mathematical Modelling 4,535-543 (1983) 
156 

5. Special Controlled-Release Systems 
In this chapter, we shall briefly examine some controlled-release systems not widely 
modeled mathematically. Nevertheless, these systems are interesting since they offer 
a wide range of performance capabilities, and also constitute interesting modeling 
problems. 
5.1 Osmotic Pumping Devices 
Pumps of various configurations have been produced that exploit osmotic pressure 
as the driving force. Most of the research in this area has focused on drug 
delivery in the form of implantable or oral formulations. A simple osmotic 
pump consists of a core of compacted, solid, water-soluble active agent. The core 
is enclosed in a polymer membrane which is selectively water (or appropriate 
biological fluid) permeable but active agent impermeable, and in which a small 
orifice is drilled. In an aqueous environment, water is transported into the core 
by permeation through this membrane. If this membrane is non-extensible or is 
suitably supported, the hydrostatic pressure inside the core will build up, and 
a solution of active agent and water will be pumped out through the orifice 
(see, e.g., Bruck, 1983). The movement of water through the semipermeable 
membrane is governed by the difference between its chemical potential in the 
core, consisting of the saturated active agent solution when at steady state, and 
its chemical potential in the elution medium, consisting of pure solvent water 
when under infinite well-agitated sink conditions. If the core contains an excess of 
the solid active agent and the concentration of active agent in the elution medium 
does not change significantly, the chemical potential gradient of water will remain 
constant. Zero-order active agent delivery, therefore, is theoretically possible if 
molecular diffusional release of the active agent can be eliminated. A schematic 
representation of the functioning of an elementary osmotic pump is given in 
Fig. 5.1. 
For an osmotic pump with a constant internal volume, the volumetric delivery 
rate of active agent solution is equal to the volumetric influx rate of water. The 
influx of water is governed by two opposing forces (Fig. 5.1). The driving force 
is the osmotic pressure difference, An, generated by the chemical potential gradient. 
The opposing force is the hydrostatic back-pressure, AP. The net volumetric flux 
of water into the pump is given by 
157 

5 Special Controlled-Release Systems 
Hydrostatic pressure 
Osmotic pressure 
Water 
Semipermeable 
membrane 
, 
I 
p.' 
I 
1 ,----Ip. 
, ,2 
I 
I 
111 
1" 
I 
, "J "2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Osmotic core 
containing 
active agent 
2 
Active agent 
solution 
Del ivery orifice 
Fig. 5.1. Schematic representation of an elementary osmotic pump (Theeuwes, 1975) 
L 
Jw = 
; (aLln -
LIP) 
(5.1) 
where Lp is the hydraulic permeability of the membrane, (j its thickness, and 
a the reflection coefficient of the membrane. The reflection coefficient characterizes 
the leakiness of the membrane -
it is equal to zero for a porous membrane and 
equal to one for an ideal semipermeable membrane. The positive sign with 
LIn (= n2 -
nl ) indicates that water permeates up the osmotic pressure gradient, 
i.e., it flows from the phase in which it has a higher "escaping" tendency (dilute 
solution, high water vapor pressure, low osmotic pressure = n2) to the phase with 
lower "escaping" tendency (concentrated solution, low water vapor pressure, high 
osmotic pressure = n l ) (Katchalsky and Curran, 1976; Theeuwes, 1980; Langer 
and Peppas, 1983). L1P (= P2 -
PI) is negative since the rigidity of the membrane 
causes the hydrostatic pressure inside the membrane, PI' to increase; this hydro-
static head tends to oppose the inflow of water due to the osmotic pressure 
difference (Fig. 5.1). 
Osmotic pressure can be related to the active agent concentration in the solution, 
Ca, through 
(5.2) 
where R is the gas constant and T is the temperature. It can also be determined 
from vapor pressure measurements by making use of the expression 
n = RT In (Po) 
[' 
P 
(5.3) 
158 

5.1 Osmotic Pumping Devices 
where v is the molar volume of the solvent (water), Po the vapor pressure of 
pure solvent, and p the vapor pressure of the solution. Substituting Eg. (S.2) 
into Eg. (S.I) yields 
(S.4) 
A device loaded with excess active agent generates a saturated solution of the active 
agent, Cas> such that 
(S.5a) 
Furthermore, if the elution medium is kept at a low concentration, then 
(S.Sb) 
If the hydrostatic head, JP, is not allowed to build up because of the outflow from 
the delivery orifice, then 
In ~ JP. 
(S.Sc) 
Thus, Eg. (S.4) reduces to 
(S.6) 
The negative sign indicates that water flows up the active agent concentration 
gradient or down the water concentration gradient. Jw also represents the volumetric 
flux of solution out from the delivery orifice since the internal volume of the 
pump is a constant. The release rate of active agent, therefore, is 
(5.7) 
where A is the permeation area of the membrane. Substituting from Eg. (S.6) yields 
(Theeuwes, 1975) 
-
= CT ART -- C . 
( dMr) 
Lp 
2 
dt 
r 
<5 
as 
(5.8) 
This expression is a simplified version of the zero-order release rate from a device 
operating at steady state without molecular diffusion of the active agent through 
the membrane or the delivery orifice. Further analysis of this device has been 
performed by Theeuwes (197S), for a non-zero-order release rate when the core 
does not contain excess active agent, and for the effect of molecular diffusion. 
Various osmotic pump ~esigns have been proposed. Among these is the Higuchi-
Leeper pump (Higuchi and Leeper, 1976) illustrated in Fig. S.2. The active agent in 
lS9 

5 Special Control1ed-Release Systems 
Semipermeable 
membrane 
Act i ve agent 
chamber 
Delivery point 
Fig. 5.2. Higuchi-Leeper osmotic pump (Higuchi and Leeper, 1976) 
al Pump assembly 
bl Pump in use 
Act i ve agent to 
be pumped 
ft Water inlt 
Fig. 5.3. Theeuwes miniature osmotic pump (Theeuwes, 1973) 
the form of a liquid is separated from the osmotically active salt compartment by 
a moveable impermeable partition. A variant on this is the Theeuwes miniature 
osmotic pump (Theeuwes, 1973) in which the cellulose-based semipermeable mem-
brane itself forms the outer rigid casing (Fig. 5.3). The performance of such a device, 
both in vivo and in vitro, is exhibited in Fig. 5.4 (Theeuwes and Yum, 1976). 
Zero-order release rates are attained; the in vitro rates correlate well with the 
in vivo availability. A detailed study of the performance of this device has been 
reported by Eckenhoff (1981). 
The elementary osmotic pump (Fig. 5.1) is evidently a simplification of the 
miniature osmotic pump (Fig. 5.3). In the elementary osmotic pump, the active 
agent is either itself osmotically active or mixed with some suitable osmotically 
160 

180 
160 
3 
"a 
140 
QI ... 
QI 
> 
120 
QI 
"a 
100 
QI 
E 
::J 
80 
0 > 
QI 
60 
> ... 
0 
40 
::J 
E 
::J 
20 
<.> 
5.1 Osmotic Pumping Devices 
• 
• 
& Rats 
• 
Mice 
• 
in vitro, isotonic 
saline, 37°C 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 120 140 160 180 200 
Time (hours) 
Fig. 5.4. Cumulative volume delivered from a Theeuwes miniature osmotic pump (Theeuwes 
and Yum, 1976) 
~ 40 
~ , 
I 
L.. 
I 
Exper i menta I rate 
.c: 
I 
Ol 
Calculated rate 
I 
E 
30 
I I 
a> 
W_PJll-H-f-fcn-~ 
..... 
c 
L.. 
2.0 
hIlI I 
>-
ihlj 
L.. 
a> 
10 
> 
a> 
I 
0 
I 
0 
0 
5 
10 
1 5 
2.0 
25 
Time (hours) 
Fig. 5.5. Experimental and predicted release rates of potassium chloride from five elementary 
osmotic pumps in water at 37°C (Theeuwes, 1975) 
active compound to form the core. The core, formed in a tableting machine, is 
then coated with the semipermeable membrane and a hole drilled through the 
membrane. The in vitro release rate of potassium chloride into water from such 
a pump is illustrated in Fig. 5.5. The zero-order portion of the predicted delivery 
rate in this figure has been calculated from Eq. (5.8) (Theeuwes, 1975). 
161 

5 Special Controlled-Release Systems 
A different version of the elementary osmotic pump, called the controlled-
porosity osmotic device has been described by Thombre (1985). In this device, the 
polymer coating contains a small amount of water-leachable and polymer-insoluble 
pore-former. The delivery orifice is not pre-formed; instead, pores are created 
in the semipermeable polymer by leaching-out the pore-former material by water. 
The active agent solution then flows out through these pores at the same volumetric 
rate as that of water influx osmosis. 
5.2 Osmotically Activated Monolithic Devices 
The devices described in the preceding section utilize osmotic pressure to pump 
the active agent. However, osmosis can also be used as a release mechanism for 
monolithic devices as indicated in Fig. 5.6 (Baker, 1987). The matrix is composed 
of dispersions of osmotically-active, active agents, having low solubility and diffusivity, 
within the polymer. When placed in an aqueous environment, water is imbibed 
osmotically by the active agent particles near the surface. Water uptake by these 
particles leads to a build-up of osmotic pressure which eventually becomes sufficient 
~
POIYmerIC matrix 
, 
~Osmotlc water" 
_____ 
_ 
--- --
"/ 
Imbibition 
~ --
--
~-~~J~ 5.0"," polym" ~ 
~ .... ~ 
around particles --~J!;:lJfj\Jbrgc;:j 
.; ~:.. •• 
imbibing water 
~ _ •
• ~. _ 
"II~I 
.,tII',.I 
• _ • • ,1 __ Sol id .actlve a~ent 
• 
• 
.. , 
• 
(osmotlcolly-actlve 
• 
• 
• • 
(0) 
particles) 
(b) 
Fig. 5.6a-d. Mechanism of active agent release from monolithic devices by osmotic rupture 
(Baker, 1987) 
162 

5.2 Osmotically Activated Monolithic Devices 
to rupture the polymer matrix surrounding these particles. Subsequently, the active 
agent solution flows out through the fractures. Once this first layer of active 
agent particles is depleted below the saturation water-solubility level, the second layer 
of the particles becomes activated; eventually, the whole process is repeated. This 
proceeds in a serial fashion towards the interior of the matrix (Wright et ai., 
1981 ; Baker, 1987). 
The serial rupturing mechanism allows the system to be broken into two 
regions: the zone of ruptured polymer and the zone of intact polymer. These 
zones are separated by a moving front of imbibing particles/rupturing polymer. The 
release rate from such a device is given by (Wright et ai., 1981) 
(dMr) 
dt 
r 
(5.9) 
where ML is the mass of active agent per layer, tb the time for a particle in 
the active layer to imbibe water and rupture, and ts the time required for 
saturated active agent solution to be pumped out. Both tb and ts are related to the 
osmotic pressure gradient across the matrix surface under the assumption that 
the flow of active agent solution between the rupture front and matrix surface 
is rapid. Wright et ai. (1981) have performed a detailed analysis of the release 
rate from such a device. They have presented the results of experiments with 
devices fabricated from ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers and various active agents. 
The results for pilocarpine nitrate release can be seen in Fig. 5.7. 
~ 
I L-
250 
..c 
01 
~ 
Q) 
200 
0 
L-
Q) 
VI 
150 
0 
Q) 
Q) 
L-
100 
c 
Q) 
01 
0 
50 
Q) 
> 
-+-
0 
u « 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
Time (hours) 
Fig. 5.7. Release of pilocarpine nitrate from an osmotically activated monolithic device 
containing 27% by volume of the active agent (Wright et ai., 1981) 
163 

5 Special Controlled-Release Systems 
The osmotic release mechanism described above does not hold for loadings greater 
than 20-30 % by volume of the active agent. At these loadings, the percolation 
threshold is approached, and the outcome is simple leaching of the active agent 
(Baker, 1987). 
5.3 Externally Modulated Devices 
If the dispersion of active agent and magnetic beads is produced within a polymer 
matrix and placed in an aqueous medium, release of the active agent occurs by 
diffusion in a manner typical of diffusion-controlled monolithic devices. However, 
when these matrices are exposed to an oscillating external magnetic field, the rate 
of release of active agent jumps to a higher value (Hsieh et ai., 1981; Hsieh and 
Langer, 1983; Edelman et ai., 1985; Kost et ai., 1985). This externally modulated 
release mechanism has been extensively examined by Langer and his coworkers 
who have prepared the matrices from ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers. The active 
agent and magnetic beads are incorporated uniformly by solvent-casting a mixture 
of polymer active agent at -80 °C on a glass mold and then placing beads 
uniformly on the cast. After two minutes, another layer of the mixture of polymer 
and active agent is cast over the beads, trapping them. Release rates with 
magnetic triggering have been found to be as much as thirty times higher than 
without triggering. While the mechanism responsible for magnetic modulation is 
not well understood, it has been suggested that the oscillating beads cause alternate 
compression and expansion of the pores, thus "pumping" the active agent. The 
7.5 
:;:: -
0 
.~, 5.0 
... c:: 
0 
0 
L. .., 
.,-
... Q) 
0'-
L.-
Q).~ 
<n ... 
0 
Q) 
2.5 
., c:: 
a; '" 
0 
0: E 
o L-~~~ 
____ -L ______ L-____ ~ 
____ ~ 
____ ~ 
o 
5 
10 
1 5 
Osci Ilotion frequency (Hertz) 
Fig. 5.S. Average ratio of the rates of bovine serum albumin release from matrices of 
ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers containing magnetic beads as a function of magnetic oscilla-
tion frequency (Edelman et aI., 1984) 
164 

5.3 Externally Modulated Devices 
20 
• Release of p-nitroaniline 
0 
o Polymer degradation 
+= 1 5 
! 
0 .. 
c 
t 
0 -
CI 
::s 10 
.... 
0 
E 
.:! 
CI .. 
5 
t 
., .. 
CI 
~ 
~ 
., ., 
¢ 
a:: 
0 
0 
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 
Ultrasonic intensity (W) 
Fig. 5.9. Effect of ultrasound intensity on the modulation ratio for the release of p-nitro-
aniline from poly[bis (p-carboxy phenoxy) methane] (Kost et ai., 1986) 
effect of oscillation frequency on the release rate of borine serum albumin is 
demonstrated in Fig. 5.8 (Edelman et al., 1984). 
Langer and his coworkers have also investigated ultrasound as a means of 
modulating the release of macromolecules from polymer matrices. Erodible and 
non-erodible polymers have been compression- or injection-molded with the active 
agent. When placed in water, the macromolecular agent diffuses out by a pore-
diffusion release mechanism. Nevertheless, when subjected to ultrasound, the release 
rates are enhanced significantly from both types of polymers. Ultrasound appears 
to influence the biodegradability of the matrix as well as its permeability, as 
indicated by the enhanced rate of release from non-erodible matrices. Erosion of 
polymer surface is apparently intensified by cavitation and acoustic streaming. 
Figure 5.9 shows the effect of ultrasound intensity on the modulation ratio, 
defined as the ratio of the rate of release (or degradation) at a given period of 
ultrasound exposure to the average rate of release immediately preceding and follow-
ing this exposure (Kost et al., 1986). 
The two types of externally modulated systems described here offer the possibility 
of developing demand-responsive release systems, especially useful in medical thera-
peutics, where constant rate infusions of the drug must be periodically supplemented 
by increased dosages (e.g., extra insulin before meals for diabetics, anti-anginals for 
cardiovascular applications, etc.) (Kost et al., 1986). Compared to magnetic 
modulation, ultrasound modulation has the advantage that it does not require any 
special formulation techniques; it can be formed with erodible polymers, thus 
obviating the need for surgical removal of implants. 
165 

References 
References 
Baker, R. W.: Controlled Release of Biologically Active Agents, pp. 132-149, John Wiley 
and Sons, New York (1987) 
Bruck, S. D.: Pharmacological Basis of Controlled Drug Delivery, pp. 1-13. In: Controlled 
Drug Delivery, Vol. I. Basic Concepts, Bruck, S. D. (Ed.), CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
Florida (1983) 
Eckenhoff, B.: Osmotically Driven Pumps for Rate-Controlled Delivery of Solutions and 
Viscous Suspensions. In: Controlled Release Systems, Chandrasekaran, S. K. (Ed.), AIChE 
Symposium Series 206,77, 1-9 (1981) 
Edelman, E., Kost, J., Bobeck, H., Langer, R.: Regulation of Drug Release from Porous 
Polymer Matrices by Oscillating Magnetic Fields, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 19, 67-83 
(1985) 
Edelman, E. R., Linhardt, R. J., Bobeck, H., Kost, J., Rosen, H. B., Langer, R.: Polymer 
Based Drug Delivery: Magnetically Modulated and Bioerodible Systems, pp. 279-292. 
In: Polymers as Biomaterials, Shalaby, S. W., Hoffman, A. S., Ratner, B. D., Horbett, T. A. 
(Eds.), Plenum Press, New York (1984) 
Higuchi, T., Leeper, H. M.: Osmotic Dispenser with Means for Dispensing Active Agent 
Responsive to Osmotic Gradient, U.S. Patent 3,995,631 (1976) 
Hsieh, D. S. T., Langer R.: Zero-Order Drug Delivery Systems with Magnetic Control, pp. 
121-131. In: Controlled Release Delivery Systems, Roseman, T. J., Mansdorff, S. Z. (Eds.), 
Marcel Dekker, New York (1983) 
Hsieh, D. S. T., Langer R., Folkman, J.: Magnetic Modulation of Release of Macromolecules 
from Polymers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 78, 1863-1867 (1981) 
Katchalsky, A., Curran, P. F.: Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics in Biophysics, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1976) 
Kost, J., Leong, K., Langer, R.: Ultrasonic Modulated Drug Delivery Systems, pp. 387-396. 
In: Polymers in Medicine. II, Chiellini, E., Giusti, P., Migliaresi, C., Nicolais, L. (Eds.), 
Plenum Press, New York (1986) 
Kost, J., Noecker, R., Kunica, E., Langer, R.: Magnetically Controlled Release Systems: 
Effect of Polymer Composition, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 19,935-940 (1985) 
Langer, R., Peppas, N.: Chemical and Physical Structure of Polymers as Carriers for 
Controlled Release of Bioactive Agents: A Review, J. Macromol. Sci.-Rev. Macromol. 
Chern. Phys. e23, 61-126 (1983) 
Theeuwes, F.: Osmotically Powered Active Agent Dispensing Device with Filling Means, 
U.S. Patent 3,760,984 (1973) 
Theeuwes, F.: Elementary Osmotic Pump, J. Pharm. Sci. 64,1987-1991 (1975) 
Theeuwes, F.: Delivery of Active Agents by Osmosis, pp. 195-205. In: Controlled Release 
Technologies: Methods, Theory, and Applications, Vol. II, Kydonieus, A. F. (Ed.), CRC 
Press, Boca Baton, Florida (1980) 
Theeuwes, F., Yum, S. I.: Principles of the Design and Operation of Generic Osmotic Pumps 
for the Delivery of Semisolid or Liquid Drug Formulations, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 4, 
343-352 (1976) 
Thombre, A. G.: Mechanism and Kinetics of Release from Two Controlled Drug Delivery 
Devices, pp. 107-205, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 
(1985) 
Wright, J., Chandrasekaran, S. K., Gale, R., Swanson, D.: A Model for the Release of 
Osmotically Active Agents from Monolithic Polymeric Matrices. In: Controlled Release 
Systems, Chandrasekaran, S. K. (Ed.), AIChE Symposium Series 20677,62-68 (1981) 
166 

6. Stochastic Model for Diffusion in 
Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
A number of new polymeric materials are being explored for possible utilization 
as carriers for the controlled release of biologically active agents. The morphological 
structure of most polymers is heterogeneous, consisting of two phases, namely 
crystalline and amorphous. These two phases are present in varying amounts 
depending on the composition and the thermal and processing history of the 
polymer, and are dispersed throughout the body of the polymer. Transport of 
active agents in such materials is influenced therefore by their molecular structure 
since the permeabilities of the two phases are different. Crystalline domains in 
a semi-crystalline polymer are virtually impermeable relative to the amorphous 
phase; consequently, the diffusing molecule has to follow a tortuous path through 
the permeable amorphous phase. This permeable phase is interspersed between 
the impermeable domains serving as boundaries or walls. It is evident that 
the characteristics of transport in the permeable-impermeable domains of a hetero-
geneous polymer are similar to those in a porous medium. Thus the release of an 
active agent from either the heterogeneous polymer or the porous matrix carrier 
can be analyzed analogously (see, e.g., Peterlin, 1979, Harland and Peppas, 1986). 
Transport within a porous matrix is usually analyzed by the deterministic 
Fickian diffusion equation, representing a continuum approximation to the system. 
However, transport inside a pore network is a probabilistic phenomenon because 
of the random nature of the pores and the stochastic nature of the transport 
process. Each molecule diffuses by executing a random walk within the network 
along with collision with walls and with other molecules. The random nature of 
both the medium and the mechanism makes this phenomenon well suited for 
a stochastic analysis, as opposed to the conventional deterministic approach. 
The deterministic approach does not provide any insight into the actual mechanism 
itself; correction for lack of "continuum" is made by utilization of "fudge factors" 
such as tortuosity, which are adjusted to make predicted values agree with experi-
mental observations (Aris, 1975). A deep insight into the system will be afforded by 
a complete molecular level description based on the laws of motion; however, this 
approach is too complicated for computation. A stochastic approach provides more 
information than the deterministic approach, and yet is more tractable than a micro-
scopic analysis. With the advent of increased and readily accessible computing 
power, the stochastic formulation becomes highly attractive because Monte Carlo 
simulations of these phenomena can be performed. The stochastic approach along 
with Monte Carlo simulations is applied here to the analysis of transport in 
heterogeneous polymer or porous matrices for illustration. Other phenomena, 
important in active agent delivery, that can be similarly analyzed include grinding 
167 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
and mixing (see, e.g., Fan and Shin, 1979; Duggirala, 1986), crystallization (see, 
e.g., Too et aI., 1986), and polymerization and polymer degradation (see, e.g., 
Nassar et aI., 1981; Chou et aI., 1987). 
Analysis of the phenomenon of concentration-gradient-driven mass tr,ansport 
in porous materials has received a great deal of attention in the chemical 
engineering literature. The equation usually applied to transport in porous media 
is 
a(C) 
eTl = V ·eD.1f VC. 
(6.1) 
This expression is rigorous only for a homogeneous medium (see, e.g., McGregor, 
1974). However, due to its intuitive appeal and the existence of a large body of 
literature based on this equation, it has also been widely employed even for 
heterogeneous media. Equation (6.1) involves fluxes and concentrations defined 
in terms of the external dimensions and configuration of the whole solid mass, 
thereby implying averaging of the local properties in deriving it. Among the 
assumptions and constraints imposed if a point equation describing diffusion 
is to be integrated over an "averaging volume" to give Eq. (6.1) is 
r', I' ~ !l' ~ L 
where r' and I' represent characteristic lengths for the structure of the porous 
media, !l' the characteristic length of the averaging volume, and L that of the 
macroscopic system (Whitaker, 1969). These constraints ensure that the volume 
and area averages for diffusion through a porous medium are identical. This 
justifies the use of the volume porosity, e, in Eq. (6.1) to calculate the cross-
sectional area open to diffusion in the porous medium (McGregor, 1974); a related 
requirement is that the pores be randomly oriented (Satterfield, 1970). 
Various definitions of the effective diffusion coefficient or diffusivity are given to 
account for the complexity of the porous media structure (see, e.g., Akanni 
et aI., 1987). The most common definition of the effective diffusivity is 
(6.2) 
where! is the tortuosity of the porous network, and Da the average diffusion 
coefficient of the diffusing species in the fluid bathing the pores. Da is variously based 
on the average pore radius (Satterfield, 1970) or defined as the pore-volume-
averaged diffusivity in a pore (Johnson and Stewart, 1965; Feng and Stewart, 
1973; Wang and Smith, 1983). 
Transport in a porous medium can be portrayed as a probabilistic phenomenon, 
with a diffusing molecule having a choice among a number of paths to follow 
at any instant. The porous medium can itself be visualized as a network of 
randomly oriented, connected pore segments; the diffusing molecule undergoes 
a random walk in this medium (see, e.g., De Jong, 1958; Saffman, 1959; 
Scheidegger, 1965; Pismen, 1974). 
168 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
Each step of the random walk, comprising passage through a single pore, 
is generally assumed to be statistically independent of the preceding one. Bhatia 
(1986) has argued that the above assumption of an uncorrelated random walk is not 
usually justified. He states that the fixed internal pore surface of the medium 
must provide a memory effect. Shortly after traversing a complete pore segment 
and arriving at a pore intersection, the diffusing molecule cap, as a result 
of chance collisions, reverse direction. In such a case, the next full pore segment 
traversed may be precisely the last one and this no longer has a random orientation 
(Bhatia, 1985, 1986). 
Directional autocorrelation between successive steps of a random walk is important 
for diffusion in an atomic lattice by the vacancy mechanism. When an atom 
jumps into a neighboring vacant lattice site, it creates a vacancy at the site it 
previously occupied. Consequently, the atom on its next jump has a greater than 
random probability of returning to its original site (Manning, 1961). However, 
the same reasoning cannot hold for diffusion in porous media. Each unit step in the 
random walk, consisting of the traversal of the length of a single pore, is 
actually made up of a number of smaller steps. The distance travelled by the 
molecule between collisions, with other molecules in the case of bulk diffusion 
or with pore walls in the case of Knudsen diffusion, is much smaller than the 
length of a pore segment. These collisions will result in a meandering motion of the 
molecule and will tend to erase any memory effect. The probability of returning 
through the previous pore will not be any different from that of exiting through 
any of the others at the intersection. Therefore, any unit step of the random 
walk will at most be weakly correlated to its preceding step (except in systems 
involving pressure-driven bulk flow). 
Based on his description of a self-correlated random walk, Bhatia (1986) has 
derived a generalized form of the master equation for the diffusion process. 
The formulation has been solved analytically by seeking the continuum limit since 
individual steps of the random walk (the pore segments) are small compared to 
the macroscopic length scale (Bhatia, 1986). An expression for the effective diffusivity 
and a correction factor have been obtained, while the form of Eq. (6.1) has 
been justified for heterogeneous media assuming random (uniform) pore orientations. 
An equation of the form of Eq. (6.1) has also been obtained for spatially 
periodic media (Ryan et ai., 1981) using the method of volume averaging. However, 
the specific case of non-uniform pore orientations has not been examined. 
The objective of this chapter is to provide a general stochastic framework or 
model for transport in porous medium to illustrate the technique. A random-
walk (uncorrelated) description of the diffusion phenomenon is adopted for this 
purpose. The molecules are considered capable of undergoing a first-order reaction 
in the pores; no a priori assumptions are made about pore orientation. The 
master equation for the phenomenon is derived; it is reduced to a generalized 
Fickian form of the diffusion equation consisting of a diffusive term and a drift 
(convective) term. An expression for the effective diffusivity is recovered from 
the analysis, and the drift velocity is defined. The process of transport in porous 
systems is also examined by an event-driven Monte Carlo simulation technique; 
both isotropic and anisotropic systems are considered. 
It must be noted that a large number of models are available for transport in 
169 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
porous media including the spatially periodic network (of tubes) model (Fatt, 
1956), the "turbulent" flow model (Scheidegger, 1959), the macropore-micropore 
model (Wakao and Smith, 1962), the convergent-divergent pore model (Foster and 
Butt, 1966), the dusty gas model (Mason et al. 1967), the random network model 
(Haring and Greenkorn, 1970), and the periodic capillary models for bidisperse 
media (Wakad and Nardse, 1974; Gavalas and Kim, 1981). Models for diffusion 
and reaction in ordered porous network catalysts have been presented by Theodorou 
and Wei (1983) and Mo and Wei (1986). 
6.1 Derivation 
A stochastic model for transport in porous media requires that all states that can 
possibly be occupied by a diffusing molecule, be identified. Transition rates between 
these states are also needed. A master equation can then be derived for the 
probability of a molecule being in any of the possible states. In what follows, 
the diffusing entity is regarded as a molecule; however, the same is valid (perhaps 
more so) for a multimolecular or meso scopic diffusing entity (e.g., colloidal 
particles). 
6.1.1 Statistical Model for the Porous/Heterogeneous-Polymer 
Matrix 
The pore space may be considered as being composed of a network of intersecting 
cylindrical capillary segments, as shown in Fig. 6.1. The number of segments 
intersecting at any point is identical throughout the matrix and is equal to M. 
A pore segment is characterized by two parameter sets OJ and e; OJ contains the 
170 
Fig. 6.1. Network of permeable domains in a semi-crystalline 
polymer or porous matrix 

6.1 Derivation 
dimensionless pore radius (r = r'lf) and the dimensionless length (/ = l' fT), while 
e contains the azimuthal angle (0) and polar angle (11)) specifying the orientation of 
the pore in the spherical coordinate system. Thus, 
w == (r, l) 
(6.3 a) 
and 
(6.3 b) 
The unit vector along the axis of the pore segment, t2r, is related to the unit 
cartesian vector components ~x, ~y and ~z by 
~r = sin () cos 11> ~x + sin () sin 11> ~y + cos 0 ~z . 
(6.4) 
The dimensions of the pore segments vary from pore to pore, but they are 
significantly smaller than the macroscopic dimensions of the matrix. 
An intersection can be characterized by specifying the parameters of the M pore 
segments comprising the intersection. Thus, the set 
(6.5 a) 
characterizes the radii and length of the M pores, while 
(6.5 b) 
defines their orientations. If S such intersections exist in the matrix (based on unit 
volume), they may be characterized by the sets 
(6.6a) 
and 
(6.6 b) 
The dimensionless position coordinate in the matrix is given by;;, defined as 
_ X 
'1 = -L 
(6.7) 
where L is the macr6scopic length scale, and X is the vector defining the position 
coordinate with respect to a stationary frame of reference. 
A probability density function for the characteristics of the matrix may be defined 
such that 
171 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
is the probability that the parameters of. the 120re intersections in the matrix lie in 
the range of ({w}, {w} + d{w}) and ({e}, {e} + d{e}), where 
s 
d{w} == n dWj 
(6.8 a) 
j = 1 
and 
(6.8 b) 
(The density function, when integrated over all possible values of {w} and {e}, 
becomes equal to 1.) In the above definitions, 
(6.9 a) 
and 
(6.9b) 
fJ. is a characteristic parameter of the pore structure of the matrix; it is defined as the 
ratio of the pore length scale, 7, to the macroscopic length scale, L, i.e., 
7 
fJ.= Z. 
As fJ. -> 0, the continuum limit is approached. 
(6.10) 
The above formulation is adequate for describing the pore structure of the media 
being considered here. This description of porous media is similar to that employed 
by Bhatia (1986). [A much less detailed version was given by De Jong (1958)]. 
6.1.2 State of the Diffusing Molecule and State Transitions 
The state of the diffusing molecule may, at any time, be defined by its position. 
The molecule is said to belong to (the neighborhood of) an intersection at if as 
long as it is in the pore segments meeting at this intersection and has not exited from 
the end of any of these. Upon arriving at the next intersection, the molecule is 
considered to belong to (the neighborhood of) the new site even if, in the course of 
its meandering, it returns to the pore it has just traversed. 
The procedure of deriving the master equation for the present system will involve 
following a particular "tagged" molecule as it moves in the matrix. The behavior 
of this molecule will be considered representative of all the molecules in the system. 
Thus, we define the probability distribution function, P(if, tl {w}, {e}), as 
172 

6.1 Derivation 
P(ij, tl {~}, {e}) = 
Probability of finding the molecule at (in the 
neighborhood of) the intersection at ij at time t, 
given that the state of the matrix is ({ ~}, {en, 
and the position of the molecule at time zero is 
known 
The "neighborhood" IS regarded as a small region of radius dij around the 
point ij, i.e., formally 
P(ij, tl({~}, {e}) == p(ij, tl {~}, {en dij, 
where p(ij, tl {ill}, {e}) is the probability density function corresponding to P(ij, tl 
{ill}, {e}). 
A molecule can undergo a transition in its state by exiting from the intersection 
or by reacting in the pore system at the intersection. However, the time that 
elapses before it completes these transitions is also a random variable. We, therefore, 
define a probability distribution function for the residence time, Pu(t,ifl {~}), 
such that 
[
Probability of finding the molecule at (in the neighbor-l 
P (t, ifl {cO}) = 
hood of) ~he intersecti?n at ij at time t, after it arriv~d 
. 
u 
there at time t = 0, gIven that the state of the matnx 
is {ill} 
After remaining in the intersection for a length of time t, the molecule may exit 
from one of the pores and arrive at the next intersection. The probability density 
function for this transition is given by pii, t, ijl {~}),.such that 
l 
Probability of the molecule exiting from the inter-l 
Pd(i, t, ifl {ill}) dt = 
section at if throu~h the i~h pore in the ~ime inter-
val (t, t + dt) havmg arnved there at time t = 0, 
given that the state of the matrix is {ill} 
Similarly, the molecule may "exit" or disappear from the intersection by reaction. The 
probability density function for this transition is given by p/t, ifl {cO}); in other 
words, 
r 
Probability ofthe molecule undergoing reaction in the 1 
( 
~I { ~}) d _ 
pore system of the intersection at if in the time 
Pr t, I'J 
w 
t -. 
I ( 
d) h' 
. d h 
. 
0 
mterva t, t + t 
avmg arnve t ere at time t = 
, 
given that the state of the matrix is {cO} 
These density functions are similar to those employed by Bhatia (1986). 
The preceding developments may now be utilized to obtain the transition rates 
between the possible states of a diffusing molecule. It will be assumed that such 
transitions are Markovian. Thus, the probability of the molecule undergoing 
173 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
a transition at any point in time is independent of the length of time it has been 
in its present state. This implies that 
[
Probability of the molecule undergoing a transition (by exiting or J 
reacting) from the intersection at fj in the time interval (I, 1 + dl) 
having arrived there at time 1 = 0, given that the state of the matrix 
is {cO} 
_ 
[
Probability of finding the molecule at (in the neighborhood of) J 
the intersection at fj at time 1 after it arrived there at time 
1 = 0, given that the state of the matrix is {cO} 
[
Probability of the molecule undergoing a transition (by exiting or ] 
x 
reacting) from the intersection at fj in a time interval of length 
dl in (t, 1 + dl), given that the state of the matrix is {cO} 
For the transition involving the exodus from the end of the ith pore, we have 
where 
pii, I, fj I {cO}) dl = P/I, fjl {cO}) A/i, fjl {cO}) dl 
(6.11) 
[
Probability of the molecule exiting from the inter-] 
A/i, fiI {cO}) dl = 
section at fj through the ith pore in a time inte,:al . 
of length dl, given that the state of the matrix is {w} 
For reaction, similarly, 
where 
P.(I, fjl {cO}) dl = P.(I, fj I {cO}) Ar(fj I {cO}) dl 
(6.12) 
r 
Probability of the molecule undergoing reaction in theJ 
A CI {cO}) dl = 
pore system of the intersection at fj in a time interval 
. 
r '1 
of length dl, given that the state of the matrix is 
[cO} 
Ad and Ar are, therefore, the actual transition intensity functions for the molecule. 
After arriving at an intersection at time 1 = 0, the molecule may exit from it, 
react in it or remain in it at time I. Summing up these probabilities, we 
obtain 
M 
I 
I 
I f pii, r, ij I {OJ}) dr + f p,{'r:, ij I {w]) dr + P"(t, ij I {OJ)) = 1 . 
(6.13) 
i= 1 0 
0 
174 

6.1 Derivation 
6.1.3 Derivation of the Master Equation 
The consideration of possible transitions experienced by a molecule in the matrix 
has not accounted for the transition by convective flow of bulk fluid (e.g., 
pressure-driven flow). Thus, the subsequent discussion is limited to constant density 
systems with no bulk fluid flow. The reaction is unimolecular, giving rise to a free 
moving inert product. This approach is also valid for dilute phase diffusion where 
the concentration of the diffusing species is small, and diffusion does not create 
a convective fluid flow. Furthermore, transitions into and out of the matrix have not 
been considered; these appear as boundary conditions. 
The master equation for the present system may now be obtained by writing 
a probability balance on the state of a "tagged" molecule. This balance is 
given as 
[
Probability of finding the molecule at (in the neighborhood of) ] 
the intersection a~ ~ at time t + At, given that the state of the 
matrix is ({w}, {e}) 
[
Probability of the molecule arriving at the intersection at ~ from] 
= 
the surrounding intersections i~ the time interval (t, t + At), given 
that the state of the matrix is {w} 
[
Probability of finding the molecule at (in the neighborhood Of)] 
x 
the surroundjng i~tersections at time t, given that the state of the 
matrix is ({w}, {en 
1 [
Probability of the molecule exiting from the intersection at] 
+ 
I -
if in the time interval (t, t + At), given that the state of the 
matrix is {w} 
[
Probability of the molecule reacting in the pore system of the] I 
_ 
intersection at ij in the _time interval (t, t + At), given that the 
state of the matrix is {w} 
[
Probability of finding the molecule at (in the neighborhood of) ] 
x 
the intersection at ~ at time t, given that the state of the 
matrix is ({w}, {e}) 
The first part in the right-hand side of this expression is the probability of the 
. molecule arriving at the intersection from the surroundings in the stated time interval. 
The second part is equivalent to the probability that the molecule is at the 
intersection at ij at time t and maintains status-quo in the time interval (t, t + At). 
The "surrounding intersections" include all the intersections at the ends of the M 
pores comprising the intersections under consideration at ij. Each of these M inter-
sections is at a distance ali «2ri from ij, i.e., at the position ij + ali «2ri (see Fig. 6.1). 
175 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
Substituting the individual terms into the probability balance expression, we 
obtain, 
P(il, t + L1tl {w}, {e}) 
M 
_ 
= I Pd(i, i1 + exl; ~r; I {w}) L1t P(il + exlj §rj, t I {w}, {em 
j:::: I 
The summations arise since the transition into and out of the intersection at 
il can occur through any of the M pores. Rearranging Eq. (6.14), dividing both 
sides by L1t, and subsequently taking the limit as L1t -> 0, yield 
ap(il, t I fro}, {e}) 
at 
M 
=.I Ad(i, i1 + exl; ~r; I [ev]) P(i1 + exl; ~r;, t I {ro}, {e}) 
1= 1 -L~l AAi, ij I {w)) + Ar(1j i [W))] P(il, t I {w}, {e}) . 
(6.15) 
This equation is the master equation for the probability distribution for the 
location of a tagged diffusing molecule in the matrix. 
Equation (6.15) may be simplified by recognizing that the lengths of the pore 
segments are small compared to the macroscopic length scale. Thus, the first term 
on the right-hand side may be expanded as a Taylor series around il, giving 
J..ii, il + exlj §rj I {w}) P(il + exlj ~r, t I {w}, {e}) 
= J..ii, ill {w}) P(il, tl {w}, {e}) 
+ exlj§rj' V[J..ii, ill {w}) P(il, tl {w}, {em 
+ ~ ex2lf §rj §rj : VV[J..ii, ill {w}) P(ill {w}, {em 
+ O[(exIY] . 
(6.16) 
Substituting Eq. (6.16) into Eq. (6.15) and dropping the higher order terms 
yield 
176 
ap(i1, t I {OJ}, {a}) 
at 
= I ~ ex21? ~r; ~r; : VV[ AAi, Ij I {w}) P(ij, t I {w}, {e})] 
;=1 2 
M 
_ 
__ 
+ I exl; §r j • VPAi, i11 {w}) P(Ij, t I {w}, {e})] 
i= I 
-
Ar(1j I {w}) P(Ij, t I {w}, {e}) . 
(6.17) 

6.1 Derivation 
This equation is the master equation for the probability of finding the tagged 
molecule at an intersection, in terms of the parameters of the matrix. Note that 
by conditioning on the matrix characteristics, we imply that the motions of this 
tagged molecule are followed in a well-defined system. 
6.1.4 Recovery of the Diffusion Equation 
To transform the probability balance equation, Eq. (6.17), into a mass balance 
equation, the transition intensities need to be defined in terms of the characteristics 
of the matrix. From the analysis, originally presented by Pismen (1974), and extended 
by Bhatia (1986) to reacting systems, we have 
(6.18a) 
(6.18b) 
and 
(6.19a) 
(6.19b) 
These expressions have been obtained by solving the diffusion equations simultane-
ously for each pore connected to an intersection, with common boundary conditions 
at the intersection. The molecules are initially placed at the intersection, and the flux 
at any pore outlet is taken as the exit intensity. De is an effective diffusivity 
utilized for de-dimensionalization, D; the dimensionless diffusivity in the ith pore, 
and kr the first-order surface reaction rate constant (Bhatia, 1986). It is evident that the 
above transition intensities are functions of the characteristics of the intersection 
under consideration only, and not of the whole system even though they have been 
defined as conditional on {6)}. 
For the present purpose, D; is the significant parameter. In a porous matrix where 
the pores are bathed with the environmental fluid, it is representative of the 
diffusivity in the pore fluid. If the pores are large enough, this may be taken to be the 
diffusivity in the bulk fluid itself (both liquids and gases). In gaseous systems 
where the radius of the pores becomes small and diffusion falls in the Knudsen region, 
it is representative of the Knudsen diffusivity. Analogous definitions may be 
employed for heterogeneous polymeric systems where D; is the diffusivity within the 
amorphous polymer. Various theories are available for predicting this diffusivity, 
e.g., statistical mechanical theories (Pace and Datyner, 1979) and free-volume theories 
(Vrentas and Duda, 1979) [see also McGregor (1974) for a brief review of this 
topic]. 
177 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
Substituting Eqs. (6.18b) and (6.l9b) into Eq. (6.17) gives 
oP(fi, t I {~}, {e}) 
at 
M 
+ L ex-II; ~r; . V[kdWj; w) P(fi, t I {w}, {e})] 
i= 1 
(6.20) 
The quantity of most interest is the concentration of the diffusing entities at any 
point. Towards this end, in the absence of interaction between the diffusing molecules, 
we have (Appendix 6A) 
£[U(fi, tl {w}, {e})] = NP(fi, tl {w}, {e}) 
(6.21) 
where U(fi, tl {Q)}, {e}) is the number of molecules at (in the neigl:!.borhood of) the 
position fi at time t, given that the state of the matrix is ({w}, {e}, and N is the 
total number of molecules in the matrix at any instant t. E[X] denotes the 
expectation value of random variable X. Molecules can only be found at fi values 
corresponding to intersections. The volume of an intersection comprises the volumes 
of all the M pores comprising the intersection. Denoting this volume by V(fi), 
we have 
_ 
{'} {"'} 
E[U(fi, tl {w}, {e})] 
W(I], tl Q), e) = 
V(fi) 
. 
(6.22) 
This expression represents the number concentration of molecules at the intersection, 
based on the local intersection volume; transformation to the system-volume basis 
requires multiplication by the local porosity. Division of this number concentration 
by the Avogadro number converts it into the molar concentration. Combining 
Eqs. (6.21) and (6.22) gives 
P(fi, tl {w}, {e}) = W(fi, tl {w), {e}) V(i1) . 
N 
(6.23) 
This may be substituted into Eq. (6.17) to obtain the master equation in terms of the 
number concentration (based on local pore volume), as given below: 
M 
+ L rt.-II; ~r; . V[kli(W;; ev) V(~) W(fi, t I {~}, {e})] 
;= 1 
(6.24) 
178 

6.1 Derivation 
The quantity N has been cancelled from both sides. Note that by not differentiating N 
with respect to t, we have restricted the model to a closed system where N can 
be taken to be a constant. However, transitions into and out of the matrix will appear 
in the form of boundary conditions when solving the master equation, and therefore 
the derivation is applicable to both closed and open systems. Application of the 
V operator to 
V(~) in Eq. (6.24) and division of the resultant expression by 
V@lead to 
aw 
M 
1 
[ 
(VV) 
VVV] 
-
= I - Ii ~ri ~ri: VV(k1iW) + 2(Vk1iW)' 
-
+ kJjW -v 
at 
;= 1 2 
V 
(6.25) 
where the parameters have been dropped for simplicity of notation. Noting that 
and 
VVk1iW = V' (k1i VW) + (Vkd . (VW) + W VVkJj 
we obtain from Eq. (6.25) 
aw 
1 ~ 2 
-a = -
L. Ii ~ri §ri : [V . (k1i VW) + (Vk1i) . (VW) + W VVk1i] 
t 
2 ;=! 
~ [! 
2 
VV] 
+ L. rr I. + /. lir· -
lir· [k!.VW + WVk!.] 
;= 1 
I 
I 
-
I 
V 
-
I 
I 
I 
or 
aw 
1 M 
-
= - I I; ~ri ~ri: V . (k1i VW) 
at 
2 ;=1 
IM[12 
-I 
+ 
-I. lir· lir.: VVk!. + (1. 
l.lir·· Vk l · 
2 
I 
-
I 
_ 
1 
I 
I 
-
I 
I 
i=1 
2 ( 
VV) 
1 
VV 
+ /. 
lir.· -
(lir.· Vk!.) + (1.- k!./.lir . . ~ 
I 
-I V 
-I 
I 
II-I V 
1 2 
VVV] 
+ - /. k l · lir· lir·: -- W 
2 
I 
I 
-
I 
-
I 
V 
(6.26a) 
(6.26 b) 
(6.27) 
(6.28) 
179 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
This equation should be valid for all systems with or without reaction. A non-
reacting system at thermodynamic equilibrium requires that 
and 
aw 
-=0 
at 
vw= O. 
(6.29 a) 
(6.29 b) 
For these conditions to be satisfied in a non-reacting system, the third part of the 
right-hand side of Eq. (6.28) must be identically zero at equilibrium, i.e., 
+ I. 
br.· -
(by.· Vk l ·) + ex- k l ·/· br.-
2 (VV) 
I 
VV 
I 
-I V -I 
I 
II-IV 
(6.30) 
Since all terms in the above expression are constants representing parameters of the 
matrix, they will be identically zero, irrespective of the thermodynamic state of the 
system (in or out of equilibrium). The simplified version of Eq. (6.28) is, therefore, 
aw 
1 M 
-
= -
" 
l~ br· br.: V . (k l · VW) 
at 
2 i~1 I 
-
I 
-
I 
I 
+ L... -t· br·· Vk l · + IX 
/.kl· + Ik l · br·· -
br.· VW 
~ [1 
2 
-I 
2 
VV] 
i== 1 
2 ' - , 
l 
'l' I 
-
I 
V 
-, 
(6.31 ) 
Note that starting from the behavior of a single molecule, we have obtained 
an equation for the population of the molecules under the assumption that all 
molecules will behave in a similar fashion. 
The preceding development has been based on the matrix characteristics. However, 
since these characteristics are seldom well defined, the equation will now be averaged 
over the probability density function for these characteristics. This will give us an 
"averaged" or expected-concentration equation. We denote an expectation operator 
by <->, such that for any function g(.) 
<g) = J J g(w, e, ~, t I {ea}, Ie}) Ps({w}, Ie}; ex) d{w} d{e}. 
(6.32) 
{~I {J} 
180 

6.1 Derivation 
Multiplying both sides of Eq. (6.31) by Ps({w}, {e}; IX) d{w} d{e} and performing 
the above mentioned integration yield, formally 
-- = -
I Ii 
~ri ~ri: V . {kli[VW]} 
a(w) 
1 \ M 
2 
) 
at 
2 
i= I 
/ 
M [1 
2 
I 
2 
VV] 
) 
+ \S 2" Ii ~ri . Vk li + IX- likli + Ii kli ~ri . V 
§ri' VW 
- (k2W), 
(6.33) 
In attempting to evaluate the expectations on the right-hand side of Eq. (6.33), 
it must be noted that the intersections in the matrix are not truly independent of 
each other. While the pore characteristics within each intersection may be in-
dependently and identically distributed, neighboring intersections share a common 
pore segment and their distributions, therefore, are correlated. Nevertheless, since IX 
is a small parameter, we may write 
where PsoO is the zero-order approximation to PsO, representing the probability 
density function applicable if all intersections are independent of and identical to 
each other; PSIO is the first-order correction term containing the effect of nearest-
neighbor interactions, while the higher-order interactions are neglected. We shall 
elaborate on Pso elsewhere. Meanwhile, note. that from the definifion of Ps and 
the requirement that density functions integrate to 1, Pso and PSI are constrained, 
respectively, by 
and 
f f Pso({w}, {e}) d{w} d{e} = 1 
{il;} {~} 
f f PSI({W}, {e}; IX) d{w} d{e} = o. 
{~} {~} 
Substituting Eq. (6.34) into Eq. (6.32) yields 
where 
(g)o = f I g(w, e, ~, t I {w}, {eD Pso({W}, {e}) d{w} d{e} 
{it.} Ie} 
and 
(g)1 = f f g(w, e,~, t I {w}, {e}) PSI({W}, {e}; IX) d{w} d{e}. 
{ff,} Ie} 
(6.35 a) 
(6.35 b) 
(6.36a) 
(6.36 b) 
(6.36 c) 
181 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
Utilizing the above definitions in Eq. (6.33), and equating terms of similar orders 
of approximation, we obtain 
and 
a(W(ij, t 1 {w}, {B}»o 
at 
= ~ (~ I; ~rj ~rj: V . {k li(w j ; w) [VW(ij, tl {w}, {e})] )0 
+ (~I [~ I; ~rj . Vku(Wj; w) + ex-I Ijkli(wj; w) 
2 
_,. 
VV(ij)] 
_,," ) 
+ Ij kli~Wj; w) ~rj' V(ij) 
§r j
• VW(f/, t 1 {w}, {e}) 0 
- (k2(W) W(ij, t 1 {w}, {e}»o , 
a(W(ij, tl {w}, {e}»1 
at 
2 
-
'" 
VV(ij)] 
_.. "') 
+ Ijkli(wj; w) ~rj' V(~) 
Qrj · VW(f/, t 1 {w}, {e}) 
I 
(6.37) 
- (k2(W) W(ij, t 1 {w}, {e}»l 
(6.38) 
after re-introduction of the parameters. The term (WO)o may be looked upon 
as the mean or zero-order concentration observed at any point. (WO \ is the first-
order correction to this mean, arising when a better approximation to the system 
statistics, PsO, is adopted in place of PsoO. For the purpose of the present work, 
this factor will not be considered further. 
The mean or zero-order equation, Eq. (6.37), may be simplified to (Appendix 6B) 
182 
a (C(ij, t)o 
at 
= ~ (I If §r j §rj klj(wj; W») : vv (C(~, t»o 
2 
j=1 
0 
+ (.I [ex-1ljkli(Wj; w) + I;kd,wj; w) ~rj' VV] Qr j) 
• V(C(~, t))o 
.=1 
V 
0 
- (k2(w»0 (C(ij, t»o 
(6.39) 

6.1 Derivation 
where, 
c == qi}, t) = f f wei}, t I {w}, {e}) Pso({w}, {e}) d{w} d{e}. 
(6.40) 
-
'" 
{wIle} 
The conditionality in the definition of W(-) is integrated out by averaging over all 
possible intersection characteristics. Thus C(.) represents the actual number concentra-
tion that would be observed at any point and corresponds to the deterministic 
concentration in Eq. (6.1). 
Equation (6.39) is of the form 
The definitions of D and v in this expression need be delineated further; nevertheless, 
it is worth noting that the stochastic model or the Fokker-Planck representation 
of the diffusion process naturally contains the drift (convective) term (see, e.g., 
Bharucha-Reid, 1960; Seinfeld and Lapidus, 1974; Fan and Shin, 1979; van Kampen, 
1981). Moreover, this "convective" term is independent of any bulk fluid-flow term 
within the pores induced by an external pressure difference across them. The 
significance of this drift velocity may be understood in terms of the tendency of 
molecules to make jumps preferably in one direction or the other. In an isotropic 
system (randomly oriented pores) with no concentration gradient, molecules at an 
intersection have an equal probability of jumping in all directions. If a concentration 
gradient is imposed on this system, a larger number of jumps are made from the 
higher to the lower concentration than vice versa. This leads to the diffusive flux, 
arising solely because a larger number of molecules exist in the direction of a higher 
concentration; the individual molecules themselves have no preferred direction of 
jump. 
In an anisotropic system (with non-uniform pore orientations), a larger number of 
pores in one direction will "force" the individual molecules at the intersection to 
jump more frequently in this direction. This may be visualized by considering 
transport in the x-y plane. If every intersection has one pore pointing in the negative-x 
direction and two in the positive-x direction, the probability of molecules moving to 
the positive-x side is twice that of movement in the opposite direction. The pore 
structure thus renders the jump frequency of an individual molecule in one direction 
across the diffusion plane different from that in the opposite direction; hence, the 
drift velocity results. [An analogous definition of drift in an atomic lattice is given 
by Manning (1965).] The drift velocity by itself cannot create a flux in the absence 
of a concentration gradient since any drift velocity-induced flux in this situation will 
produce a gradient and, thereby, a diffusive flux that will tend to negate this 
drift velocity-induced flux. 
To summarize, a non-uniform (non-random) pore orientation in a matrix, 
leading to a spatial gradient in the microstructure, gives rise to a drift velocity; 
there are more pores at one end of such a matrix than the other. 
183 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
6.2 Transport Coefficients from the Diffusion Equation 
In the preceding section, it has been shown that the master equation formulation for 
transport leads to a mean or zero-order diffusion equation, Eq. (6.39), of the 
form 
(6.41) 
along with the parallel first-order correction equation of the form 
Note that from the definition of (->0 and <->t in Eq. (6.36a), a quantity, (C), 
that can be expressed as 
(C) = (C)o + a(C)l 
is obtained. This is the experimentally observable or measurable concentration. 
Conventionally, we resort to the zero-order equation, Eq. (6.41), for analysis of 
transport in a porous or heterogeneous polymeric matrix. In this section, we shall 
recover the mean or effective diffusion coefficient, Deff, and the drift or convective 
velocity term, v, from this zero-order diffusion equation. The definition of Pso' as 
stated in the context of Eq. (6.34), will be exploited for this purpose. Pso is the 
probability density function of the matrix characteristics if each intersection were 
taken independent of and identical to the others, i.e., in isolation. The following 
definition is the outcome, 
_ 
s 
Pso({w}, {B}) = TI Po(wm, em) 
(6.42) 
m=l 
where PO(w, e) is the probability density function for the characteristics of an 
intersection, i.e., of the set of pores comprising the intersection. 
In certain cases, we shall simplify further by assuming that all pores within an 
intersection are independently and identically distributed. This leads to 
M 
PO(w, e) = TI fo(w j , B). 
(6.43 a) 
j=l 
Thus, 
(6.43 b) 
wherefo(w,e) is the probability density function for the characteristics of an individual 
pore within an intersection. 
184 

6.2 Transport Coefficients from the Diffusion Equation 
6.2.1 Mean or Effective Diffusion Coefficient 
The effective diffusivity will be extracted from the first term on the right-hand side 
of Eq. (6.39). Comparing this equation with Eq. (6.41), we obtain 
(6.44) 
or, from the definition of <->0 in Eq. (6.36b), 
Substituting for Pso from Eq. (6.42), 
(6.46) 
Integrating over all intersections, except the one under consideration at ij, results 
in 
Substituting for kl(w; w) from Eq. (18b) into this expression gives 
Integrating formally, we have 
Deff = (D;) (f 
_lir~f~~i_~r_iQ_ri)'" 
L 
i= 1 
" 
2[ 
~ ri i 
i=1 
0 
(6.47) 
(6.49) 
where <->: denotes the average over all possible intersection characteristics, utilizing 
the probability density function, Po(-)' for this purpose, i.e., 
<g>~ = f f g(w, e, ij, t) Po(W, e) dw de . 
~~ 
(6.50) 
185 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
If all M pores at an intersection are identical and independent of each other, 
the simplification in Eq. (6.43 a) may be utilized in Eq. (6.49), leading to 
(6.51) 
For an approximation, we let 
E [~J ~ E[X] . 
Y 
E[Y] 
This approximation is reasonable when the pores are taken to be independent of each 
other. The numerator and denominator on the right-hand side of Eq. (6.51) may 
then be integrated separately to give 
and 
whereby Eq. (6.51) yields 
D = (De) <r2/D ~r ~r>; 
eff 
L 2 
<r2[>;; 
. 
(6.52) 
The operator <. >~ indicates that the averaging has been performed over all 
possible characteristics of an individual pore through the density function 100, 
i.e., 
<g>~ = S f g(w, e, ij, t) !o(w, e) dw de . 
we 
(6.53) 
D eff, as obtained above, is a second-order tensor since the derivation is general 
and valid for anisotropic systems also. The diagonal elements represent diffusivities 
along the principal axes, while the off-diagonal elements arise due to the fact that 
in anisotropic systems, the flux vector may not be normal to the surfaces of 
constant concentration; this flux vector may point in a direction different from the 
concentration gradient vector. For an isotropic system (i.e., a system with random 
pore orientations), the diagonal elements will be equal and the off-diagonal elements 
will reduce to zero. 
186 

6.2 Transport Coefficients from the Diffusion Equation 
6.2.2 Drift or Convective Velocity 
The drift velocity, v, will be extracted from the second term on the right-hand 
side of Eq. (6.39). Comparing this equation with Eq. (6.41), 
v = - (~I {1X-1
[ikli(Wi ; w) + l;kdwi; w) [~ri' v:]} ~r)O 
(6.54) 
or, from Eq. (6.36b), 
v = - f f itl [{1X-1Iikli(Wi; 
w) + [;k li(wi, w) [~ri . V;]} ~ri 
(6.55) 
{';;} {~} 
x Pso({w}, {e}) d{w} d{e}] . 
Following a development similar to that in Eqs. (6.46) and (6.47), we obtain 
(6.56) 
Substituting for kl (-) and integrating yield 
-I (De) < 
~ rfDi ~ri)'" 
V = - 21X 
-2 
.L -M:-;---
L 
1= 1 
" 
2[ 
'- ri i 
i= 1 
0 
< 
r21D. [br .. VV] br)'" 
(De) 
MIl 1 
-
1 V-I 
- 2 -
L -----'=:-:-----
L2. 
M 
\
1=1 
L rf1i 
i= 1 
0 
(6.57) 
The above expression represents the drift velocity obtained by averaging over all 
possible intersection characteristics, utilizing the density function Po(·) for this purpose 
[see Eq. (6.50)]. A further simplification can result if the pore characteristics 
within each intersection are identically and independently distributed. The procedure 
is similar to that employed to derive Eq. (6.52) from Eq. (6.49); the result is 
187 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
with the operator <-)~ as defined in Eq. (6.53), based on pore characteristics 
density fo( .). 
Equation (6.58) indicates that the drift velocity is composed of two terms, the 
first being directly related to the distribution of pore orientations, and the second 
to the intersection void-volume (or porosity) distribution. 
6.3 Transport Coefficients in Specific Systems 
In the preceding section, general expressions have been obtained for the transport 
coefficients in porous or heterogeneous polymeric matrices, in terms of the distribution 
of intersection characteristics [Eqs. (6.49) and (6.57)]. The general expressions are 
simplified under the assumption of independently and identically distributed pore 
characteristics. The resultant simplified expressions, Eqs. (6.52) and (6.58), will be 
further simplified to specific cases in this section. Note that for Eq. (6.42), all 
intersections have been taken to be identically distributed. This would imply isotropy 
in the usual sense, i.e., each intersection is similar to the others. However, in the 
present work, the term "isotropic" is further limited to systems in which the 
pores within an intersection are also randomly oriented, i.e., each intersection, apart 
from being similar to all other intersections, also appears the same in all 
directions. 
6.3.1 Mean or Effective Diffusion Coefficient 
The factor (De/L2) is required in the right-hand side of Eq. (6.52), defining the mean 
or effective diffusivity, to balance the dimensions. From our definition, Deff has the 
dimension of[r 1] while D is dimensionless. Absorbing this factor on the left-hand 
side, we have 
where 
<rID §r gr)(j 
D:rr = 
<rl)(j 
D:rr = Derr (~:) . 
(6.59) 
D:ff is thus the dimensionless effective diffusivity that may be observed in 
a porous matrix over a number of experimental determinations. D is the correspond-
ing diffusivity in a single pore; it can be considered as the molecular diffusivity, 
Dmol, if the mean free path of the molecules is sufficiently small compared to the 
pore radii (liquid and gaseous systems). On the other hand, if the mean free 
path is larger than or of similar magnitude to the pore radii (dilute gaseous systems 
only), D can be considered to be the Knudsen diffusivity, Dknud ' 
188 

6.3 Transport Coefficients in Specific Systems 
Further simplifications of the expression for effective diffusivity, Eq. (6.59), will 
depend on the nature of the pore characteristics, given by the density function 
fo(w, e). 
a) Uncorrelated pore orientation and dimensions. For a matrix in which the pore 
orientations are independent of their dimensions, we may write 
(6.60) 
Under this condition, the expression for D:ff reduces to 
* 
<?lD>~ <~ ~ >_ 
Deffl = <?l)~ 
!!r!!r 0 
(6.61) 
since D, in general, does not depend on pore orientation. Rearranging Eq. (6.61) 
leads to the definition of D:ff in terms of the pore-volume-averaged diffusivity D, 
i.e., 
* 
D 
Deffl = -
(6.62) 
r 
where 
(6.63a) 
and 
(6.63 b) 
This definition of D was originally derived by Johnson and Stewart (1965), by 
considering the diffusion flux per unit of void plus non-void area. The random walk 
model derived here has naturally given rise to this definition of D. Wang and 
Smith (1983) have demonstrated that this expression is the most suitable when 
attempting to measure the tortuosity factors in matrices with a wide range of 
pore sizes. 
b) Constant pore length, and uncorrelated pore orientation and radius. This case leads 
to the simplified expression 
(6.64) 
c) Randomly oriented pores, and uncorrelated orientation and dimensions. In such 
a system, the pore orientations are uniformly distributed, i.e., the angular distribution 
of e is sinusoidal while that of <P is uniform (De Jong, 1958; Bhatia, 1986). Thus, 
the density function for orientations becomes 
_ 
sin e 
gee) = 
4n ' 
(6.65) 
189 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
The above distribution may be employed to evaluate <<2r <2r), thereby giving 
(j 
<<2r <2r) = "3 
(6.66) 
where b is the identity tensor (diagonal elements equal to I, and off-diagonal 
elements equal to zero). The symmetric nature of this tensor indicates the isotropy 
of the system due to the randomness of the pore orientation. Substituting Eq. (6.66) 
into Eq. (6.61) leads to 
_ ~ <?lD)~;) 
-
3 <?l)~ 
. 
Moreover, from Eq. (6.63a) we have 
r = 3. 
(6.67) 
(6.68) 
The tortuosity value predicted by this model for an isotropic system is identical 
to that calculated by Johnson and Stewart (1965) and Feng and Stewart (1973) 
employing the mass-flux model. 
In all specific cases considered above, D can be the molecular diffusivity, 
Dmol> or the Knudsen diffusivity; Dknud, or their combination, depending upon the 
nature of the diffusion phenomenon in a single pore. Each of these is a function of the 
pore radius. However, if the pore radii are large enough for the diffusivity in the 
pore to be equal to bulk fluid diffusivity (i.e., in the absence of pore walls), 
D = Dmol = D bulk • 
Then, from Eq. (6.65), we obtain 
D* 
_ D bulk ~ 
eff4 - -3- u . 
(6.69) 
(6.70) 
This corresponds to the well-known result for an isotropic system (Satterfield, 
1970). 
For the case of small pore radii, in the Knudsen regime for gaseous systems 
D = Dknud = Jlr 
(6.71) 
where Jl is a constant that depends on the mass of the diffusing molecule and 
temperature of the system only (Smith, 1970). Thus, from Eq. (6.67), 
(6.72) 
In a matrix system where the fluid filling the pores is a gas, and the radii 
of the permeable regions are in the range between those for the bulk and Knudsen 
190 

6.3 Transport Coefficients in Specific Systems 
diffusivities, D in Eq. (6.67) can be written as an average of the form (Satterfield, 
1970) 
(6.73) 
and used to evaluate the effective diffusivity. 
6.3.2 Drift or Convective Velocity 
The zero-order drift velocity coefficient has been obtained, as expressed in Eq. (6.58), 
in which v has the dimensions of[T- 1]. Absorbing the factor (De/L2) into the left-hand 
side of the equation, the dimensionless drift velocity, v*, becomes 
\ 
2 
[ 
VV] )-
2 
r lD br· ~ br 
-I <r D ~r);;-
-
V 
-
0 
v* = -2(X 
-
2 
. 
<r 2[);; 
<r2[); 
(6.74) 
Different pore characteristics, as reflected in the function fo(w, e), result in various 
forms of v*. 
a) Constant porosity. If the pore volume is constant at all points in the matrix, 
i.e., V(ff) is not a function of the position, 
* _ 
2 -I <?D~r)~ 
VI -
-
(X 
<?l)~ 
(6.75) 
b) Uncorrelated pore orientation and dimensions. If the dimensions of the pores are 
distributed independent of their orientations [Eq. (6.60)], we have 
(6.76) 
c) Constant pore length, and uncorrelated pore orientation and radius. This case results 
III 
(6.77) 
d) Randomly oriented pores, and uncorrelated orientation and dimensions. Randomly 
oriented pores have the density function given in equation (6.65), thereby leading 
to 
<~r) = 0 
(6.78) 
191 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
since all directions are equally probable. In such a system (isotropic by definition), 
from Eq. (6.76), 
v: == o. 
(6.79) 
The drift velocity is zero in an isotropic matrix since the frequencies of molecular 
jumps are identical in all directions; in the absence of a concentration gradient, 
the geometry of the pores does not favor any particular direction. Hence, in the usual 
analyses of porous systems, the absence of the drift velocity indicates that the more 
restrictive assumption of isotropy in terms of pore orientations has been implicitly 
invoked. 
e) Constant porosity, uncorrelated orientation and dimensions, and non-uniform orienta-
tion. Under these conditions 
(6.80) 
For a constant pore length (Ii = 7) 
(6.81) 
or 
(6.82) 
This equation implies that in a system with non-uniform pore orientations, the 
drift term could be significant; a preferred pore orientation generates a greater 
probability for movement in a particular direction, which in turn, generates the drift 
or convective flux over and above the diffusive flux. 
6.4 Monte Carlo Simulations of Transport 
in Porous Media 
The effects of the pore orientation distribution on transport in porous media have 
been examined numerically by Monte Carlo simulations. Estimates of transport 
coefficients in different networks have been recovered. Two varieties of networks have 
been generated for this purpose. One variety includes uniform networks in which the 
positions of the intersections are uniformly distributed, and the other includes 
skewed networks in which certain quadrants are more probable than others. 
Reaction in the pores is not considered, and no attempt has been made to 
obtain complete concentration profiles in the system. The pores are assumed to have 
constant pore radii, but variable lengths and orientations. (For a detailed discussion 
192 

6.4 Monte Carlo Simulations of Transport in Porous Media 
of Monte Carlo simulations of the master equation with examples, see Fox, 1987; 
also see, e.g., Rajamani et ai., 1986.) 
6.4.1 Procedure 
The simulation procedure essentially involves the generation of a pore network, 
calculation of the transition intensities and the associated probabilities, determination 
of the event Gump of a molecule from one intersection to another), and its 
inter-arrival time (time elapsed between two events). The probabilities, event, and 
times are determined repeatedly until the requisite number of events have occurred 
or the desired time elapsed. The procedure is detailed in Singh (1987). 
The following three types of networks are created here in a 1 x 1 x 1 cube for the 
purpose of simulation. 
a) Uniform in all three directions: 
{intersection coords. (Ui -
0.5, U2 -
0.5, U3 -
0.5); Ub U2, U3 E U[O, I]} 
b) Skewed to the right in "x", and uniform in the other two: 
{intersection coords. (2ui -
ui - 0.5, U2 -
0.5, U3 -
0.5); Ub U2, U3 E U[O, I]} 
c) Skewed to the right in all three directions: 
{intersection coords. (2ui 
-
u; -
0.5, 2u2 -
~ -
0.5, 2u3 -
~ -
0.5); 
up u2' u3 E U[O, I]}. 
The uniform network approximates an isotropic network most closely; the other two 
types have preferential pore orientations. The pore network in each case was 
formed by first determining the intersection positions according to the type of 
network desired. These intersections were then connected to M of their nearest 
neighbors, starting from the intersection at the origin (Singh, 1987). Different 
networks within each type were created by employing different sets of random 
variables. A coordination number, M, of 5 was employed. 
The transition intensities within each pore were obtained from Eq. (6.18a), under 
the assumptions of constant pore radii, and 
D = 1 (-), 
and 
L = 1 (L) 
from the dimensions of the cube. At time t = 0, the molecules were distributed 
among the intersections such that the intersection at the origin had 3000, inter-
sections within a radius of 0.1 units of the origin had 1000, intersections at 
a distance between 0.1 and 0.2 units from the origin had 500, those between 0.2 and 
0.3 units 300, those between 0.3 and 0.4 units 100, and those at a distance greater 
than 0.4 units no molecules. The transitions made by the molecules were followea 
along with their inter-arrival times, providing information about the number of 
molecules at each intersection at various times. 
193 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
/.0 
A 
c: 
C(x,tol 
0 
.+= 
2 
0 
a- (tol 
~ -
8 
c: 
<1> 
U 
' , 
c: 
, \8 
I 
0 
, 
\ 
C(x ,t2l 
u 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
C a-2(t2l 
I 
\ 
, 
\ 
,/ C,\~ 
_" 
0.0 
........ / 
~, ...... 
0.0 
Xo 
X, 
x2 
1.0 
position 
Fig. 6.2. Schematic diagram illustrating significance of the diffusivity and drift velocity 
Effective diffusivities and drift velocities in the networks have been recovered from 
the results of simulation. The effective diffusivity can be estimated from the mean 
square displacement of the molecules around the center of mass per unit time, 
while the rate of movement of this center of mass is the drift velocity (see, e.g., 
Fan and Shin, 1979). This is illustrated in Fig. 6.2 in one dimension. "A" is the 
initial distribution of molecules at time to' assumed to be a delta-function. 
Curves Band C represent the distributions at times tl and t2, respectively. 
The means (centers of mass) of distributions Band C are at XI and X2, respectively, 
while their variances are ~(tl) and ~(t2)' respectively. The mean of the distribution A 
is at x o' while its variance is zero. The average diffusivity between points Xo and XI' 
Xo and X2, or a general set Xo and Xj' is then given by (Fan and Shin, 1979) 
1 
1 
D(xo --> x·) ::::: -- - a:(t.) 
) 
tj -
to 2 
x 
) 
, 
j = 1,2, .... 
Similarly, the drift velocity is 
j = 1,2, .... 
(When the drift velocity is negligible, the initial concentration distribution A under-
goes a transition to B' and C' as shown in Fig. 6.2.) The above relations were 
employed to obtain estimates of diffusivities and drift velocities in all three 
coordinate axes, using the variances and centers of mass corresponding to the 
axis under consideration. 
(The simulations were performed on the Cray-XMP supercomputer at the National 
Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign. The program-runs were time intensive; each run was limited, therefore, 
to 30 minutes CPU time; this resulted in approximately 20,000 transition events. 
194 

6.4 Monte Carlo Simulations of Transport in Porous Media 
The steady state was not approached in any of the runs. The algorithm and 
FORTRAN code are provided in APPENDIX 6C.) 
A set of simulation was also performed starting with all molecules placed at the 
origin. In this case, however, the vast majority of transitions were from the inter-
section at the origin to the intersections connected to it. A preponderance of these 
transitions biased the estimates of the various coefficients. This problem could be 
avoided by running the program until a near-steady-state is achieved, but would 
require a large amount of CPU time. On the other hand, with the molecules 
distributed among a larger number of intersections initially, as detailed in a previous 
paragraph, the transition will be well distributed and provide better estimates of 
the coefficients. 
The relations derived earlier in this chapter can be employed to estimate values 
of the transport coefficients in the networks generated. This requires creation of 
the pore network only; knowledge of the positions of the intersections and pore 
lengths allows the pore orientation vectors to be readily obtained, and thence 
the averages in Eqs. (6.44) and (6.54) over the complete matrix. Only the diagonal 
elements in the diffusivity tensor were estimated, although the other elements 
could also be evaluated with this procedure. Due to the difficulty in calculating the 
term 
[br. VV] br 
-
V 
-
for the network generated, the drift velocities were estimated only with the first 
term on the right-hand side of Eq. (6.54). As with the others, these networks were 
generated on the Cray - XMP. 
6.4.2 Results 
The results of the simulations are presented in Table 6.1. The parameter values 
obtained from the Monte Carlo runs are given in the table in the column 
labelled "simulated". The diffusivities range between 0.280 and 0.340; the skewness 
of the network does not show any particular effect on these values. The type of net-
work is more clearly reflected in the drift velocities with those for uniform 
networks being approximately equal to zero. This is to be expected since the 
uniform network generated here corresponds most closely to an isotropic system 
[Eq. (6.79)]. 
In the x-skewed network, the drift velocity in the x-direction is greater than 
zero while those in the y- and z-directions are almost zero (Table 6. I). The pores 
in this type of network are preferentially oriented towards the positive-x axis, resulting 
in a higher probability of movement or "drift" towards this direction. 
In the third type of network considered here, the preferred orientation of the 
pores is towards the quadrant with positive x, y, and z. This is also reflected in the 
values of the drift velocities (Table 6. I). 
195 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
Table 6.1. Comparison of the transport coefficients obtained from Monte Carlo simulations 
with those estimated from Eqs. (6.44) and (6.54). 
Network 
Coefficient 
Simulated" 
Estimatedb 
[Monte Carlo] 
[Eqs. (6.44), (6.54)] 
uniform 
Dxx 
0.30376 
0.33625 
Dyy 
0.32304 
0.33480 
D .. 
0.30951 
0.32894 
vx 
0.10549 
-0.00117 
Vy 
-0.07225 
-0.00233 
v% 
-0.05545 
-0.00843 
x-skewedC 
Dxx 
0.34006 
0.31742 
Dyy 
0.30282 
0.34373 
D .. 
0.30621 
0.33884 
Vx 
0.51780 
0.20464 
Vy 
-0.03823 
-0.00687 
v% 
-0.13722 
-0.00774 
x,y,z-skewed C 
Dxx 
0.33518 
0.33572 
Dyy 
0.28938 
0.33307 
D .. 
0.32420 
0.33120 
Vx 
0.27787 
0.24974 
Vy 
0.55472 
0.21122 
v% 
0.26858 
0.20518 
a average over 3 Monte Carlo runs per type of network 
b average over 8 pore networks generated per type of network 
C skewed by taking the appropriate coordinates = (2u - ,r - 0.5); U E U [0, I] 
The transport coefficients estimated with Eqs. (6.44) and (6.54) are listed in Table 6.1 
in the column labelled "estimated". These estimated values correspond closely to 
those expected from a consideration of the nature of the network. The agreement 
between the estimated and simulated values is very good in most cases. The 
discrepancies between the simulated and estimated values for the drift velocities 
may be a consequence of the fact that only three Monte Carlo simulations were 
performed for each type of network; better averages will require a large number of 
runs due to the wide variations in the estimates from each run. Furthermore, 
only part of Eq. (6.54) was employed to estimate these values for the skewed 
networks. Nevertheless, the difference between the simulated and estimated values 
is not large. Thus, the first part of Eq. (6.54) may suffice to obtain a rea~onable 
estimate of this transport coefficient in most cases. 
The relatively large magnitude of the drift velocities is due to the large average 
pore lengths (:::::0.12 units) in the networks created, thus resulting in large average 
displacements and, therefore, large v's. A denser network will lead to smaller pores 
and smaller v's; however, the diffusivities will not be influenced. 
196 

6.5 Concluding Remarks 
6.5 Concluding Remarks 
To summarize the conclusions of the preceding sections of this chapter, the master 
equation for the position of a diffusing molecule has been derived and reduced 
to the form 
(6.41 ) 
The subscript 0 indicates the mean value. From Eq. (6.41), expressions have been 
obtained for the mean diffusion coefficient and the drift or convective velocity in 
terms of the distribution of the intersection of pore characteristics. 
The resultant expression for the mean or effective diffusion coefficient in terms 
of pore characteristics distribution,fo(w, 8), is given in Eq. (6.59). While the expression 
is not very different from the definition provided by Johnson and Stewart (1965) 
[see Eq. (6.62)], > it is somewhat more general, having been derived for anisotropic 
systems. More important, it has been arrived at from a mechanistic consideration 
of the diffusion phenomenon without resorting to the Fickian formulation. In this 
sense, the present analysis provides a rigorous basis for the use of a pore-
volume based effective diffusivity in porous media, furthermore it reduces to the 
conventional form for isotropic media [see Eq. (6.67)]. 
The drift velocity,· given in Eq. (6.74) in terms of the pore characteristics 
distribution, is a consequence of the pore structure of the matrix that makes the 
probability of jumps of the individual molecules in one direction higher than in 
others. As stated earlier, it should not be confused with convective transport 
caused by the flow of bulk fluid within the pores. 
An isotropic system, defined here in a restrictive sense (identical pore inter-
sections along with random pore orientations within an intersection) to will reduce the 
convective term to zero [Eq. (6.79)]. Most analyses of transport data from porous 
or heterogeneous polymers do not take this factor into account, thereby implicitly 
assuming such a restrictive system. 
As IX -+ 0, the continuum limit is approached. From the definition of the 
continuum approximation, we know that a diffusing molecule is able to move in all 
directions in such a medium. Thus, in the- limit of IX -+ 0, we have <~r> -+ o. The 
drift velocity, therefore, does not exist in a homogeneous system. 
The differential equation obtained by Bhatia (1986) from a consideration of 
correlated random walk in a porous system is of the form 
where Deorr is a correction factor for the effective diffusivity, D;ff, ansmg as 
a result of the correlations between successive random walk steps (Bhatia, 1986). 
The analysis of Bhatia (1986) includes the a priori assumption of random or 
uniform pore orientation; because of this assumption, the drift velocity is not 
recovered. The general expression obtained here for the mean or effective diffusivity 
reduces to that obtained by Bhatia (1986), under this assumption of randomness 
of pore orientation [see Eq. (6.67)]. As a consequence of neglecting correlations 
197 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
Fig. 6.3. A cross-linked pore network 
between intersections, the present analysis does not have a term corresponding to 
the correction factor. Nevertheless, this term is embodied in the first-order correction 
equation, Eq. (6.38), obtained here.' 
Applying the two models [that of Bhatia (1986) and the present] to a cross-linked 
pore network (Fig. 6.3) also leads to identical results. In such a network, the 
correction factor of Bhatia (1986) is equal to zero, while the convective term 
of the present model drops out. 
Monte Carlo simulations of transport in porous networks prove the existence 
of the convective term when analyzing systems with preferred pore orientations. 
The relations derived here may be utilized to estimate the drift velocities, given 
the knowledge of the pore parameters. It is apparent from the present analysis that 
the drift velocity can affect the observed flux in certain systems; when not accounted 
for, it will affect the calculated diffusion coefficient and tortuosity. Further work, 
especially Monte Carlo simulation, is needed to elucidate the detailed nature of this 
factor and to analyze its dependence on system parameters. 
The use of Eq. (6.1) instead of Eq. (6.41) (without the reaction term), to 
analyze diffusion in porous/heterogeneous polymeric matrices, is particularly in-
appropriate since these matrices are usually anisotropic. The presence of a convective 
term can lead to differences between expected and observed concentrations. These 
differences can be particularly critical if the matrix is employed to deliver a pharma-
ceutically active agent. Depending on the distribution of the permeable regions, the 
concentration obtained may be lower or higher than desired, with the concomitant 
loss of performance of the device. 
Some of the polymeric systems being employed/examined for drug release satisfy 
this anisotropy criterion. Among the systems reported. are those made by mixing 
hydrophobic polymers (usually in powder form) with a drug (usually solid) and 
compressing the mixture below their melting points. This produces tablets or 
sustained release devices with irregular pores. When placed in an appropriate 
medium (e.g., water for water-soluble drugs), release occurs by dissolution of the 
drug in the water-filled pores followed by diffusion (Gurny et ai., 1982). As 
dissolution progresses, the size and shape of the pores change continuously .. In 
attempting to predict the release of KCl from ethyl cellulose tablets with a diffusion-
198 

6.5 Concluding Remarks 
dissolution model, Gurny et al. (1982) have noted that the deviation from prediction 
becomes large as the tablet proceeds from diffusion to dissolution control. They 
have attributed the deviation to the change in void fraction and porosity caused by 
depletion of the drug in polymer. It is also worth noting that the deviation 
appears to increase as the system becomes dilute (due to slow dissolution rate). 
Successes have been achieved in delivering macromolecular drugs from hydro-
philic polymers (see, e.g., Langer and Folkman, 1978). Langer and his coworkers 
have employed solvent casting techniques with ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers 
to prepare their matrices. This involves the dissolution of drug and polymer in 
a suitable solvent which is subsequently evaporated, producing a formation with 
microchannels. When placed in water, these polymers undergo swelling, thereby 
causing the size and shapes of the microchannels to change continuously. Since 
the swelling process progresses inwards, there is a gradient in the extent of 
swelling undergone by a pore depending on the position of the pore. Lapidus and 
Lordi (1968), have obtained a similar system by compressing mixtures of drug 
and hydrophilic polymer granules to obtain tablets. Four out of the 15 tortuosity 
values calculated by them lie in the range 4-6. A possible explanation for these 
high tortuosity values can be given in terms of the analysis presented here. 
Leaching of the active agent from these matrices will give rise to a pore structure 
with fine finger-like pore projections on the inside, connected to a few pores 
on the surface (somewhat like a tree with the trunk connecting the surface to the 
roots in the interior). The drift velocity in these matrices will be towards the 
interior and will thus slow the release rate. The calculated effective diffusivity, 
when data are analyzed based on the Fickian equation, will be small and will lead to 
high estimated tortuosities. 
The structure of gels (e.g., hydrogels used in swelling-controlled release systems) 
has also been found to be heterogeneous. These gels are characterized by the 
existence of extensively organized (crystalline) regions containing a large amount 
of the gel substance, between which a small number of long coiling polymer 
chains establish the connections and hold the gel together topologically. The organized 
regions act as effective crosslinks and the chain segments between them as 
effective network segments (Silberberg, 1976). While the network segment distribution 
can be assumed to be isotropic inside the gel, this will not. be true at the surface. 
The surface layers will be much more diffuse than the interior of the gel. After 
a study of three model gel systems, Pines and Prins (1973) have concluded that a struc-
tural model for gels, based on randomly crosslinked Gaussian chains, is often 
inadequate. 
Gels formed on the surface of swelling-controlled release systems during the 
release process are further constrained by the inner glassy core. The above mentioned 
heterogeneity, between the surface and the interior, will be even more pronounced 
in these gels than in gels in isolation. 
The stochastic formulation of concentration-gradient-driven transport in porous 
media presented in this chapter has permitted a rigorous justification for using 
an equation of the diffusive-convective type for analysis. The assumptions and 
restrictions involved in reducing this equation to the Fickian diffusion form have 
been elaborated. General relations between the transport coefficients and pore 
structure parameters have been recovered. The expression for the effective diffusivity 
199 

6 Stochastic Model for Diffusion in Porous or Heterogeneous Polymer Matrix 
reduces to that appearing in the available literature, under certain simplifying 
assumptions. Similarly, the expression for the drift velocity enables us to elucidate 
the conditions under which this term can be neglected, as is usually the case. The 
expressions and analysis presented here, therefore, provide a method of estimating, 
qualitatively and quantitatively, the role of various structural factors in the pheno-
menon of transport in such media. 
References 
Akanni, K. A., Evans, J. W., Abramson, I. S. : Effective Transport Coefficients in Heterogeneous 
Media, Chern. Eng. Sci. 42, 1945-1954 (1987) 
Aris, R.: The Mathematical Theory of Diffusion and Reaction in Permeable Catalysts, Vol. I, 
The Theory of the Steady State, pp. 23-25, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1975) 
Bharucha-Reid, A. T.: Elements of the Theory of Markov Processes and Their Applications, 
pp. 129-163, McGraw-Hill, New York (1960) 
Bhatia, S. K.: Directional Autocorrelation and the Diffusional Tortuosity of Capillary 
Porous Media, J. Catalysis 93, 192-196 (1985) 
Bhatia, S. K.: Stochastic Theory of Transport in Inhomogeneous Media, Chern. Eng. Sci. 41, 
1311-1324 (1986) 
Chou, S. T., Fan, L. T., Nassar, R.: Stochastic Analysis of Stepwise Cellulose Degradation 
Data, Presented at the AIChE 1987 Summer National Meeting, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
August 16-19 (1987). 
De Jong, G. De J.: Longitudinal and Transverse Diffusion in Granular Deposits, Trans. Am. 
Geophys. Union 39, 67-74 (1958) 
Duggirala, S. K.: Stochastic Analysis of Particulate Processes-A Study of Attrition, Sieving 
and Grinding, M. S. Thesis, Department of Chemical Engineering, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas (1986) 
Fan, L. T., Shin, S. H.: Stochastic Diffusion Model of Non-Ideal Mixing in a Horizontal 
Drum Mixer, Chern. Eng. Sci. 34, 811-820 (1979) 
Fatt, I.: The Network Model of Porous Media, Parts I, II, III, Petroleum Transactions, 
AIME 207,144-181 (1956) 
Feng, c., Stewart, W. E.: Practical Models for Isothermal Diffusion and Flow of Gases in 
Porous Solids, Ind. Eng. Chern. Fundam. 12, 143-147 (1973) 
Foster, R. N., Butt, J. B.: A Computational Model for the Structure of Porous Materials 
Employed in Catalysis, AIChE J. 12, 180-185 (1966) 
Fox, R. 0.: Master Equation Formulation and Monte Carlo Simulation of Some Multi-
nomial Stochastic Processes from Chemical Engineering, PhD Dissertation, Kansas State 
University, Manhattan, Kansas (1987) 
Gavalas, G. R., Kim, S.: Periodic Capillary Models of Diffusion in Porous Solids, Chern. 
Eng. Sci. 36, 1111-1122 (1981) 
Gurny, R., Doelker, E., Peppas, N. A.: Modelling of Sustained Release of Water-Soluble 
Drugs from Porous, Hydrophobic Polymers, Biomaterials 3, 27-32 (1982) 
Harland, R. S., Peppas, N. A.: Drug Diffusion in Heterogeneous Polymeric Systems with 
Impermeable Domains, pp. 153-154. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium 
on Controlled Release of Bioactive Materials, Chaudry, I., Theis, C. (Eds.), August 3~ 
Norfolk, Virginia (1986) 
Haring, R. E., Greenkorn, R. A.: A. Statistical Model of a Porous Medium with Non-
uniform Pores, AIChE J. 16,477-483 (1970) 
Johnson, M. F. L., Stewart, W. E.: Pore Structure and Gaseous Diffusion in Solid Catalysts, 
J. Catalysis 4, 248-252 (1965) 
Langer, R., Folkman, J.: Sustained Release of Macromolecules from Polymers, pp. 175-196. 
In: Polymeric Delivery Systems, Kostelnik, R. J. (Ed.), Gordon and Breach Science 
Publishers, New York (\ 978) 
Lapidus, H., Lordi, N. G.: Drug Release from Compressed Hydrophilic Matrices, J. Pharm. 
Sci. 57, 1293-1301 (1968) 
200 

References 
Manning, J. R.: Diffusion in a Chemical Concentration Gradient, Phys. Rev. 124, 470-482 
(1961) 
Manning, J. R.: Correlated Walk and Diffusion Equations in a Driving Force, Phys. Rev. 139, 
A 126--A 135 (1965) 
Mason, E. A., Malinauskas, A. P., Evans III, R. B.: Flow and Diffusion of Gases in Porous 
Media, J. Chern. Phys. 46, 3199-3216 (1967) 
McGregor, R.: Diffusion and Sorption in Fibers and Thin Films, Vol. I., pp. 193-218, 
Academic Press, New York (1974) 
Mo, W. T., Wei, J.: Effective Diffusivity in Partially Blocked Zeolite Catalyst, Chern. Eng. 
Sci. 41, 703-710 (1986) 
Nassar, R., Too, J. R., Fan, L. T.: Stochastic Modeling of Polymerization in a Continuous 
Flow Reactor, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 26, 3745-3759 (1981) 
Pace, R. J., Datyner, A.: Statistical Mechanical Model for Diffusion of Simple Penetrants in 
Polymers. I. Theory, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed. 17,437-451 (1979) 
Peterlin, A.: Transport Phenomena and Polymer Morphology, Makromolekulare Chern. Suppl. 
3,215-232 (1979) 
Pines, E., Prins, W.: Structure-Property Relations of Thermoreversible Macromolecular 
Hydrogels, Macromolecules 6,888-895 (1973) 
Pismen, I. M.: Diffusion in Porous Media of a Random Structure, Chern. Eng. Sci. 29, 
1227-1236 (1974) 
Rajamani, K., Pate, W. T., Kinneberg, D. J.: Time-Driven and Event-Driven Monte Carlo 
Simulations of Liquid-Liquid Dispersions: A Comparison, Ind. Eng. Chern. Fundam. 25, 
746--752 (1986) 
Ryan, D., Carbonell, R. G., Whitaker, S.: A Theory of Diffusion and Reaction in Porous 
Media. In: Transport with Chemical Reactions, AIChE Symposium Series 202 77, 46--62 
(1981) 
Saffman, P. G.: A Theory of Dispersion in a Porous Medium, J. Fluid Mech. 6, 321-349 
(1959) 
Satterfield, C. N.: Mass Transfer in Heterogeneous Catalysis, pp. 1-77, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts (1970) 
Scheidegger, A. E.: Statistical Approach to Miscible Displacement in Porous Media, The 
Canadian Mining and Metallurgical Bulletin, pp. 26--30, January (1959) 
Scheidegger, A. E.: Statistical Theory of Flow Through Porous Media. Trans. Soc. Rheol. 9, 
313-319 (1965) 
Seinfeld, J. H., Lapidus, L.: Mathematical Models in Chemical Engineering, Vol. 3, pp. 225-229, 
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliff, New Jersey (1974) 
Silberberg, A.: The Hydrogel-Water Interface. In: Hydrogels for Medical and Related 
Applications, J. D. Andrade (Ed.), ACS Symposium Series 31, 198-205 (1976) 
Singh, S. K.: Analysis and Development of Some Controlled Release Systems, pp. I1I.48-III.56, 
PhD Dissertation, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas (1987) 
Smith, J. M.: Chemical Engineering Kinetics, pp. 268-269, McGraw-Hill, New York (1970) 
Theodorou, D., Wei, J.: Diffusion and Reaction in Blocked and High Occupancy Zeolite 
Catalysts, J. Catalysis 83,205-224 (1983) 
Too, J. R., Nassar, R., Chou, S. T., Fan, L. T.: Stochastic Analysis of Crystallization in an 
Open Flow System, J. Chinese I. Ch. E. 17,303-313 (1986) 
van Kampen, N. G.: Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry, North-Holland, Amster-
dam, Netherlands (1981) 
Vrentas, J. S., Duda, J. L.: Molecular Diffusion in Polymer Solutions, AIChE J. 25, 1-24 
(1979) 
Wakad, N., Nardse, Y.: Effective Diffusivities and Deadend Pores, Chern. Eng. Sci. 29, 
1304-1306 (1974) 
Wakao, N., Smith, J. M.: Diffusion in Catalyst Pellets, Chern. Eng. Sci. 17, 825-834 (1962)· 
Wang, C.-T., Smith, J. M.: Tortuosity Factors for Diffusion in Catalyst Pellets, AIChE J. 
29,132-136 (1983) 
Whitaker, S.: Advances in Theory of Fluid Motion in Porous Media, Ind. Eng. Chern. 61 
(12), 14-28'<1969) 
201 

Appendix 6A. Conversion of Probability to Number Concentration 
Appendix 6A. Conversion of Probability 
to Number Concentration 
Let us define 
U(ff, t I {cO}, {e}) 
= Number of molecules at (in the neighborhood of) the position ij at 
time t, given that the state of the matrix is ({cO}, {e}). 
If N is the number of molecules in the matrix at time t, then we have 
(6A.I) 
where 1(-) is the indicator function and Xi represents the position of the ith molecule 
_ {I 
if Xi E (r;, ij + dij) 
1__ 
_ (xJ = 
. 
(~. ~ + d~J 
0 otherwise 
(6A.2) 
Equation (6A.l) thus represents a count of the number of molecules in the 
neighborhood of ij. The expected value of U is 
where 
and 
E[U(ff, t I {w}, {eD] = I Ltl I(fi. ii+diiJ(iJ] g({i}, t I {cO}, {eD d{x} 
{ ) 
(6A.3) 
{i} = set of position vectors of the N molecules in the matrix at time t 
g({x}, t I {cO}, {e})' 
Probability density function for the set of positions of the N molecules 
in the patrix at time t, {x}, given that the state of the matrix is 
({cO}, {e}). 
The integration is therefore over all possible values of {x} denoted by {xl 
An expression for g(') may be obtained by reverting back to our definition of 
P(X, t I {cO}, {e}), which states that 
P(X, t I {cO}, {e}) 
Probability of finding a "tagged" molecule at (in the neighborhood 
of) the intersection at x at time t, given that the state of the matrix is 
({cO}, {e}). 
The same PO may also be interpreted as 
202 
P(x, t I {cO}, {e}) 
Probability that the position of the molecule at time t is at (in the ne~h­
borhood of) the point x, given that the state of the matrix is ({cO}, {e}). 

Appendix 6A. Conversion of Probability to Number Concentration 
The notion that the molecule is in the neighborhood of i corresponds to the 
statement that the position of the molecule is in the range (i, i + di). Thus 
P(i, t I fro}, {a}) = p(i, t I fro}, {a}) di 
(6AA) 
where p(.) is the probability density function for P(J In the absence of inter-
action among molecules, the behavior of a single molecule may be considered 
representative of all molecules. Therefore, 
_ 
N 
g({x}, t I {w}, {a}) = n p(x j , t I {w}, {EJ}) . 
j=1 
(6 A.S) 
Substituting Eg. (6A.S) into Eg. (6A.3) and reversing the order of integration and 
summation, we have 
(6 A.6) 
Expanding, 
E[U(-)] =t [J J ... J ... j I(i;,;i+d~)(xJ . 6 [p(Xj' t I {w}, {e}) dX j ]]. 
I-I 
XI X2 
Xi 
XN 
)-1 
(6A.7) 
Rearranging the integrals, 
E[U(·)] = it [[;]1 J. p(Xj' t I {w}, {e}) dX j ] 
)* I 
) 
X [x~ I(~.~+dij)(X;) P(Xi' t I {w), {e}) dXiJ]. 
(6 A.8) 
On evaluating the integrals, the only term that remains is that corresponding 
to the ith molecule, the rest integrates to 1. Thus, 
(6 A.9) 
From the definition of the indicator function in Eg. (6A.2), we obtain 
N 
_ 
E[U(.)] = L p(ij, t I {ro}, {e}) dij 
(6 A.lO) 
i=1 
or 
N 
_ 
"" 
E[U(.)] = L P(ij, t I {ill}, {e}). 
(6A.ll) 
i=1 
203 

Appendix 6B. Derivation of Equation (6.39) from Equation (6.37) 
Equation (6A.11) yields, for molecules behaving identically and independently, 
E[U(Ij, t I {ro}, feD] = NP(Ij, t I {ro}, {e}) 
which corresponds to Eq. (6.21) in the text. 
Appendix 68. Derivation of Equation (6.39) 
from Equation (6.37) 
Equation (6.37) in the text is reiterated here. 
a(W(Ij, t I {ca}, {e}»o 
at 
= ~ / I I; ~ri ~ri : V . {k1i(Wi; w) [VW(i], t I {w}, {ell]}) 
2 \=1 
0 
z 
-
'" 
VV(i])] 
_ 
'" 
"') 
+ likil(w; w) {5ri . -_-
flri' VW(I], t I {w}, {ell 
-
V(I]) 
0 
- (kz(w) wei], t I {w}, {e})o 
where the operator (">0 represents 
() 
f f ('" e'" -
Ii"'} re"'}) 
(r"'l re"'})df"'ldre"'} 
q 0 = 
q W, ~, 1], t 
(W, l -
Pso (Wj, \ -
(Wj 
1 ~ 
. 
I':;j lEi) 
Note that from Eq. (6.22) in the text 
W(- t I rw} {ell = E[U(Ij, t I {w}, {e})] . 
1], 
l 
' 
Vein 
(6A.12) 
(6 B.1) 
(6 B.2) 
(6 B.3) 
The <-)0 operations in Eq. (6 B.l) can be generalized and written as follows, 
( h(rU)l re1 » t) 
_ ) 
00 = 
1 
j, 1 _ j, 'P 
E[U(i], t I {w], Ie})] . 
V(I]) 
0 
(6 B.4) 
This equation may be expanded to yield 
f J 
h(rw1 Je\ '-I t) 
-
00 = 
1 
j~~i];' , E[U(i]. t I {(u}, [ell] 
I~l If!} 
x Pso({w}, {eD d{w} d{e}. 
(6 B.5) 
204 

Appendix 6B. Derivation of Equation (6.39) from Equation (6.37) 
In the above equation, ij ~nd t are parameters while ({cO}, {e}) ~re the random 
variables. E[U(ij, t I {cO}, {e})] is thus ol!Jy a function of ({cO}, {e}). Integration 
over the distribution function of ({cO}, {e}) will yield, formally 
jh({w}, [e}, ij, t) U(ij, t») 
00 = \ 
V(in 
0 
(6B.6) 
The conditionality has thus been removed by integrating over all possible inter-
section characteristics. Neglecting the covariance, equation (6B.6) may be written 
as 
_,.. 
(V(ij, t») 
<->0 = <h({w}, {B}, if, t»o 
V(ij) 
o' 
(6B.7) 
Defining 
(6 B.Sa) 
or 
<C(~, t»o = V;ij) J J 
E[V(ij, t I {w), {e})] pso({w],{e}) d{w} d{e} (6B.Sb) 
I';;ll~l 
we recover the average number concentration at any point in the matrix. 
From Eq. (6.1Sb) in the text, we have 
(6B.9) 
smce 
(6B.10) 
Substituting Eqs. (6 B.7), (6 B.Sa), (6 B.9), and (6 B.1O) into Eq. (6 B-1) yields 
a<C(ij,t)o 
at 
(6 B.II) 
The derivatives on the right-hand side can be taken outside the expectation 
since this operator does not act on ij as it is not a random variable. 
Equation (6B.II) corresponds to Eq. (6.39) in the text. 
205 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
for Monte Carlo Simulation of Transport 
in Porous Networks 
An event-driven Monte-Carlo simulation (see, e.g., Rajamani et aI., 1986) was 
employed in this work. The steps involved in the process are as follows: 
I. Generate intersections in a I x I x I cube 
a. Pore intersection no. 1 is placed at the origin. 
b. Generate 3 uniform random variables 
(Up u2, u3) E U[O, I] . 
c. If uniform network is to be generated, assign 
(UI -
0.5, U2 -
0.5, U3 -
0.5) as coordinates of the next pore intersection. 
If skewed network is to be created: 
-
for x-skewed network, assign (2u I -
ui - 0.5, 
U2 -
0.5, U3 -
0.5) as coordinates of the next pore intersection. 
-
for x, y, z-skewed network, assign (2uI - uI - 0.5, 
2U2 -
u~ -
0.5, 2U3 -
~ -
0.5) as coordinates of the next pore intersection. 
d. Repeat steps I b, lc till all required (S) intersections have been created and 
stored in POS(I, 1/2/3). 
Note: Schemes other than 2u -
~ can be utilized to generate a non-uniform 
network. 
2. Generate pore network 
a. Find the intersection (J), closest to the one under consideration (I). 
b. Does this intersection (J) already have M interconnections? 
c. If yes, find the next closest intersection and repeat from step 2b onwards. 
If no, connect intersections (I) and (J) and increment the numbers of inter-
connections of both by 1. 
d. Repeat steps 2a-2c until M interconnections have been generated for (I). 
e. Repeat steps 2a-2d for all S intersections. 
Note: Near the end of the above procedure, there may be some intersections left 
which are unable to achieve a full complement of M pores, depending on 
the relative values of M and S. 
3. Determine transition intensities 
a. Determine length of each interconnection (IJ). 
b. Evaluate the transition intensity from intersection (I) to (J) by Eq. (6.18), i.e., 
where lik and rik are the length and radius of the pore going from (I) to 
(K). 
Note: All pore radii were taken to be equal; De' D, were taken equal to I; L is 
equal to I. Transition intensities were stored in TRN(I, J) 
206 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
4. Generate number-of-molecules vector from initial conditions. 
a. Based on initial conditions, place appropriate number of molecules at each 
intersection. 
Note: Number of molecules at intersection (I) were stored in NUM(I). For starting 
the present simulations, 3000 molecules were placed at the origin, 1000 were 
placed at intersections within a radius of 0.1 units from the origin, 500 were 
placed at intersections between 0.1 and 0.2 units distant from the origin, 
300 at those between 0.2 and 0.3 units from the origin, 100 at those 
between 0.3 and 0.4 units from the origin, with none at those inter-
sections farther than 0.4 units from the origin. 
5. Determine inter-arrival time and transition event 
Inter-arrival time 
a. Generate uniform random variable u1 E U[O, 1]. 
b. Under the condition that inter-arrival time is exponentially distributed, obtain 
the inter-arrival time from 
t = -In (u1)/RATE 
Transition event 
c. Generate uniform random number u2 E U[O, 1]. 
d. Determine probability of transition by multiplying each row (I) of the 
transition intensity matrix TRN(I, J) by the number of molecules at that 
intersection NUM(I), and then dividing each element of the resultant matrix 
by the sum of these elements (= RATE), i.e., 
PTRN(I, J) = TRN(I, J) *NUM(I)/RATE 
where 
RATE = II 
TRN(I, J)* NUM(I). 
i 
j 
RATE is the total transition rate in (no. of events/time) 
e. Determine the event that occurs by adding the individual elements of PTRN 
from left to right, top row down, until the sum exceeds u2 at element (I, J). 
The event is then designated to be a jump of one molecule from inter-
section (I) to intersection (J). 
f. Update NUMO vector by subtracting I from NUM(I) and adding I to 
NUM(J). 
g. Accumulate inter-arrival time to obtain clock-time. 
h. Repeat steps 5a-5g until desired number of events have occurred or desired 
clock-time has elapsed. 
6. Determine diffusivities and velocities at time tm corresponding to the occurrence 
of event No. m 
a. Determine center-of-mass of system, <.) m 
s I NUM(I)* POS(I, 1) 
<x)m = _j=_l---S~----------
I NUM(I) 
i=l 
207 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
s L NUM(I)* POS(I, 2) 
(Y>m = _i =-1-s=------
L NUM(I) 
;=1 
s L NUM(J)* POS(I, 3) 
(z>m = 
=--; =...::.1-:;;--S -----
L NUM(l) 
i=l 
h. Determine mean square distances, ~. ~ m 
S L NUM(I)* (POS(l, 1) - (x>m)2 
«x»m = -;=....::.1-----=S-------
L NUM(l) 
i=l 
S L NUM(l)* (POS(J, 2) -
(Y>m)2 
«Y»m = ;= 1 
S 
L NUM(l) 
;=1 
S L NUM(I)* (POS(J, 3) - (z>m)2 
«z»m = ;=1 
S 
L NUM(J) 
;=1 
c. Set velocities at time 1m as 
(X>m -
(X>m-1 
v = --=----"'----" 
x 
1m -
Im - 1 
d. Set effective diffusivities at time 1m as 
D = ~x~m -
~x~m-1 
xx 
2(lm -
Im- 1) 
D 
= ~Y~m -
~Y~m-1 
YY 
2(lm -
Im- 1) 
208 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Note: The numerators and denominators in the above expressions are very small 
since they represent differences created by one event only. Dividing a small 
number by another leads to wildly fluctuating estimates of the parameters. 
This problem was avoided by taking differences every 50 or 100 events, 
i.e., between m and (m -
50) or (m -
100). 
Listing Program I: NETWORK 
C ********************************************************************** 
C OBJECTIVE: CREATE NETWORK OF PORES AND SIMULATE 
C 
DIFFUSION. 
C ITYPE: I = UNIFORM NETWORK; 2 = SKEWED NETWORK. 
C ICORD: 199 = X-SKEWED, X COORD. 2U-U*U-0.5 
C 
999 & ITYPE= 1 UNIFORM 
C 
999 & ITYPE=2 X,Y,Z-SKEWED, ALL COORDS. 
C 
2U - U*U -0.5 
C NPORE = NUMBER OF PORES PER INTERSECTION 
C IMAX = NUMBER OF INTERSECTIONS IN CUBE 
C NMOLES = NUMBER OF MOLECULES, TOTAL 
C POS(I,lj2j3) = COORDS. OF INTSXN. # I 
C ICN(I,J) = INTERCONNXN. MATRIX BETWEEN INTSXN. I & J 
C 
0 = NO CONNXN, I = CONNXN. 
C TRN (I,J) = TRANSITION INTENSITY BETWEEN INTSXN. I & J 
C PLN(I,J) = PORE LENGTH BETWEEN I & J 
C PCENT{lj2j3) = CENTER OF INTERSECTIONS (FROM POS) 
C NUM(I) = NUMBER OF MOLECULES AT I 
C PTRN(I,J) = TRN*NUMjRATE; ROW MULTIPLICATION ONLY 
CRATE = SUMMATION OF PTRN; TOTAL RATE TO FIND ARR. 
C 
TIME 
C IVENT(K) = TRANSN. FROM INTSXN # IVENT(I) TO # IVENT(2) 
C ********************************************************************** 
PROGRAM NETWORK 
REAL PCENT(3) 
INTEGER IVENT(2) 
CLICHE COMMONS 
PARAMETER (III = 600) 
COMMONjISTjSTOR(III),ISTR(III),NP(III) 
COMMONjNTWRKjPOS(IlI,3) 
CO MM ON jTRANSjTRN(IlI,IlI) 
COMMONjPTRANjPTRN(III,III) 
COMMONjRESTjICN(III,III),PLN(IlI,III),NUM(III) 
ENDCLICHE 
COMMONS 
209 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Program I: NETWORK (continued) 
C ** SPECIFY PARAMETERS 
IRUN=2 
ITYPE=2 
ICORD=199 
NPORE=5 
IMA.X = III 
C ** FTIM=MAX CPU TIME TO BE USED IN PROGRAM 
C ** NRN=STARTING RANDOM NUMBER 
C ** RANSET IS LIBRARY SUBROUTINE THAT RESETS THE 
C 
RANDOM 
C ** NUMBER GENERATOR RANF 
FTIM=30.0 
NRN=647 
CALL RANSET(NRN) 
C ** STORE EVENT DATA ON UNIT II, NETWORK COORDS. ON 12 
OPEN (UNIT = II,FILE= 'EVEN26) 
OPEN (UNIT = 12,FILE= 'POSI26) 
C ** CREATE INTSXNS., STORE TYPE ON II 
CALL INTERX(lTYPE,ICORD,IMAX,PCENT) 
C ** INITIALIZE 
NMOLES=O 
NUM( I) = 3000 
DO 400 I=2,IMAX 
D 1ST = SQ R T(POS(I, I )**2 + POS(I,2)**2 + POS(I,3)**2) 
IF (DIST.LT.O.l) 
NUM(I)=1000 
IF «DIST.LT.0.2).AND.(DIST.GT.O.l» NUM(I)=500 
IF «DIST.LT.0.3).AND.(DIST.GT.0.2» NUM(I)=300 
IF «DIST.LT.0.4).AND.(DIST.GT.0.3» NUM(I)+ 100 
IF (DIST.GT.O.4) 
NUM(I)=O 
NMOLES = NMOLES + NUM(I)400 CONTINUE 
NMOLES = NMOLES + NUM(I)C 
C ** CREATE INTERCONNECTIONS AND STORE POSITIONS ON 12C 
CALL CONNEX(NPORE,IMAX,AVLTGH) 
WRITE(\2,25) NPORE,IMAX,AVLTGH,IRUN,NRN,ICORD 
25 
FORMAT(IX,I2,2X,15,2X,F8.5,2X,I2,2X,I4,2X,I3) 
WRITE(l2,26) PCENT(I ),PCENT(2),PCENT(3) 
26 
FORMAT(IX,3(2X,EI4.6» 
, 
DO 100 1= I,IMAX 
WRITE( 12,27) I,POS(I, I ),POS(I,2),POS(I,3), NUM(I) 
27 
FORMAT(lX,16,2X,3(E 14.6,2X),2X,I9) 
100 
CONTINUE 
C 
C 
210 
CLOSE (UNIT = 12) 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
TIME=O.O 
IVENT(1) = I 
IVENT(2) = I 
IFR=IVENT(I) 
ITO = IVENT(2) 
WRITE(II,420) ITYPE,ICORD,NMOLES,IRUN,NRN 
420 
FORMAT(IX,13,2X,13,2X,I7,2X,I2,2X,I4) 
WRITE(lI,440) TIME,IVENT(l),IVENT(2) 
440 
FORMAT(lX, EI2.6, 5X, 13, 2X, 13) 
C 
C ** DETERMINE EVENT 
C 
999 
CONTINUE 
CALL TRANSN(IMAX,NMOLES,RATE,IFR,ITO) 
C ** RANF HAS AN INTERNALLY GENERATED ARGUMENT 
RV = RATE*RANF( ) 
CALL EVENT(IMAX,RV,IVENT) 
C ** UPDATE NUMBER VECTOR 
IFR = IVENT(I) 
ITO = IVENT(2) 
NUM(IFR) = NUM(IFR)-I 
NUM(ITO) = NUM(ITO) + I 
C ** DETERMINE TIME OF TRANSITION 
RV=RANF( ) 
TINV = - LOG(R V)/RA TE 
TIME=TIME+ TINV 
WRITE(II,450) TIME,IVENT(l),IVENT(2) 
450 
FORMAT(IX,EI2.6,5X,13,2X,13) 
C ** STOPPING CRITERIA 
C ** CALCULATE CPU USED BY INTERNAL ROUTINE QTIME 
CALL QTIME(ICPU,IO,MEM,FCPU,FIO,FMEM) 
CUM CPU = FLOAT(ICPU)/(60* I 0**6) 
C ** ALSO CHECK FOR STEADY STATE 
IF(NUM(l).GT.NMOLES/IMAX) THEN 
IF(CUMCPU.LT.FTIM) GO TO 999 
ENDIF 
C 
A=999999.0 
JJ=I 
KK=I 
WRITE(lI,*) A,JJ,KK 
CLOSE (UNIT = II) 
STOP 
END 
C ** GENERATE INTSECTIONS 
C 
211 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Program I: NETWORK (continued) 
SUBROUTINE INTERX(ITYPE,ICORD,IMAX,PCENT) 
REAL PCENT(3) 
COMMONS 
PCENT(l) =0.0 
PCENT(2) =0.0 
PCENT(3) = 0.0 
DO 100 1= 2,IMAX 
DO 200 J=1,3 
U=RANF( ) 
IF (ITYPE.EQ.1) THEN 
ENDIF 
POS(I,J)= U-0.5 
GO TO 150 
IF (ICORD.EQ.199) THEN 
IF (J.EQ.1) V=2*U-U*U 
IF (J.EQ.2) V=U 
IF (J.EQ.3) V=U 
POS(I,J) = V -0.5 
ELSE 
V=2*U-U*U 
POS(I,J)=V-0.5 
ENDIF 
150 
CONTINUE 
PCENT(J) = PCENT(J) + POS(I,J) 
200 
CONTINUE 
100 
CONTINUE 
C 
POS(l,l)=O.O 
POS(1,2) =0.0 
POS(1,3) =0.0 
PCENT(1) = PCENT(1)/IMAX 
PCENT(2)= PCENT(2)/IMAX 
PCENT(3)= PCENT(3)/IMAX 
RETURN 
END 
C ** GENERATE CONNECTIONS AND DETERMINE TRANSITION 
C 
MATRIX 
C 
SUBROUTINE CONNEX(NPORE,IMAX,AVLTGH) 
COMMONS 
DO 50 1= 1,IMAX 
DO 60 J=l,IMAX 
ICN(I,J)=0 
60 
CONTINUE 
NP(I)=0 
212 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
ISTR(I)=O 
STOR(I) =0.0 
50 
CONTINUE 
TLGT=O.O 
DO 100 1= 1,IMAX 
K=O 
DO 200 J = 1,IMAX 
IF (J.EQ.I) GO TO 200 
IF (NPORE.EQ.NP(I)) GO TO 100 
IF (NPORE.EQ.NP(J)) GO TO 200 
IF «ICN(I,J).NE.O).OR.(ICN(J,I).NE.O)) GO TO 200 
K=K+l 
PLN(I,J) = SQRT«POS(I, 1 )-POS(J, 1 ))**2 
(POS(I,2)-POS(J,2))**2 
2 
(POS(I,3)-POS(J,3))**2) 
PLN(J,I)=PLN(I,J) 
ISTR(K)=J 
STOR(K)=PLN(I,J) 
200 
CONTINUE 
NEED = NPORE-NP(I) 
IF (K.EQ.O) GO TO 100 
IF (K.EQ.l) THEN 
ENDIF 
NEED=K 
GO TO 350 
IF (NEED.GT.K) THEN 
NEED=K 
ENDIF 
KMX:=K-l 
400 
CONTINUE 
C ** SORT 
IFLAG=O 
DO 300 KK=I,KMX 
IF (STOR(KK).GT.STOR(KK+l)) THEN 
IEMPI = ISTR(KK) 
TEMP2 = STOR(KK) 
ISTR(KK) = ISTR(KK + 1) 
STOR(KK) = STOR(KK + 1) 
ISTR(KK+ 1)=IEMPI 
STOR(KK+ 1)=TEMP2 
IFLAG=1 
ENDIF 
300 
CONTINUE 
IF (lFLAG.EQ.l) GO TO 400 
C ** 
350 
CONTINUE 
DO 500 NN=I,NEED 
213 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Program I: NETWORK (continued) 
ICN(I,ISTR(NN))= I 
NP(I) = NP(I) + I 
ICN(ISTR(NN),I)= I 
NP(ISTR(NN)) = NP(ISTR(NN)) + I 
500 
CONTINUE 
DO 600 NN = I,NEED 
600 
CONTINUE 
DO 700 KZ= I,IMAX 
ISTR(KZ)=0 
STOR(KZ)=O.O 
700 
CONTINUE 
100 
CONTINUE 
C ** 
NPTOT=O 
TLTGH=O.O 
DO 800 I=I,IMAX 
DSUM=O.O 
DO 900 J = I,IMAX 
IF (ICN(I,J).EQ.l) THEN 
NPTOT = NPTOT + I 
TLTGH = TLTGH + PLN(I,J) 
DSUM = DSUM + PLN(I,J) 
ENDIF 
900 
CONTINUE 
DO 950 J = I,IMAX 
IF (ICN(I,J).EQ.I) THEN 
ELSE 
TRN(I,J)=O.O 
ENDIF 
TRN(I,J) = 2.0/(PLN(I,J)*DSUM) 
950 
CONTINUE 
800 
CONTINUE 
C 
A VL TGH = TLTGH/NPTOT 
NPOT = NPTOT /2 
RETURN 
END 
C ** CALCULATE TRANSITION RATE 
C 
214 
SUBROUTINE TRANSN(IMAX,NMOLES,RATE,IFR,ITO) 
COMMONS 
IF (IFR+ITO.GT.2) GO TO 150 
RATE =0.0 
DO 100 1= I,IMAX 
DO 200 J = I,IMAX 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
PTRN (I,J) = TRN(I,J)*NUM(I) 
RATE = RATE + PTRN(I,J) 
200 
CONTINUE 
100 
CONTINUE 
GO TO 600 
150 
CONTINUE 
DO 300 J = 1,IMAX 
RATE = RA TE-PTRN(IFR,J)-PTRN(ITO,J) 
PTRN (lFR,J) = TRN (lFR,J)*NUM(lFR) 
PTRN(lTO,J)= TRN(lTO,J)*NUM(ITO) 
RATE = RATE + PTRN(IFR,J) + PTRN(ITO,J) 
300 
CONTINUE 
600 
CONTINUE 
C 
RETURN 
END 
C ** DETERMINE EVENT 
C 
SUBROUTINE EVENT(IMAX,R V ,IVENT) 
INTEGER IVENT(2) 
COMMONS 
SUM=O.O 
DO 100 1= 1,IMAX 
DO 200 J = 1,IMAX 
SUM = SUM + PTRN(I,J) 
IF (SUM.GT.RV) THEN 
IVENT(1)=I 
IVENT(2)=J 
GO TO 300 
ENDIF 
200 
CONTINUE 
100 
CONTINUE 
300 
CONTINUE 
RETURN 
END 
Listing Programm II: DIFFUSIVITY AND DRIFT 
C ********************************************************************** 
C OBJECTIVE: READ EVENT AND POSITION DATA FROM 
C PROGRAM "NETWORK", AND COMPUTE DIFFUSIVITIES 
C AND DRIFT VELOCITIES. 
C CENT(1/2/3) = CENTER OF MASS AT ANY TIME 
C MSQDSi = MEAN SQUARE DISTANCE FROM CENTER OF MASS 
C ********************************************************************** 
215 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Programm II: DIFFUSIVITY AND DRIFT (continued) 
DIMENSION POS(IOOO,3),NUM(IOOO),IVENT(2) 
DIMENSION PCENT(3),CENT(3) 
REAL MSQDSX,MSQDSY,MSQDSZ,MSOLDX,MSOLDY,MSOLDZ, 
MSQDIS 
COMMON/LENGTH/POS 
COMMON/CENTER/OCENTX,OCENTY,OCENTZ 
C ** IMEAN: FIXES NUMBER OF EVENTS OR TIME STEPS 
C 
BETWEEN WHICH DIFFUSIVITIES AND VELOCITIES 
C 
WILL BE CALCULATED 
IMEAN=IOO 
OCENTX=O.O 
OCENTY=O.O 
OCENTZ=O,O 
C ** READ NETWORK 
OPEN (UNIT = 11 ,FILE = 'EVEN26) 
OPEN (UNIT = I2,FILE= 'POSI26) 
OPEN (UNIT = I3,FILE= 'DIFF26) 
OPEN (UNIT= I4,FILE= 'VEL026) 
READ(l2, *) NPORE,IMAX,A VLTGH,IRUN,NRN 
READ( 12, *) PCENT(I ),PCENT(2),PCENT(3) 
DO 100 1= I,IMAX 
READ(l2, *) II,POS(I, 1 ),POS(I,2),POS(I,3),NUM(I) 
100 
CONTINUE 
C 
C ** INITIALIZE 
C 
READ(II, *) ITYPE,ICORD,NMOLES,IR UN 
WRITE(l3, I25)ITYPE,ICORD,NPORE,IMAX,NMOLES,A VLTGH, 
1 
IRUN, 
1 
IMEAN,NRN 
125 
FORMAT(IX,12,2X,14,2X,I3,2X,15,2X,17,2X,F9.7,2X,12,2X, 
1 
14,2X,14) 
WRITE( 13, 126) PCENT( 1 ),PCENT(2),PCENT(3) 
126 
FORMAT(lX,3(FI2.9,2X» 
C 
216 
MSOLDX=O.O 
MSOLDY=O.O 
MSOLDZ=O.O 
MSOLD=O.O 
TIOLD=O.O 
READ(II,*) TIME,IVENT(I),IVENT(2) 
ICNT=IMEAN 
CALL PARAM(IMAX,NUM,NMOLES,IVENT,CENT,ICNT,IMEAN, 
1 
MSQDSX,MSQDSY,MSQDSZ,MSQDIS) 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
OCENTX=CENT(I) 
OCENTY = CENT(2) 
OCENTZ= CENT(3) 
MSOLDX= MSQDSX 
MSOLDY = MSQDSY 
MSOLDZ= MSQDSZ 
MSOLD= MSQDIS 
TIOLD=TIME 
WRITE(13,12l) TIME,OCENTX,OCENTY,OCENTZ 
121 
FORMAT(lX,FI3.8,3(2X,FI2.9» 
C ** 
ICNT=O 
990 
CONTINUE 
READ(lI, *) TIME,IVENT( 1 ),IVENT(2) 
ICNTf" ICNT + 1 
IF (TIME.GT.999.0) THEN 
GO TO 999 
ELSE 
CALL PARAM(IMAX,NUM,NMOLES,IVENT,CENT,ICNT,IMEAN, 
C 
C 
C 
1 
MSQDSX,MSQDSY,MSQDSZ,MSQDIS) 
IF (ICNT.NE.O) THEN 
GO TO 260 
ELSE 
DIFFX=(MSQDSX-MSOLDX)/(2.0*(TIME-TIOLD» 
DIFFY = (MSQDSY -MSOLDY)/(2.0*(TIME-TIOLD» 
DIFFZ=(.MSQDSZ-MSOLDZ)/(2.0*(TIME-TIOLD» 
VELOX = (CENT(l)-OCENTX)/(TIME-TIOLD) 
VELOY = (CENT(l)-OCENTY)/(TIME-TIOLD) 
VELOZ-(CENT(1 )-OCENTZ)/(TIME-TIOLD) 
TIOLD=TIME 
MSOLD=MSQDIS 
MSOLDX-MSQDSX 
MSOLDY -MSQDSY 
MSOLDZ=MSQDSZ 
OCENTX= CENT(l) 
OCENTY = CENT(2) 
OCENTZ= CENT(3) 
WRITE(13,250) TIME,DIFFX,DIFFY,DIFFZ 
250 
FORMAT(lX,FI3.8,3(IX,F13.8» 
WRITE(14,251) TIME, VELOX, VELOY, VELOZ 
251 
FORMAT(IX,FI3.8,3(lX,FI3.8» 
ENDIF 
260 
CONTINUE 
GO TO 990 
217 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Program II: DIFFUSIVITY AND DRIFT (continued) 
ENDIF 
999 
CONTINUE 
C 
CLOSE (UNIT = 11) 
CLOSE (UNIT = 12) 
CLOSE (UNIT = 13) 
CLOSE (UNIT = 14) 
STOP 
END 
C * CALCULATES CENTER OF MASS AND MEAN SQUARE 
C 
DISTANCES 
C * AROUND CENTER OF MASS 
C 
SUBROUTINE PARAM(IMAX,NUM,NMOLES,IVENT,CENT,ICNT, 
1 
IMEAN,MSQDSX,MSQDSY,MSQDSZ, 
1 
MSQDIS) 
DIMENSION NUM( 1 000),IVENT(2),POS( 1 000,3),CENT(3) 
REAL MSQDSX,MSQDSY,MSQDSZ,MSQDIS 
COMMON/LENGTH/POS 
COMMON!CENTER/OCENTX,OCE~TY,OCENTZ 
XDIS=O.O 
YDIS=O.O 
ZDIS=O.O 
MSQDIS=O.O 
NUM(lVENT( 1» = NUM(IVENT( 1 »-1 
NUM(lVENT(2» = NUM(lVENT(2» + 1 
IF 
(lCNT.NE.IMEAN) THEN 
GO TO 200 
ELSE 
DO 100 1= I,IMAX 
XD IS = XD IS + NUM(I)*POS(I, 1) 
YDIS= YDIS+ NUM(l)*POS(I,2) 
ZDIS=ZDIS+ NUM(I)*POS(l,3) 
100 
CONTINUE 
218 
CENT(I)=XDIS/NMOLES 
CENT(2) = YDIS/NMOLES 
CENT(3) = ZDIS/NMOLES 
DO 300 1= I,IMAX 
SQDSX = NUM(I)*((POS(I, 1)-CENT(I»**2) 
SQDSY = NUM(I)*((POS(I,2)-CENT(2»**2) 
SQDSZ = NUM(l)*((POS(I,3)-CENT(3»**2) 
SQDIS=SQDSX+SQDSY +SQDSZ 
MSQDSX = MSQDSX + SQDSX 
MSQDSY = MSQDSY + SQDSY 
MSQDSZ= MSQDSZ+ SQDSZ 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
MSQDIS= MSQDIS+ SQDIS 
300 
CONTINUE 
MSQDSX=MSQDSXjNMOLES 
MSQDSY = MSQDSY jNMOLES 
MSQDSZ= MSQDSZjNMOLES 
MSQDIS = MSQDISjNMOLES 
ICNT=O 
ENDIF 
200 
CONTINUE 
RETURN 
END 
Listing Program III: EQUATIONS (6.44) AND (6.54) 
C ********************************************************************** 
C OBJECTIVE: CREATE NETWORK OF PORES AND APPLY EQNS. 
C (6.44), (6.54) TO CALCULATE DIFFUSIVITIES AND DRIFT 
C VELOCITIES. NO RANDOM WALK GENERATED. 
C THE FIRST PART OF THIS PROGRAM IS SIMILAR TO 
PROGRAM I. 
C ITYPE: 1 = UNIFORM NETWORK; 2 = SKEWED NETWORK. 
C ICORD: 199 = X-SKEWED, X COORD. 2U-U*U-0.5 
C 
999 & ITYPE= 1 UNIFORM 
C 
999 & ITYPE=2 X,Y,Z-SKEWED, ALL COORDS. 
C 
2U-U*U-0.5 
C NPORE = NUMBER OF PORES PER INTERSECTION 
C IMAX = NUMBER OF INTERSECTIONS IN CUBE 
C NMOLES = NUMBER OF MOLECULES, TOTAL 
C POS(I,lj2j3) = COORDS. OF INTSXN. =#= I 
C ICN(I,J) = INTERCONNXN. MATRIX BETWEEN INTSXN. I & J 
C 
0 = NO CONNXN, 1 = CONNXN. 
C TRN(I,J) = TRANSITION INTENSITY BETWEEN INTSXN. I & J 
C PLN(I,J) = PORE LENGTH BETWEEN I & J 
C PCENT(lj2j3) = CENTER OF INTERSECTIONS (FROM POS) 
C NUM(I) = NUMBER OF MOLECULES AT I 
C PTRN(I,J) = TRN*NUMjRA TE; ROW MULTIPLICATION ONLY 
C RATE = SUMMATION OF PTRN; TOTAL RATE TO FIND ARR. 
C TIME 
C IVENT(K) = TRANSN. FROM INTSXN =#= IVENT(l) TO =#= IVENT(2) 
C ********************************************************************** 
PROGRAM NETWORK 
REAL PCENT(3) 
INTEGER IVENT(2) 
CLICHE COMMONS 
PARAMETER (III = 600) 
219 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Program III: EQUATIONS (43) AND (52) (continued) 
COMMON JIST jSTOR(III),ISTR(III),NP(III) 
COMMONjNTWRKjPOS(III,3) 
COMMONjTRANSjTRN(III,III) 
COMMONjPTRANjPTRN(III,III) 
COMMONjREST jICN(I1I,III),PLN(I1I,I1I),NUM(III) 
ENDCLICHE 
COMMONS 
C ** SPECIFY PARAMETERS 
IRUN=2 
ITYPE=2 
ICORD=I99 
NPORE=5 
IMAX = III 
C ** NRN=STARTING RANDOM NUMBER 
C ** RAN SET IS LIBRARY SUBROUTINE THAT RESETS THE 
C 
RANDOM 
C 
NUMBER GENERATOR RANF 
NRN=647 
CALL RANSET(NRN) 
C ** STORE COEFFICIENTS CALCULATED ON UNIT 11 
OPEN (UNIT = 11 ,FILE = 'COEF26') 
C ** CREATE INTSXNS., STORE TYPE ON 11 
CALL INTERX(lTYPE,ICORD,IMAX,PCENT) 
C 
C ** CREATE INTERCONNECTIONS AND STORE POSITIONS 
C 
CALL CONNEX(NPORE,IMAX,A VLTGH) 
WRITE(II,25) NPORE,IMAX,A VLTGH,IRUN,NRN,ICORD 
25 
FORMAT(IX,I2,2X,I5,2X,F8.5,2X,12,2X,I4,2X,I3) 
WRlTE(lI,26) PCENT(l ),PCENT(2),PCENT(3) 
26 
FORMAT(l X,3(2X,E 1 4.6)) 
C 
CALL PARAMS(NPORE,IMAX,A VLTGH,DIFFX,DIFFY,DIFFZ, 
1 
VELOX,VELOY,VELOZ) 
WRITE(lI,27) D IFFX,DIFFY ,DIFFZ 
WRlTE(lI,27) VELOX,VELOY,VELOZ 
27 
FORMAT(lX,3(2X,EI4.6)) 
C 
CLOSE (UNIT = 11) 
STOP 
END 
C ** GENERATE INTERSECTIONS 
C 
220 
SUBROUTINE INTERX(lTYPE,ICORD,IMAX,PCENT) 
REAL PCENT(3) 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
COMMONS 
PCENT(l) = 0.0 
PCENT(2) = 0.0 
PCENT(3) = 0.0 
DO 100 1= 2,IMAX 
DO 200 J=I,3 
U=RANF() 
IF (ITYPE.EQ.l) THEN 
ENDIF 
POS{I,J) = U -0.5 
GO TO 150 
IF (ICORD.EQ.199) THEN 
IF (J.EQ.l) V=2*U-U*U 
IF (J .EQ.2) V = U 
IF (J.EQ.3) V = U 
POS(I,J) = V -0.5 
ELSE 
V=2*U-U*U 
POS(I,J)= V -0.5 
ENDIF 
150 
CONTINUE 
PCENT(J) = PCENT(J) + POS(I,J) 
200 
CONTINUE 
100 
CONTINUE 
C 
POS(l,I)=O.O 
POS(l ,2) = 0.0 
POS(I,3)=0.0 
PCENT(l) = PCENT(l )/IMAX 
PCENT(2) = PCENT(2)/IMAX 
PCENT(3) '= PCENT(3)/IMAX 
RETURN 
END 
C ** GENERATE CONNECTIONS AND DETERMINE TRANSITION 
C 
MATRIX 
C 
SUBROUTINE CONNEX(NPORE,IMAX,A VLTGH) 
COMMONS 
DO 50 1= I,IMAX 
DO 60 J=I,IMAX 
ICN(I,J)=O 
60 
CONTINUE 
NP(I)=O 
ISTR(I)=O 
STOR(I) =0.0 
50 
CONTINUE 
TLGT=O.O 
221 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Program III: EQUATIONS (43) AND (52) (continued) 
DO 100 1= I,IMAX 
K=O 
DO 200 J = I,IMAX 
IF (J.EQ.l) GO TO 200 
iF (NPORE.EQ.NP(I)) GO TO 100 
IF (NPORE.EQ.NP(J)) GO TO 200 
IF «ICN(I,J).NE.O).OR.(ICN(J,I).NE.O)) GO TO 200 
K=K+l 
PLN(I,J) = SQRT«POS(I,I)-POS(J, 1))**2 
1 
(POS(I,2)-POS(J,2))**2 
2 
(POS(I,3)-POS(J,3))**2) 
PLN(J,I)= PLN(I,J) 
ISTR(K)=J 
STOR(K) = PLN(I,J) 
200 
CONTINUE 
NEED = NPORE-NP(I) 
IF (K.EQ.O) GO TO 100 
IF (K.EQ.l) THEN 
ENDIF 
NEED=K 
GO TO 350 
IF (NEED.GT.K) THEN 
NEED=K 
ENDIF 
KMX=K-l 
400 
CONTINUE 
C ** SORT 
IFLAG=O 
DO 300 KK = I,KMX 
IF (STOR(KK).GT.STOR(KK+ 1)) THEN 
IEMP 1 = ISTR(KK) 
TEMP2= STOR(KK) 
ISTR(KK) = ISTR(KK+ 1) 
STOR(KK) = STOR(KK + 1) 
ISTR(KK+ 1)=IEMPI 
STOR(KK+ 1)=TEMP2 
IFLAG=1 
ENDIF 
300 
CONTINUE 
IF (IFLAG.EQ.l) GO TO 400 
C ** 
350 
CONTINUE 
222 
DO 500 NN=I,NEED 
ICN(I,ISTR(NN))= 1 
NP(I) = NP(I) + 1 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
ICN(ISTR(NN),I)= I 
NP(ISTR(NN)) = NP(ISTR(NN)) + 1 
500 
CONTINUE 
DO 600 NN=l,NEED 
600 
CONTINUE 
DO 700 KZ= I,IMAX 
ISTR(KZ)=0 
STOR(KZ)=O.O 
700 
CONTINUE 
100 
CONTINUE 
C** 
NPTOT=O 
TLTGH=O.O 
DO 800 1= I,IMAX 
DSUM=O.O 
DO 900 J = I,IMAX 
IF (ICN(I,J).EQ.l) THEN 
NPTOT = NPTOT + 1 
TLTGH = TLTGH + PLN(I,J) 
DSUM = DSUM + PLN(I,J) 
ENDIF 
900 
CONTINUE 
800 
CONTINUE 
C 
A VL TGH = TL TGH/NPTOT 
NPOT = NPTOT /2 
RETURN 
END 
C ** CALCULATE COEFFICIENTS 
C 
SUBROUTINE PARAMS(NPORE,IMAX,AVLTGH,DIFFX,DIFFY, 
1 
DIFFZ, 
1 
VELOX,VELOY,VELOZ) 
COMMONS 
AVLTG2= AVLTGH**2 
DIFFX=O.O 
DIFFY=O.O 
DIFFZ=O.O 
VELOX=O.O 
VELOY=O.O 
VELOZ=O.O 
DO 100 1= I,IMAX 
DENO=O.O 
DENX=O.O 
DENY=O.O 
DENZ=O.O 
DO 200 J=I,IMAX 
223 

Appendix 6C. Algorithm and FORTRAN Code 
Listing Program III: EQUATIONS (43) AND (52) (continued) 
IF (ICN(I,J).EQ.O) GO TO 200 
RLEN =SQRT«POS(J,I)-POS(l, 1))**2 
+ «POS(J ,2)-POS(I,2))**2 
2 
+ «POS(J,3)-POS(I,3))**2) 
DENO=DENO+RLEN 
DENX=DENO 
DENY=DENO 
DENZ=DENO 
200 
CONTINUE 
DO 300 J = I,IMAX 
IF (lCN(I,J).EQ.O) GO TO 300 
XL = POS(J, 1)-POS(l, 1) 
YL= POS(J,2)-POS(I,2) 
ZL = POS(J ,3)-POS(I,3) 
RLEN =SQRT«POS(J,1)-POS(I,I))**2 
+ «POS(J,2)-POS(I,2))**2 
2 
+ «POS(J ,3)-POS(I,3))**2) 
DDX=XL/RLEN 
DDY = YL/RLEN 
DDZ=ZL/RLEN 
DIFFX = DIFFX + RLEN*(DDX**2)/DENX 
DIFFY = DIFFY + RLEN*(DDY**2)/DENY 
DIFFZ=DIFFZ+ RLEN*(DDZ**2)/DENZ 
VELOX = VELOX + DDX/DENX 
VELOY = VELOY + DDY /DENY 
VELOZ= VELOZ+ DDZ/DENZ 
300 
CONTINUE 
100 
CONTINUE 
224 
DIFFX = DIFFX/IMAX 
DIFFY = DIFFY /IMAX 
DIFFZ = DIFFZ/IMAX 
VELOX = - 2.0*NPORE*VELOX/IMAX 
VELOY = -2.0*NPORE*VELOY/IMAX 
VELOZ= -2.0*NPORE*VELOZ/IMAX 
RETURN 
END 

7. Epilogue 
As stated in the preface of this monograph, a quantitative treatment can facilitate 
computer-aided design of controlled-release devices or systems. In theory, the 
mathematical models presented in this monograph could be employed to design 
these devices. In reality, however, the resultant device cannot be expected to 
perform optimally over the whole range of possible "environmental" conditions. 
The preceding chapters have indicated that a controlled-release device often 
interacts with its surrounding environment in a highly complex manner. Thus it 
may be nearly impossible to develop a mathematical model that can precisely or 
always predict the device's behavior or performance. Even if such a model can 
be developed, its solution with conventional techniques may be unwieldy; con-
sequently, approximations may be required. Although the resultant approximate 
model may suffice in practice, certain situations may exist outside its bounds, 
as a rule rather than as an exception. Nevertheless, the expert designer or user 
often possesses heuristic models of controlled-release devices, which cannot be 
expressed mathematically, but which may be employed fora variety of purposes 
under various conditions. For example, the designer may resort to heuristic 
models to examine biocompatibility of polymer materials, to select the types of 
adhesive and backing polymer layer for transdermal patches, the linkage between 
active agent and polymer backbone for chemical-reaction controlled release, the size 
and distribution of microparticulates in injectibles, and the arrangement of the 
semi-permeable membrane in osmotic devices. The actions of the expert designer 
appear to be shaped by perception and judgement, and honed by the experience 
gained in dealing with the devices. Such perception and judgement are valuable 
assets which, if extracted and applied properly, can form the basis for developing 
effective and practical models for controlled-release systems. 
Research in the area of Knowledge Engineering (see, e.g., Barr and Feigenbaum, 
1981), a sub-field of Artificial Intelligence, explicitly recognizes the power of expert 
knowledge. An expert designer or operator of any system uses pragmatic know-
how comprising heuristics, rules-of-thumb, and other empirical associations based 
on the expert's perception and understanding of the process system and its sub-
systems. This expertise is extremely valuable, although it can frequently be expressed 
only in qualitative and imprecise terms. The aim of Knowledge Engineering is to 
extract this knowledge from the expert and to harness it in solving complex 
problems in a real-world environment. Such a system, termed an expert system, 
derives its power solely from the knowledge embedded within it. Since several 
systems have been rated as performing at or above the level of human experts, 
numerous industrial organizations and governmental agencies have increasingly 
expressed interest in the application of expert systems. 
225 

7 Epilogue 
Clearly, expertise pertaining to a complex system, e.g., a controlled-release device, 
involves several different kinds of knowledge. Since an expert system derives its 
power from the knowledge emodied in it, a faithful representation of all con-
cepts and intentions of the expert is essential. Recently, the designers of Artificial 
Intelligence language have recognized this need for multiple forms of knowledge 
representation by creating programming environments, such as KEE (Fikes and 
Kehler, 1985) and LOOPS (Bobrow and Stefik, 1982), that integrate several 
knowledge programming formalisms. It would be highly desirable, therefore, that 
in the foreseeable future both mathematical and heuristic models be incorpo-
rated into these formalisms for the optimal design of controlled-release devices. 
For additional information on the concepts, theories and methodologies underlying 
the field of Artificial Intelligence or expert systems, readers are referred to 
available books and monographs on the subject (see, e.g., Nilsson, 1980; Rich, 
1983; Winston, 1984). 
References 
Barr, A., Feigenbaum, E. A.: The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence, Vol. I, pp. 198-199, 
William Kaufman, Los Altos, Caiifomia (1981) 
Bobrow, D. G., Stefik, M.: The LOOPS Manual, Technical Report KB-VLSI-81-13, Knowl-
edge Systems Area, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (1981) 
Fikes, R., Kehler, T.: The Role of Frame-Based Representation in Reasoning, Communi-
cations of the ACM 28, 904--920 (1985) 
Nilsson, N. J.: Principles of Artificial Intelligence, Tioga Publishing, Palo Alto, CA (1980) 
Rich, E.: Artificial Intelligence, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY (1983) 
Winston, P. H.: Artificial Intelligence, 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA (1984) 
226 

Author Index 
Abramson, I. S. 168, 200 
Ackerman, J. L. 24, 85 
Ahn, B. J. 123, 152 
Akanni, K. A. 168, 200 
Alfrey, T. 112, 113, 116, 
123, 144, 152 
Allan, G. G. 95, 96, 100, 
102, 107, 108 
Amore, P. D. 5, 8 
Andersen, C. G. 97, 108 
Anderson, J. M. 97, 108 
Apicella, A. 126, 154 
Aris, R. 19, 83, 167, 200 
Ashare, E. 79, 83 
Astarita, G. 112, 116, 120, 
123, 152, 154 
Attwood, D. 41, 88 
Aulabaugh, A. E. 6, 8, 95, 
97,107 
Ayres, J. W. 78,83,86 
Bagley, E. 115, 152 
Baird, B. R. 112, 136, 152 
Baker, R. W. 3, 7, 27, 37, 
38, 40, 41, 43, 51-53, 62, 
71, 82, 83, 89, 91-94, 97, 
100, 105, 107, 127, 152, 
162, 163, 166 
Balazs, A. C. 20, 83 
Bamba, M. 125, 152 
Barr, A. 225, 226 
Barrer, R. M. 18, 23-25, 83 
Barrie, J. A. 2, 59, 83 
Batz, H. G. 102, 107 
Baudys, M. 101, 108 
Bearman, R. J. 141, 152 
Bechgaard, H. 60, 83 
Beer, J. W. 95, 96, 100, 102, 
107 
Berens, A. R. 123, 153 
Berg, J. 44, 83 
Bernier, G. A. 115, 153 
Berner, B. 59, 83 
Bharucha-Reid, A. T. 141, 
153, 183, 200 
Bhatia, S. K. 169, 173, 177, 
189,197,198,200 
Bird, R. B. 13, 83 
Bixler, J. 19, 86, 115, 116, 
154 
Blake, D. R. 93, 109 
Bobeck, H. 164-166 
Bobrow, D. G. 226 
Bodde, H. E. 6, 8, 128, 155 
Boyer, R. F. 23, 83 
Brooke, D. 39, 42, 76, 83 
Brooks, T. W. 83, 179 
Brott, B. C. 5, 8 
Bruck, S. D. 157, 166 
Bueche, F. 24, 25, 85 
Bunge, R. G. 38, 87 
Buri, P. 82, 85, 139, 151, 155 
Burrell, H. 29, 83 
Butt, J. B. 19, 84, 170, 200 
Byron, P. R. 26, 83 
Cable, H. C. 101, 107 
Calef, D. F. 20, 83 
Caplan, S. R. 14, 86 
Carbonell, R. G. 169,201 
Cardarelli, N. F. 31, 87 
Cardinal, J. R. 38, 77, 85 
Carslaw, H. S. 57, 59, 63, 
83 
Carstensen, J. T. 81, 84, 
125, 152 
Case, R. D. 6, 8, 95, 97, 107 
Chandrasekaran, S. K. 78, 
83, 163, 166 
Chazov, E. I. 92, 99, 108 
Chien, Y. W. 29, 32, 44, 
58, 69, 79, 83, 87 
Christensen, F. N. 60, 83 
Christopherson, J. 31, 36, 
85 
Chou, S. T. 168,200,201 
Clarke, M. 62, 85 
Cob by, J. 76, 84 
Cohen, D. S. 16, 84, 122, 
153 
Collett, J. H. 41, 88 
Colton, C. K. 15,20,87, 
129, 130, 156 
Cooney, D. O. 102, 103, 107 
Cousin, M. J. 95, 96, 100, 
102,107 
Cowsar, D. R. 2, 7, 28, 85 
Crank, J. 13, 14, 51, 53, 62-
65, 72, 74, 84, 112, 120-
123, 147, 153 
Curran, P. F. 158, 166 
Currie, J. A. 19, 84 
Dalby, R. N. 26, 83 
Datyner, A. 16, 86, 177, 201 
Davidson, G. W. R. 119, 
127, 153 
DeBoer, A. G. 6, 8, 127, 
128, 155 
DeGroot, S. R. 12,84 
Dejong, G. 168, 172, 189, 
200 
DeLee de, L. G. T. 128, 155 
Deutch, J. M. 20, 83 
DeVries, M. A. 128, 155 
DiBenedetto, A. T. 16, 84 
Doelker, E. 82, 85, 139, 151, 
152, 155, 198, 200 
Duda, J. L. 16, 17, 22, 84, 
88, 117-119, 135, 136, 147, 
152, 156, 177, 201 
Duggirala, S. K. 168, 200 
Duncan, R. 6, 7, 95, 97, 
101, 102, 107 
Dykes, M. K. 6, 7, 95, 97, 
107 
227 

Author Index 
Eckenhoff, B. 160, 166 
Edelman, E. 164-166 
Eldridge, J. 93, 109 
Elking, D. 32, 33, 86 
Elworthy, P. H. 19, 87 
Evans, J. W. 168,170,200, 
201 
Evans, R. B. 19, 84 
Fan, L. T. 53, 60, 61, 84, 
87,106, 108, 141, 142, 144, 
146-150, 152, 153, 156, 
168, 182, 194, 200, 201 
Fan, L. S. 60, 61, 84 
Fang, S. ~. 97, 108 
Fatt, I. 170, 200 
Feigenbaum, E. A. 225, 
226 
Feijen, J. 97, 108 
Feld, W. A. 6, 8, 95, 97, 
107 
Felder, R. ~. 14, 84 
Feng, C. 168, 190, 200 
Fessi, H. 81, 84 
Feynman, R. P. 141, 153 
Fikes, R. 229 
Flynn, G. L. 24, 29, 53, 54, 
58,59,84 
Folk, G. ~. 112, 153 
Folkman, J. 164, 166, 199, 
200 
Fooladi, ~. 97, 98, 108 
Foster, R. N. 19, 83, 170, 
200 
Fox, R. O. 193,200 
Franson, N. ~. 112, 127, 
136, 153 
Franzmann, G. 96, 107 
Frisch, H. L. 15, 17, 84, 88, 
112-116, 119, 121, 123, 124, 
129, 134, 135, 140, 141, 
144, 147, 152, 153, 156 
Fu, J. C. 63, 84 
Fuhrmann, J. 20, 84 
Fujita, ~. 16, 84 
Furuhata, K. 27, 85 
Furusawa, T. 15,20,84 
Gale, R. ~. 30, 50, 86, 87, 
92, 93, 107, 163, 166 
Ganderton, D. 87 
Garcin, ~. 130, 155 
Garmon, W. E. 130, 155 
Gavalas, G. R. 19,84, 170, 
200 
228 
Geddes, A. L. 14, 84 
Ghannam, ~. ~. 58, 87 
Gienger, G. 68, 69, 77, 84 
Gillett, J. W. 35, 36, 85 
Good, W. R. 125, 127, 153 
Gostoli, C. 112, 124, 153 
Greenkorn, R. A. 19, 85, 
170,200 
Gregonis, D. E. 97, 108 
Graham, N. B. 127, 153 
Giilcat, U. 113, 123, 156 
Gupta, D. V. S. 75, 85 
Gtirkan, T. 113, 123, 156 
Gurnee, E. F. 112, 113, 123, 
144,152 
Gurny, R. 82, 85, 139, 152, 
155, 198, 200 
Haas, Ch. 20, 86 
Hagemeir, C. 63, 84 
Haleblian, J. 31, 35, 36, 85 
Halpern, B. D. 24, 85 
Hansch, C. 33, 86 
Hansen, F. Y. 60, 83 
Haring, R. E. 19,85, 170, 
200 
Harland, R. S. 167, 200 
Harr, J. R. 36, 85 
Harrigan, S. E. 93, 107 
Harris, F. W. 6, 8, 95, 97-
100, 102, 107 
Heller, J. 91-93, 107 
Hellwege, K. H. von 24, 85 
Higuchi, T. 69, 70, 73, 74, 
76, 77, 80, 85, 159, 160, 
166 
Higuchi, W. I. 70, 73, 74, 
76, 77, 80, 86, 87 
Hildebrand, J. H. 29, 85 
Himmelstein, K. J. 104, 108 
Hoffman, V. 98, 107 
Holley, R. H. 115, 153 
Hopfenberg, H. B. 103, 108, 
112, 113, 116, 117, 119, 123, 
125-127, 136, 152-154 
Howell, J. ~. 119, 123, 156 
Howes, J. F. 93, 108 
Hsieh, D. S. T. 76, 85, 86, 
119, 123, 156, 164, 166 
Hsu, K. C. 112, 125-127, 
136, 154 
Huber, S. 44, 83 
Huvard, G. S. 14, 84 
Hwang, S. T. 38, 87 
Imanidis, G. 2, 86 
Jacobs, H. 38, 77, 85 
Jacques, C. H. ~. 114, 154 
Jaeger, J. C. 57, 59, 62, 83, 
85 
Jarzebski, C. ~. 117-119, 
147, 156 
Jeffcoat, R. 93, 108 
Johnson, ~. F. L. 19, 85, 
168, 189, 190, 197, 200 
Joshi, S. 116, 123, 152, 154 
Junginger, H. E. 6, 8, 128, 
155 
Kambour, R. P. 115, 153 
Katchalsky, A. 158, 166 
Kehler, T. 229 
Kelley, F. N. 24, 25, 85 
Kim, S. 19,84,170,200 
Kim, S. H. 38, 77, 85 
Kim, S. W. 38, 77, 85, 97, 
108 
Kimmel, G. L. 93, 108 
King, K. F. 44, 83 
Kinneberg, D. J. 193, 201 
Kirkwood, J. G. 141, 152 
Knappe, W. 24, 85 
Knoch, A. 68, 69, 77, 84 
Kojima, Y. 27, 85 
Kopec, L. 24, 85 
Kopecek, J. 6, 7, 91, 95, 97, 
101, 102, 107, 108 
Korostoff, E. 24, 85 
Kosmeyer, R. W. 82, 85, 
110, 125, 127, 128, 135, 
136, 149, 152, 154 
Kosho, C. 128, 155 
Kost, J. 164-166 
Kostka, V. 101, 108 
Kubin, ~. 54, 56, 87 
Kunica, E. 164, 166 
Kuu, W. Y. 76, 85 
Kwei, T. K. 15, 88, 112, 121, 
136, 140, 144, 153, 154, 
156 
Kydonieus, A. F. 2, 3, 8 
Lacey, R. E. 28, 85 
Lamaze, C. E. 129, 130, 156 
Lambert, H. J. 32, 44, 83 
Langer, R. 3, 5, 6, 8, 15,20, 
38, 76, 82, 83, 85-87, 89, 
91, 93, 108, 158, 164-166, 
199, 200 

Lapidus, H. 125, 127, 141, 
154, 155, 183, 199, 200, 
201 
Lawyer, K. R. 98, 108 
Leafe, T. 91, 109 
Lee, E. S. 38, 77, 85 
Lee, P. 1. 66, 67, 72, 85, 
103, 108, 125, 127, 129, 
131, 133, 152, 154 
Leeper, H. M. 159, 160, 166 
Leighton, R. B. 141, 153 
Leo, A. 33, 86 
Leong, K. W. 5, 8, 165, 166 
Leuenberger, H. 20, 86 
Levine, J. D. 59, 83 
Lightfoot, E. N. 12, 14, 83, 
86 
Lindstrom, F. T. 36, 70, 83, 
85,86 
Ling, H. C. 135, 136, 152, 
156 
Linhardt, R. J. 164-166 
Lipper, R. A. 76, 86 
Litovitz, T. A. 16, 85 
Lloyd, J. B. 101, 107 
Lloyd, W. G. 112, 113, 123, 
144, 152 
Lohe, P. 24, 85 
Long, F. A. 115, 123, 152, 
154 
Lonsdale, H. K. 27, 37, 40, 
41, 52, 53, 62, 70, 83, 105, 
107 
Lordi, N. G. 125, 127, 154, 
199,200 
Lotan, N. 91, 109 
Lustig, S. R. 150, 152, 154 
Macedo, P. B. 16, 86 
Makarewicz, P. J. 119, ISS 
Malinauskas, A. P. 170, 201 
Manning, J. R. 169, 183, 201 
Mares, S. F. 44, 83 
Marietta, M. 6, 8 
Marty, J. P. 81, 84, 125, 152 
Mason, E. A. 19, 84, 201 
Mayersohn, M. 76, 84 
McCarthy, D. A. 93, 108 
McCormick, C. L. 97, 98, 
108 
McGregor, R. IS, 18, 86, 
112, 154, 177, 201 
McNeill, M. E. 127, 153 
McSpadden, S. K. 71, 72, 
74,86 
Meadows, D. L. 130, 155 
Meares, P. 21, 22, 86 
Merkle, H. P. 68, 69, 77, 84 
Merril, E. W. 129, 130, 156 
Meyer, F. 93, 109 
Michaels, A. S. 19, 30, 59, 
83, 86, 115, 154 
Mikels, R. A. 95, 96, 100, 
102, 107 
Mikulecky, D. C. 14, 86 
Miller, E. S. 81, 86 
Mitra, S. 97, 108 
Miyanami, K. 53, 60, 61, 
84, 87, 106, 108 
Miyasaka, K. 27, 85 
Mo, W. T. 170, 201 
Mount, D. A. 36, 84 
Moyer, D. L. 63, 84 
Moynihan, H. J. 130, 155 
Mueller, N. 31, 36, 85 
Nagy, M. 120, 154 
Nardse, Y. 19, 88, 170, 201 
Nassar, R. 168, 200, 201 
Neogi, A. N. 95, 96, 108 
Neogi, P. 95, 108, 123, 154 
Ng, K. 31, 35, 85 
Nicolais, L. 120, 152 
Nilsson, N. J. 226 
Noecker, R. 165, 166 
Omar, M. A. 141, 155 
Ouano, A. C. 122, 156 
Pace, R. J. 16, 86, 177, 201 
Park, G. S. 14,16, 84, 86, 
112, 155 
Parrish, W. R. 123, 152 
Pate, W. T. 193, 201 
Paul, D. R. 71, 72, 74, 77, 
83, 86, 130, 155 
Peppas, N. A. 15,80-82,85, 
86, 90, 93, 108, 110, 112, 
119, 123, 127, 128, 130, 
136, 139, 142, 147, 149, 
150, 151, 153, 155, 156, 
158, 166, 167, 200 
Peterlin, A. 19, 86, 114, 121, 
122, 155, 167, 201 
Petersen, E. E. 19, 86 
Petersen, R. V. 97, 108 
Petropoulos, J. H. 123, 124, 
155 
Author Index 
Pines, E. 199, 201 
Pismen, I. M. 19, 86, 168, 
177, 201 
Pitcher, W. H. 15, 20, 87 
Pitt, C. G. 93, 94, 108 
Pittman, C. U. 98, 107 
Pohl, J. 101, 108 
Pontius, R. B. 14, 84 
Prather, R. 29, 86 
Prins, W. 199,201 
Puisieux, F. 81, 84, 125, 152 
Rajamani, K. 193, 200 
Ramachandran, K. S. 98, 
108 
Rebenfeld, L. 119, 155 
Reid, R. C. 65, 86 
Reinhart, C. T. 130, 155 
Rejmanova, P. 101, 106, 107 
Rhine, W. D. 38, 39, 42, 
76,85,86 
Rich, E. 226 
Richman, D. 123, 154 
Ringsdorf, H. 96, 98, 102, 
107, 108 
Rodin, J. 0.92,107 
Rogers, C. E. 12, 25, 27, 33, 
34, 87, 116, 155 
Rogers, M. G. 24, 83 
Roorda, W. E. 6, 8, 127, 
128, 155 
Roseman, T. J. 31, 41, 43, 
53, 54, 58, 59, 70, 73, 74, 
77, 80, 84, 87 
Rosen, H. B. 164-166 
Roussis, P. P. 123, 124, 155 
Rowe, R. C. 19, 87 
Rudolph, F. B. 137-13'9, 
149, 152, 155 
Runkel, N. 31, 36, 85 
Ryan, D. 169, 201 
Saffman, P. G. 168, 201 
Saleeby, D. E. 127, 153 
Saltzman, W. M. 20, 38, 
82, 87 
Sands, M. 141, 153 
Sarti, G. C. 112, 123, 124, 
152, 153 
Satterfield, C. N. 15,20,87, 
168, 190, 191, 201 
Scheidegger, A. E. 168, 170, 
201 
229 

Author Index 
Schindler, A. 93, 94, 108 
Schwope, A. D. 65, 86, 93, 
108 
Scott, R. L. 29, 85 
Seganova, A. 98, 107 
Segot-Chicq, S. 127, 155 
Seinfeld, J. H. 141, 155, 183, 
201 
Sfirakis, A. 116, 155 
Shin, S. H. 168, 183, 194, 
200 
Shippy, R. L. 38, 87 
Sideman, S. 91, 109 
Sidman, K. R. 65, 86 
Siegel, R. A. 20, 83, 87 
Silberberg, A. 199, 201 
Sinclair, J. L. 123, 147; 149, 
155 
Singh, S. K. 141, 142, 144-
152, 155, 156, 193, 194, 
201 
Skirrow, G. 24, 25, 83 
Sladek, K. J. 123, 156 
Smirnov, V. N. 92, 99, 108 
Smith, J. M. 15, 19, 20, 84, 
88, 123, 152, 168, 170, 189, 
190,201 
Smith, K. A. 129, 156 
Solomon, O. 84 
Somasekharan, K. N. 68, 
87 
Spacek, P. 54, 56, 87 
Sparks, R. E. 75, 85 
Speiser, P. 4, 8 
Spencer, R. S. 23, 83 
st. Clair, A. D. 36, 85 
Stanley, E. A. 122, 153 
Stannett, V. 21, 22, 33, 87, 
112-114,116,117,127,136, 
153, 154 
Stefik, M. 226 
Stewart, W. E. 13, 19, 83, 
85, 168, 189, 190, 197, 200 
Subramanian, R. V. 68, 87 
Sukhatme, V. 76, 86 
230 
Sun, Y. 58, 87 
SundeHif, L. o. 33, 34, 88 
Swanson, D. 163, 166 
Swenson, D. W. 79, 83 
Szwarc, M. 32, 87 
Taverdet, J. L. 24, 87 
Theeuwes, F. 50, 87, 158-
161, 166 
Theodorou, D. 170,201 
Thomas, N. 112, 113, 124, 
136, 144, 147, 156 
Thombre, A. G. 104, 106, 
108, 162, 166 
Till, D. E. 65, 86 
Tischenko, E. G. 92, 99, 
108 
Tojo, K. 32, 33, 46, 53, 58, 
60, 61, 73, 84, 87, 105, 108 
Too, J. R. 168, 201 
Torchilin, V. P. 92, 99, 108 
Tosun, I. 123, 156 
Tranter, C. J. 63, 87 
Trescony, P. V. 91, 107 
Tu, Y. O. 122, 156 
Turnbull, D. 16, 83 
Tuttle, M. E. 40, 41, 83 
Urdahl, K. G. 127, 156 
Usteri, M. 20, 86 
Valia, K. H. 32, 87 
van Amerongen, G. J. 24, 
26, 28, 30, 88 
Van Brunt, J. 3, 5, 8 
van Kampen, N. G. 141, 156, 
183, 201 
Vergnaud, J. M. 24, 87 
Vieth, W. R. 19, 85, 119, 123, 
156 
Vrentas, J. S. 16, 17, 88, 
117-119, 135, 136, 147, 
152, 156, 177, 201 
Wakad, N. 19, 88, 170, 201 
Wakao, N. 19, 88, 170, 201 
Walker, G. C. 76, 84 
Wall, M. E. 93, 108 
Wang, C. T. 168, 189, 201 
Wang, F. H. L. 134, 152, 
156 
Wang, T. T. 15, 88, 120, 
121, 140, 144, 153, 156 
Washkuhn, R. J. 39,42, 76, 
83 
Watson, G. M. 19,84 
Weber, L. J. 36, 85 
Wei, J. 170, 201 
Weignann, H. D. 119, 155 
Whitaker, S. 160, 169, 201 
Wilkes, G. L. 119, 155 
Williams, J. L. 21, 22, 87 
Windle, A. H. 112, 113, 116, 
120, 124, 136, 144, 147, 
156 
Winston, P. H. 226 
Winzap, S. 20, 86 
Wirbrant, A. 33, 34, 88 
Wise, D. L. 93, 108 
Wong, P. 59, 83 
Wong,P. S. L.30,86 
Wood, J. M. 41, 88 
Woodland, J. H. R. 93, 109 
Wright, J. 163, 166 
Yaacobi, Y. 91, 109 
Yalkowsky, s. H. 41, 43, 
53, 54, 58, 59, 76, 84, 85 
Yariv, A. 141, 156 
Yasuda, H. 129, 130, 156 
Yilmaz, L. 113, 156 
Yolles, s. 93, 109 
Yum, S. I. 160, 161, 166 
Zimmermann, I. 38, 88 
Zupko, H. M. 112, 121, 136, 
140, 154 
Zweidinger, R. 93, 108 
Zygourakis, K. 19, 88 

Subject Index 
Active agent, decay of 60 
dispersed 2, 4, 36, 39, 69, 107 
dissolved 2, 4, 11, 36, 39, 61, 69, 70, 71 
loading of 34, 61, 69, 81 
solubility of 28 
Amorphous regions, see Polymer 
Anisotropic system 169, 183, 186, 197 
Anomalous transport 112, 114, 116, 127, 140, 
149 
Approximate solution, heat balance inte-
gral method 66, 131 
long-time 62 
short-time 62 
Artificial intelligence 225, 226 
Blocking factor 19 
Boundary layer 40, 56, 58, 60, 68, 73 
Bulk erosion 5, 90, 92 
Burst effect 53, 61 
Case-I diffusion 112, 115, 140 
Case-II transport 112, 119, 122, 126, 140, 144, 
147 
Characteristic diffusion time 117, 118 
Characteristic relaxation time 117, 118, 150 
Chemical immobilization 89, 94 
Chemical potential 12, 121, 157 
Chemical reaction controlled release, see 
Release 
Computer-aided design 7, 225 
Convective velocity 121, 140, 144, 169, 183, 
187, 191, 194, 196 
Copolymerization 95, 97, 99 
graft 24 
Crosslin king 23, 92, 110, 130 
Crystalline regions, see Polymer 
Deborah number 117, 124, 127, 151 
Detour ratio 19 
Devices, controlled-porosity osmotic 162 
erodible 5, 89, 102 
externally-modulated 164 
hemispherical monolithic 38 
hollow-fiber 79 
laminated monolithic 38, 77 
laminated reservoir 58, 68 
magnetically-modulated 164 
matrix, see Matrix devices 
monolithic, see Monolithic devices 
osmotic pumping 6, 157 
osmotically-activated monolithic 162 
reservoir, see Reservoir devices 
sectioned-cylinder monolithic 39, 76 
swellable 110 
ultrasound-modulated 165 
Diffusion, Fickian 14, 17, 112, 115, 119, 127, 
130, 132, 134, 147 
non-Fickian 112, 123 
Diffusion, Theory of 
Approximate molecular 16 
Free-volume 16, 177 
Statistical mechanical 177 
Diffusion coefficient, see Diffusivity 
Activity-based 12 
Self- 12, 13, 16, 117 
Effective, see Effective diffusivity 
History-dependent 120 
Intrinsic 12, 14 
Mutual (inter)- 13, 17, 117 
Stress-dependent 123 
Diffusion - controlled release, see Release 
Diffusion - dissolution controlled release, 
see Release 
Diffusion equation, generalized form of 14, 
121, 140, 184, 197 
Diffusivity 11, 20, 120, 122, 129, 135, 151, 
177, 190 
Knudsen 169, 177, 190 
tensor 186 
Diffusivity, effect of crosslinking 23, 130 
crystallites 24 
fillers 24 
graft copolymerization 24 
plasticizers 23, 24 
solute molecular orientation 27 
231 

Subject Index 
solute molecular shape 27 
solute molecular size 22, 27 
solute molecular structure 28 
thermal history 26 
Dissolution 9, 13, 28, 37, 48, 60, 78, 81, 92, 
102, 122, 198 
Drift velocity 169, 183, 187, 191, 194, 196 
stress-induced 121, 140, 144 
Drug targeting 90, 101 
Effective diffusivity 18, 82, 121, 168, 177, 
184, 188, 191, 194, 197, 199 
Enzymatic cleavage 6, 90, 101 
Equilibrium swelling factor 112, 145 
Erodible devices, see Devices 
Erosion controlled release, see Release 
Ethyl cellulose 5, 199 
Ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers 3, 163, 
199 
Expert systems 226 
Externally-modulated devices, see Devices 
Extraction front 69, 71, 74, 77 
Fick's law 11, 14 
Fillers 24, 30 
Finite sink 53, 54, 62, 64, 65, 75 
Free volume, hole 16, 17, 23 
interstitial 16 
Free-volume theories, see Diffusion, 
Theory of 
Gel 15, 110, 136, 199 
Diffusion in 17, 129 
Gel-glassy polymer interface 112, 115, 121, 
126, 136, 151 
velocity 114, 124, 138, 143 
Geometry, of device 38, 39, 76 
of obstructing particles 18 
Glass-to-gel transition 6, 110, 128, 141, 147 
Glass transition temperature 6, 22, 110, 112, 
116 
Glycolic acid 5, 93 
Graft copolymerization 24 
Heat balance integral method, see Approx-
imate solution 
Hemispherical monolithic devices, see 
Devices 
Heterogeneous erosion 5, 90, 93, 105 
Heterogeneous polymer 15, 17, 167, 177, 
183, 184, 188, 197 
Hollow-fiber devices, see Devices 
Homogeneous erosion 5, 90, 92 
Homogeneous polymer, see Polymer 
232 
Homopolymerization 95, 98, 100 
Hydrodynamic diffusion layer 40, see also 
Boundary layer 
Hydrogels 6, 79, 99, 125, 127, 199 
Hydrolytic cleavage 6, 90, 101 
Hydroxypropyl cellulose 5 
Intrinsic mobility 12 
Knowledge engineering 225 
Labile bonds 91, 93, 101 
Lactic acid 5, 93 
Laminated devices, see Devices 
Low-temperature casting 5, 164 
Magnetically-modulated devices, see 
Devices 
Maleic anhydride 5, 92 
Master equation 169, 172, 175, 184, 193, 197 
Matrix devices 2, 9, 11, 28, 3.1, 36, 47, 49, 
51, 61, 64, 68, 78, 81, 90, 105, 162, 198 
Matrix-medium interface mass transfer 68 
flux continuity 139 
Methyl vinyl ether 5, 92 
Microencapsulation 4 
Mobility coefficient 121 
Monolithic devices 2, 9, 11, 28, 31, 36, 47, 
49, 51, 61, 64, 68, 78, 81, 90, 105, 162, 198 
Monolithic dispersions, complex 37 
simple 37, 39 
Monolithic matrix systems 38 
Monte Carlo simulation 20, 167, 169, 192, 
198 
Moving boundary 80, 123, 136, 163 
Osmosis 3, 162 
Osmotically-activated monolithic device, 
see Devices 
Osmotic device, controlled-porosity, see 
Devices 
Osmotic pressure 6, 157 
Osmotic pumping devices, see Devices 
Osmotic pump, elementary 7, 157, 159 
Higuchi-Leeper 159 
Theeuwes miniature 160 
Particle size, effect on solubility 31 
Partition 9, 111, see also Partition coeffi-
cient 
Partition coefficient 20, 26, 28, 31, 54, 58, 
68, 77, 134, 138 
Pendant chain 6, 90 
Penetrant 17, 111, 116, 122, 129, 130, 132 
Permeability 26, 30, 50, 59, 158, 165 

Percolation theory 20 
Physical immobilization 89 
Plasticizers 23 
Poly (vinyl pyrrolidone) 5, 92 
Polyagents 90, 95 
Polyanhydrides 5, 93 
Polyethylene 3, 33, 34 
Polymer, amorphous regions of 17, 20, 91, 
167, 183 
continuum 9, 37, 69, 79 
crystalline regions of 17, 20, 24, 27, 91, 
167 
heterogeneous, see Heterogeneous 
polymer 
homogeneous 15 
porous 15, 80, 167 
relaxation of 1l0, 114, 120, 140, 144, 147 
semi-crystalline 17,20, 1l0, 167 
stress cracking of 115, 128 
Polymer-drug combinations 98, 101 
Polymer-pesticide combinations 98 
Polyurethane 3, 43 
Pore-diffusion controlled release, see 
Release 
Pore parameter distribution 171 
Pore size distribution 82 
Porosity 18, 24, 80, 162, 168, 188, 191 
Probability density function 171, 173, 180, 
184, 185, 202 
Probability distribution function 172 
Probabilistic theory 168 
Psuedo-case-II 127 
Psuedo-convective contribution 121, 140 
Psuedo-Fickian 114, 120 
Psuedo-super-case-I1 127 
Random walk 167, 189, 197 
Relaxation of polymer, see Polymer 
Release, chemical reaction controlled 3, 6, 
89 
diffusion controlled 3, 9, 44, 69 
diffusion-dissolution controlled 77, 82, 
198 
erosion controlled 3, 5, 89, 102 
osmotically controlled 3, 157, 160, 162 
sustained 2 
swelling controlled 3, 6, 110, 125, 130, 199 
Subject Index 
Reservoir devices 3, 5, 9, 28, 36, 44, 49, 51, 
58, 60, 68, 90, 105 
Reservoir fluid 39 
Sectioned-cylinder monolithic devices, see 
Devices 
Self-diffusion coefficient, see Diffusion 
coefficient 
Semi-crystalline polymer, see Polymer 
Sigmoid behavior 114, 120 
Silicone rubber 3, 5, 27, 38 
Solubility parameter 29 
Solution-diffusion mechanism 9, 69, 79 
Solvent-casting 5, 164 
Statistical mechanical theories, see Diffu-
sion, Theory of 
Stefan problem 122 
Stochastic modeling 141, 167, 169, 183 
Stress cracking, see Polymer 
Super case-II transport 113, 123, 127 
Surface erosion 5, 90, 93, 105 
Sustained release, see Release 
Swellable polymer matrix 2, 110, 125 
Swellable release device, see Devices 
Swelling controlled, release, see Release 
Swelling interface number 127, 157 
Swelling stress 116, 121,123, 141 
Targeting residues 102 
Temperature, glass transition, see Glass 
transition temperature 
-penetrant activity diagrams 118 
surrounding 62 
Thermal history 26 
Time-lag 45, 51, 105 
Tortuosity 18, 24, 80, 167, 190, 199 
Transference 50 
Transport coefficients 184, 188, 192, 195, 
199 
Two-stage sorption 114 
Ultrasound - modulated devices, see 
Devices 
233 

