Peter Dalmaris
Graduate Project
Arduino Step by Step
Congratulations! 
Following through with the Arduino Step by Step course and completing it is no small feat. I 
am proud of what you have achieved so far, and can’t wait to see what you are going to 
build next! My statistics show that only a small percentage of students that subscribe in this 
(and any course) actually complete it. That is normal: commitment to the course may be 
overshadowed by more urgent obligations elsewhere; it may turn out that electronics is not 
that exciting (I can’t believe that either); or people may just not like the course itself (how 
can that be possible??).  
But the fact that you are here and reading this is likely to indicate that you are one of the 
few people excited enough to make it through. So again, congratulations! 
When I was planning this course, I intended to conclude it by showing you how to put 
together an environmental monitoring gadget that I have already created. I call it 
“Envirobox”. But as I thought about this more carefully, I realised that I don’t really have to 
show you how to do this. You already know. 
All I want to do in this “Graduate project” is to suggest a project in which you can apply 
most of what you have learned in this course. You will need to work out the details, the 
bugs, overcome the problems, and create a design that you will be proud to call your own. 
You are now ready to go from following instructions to making your own gadgets. Here’s a 
rough speciﬁcation of something you can make with the components you already have. 
Envirobox 
The Envirobox is a circuit that brings together multiple environment sensors, that displays 
readings from these sensors to an on-board LCD screen, and stores them to a Cloud-based  
Internet of Things service. 
The center of the Envirobox is an Arduino Uno, and this is its list of sensors: 
• DHT11/22 temperature and humidity 
• BMP085 barometric pressure and altitude 
• Photoresistor 
With these sensors, your gadget will be able to tell if its dark or bright, the elevation from 
the surface of the sea, the atmospheric pressure, the temperature and humidity. 
These values should be displayed on an LCD screen. You can consider a character LCD 
(like the 16x2 one), or a pixel (TFT) screen like the one in Lecture 27. 
You may also want to transmit your data to the cloud. You have a choice of 
communications technology to use. You could go for an Ethernet shield, or a Wiﬁ module. 
#1

Peter Dalmaris
Graduate Project
Arduino Step by Step
As far as a cloud service is concerned, you could choose Nimbits, from Lecture 39, or go 
for an alternative, like xively.com. We did not look at Xively at all, only mentioned in passing, 
however you can still go for this option. Xively has really good documentation and a library 
for the Arduino. 
I suggest that you build your Envirobox in iterations. One component at a time, an update 
to the sketch, upload and testing, then move to the next iteration: 
 
!
 
!
!
If you run into problems, feel free to post a message to the discussion board, myself or a 
community member maybe able to help out. 
When you are ﬁnished, please show me what you have done! Share your building 
experience with me and your course colleagues. Go ahead and write a blog post about it, 
like this one (it was featured in my February 22, 2014, issue of Tech Explorations magazine).  
Upload your sketch to Github and invite people to have a look at it. 
Sharing the knowledge is a fundamental part of the maker lifestyle. You will be surprised 
how much you have to say that other people are interested to know, even if you are “just a 
beginner”! 
#2
Add new component
Update sketch
Upload
Test

