

Peptides and Proteins 
R S C  
ROYAL SOCIETY OF CHEMISTRY 
S H A W N  D O O N A N  

Cover images 0 
Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-692-5 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2002 
All rights reserved 
Apurt from unj1,fuir deulingjvr the purposes qf reseurdi or privute study, or criticism or 
review us permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs und Putents Act, 
1988, thispublicution muy not be reproduced, stored or trunsrnitted, in unyjvrm or by 
any meuns, Irithout rhe prior permission in wiring of Tlir Royal Society of Chemistry, 
or in the case of reprogruphic reproduction only in accordance It-ith the tern1.r of the 
licences issirrd by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance 1vitli the 
terms of’ the licences issued by the uppropriate Reproduction Rights Orgunixition out- 
side the UK. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stuted here should he 
sent to The Royal Society of Chemistry ut the address printed on thispuge. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 21, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
Life on Earth depends on the chemistry of two classes of macromolecule: 
nucleic acids and proteins. Nucleic acids carry the genetic information 
which is passed from parents to progeny, and which provides the blueprint 
for a particular living organism. That blueprint is essentially a set of 
instructions for making proteins, and it is on the activities of those pro- 
teins that life processes depend. It is, then, no surprise that proteins have 
attracted enormous scientific interest over the last century or so. 
Proteins are constructed on a simple pattern, but that pattern allows for 
an almost endless diversity of structure and function. They are also very 
large molecules. For these reasons, the study of proteins has provided a very 
considerable challenge for the chemist who wishes to determine their struc- 
tures, and to find out how they work. The importance and magnitude of the 
task is, perhaps, reflected in the large number of Nobel Prizes for Chemistry 
that have been awarded for discoveries in protein chemistry; the contribu- 
tions made by the winners of those prizes are given due prominence here. 
This book has been written primarily for students of chemistry, although 
it is hoped that biological scientists who want to understand something of 
the chemistry of their subject will also find it useful. For the benefit of those 
chemistry students who have little background knowledge of biology, I have 
included brief descriptions of the biological significance of some of the pro- 
teins dealt with. These digressions should not be considered as essential 
reading, but I am firmly of the view that understanding something of the 
biology adds enormously to the interest of protein chemistry. It might even 
encourage some readers to become biochemists or molecular biologists! 
One word of warning is required. The other books in this series are 
written using mainly IUPAC names for chemical compounds. Protein 
chemists do not use that system in the books they write, or in the papers 
they publish. This might cause confusion for students who choose to read 
some of the papers and books referred to here. To avoid this difficulty, I 
have used the nomenclature conventionally adopted in the field, but on 
first mention of a compound the IUPAC name is also given in parentheses. 
This book is dedicated to the memory of Professor Charles Vernon, to 
whom I owe, besides much else, my interest in protein chemistry. 
Shawn Doonan 
London 
iii 

F D I T O K - I N - C  F i l l  k 
Projkssor E W Abel 
L X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
Prqfissor A G Duvies 
Professor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
t D U C A ?  I ON A L C O  N S I,' 
L T A  N T 
Mr M Berrj2 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M I N G  T I T L E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Burrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hunson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Suinsbury 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Burrrtt 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Organic Synthetic Methods J R Hunson 
Aromatic Chemistry J D Hepworth, 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Peptides and Proteins 
SEDunn , 
J M Seddon and J D Gule 
J M Hollus 
D R Wuring und A4 J Waring 
D 0 Huywurd 
S Doonun 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multi-element NMR 
d-Block Spectroscopy and Magnetism 
Biophysical Chemistry 
EPR Spectroscopy 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Further informution uhout this series is availuhle ut NWW chenzsoc. orgltct 
Orders und enquiries should he sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 426017; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
Introduction: Why Proteins are Interesting 
Amino Acids as the Building Bricks of Proteins 
Properties of the Amino Acids 
The Peptide Bond 
Terminology and Shorthands 
Composition and Sequence 
Electrical Charges on Peptides and Proteins 
An (Almost) Infinite Variety of Structures 
An Example of Protein Structure: Insulin 
Introduction 
Principles of Peptide Synthesis 
Solution and Solid-phase Approaches to Synthesis 
Protecting Groups 
The Coupling Reaction 
Linkage to the Solid Support in SPPS 
Purifying and Characterizing the Product 
Racemization During Peptide Synthesis 
An Example of Peptide Synthesis 
3.1 Nature of the Problem 
3.2 Approaches to a Solution 
1 
2 
4 
11 
14 
14 
16 
16 
16 
20 
21 
24 
27 
31 
33 
35 
37 
38 
44 
47 
V 

vi 
Contents 
3.3 Specific Techniques 
3.4 A Typical Purification 
51 
68 
4.1 Introduction 
74 
4.2 Relative Molecular Mass and Subunit Composition 
75 
4.3 Amino Acid Analysis 
79 
4.6 Sequencing using Mass Spectrometry 
95 
4.4 N-terminal Analysis 
81 
4.5 Sequence Analysis by Chemical Methods 
83 
5.1 Introduction: the Anatomy of Crambin 
108 
5.2 Conformations of the Polypeptide Backbone 
113 
5.3 Regular Secondary Structures 
117 
5.4 Factors Determining the Three-dimensional Structures of 
Proteins 
124 
5.5 Stability of the Folded State and Ways of Measuring It 
126 
5.6 Examples of How Proteins Work 
130 
6.1 Introduction 
6.2 Protein Databases 
6.3 Molecular Modelling 
6.4 Sequence Searching and Comparison 
6.5 Protein Evolution 
6.6 Prediction of Three-dimensional Structures 
6.7 Proteomics 
143 
144 
147 
151 
156 
161 
164 

The Covalent Structures of 
Peptides and Proteins 
1 A 
Introduction: Why Proteins are Interesting 
Our genes carry the instructions for making a human being, just as those 
of the disease-causing bacterium Helicobacter pylori (one of the causative 
agents of duodenal ulcers) carry the instructions for making that, clear- 
ly very different, organism. Indeed, one of the great scientific advances 
of the last few years of the 20th century and the beginning of this was 
the determination of the complete chemical structures of the genetic 
material (or 
) of these and other organisms. So what sort of 
instructions are they? Genomes are largely a set of instructions for mak- 
ing 
, and one living organism differs from another in the pro- 
teins that it makes. 
This obviously means that proteins are the key molecules in the 
processes of life, and it is now known that virtually all the activities which 
1 

2 
Peptides and Proteins 
sustain living organisms are carried out by proteins. The following are 
a few examples of proteins and what they do: 
catalyse the reactions of life processes, often increasing their 
rates by many orders of magnitude 
control functions such as the expression of genet- 
ic information and the balance of the chemical reactions that are 
going on in a cell at any time 
carry other molecules from place to place in the 
organism. For example, the protein haemoglobin transports oxygen 
around the blood stream 
(also known as antibodies) provide a first line of 
defence against foreign proteins or invading pathogens 
carry out the work of muscular contraction 
, one of the most abundant proteins in the body, provides 
an essential structural component of skin, bone and tendons 
produced by micro-organisms are often proteins. For exam- 
ple, the protein toxin produced by the food-spoilage organism 
Clostridium botulinum is one of the most toxic molecules known 
This list of functions obviously provides a good reason why biologists 
are interested in proteins, but why should chemists share this interest? 
The reason is that proteins are extremely complex chemical entities, and 
analysis of their structures and they ways in which they carry out their 
particular functions are essentially problems in chemistry. It is no sur- 
prise then that, for more than 1 0 0  years, chemists have been involved in 
purifying proteins, analysing their structures, and investigating their 
modes of action. This book provides an introduction to these areas. 
1.2 
Amino Acids as the Building Bricks of 
Proteins 
H 
I 
H2N-C-CO2H 
I 
R 
1 
I C02H 
I 
,CH2 
2 
Proteins are made from a set of 1 9  
proline. The general structure of an a-amino acid is shown in 1 and the 
structure of proline in 2. Note that in the rest of the book, as in other 
articles that you might read, the term “amino acid” is often used as short- 
hand for a-amino acid and is frequently taken to include proline. For 
example, it is often stated that proteins are made up of 20 different amino 
acids; this is not strictly correct but is convenient shorthand. 
What differentiates one amino acid from another is the nature of the 
R. Table 1.1 lists the 1 9  a-amino acids found in proteins 
according to their chemical types, and gives the structures of the side 
chains. You need not try to memorize these structures at this stage; they 
will become familiar as we proceed, and you can look them up in Table 
1.1 when necessary. 
and the 
H.N,CH \ 
H2C ‘CH2 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
3 
Table 1.1 The 19 a-amino acids occurring in proteinsa 
~ 
Type of 
Name 
Structure of side than 
Abbreviated One-letter 
Relative 
side chain 
name 
abbreviation molecular 
mass 
Aliphatic Glycine 
-H 
Gly 
G 
Alanine 
-Me 
Ala 
A 
Valine 
-CH 
Val 
V 
Me 
Leucine 
-CH2C,H 
Leu 
L 
Me 
Me 
/ 
\ 
Me 
/ 
Me 
/ 
lsoleucine 
-CH 
Ile 
I 
\ 
Aromatic Phenylalanine 
- C : : a  
Phe 
F 
w 
Tyrosine 
-
C
H
2
e
O
H
 
- 
Tyr 
Y 
-H2C 
H 
Alcohols Serine 
-CH20H 
OH 
/ 
Threonine 
-CH 
\ 
Me 
Ser 
S 
Thr 
T 
Thiol 
Cysteine 
-CH2SH 
cys 
c 
Sulfide 
Methionine 
-CH2CH2S 
-Me 
Met 
M 
Acids 
Aspartic acid - 
CH2C02H 
Asp 
D 
Glutamic acid 
-CH2CH2C02H 
Glu 
E 
Amides 
Asparagine 
-CH2CONH2 
Asn 
N 
Glutamine 
-CH2CH*CONH* 
Gln 
Q 
Bases 
Lysine 
- C H Z C H ~ C H ~ C H ~ N H ~  
LYS 
K 
75.06 
89.10 
117.15 
131.17 
131 .I 7 
165.1 9 
181.19 
204.22 
105.09 
119.12 
121.16 
149.20 
133.1 0 
147.1 3 
132.1 2 
146.15 
146.1 8 
174.20 
155.1 5 
a The imino acid proline (structure 2) is also a constituent of proteins. Its abbreviated name 
and one-letter abbreviation are Pro and P, respectively. Its relative molecular mass is 1 15.1 3 

4 
Peptides and Proteins 
H 2 N - 7 z  
R 
3 
H
4
Z
2
 
R 
4 
The names of the amino acids in Table 1.1 are not systematic. They 
are, however, the names by which they are universally known. In addi- 
tion to the name, each amino acid is given a three-letter abbreviation, 
most of which are the first three letters of the name of the molecule. 
Exceptions are Asn (asparagine) and Gln (glutamine) to distinguish them 
from their parent carboxylic acids, Ile (isoleucine) to avoid use of the 
common term Iso, and Trp (tryptophan) to avoid use of the common 
word Try. Also listed is a set of one-letter abbreviations. In many cases 
these are the first letter of the name of the amino acid, but this is not 
always possible since there are frequently two or more amino acids with 
the same initial letter. In such cases the most commonly occurring amino 
acid is given the initial letter (e.g. A for alanine), and other letters are 
used for the rest of the group with the same initial letter (D for aspar- 
tic acid, N for asparagine and R for arginine). D and R have been 
assigned on the somewhat fanciful grounds that aspartic sounds a bit 
like asparDic and arginine could be written as Rginine. There are also 
fairly obvious reasons for Fenylalanine and gluEtamic acid. Use of Y, 
W, N, Q and K for their respective amino acids is not so obvious. It is, 
however, important to get used to these symbols for reasons that will 
become apparent later, when we start to deal with the structures of actu- 
al proteins. 
1.3 
Properties of the Amino Acids 
We will not deal here with the chemical properties of the amino acids. 
The a-amino and a-carboxylic acid groups are mainly of interest in the 
context of the chemical synthesis of peptides. This is the subject of 
Chapter 2, and so discussion will be deferred until then. Similarly, the 
side chains show the usual chemical reactivities in the free amino acids, 
and these can be found in any standard text on organic chemistry. What 
is more interesting is the ways in which those reactivities can become 
modified in proteins, and that will be dealt with in Chapter 5. 
1.3.1 Stereochemistry 
One obvious feature of the amino acids, with the exception of glycine, 
is that they all contain at least one stereogenic carbon atom; that is, the 
molecules are chiral. This topic has been dealt with in detail by Morris' 
and will be considered here only briefly. Structures 3 and 4 show Fischer 
Recall that the conventions are: (a) to draw the carbon chain verti- 
cally; (b) to place the carbon of highest oxidation state at the top; (c) 
the vertical bonds go back into the plane of the page and the horizon- 
tal bonds come forward out of the plane. Recall also that if a pair of 
of the two forms of an amino acid. 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
5 
groups is switched in a Fischer projection, the configuration is inverted; 
if two pairs are switched, then the configuration is retained. The corre- 
sponding stereo diagrams are shown in 5 (equivalent to 3) and 6 (equiv- 
alent to 4). The Fischer projection on the left represents an amino acid 
with the L 
, and has the amino group on the left, 
whereas the structure on the right is D. These absolute configurations 
were assigned by chemical conversions that related them to the configu- 
rations of the standard molecule glyceraldehyde (2,3-dihydroxy- 
propanal). 
Two of the amino acids, threonine and isoleucine, have two stere- 
ogenic centres, and so the possibility of 
forms exists. 
Fischer projections of the L-forms of threonine and isoleucine are shown 
in 7 and 8, respectively, The diastereomers of these molecules do not 
occur in proteins. 
- 
C02H 
C02H 
I 
I 
H.’ic‘R 
NH2 
H2N 
5 
6 
CO2H 
H 2 N t H  H2N-r: 
H 
OH 
Me- 
Me 
Et 
7 
8 

6 
Peptides and Proteins 
One of the fascinating things about the chemistry of living systems is 
that it seems to be inherently asymmetric. The amino acids found in pro- 
teins always have the L configuration. How this came about is a mys- 
tery. Most people believe that living organisms arose by chance 
association of simple molecules present in the oceans of pre-biotic Earth. 
There is, however, no easy way to explain how it happened that the 
amino acids selected were entirely of one configuration. The same holds 
true of virtually all biomolecules that are chiral: one enantiomer is bio- 
logically active, the other is not. In the case of the amino acids, small 
amounts of the D enantiomers do occur in Nature, for example in the 
cell walls of certain micro-organisms. If these are ingested by animals, 
enzymes called D-amino acid oxidases convert them into the correspon- 
ding aldehydes and thence to carboxylic acids. They are never incorpo- 
rated into our proteins. 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
7 
1.3.2 AcidIBase Properties 
All amino acids have an a-amino group with a pKa of about 9-10 and 
a-carboxylic acid group with a pKa of about 2-2.5, Hence in neutral 
solution an amino acid will exist predominantly in the zwitterionic form 
shown in 12. These pKa values are lower than those of monofunctional 
carboxylic acids and amines because the positive charge on the amino 
group of the amino acid at low pH stabilizes the negative charge on the 
carboxylate and vice versa. The properties of the amino acids will there- 
fore be pH dependent. For example, the amino group of an amino acid 
will only be a good nucleophile at pH values greater than about 10. 
'NH3CHC02- 
I 
R 
12 

8 
Peptides and Proteins 
As we shall see in Section 1.4, the a-amino and a-carboxyl groups of 
most of the amino acids in a peptide or protein are involved in linking 
the units together, and so their ionization characteristics are not partic- 
ularly important in determining the properties of proteins. What is 
important is that some of the amino acids have ionizable side chains, as 
can be seen from Table 1.1. Both aspartic acid and glutamic acid have 
a carboxylic acid group in the side chain. When these amino acids are 
incorporated into a protein, the pKa value of the carboxylic acid group 
is in the range 3.54.5. The precise value will depend on the position of 
the amino acid in the protein, for reasons that will be dealt with in 
Chapter 5; the important point is that at neutral pH these residues will 
carry a negative charge. The thiol side chain of the amino acid cysteine 
is also weakly acidic, with a pKa value in the region of 9 (more proper- 
ly, one should say that the thiolate anion is weakly basic). The thiols in 
proteins are generally uncharged, but in some enzymes, for example, a 
particular thiol might be in an environment that favours its ionization, 
thus making it a good nucleophile. 
The basic amino acid side chains are those of lysine, arginine and his- 
tidine. In proteins the pK, values of these side chains are in the ranges 
9.5-10.5, 12-13 and 6-7, respectively. Hence, in neutral solution, lysine 
and arginine residues in proteins will be charged. Arginine is a relative- 
ly strong base because of resonance stabilization of the protonated guani- 
dinium side chain, and indeed the structure of the amino acid is usually 
shown in its charged form. 
Histidine is interesting in that its pKavalue is close to the pH in living 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
9 
cells. Hence the charge on a particular histidine in a protein will vary 
with changes in pH around the physiological value (usually taken to be 
7.4). 
It is important to note that the side chains of the amino acids 
asparagine and glutamine are not basic. This is because the unproto- 
nated amide group is resonance stabilized, the stabilization being lost if 
the group is protonated. Similarly, the side chain of tryptophan contains 
a resonance-stabilized aromatic system and it is only very weakly basic. 
Under the conditions of pH in which proteins can be studied, the side 
chain in tryptophan may be considered as non-basic. 
I .3.3 Physical Properties 
The amino acids were listed in Table 1.1 according to chemical type. An 
equally important classification depends on the 
properties of the side chains; that is, on the affinity that the side chains 
show for water. This is a property of paramount importance for the way 
in which proteins fold up into compact three-dimensional structures, and 
will be returned to in Chapter 5. 
It is not easy to quantify the hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties of 
the amino acids. A variety of quantitative measurements have been made 
of the partition of derivatives of the side chains or of the amino acids 
between water and organic solvents to obtain scales of hydrophobicity, 

10 
Peptides and Proteins 
but the values obtained vary somewhat depending on the precise system 
used. The results of one such set of experiments are given in Table 1.2. 
Here the partition of N-acetyl (N-ethanoyl) amino acid amides 
(CH,CONHCHRCONH,) between water and octanol was determined;4 
the results are presented-as free energies of transfer of the compound 
from octanol to water and normalized to zero for glycine. The larger the 
positive value, the greater the hydrophobicity; the larger the negative 
number, the greater the hydrophilicity. On this basis, the amino acids 
fall into three groups that merge into one another. The acidic and basic 
amino acids (except histidine) and the amides are hydrophilic. The 
hydroxy-amino acids, glycine, histidine and alanine, are intermediate in 
properties. The aliphatic and aromatic amino acids, proline and methio- 
nine, are hydrophobic. 
The values in the final column of Table 1.2 give the so-called 
of the amino acids.5 This is a different type of scale in which 
Table 1.2 The hydrophilic/hydrophobic nature of the amino acids 
Amino acid 
Free energy of transfer 
of N-acetyl amino 
acid amides from 
octanol to water 
(kJ m0l-l) 
Hydropa thy indexa 
Tryptophan 
lsoleucine 
Phenylalanine 
Leu cine 
Cysteine 
Methionine 
Valine 
Tyrosine 
Proline 
Alanine 
Threonine 
Histidine 
Glycine 
Serine 
Glutamine 
Asparagine 
Glutamic acid 
Aspaltic acid 
Lysine 
Arginine 
9.41 
7.52 
7.48 
7.1 1 
6.43 
5.1 4 
5.10 
4.01 
3.00 
1.29 
1.09 
0.54 
0 
-0.1 7 
-0.92 
-2.54 
-2.67 
-3.22 
-4.14 
-4.22 
-0.9 
4.5 
2.8 
3.8 
2.5 
1.9 
4.2 
-1.3 
-1.6 
1.8 
-0.7 
-3.2 
-0.4 
-0.8 
-3.5 
-3.5 
-3.5 
-3.5 
-3.9 
-4.5 
a A  scale in which experimental values of free energies of transfer are combined with 
information obtained from the locations of amino acid residues in proteins to give a 
consensus scale of relative hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
11 
experimental values of free energies of transfer are combined with infor- 
mation obtained from the locations of amino acid residues in three- 
dimensional structures of proteins (see Chapter 5) to give a consensus 
scale of relative hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity. It can be seen that the 
relative positions of the amino acids are now rather different when com- 
pared with the values for free energy of transfer. In particular, trypto- 
phan and tyrosine are moderately hydrophilic on this scale, and histidine 
quite strongly so. This reflects the common occurrence of these amino 
acids on the surfaces of proteins, where they play special roles. 
Nevertheless, the broad outlines of the two classifications are similar and 
help us to understand, in most cases, the locations in which we find the 
various amino acids in the three-dimensional structures of proteins. 
1.4 
The Peptide Bond 
Amino acids are the structural units of peptides and proteins, but how 
are these units - or 
as they are termed - linked together? As 
long ago as 1902, Emil Fischer noted that proteins contain relatively few 
free amino and carboxyl groups. On this basis he suggested that the link- 
age between them involves condensation of the carboxylic acid group of 
one amino acid with the amino group of the next to form an amide link- 
age, as shown in Scheme 1.1. The linkage produced is referred to as the 
. Simply 
repeating this process leads to the generalized structure of a 
as 
shown in 13, where the R groups represent the side chains of any of the 
amino acids in Table 1.1. 
. The product of Scheme 1.1 is known as a 
-
-
 
Scheme I .I 
NH2CHCO -[NHCHCO],, 
-NHCHC02H 
I 
I 
I 
R 
R 
R 
13 
Note that peptide bond synthesis in Nature does not occur like this. 
The interested reader can consult any standard textbook of biochemistry 
to find out how Nature does it. 
The two ends of a protein are different. That on the left of 13 has a 
free a-amino group and is termed the 
, whereas that on the 
BY 
right has a free carboxylic acid group and is termed the 

12 
Peptides and Proteins 
convention, protein structures are always written this way around. This 
becomes important when we use shorthand representations of protein 
structures as described below. 
Recall that two of the amino acids contain carboxylic acid groups in 
their side chains (aspartic and glutamic acids) whereas one, lysine, con- 
tains an amino group. The possibility therefore arises that proteins could 
contain branches, with chains growing from the side chain carboxylic 
acid or amino groups. They never do: the way in which proteins are 
biosynthesized makes it impossible. This is not to say that branched pep- 
tides never occur. The biologically active peptide glutathione, or 7-glu- 
tamylcysteinylglycine (14), has a peptide bond to the side chain of 
glutamic acid, but this peptide is made by a route different from that 
used to synthesize proteins. 
NH2CHC02H 
I 
CH2 
I 
CH2 
I 
CONHCHCONHCH2C02H 
MeCONHCHCONHCHCONH2 
CH2SH 
H 
Me 
14 
15 
I 
I 
I 
Other variations on the usual theme also occur, in particular modifi- 
cation of either the N-terminal amino group or C-terminal carboxyl 
group, or both. Frequently found modifications are acetylation (ethanoyl- 
ation) of the N-terminus and amidation of the C-terminus. Structure 15 
shows a peptide with both of these modifications. Another possibility for 
blocking the N-terminus when the terminal residue is glutamine involves 
a condensation reaction between the amino group and the side chain 
amide to form a 
(Scheme 1.2). The resulting residue is known as 
. Modifications at the termini are probably introduced 
to prolong the activity of peptides in the body by preventing the action 
of enzymes that catalyse the hydrolysis of peptides at the terminal 
residues. 
Scheme 1.2 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
13 
One other important modification which occurs in some peptides and 
proteins involves the amino acid cysteine. In solution, under mildly oxi- 
dizing conditions, two molecules of cysteine react to give a 
and produce the amino acid cystine (18). The same thing can hap- 
pen when a peptide or protein contains two residues of cysteine. The 
disulfide bridge in this case links together two, possibly remote, regions 
of the polypeptide chain that are brought together by the way in which 
the chain folds up in space. Some proteins are known that contain sev- 
era1 such disulfide bridges. A few proteins consist of two or more 
polypeptide chains linked together by disulfide bridges. One example is 
NH2 
I 
NH2 
I 
CHCH~-S---S-CH~CH 
I 
I 
18 
, whose structure is described in Section 1.9. 
CO2H 
C02H 
It is important to note that this is not a chance occurrence. Many pep- 
tides and proteins contain pairs of cysteine residues that do not produce 
disulfide bridges. Where two or more pairs of cysteines in a particular 
protein molecule form bridges, they always link in precisely the same 
way; it is part of the architecture of the protein, and the links are intro- 
duced after the protein has been synthesized. 

14 
Peptides and Proteins 
1.5 
Terminology and Shorthands 
The product of Scheme 1.1 was termed a dipeptide. The structure in 13 
is a protein. The difference is only one of size and the point at which the 
terminology changes is not clear-cut. Molecules containing up to 20 
residues would certainly be referred to as peptides (or sometimes as 
). Molecules containing 50 residues would 
usually be considered as proteins. Where the switch occurs is not par- 
ticularly important. What is important is that chemically there is no dis- 
tinction between the two: peptides are small proteins. 
Structure 19 represents a pentapeptide. It can be named as glycylly- 
sylserylaspartylalanine. It is clearly laborious to draw structures such as 
19 and becomes rapidly more so, or indeed impossible, as the chain length 
increases. Hence, for many purposes, shorthand is used where the struc- 
ture is represented by a string of the three-letter abbreviations for the 
amino acids. To a protein chemist the string of abbreviations Gly-Lys- 
Ser-Asp-Ala means just the same as structure 19. It is, of course, essen- 
tial to recall the convention that the amino acid on the left is the 
N-terminus and that on the right is the C-terminus. The pentapeptide 
Ala-Asp-Ser-Lys-Gly is a different molecule. 
or 
NH2CH2CONHC HCONHCHCONHCHCONHCHCO2H 
I 
I 
I 
I 
CH2 
CH20H CH2 
Me 
I 
I 
CH2 
C02H 
I 
CH2 
I 
For some purposes, and in particular when it is required to store and 
analyse large amounts of data about protein structures (see Chapter 6), 
even this shorthand is not short enough. It was for this reason that the 
single letter code (Table 1.1) was introduced. In its most abbreviated 
form, structure 19 may be represented as GKSDA; to a protein chemist 
this string of five letters has the same information content as structure 
19. 
I .6 
Composition and Sequence 
The peptide in 19 contains one residue each of the amino acids alanine, 
aspartic acid, glycine, lysine and serine. That is its 
There are 120 ways in which one residue of each of these five amino 
acids can be linked together to form a pentapeptide. Each of these rep- 
resents a different 
). So the amino acid composition of a peptide or protein is the 
(also referred to as 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
15 
number of residues of each of the constituent amino acids that the mol- 
ecule contains. The amino acid sequence (primary structure) describes 
the order in which these amino acids occur in the polypeptide chain. 

16 
Peptides and Proteins 
1.7 
Electrical Charges on Peptides and Proteins 
Structure 19 has been drawn without specifying the charges on the amino 
acids; this is usual practice. Peptides and proteins are almost invariably 
studied in aqueous solution at a particular pH, and sometimes it is nec- 
essary to focus on the charge that the molecule will have. From the approx- 
imate pKa values given in Section 1.3.2 it is easy to predict what the 
approximate charge state of the molecule will be at extremes of pH. At 
pH values less than 3, both amino groups will be protonated to give -NH,+, 
as will both carboxyl groups to give -CO,H; that is, the molecule will carry 
a charge of 2+. At high pH, say above 10, both amino groups will be 
uncharged (-NH,) and both carboxylate groups ionized (-C02-) and the 
net charge will be 2-. At intermediate pH values around 7, all four groups 
will be ionized. This means that the net charge will be zero because the 
peptide carries an equal number of positive and negative charges. For any 
peptide or protein there will be some value of the pH at which the net 
charge is zero (i.e. the numbers of positive and negative charges are equal). 
This is referred to as the isoelectric pH or, more commonly, the 
. The variation of charge on a protein with pH will be important 
to us for the discussion of protein purification in Chapter 3. 
1.8 
An (Almost) Infinite Variety of Structures 
As outlined in the Section 1.1, peptides and proteins perform a vast range 
of biological functions, but we have just seen that their structures are 
based on a rather simple pattern: amino acids linked together by pep- 
tide bonds. There is no contradiction here. Consider a decapeptide, that 
is, a molecule containing 10 amino acids linked in a chain. Given that 
there are 20 different amino acids, how many such peptides could in prin- 
ciple exist? The first residue could be any one of 20, as could the second. 
So there are 20 x 20 possible dipeptides. Each of these 202 dipeptides 
could be converted to 203 tripepetides, and so on, There are hence 20'O 
or 10,240,000,000,000 possible decapeptides that could be made from the 
20 amino acids listed in Table 1.1. This is a very large number indeed, 
and the possibilities increase very rapidly as the length of the chain 
increases. Given also that the amino acids have a range of different chem- 
ical and physical types, it is not surprising that Nature has been able to 
construct proteins to carry out so many diverse functions. 
1.9 
An Example of Protein Structure: Insulin 
The hormone insulin was mentioned in Section 1.4 as an example of a 
protein whose structure consists of two polypeptide chains linked by 
disulfide bridges. The structure of human insulin is shown in 22 using 
the three-letter code for the amino acids. Insulin is a very small protein 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
17 
- indeed it is frequently referred to as a 
- but it should 
be clear that it is only practical to write down its structure using the 
shorthand representations for the amino acids. The two chains of insulin 
are called the A- and B-chains. The A-chain contains 21 amino acid 
residues and has a glycine at its N-terminus; it also has a disulfide bridge 
linking cysteines 6 and 11. The B-chain contains 30 amino acids and has 
phenylalanine as the N-terminal residue. It does not contain any inter- 
nal disulfide bridges, but is linked to the A-chain by two bridges joining 
residue B7 to A7 and residue B19 to A20. If you are wondering how the 
two chains of insulin “find” one another after synthesis in the cell, the 
answer is that they do not. Insulin is synthesized as an inactive - 
; that is, as a larger, single-chain protein from which an internal sec- 
tion is subsequently removed to produce the two-chain active hormone. 
The bridges are formed before the internal section is removed. 
Is-sl 
A-chain 
Gly-Ile-Val-Glu-Gln-Cys-Cys-Thr-Ser-Ile-Cys-Ser-Leu-Tyr-Gln-Leu-Glu-Asn-Tyr-Cys-Asn 
I 
I 
s 
I 
S 
S 
I 
I 
B-chain 
Phe-Val-Asn-Gln-His-Leu-Cys-Gly-Ser-His-Leu-Val-Glu-Ala-Leu-Tyr-Leu-Va~-Cys-Gly-Glu-Ar~-G~y-Phe-Phe-Tyr-Thr-Pro-Lys-Thr 
22 

18 
Peptides and Proteins 

The Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
I 9  

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
2.1 
Introduction 
Peptides have a wide range of interesting and important biological activ- 
ities. A few examples may help to give an idea of the range of their func- 
tions. The level of glucose in the blood is regulated by the two peptide 
insulin and glucagon; insulin decreases the level of blood 
glucose by increasing its uptake into the liver and its storage as glyco- 
gen, whereas glucagon has the opposite effect of promoting the break- 
down of glycogen. The nine-residue peptide oxytocin (1) has the effect 
of stimulating uterine contractions during childbirth. Note that oxytocin 
has a disulfide bridge linking residues 1 and 5 and is amidated at the 
C-terminus. Structures 2 and 3 are a pair of peptides called enkephalins 
that are produced in the central nervous system and have the effect of 
20 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
21 
decreasing the sensation of pain; they are Nature’s painkillers and in 
many ways mimic the action of morphine. 
I
s
-
s
 1 
Cy s-Tyr-Ile-Gln- Asn-Cys-Pro-Leu-Gl yNH2 
1 
Tyr-Gly -Gly-Phe-Met 
Tyr-Gly-G1 y -Phe-Leu 
2 
3 
A question that immediately arises is: how do these peptides work? 
One way of approaching this question is to synthesize variants or 
where one or more of the amino acid residues is replaced by 
another, perhaps a non-naturally occurring one, and to investigate the 
effect of the change on biological activity. Such 
studies 
are a fundamental part of physiology and pharmacology. 
The second interesting question is: can we use these biologically active 
peptides, or analogues of them, therapeutically? The answer is often yes. 
For example, oxytocin is widely used to induce labour in cases of diffi- 
cult childbirth and, of course, insulin has been used for many years in 
the treatment of diabetes. Indeed, there are now many peptides that are 
routinely used in human health care. The vast majority of these are 
synthetic, and peptide synthesis is a major activity in pharmaceutical 
companies just as it is in many academic research laboratories. 
2.2 
Principles of Peptide Synthesis 
It is easy to make a peptide bond (that is, an amide) by reaction of a 
suitable carboxylic acid derivative with an amine. An example is shown 
in Scheme 2.1, where the derivative is an acyl chloride. However, there 
is much more to peptide synthesis than that. If we are trying to make a 
dipeptide, then mixing the acyl chloride of amino acid 1 (A,) with amino 
acid 2 (A,) will indeed yield some of the desired dipeptide (A,A,), but 
we will also get the product of A, reacting with itself (A,A,) and a com- 
plex mixture of larger molecules (A,A,A,, etc.). In addition, if one of the 
amino acids has a nucleophilic side chain, then reaction will also occur 
at the side chain to yield branched products. The result will be a mess. 
; that 
is, all reactive groups not required to participate in the reaction must be 
chemically modified to prevent their reaction. 
Fundamental to peptide synthesis is the use of 
0 
0 
II 
-HCl 
II 
R-C-Cl 
+NHZ-R’ - 
R-C-NHR’ 
I 
Scheme 2.1 

22 
Peptides and Proteins 
A generalized scheme for peptide synthesis is shown in Scheme 2.2. 
The process is started with an amino acid that has the amino group pro- 
tected with a group P, and, if necessary, the side chain protected with a 
group P,. In reaction (i) the carboxyl group of this amino acid is con- 
verted into a derivative that will be reactive to nucleophilic attack. The 
second amino acid has a protected carboxylic acid group (P,) and, again 
if necessary, a protected side chain (P,). Reaction between these two 
[reaction (ii)] will yield the fully protected dipeptide. There are now two 
possibilities. Protecting group P, can be removed [reaction (iii)]. Addition 
of another amino-protected carboxyl-activated amino acid will then 
extend the polypeptide chain at the N-terminus [reaction (iv)]. 
Alternatively, P, can be removed [reaction (v)] to yield a free carboxylic 
acid group that can be activated and reacted with another carboxyl- 
protected amino acid to extend the polypeptide at the C-terminus [reac- 
tion (vi)]. For reasons that will be explained in Section 2.8, elongation 
at the N-terminus is the favoured route. 
Scheme 2.2 
The process in Scheme 2.2 poses some interesting chemical problems. 
Firstly, there is obviously a need for protecting groups that can be selec- 
tively removed during the course of the synthesis. For example, in step 
(iii) the amino protecting group P, must be removed without affecting 
the other three and without breaking the newly formed peptide bond. In 
fact, there is a need for two different amino protecting groups if one of 
the amino acids involved in the synthesis is lysine, because lysine has an 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
23 
amino group in its side chain (see Table 1.1) which will have to remain 
protected whilst the a-amino group is unprotected. At the end of the 
synthetic process, all side-chain protecting groups must be removed to 
yield the final product. 
The other major requirement is that the peptide bond formation 
should be as complete as possible, particularly if it is intended to syn- 
thesize a peptide more than a few amino acids long. The reason for this 
is that the overall yield decreases rapidly with the number of steps in the 
synthetic process unless the step yield is high. This is illustrated in Figure 
2.1, which shows how the overall yield decreases with the number of syn- 
thetic cycles for step yields of 90% and 99%. For moderately long pep- 
tides (25 residues), a step yield of 90% is clearly unacceptable since it 
leads to a final yield of less than 10% Even with a repetitive yield of 
99% the overall yield is only about 80%. Obtaining a step yield of 99% 
obviously imposes great demands on the chemistry of the process, and 
unrealistic demands on the skill of the chemist carrying it out! 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Number of cycles 
Figure 2.1 Dependence of 
overall yield on step yield. Open 
circles: step yield 90%; closed 
circles: step yield 99% 

24 
Peptides and Proteins 
2.3 
Solution and Solid-phase Approaches to 
Svnt hesis 
The original approach to peptide synthesis was to carry out the chem- 
istry in solution. At each stage the product peptide had to be isolated 
and purified, which required considerable technical skill and resulted in 
loss of yield even if the coupling step was very efficient. Clearly this 
approach could only be used to synthesize small peptides in acceptable 
yield. To extend the method to the practical synthesis of large peptides 
a process of 
followed by 
was devel- 
oped. In this process the desired peptide is broken down into conven- 
ient sized blocks of 5-10 residues. Each of these blocks is synthesized in 
protected form and then, after appropriate deprotection, the units are 
sequentially linked to form the final product, The process is shown in 
outline in Scheme 2.3. 
Scheme 2.3 
The amino acid residues are shown as A,, A,, etc., and, for con- 
venience, condensation of only three blocks of sequence is shown. The 
final step in the synthesis would be removal of the N- and C-terminal 
protecting groups and also of those from any side chains that needed 
protection. 
A completely new approach was introduced by Merrifield' in the early 
1960s. This was 
. In this technique 
the amino acid that is to be at the C-terminus of the final peptide is 
N-protected and then attached via its carboxyl group to an insoluble 
polymeric material, usually polystyrene [poly(phenylethene)]. 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
25 
Scheme 2.4 
Linkage to the 
must be such that it is not broken dur- 
ing the course of subsequent peptide synthesis but can be cleaved at the 
end of the process to liberate the product peptide. The protecting group 
of the amino acid linked to the solid support is then removed and react- 
ed with the N-protected and carboxyl-activated derivative of the next 
residue in the chain, and so on. That is, the peptide is built up attached 
to the solid support from the C-terminus to the N-terminus. The first 
few steps in the process are shown in outline in Scheme 2.5. The solid 
support is represented by the brown ball. Protecting groups are also 
shown in brown with the peptide in black. It is usual practise to draw 
these schemes from right to left to emphasize that synthesis is carried 
out from the C-terminus to the N-terminus. 
There are some very great advantages in the solid-phase approach to 
peptide synthesis. The most obvious one is that removal of side prod- 
ucts in the reaction is achieved simply by washing the resin on a filter. 
The growing chain at all times remains attached to the solid support and 
so does not have to be isolated. More importantly, whereas solubility of 
protected peptides is often a serious problem in solution phase synthe- 
sis, the issue does not arise with SPPS since the peptide is attached to 

26 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 2.5 
the support. For these reasons, SPPS is a fairly straightforward process 
which can be implemented in any research laboratory where there is an 
interest in peptides. Indeed, the process has been fully automated so that 
it is now possible to buy a machine which does the work for you. Solution 
synthesis, on the other hand, is technically difficult and requires consid- 
erable experience to be carried out effectively. This is not to say that 
solution synthesis is no longer practised. It is still widely used in the phar- 
maceutical industry, particularly for those peptide products that were 
developed before SPPS became an established method. One of the rea- 
sons for this is that if a switch were made to synthesizing licensed prod- 
ucts by a different method, the regulatory agencies would require 
re-validation of the product; this is a long and expensive task. Solution 
synthesis is also often still used in block synthesis (Scheme 2.3) of large 
peptides for producing the individual fragments to be linked together. 
However, because of its more widespread use, SPPS is the main focus 
of the rest of this chapter. 
There is often a down side to technical advances and in the case of 
SPPS it arises from the very fact that the growing peptide chain remains 
linked to the solid support. This means that if for some reason the cou- 
pling reaction does not go to completion at any step, then the final prod- 
uct will contain a population of molecules with a residue missing. It may 
be quite difficult to remove this 
. For this reason it is 
common practice to check for completion of coupling at each step so 
that a repeat coupling can be carried out if necessary. This can be done 
by removing a small sample of the resin and testing for free residual 
amino groups using the ninhydrin reaction (see Chapter 4). If the repeat 
coupling still does not proceed to completion, the uncoupled peptide 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
27 
molecules can be permanently blocked to prevent them growing any 
further (see Section 2.9). 
2.4 
Protecting Groups 
An enormous amount of effort has been expended over the last 70 years 
in developing protecting groups for peptide synthesis, and it is not the 
intention to catalogue all of the reagents that have been used. A com- 
prehensive review of earlier work in the field is available.2 Here we will 
concentrate on some of those protecting groups that are most widely 
used in modern peptide synthesis, and in particular those used in solid- 
phase methods. 
2.4.1 Amino Group Protection 
The most important single advance in peptide synthesis was made in 
1932 by Bergmann and Z e r ~ a s , ~  
who introduced 
protecting group. The essential point about benzyloxycarbonyl amino 
acids (or Cbz amino acids as they are commonly called from the - incor- 
rect - designation of the protecting group as carbobenzoxy) is that, as 
esters of carbamic acid, the nitrogen atom does not have nucleophilic 
properties and will not take part in peptide bond formation. They are 
easily prepared by reaction with benzyloxycarbonyl chloride, as shown 
in Scheme 2.6. Equally important, the protecting group is removable 
Scheme 2.6 

28 
Peptides and Proteins 
under a variety of conditions including treatment with liquid HF under 
conditions where peptide bonds are not affected. 
Subsequently an improved carbamate protecting group, 
(t-Boc), was developed. The structure of a t-Boc amino acid is 
shown in 4. This group is removable by treatment with aqueous trifluo- 
roacetic acid (TFA, trifluoroethanoic) under conditions milder than 
those required for Cbz. Availability of these two protecting groups 
removable under different conditions provides a strategy for synthesis of 
peptides containing lysine. The a-amino group can be protected with 
t-Boc and the side chain amino group with Cbz. During synthesis the 
a-amino group may then be deprotected with TFA for chain elongation 
under conditions where the side-chain amino protecting group is 
unaffected. 
Scheme 2.7 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
29 
A further important advance was made by Carpino and his co- 
 worker^,^ who introduced the 
(Fmoc) pro- 
tecting group 5. The significance of this is that the protecting group is 
removable under very mild conditions by treatment with an organic base. 
This is because of the acidity of the proton at position 9 of the fluorenyl 
group. The deprotecting reaction is shown in Scheme 2.8. 
Scheme 2.8 
2.4.2 Carboxyl Group Protection 
Carboxyl group protection is usually carried out by conversion to esters. 
These must be unreactive in the process of peptide bond formation but 
easily removable during chain elongation or formation of the final 
and 
(7). The benzyl group can be removed by HF where- 
as the t-butyl group can be removed by treatment with TFA. Again it 
is important to have two protecting groups removable under different 
conditions because of the need for differential protection of amino acids 
with carboxylic acid side chains (aspartic acid and glutamic acid; see 
Table 1.1). 
In the solid-phase method, of course, protection of the a-carboxylic 
acid function of the C-terminal residue is effected by the attachment 
to the solid support. The types of linkage used are dealt with in Section 
2.6. 
deprotected product. Two widely used derivatives are 
(6) 
2.4.3 Side-chain Protection 
Apart from those residues already mentioned (aspartic and glutamic 
acids, lysine) the side chains that are always protected are those of cys- 
teine, serine, threonine, tyrosine, histidine and arginine. Whether or not 
tryptophan, methionine and the amino acids with amide side chains 

30 
Peptides and Proteins 
~~~~~~ 
(asparagine and glutamine) are protected depends on the approach to 
peptide synthesis being used. We will concern ourselves here with the 
principles of side-chain protection rather than the details of the deriva- 
tives used in each case, but the interested reader can find further infor- 
mation in the articles referred to in the reading list at the end of the 
chapter. 
The choice of side chain protecting agents will depend on the pro- 
tecting group used for the a-amino function, since it is essential that the 
side chains remain protected when the N-terminal amino acid is depro- 
tected for chain elongation. The two main approaches for SPPS are sum- 
marized in Table 2.1. When the t-Boc group is used for N"-protection, 
then side chains are protected with groups based on the benzyl (phenyl- 
methyl) function (e. g. the benzyl ether for threonine). Selective removal 
of the t-Boc group is achieved using TFA, which does not affect the side- 
chain protecting groups. The latter are removed with liquid HF. When 
Fmoc is used for Na-protection, the side chains are protected with groups 
based on the t-butyl function (e.g. the t-butyl thioether of cysteine). Fmoc 
is removed by treatment with an organic base such as piperidine and the 
side chains are deprotected with HF. 
Table 2.1 Summary of the two main approaches to side-chain protection in SPPS 
Na-protection 
Na-deprotection 
Side-chain 
Side-chain 
protection 
deprotection 
t-BOC 
TFA 
Bz based 
HF 
Fmoc 
Piperidine 
t-Bu based 
TFA 
The 
was the first to be developed and is very 
widely used. It does, however, have the disadvantage that the Na-depro- 
tection and side-chain deprotection are both carried out under acidic 
conditions, and there is the danger that the deprotection process may 
not be entirely specific. With the 
the two phases of 
deprotection are carried out under completely different conditions, and 
so specificity is more certain. It is also easier to automate. Both strate- 
gies have their adherents, and both are likely to continue in use for the 
foreseeable future. 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
31 
2.5 
The Coupling Reaction 
As outlined in Section 2.2, the basis of peptide bond formation is the 
conversion of the carboxylic acid function of one amino acid to a reac- 
tive acyl derivative that is susceptible to nucleophilic attack by the amino 
group of the second amino acid. The majority of methods currently in 
use are based on activation of the amino acid using 
(DCC, 10). 
In the most straightforward application of DCC coupling, the pro- 
tected amino acids are mixed in the presence of the coupling agent 
(Scheme 2.9; the cyclohexyl groups are shown as R). 
The carboxylic acid function of the N-protected amino acid reacts 
with the DCC to form an 0-acylisourea intermediate; this is effectively 
an 
of the amino acid. In the second reaction the amino group 

32 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 2.9 
Scheme 2.10 
of the C-protected amino acid (or of the growing peptide) attacks the 
carbonyl function of the intermediate to form a peptide bond and lib- 
erate dicyclohexylurea. The product is the protected peptide. Removal 
of the protecting group P, allows the peptide chain to be extended at the 
N-terminal end. 
The reaction is a bit more complex than suggested in Scheme 2.9. Once 
the 0-acylurea intermediate is formed it can also react, albeit at a slow- 
er rate, with the carboxyl group of the N-protected amino acid to give 
a 
(Scheme 2.10). This is not a problem because the 
anhydride will then react with the C-protected amino acid to give the 
desired product. What can be a problem is the rearrangement of the 0- 
acylisourea intermediate to give the unreactive N-acylurea (1 l), but this 
can minimized by appropriate choice of solvent. 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
33 
The formation of the symmetric anhydride by reaction of 1 mol of 
DCC with 2 mol of protected amino acid provides an alternative 
approach to peptide synthesis in which the anhydride is generated in a 
separate reaction and then mixed with the C-protected amino acid to 
generate the peptide. This method gives very high coupling yields but 
has the disadvantage that it requires the use of two molar equivalents of 
the N-protected amino acid at each step. 
A more recent method of peptide bond formation, and one which is 
very widely used in automated SPPS, involves the DCC-mediated gen- 
eration of an active ester between the N-protected amino acid and 1- 
(HOBT, 12).5 The pre-formed active ester is then 
reacted with the free amino group of the growing peptide attached to 
the solid support, as shown in Scheme 2.11. 
OH 
I 
(Jb 
N 
12 
Scheme 2.11 
2.6 
Linkage to the Solid Support in SPPS 
In the original method developed by Merrifield, chloromethyl groups 
were introduced into the polystyrene resin and the C-terminal amino acid 
was attached by reaction with a trialkylamine salt to form an ester link- 
age (Scheme 2.12; note that benzene ring attached to the ball symbol is 
part of the polystyrene). Although some remarkable successes were 
achieved with this attachment method, it was not ideal because of the 
relatively harsh conditions required to attach the C-terminal amino acid 
in the first place and then to liberate the completed peptide at the end 

34 
Peptides and Proteins 
of the synthetic process. Consequently, much effort has been expended 
to the development of improved linkage chemistries. 
Scheme 2.12 
One of the most widely used linkers, 
(13), was 
developed by Wang6 and resins with this group attached are now usu- 
ally known as " 
". Attachment of the C-terminal N-protect- 
ed amino acid is easily effected by DCC coupling, and at the end of 
synthesis the product peptide can be released by treatment with aqueous 
TFA. Wang resin is ideally suited to Fmoc synthesis, since the linkage 
to the resin is not affected by the basic conditions required to release the 
9-fluorenylmethoxy protecting group, whereas it is sensitive to acid. 
Indeed, a range of Wang resins is available commercially, each with a 
different Fmoc-protected amino acid already attached. A variant of the 
linker ( 
, 14) is available. In this case 
the C-terminal amino acid is linked to the resin via an amide bond and 
on release by TFA generates the peptide amide. This is useful if the object 
of the synthesis is to produce a peptide amidated at the C-terminus. 
In SPPS using t-butoxy protection, the resin-peptide linkage must be 
stable to the acidic conditions used to deprotect the N-terminal amino 
acid. A suitable choice in this case is the 
resin 
(PAM resin) shown in 15. The final product of the synthesis is released 
by treatment with HF. The 
resin 16 is used to yield 
products with a C-terminal amide. 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
35 
2.7 
Purifying and Characterizing the Product 
After deprotection and release of the product peptide from the solid sup- 
port it is invariably necessary to carry out some form of purification of 
the product peptide. The reasons for this are, firstly, that no matter how 
carefully the synthesis has been done to avoid deletion molecules arising 
from incomplete coupling (see Section 2.3), there are bound to be small 
amounts of such products present. Secondly, the deprotection process 
leads to small amounts of side products arising from modification of 
amino acid side chains. The usual way to purify the peptide is by prepar- 
ative reverse-phase HPLC. Confirmation of purity of the product is usu- 
ally done by using analytical HPLC with a range of different mobile 
phases. 

36 
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 2.2 Reverse-phase 
HPLC of a crude product from 
peptide synthesis (A) and of the 
purified peptide (6). The scale on 
the right of each figure gives the 
percentage of acetonitrile in the 
gradient (Redrawn from 
Pennington* with the permission 
of Hurnana Press) 
It is also good practice to prove that the peptide has the desired 
structure. A good indication of this would be to confirm that the 
product has the correct amino acid composition; how this is done 
is described in Chapter 4. A more rigorous test would be to determine 
the amino acid sequence; again, methods for doing this are given in 
Chapter 4. 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
37 
2.8 
Racemization During Peptide Synthesis 
One of the most serious problems encountered in early peptide synthe- 
sis was partial 
of the incorporated amino acids. 
Racemization is not easy to detect and, more importantly, it is not pos- 
sible to separate peptides containing D-amino acids from the desired 
all-L molecules. 
formation from the 
carboxyl-activated amino acid derivative or peptide. This is shown in 
Scheme 2.13. Once the azlactone is formed it can lose a proton to form 
a resonance-stabilized anion which is achiral. Re-protonation of the 
anion can give either the azlactone of the original chirality or the enan- 
tiomer. Clearly this process will be helped by basic conditions, which 
therefore must be avoided. 
The main route to racemization is by 
Scheme 2.13 
Fortunately this process does not occur to any significant extent with 
amino acids N-protected by t-Boc or Fmoc groups. Similarly, it does not 
occur during elongation of a peptide from the C-terminal end, because 
the carboxyl function is protected by an unreactive group, or during 
SPPS because the carboxyl group of the C-terminal amino acid is bound 
to the solid support in an unreactive linkage. On the other hand, syn- 
thesis by chain elongation from the N-terminal end [Scheme 2.2, reac- 
tions (v) and (vi)] involves activation of the carboxylic acid function at 
each step, and there is always a risk of racemization. Hence this approach 
to synthesis is rarely used. 
Even though the risks of racemization are minimized by synthesis of 
peptides from the C-terminus and with the appropriate chemistry, there 
remains a problem when large peptides are made by the fragment con- 
densation method (Scheme 2.3). Once the fully protected fragments have 
been produced, either by solution synthesis or SPPS, they have to be 
coupled and this inevitably involves activation of the carboxylic acid 

38 
Peptides and Proteins 
group of all but the C-terminal fragment. There is, then, the attendant 
risk of racemization. In favourable circumstances this can be avoided by 
making fragments with C-terminal glycine or proline residues. Glycine 
is not stereogenic and so the problem does not arise, and proline, being 
an imino acid, lacks the proton that is removed in azlactone formation. 
If neither of these is possible, then it is necessary to try a variety of 
coupling methods for the fragments and determine the one that gives 
the minimum amount of racemization for the fragments under 
consideration. 
2.9 
An Example of Peptide Synthesis 
Peptide synthesis is obviously a complicated process, and it might be 
helpful to give an example of how it was done in practice. The peptide 
apamin (18) is a neurotoxin that occurs in high concentration in the 
venom of the honey bee. Notice that it has two disulfide bridges linking 
residues 1+11 and 3+15 and that the C-terminus is amidated The pep- 
tide was synthesized by van Rietschoten and colleagues9 using SPPS by 
the procedure summarized in Table 2.2. The t-Boclbenzyl strategy was 
used and the linker, benzhydrylamine, was dictated by the fact that the 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
39 
C-terminus of the peptide is amidated. Histidine and arginine were pro- 
tected as the tosyl (4-toluenesulfonyl or 4-methylbenzenesulfonyl) deriv- 
atives; the structures of the protected side chains are shown in 19 and 
20. Coupling was by the DCC method (Scheme 2.9) except for the glu- 
tamine and asparagine, where 4-nitrophenyl esters were used. The first 
two cycles of synthesis are shown in Scheme 2.14. Double coupling was 
carried out at each step and the completeness of coupling checked by 
testing for free NH, groups. Coupling at two positions (Cys-1 1 and Gln- 
17) did not go to completion and residual amino groups were blocked 
by treatment with acetylimidazole (Scheme 2.15). Final release of the 
peptide from the resin and deprotection were done by treatment with 
HF. The amino acid sequence of the product was determined by Edman 
degradation (see Chapter 4), and shown to be identical with that of the 
natural molecule. The average yield of incorporation of residues at each 
step was 99.3%. 
Apamin presents a problem that we have not deal with previously; 
that is, it contains disulfide bridges (see Section 1.4) and these have to 
Table 2.2 Experimental conditions for the synthesis of apamin 
Step 
Method 
~~~ 
~ 
N*-protection 
t-Boc 
Na-deprotection 
30% TFA in CH,CI, 
Linker 
Benzhydrylamine 
Coupling 
DCC 
Side-chain protection 
Thr: benzyl ether 
Glu: benzyl ester 
Lys: benzyloxycarbonyl 
Cys: t-butyl thioether 
His: tosyl 
Arg: tosyl 
HF, 1 h at 0 "C 
Removal from resin and deprotection 

40 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 2.14 
Scheme 2.15 
m 
+ HZN-peptide - 
Nv 
NH + MeCONH-peptide 
m 
N V N I C O M e  
Blocked 
be formed by oxidation of the incorporated cysteines. The product pep- 
tide was first fully reduced by treatment with the reducing agent trib- 
utylphosphine (some degree of oxidation of cysteines during synthesis 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
41 
and deprotection usually occurs). After removal of the reducing agent 
the peptide in dilute solution (to avoid intermolecular disulfide forma- 
tion) was oxidized with air for 48 h to form the disulfide bridges. Note 
that in principle there are three ways that the bridges could form ( 1 4  1 
and 3-45; 1+3 and 1 1 4 5 ;  1 - 4 5  and 3-41). In fact, only the correct 
pairing was produced, which presumably means that the reduced pep- 
tide adopts the native three-dimensional shape (see Chapter 9, which 
brings the cysteines into the correct positions to form the bridges. 

42 
Peptides and Proteins 

Chemical Synthesis of Peptides 
43 

Protein Purification 
3.1 
Nature of the Problem 
The problems involved in the purification of proteins are rather differ- 
ent from those experienced by the synthetic chemist. At any step during 
an organic synthesis the desired intermediate, or the final product, should 
constitute at least the majority of the sample, and the impurities will gen- 
erally be compounds of a different chemical type. Purification can then 
be achieved using the standard methods of distillation, crystallization, 
and so on. 
The protein chemist faces a rather more difficult problem. A typical 
cell contains hundreds or thousands of different proteins. This means 
that, if we make an extract of a tissue, the protein that we are interest- 
ed in may be present at a level of only 0.1% or even less of the total pro- 
tein in the extract. Moreover, all of the other components of the mixture 
are of the same chemical type: they are all proteins. So the problem is 
how to separate a particular protein present at a very low level in a mix- 
ture where all the contaminants are also proteins. 
There is another problem. Proteins are delicate molecules. The main 
44 

Protein Purification 
45 
reason for this is that their biological activity depends on the way in 
which they fold up in space to form precisely defined three-dimensional 
structures (see Chapter 5). These three-dimensional structures are very 
easily disrupted - a process known as 
- and so proteins can 
only be handled under a restricted range of conditions. This usually 
means at or below room temperature, in aqueous solutions, with a pH 
not far removed from neutrality. 
Scheme 3.1 
Scheme 3.2 

46 
Peptides and Proteins 
Small peptides are much more robust because they do not have defined 
three-dimensional structures. They can, therefore, be handled by the 
techniques more familiar to the organic chemist. For example, extrac- 
tion of a tissue with dilute acid will normally produce a solution con- 
taining the peptides in the tissue, but not the larger proteins which 
will have been denatured and rendered insoluble. The mixture will 
not be very complex, because tissues contain relatively small numbers of 

Protein Purification 
47 
peptides, and the components can be separated by RP-HPLC as 
described for synthetic peptides (Section 2.7). Because there are no new 
problems involved in the purification of peptides, we will not deal with 
the topic further. 
3.2 Approaches to a Solution 
Given that the impurities in a protein extract are themselves all proteins 
and have the same basic structure, the solution to the problem of how 
to purify proteins must come from the question: how do proteins differ 
from one another? The question then becomes: how can we exploit those 
differences to achieve separation of one protein from another? 
A summary of the ways in which proteins differ from one another, 
and the ways that these differences can be used in purification, is given 
in Table 3.1. Some explanation is needed before we deal with the details 
of the purification methods. 
Table 3.1 Differences between proteins and their exploitation for purification 
Property 
Resulting differences 
Purification method 
Amino acid 
composition 
Electrical charge 
Surface hydrophobicity 
Solubility in salt solutions 
Affinity for other molecules 
Binding sites 
Carbohydrate content 
Antigenic determinants 
Number of residues 
Size 
ion exchange chroma- 
tography 
Hydrophobic chroma- 
tography 
Fractional precipitation 
Affinity chromatography 
Lectin affinity chroma- 
tography 
lmmunoaffinity chroma- 
tography 
Gel permeation chromato- 
graphy 
A fundamental difference between proteins is that they have different 
amino acid compositions. Given that some of the amino acids are ion- 
izable (see Section 1.3.2), this means that, at a particular pH, different 
proteins will have different net electrical charges. This fact is exploited 
in 
, which is the most generally applicable 
and most important of all the techniques of protein purification. Another 
difference between amino acids is that some are hydrophobic and 
some hydrophilic (see Section 1.3.3). Although most of the hydrophobic 
amino acids are found in the interiors of proteins (see Chapter 5), 
some are exposed on the surface and lead to regions with a hydropho- 
bic character. This allows the possibility of using 

48 
Peptides and Proteins 
as a means of separation. This technique is similar in 
principle to the RP-HPLC method that we have already come across (see 
Chapter 2). 
Figure 3.1 Block diagram of 
equipment used for column chro- 
matography. The solid lines rep- 
resent tubing through which liquid 
passes. The dashed line is an 
electrical connection 

Protein Purification 
49 
Another characteristic of the vast majority of proteins is that they 
have specific binding sites for other molecules. This is a reflection of the 
way that proteins work. To exert their actions, proteins have to bind to 
the molecule on which they are going to act. For example, for an enzyme 
to catalyse its specific reaction, it must first bind the molecule (referred 
to as the 
) on which it acts at a particular site on the enzyme 
(the 
). The active site of an enzyme will generally recognize and 
bind only one molecule, or a very small number of structurally related 
molecules. Similarly, any particular molecule will only be recognized by 
one enzyme, or a small number of different enzymes. To give some other 
examples, hormones often exert their biological actions by binding to 
specific 
in the membranes of their target cells. Proteins 
that are involved in regulation of expression of the genetic messages in 
cells do so by recognizing, and binding to, specific sequences of the chem- 
ical units of which the genes are made. Some proteins contain binding 
sites for metal ions; these may be involved in the mechanism of action 
of the protein or, in some cases, have a structural role. This property of 
specific recognition of other molecules is exploited in a set of powerful 
techniques collectively known as 
is a special case of affinity chro- 
matography. It relies on the extremely highly specific binding of an 
to an 

50 
Peptides and Proteins 
So far, we have considered proteins to consist solely of amino acids, 
and in many cases this is in fact correct. Some proteins, however, have 
non-amino acid components that are added after synthesis of the 
polypeptide chain. One example is provided by the class of molecules 
called 
, which have polysaccharide chains attached to some 
of the amino acids. These polysaccharide chains have very diverse struc- 
tures and serve a range of functions, but it is beyond the scope of this 
book to deal with these matters in detail. For present purposes it is 
sufficient to note that some plants produce proteins called 
that 
have the property of recognizing, and binding to, specific saccharides or 
polysaccharide chains. This property offers the possibility of yet a fur- 
ther type of affinity chromatography known as 
. This technique can be used to separate glycoproteins from 
those that do not contain carbohydrate, and also to separate individual 

Protein Purification 
51 
glycoproteins, depending on the types of polysaccharide chains that they 
contain. 
Perhaps the most obvious distinguishing feature between proteins is 
size: proteins vary in size from a few tens to a few thousands of amino 
acids. The associated separation method is 
This method separates proteins on the basis of the effective radii of the 
spheres that they generate on rotation in solution, but for most proteins 
this is related to the number of amino acids that they contain. In spite 
of the very wide range of sizes that proteins show, gel permeation chro- 
matography is not a very powerful separation method, for reasons given 
in Section 3.3.6. 
(also known as 
or 
1. 
3.3 
Specific Techniques 
3.3.1 Extraction 
The first problem in protein purification is to obtain an aqueous extract 
containing the protein of interest. This is not difficult when the source 
is an animal tissue; in such cases it is sufficient to blend the tissue in a 
suitable buffer using a domestic food mixer and then to remove insolu- 
ble material, such as connective tissue, by 
, In other cases, 
for example where the source is a bacterium, yeast or plant material, it 
is more difficult because these organisms have tough cell walls that are 
not easily disrupted by mechanical means. How these problems are 
solved, and indeed what determines the choice of source in any particu- 
lar case, are matters beyond the scope of this book, but the methods 
have recently been described in detail (see Doonan3 and other chapters 
in the same volume). The following sections describe the techniques that 
are used to separate the components of the protein extract. 

52 
Peptides and Proteins 
3.3.2 Fractional Precipitation 
This technique depends on the fact that different proteins precipitate out 
of solution at different salt concentrations. The salt usually used is 
ammonium sulfate because it is very soluble in water, and also because 
ammonium ions and sulfate ions are innocuous to most proteins. 
The method is crude because precipitation for any particular protein 
occurs over a rather wide range of salt concentrations, and in complex 
mixtures the ranges will overlap. A hypothetical example is shown in 
Figure 3.2, where the precipitation curves are shown for a mixture con- 
taining only three proteins, one of which (B) we wish to purify. We might 
proceed as follows: 
Figure 3.2 Precipitation curves 
for three proteins (A, B and C) as 
a function of salt concentration 

Protein Purification 
53 
Add salt to a concentration represented by point X on the x-axis. 
Some of protein A will precipitate. 
Remove the precipitate from the suspension by centrifugation and 
collect the supernatant liquid. 
Add more salt to the supernatant to bring the concentration up to 
point Y. All of B will precipitate plus the remainder of A and some 
of c. 
Collect the precipitate by centrifugation. Pour off the supernatant 
and re-dissolve the precipitate. 
This will clearly yield a product which is purer that the starting mate- 
rial in that a proportion of both A and C have been removed, but the 
will be rather small (see Section 3.4 for further dis- 
cussion of what is meant by this term). We could proceed differently by 
adding salt to concentration V at the first step, which will precipitate 
nearly all of A but also some of B, and then increasing the concentra- 
tion of salt to W, which will precipitate very little of C but will also leave 
some of B in solution. The result in this case is a purer product but at 
a substantially reduced 
For reasons that will be returned to in 
Section 3.4, a high 
is usually of considerable importance, and 
increased purity will normally be sacrificed in the interest of high yield. 
It might seem that fractional precipitation is of limited value. It is, 
however, a very useful technique, particularly when working on a large 
scale. If, for example, 5 kg of tissue are used, about 10 dm3 of buffer 
would be required for the initial extraction. This is too large a volume 
for chromatographic work using normal laboratory equipment - water 
is a major contaminant in the initial extract! However, the protein col- 
lected by centrifugation during salt fractionation can be re-dissolved in 
a much smaller volume of buffer - say 500 cm3 - so achieving a 10-fold 
reduction in the volume of the solution for the next step as well as a 
modest purification. 

54 
Peptides and Proteins 
3.3.3 Ion Exchange Chromatography 
This is by far the most general and powerful method available for the 
purification of proteins. The solid supports used for protein work are 
usually polysaccharides such as cellulose, dextran or agarose, on to which 
the ion exchange groups are substituted. Examples of these groups are 
given in Table 3.2. The exchangers are usually classified as weak or 
strong, depending on the pH range over which they can be used. The 
carboxymethyl (CM) group has a pK, value of about 4, and so is useful 
as an ion exchanger at pH values of 5 and above. For work at a lower 
pH, the strong cation exchanger propylsulfonate (SP), with a pK, value 
of about 2, can be used. Among the anion exchangers, the diethyl- 
aminoethyl (DEAE) group has a pK, of about 10 and so is usable at pH 
values of 9 or less, whereas the strong anion exchanger quaternary methy- 
lammonium is charged at all pH values. 
I 
Table 3.2 Some ion exchange groups used in protein chromatography 
I 
Exchange group 
Abbreviation Structure 
Type 
Carboxymethyl 
CM 
-CH,CO,- 
Weak cation 
Propylsulfonate 
SP 
-CH,CH,CH,SO,- 
Strong cation 
Diethy larni noet hyl 
DEAE 
-CH,CH,NHEt,+ 
Weak anion 
Quaternary methylammonium 
Q 
-CH,NMe,+ 
Strong anion 
To explain how ion exchange chromatography is actually carried out 
and how it works, it is best to give an example. To make carboxymethyl- 
cellulose (CM-cellulose), cellulose fibres are chemically modified by intro- 
duction of the carboxymethyl groups, mainly on position 6 of the glucose 
residues. A partial structure is shown in 1, with the introduced group in 
brown. The material is available commercially, as are others with dif- 
ferent ion exchange groups or with different supporting materials such 
as Sephadex. 

Protein Purification 
55 
The ion exchanger is packed into the chromatography column and 
equilibrated with a buffer of suitable strength and pH. A good choice 
might be sodium acetate buffer of concentration 0.01 mol dm-3 and pH 
5.50. Under these conditions the carboxymethyl groups will be fully 
deprotonated and neutralized by sodium ions (Figure 3.3). The protein 
solution is equilibrated to the same conditions either by 
or by 
gel filtration (see Section 3.3.6) and run onto the column. Proteins in the 
mixture will be of three types. Some will be positively charged, some neg- 
atively charged and some will be isoelectric and have no net charge. 
Proteins in the second and third categories will have no affinity for the 
ion exchange groups and will pass straight through the column on wash- 
ing with the starting buffer. Positively charged proteins, however, will 
exchange with sodium ions associated with the carboxymethyl groups 
(hence the name 
and will become bound 
to the matrix. 
Figure 3.3 Ion exchange chro- 
matography using CM-cellulose. 
A single bead of the exchanger is 
shown in brown. Po, P+ and P 
represent isoelectric, net positive- 
ly charged and net negatively 
charged proteins, respectively 
It remains to elute the bound proteins from the column. The easiest 
way to do this is to pass buffer through the column containing an increas- 
ing concentration of a salt such as sodium chloride. As the sodium ion 
concentration increases, sodium ions will compete with protein for bind- 
ing sites on the exchanger and the proteins will be displaced in order of 
increasing positive charge. 
Figure 3.4 shows an idealized elution profile from such an experiment. 
The first peak was eluted with the starting buffer. After that a salt gra- 
dient was applied to elute bound proteins. In practice, if the mixture of 
proteins is complex, the peaks will overlap. An actual example is shown 
in Figure 3.5.4 In this work it was intended to purify two enzymes, called 
aspartate aminotransferase and malate dehydrogenase, from pig heart 
muscle. A partially purified protein extract containing both enzymes was 
applied to a column of CM-Sephadex at pH 6.8 and the unabsorbed pro- 
tein was eluted (peak not shown). A salt gradient was then applied. The 
dashed line shows the concentration of protein in each fraction as meas- 
ured from the absorbance at 280 nm. The solid lines show the results of 
assay of each fraction for the activity of the two enzymes. It can be seen 
that essentially complete separation of the two was achieved. Neither 

56 
Peptides and Proteins 
enzyme was pure at this stage (as can be deduced from the elution pro- 
file since neither peak of enzyme activity coincides with a discrete pro- 
tein peak), but the fractions containing each enzyme could be combined 
and subjected to further purification. 
Figure 3.4 Elution profile from 
ion exchange chromatography. 
The brown solid line represents 
the concentration of sodium 
chloride in the gradient applied at 
fraction 6. The dashed line shows 
the concentration of the protein 
to be isolated 
Figure 3.5 An example of an 
elution profile from chromatogra- 
phy on CM-Sephadex. Dashed 
line: absorption at 280 nm; cir- 
cles: aspartate aminotransferase 
activity: triangles: malate dehydro- 
genase activity. (Redrawn from 
Barra et 
with the permission 
of Blackwell Publishing) 

Protein Purification 
57 
3.3.4 Hydrophobic Interaction Chromatography 
The stationary phase for this form of chromatography comprises inert 
beads coated with a layer of hydrocarbon chains (usually butyl, octyl or 
phenyl), and absorption to the support occurs between these hydropho- 
bic chains and the hydrophobic regions that are found on the surfaces 
of some proteins. These regions are surrounded by a layer of structured 
water (see the discussion of hydrophobicity in Section 1.3.3) which tends 
to mask the hydrophobic residues, but this layer can be stripped off by 
the addition of a high concentration of a salt. Hence, typically the col- 
umn is equilibrated with a buffer containing 2.0 mol dm-3 ammonium 
sulfate and the protein sample is adjusted to the same conditions. On 
application of the sample, those proteins with hydrophobic surfaces will 
bind to the support whereas hydrophilic proteins will pass through 
unabsorbed. 
To complete the chromatography it is necessary to elute bound pro- 
teins, and the first thing to try is application of a gradient of deceasing 
ammonium sulfate concentration. This should be effective in eluting 
weakly or moderately hydrophobic proteins. A problem arises, however, 
if the protein of interest is strongly bound to the column. In such cases 
the protein will either leak off slowly in a large volume of solution, or 
it may not elute at all. In the later case, the only recourse is to elute with 
increasingly hydrophobic agents such as alcohols or non-ionic detergents, 
or, in the last resort, with solutions containing 
such as 
guanidinium thiocyanate. These will definitely elute the protein, but will 
almost certainly lead to partial or complete loss of biological activity. 
In summary, hydrophobic chromatography is a useful technique if the 
protein of interest is only moderately hydrophobic. It also has the virtue 
that it can be used straight after an initial purification step by salt frac- 
tionation without the need to remove the residual ammonium sulfate 
that is always present when the precipitated protein is re-dissolved. All 
too often, however, a protein subjected to hydrophobic chromatography 
is never seen again - at least not in an active form! 

58 
Peptides and Proteins 
3.3.5 Affinity Chromatography 
The general principles of affinity chromatography are illustrated in 
Figure 3.6.'The essential feature is that a ligand which is specific for the 
protein of interest is attached to a solid support. This is shown dia- 
grammatically as a triangular-shaped ligand attached to the support, 
whereas the sample contains proteins that have binding sites for trian- 
gles, circles and squares. The protein with the binding site for triangles 
will attach to the ligand, whereas the others will have no affinity for the 
ligand and will pass straight through the column. It then remains to elute 
the bound protein by passing through the column a solution containing 
an excess of the free ligand. Of course, in practice, the recognition is not 
based simply on shape. It will be a combination of geometry plus a range 
of interactions - electrostatic, hydrophobic, hydrogen bonding, and so 
on - between the ligand and the binding site. Some examples will help 
to make this more concrete, as well as illustrating some of the problems 
that are encountered in affinity chromatography. 
Figure 3.6 Principles of affinity 
chromatography 
Enzyme Affinity Chromatography 
The highly selective binding of an enzyme and its substrate is just what 
is required for affinity chromatography. In this case the substrate, or a 
closely related molecule termed a 
is bound to the solid 
support. 
Let us take a specific example. Fumarase catalyses reversible hydra- 
tion of fumarate (trans-butenedioate) to yield malate (2-hydroxybutane- 
dioate) (Scheme 3.3). An affinity matrix for this enzyme can be made by 
linking pyromellitic acid (benzene- 1,2,4,5-tetracarboxylic acid, 2) to a 
solid support via one of its carboxylate groups, to yield an affinity matrix 
as shown in 3. If a sample containing fumarase is loaded onto a column 
of this material, then the fumarase binds to the immobilized substrate 

Protein Purification 
59 
analogue whereas some of the contaminating proteins pass straight 
through. The enzyme can be eluted by passing a solution containing 
malate through the c01umn.~ 
H 
-02c 
1 
Scheme 3.3 
There are some interesting points about this example. Firstly, other 
proteins beside fumarase bind to the affinity matrix, and so a pure Sam- 
ple of the enzyme is not obtained. The main reason for this is that the 
ligand is negatively charged and so the affinity matrix will also bind pos- 
itively charged proteins by purely electrostatic forces. This effect can be 
reduced by working at as high a pH as practical to reduce the number 
of positively charged proteins in the mixture. The other way to improve 
the specificity is to use 
that is, to elute the enzyme 
with a low concentration of a substrate or substrate analogue rather than 
to use general elution with salt. Malate serves this purpose in the pres- 
ent example. Indeed, it is one of the tests of genuine affinity chro- 
matography that elution can be achieved biospecifically. 
The other interesting thing about this example is that it is not imme- 
diately apparent why it works! Presumably the enzyme recognizes the 
part of the affinity label coloured brown in 3. However, note that this 
is not really a structural analogue of the substrate. To start with, the 
carboxylate groups in fumarate are trans whereas they are cis in 3. Also, 
of course, the bonds in the aromatic ring are not really alternating dou- 
ble and single, even though they are usually drawn that way; benzene is 
aromatic. Perhaps the affinity label resembles more closely the transition 
state of the reaction in Scheme 3.3 than it does the ground state. The 
fact of the matter is that affinity chromatography does work, and empha- 
sizes that the protein chemist has to be inventive in designing potential 
affinity ligands for any purification. 

60 
Peptides and Proteins 
Dye Ligand Chromatography 
Cofactors are molecules that 
participate with enzymes in 
carrying out particular classes of 
reaction. An example is NAD', 
which is the cofactor for oxidative 
enzymes called 
dehydrogenases , Typical is 
alcohol dehydrogenase, which 
oxidizes ethanol to acetaldehyde 
(ethanal, Scheme 3.4). This is the 
first step in the process by which 
we remove ethanol from the 
body. 
Scheme 3.4 
Affinity chromatography using triazine dyes such as 4 (known as 
Cibacron Blue) was discovered by accident when it was observed that 
the dye had the property of binding to some proteins but not to others. 
The proteins that bind the dye are generally enzymes that use nucleotide 
cofactors such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP), nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NAD+) and Coenzyme A (CoA). These molecules have in 
common the partial structure shown in 5, and it is likely that the sites 
on these enzymes that bind this structure are the sites that recognize the 
triazine dyes, Triazine dyes are easily attached to solid supports such as 
dextran by nucleophilic displacement of the chlorine atom, and the result- 
ing material can then be used as an affinity matrix. Elution of bound 
proteins can be achieved by increasing the salt concentration in the buffer 
or, better, biospecifically using a solution of the nucleotide for which the 
enzyme of interest is specific. 
R'O 
soy 
4 
0 
II 
I 0- 
-P-0- 
N c ''w 
3 t J  
N 
OR2 OH 
5 
ATP and NAD+, R2 = H; CoA, R2 = PO3'- 
MeCH20H + NAD' - 
MeCHO + NADH + H+ 
A range of triazine dyes has been developed and these have been found 
to have different selectivities for the various nucleotide-dependent 

Protein Purification 
61 
enzymes. It is sometimes useful to use more than one of these matrices 
sequentially for purification of a particular enzyme. A particularly suc- 
cessful example of this approach has been described by Worral16 for the 
purification of the enzyme CoA synthase. A crude extract from pig liver 
was first subjected to affinity chromatography using Procion Red 
Sepharose (Procion Red is a triazine dye with a somewhat more com- 
plex structure than that of Cibacron Blue). The enzyme was retained on 
the column and was subsequently eluted by applying a linear gradient 
of KCl. The elution profile is shown in Figure 3.7A. The fractions con- 
taining enzyme activity were pooled and applied to a column of Blue 
Sepharose. Again the enzyme was retained by the column and, after 
washing the column to remove impurities, was eluted by applying a solu- 
tion containing 0.1 mmol dm--3 Coenzyme A. The product of the second 
step was analysed by 
(Figure 3.7B) and shown to be essen- 
tially pure. 
A 
0*25 I 
1 
0.75 2 
0.50 
W - 
z, 
0.25 
0 
1 
Fraction number 
1.5 
3 
1
2
3
 
Figure 3.7 Purification of CoA 
synthase. A Elution profile; B 
SDS-PAGE (Redrawn from 
Worral16 with the permission of 
Humana Press) 

62 
Peptides and Proteins 
The electrophoretic patterns of three samples are shown in Figure 3.7, 
with an arrow marking the position of the pure enzyme. Lane 1 is the 
crude sample that was applied to the first column. Note that the desired 
enzyme is present at such a low level in the crude extract that it is not 
visible on the gel; the large band running just faster than the enzyme is 
an impurity. Lane 2 shows the active fraction from the column of Procion 
Red. The enzyme of interest is now clearly visible but there are several 
contaminants present, some of which were not visible in the crude 
sample. Lane 3 shows the pure enzyme as eluted from the Blue Sepharose. 
Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography 
Some proteins have binding sites for metal ions, typically Ca2+, Zn2+, 
Cu2+, Ni2+ or Fe2+. These metal-binding sites can be exploited in 
(known as 
In this 

Protein Purification 
63 
technique a metal chelator such as iminodiacetate is coupled to the solid 
support and loaded with metal ions. The resulting structure is shown in 
6, where the X groups represent coordinated water and M is the chosen 
metal ion. 
The mixture of proteins to be purified is first treated with a chelator 
to remove bound metals from the proteins, and then dialysed to remove 
excess chelator. When the protein mixture is loaded onto the column, 
those proteins that have a binding site for the metal immobilized on the 
column will displace the coordinated water molecules and become 
bound to the metal. Other proteins will pass through as the column is 
washed with the starting buffer. Absorbed proteins can then be eluted 
by passing a buffer containing an excess of the metal ion through the 
column. 
Lectin Affinity Chromatography 
This, and the final example of affinity chromatography described below, 
is a little different from the cases described before. In those previous 
cases the ligand which is recognized by the protein is bound to the solid 
support. In the remaining two cases it is the species joined to the solid 
support that recognizes the protein. 
As outlined in Section 3.2, many proteins, particularly ones which are 
components of biological membranes, are glycoproteins. The carbohy- 
drate chains are added to the protein after completion of synthesis of 
the polypeptide chain, and the precise structure of the polysaccharide is 
specific for the particular protein. Lectin affinity chromatography pro- 

64 
Peptides and Proteins 
vides a method of separating proteins of a particular carbohydrate class 
from other classes and from non-glycosylated proteins. 
Lectins from different sources differ in their specificities. A few exam- 
ples are given in Table 3.3. The most commonly used is concanavalin A 
(Con A) which has specificity for a-D-mannopyranoside residues. Hence 
if a column is made with this lectin immobilized on a solid support, 
glycoproteins containing a-r>-mannopyranoside residues will be specifi- 
cally absorbed out from a mixture of proteins. Non-glycosylated 
proteins, and glycoproteins not containing a-D-mannopyranoside 
residues, will pass through the column unabsorbed. The retained glyco- 
proteins can then be eluted by passing a solution containing a high 
concentration of D-mannose or, better, methyl-a-D-mannoside through 
the column. The product of such an experiment will be a mixture of 
glycoproteins of the particular class containing a-D-mannopyranoside 
residues, the components of which can then be separated by other 
methods. 
Table 3.3 Specificities of some lectins 
Name 
Specificity 
Eluent 
Concanavalin A 
a-D- Mannopyranosyl 
Methyl a-D-mannoside 
Wheat germ agglutinin 
N-Acetyl-D-glucosamine 
N-Acetyl-D-glucosamine 
Jacalin 
D-Galactopyranosyl 
Melobiose 
Immunoaffinity Chromatography 
In this method an antibody raised against a particular protein is coupled 
to a solid support. The affinity matrix so produced can then be used to 
absorb that protein specifically from a mixture of other proteins. Because 
of the extreme selectivity of antibody-antigen reactions, the only protein 
that should be bound to the affinity matrix is the protein to which the 
antibody is raised. 

Protein Purification 
65 
Scheme 3.5 
Scheme 3.6 

66 
Peptides and Proteins 
It seems that immunoaffinity chromatography should provide the 
ideal method for purification of a protein. In principle, once the affini- 
ty matrix has been made, it should be possible to isolate the protein from 
a crude mixture in a single experiment. 
There are two problems. Firstly, there is the problem of obtaining the 
antibody in the first place. As mentioned previously, antibodies are pro- 
duced when a protein from one organism is injected into the blood stream 
of a different animal. Obviously it is no use injecting a mixture of pro- 
teins into the animal because the antiserum produced will contain anti- 
bodies to all the proteins in the mixture, This means that the protein of 
interest will have to be purified first by some other set of procedures so 
that it can be used to raise the antibody. This is not quite as strange as 
it might seem because very often it is necessary to purify a protein on 
many occasions, for example if it is to be used for an extensive series of 
investigations, or if it is to be sold as a therapeutic agent. In such cases 
it is worthwhile developing a method to purify the protein by other 
methods, raise an antiserum, and then make an affinity column which 
can be used repeatedly for subsequent purifications. 
The other problem is more severe. Antibodies bind antigens very 
strongly; it is important for their biological role that they should do so. 
As a result of this, it is usually very easy to get the protein of interest 
bound onto the affinity matrix, but is often extremely difficult to get it 
off again. The protein is typically loaded onto the matrix at a pH of 
about 8.5 and, after unbound protein has been washed off, the pH is 

Protein Purification 
67 
lowered to attempt to elute the bound protein. There is, however, a limit 
to how far one can go. All proteins are unstable and lose biological activ- 
ity at a low enough pH; for most proteins the safe limit might be pH 
2-3. This may well not work because even at these low pH values the 
binding of the antigen to the antibody might still be very tight. If that 
fails, then elution can be attempted using solutions of urea or even of a 
chaotropic agent. These will almost certainly elute the protein, but quite 
likely it will be in an inactive from. 
In summary then, immunoaffinity chromatography is a very valuable 
technique if: 
(I) it is intended to repeat the purification sufficiently often to make it 
worthwhile going to the trouble of making an antibody; 
(2) an antibody is obtained that binds the antigen sufficiently strongly 
to retain it on the column under the starting conditions, but not so 
strongly that the protein cannot be released under conditions where 
the biological activity is retained. 
3.3.6 Gel Permeation Chromatography 
In gel permeation chromatography (also known as gel filtration, or size 
exclusion chromatography) the protein mixture is passed through a 
column of porous beads. The beads are made of cross-linked polysac- 
Figure 3-8 Principles of gel per- 
-
-
 
meation chromatography. Open 
brown objects are protein mole- 
charide chains and the degree of cross-linking can be varied so as to vary 
the sizes of the pores. When the beads are suspended in buffer solution 
are the 
beads and 
and packed into the column, there will be solvent both inside the beads 
cules (not on the same scale). 
and also filling the interstices between them. What happens when a :
:
:
A
 
~
~
~
~
~
e
~
s
e
a
~
Fass 
mixture of proteins is passed through the column is shown diagram- 
through slowly; large proteins do 
matically in Figure 3.8. 
not and will emerge first 
Consider first a protein which is large compared with the size of the 
pores and hence cannot enter them. It has access only to the buffer 
between the beads (about 25% of the total liquid volume of the column) 
and hence will emerge from the column very quickly. A very small pro- 

68 
Peptides and Proteins 
tein, on the other hand, can freely enter the pores and has access to the 
total liquid volume of the column. It will, therefore, emerge later. An 
intermediate sized protein will have partial access to the pores and will 
emerge in an intermediate volume of buffer. 
This is all very well for a simple mixture of three proteins with very 
different sizes, but in fact the resolving power of the method is rather 
poor. The peaks of retarded proteins tend to be rather broad - after all, 
the method depends on the diffusion of proteins into and out of the 
beads - and hence separation of proteins with only small size differences 
is not possible. Although gel permeation media are available covering a 
wide range of size exclusion limits, the method is of limited application 
in protein purification. 
That being said, gel permeation chromatography is very useful as an 
alternative to dialysis for removing salts from protein solutions, or for 
changing the buffer. For example, if a sample of protein solution in buffer 
A is passed through a gel permeation column equilibrated in buffer B 
and from which the protein is excluded, the protein will move ahead of 
the buffer in which it was applied and will emerge in buffer B. Changing 
buffers is a frequent requirement in protein purification. 
3.4 
A Twical Purification 
We have now looked at all the major techniques available for protein 
purification and the question arises as to how to put them together in 
practice. The answer is that there is no general rule: each purification 
problem is unique. However, a general approach for the isolation of a 
protein at relatively large scale (perhaps starting with a few kilograms 
of tissue) would be: 
0 
0 
0 
Homogenization of the tissue in buffer and removal of insoluble 
material by centrifugation 
Initial crude fractionation and volume reduction by fractional pre- 
cipitation with salt 
Remove residual salt and change the buffer by dialysis 
Large-scale (column volume of, say, 2 dm3) ion exchange chro- 
mat ograp hy 
Change buffer by dialysis or gel permeation chromatography 
Second ion exchange chromatography step under different condi- 
tions (e.g. using an exchanger of opposite charge) 
Change buffer by dialysis or gel permeation chromatography 
Affinity chromatography to exploit special properties of the protein 
The steps are ordered to move from the more general to the more spe- 
cific, and from ones that are easy to do on a large scale to ones that are 
only practical on a small scale. At each step it will be necessary to carry 

Protein Purification 
69 
out trials to find the optimum conditions for the step, and to analyse the 
product by electrophoresis to see how the purification is progressing. One 
factor which is common to all purifications is that it is essential to have 
a method available for measuring the amount of the desired protein in 
the fractions at each stage of the purification so that the yield can be 
determined. A step resulting in a low yield will have to be abandoned 
and replaced by an alternative, otherwise the final yield of the process 
may be unacceptably low. Five purification steps each with a step yield 
of 50% will lead to a final overall yield of only 3%! 
A typical purification of an enzyme starting from 10 kg of pig liver is 
summarized in Table 3.4, taken from work done in the author’s own lab- 
oratory. Quantitation was easy here because the catalytic activity of the 
enzyme could be determined. Enzymologists usually define the activity 
of an enzyme in terms of 
where 1 U is the amount of enzyme that 
produces 1 pmol of product per min under standard assay conditions. 
The 
is then the number of U/mg of protein. The require- 
ments for a useful step in the purification are that the yield should be 
high, and that there should be a substantial increase in the specific activ- 
ity. The 
is given by the ratio of the specific activity of 
the enzyme at each step compared with that of the original homogenate. 
In the present case the purification factor achieved was about 6000, which 
means that the enzyme was present at a level of only about 0.017% of 
the protein in the initial homogenate. Note how the scale of the proce- 
dure decreases from beginning to end. It started with 9 dm3 of 
homogenate and ended with 12 cm3 of pure protein solution. Similarly, 
28 mg of pure enzyme were obtained from 340 g of protein in the extract. 
Table 3.4 Example of a purification table 
fraction 
Volume 
Protein 
Total 
Activity 
Total 
Specific Purification Overall 
(cm3) 
concentration 
protein 
(U/cm3) 
activity 
activity 
factor 
yield 
(mg/cm3) 
(mg) 
(U) 
(U/mg) 
(%) 
Homogenate 
9000 
37.8 
340,200 
1.8 
16,200 
0.048 
1 
100 
45-65% (NHJSO, 
530 
190.0 
100,700 
23.5 
12,455 
0.124 
2.6 
77 
CM-cellulose 
420 
19.5 
8,190 
25.5 
10,710 
1.31 
27.2 
66 
DEAE-Sephadex 
75 
7.5 
563 
138 
10,350 
18.4 
383 
64 
Affinity chromatography 
12 
2.33 
28 
683 
8,200 
293 
6100 
51 

70 
Peptides and Proteins 

Protein Purification 
71 

72 
Peptides and Proteins 
Table 3.5 
Fraction 
Volume 
Protein 
Total 
Activity 
Total 
Specific Purification Overall 
(cm3) 
concentration 
protein 
(U/cm3) 
activity 
activity 
factor 
yield 
(mg/cm3) 
(ms) 
(U) 
(U/mg) 
Homogenate 
1000 
42.5 
45-65% (NH,)SO, 
120 
134.0 
DEAE-Sephadex 
55 
0.92 
CM-Sephadex 
15 
0.48 
Hydrophobic chromatography 
230 
3.7 
0.9 
6.8 
0.8 
2.4 
7.2 

Protein Purification 
73 

Determination of the Covalent 
Structures of Peptides and 
Proteins 
4.1 
Introduction 
We know that peptides and proteins are made from amino acids linked 
together by peptide bonds, and so determination of the covalent struc- 
ture amounts to discovering the order in which the residues occur in the 
chain; that is, the amino acid sequence (or 
as it is corn- 
monly called). Most of what follows refers particularly to proteins which, 
because of their greater size and extra level of structural complexity, pres- 
ent more of an analytical challenge. The exception is in the description 
of sequence analysis, where peptides are dealt with first, followed by what 
is required to extend the methods to proteins. 
74 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
75 
Before embarking on determination of the primary structure there are 
certain other pieces of information that are required. Firstly, we need to 
know the 
(MJ of the protein, which defines the 
magnitude of the sequencing problem. It is also necessary to know 
whether or not the protein consists of a single polypeptide chain. There 
are two different circumstances where a protein can consist of two, or 
more, chains. Firstly, but relatively uncommon, the protein may have 
different polypeptide chains linked by disulfide bridges. Insulin, as we 
have seen, is a case in point. It consists of two chains, one of 21 amino 
acids and the other of 30, linked by two disulfide bridges. Much more 
common, the native protein may consist of two or more chains that are 
associated together, but not covalently linked. This is referred to as 
(we will see what secondary and tertiary structures are 
in Chapter 5). Usually the individual chains, referred to as 
have the same amino acid sequence, so this is not a problem. If, as some- 
times occurs, the protein consists of two monomers of different primary 
structure, then the chains have to be separated before analysis of their 
sequences. 
The next thing to determine is the amino acid composition of the pro- 
tein, or of its constituent polypeptide chains. This information is not 
strictly necessary for amino acid sequence analysis, but is useful for a 
variety of reasons that will be discussed later. With this preliminary infor- 
mation to hand, the sequence can be determined. Two approaches to 
sequence analysis will be described. One is the now classical chemical 
method in which the polypeptide chain is degraded one residue at a time 
from the N-terminus, and the residue released at each stage is deter- 
mined. The other is a more recent approach that depends on the use of 
mass spectrometry . 
One aspect of protein structure analysis that will not be covered is 
determination of the structures of the polysaccharide units of glycopro- 
teins. This is a difficult and specialized area of chemistry, and is outside 
the scope of this book. The interested reader can find a detailed account 
of this topic in Chapters 97-111 of Walker.' This reference also contains 
detailed treatments of many of the topics covered in this chapter. 
4.2 
Relative Molecular Mass and Subunit 
Composition 
Commonly used methods for the determination of the relative molecular 
masses (MJ of proteins are gel permeation chromatography or SDS- 
PAGE, both of which have been covered in other contexts in Chapter 
3. These are 
methods. That is, they work, but they have no 
theoretical underpinning. In the case of gel permeation chromatography, 
a column is 
by passing through it a series of proteins of known 

76 
Peptides and Proteins 
5.25 - 
5.00- 
4.75- 
4.50 - 
4.25 - 
s 
0 
3 
Figure 4.1 Plot of M, against 
elution volume for gel permeation 
chromatography 
M, and measuring the elution volume of each; that is, the volume of 
solution passed through the column from the point of application of the 
sample until the peak maximum of the eluted protein appears. It turns 
out that if the elution volume is plotted against the logarithm of Mr, 
then a smooth curve is obtained, as shown in Figure 4.1. If a protein of 
unknown Mr is now passed through the column and the elution volume 
measured, its M, can be obtained from the calibration curve. 
4.00 1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Elution volume (cm3> 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
77 
Determination of M, by SDS-PAGE is similar in principle. In this 
case, a gel is run with a set of proteins of known M, and, after staining, 
the distance migrated by each protein is measured and plotted against 
log M,. In this case a straight line relationship is found. Again, if the 
distance migrated by an unknown protein is measured under identical 
conditions, then its Mr can be obtained from the calibration curve. 
Both of these methods usually provide quite accurate values of the Mr 
of a protein, although with glycoproteins the gel permeation method 
sometimes yields an underestimate because the protein is retarded in its 
passage through the column by interaction of the polysaccharide chain 
of the protein with the matrix. SDS-PAGE is the preferred method 
because it is very quick to do (the whole experiment can be carried out 
in a couple of hours) and, more importantly, because it requires very 
little protein; a few micrograms are sufficient. 
It is, however, often instructive to carry out both types of determina- 
tion and compare the results. Suppose, for example, that the value 
obtained by SDS-PAGE was exactly one half of that from gel perme- 
ation chromatography. The likely explanation of this finding would be 
that the protein is a dimer of two identical subunits. The reason for this 
behaviour on SDS-PAGE is that the detergent disrupts the non-covalent 
interactions that are responsible for formation of quaternary structure. 
It would be necessary to do a control experiment to ensure that the two 
chains are not linked by disulfide bridges. SDS-PAGE is usually carried 
out in the presence of the reagent mercaptoethanol (ethanethiol). This 
reagent reduces disulfide bridges in proteins, as shown in Scheme 4.1, 
and is added to ensure that the protein is able to fully unfold and adopt 
an extended rod-like conformation. A gel could be run in the absence of 
mercaptoethanol. If the protein still migrated at or near the monomer- 
ic position, then the possibility of inter-chain disulfide bridges would be 
ruled out. An example of how a combination of gel permeation chro- 
matography and SDS-PAGE can give information about quaternary 
structure is in the following worked problem. 
Scheme 4.1 
-NH 
NH- 
I 
I 
-NH 
I 
NH- 
I 
EtS 
CHCH~--S--S-CH.LCH 
+ 2EtSH - 
CHCH2-SH 
+ HS-CH2CH 
+ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
EtS 
co- 
-co 
co- 
-co 

78 
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 4.2 SDS-PAGE of a set 
of standard proteins (left) and an 
unknown protein (right) 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
79 
4.3 
Amino Acid Analysis 
First the protein has to be degraded completely into its constituent amino 
acids. Peptide bonds vary considerably in their resistance to hydrolysis, 
depending on the particular residues involved, with bonds to hydropho- 

80 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 4.2 
bic amino acids being most resistant. Complete hydrolysis requires vig- 
orous conditions, and 6 mol dm-3 HCl at 105 "C for 24 h is commonly 
used. Under these conditions, asparagine and glutamine are hydrolysed 
to the corresponding acids, and so the values subsequently obtained for 
aspartic and glutamic acids are composites of the values for the free acids 
and the amides. Tryptophan is completely destroyed, but can be analysed 
separately after milder hydrolysis with 3 mol dm -3 toluene-4-sulfonic 
acid. Substantial loss of cysteine and cystine will also occur because of 
oxidation, even if the hydrolysis is carried out in evacuated tubes. In a 
separate analysis, these amino acids can be quantitatively converted to 
the stable derivative cysteic acid (1) by oxidation of the protein with per- 
formic acid [peroxomethanoic acid, HC(0)-0-OH]. 
Having obtained the hydrolysate, there are two ways of proceeding 
to separate and quantitate the amino acids. The classical method for sep- 
aration of the amino acids is by ion exchange chromatography using sul- 
fonated polystyrene resins. The amino acids are bound to the column at 
a pH of about 2.2, and then subsequently eluted by gradually increas- 
ing the pH. Eluted amino acids are mixed with 
which reacts 
to form a purple product (Scheme 4.2). The product formed is the same 
irrespective of which amino acid is involved, and can be measured quan- 
titatively by its absorption at 570 nm. Proline forms an orange product 
which absorbs around 440 nm and is measured separately. 
This form of analysis was introduced by Stamford Moore and William 
Stein in the 195Os, and is universally referred to as the Moore and Stein 
method. It was subsequently a~tomated,~ 
and commercial machines are 
available to carry it out. After the chromatographic separation, the nin- 
hydrin reagent is mixed with the effluent stream from the column, the 
solution is passed through a heater to develop the coloured product, and 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
81 
finally to a UV detector. The output of the detector is fed to a chart 
recorder. Each amino acid is identified by its time of elution and its quan- 
tity determined from the area (or height) of the peak on the chart. 
Automated systems have undergone extensive development over the 
years, particularly to increase sensitivity, and systems can be obtained 
which will give reliable analyses at the nmol level; that is, analysis can 
be carried out on 1-2 pg of protein. 
The alternative is to convert the amino acids to some appropriate 
derivative before analysis and then to separate the derivatives using RP- 
HPLC (this is referred to as 
as opposed to the 
Moore and Stein procedure which is a 
method). A variety 
of reagents has been used, but they share the property that the deriva- 
tives formed are 
The advantage of this is that fluorescence 
detection can be more sensitive that UV detection, and so by using flu- 
orescent derivatives the sensitivity of analysis can be increased about 100- 
fold; that is, down to the 10 pmol level. In one commercial system the 
amino acids are converted to the Fmoc derivatives for analysis (see 
Chapter 2). A more recent system5 uses 6-(aminoquinolyl)-N-hydroxy- 
succinimidyl carbamate to produce the fluorescent derivatives (Scheme 
4.3). Separation is carried out using a C reverse-phase column, and the 
separated derivatives detected and quantltated by fluorescence at 395 nm. 
!8 
Scheme 4.3 
4.4 
N-terminal Analysis 
It is important to have methods for identification of the N-terminal 
amino acid residue. For example, if a protein shows two different N-ter- 
mini, then it usually contains two different polypeptide chains. Similarly, 
if a protein shown to be a dimer with chains of equal sizes shows only 
a single N-terminal residue, then it is added evidence that the chains are 
iden tical. 
What is required is a label that can be attached to the amino termi- 
nal group, and which stays in place when the protein is hydrolysed. The 
first such label to be introduced was the 
group. 
The N-terminus was labelled by the reaction shown in Scheme 4.4 and, 
after complete hydrolysis of the protein, the liberated N-terminal DNP- 
amino acid was identified by paper chromatography. 

82 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 4.4 
This method is now largely of historic interest because it i s  relatively 
insensitive. A more modern method uses the reagent 
The reaction 
of this reagent with a peptide, and hydrolysis to liberate the DNS-amino 
acid, is shown in Scheme 4.5. The advantage of this technique is that the 
DNS-amino acids are fluorescent. Identification is by separation of the 
lowed by viewing under UV light. DNS-amino acids fluoresce yellow. 
The method is very sensitive and it is easy to identify 50 pmol of the 
products on 
(2-D TLC) fol- 
Scheme 4.5 
product. 
NMe2 
NMe2 
I 
I 
a 
+ /NH2TCONHCHCONHCHCO- 
I 
I 
R2 
R3 
I 
S02-NHCHCONHCHCONHCHCO- 
I 
I 
I 
R' 
R2 
R3 
1 6 M H C I  
NMe2 
I 
SO, -NHCHC02H 
I 
R' 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
83 
4.5 
Sequence Analysis by Chemical Methods 
4.5.1 Peptide Sequencing 
The first protein to have its amino acid sequence determined was insulin. 
This was done by Frederick Sanger in the late 1 9 5 0 ~ . ~  
It was an enor- 
mously important piece of work, not least because it showed that pro- 
teins do indeed have defined amino acid sequences; this was still a matter 
of debate at the time. In essence, the two chains were separated and each 
broken into many small peptides. Each peptide was analysed for its 
amino acid composition, and the N-terminus determined using 1 -fluoro- 
2,4-dinitrobenzene as described in Scheme 4.4. We will not go into details 
about how the sequences of the two chains were re-assembled from the 
results obtained because modern methods are somewhat different. Suffice 
it to say that the structure was successfully determined, and Sanger was 
awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for this work in 1958. 
What Sanger lacked was a method for degrading a polypeptide chain 
one residue at a time from the terminus while leaving the rest of the 
chain intact. A major breakthrough in peptide sequencing was made Pehr 
Edman, who developed such a method.’ The procedure, now known as 
the 
is shown in Scheme 4.6. The peptide or protein 
is reacted with 
in slightly alkaline solution. 
The unprotonated N-terminal amino group attacks the carbon of the 

84 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 4.6 
isothiocyanate group and a 
peptide derivative 
is produced. The crucial reaction is the next one. If the PTC derivative 
is heated in anhydrous TFA, a ring-closure reaction occurs, which results 
in breakage of the peptide bond between residues 1 and 2. There are two 
essential points. Firstly, the rest of the peptide is left intact; hence it can 
be subjected to further rounds of degradation, each time liberating a new 
N-terminal amino acid. Secondly, the 
formed still contains 
the side chain of the amino acid so that, in principle, it can be identi- 
fied, thus identifying the original N-terminal residue. The N-terminal 
residue has been coloured brown in Scheme 4.6 to make its fate clear. 
In fact, thiazolinones are not very stable, and are not suitable for iden- 
tification. However, if the thiazolinone is heated in acidic solution, it 
undergoes rearrangement to the corresponding 
derivative (Scheme 4.7). These are stable and can be readily iden- 
tified. Originally this was done by thin layer chromatography, but the 
sensitivity of analysis has been enormously increased by using RP-HPLC 
on C,, reverse phases. An elution profile of a standard mixture of PTH- 
amino acids is shown in Figure 4.3. The detection limit is LO pmol, so 
very small amounts of peptides or proteins can be analysed. 
Scheme 4.7 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
85 
1 
A- 
Q 
E 
M 
w 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
28 
Time (min) 
Figure 4.3 Separation of a 
standard mixture of PTH-amino 
acids by RP-HPLC. Peaks are 
identified by the usual one-letter 
codes. Other peaks are side 
products of the Edman reaction 
The Edman degradation has been automated and, provided extremely 
pure reagents are used, it is capable of very high repetitive yields. This 
is important because, as we have seen before, the overall yield of a process 
decreases drastically if the step yield is low. It is particularly important 
that the cleavage step of the degradation is essentially complete, other- 
wise there will be “carry over” of a given residue into the next cycle. So, 

86 
Peptides and Proteins 
for example, if the first cleavage is only 95% complete, 5% of residue 1 
will be seen as a contaminant at step 2. Another problem that arises is 
the “preview” of residues. If there is a peptide bond in the molecule that 
is partially labile under the reactions conditions of the degradation, then 
the amino acid at the C-terminal side of that bond will begin to appear 
before it is reached in the sequence. In short, there is a limit to the length 
of a peptide that can be sequenced by repeated application of the Edman 
degradation. It will vary from case to case, but is unlikely to be more 
than 40-50 
residues. However, in favourable cases, the complete 
sequence of a peptide in this size range can be obtained by repeating the 
Edman degradation until the C-terminal residue is reached. Using these 
methods, both of the chains of insulin could be completely sequenced; 
so, at least in this context, insulin can be considered to be a large peptide. 
Particularly with longer peptides, the question arises as to whether the 
sequence determined is correct. The results may be difficult to interpret 
towards the C-terminus because of decreasing yield, accumulating carry- 
over, and possible preview of residues. One check is that the sequence 
determined agrees with the amino acid composition. It may also be advis- 
able to check the sequence at the C-terminus. There is no good chemi- 
cal way of doing this, but Nature provides a useful tool. Enzymes called 
hydrolyse peptides and proteins at the C-terminal end 
and release free amino acids (Scheme 4.8). The best one to use is the 
enzyme from yeast, called carboxypeptidase Y, which has a wide speci- 
ficity; that is, it removes any of the amino acids even though the rate of 
hydrolysis differs from one amino acid to another. Of course, once the 
C-terminal amino acid is liberated, the enzyme will proceed to remove 
the next one. For this reason it is necessary to do a 
where 
samples are removed at various time intervals and subjected to amino 
acid analysis. From the results it should be possible to obtain a short C- 
Scheme 4.8 
terminal sequence to confirm the results from Edman degradation. 
Carbox ypeptidase 
-NHCHCONHCHCONHCHC02H 
* -NHCHCONHCHC02H 
+ NH2CHC02H 
I 
Rfl 
Rfl-2 
I 
Rfl-1 
I 
I 
Rfl-2 
I 
Rfl-1 
I 
Rfl 
Carbox ypeptidase 
I 
Further hydrolysis - 
-NHCHC02H 
+ NH2CHC02H 
1 
Rfl- 1 
I 
Rn-2 
4.5.2 Problems with Cystine and Cysteine 
Peptides and proteins containing cysteine and/or cystine present partic- 
ular problems. As stated earlier, these residues are usually oxidized with 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
87 
performic acid before amino acid analysis. Suppose that such an analy- 
sis reveals four residues of cysteic acid. What was the situation in the 
original peptide? Were there four cysteines, or two cysteines and one 
disulfide bridge, or two disulfide bridges? The easiest way to answer this 
question is by reaction of the protein with 
This reacts with free thiol 
groups as shown in Scheme 4.9. The thiolate anion liberated is strongly 
coloured at alkaline pH, with a A,,, 
of 412 nm (that is, the solution 
becomes yellow). If a known amount of peptide is treated with Ellman’s 
reagent, then the 
value allows calculation of the number of mol of 
cysteine (if any) per mol of peptide. 
which is known as 
Scheme 4.9 
For sequence analysis, it is usual to convert any cystines to cysteine 
(Scheme 4.1), and then to protect the sulfur by reaction with iodoacetic 
acid (iodoethanoic acid) to give carboxymethyl-cysteine (Scheme 4.10). 

88 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 4.10 
Scheme 4.11 
Sequence analysis can then proceed in the normal way. Note, however, 
that there is a problem if the original peptide contained two or more 
disulfide bridges. These were reduced and carboxymethyla ted before 
sequencing, so the sequence obtained contains no information about how 
they were joined in the first place (recall the discussion about apamin in 
Section 2.9). 
-NHCHCO- 
-NHCHCO- 
I 
+ ICH2C02H - I 
+ HI 
CH2SH 
CH2SCHzC02H 
For a solution to this problem we have to go back to the native pep- 
tide with bridges intact. The general approach is to partially hydrolyse 
the peptide (commonly using dilute sulfuric acid), and separate the prod- 
uct smaller peptides. It is hoped that one or more of these will have an 
intact bridge. The bridged peptide is then oxidized, the two halves 
separated, and analysed. With luck, this will provide the necessary 
information. 
It is easier to see how this works with a specific example. In the case 
of apamin, the experiment was as summarized in Scheme 4.11. A disul- 
fide-containing peptide was isolated and the two halves were found to 
have the amino acid compositions: 
(a) CysSO,H, Lys, Ala, Asp, Pro; and (b) CysSO,H, Arg, Glu 
dilute 
H2S04 
Native peptide - 
Smaller peptides - 
Isolate S-S containing peptide 
I HCOOOH 
Amino acid analysis - 
Separate - 
Oxidized peptides 
From the amino acid sequence (18 in Chapter 2), it is clear that pep- 
tide (a) contains cysteine at position 3, and peptide (b) contains cysteine 
at position 15 (remember that the cysteines have been oxidized to cys- 
teic acid, and that asparagine and glutamine will appear as aspartic and 
glutamic acids on amino acid analysis). Hence one bridge links residues 
3 and 15. The other, by elimination, links positions 1 and 1 I. In general, 
it is necessary to isolate and analyse N - 1 different peptides to locate 
N bridges. 
There is a convenient way of identifying which peptides in the partial 
digest contain disulfide bridges by using 
The 
mixture of peptides is spotted onto one corner of a square thin layer 
plate (usually coated with cellulose) moistened with a buffer of pH about 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
89 
2. All of the peptides will be positively charged and so, on application 
of an electric field, will migrate towards the cathode to produce a line 
of spots along the edge of the plate (Figure 4.4A). If the plate is turned 
through 90" and electrophoresis repeated under the same conditions, then 
the peptides will migrate the same distance in the second dimension and 
will lie on a diagonal (see B). If, on the other hand, the plate is exposed 
to performic acid vapour before the second electrophoresis, then pep- 
tides containing disulfide bridges will be oxidized. Each such peptide will 
give rise to two product peptides, both of which now contain a nega- 
tively charged cysteic acid residue. On second-dimension electrophoresis 
these peptide pairs will lie off the diagonal; peptides not containing cys- 
tine will lie on the diagonal as before (see C). The pairs of peptides can 
be eluted from the thin layer plate and subjected to amino acid analy- 
sis. The method is known as 
Figure 4.4 Diagonal elec- 
trophoresis of disulfide-containing 
peptides. Diagram A shows the 
positions of the peptides after 
electrophoresis in the direction 
indicated; all peptides migrate 
towards the cathode at pH 2. In 
B, electrophoresis has been run 
under the same conditions in the 
second dimension and peptides 
lie on the diagonal. In C, the 
plate was exposed to performic 
acid vapour and then run in the 
second dimension. Peptides with 
disulfide bridges split into two 
and, because of the introduced 
negative charge, run more slowly 
off the diagonal (shown in brown) 
4.5.3 Extension to Sequencing Proteins 
Clearly, a protein several hundred amino acids long cannot be completely 
sequenced by repeated application of the Edman degradation. We have 
already seen that a maximum of perhaps 40 or 50 residues can be 
identified in this way. The usual approach to any problem that is too 
large for a direct solution is to break it down into smaller pieces and 
solve them individually. This is what is done in protein sequencing. 
Suppose that we have a method for breaking the protein down into 
polypeptides at specific points in the chain. This is shown schematically 
in Scheme 4.12, where the protein is represented as a line along which 
there may be some hundreds of amino acids. Only the N-terminus and 
Scheme 4.12 

90 
Peptides and Proteins 
C-terminus are specifically shown. The protein is fragmented at the 
points indicated by the dashed black lines to produce a set of peptides, 
labelled P,, P2, P,, and so on. These can be purified by methods such as 
RP-HPLC and sequenced independently. In the best case. all of the 
amino acids in the original protein will be included in this set of peptides. 
The problem is that we do not know in what order the fragments 
occurred in the original protein. We can establish that P, was at the N- 
terminus by sequencing of the intact protein. What is not known is 
whether P, was followed by P,, or by P,, or any other of the fragments. 
. What is 
required is a second method for fragmenting the protein to produce a 
second set of fragments. The points of breakage in this case are shown 
in brown in Scheme 4.12. A new set of peptides, Pa, P,, Pc, and so on, 
is generated. Again these are isolated and sequenced. The object is to 
find peptides in the second set that contain the C-terminal sequence 
of one of the peptides from the first set, and the N-terminal sequence of 
another. For example, in Scheme 4.12, peptide P, contains the C-termi- 
nal region of peptide P, and the N-terminal region of peptide P,. That 
is, peptide P, overlaps peptides P, and P,. In fact, the sequences of the 
second set of peptides in this idealized case contain all the information 
required to put the first set in order along the chain. 
The success of the method of overlaps depends on the availability of 
procedures for fragmenting proteins at specific amino acid residues. In 
addition, to profit from the ability to sequence large fragments using the 
automated Edman method, the fragments should be large. There are two 
ways of doing this: using chemical methods and using enzymes. 
or 
whose function is to hydrolyse proteins. They come in two 
types. 
cleave amino acids from the end of the polypeptide 
chain (carboxypeptidases cleave at the C-terminus; aminopeptidases 
cleave at the N-terminus). We are interested here in proteinases that 
cleave in the interior of the protein. These are known as 
To be useful they must be selective; many are not. For example, the 
enzyme 
, which is involved in digesting protein in the diet, has a 
very wide specificity and will cleave proteins on the C-terminal side of 
most aliphatic and aromatic amino acids. It thus produces many small 
peptides that are not useful for sequence studies. Much more useful is 
. This cleaves proteins at the C-terminal side of lysine and argi- 
nine residues - that is, the basic amino acids - to leave the lysine or argi- 
nine at the C-terminus of the product peptides (Scheme 4.13). Even this 
degree of specificity is less than optimal since lysine and arginine are rel- 
atively commonly occurring in proteins. The selectivity of the enzyme 
can be improved by treatment of the protein with maleic anhydride (cis- 
butenedioic anhydride) (Scheme 4.14). This converts the lysines to acidic 
This difficulty can be solved by the 
Living organisms contain a large number of 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
91 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-NHCHCO+NHCHCO 
NHCHCOLNHCHCO- 
NHCHCO +NHCHCO - 
I 
;
I
 
I 
:
I
 
I 
;
I
 
I 
I 
(CH2)4 
R 
(CH213 
R 
(?H2)4 
R 
+NH3 
NH 
+NH3 
I
+
 
C=NH2 
I 
NH2 
Trypsin 
NHCHC02H + NH2CHCO- 
-NHCHC02H 
+ NHzCHCO- 
NHCHC02H + NH2CHCO- 
I 
I 
I 
R 
(CH2)3 
R 
(CH2)4 
R 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+NH3 
NH 
+NH3 
I
+
 
C=NH2 
I 
NH2 
(CH214 
derivatives that are not recognized by trypsin. The protein will now be 
cleaved only at arginines. Typically, a protein with 500 amino acids might 
contain 15-20 arginine residues, so trypsin cleavage will now produce a 
relatively small number of large peptides as required. There is also an 
enzyme called V, proteinase, isolated from the bacterium Staphylococcus 
aureus, which cleaves specifically at the C-terminal side of glutamic acid 
residues, and one from the fungus Armillaria mellea, which cleaves at the 
N-terminal side of lysine residues. These are useful complements to 
trypsin in sequence analysis. Thermolysin, which cleaves on the N-ter- 
minal side of aromatic and long-chain aliphatic residues, is also widely 
used. 
Scheme 4.13 
Scheme 4.14 
Chemical methods are available for cleavage C-terminal to trypto- 
phan, between asparagine and glycine, and C-terminal to methionine. 
The last of these is the most specific and, because methionine is one of 
the least-commonly occurring amino acids, it produces a small number 
of very large fragments. The reagent used is cyanogen bromide, and the 
reaction is shown in Scheme 4.15. Chain cleavage is accompanied by con- 
version of the C-terminal methionine to homoserine lactone. 

92 
Peptides and Proteins 
&heme 4.16 
&heme 4.16 
There is also a method for cleavage N-terminal to cysteine residues. 
The reagent used is 2-nitro-5-thiocyanatobenzoic acid. This reacts with 
cysteine to form the S-cyan0 derivative which, under alkaline conditions, 
undergoes ring closure with peptide bond cleavage (Scheme 4.16). 
Unfortunately, this reaction leaves the N-terminus of the product pep- 
tide blocked, and so not available for Edman degradation. The N-ter- 
&al 
blocking group can be opened and converted to alanine by 
treatment with Raney nickel (which is hydrogen absorbed onto finely 
powdered nickel), but the reaction is not very efficient and is rarely used. 
Chemical cleavage at cysteine is, however, useful for generating frag- 
ments for analysis by mass spectrometry (see Section 4.6.2). 
To summarize, a possible approach to sequence analysis of a protein 
would be: 
1. Reduce and carboxymethylate to break any disulfide bridges and 
protect cysteines. 
2. Fragment with CNBr, purify the product peptides, and sequence 
them using automated Edman degradation. 
3. Maleylate the protein to block lysine side chains, digest with trypsin, 
isolate and sequence the product peptides. 
4. Use peptides from the second digest to overlap peptides from the 
first set. 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
93 
5. If the data are not complete, carry out another digest using, for 
example, V, proteinase. 
6. If necessary, locate disulfide bridges using partial hydrolysis of the 
native peptide followed by diagonal electrophoresis. 

94 
Peptides and Proteins 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
95 
4.6 
Sequencing using Mass Spectrometry 
Mass spectrometry has a distinguished history in the determination of 
the structures of organic molecules, but its application to the study of 
peptides and proteins is relatively recent. Early work was hampered by 
the fact that mass spectrometry was restricted to volatile compounds. 
This meant that proteins were inaccessible to the technique; to study 
peptides, they had to be chemically modified to make them volatile. 
Recent technical developments have removed these restrictions, and mass 
spectrometry has now become an extremely powerful tool in protein 
chemistry. These two phases in application of the method will be dealt 
with separately. 
4.6.1 Early Approaches 
Peptides are involatile because of the charged and polar residues that 
they contain. A solution to this problem was developed by Howard 
Morris and colleagues.8 First, primary amino groups were converted to 
the methyl amides by treatment with acetic anhydride (Scheme 4.17). 
Then all hydrogen atoms on N, 0 and S were replaced by methyl groups 
by treatment with methyl iodide in the presence of the (methyl- 
sulfiny1)methyl carbanion (e.g. Scheme 4.18); the carbanion is generated 
by reaction of dimethyl sulfoxide with sodium hydride. 
Me-CO \ 0 - 
-NH-COMe 
+ MeC02H 
/ 
Me-CO 
-NH2 
+ 
Scheme 4.1 7 
H 
Me 
I 
.N-CO-- 
+Me1 
TH2SOMe 
I 
* -N-CO- 
I 
Scheme 4.18 
So, for example, the structure of the fully derivatized peptide Lys- 
Asn-Asp would be as shown in 2 (atoms of the original peptide are in 
black and introduced atoms in brown). 

06 
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 4.5 Electron impact 
mass spectrum of a derivatized 
tripeptide. The three-letter abbre- 
viations are used here for the 
derivatized amino acids 
If such a derivatized peptide is subjected to 
the parent ion will be seen but, more importantly, frag- 
mentation will also occur. In particular, a set of fragments will be 
produced arising from breakage at the peptide bond; that is, at the points 
shown by dashed lines in 2. So, in this case, the mass spectrum would 
appear as shown schematically in Figure 4.5. This is an idealized spec- 
trum; there will be other peaks present arising from further fragmenta- 
tion, but these have not been shown. The sequence of the peptide can 
be read directly from the mass spectrum, taking into account the rela- 
tive molecular masses of the amino acids (given in Table 1.1) and allow- 
ing for the modifications carried out. For example, glycine as the 
N-terminal residue has an mlz of 114 (3), as an internal residue it has an 
rnlz of 71 (4), and as the C-terminus it has an rnlz of 102 (5). In the case 
shown in Figure 4.5, the peak at rnlz 241 corresponds to N-terminal 
lysine. The rnlz of the next peak is 156 units greater, which corresponds 
to an internal asparagine. The rnlz of the final peak is 174 units greater 
again, which corresponds to C-terminal aspartic acid. Note that all of 
the amino acids give unique mlz values at each of the three possible posi- 
tions except that, of course, it is not possible to distinguish between 
leucine and isoleucine, which are structural isomers. 
Lvs- Asn- Am 
Lys- Asn 
4 
I 
w 
24 1 
397 
mtz 
57 1 
This approach to peptide sequencing has some important merits. For 
example, it is possible in principle to sequence mixtures of peptides, pro- 
vided that they differ in volatility. The peptides are introduced into the 
mass spectrometer from a heated probe, so that if the temperature of the 
probe is gradually raised, the spectra of the peptides will appear in turn. 
That of the most volatile peptide appears first. As the temperature is 
increased, this spectrum fades out, and that of the next most volatile 
peptide appears, and so on. 
Perhaps the greatest advantage of the method is that it allows sequenc- 
ing of peptides that have blocked terminal residues. Although not specif- 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
97 
ically referred to in Section 4.5.1, it should be obvious that the Edman 
degradation only works if the N-terminal residue has a free primary or 
secondary amino group. Similarly, carboxypeptidases require a free ter- 
minal carboxyl group. Many peptides are chemically modified at one end 
or the other, or sometimes both (see structure 17 in Chapter I), and some 
proteins also have blocked N-terminal residues. In these cases, mass spec- 
trometry provides a convenient way of sequencing the peptide and of 
identifying the blocking group. 
Figure 4.6 Mass spectrum of 
the N-terminal peptide from trout 
haemoglobin 
An interesting example of the power of mass spectrometry is shown'by 
the discovery of a previously unknown derivative of an amino acid dur- 
ing sequence analysis. The N-terminal region of the protein prothrombin, 

98 
Peptides and Prateins 
which is involved in the process of blood clotting, yielded peptides which 
seemed to contain modified glutamic acid residues.'O Analysis by mass 
spectrometry showed that the peptides contained y-carboxyglutamic acid 
(6). This residue had gone undetected during sequence analysis using the 
Edman degradation because it decarboxylates during the process. In fact, 
prothrombin was found to contain 10 residues of y-carboxyglutamic acid. 
Conversion of glutamic acid to the y-carboxyl derivative occurs after syn- 
thesis of the protein (that is, it is a 
), and 
requires an enzyme that depends on vitamin K for its activity. 
NH2CHCO2H 
I 
CH2 
I 
,CH 
6 
H02C 
'C02H 
4.6.2 Modern Methods 
Technical Advances 
There has recently been an enormous increase in the applications of mass 
spectrometry to the study of peptides and proteins, arising from techni- 
cal advances in the field (for a review, see Mann et a1Y). The crucial 
advance has been the development of methods that allow analysis of 
unmodified peptides and proteins. Two methods are now available for 
transfer of these molecules into the gas phase, and for their ionization 
so that mass spectra can be recorded. 
(referred to as 
). In this technique the protein is precipitated with 
a matrix material on to a metal support and allowed to dry; the most 
common matrices are a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid and dihydro- 
benzoic acid. The solid formed is then irradiated with nanosecond-long 
pulses from a nitrogen laser, which has a wavelength of 337 nm. The 
matrix absorbs the laser radiation and transfers some of the energy to 
the protein. This causes the protein to be desorbed from the matrix into 
the gas phase and to become ionized by capture of a proton. Hence the 
parent peak in the spectrum is that of the [M + H]+ ion where M here 
represents the molecule being analysed. 
I). Here, a solution of the 
protein is pumped at very low flow rates (a few mm3/min) through a 
hypodermic needle which is maintained at a high voltage. This causes 
fine droplets of the solution to be sprayed out. These rapidly evaporate 
and the vaporized protein molecules become charged in the process by 
gaining protons. In this case, the peptide or protein may gain more than 
one proton, so that multiple peaks are seen in the spectrum arising from 
[M + HI+, [M + 2H]*+, and so on. A particularly valuable technique 
exploiting ES is 
in 
which a mixture of peptides or proteins is separated by RP-HPLC and 
the effluent from the column directly analysed. In this way, the Mr Val- 
ues of the components of the mixture can be obtained. 
The first of these methods is 
The second method is 
(or 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
99 
The other area in which there have been major advances is in the 
instrumentation for the mass spectrometry itself. MALDI is usually car- 
ried out using 
instruments in a technique known as 
, Here, the sample in the spectrometer is irradiated by a 
laser pulse to generate ions, and the ions are accelerated by an electrical 
field. They then enter a flight tube, and the time required for each ion 
to reach a detector is measured. The time taken depends on the m/z of 
the ion. The final spectrum is obtained by averaging signals from many 
laser pulses. ES is usually carried out using 
mass spectrome- 
ters. A quadrupole consist of four rods to which an oscillating electrical 
field is applied. Depending on the amplitude of the field, only ions with 
a particular mass can pass through the quadrupole, and so a scan of the 
ions reaching a detector as a function of the amplitude of the field yields 
a mass spectrum. This type of MS is particularly useful for peptide 
sequencing as described below. 
Intact Peptides and Proteins 
Mass spectrometry is now routinely used in the study of intact peptides 
and proteins. An example of the mass spectrum of a protein is shown in 
Figure 4.7. The M, of the antibody was determined from the [M + HI+ 
and the [M + 2H]+ peaks as 150,364.3. 
50,000 
100,000 
150,000 
There are many applications of mass spectrometry of intact peptides 
and pr0teins.'*3'~ For example, it is a good way of confirming the struc- 
ture and purity of a synthetic peptide. Deviation of the measured M, from 
that calculated from the sequence of the peptide can be correlated with 
problems such as failure to remove a protecting group, or failure of the 
coupling procedure at one step in the synthesis. It is also a very valuable 
method for analysis of post-translational modifications of a protein whose 
amino acid sequence has been determined indirectly from nucleic acid 
sequencing. For example, if the measured Mr is 42 units greater than that 
predicted from the sequence, this provides good evidence that the N-ter- 
minus is acetylated (an extra CH,CO and loss of H). Many proteins after 
Figure 4.7 SELDI-ToF mass 
spectrum of the antitoxin against 
Clostridium botulinum type A 
toxin absorbed on a normal 
phase (NP-1) Proteinchip. The 
spectrum shows both the [M + 
HI+ ion and the [M + 2HI2+ ion of 
the antibody. The other ion pres- 
ent was from a carrier protein 
(bovine serum albumin). 
(Spectrum courtesy of Dr Renata 
Culack) 

100 
Peptides and Proteins 
synthesis are 
usually on a serine residue, or less commonly 
on threonine or tyrosine. This introduces an extra 80 mass units into the 
protein. A particularly important application of mass spectrometry is the 
determination of the Mr values of proteins separated by two-dimension- 
al electrophoresis. This technique is exploited in the new field of 
which is dealt with in Chapter 6. 
Peptide Sequencing 
This is done using 
usually referred to as 
The protein is digested using one of the methods described in 
Section 4.5.3. The mixture of peptides is then introduced, by electrospray, 
into a quadrupole mass spectrometer. By adjustment of the amplitude of 
the quadrupole field, one of the peptide ions is selected and allowed to 
pass into the next section of the machine. Here the peptide is bombarded 
with atoms of a noble gas, such as neon or argon. This increases the vibra- 
tional energy of the peptide and causes it to fragment and form positive 
ions; this process is called 
The frag- 
ment ions are then passed into the final section of the mass spectrome- 
ter, which may be either a quadrupole or ToF, and the mass spectrum 
recorded. Another peptide can then be selected from the first stage of the 
mass spectrometer, fragmented and analysed, and so on. 
Fragmentation of the peptide occurs mainly at the peptide bond. Two 
predominant sets of ions are produced, the origins of which are shown 
for a tetrapeptide in 7 (the H' outside the bracket indicates that there is 
a proton somewhere on the peptide). Ions of the y-type contain the intact ' 
C-terminus. The structures of y, and y2 are shown in 8 and 9. Ions of 
the b-type contain the N-terminus. The structures of b, and b, are shown 
in 10 and 11. 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
101 
Interpretation of the mass spectra of these fragments is similar in prin- 
ciple to the method described in Section 4.6.1. Considering the y-type 
ions first, y, has the mass of the corresponding amino acid plus one; 
hence identification of y1 identifies the C-terminal residue. The ion y, dif- 
fers from y, by the atoms shown in brown in 9, that is, by the next amino 
acid in the chain minus the elements of water. Consulting a list of the 
Mr values of the amino acids (Table 1.1) and subtracting 18 from each 
allows identification of this amino acid, and so on along the chain 
towards the N-terminus. Ions of the b-type provide a sequence starting 
from the N-terminal end. Ion b, has the mass of an amino acid minus 
17. Ion b, is larger by the atoms shown in brown in 11; that is, by the 
second residue in the chain minus the elements of water. Again, the 
process repeats until the C-terminal residue is reached. 
Clearly it will not be a simple matter to identify the sequence ions in a 
complex spectrum which also contains ions arising from other fragmen- 
tation processes. There are, however, computer programs that can be used 
to help with the interpretation of the spectra. One way of simplifying the 
task of identifying sequence ions is to use trypsin to digest the protein. In 
this case all of the peptides, except that from the C-terminus, will end with 
either lysine or arginine. In these cases, the y1 ion will have an mlz of either 
147 (Lys) or 175 (Arg). Identification of one of these simplifies finding the 

102 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 4.19 
y-series of ions. Note that lysine and glutamine have the same whole- 
number mass so cannot be distinguished at low resolution. In the case of 
a tryptic peptide, the C-terminal residue cannot be glutamine, so no con- 
fusion arises. The residues can also be distinguished if a high-resolution 
spectrum is recorded because they differ in mass by about 0.05 Da. Leucine 
and isoleucine cannot, of course, be distinguished. 
Disulfide Bridges 
Mass spectrometry provides a convenient way of establishing whether 
disulfide bridges are present in a peptide or protein, and also of locat- 
ing bridges where two or more exist. Suppose, for example, that a pep- 
tide had been carboxymethylated, sequenced and found to contain two 
residues of CM-cysteine. Mass spectrometry of the native peptide will 
then establish whether the molecule contains two cysteine residues or a 
disulfide bridge, because the disulfide-bridged peptide would have an Mr 
two mass units lower than would the peptide containing free cysteines. 
Confirmation of the presence of a disulfide bridge could be obtained by 
reducing the peptide with mercaptoethanol (Scheme 4.1) and confirming 
that the Mr increases by two mass units. 
Location of the bridges where there are two or more is, in principle, 
straightforward once the sequence of the protein has been deteimined. The 
method involves digestion of the native protein with an enzyme such as 
trypsin and determining the mlz values of the product peptides. Scheme 
4.19 shows a hypothetical example where there are two bridges. The pro- 
tein is represented by a line, and the positions of the half-cystines, that is, 
the ends of the two bridges, are as shown. Also shown are the positions 
of lysines and arginines. Digestion of the protein with trypsin will yield a 
set of peptides P, to P, as indicated. P,, P4 and P, do not contain half- 
cystines and so will be formed as free peptides whose masses can be cal- 
culated from their known sequences. Peptide P,, on the other hand, will 
be linked by a disulfide bridge to one of P3, P, or P6. Each of these possi- 
bilities would give rise to a bridged peptide whose mass can be calculated, 
and whose presence or absence in the mass spectrum of the mixture of ions 
can be established. So, for example, if the first and second half-cystines in 
the sequence are bridged, then a peptide ion will be observed with an mlz 
corresponding to P, plus P,. A peptide should also be observed in this case 
with an m/z corresponding to P, plus P6’ In principle it should be possible 
to locate any number of bridges in a single experiment using this technique. 
I
S
 
I
S
 
I 
I
S
 
‘ 7  
I 
NH2-Arg k y s - L y s k y s - L y s c A r g  
~ C y s - L y s ~ C y s - A r g ~ C 0 2 H  

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
103 

104 
Peptides and Proteins 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
105 
Figure 4.8 SDS-PAGE of a set 
of standard proteins (left-hand 
land) and purified aspartate 
aminotransferase (right-hand lane) 

106 
Peptides and Proteins 

Determination of the Covalent Structures of Peptides and Proteins 
107 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
5.1 
Introduction: the Anatomy of Crambin 
A vast amount of effort has been expended on determination of the pri- 
mary structures of proteins, and information of great biological interest 
has been derived from the results. For example, comparison of the 
sequences of the same protein from different organisms has lead to 
increased understanding of the processes of 
. This topic will be 
returned to in Chapter 6. If, however, the question is asked how knowl- 
edge of the primary structure of a particular protein helps to understand 
how it works, the answer is that it does not. The reason for this is that 
proteins fold up in space into precisely determined three-dimensional 
structures, and it is on these three-dimensional structures that the 
activities of proteins depend. This chapter is concerned with what those 
structures look like and why they form. A small number of examples 
108 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
109 
will also be used to show how activity and three-dimensional structures 
are related. 
As an introduction to the subject we will look at the general features 
of the three dimensional structure of a small protein called crambin.' 
This protein comes from the seeds of the Abyssinian cabbage (Crambe 
abbyssinica). It has only 46 amino acid residues but still contains most 
of the essential structural features found in much larger proteins. Its pri- 
mary structure is: 
TTCCPSIVAR SNFNVCRLPG TPEAICATYT GCIIIPGATC 
PGDYAN 
It has three disulfide bridges linking residues 3+40, 4+32 and 16+26. 
Its three-dimensional structure is shown in a variety of different ways in 
Figure 5.1, always with the molecule in the same orientation. 
Figure 5.1 Models of crainbin 

110 
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 5.1 Continued 
Figure 5.1A shows a 
model in which each atom is represented 
as a sphere of radius proportional to its van der Waals radius. Note that, 
for clarity, hydrogen atoms are not shown in this or any other of the 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
111 
models; all spare valencies in the model are occupied by hydrogen. The 
colour code used for the atoms in this model is light grey for carbon, 
black for nitrogen, dark brown for oxygen and light brown for sulfur. 
One thing that is apparent from this model is that the protein is folded 
up into a compact, roughly spherical, three-dimensional structure. This 
overall fold is known as the 
. The amino acids in the 
protein are in close contact and fill most of the available space. A space- 
fill model is useful to get an impression of the overall shape of the mol- 
ecule, but it is difficult to see details of the structure, and impossible, of 
course, to see what is going on in the interior. Figure 5.1B shows a 
model. Here, heavy atoms are drawn as balls of the appropri- 
ate colour, and the bonds linking them are drawn as sticks. The disul- 
fide bonds are shown as light brown cylinders. It is now possible to see 
all of the residues and to identify some of them. So, for example, the 
residue at the bottom and slightly to right of centre in Figure 5.1B is an 
isoleucine [side chain -CH(Me)CH,Me; remember that only the carbon 
atoms of the side chain are shown]. 
The ball and stick model is still very cluttered, and this is even more 
true when models are drawn of proteins containing several hundred 
amino acid residues. Better is the 
model in Figure 5.1 C. Here, 
each line represents the bond joining a pair of atoms, but the atoms 
themselves are not shown. Where the bond joins two atoms of different 
types, the line is shown half in the colour of one atom and half in the 
colour of the other. This representation is less cluttered and it is possi- 
ble, but not easy, to trace the polypeptide chain through the molecule. 
To help in this, every tenth amino acid and the C-terminal residue has 
been labelled with its number and name. It is instructive to try to trace 
the chain through the model, and to identify individual amino acid 
residues from the sequence of the protein given above. 
To the unpractised eye, the structure in Figure 5.1C still seems to be 
without any obvious regularity or order. That this is not so is shown by 
the model in Figure 5.1D. This is a 
structure where all the 
atoms have been removed and all that is shown is a line joining each of 
the C, atoms of the polypeptide chain. It is now easy to trace the chain 
through the molecule. More importantly, regions become apparent 
where the chain seems to have a regular structure. For example, from 
position 7 to 17 the chain appears to be following a helical path. This 
part of the structure is, in fact, arranged in what is known as an 
, 
which is an example of one type of 
. Similarly, from 
position 32 to 35 the chain is extended and is in a conformation 
known as a 
, the second main type of secondary structure. 
There is a third element of secondary structure in the molecule. This is 
a 
) where the chain under- 
goes an 180" change in direction in a sequence of four residues. The 
(sometimes referred to as a 

I I 2  
Peptides and Proteins 
orientation of the molecule in Figure 5.1D does not allow this to be 
clearly seen. 
These elements of secondary structure are of prime importance in 
describing and classifying three-dimensional structures of proteins. For 
this reason, a 
representation is often used to make them more 
obvious. Crambin is shown as a cartoon in Figure 5.1E. Here, the a-helices 
(there are two of them) are shown as dark brown spirals. The P-strands 
are shown as flat light brown ribbons with an arrowhead indicating the 
direction of the chain (this is useful in large molecules with many regions 
of p-structure). Again, there are two of them, and they lie alongside one 
another; the significance of this will be discussed in the next section. 
Finally, the single p-turn in the molecule is shown as a black region of 
the backbone. The rest of the protein, shown in grey, has no ordered 
secondary structure and is said to be in a 
In summary, then, proteins contain local regions of regular structure 
- a-helices, P-strands, P-turns - separated by segments of random coil. 
The local ordered regions constitute the secondary structure. The whole 
chain is folded into a tightly packed globular structure referred to as the 
tertiary structure. In the next section we will look at these conformations 
more systematically. 
configuration. 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
113 
5.2 
Conformations of the Polypeptide Backbone 
Each residue in a protein contributes three bonds to the polypeptide 
backbone, and so it might be thought that to describe the conformation 
of the chain requires specification of three 
for each 
residue. In fact this is not so, because the peptide bond itself is planar. 

114 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 5.1 
This is because it is a resonance hybrid between the structures shown in 
Scheme 5.1, and so the NH-CO bond is partially double in character. 
In principle, the peptide bond could have either a cis or a trans config- 
uration, but trans is strongly favoured over cis (by a factor of about 
1OOO:l) for steric reasons. Structure 1 shows a trans peptide bond, and 
2 shows the corresponding cis form. It is clear that in the cis form there 
would be substantial steric interaction between the side chains on adja- 
cent a-carbon atoms, and so this form is not favoured. The exception is 
with proline, where there is only a small difference in stability between 
the trans and cis forms. Consistently, some proteins have been found to 
contain one or more cis proline residues. This is not to say that a frac- 
tion of the molecules contain a given proline residue in the cis confor- 
mation with the rest trans; a particular proline will be either all trans or 
all cis. 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
115 
That leaves the other two bonds. Figure 5.2 shows the C, atom of an 
amino acid with the preceding and following peptide bonds. The boxes 
contain the two planar, trans peptide units. Rotation is allowed around 
the N-C, bond, and this dihedral angle is called @ (Greek letter phi). 
Rotation is also allowed around the C,-C bond, and this dihedral angle 
is called y(Greek letter psi). Rotation is not allowed around the CO-NH 
(peptide) bond; this dihedral angle is called CL) (Greek letter omega) and 
has a value of 180" for the trans peptide bond as shown. In the diagram 
in Figure 5.2 the other two dihedral angles have also been set at 180°, 
which results in a fully extended peptide chain. In principle, to define the 
conformation of a polypeptide chain amounts to defining the two dihe- 
dral angles @ and I,Y 
for each residue in the chain. 
Figure 5.2 Dihedral angles of a 
peptide 
It turns out that not all values of @ and y are possible, for steric rea- 
sons. Many combinations will result in unfavourable interactions 
between main chain atoms or side chains. This problem was analysed by 
Ramachandran and Sa~isekharan,~ 
who used solid sphere models of 
amino acids to determine the range of possible values of @ and y. The 
results for peptides made from L-amino acids are shown in Figure 5.3 
as what is known as a 
. The fully allowed regions are 
shown enclosed by solid lines in Figure 5.3 and contain a relatively small 
area of the plot. The dashed lines enclose an area where @ and y are 
allowed with small deviations of the structure from ideal bond lengths 
and angles. Notice that the dashed region disappears off the plot at the 
top and reappears at the bottom because a dihedral angle of 180" is the 

116 
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 5.3 Ramachandran plot 
showing allowed combinations of 
dihedral angles in peptides. The 
circled regions show the range of 
dihedral angles in J3-structures 
(B), right-handed a-helices (R) 
and left-handed a-helices (L) 
(Adapted from Ramachandran 
and Sasisekharan3 
same as one of -180". In practice, the vast majority of residues in actu- 
al proteins have dihedral angles in the area enclosed by the dashed lines. 
The exceptions are usually glycine residues, which, because they have no 
side chains, are subject to fewer steric restrictions. 
t 
-120" 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
11 7 
5.3 
Regular Secondary Structures 
5.3.1 The a-Helix 
The secondary structure elements in crambin have already been outlined 
above, but it is necessary to look at them in more detail. The a-helix 
spanning residues 7 to 17 in crambin has been cut out and is shown sep- 
arately in Figure 5.4. In Figure 5.4A, a wireframe model of the helix is 
shown with Ile-7 at the bottom. The polypeptide chain winds upwards 
and makes a complete turn every 3.6 residues. The essential feature is 
that the carbonyl oxygen of each amino acid makes a hydrogen bond 
with the hydrogen on the amide nitrogen of the fourth residue along the 
chain; the hydrogen bonds are shown as dotted lines between the oxy- 
gen and nitrogen atoms (recall that the hydrogen atoms are not explic- 
itly shown in the models). It is these hydrogen bonds that give the a-helix 
its stability. Because the helix makes a turn every 3.6 residues, and the 
hydrogen bond is to the fourth residue along, this means that the hydro- 
gen bonds are nearly parallel to the axis of the helix. The same view of 
the helix is given as a ball and stick model in Figure 5.4B. The helix is 
right handed; that is, as the helix is traced from the N-terminal end to 
the C-terminal end the direction of rotation is right handed, or clock- 
wise. Figure 5.4C shows the helix looking almost along the axis from 
Ile-7 and with the C, backbone drawn in; it is now easier to see the direc- 
tion in which the helix turns. With a right-handed helix made from L- 
amino acids the side chains point outwards, away from the helix axis. 
The dihedral angles for a perfectly regular right-handed a-helix are @ = 
-57" and y = -47". There is, however, some degree of latitude in these 
angles, as shown by the region marked in Figure 5.3; a-helices in pro- 
teins rarely have the ideal dihedral angles. 

i i 8  
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 5.4 An a-helix from 
crambin. C is an end-on view 
showing the right-handed 
direction of the helix 
5.3.2 p-Sheets 
Residues 1-4 and 32-35 in crambin are in 9-strands; that is, they have 
dihedral angles in the region indicated with a B in Figure 5.3. Figure 
5.5A shows these two strands. They run in opposite directions and are 
hydrogen bonded to one another; they constitute a small 
. Generally, P-strands do not occur singly in proteins because they 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
119 
cannot form stabilizing internal hydrogen bonds. Instead, they occur in 
sheets where two or more strands lie alongside one another and form 
hydrogen bonding networks between the strands. There is an important 
difference here compared with the a-helix. In the latter, the hydrogen 
bonding is between amino acids close together in the sequence of the 
protein. In the case of P-sheets, the strands forming the sheet can come 
from widely separated parts of the protein, as, indeed, is the case with 
crambin. 
The chains in P-sheets are generally not fully extended but are puck- 
Figure 5.5 The P-sheet from 
ered; this can be seen in Figure 5.5B where the sheet is viewed edge-on. 
Moreover, when several chains are associated together there tends to be 
crambin. *: view from the top- 
B: view from the side 
a twist in the resulting P-sheet. In Figure 5.6 a P-sheet consisting of four 
antiparallel P-strands has been extracted from the protein prealbumin 
(lBMZ).S Figure 5.6A shows the P-sheet from the top. Note how the 
two internal strands make hydrogen bonds with their neighbours. 
Successive peptide units make hydrogen bonds first with a chain on one 
side, then with the chain on the other. Note also that at some positions 
a given group makes hydrogen bonds with two others rather than one. 
Figure 5.6B shows the P-sheet drawn as a cartoon and looking at it side- 
on. The puckering of each strand is obvious, as is the fact that the sheet 
twists from front to back. 

i20 
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 5.6 Antiparallel P-sheets. 
A: a four-stranded antiparallel 
P-sheet from prealbumin. B: the 
same P-sheet as a cartoon and 
viewed from the side 
Strands can also run parallel to one another to form a 
9 
and sometimes a sheet contains a mixture of parallel and antiparallel 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
121 
strands. The enzyme triose phosphate isomerase is a dimer of identical 
subunits. Each subunit has a central core consisting of eight parallel 
P-strands which form a cylindrical structure known as a 
. Three 
of the parallel strands have been extracted from the structure of the 
enzyme ( lYPI)6 in Figure 5.7A. 
Figure 5.7 Parallel P-sheets. 
A: a parallel P-sheet from triose 
phosphate isomerase. B: the 
P-barrel from triose phosphate 
isomerase shown as a cartoon 
Notice that in the parallel P-sheet the hydrogen bonds are more 
inclined to the direction of the chain than they are in the antiparallel 
sheet. Figure 5.7B shows a carton of the complete p-barrel; all the p- 
strands run from top to bottom in the figure. In the intact enzyme 
the p-barrel is surrounded by a-helices. Figure 5.8 shows a cartoon of 
Figure 5.8 Cartoon of the 
dimeric structure of triose phos- 
phate isomerase 

122 
Peptides and Proteins 
the dimeric enzyme looking down the &barrel of the left-hand monomer 
and sideways at the right-hand monomer. Recall that the two monomers 
constitute the quaternary structure of the enzyme. 
5.3.3 Hairpin Bends 
The remaining element of the structure of crambin that we have not 
looked at in detail is the P-turn. This is shown as a wireframe model in 
Figure 5.9. The essential point here is that the carbonyl group of 
the proline residue at the bottom of the figure is hydrogen bonded to the 
nitrogen of the tyrosine reside three positions along in the chain. The 
turn includes a glycine residue. This is very commonly the case because 
the lack of a side chain in glycine allows it to adopt the required, some- 
what distorted, backbone angles required to fit into a p-turn. There are, 
in fact, several distinct types of p-turn that differ in the dihedral angles 
adopted by the central residues, but the details need not concern us here. 
There is also another type of turn, called a 
, in which the first amino 
acid is hydrogen bonded to the residue two along in the chain. This is a 
very tight turn and occurs relatively rarely. 
Figure 5.9 The j3-turn from 
crambin 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
123 
7 
Figure 5.10 Structure of 
collagen. A: triple helical 
structure. 6: wireframe model of 
a small section of one chain 

124 
Peptides and Proteins 
5.4 
Factors Determining the Three-dimensional 
Structures of Proteins 
The picture that emerges from the discussion above is that proteins 
consist of regions of regular secondary structure folded into an overall 
globular shape. The secondary structure elements are formed largely as 
a result of their hydrogen bonding interactions, but what gives rise to 
the overall folding of the chain into a precisely defined tertiary structure? 
Part of the answer lies in the formation of P-sheets which, as we have 
seen, often bring together remote regions of the protein chain. In 
addition, however, each amino acid residue makes a variety of interac- 
tions with its neighbours in space. These are of several different types. 
Firstly, hydrogen bonds will be formed between the side chains of polar 
residues with other such residues, or with the peptide bond.. There may 
also be ionic interactions between amino acids with ionized acidic and 
basic side chains. Because of its resonance hybrid character, the peptide 
bond itself is a dipole, and so can interact electrostatically with other 
dipoles or with charged amino acids. 
Any given amino acid may or may not be involved in interactions of 
the types listed above. All of them, however, make van der Waals inter- 
actions with their neighbours. These interactions, though individually 
weak, are all-pervasive and collectively make a very important contri- 
bution to the shape of a protein. In Figure 5.1 1, one amino acid residue 
of crambin, Phe-13, was selected and all atoms within a distance of 4 A 
(0.4 nm) from the benzene ring of its side chain drawn in spacefill mode. 
Figure 5.11 Packing around the 
side chain of Phe-13 in crambin 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
125 
The benzene ring is viewed edge-on in the centre and can be seen to be 
in close contact with a variety of atoms. Interactions of this sort exist 
throughout the molecule, and adjustment of the folding so as to opti- 
mize van der Waals contacts is of central importance in determining its 
precise shape. 
5.4.1 Why Proteins Fold Up 
Proteins are synthesized as a linear array of amino acids and there is no 
machinery in the cell that causes them to fold. It was shown by Anfinsen8 
that protein folding is a spontaneous process, and that the ability to 
achieve the native fold is in some way encoded in the amino acid 
sequence. What he did was to take the enzyme 
, reduce its 
disulfide bridges, and then, by treatment of the enzyme with the dena- 
turing agent urea, completely unfold it. The unfolded enzyme was, of 
course, completely inactive. He then slowly removed the urea, re-oxi- 
dized the protein, and showed that the native three-dimensional struc- 
ture was regained. 
The fact that folding is spontaneous means that the equilibrium in 
equation (5.1 ): 
where U stands for the 
form, lies to the right. 
decrease in free energy. 
enthalpy change A H  an( 
unfolded protein and N stands for the native 
In other words, folding is associated with a 
The free energy change AG is related to the 
the entropy change A S  by equation (5.2): 
AG = AH - TAS 
(5.2) 
where T is the absolute temperature. A H  will approximate to the differ- 
ence between the energies of interaction of the amino acid residues with 
one another in the native state, on the one hand, and the energy of inter- 
action of those same amino acids with water when the protein is unfold- 
ed. The precise values of these cannot be calculated, but it is likely that 
interaction with water is the more favourable so that A H  in equation 
(5.2) will be positive; that is, it will act against spontaneous folding. This 
means that the A S  value must be positive if folding is to be spontaneous. 
To see the significance of this, it is helpful to split the entropy term 
into contributions from the protein itself (ASp) and contributions from 
the solvent (water) in which it is dissolved (ASw). ASp is certain to be 
negative. The reason for this is that in the unfolded state the protein 
chain can adopt many conformations; that is, it is a disordered system 
with high entropy. On folding, the protein is constrained to adopt a 

126 
Peptides and Proteins 
unique conformation, and so the process must be associated with a 
decrease in entropy. Indeed, by making some assumptions about the 
number of conformations that the unfolded chain can adopt, it is pos- 
sible to make a rough estimate of the entropy change on folding. If there 
are n possible conformations per residue in the unfolded state, then ASp 
is given by equation (5.3): 
ASp = -NR In n 
(5.3) 
where N is the number of residues in the protein. The value of ASp must 
necessarily be negative, and so for folding to be spontaneous, ASw must 
be large and positive (i.e. -TASw large and negative). That this is so aris- 
es from the hydrophobic effect (Section 1.3.3). When the protein is 
unfolded, the hydrophobic amino acid side chains are exposed to the sol- 
vent. Water responds to this by forming ordered layers around these 
non-polar residues (see Section 1.3.3). When the protein folds, the 
hydrophobic side chains are hidden away in the interior of the molecule, 
out of contact with the solvent, and the constraints on the water are 
removed. This results in an increase in the entropy of the water which 
more than outweighs the loss of configurational entropy of the protein. 
Hence protein folding is essentially driven by the gain in entropy of the 
solvent, and has little to do with the interactions that the residues make 
within the folded molecule. This is not to say that those interactions are 
not important. The entropy effect causes the protein to fold whereas the 
intramolecular interactions dictate the precise shape into which it folds. 
5.5 
Stability of the Folded State and Ways of 
Measuring It 
The three-dimensional structures of proteins are only marginally stable. 
Changes in temperature, or composition of the solvent, usually result in 
loss of the native structure and transition to an unfolded state. This 
process can be studied by measuring any property of the protein 
that changes as a result of the transition. For example, the 
of 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
127 
~ 
O l  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
i 
Temperature ("C) 
protein solutions increases when the protein is unfolded. However, most 
methods that are used for studies of this type involve spectroscopic meth- 
ods (for a review of the application of these methods to proteins, see 
Sheehan9). The UV absorption spectra of proteins show a peak at around 
280 nm, largely arising from their content of tryptophan and tyrosine. 
When proteins are unfolded, these amino acids move from the less polar 
interior of the protein into contact with the solvent, resulting in a 
decrease in both the Amax and the absorption coefficient. The changes 
are, however, relatively small. More dramatic changes occur in the flu- 
orescence spectrum. In aqueous solution, tryptophan fluoresces relative- 
ly weakly with an emission maximum at about 350 nm. In non-polar 
solvents the emission shifts to about 330 nm. This shift provides a sen- 
sitive method for detection of the transfer of tryptophan residues from 
the non-polar interior of a protein into contact with the solvent. So, for 
example, if the fluorescence of a protein solution is measured at 330 nm 
as a function of temperature, an unfolding curve such as that shown in 
Figure 5.12 will be obtained. The fluorescence decreases slightly with 
increasing temperature, and then increases rapidly as the protein under- 
goes denaturation. In this (hypothetical) case the temperature for 50%) 
denaturation, the melting temperature Tm, is about 42 "C. Proteins vary 
widely in their Tm values. Some proteins, particularly those from ther- 
mophilic micro-organisms that live in inhospitable environments such as 
hot springs, have T, values as high as 100 "C. The origins of this ther- 
mostablity are not well understood. 
Another commonly used technique for studying protein denaturation 
is 
. The ordered secondary structures in proteins 
Figure 5.12 Heat denaturation 
curve for a hypothetical protein 
301 

128 
Peptides and Proteins 
are inherently asymmetric. As a result, the absorption of the left and 
right circularly polarized components of 
by peptide 
bonds in these ordered structures is different. Hence if plane polarized 
light with a wavelength around 220 nm, the region where peptide bonds 
absorb, is passed through a protein solution, the emergent light is 
plot of 8 against wavelength is a CD spectrum. The two main types of 
secondary structure have distinctly different CD spectra, as shown in 
Figure 5.13.1° The random coil configuration has a small positive ellip- 
ticity at 220 nm. Consequently, if the ellipticity of a protein solution is 
measured as a function of temperature, then a curve similar to that in 
Figure 5.12 will be obtained. 
. The extent of this is referred to as the 
, e. A 
Figure 5.1 3 Circular dichroism 
spectra of the a-helix (A) and the 
P-sheet (B) (Adapted from Adler 
et al. lo) 
These techniques can equally be used to study denaturation of pro- 
teins as a result of factors such as change in pH, or the addition to the 
solution of increasing concentrations of denaturing agents such as urea 
or guanidinium chloride. Generally it is found that proteins are stable 
over only a restricted range of pH, the precise value depending on the 
particular protein. Outside this range denaturation occurs, presumably 
as a result of changes in ionization state of acidic and basic amino acid 
side chains. Similarly, different proteins differ in the concentrations of 
urea or guanidinium chloride that cause denaturation. With urea, the 
effective concentrations are generally in the range 3-6 mol dm-3; guani- 
dinium chloride is effective at lower concentrations. The reasons why 
these agents denature proteins are not entirely clear, but it probably has 
to do with the structure of water in solutions of high denaturant con- 
centration. We have already seen that the dominant factor in protein 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
129 
folding is the increase in entropy of water when hydrophobic side chains 
are sequestered into the interior of the folded protein. It is therefore rea- 
sonable to speculate that addition of high concentrations of agents that 
will themselves alter the properties of the solvent will have an effect on 
protein folding and unfolding. 
Figure 5.14 Denaturation of a 
protein by urea 

130 
Peptides and Proteins 
5.6 
Examples of How Proteins Work 
As described in Chapter 1, proteins carry out a vast range of functions. 
In many cases, knowledge of the three-dimensional structure provides 
insights into how a particular protein works. In this section, a few 
examples have been chosen to illustrate some of the ways in which 
structure is related to function. The books listed under Further Reading 
are strongly recommended for a more extensive treatment. 
5.6.1 A DNA Binding Protein 
Control of the expression of the genetic information contained in DNA 
is essential for the proper functioning of an organism, and this control 
is carried out by proteins that bind to specific base sequences in the DNA 
molecule. An extensively studied example is a protein called Cro from 
the 
434. This protein binds to a particular region of the 
phage DNA and stops expression of the gene for a protein that prevents 
the phage from entering what is known as the lytic phase of its life cycle. 
The phage then replicates and destroys the host. 
The three-dimensional structure of the Cro protein bound to the piece 
of DNA for which it is specific is shown in Figure 5.15 (3CRO).I1 The 
protein is a dimer of identical subunits and is symmetric in a mirror plane 
perpendicular to the centre of the model shown in Figure 5.1 5. The inter- 
actions made by the two monomers with the DNA molecule are the same. 
The main interactions are with the major groove of the DNA double 
helix, and the shape of the Cro protein is tailored to fit into the grove. 
This is shown in the spacefill model at the right of the figure, where all 
atoms within 10 A of the point indicated by the arrowhead have been 
selected. The tightness of the packing is clear. There are many interac- 
tions between the protein and the DNA in this region, but the most 
important for specificity of binding are hydrogen bonds made between 
a pair of glutamine residues and specific bases in the DNA. One of these 
glutamines can be clearly seen in the model. There are also interactions 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
131 
between Cro and the minor groove of the DNA. A spacefill model of 
this region is at the bottom of the figure. Again, atoms have been select- 
ed within 10 A of the point indicated. The arrowhead points to a pair 
of arginines, one from each subunit, which interact with phosphates from 
the DNA backbone. 
Figure 5.15 Cro protein arid its 
interaction with DNA. The space- 
The essential point about Cro protein is, of course, that it binds to a ~ ~ ~ ~ “ , e d “ b ” : ~ h ~ ~ s .
piece of DNA with a specific base sequence and to no other. Nevertheless, 
toon shows the helix-turn-hplix 
it shares a structural feature with many other DNA-binding proteins. 
motif in brown 

132 
Peptides and Proteins 
This feature is a pair of a-helices separated by a turn: the so-called 
. The two helices concerned are shown. in brown in 
the cartoon at the bottom of Figure 5.15. The helix at the top is the one 
which binds to the major grove of DNA and the sequence of which is 
primarily responsible for the specificity of binding. 
5.6.2 An Antibody 
The outline structure of an antibody molecule (also known as an 
) is shown in Figure 5.16. The molecule consists of four 
polypeptide chains. There are two identical 
(shown in grey) 
and two identical 
(shown in brown). The light chains have 
about 220 amino acid residues and the heavy chains have about 440. 
There are disulfide bridges linking pairs of light and heavy chains, and 
also between the heavy chains; these are indicated by grey lines. The light 
chain is divided into two roughly equal size 
, as indicated by the 
black horizontal lines. The heavy chain is divided into four domains; the 
second and third of these are separated by a short stretch of amino acids 
called the 
, about which the two halves of the heavy chain 
can bend. 
Figure 5.16 Outline structure of 
an immunoglobulin 
The second half of the light chain has an amino acid sequence that is 
invariant from one immunoglobulin to another and is referred to as the 
, or C,. The sequence of the N-terminal half (at the top 
of the cartoon), on the other hand, is variable. It is referred to as the 
, or V,. In particular, three stretches of sequence (around 
residues 30, 50 and 90) vary very considerably between different mole- 
cules, and are called the 
. Similarly, the three C-ter- 
minal domains of the heavy chain are constant in sequence, and are called 
C,,, C,, and CH3. Just as with the light chain, the N-terminal domain 
is variable (V,) and also contains three hypervariable sequences. It is 
these six hypervariable sequences, three from the light chain and three 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
133 
from the heavy chain, that come together to form the specific binding 
site for the antigen. Because the immunoglobulin consists of two identi- 
cal pairs of chains, it has two identical binding sites. The constant regions 
of the molecule, particularly those of the heavy chains, are involved in 
biological functions other than antigen binding, but these need not con- 
cern us here. 
Each of the constant domains in the antibody molecule has a similar 
P-barrel fold consisting of a three-stranded P-sheet packed against a four- 
stranded P-sheet. A cartoon of this structure is shown in Figure 5.17. 
The strands are labelled A-G starting at the N-terminal end of the 
domain. Strands A, B, E and D, all running antiparallel, form one sheet. 
Strands G, F and C, again all running antiparallel, form the other sheet. 
The variable domains are basically similar except that there is an extra 
pair of P-strands, C’ and C”, between strands C and D. The hypervari- 
able regions of these domains link strands B and C, strands C’ and C”, 
and strands F and G. 
Figure 5.17 P-Barrel core of 
the constant domains of an 
immunoglobulin 
If an immunoglobulin molecule is digested with the proteinase 
, 
cleavage occurs at the hinge region of the heavy chains (Figure 5.16). 
This yields three fragments. One consists of the third and fourth domains 
of the two heavy chains, linked by a disulfide bridge, and is called the 
(from fragment, crystallizable). The other two fragments are 
identical and consist of a light chain linked to the first two domains of 
a heavy chain; they are called 
(from fragment, antigen 
- 
binding). The Fab fragments contain intact binding sites, and most 
studies of the structures of antibodies, particularly ones aimed at 
understanding antigen-antibody binding, have been done with Fab 
fragments. 

134 
Peptides and Proteins 
An example of an Fab fragment is shown in Figure 5.18 (2MCP).l2 
The light chain is on the left, and the first two domains of the heavy 
chain on the right. The hypervariable regions of the two chains come 
together at the top of the fragment to form the antigen binding site. It 
is the precise shapes and amino acid compositions of the six hypervari- 
able regions within this site that provide the specificity of the antibody. 
Figure 5.18 Cartoon of the Fab 
fragment of an antibody mole- 
cule.I2 The antigen, phosphoryl- 
choline, is shown in spacefill 
0 
Me 
II 
I 
-0 
-P-OCH~CH~N+-M~ 
I 
I 
8 
0- 
In the example in Figure 5.18, the antigen is a small molecule, phos- 
phorylcholine (8). It is shown in its binding site as a spacefill model. 
Because the binding site in the figure is shown as a cartoon, it is not pos- 
sible to see why the antibody specifically binds phosphorylcholine. To 
make this clear, Figure 5.19 shows three views of the antigen (drawn in 
spacefill), and those amino acids which are within a distance of 8 A of 
the antigen (drawn in wireframe). In the first part of the figure the three 
amino acids Tyr-33H, Tyr-lOOL and Trp-107H have been emphasized 
(H and L stand for heavy and light chain residues). These three residues 
form a hydrophobic pocket into which the three methyl groups of the 
antigen fit. In the second part, residues Arg-52H and Tyr-33H are empha- 
sized. Both of these form hydrogen-bonded interactions with the phos- 
phate group. Finally, in the third part, Asp-97L and Glu-35H are shown 
(note that only the -CH,CO; part of the side chain of Glu-35H is with- 
Me 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
135 
in the specified distance from the antigen). These interact electrostati- 
cally with the positive charge on the nitrogen of the antigen. From these 
models it should be clear that the binding site is tailor made to fit both 
the shape and the charge distribution of the antigen, and moreover that 
both the heavy and the light chain hypervariable regions contribute to 
the site. 
In the more usual case of protein antigens, the binding sites are much 
larger and make more interactions with the antigen. This provides even 
more scope for specificity in the binding. 
Figure 5.19 Three views of the 
binding site for phosphoYlc;holine 

I36 
Peptides and Proteins 
5.6.3 An Enzyme 
In the examples given above the essential feature is specific binding 
between the protein and some other species. In the case of enzymes, spe- 
cific binding is also involved. Enzymes work on only one substrate, or 
a small number of related substrates, and the first step is always bind- 
ing of the substrate to the active site of the enzyme. There is, however, 
a second essential factor. Once the substrate has bound to the enzyme, 
a sequence of reactions occurs that leads to rapid conversion of the sub- 
strate into products. That is, there is a catalytic process. To understand 
how the binding and catalysis occur again requires knowledge of the 
three-dimensional structure of the enzyme. 
The first enzyme whose structure was determined in three dimensions 
was 
. This was done by David Phillips and his co-~oi-kers.'~ 
The 
enzyme from hen egg white has 129 amino acid residues with four disul- 
fide bridges. The natural substrate of lysozyme is the cell wall polysac- 
charide of certain bacteria. This polysaccharide consists of repeating 
units of N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM). 
The sugar units are p1+4 linked; a short section of the polymer is shown 
in 9. Cleavage occurs at the glycosidic bond between C, of NAM and 
C, of NAG, at the point indicated by the arrow in 9. Poly-NAG is also 
a substrate for the enzyme. 
A model of the structure of lysozyme is shown in Figure 5.20 (3LYZ).I4 
A prominent feature of the structure is that the enzyme has two distinct 
lobes separated by a cleft. The substrate binds in this cleft, and model 
building showed that the cleft can accommodate six monosaccharide 
units. Cleavage of the substrate occurs between the fourth and fifth 
residues of the substrate,13 and the bond cleaved has a glutamic acid on 
one side and an aspartic acid on the other. Figure 5.21 shows a model 
of the enzyme with tetra-NAG bound in the active site (1LZC);l5 the 
remaining two monomers of the substrate would bind at the top of the 
molecule. The catalytically active glutamic and aspartic acid residues are 
shown in spacefill. 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
137 
Figure 5.20 Wireframe model of 
lysozyme showing the active site 
cleft 
Figure 5.21 Lysozyme with 
tetra-N-acetylglucosamine in the 
active site cleft. Residues Glu-35 
and Asp-52 are shown in space- 
fill 
Based on the structure of the enzyme-substrate complex, and on his 
knowledge of the mechanism of hydrolysis of glycosides, Charles Vernon 
proposed a mechanism for the action of lysozyme.16 The mechanism is 
outlined in Scheme 5.2. In this scheme, only two of the monosaccharide 
units, D and E, are explicitly shown, and the others are represented by 
letters; for clarity, ring substituents are not shown, but it should be borne 
in mind that it is the interactions between these substituents and amino 

138 
Peptides and Proteins 
Scheme 5.2 
acids in the cleft that are responsible for the proper location of the sub- 
strate. From the enzyme, only Glu-52 and Asp-35 are shown, one on 
either side of the glycosidic link between rings D and E (the cleavage 
point). Glu-35 is in a non-polar environment in the enzyme, and hence 
will be un-ionized at the pH (around 5) at which the enzyme is maxi- 
mally active. When the substrate binds, Glu-35 donates a proton to its 
glycosidic oxygen as shown, thus making it a good leaving group. The 
next step is unimolecular fission of the C,-0 bond. Fragment EF then 
diffuses away from the enzyme and is replaced by a water molecule. Re- 
protonation of Glu-35 and attack of the hydroxide ion onto the carbo- 
nium ion at C, generates the product ABCD, which diffuses away from 
the enzyme. 
Once the mechanism has been determined, the question arises as to 
why the reaction sequence is fast; that is, what factors are responsible 
for 
There are three possible factors. Firstly, Glu-35 acts as a 
general acid catalyst and protonates the glycosidic oxygen, thereby con- 
verting it into a good leaving group. Secondly, the negative charge on 
Asp-52 promotes heterolysis of the C,-0 bond by stabilization of the 
transition state, leading to carbonium ion formation. The negative charge 
on Asp-52 and the carbonium ion do not collapse to form a covalent 
bond because they are held rigidly about 3 A apart; this is too far for a 
bond to form, but close enough for a stabilizing electrostatic interaction. 
The third factor is not apparent from the reaction sequence as given in 
Scheme 5.2. Carbonium ions of monosaccharides are thought to adopt 
the so-called 
in which C, is co-planar with the 
ring oxygen and with C2 and C,. This allows the positive charge to be 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
139 
partially located on the ring oxygen. If this is so, then the transition state 
leading to carbonium ion formation will have some half-chair character. 
Model buildingI3 showed that when the substrate binds to the active site, 
ring D is distorted towards a half-chair conformation; this will have the 
effect of decreasing the activation energy between the ground state and 
the transition state of the reaction. 
Which, if any, of these factors is the most important? Lysozyme 
catalyses the hydrolysis of its substrate by a factor of about 10'O-fold 
compared with the same reaction in aqueous solution. This implies a 
decrease in the energy of activation of about 60 kJ mol I .  Although the 
calculations cannot be done with any precision, it is likely that the energy 
of interaction between Asp-52 and the developing positive charge in the 
transition state could provide the bulk of this, with the other two fac- 
tors making smaller contributions. It is not, however, profitable to push 
arguments of this sort too far. 
Space does not allow detailed treatment of other enzyme systems here. 
The strategy used by an enzyme to catalyse its reaction depends on the 
reaction type. For example, many enzymes work by an initial nucleo- 
philic attack on the substrate by an active site residue to form a cova- 
lent enzyme-substrate intermediate that breaks down to products. A case 
in point is the so-called 
in which a serine residue in 
the active site acts as the nucleophile. The outline reaction mechanism 
is shown in Scheme 5.3. Here, only the essential serine residue of the 
enzyme is shown. In the first part of the reaction, the serine residue 
attacks the peptide bond to be cleaved and forms an acyl-enzyme inter- 
mediate. The C-terminal part of the substrate is released. Then a water 
molecule hydrolyses the intermediate to release the N-terminal part of 
the substrate. There are two main reasons why this reaction proceeds 
rapidly. First, adjacent to the serine there is a histidine residue which 
acts as a base to remove the proton from the serine -OH group. Secondly, 
bulk solvent is excluded from the active site when the substrate binds, 
and so the negatively charged serine is unsolvated and hence a powerful 
nucleophile. 
From studies such as these it is possible to make some generalizations 
about how enzymes work. First, the active site is designed for selective 
substrate binding. Sometimes binding is associated with distortion of the 
Scheme 5.3 
R 
I 
R
O
 
I 
I/ 
I 
// 
H20 
\ 
\ 
OH 
0 
I 
I 
Ser 
Ser 
R
0
 
NH~CHCO - 
R
O
 R 
-NHCH-C-NHCHCO- 
-NHCH-C - 
-NHCH-C 
I 
I+ 
I 
3 
OH 
H-0 
I 
Ser 

140 
Peptidm and Proteins 
substrate towards a conformation similar to that of the transition state 
for the reaction. Within the active site, strategically placed amino acid 
side chains promote the reaction concerned. Exclusion of bulk solvent 
(water) from the active site creates a special microenvironment in which 
the reactive amino acid side chains show increased reactivity. The rest 
of the enzyme molecule is responsible for creation of the active site, some- 
times by bringing together amino acids from remote regions of the 
polypeptide chain. 

Proteins in Three Dimensions 
141 

142 
Peptideg and Proteins 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
6.1 
Introduction 
Protein chemistry has traditionally been carried out either 
(in the 
living organism, be it animal, plant, or micro-organism), or 
(lit- 
erally “in glass”, or in the test tube). Much of modern protein chemistry 
is carried out 
, that is, within the microchip of a computer. The 
reason for this is that there is now such a wealth of sequence and 
structural data available that it is impossible to store and analyse it 
without the aid of computers. So, for many protein chemists, the com- 
puter is the laboratory where the experiments are done, and 
are the equivalent of the stores from which materials are withdrawn to 
do the experiment. This chapter is concerned with what some of those 
databases contain, how the information is retrieved, and what sort of 
143 

144 
Peptides and Proteins 
things can be done with it. This is the field of what has become known 
as 
To get the most out of what follows, and to do some of the problems, 
you will need access to a computer connected to the internet. Modern 
PCs are sufficiently powerful to do a considerable amount of work in 
bioinformatics, and all of the applications described here were run on 
such a machine. For more advanced applications, particularly when a 
large amount of computer power is needed, access to a dedicated work- 
station is required. This will almost certainly be running under the Unix 
operating system. It is possible to mount Unix (or the open source soft- 
ware version Linux) on a PC, and even to partition the hard drive so 
that both Windows and Unix can run on the same machine. If you want 
to do that, then a recent book by Gibas and Jambeck' is an invaluable 
guide. 
6.2 
Protein Databases 
Protein databases are much more that just a repository of structural 
information. For a start, the experimental results that are submitted to 
databases are, as far as possible, checked for correctness before being 
deposited in the database. They are also annotated to give background 
information about the protein in question, and hyperlinks are provided 
to other important data sources. Moreover, databases also contain 
programs that can be used to extract the data that one requires, and to 
Table 0.1 Some databases important for protein chemistry 
Site 
Contents 
Address 
European Bioinformatics 
Institute (EBI) 
Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics (SIB) 
Research Collaboratory for 
Structural Bioinformatics 
(RCSB) 
National Centre for 
Biotechnotogy Information 
(NCBI) 
Protein Information 
Resource (PIR) 
Protein sequences, 3-D 
structures, analysis tools 
Protein sequences, 3-D 
structures, analysis tools 
3-D structures (Protein 
Data Bank) 
Entrez search and retrieval 
system 
Protein sequences, 
analysis tools 
http://w.ebi.ac.uk 
htt p ://www .expasy . c h/ 
http://www . rcs b . org/ 
index.htm1 
http://w.ncbi.nlm. 
nih.gov/ 
http://pir.georgetown. 
edU/ 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
145 
analyse it. Indeed, it is often unnecessary to download the structures of 
the molecules in which one is interested - the analyses can be done online 
using programs within the database. 
For the present purposes, the most important databases are those 
listed in Table 6.1. They all contain a vast amount of information, and 
the only way to get a full appreciation of their contents is to go in and 
look around. 
at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics probably 
offers the most comprehensive set of tools for analysis of proteins. The 
main database for three-dimensional structures is that maintained by 
the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics at Rutgers 
University. This started life in 1971 at the Brookhaven National Lab- 
oratory, and is sometimes (incorrectly) still referred to as the 
. The National Centre for Biotechnology Information in 
Bethesda, Maryland, is now more important as a database for DNA 
sequences and genomes than for proteins. It does, however, have a search 
and retrieval system called 
which is extremely useful for sourcing 
information. The 
evolved from a sequence 
database started by the late Margaret Dayhoff, who was one of the 
first people to recognize that storage and analysis of the rapidly accu- 
mulating protein structural data would only be feasible by electronic 
means. 
In the examples of database use that follow, reference will be made 
to particular sites, but problems can usually be solved using the facili- 
ties at more than one site, and to some extent the one used is a matter 
of personal preference. 

146 
Peptides and Proteins 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
147 
6.3 
Molecular Modelling 
Pictures of models of protein structures, such as those in Chapter 5, are 
limited in their ability to provide information about the important struc- 
tural features of a protein. They provide a single, flat view. It is possi- 
ble to construct stereo views which, with practice, allow the model to be 
seen in three dimensions (see Worked Problem 6.3). However, to appre- 
ciate fully what a protein structure looks like, and even more to obtain 
answers to questions about its features, there is no practical alternative 
to using a molecular modelling program to draw structures on a com- 
puter screen. The structure can then be rotated to see it from any direc- 
tion, parts of it can be selected for more detailed views, distances between 
features can be measured, and so on. 
The molecular graphics program used to produce the images in this 
book is 
. This program was created by Roger Sayle, who made 
it freely available to the scientific community. It is now maintained at 
the University of Massachusetts. You are strongly urged to obtain a copy 
and install it on your computer; otherwise you will not be able to do 
some of the examples that follow. 
First create a directory to put the program in (e.g. C:\RasMol), and 
then go to the RasMol home page at http://www.umass.edu/microbio/ 
rasmol/, where you will find a description of the program and a link to 
take you to the download page. You will need to look through the infor- 
mation on that page to decide which version of the program you need 
(which depends on the characteristics of your computer system), but it 
is then just a matter of downloading it into the directory you have cre- 
ated, and then installing it. Be sure to download the help files and the 
RasMol reference manual at the same time. 

148 
Peptides and Proteins 
You will obviously need some structures to draw with RasMol. These 
can be downloaded from the database of the RCSB (or from other sites 
listed in Table 6.1). 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
149 
The atom type and its x,y,z coordinates are the raw material that 
RasMol uses to draw the molecule. The computer screen is treated like 
a piece of graph paper with the x-axis horizontal and the y-axis vertical. 
The x,y coordinates of each atom are then used to determine where that 
atom (or the bond drawn to it) is placed on the screen. The type of the 
atom (carbon, oxygen, etc.) determines its colour. The z coordinate is 
effectively ignored; that is, the molecule is flattened onto the plane of 
the screen. It becomes important, however, if the molecule is rotated, 
because where the atom ends up on the x/y plane depends on how far it 
was above or below it before rotation. 
To begin modelling, click on the RasMol icon that will have been set 
up when the program was installed. This opens a window with a black 
drawing surface. At the top of the window are several pull down menus. 
Left clicking on File, then on Open produces a window listing whatever 
files are in the directory that are readable by RasMol - there should be 
at least one, 1CRN. Clicking on that file results in a wireframe model 
of crambin. The molecule can be translated along the x- and y-axes by 
right clicking and moving the mouse leftkight and up/down, respective- 
ly. Left clicking and moving the mouse lefthight or upldown rotates the 
molecule around the y- and x-axes, respectively. Rotation around the z- 
axis is done by holding down the shift key whilst right clicking and mov- 
ing the mouse leftlright. Holding down the shift key whilst left clicking 
and moving the mouse up/down changes the size of the molecule. 
Besides these basic mouse operations, much can be done with the pull- 
down menus, including changing the colour scheme of the molecule, and 
selecting between display modes (wireframe, ball and stick, spacefill, etc.). 
However, at the bottom of the screen will be found a button labelled 
RasMol Coinmand Line. Clicking on this opens a new window into which 
commands can be typed at the RasMob prompt. The real power of 
RasMol is only obtained by making full use of this facility. The possi- 
ble commands and what they do can be discovered from the user man- 
ual under the Help pull down, or from the reference manual. There is 
no substitute for studying these sources of information and trying the 
commands out. Some examples of commands and their use will be found 
in the following worked problem. 

150 
Peptides and Proteins 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
151 
Figure 6.1 Stereo image of the 
p-turn from crambin 
6.4 
Sequence Searching and Comparison 
Modern methods of DNA sequence analysis are extremely rapid, and 
are providing an embarrassment of riches. Sometimes the sequences of 
genes coding for proteins of known function are determined, but often 
sequences are obtained that code for proteins of unknown function. This 
is particularly true where sequences of complete genomes are determined; 
the functions of many of the proteins that are encoded by the genome 
will be unknown. The solution to this problem comes from the fact that 
proteins with similar functions have related amino acid sequences (see 
Section 6.5). Hence the approach is to search a database for proteins 
whose sequences are related to that of the newly determined sequence. 
The main program used for this purpose is called 
(from Basic 
- 
Local Alignment Search Tool). This program takes a query sequence, uses 
it to search the contents of a specified database, and produces a report 
of those proteins in the database that have structures related to that of 
the query sequence. An example of the use of BLAST to identify the func- 
tion of an unknown protein is given in the following worked example. 

152 
Peptides and Proteins 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
153 
Subject: Blast2.0 search results 
SIB BLAST network server version 1.4 of October 6, 2001 
Welcome to the SIB BLAST Network Service (sib-blast) 
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB) 
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research (LICR) 
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC) 
BLASTP 2.2.1 [J~l-12-2001] 
Reference: Altschul, Stephen F., Thomas L. Madden, Alejandro A. Schaffer, 
Jinghui Zhang, Zheng Zhang, Webb Miller, and David J. Lipman (19971, 
"Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search 
programs", Nucleic Acids Res. 25:3389-3402. 
Query 164 
Database : 
Sequences 
sp I P42983 
sp 1054898 
sp I P12667 
letters 
swiss 107,093 sequences; 39,364,193 total letters 
producing significant alignments: 
Score 
E 
(bits) Value 
NUCB-BACSU (NUCB)Sporulation-specific extracellular nu.. . 
31 0.76 
CCAG-RAT (CACNA1G)Voltage-dependent T-type calcium cha ... 
30 1.3 
NUCA-BACSU (NUCA..)DNA-entry nuclease (EC 3.-.-.-I (Co ... 
30 2.2 
>sp\P429831NUCB_BACSU (NUCB)Sporulation-specific extracellular 
nuclease precursor (EC 3.-.-.-).[Bacillus subtilisl 
Length = 136 
Score = 31.2 bits (691, Expect = 0.76 
Identities = 14/38 (36%), Positives = 17/38 (43%) 
Query: 65 GYQCDEWPWXXXXXXXXXXXTRCIPTADNTGSGSQWGN 102 
Sbjct: 83 GYDRDEWPMAVCEEGGAGADVRYVTPSDNRGAGSWVGN 120 
GY DEWP 
R + 
+DN G+GS GN 
>sp(P126671NUCA_BACSU (NUCA..)DNA-entry nuclease (EC 3.-.-.-I 
(Competence-specific nuclease) .[Bacillus subtilisl 
Length = 147 
Score = 29.6 bits ( 6 5 ) ,  Expect = 2.2 
Identities = 24/91 (26%), Positives = 34/91 (36%), Gaps = 11/91 (12%) 
Query: 12 Y P Q S S E N I C Y S W F C N N G P H S V A P D R T ~ ~ S N S C G N S G Y Q C D E W  
71 
YP+++++I + 
N G 
V 
A
R
 S + V  + 
GY DEW 
Sbjct: 52 YPETAKHIKDA--INEGHSEVCTIDRDGAEERREQSLKDVPSKK--------- 
GYDRDEW 100 
Query: 72 PWXXXXXXXWXXTRCIPTADNTGSGSQWGN 102 
Sbjct: 101 PMAMCKEGGEGASVEYISPADNRGAGSWVGH 131 
P 
I ADN G+GS G+ 
Figure 6.2 Edited output from a BLAST search 

154 
Peptides and Proteins 
BLAST does not attempt to match up the full sequences of the query 
and subject proteins. It simply looks for the most similar regions. This 
is to increase its speed of operation. Once one or more matching 
sequences are obtained, it is necessary to compare the sequences in more 
detail. The program 
provides a tool for doing this. 
CLUSTAL W is a very powerful program because it can do multiple 
alignments; that is, alignment of three, or more, sequences. It can either 
be run online, or can be downloaded onto one’s own computer. For 
example, in Worked Problem 6.4 it was found that a query sequence 
was, somewhat distantly, related to a nuclease from another organism. 
A second nuclease (SwissProt accession code P12667) was more distant- 
ly related (see Figure 6.2, third entry in the list of sequences producing 
significant alignments), but the matches in the region of residues 88-102 
of the query looked very similar to those found with protein P42983. A 
multiple sequence alignment between these three proteins would be the 
next move to make, and is the subject of the following Worked Problem. 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
155 
sp I P42983 
sp I P12667 
A. me 11 ea 
sp I P42983 
sp I P12667 
A. me 1 1 
ea 
sp 1 P42983 
sp I P12667 
A. me1 lea 
NUCB-BACSU 
----- MKKWMAGLFLAAAVLLCLMVP------ QQIQGASSYDKVLYFPLSRYPETGSHIR 49 
NUCA-BAC SU 
M T T D I I K T I L L V I V I I A L I K G D F F S A D Q K T S Q T K I K  60 
---------------- AGPDFDLDYR------ TYPQSSENICYSWFCNNGPHSVAPDRTH 38 
. . . .  
*. . * 
. . . .  
. . . . . . .  
NUCB-BACSU 
DAIAEGHPDICTIDRDGADKRREESLKGIPTKPGYDRDEWPMAVCEEGGAGADVRYVTPS 109 
NUCA-BAC SU 
DAINEGHSEVCTIDRDGAEERREQSLKDVPSKKGYDRDEWPMAMCKEGGEGGEGAS~YISPA 120 
AAAHRASNSCGNVNPNRCSIR------- 
VGHVSGYQCDEWPWANSNAGGANMTRCIPTA 91 
. . .  
.................... 
.
.
 
. . . . . . . . . . .  
splP429831NUCBBACSU 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ -  
sp(P126671NUCA-BACSW 
------------- 
A. me 1 1 ea 
QVANGQPYLQRIG 164 
In Figure 6.3, each line starts with an identifier for the protein whose 
sequence follows. The sequences of the three proteins have been aligned 
so as to maximize the number of places (shown by *) at which the same 
amino acid occurs in all three. Very similar, but not identical, residues are 
marked with a colon, and more distantly related residues with a full stop. 
At various points it is necessary to put gaps in one or other of the sequences 
(indicated by -) to optimize the alignment. These results confirm that the 
three proteins are members of the same family (their sequences are more 
similar than would occur by chance), and confirms that the protein from 
A. mellea is indeed a nuclease. The highest degree of similarity is in the 
region of residues 65 to 101 of the A. rnellea protein (residue numbers are 
given at the end of each line). In this stretch, there are 16 identical residues. 
The high degree of similarity probably implies that this region of the 
enzyme is important for its function, and it may represent the active site. 
Figure 6.3 Multiple alignment of 
three proteins using cLusTAL 

156 
Peptides and Proteins 
6.5 
Protein Evolution 
One important application of protein sequence databases and protein 
sequence comparisons is the study of 
. There are two 
distinct aspects to this. Firstly, comparison of the sequences of the same 
protein from different organisms provides information about the 
. Secondly, comparison of the sequences of different pro- 
teins within the same organism provides information about the 
. These two aspects will be treated briefly here; for a 
detailed account, see Pathy? 
If a pair-wise comparison of the same protein from two species is car- 
ried out, it is found that the sequences are (usually) different. An exam- 
ple is shown in Figure 6.4. The sequences of a small protein called 
from humans and from the rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox) 
were obtained from SwissProt and then aligned using CLUSTAL W. 
The usual symbols are used in the comparison; that is, * for identity, a 
colon for very similar residues, and a full stop for somewhat similar 
residues. The format of the report looks somewhat different from that 
in Figure 6.3 because this time CLUSTAL W was run at the SIB site. 
~~ 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
CYC_HUMAN 
GDVEKGKKIFIMKCSQCHTVEKGGKHKTGPNLHGLFG~TGQAPGYSYT~~KGIIWG 
CYCCROAT 
GDVEKGKKIFSMKCGTCHTEGGKHKTGPNLHGLFGRKTGQAVGYSYTAANKNKGIIWG 
********** ***. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
**************** 
70 
80 
90 
100 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
CYC-HUMAN 
EDTLMEYLENPKKYIPGTKMIFVGIKKKEERADLIAYLKKATNE 
CYCCROAT 
DDTLMEYLENPKKYIPGTKTGLKSKKERTDLIAYLKE 
............................................ : 
Figure 6.4 Comparison of the 
Of the 104 residues in the protein, 89 (85.6%) are identical between 
Of cflochrome 
from 
the two sequences. Cytochrome c sequences are available from a very 
large range of organisms. If pair-wise comparisons are carried out on all 
humans and rattlesnake 
of them, it is found that the closer are two organisms on the evolution- 
ary time scale, the more similar are the sequences of their cytochrome c 
molecules. 
Moreover, from knowledge of the time of divergence of organisms 
whose ancestors are well represented in the fossil record, it is possible to 
determine the rate at which the sequence of cytochrome c has changed 
over time. The value obtained is about one change in sequence per 100 
residues in 21.4 million years, and appears to have remained constant 
over time. This means that changes in sequence of a protein can be used 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
157 
as a 
can be constructed; that is, evolutionary trees based sole- 
ly on protein sequence comparisons.6 Molecular phylogenies are more 
complete than those based on the fossil record. This is because many 
more data are available, and because it is possible to study organisms 
whose ancestors have not left fossils. For these reasons, phylogenetic 
trees based on molecular data are now regarded as giving the most com- 
prehensive and reliable view of the evolutionary process. 
to time evolutionary events. It also means that 

158 
Peptides and Proteins 
The other aspect of interest is evolution of protein function. It is rea- 
sonable to assume that the earliest living organisms contained a small 
number of relatively simple protein molecules. Modern day organisms 
contain a large number of different proteins, many of them with complex 
structures. How did this happen? 
Comparing the sequences of different proteins from within the same 
organism shows that they fall into families with related sequences. In 
Section 5.6.3 the mechanism of action of the serine proteinases was briefly 
described. In fact, there are many serine proteinases, all of which have 
the same mechanism of action, but which differ in substrate specificity; 
that is, they hydrolyse proteins at different sites. Some of them will 
hydrolyse almost any protein wherever the site in question occurs; for 
example, trypsin will catalyse hydrolysis on the C-terminal side of vir- 
tually all lysine and arginine residues in any protein. Some of them 
hydrolyse at only a single type of site in a single protein molecule. For 
example, the enzyme 
is involved in the process of blood clot- 
ting. It catalyses the hydrolysis of only one substrate, 
, and this 
only at four particular Arg-Gly bonds, to produce 
. The fibrin then 
produces the clot. 
Consider, as an example, the two digestive enzymes trypsin and chy- 
motrypsin. The amino acid sequences of their precursor molecules, 
trypsinogen (SwissProt P07477) and chymotrypsinogen (SwissProt 
P17538), from humans are compared in Figure 6.5. As before, the align- 
ment has been done with CLUSTAL W and the usual symbols are used. 
It turns out that the sequences are 38% identical. Moreover, the catalytic 
serine and histidine residues (shown in brown) are in identical places in 
the two sequences, in regions where the structures are more similar than 
elsewhere. There is a third important residue, an aspartic acid, whose 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
159 
role is probably to hold the catalytic histidine in the correct orientation, 
Figure 6.5 Alignment of the 
which is also conserved between the two moteins (also shown in brown). 
sequences of t ~ ~ r n a n  
t ~ s i n o g e n  
’ 
and chymotrypsinogen. The 
The similarity between these two proteins cannot have arisen by chance. 
active site residues are shown in 
The only feasible explanation of the similarity in their structures is that 
brown 
they have been formed by 
from a common ancestral 
protein, also presumably a serine proteinase. The two proteins are said 
to be 
, or 
to one another. In fact, if one or other 
of these proteins is used for a BLAST search of the SwissProt database, 
dozens of related proteins will be found, all members of the serine pro- 
teinase family. Some of them are considerably larger than trypsin or chy- 
motrypsin, and are found to have other recognizable structural 
or 
associated with them. For example, prothrombin, which is the 
proenzyme of thrombin, has an N-terminal calcium-binding domain con- 
taining y-carboxyglutamate (see Section 4.6. l), followed by two so-called 
(so-called because kringle domains fold up into a shape 
very similar to that of a Danish pastry of the same name!), followed by 
the serine proteinase domain. 
How has this happened? The likely explanation is that during copy- 
ing of the DNA for cell division, a gene becomes duplicated; that is, an 
extra copy is produced. This extra copy is not required for the activities 

160 
Peptides and Proteins 
of the cell, and so can accumulate mutations until it acquires a new func- 
tion. This process must have occurred many times to produce a large 
family of proteins such as the serine proteinases. In the case of multi- 
domain proteins like prothrombin, the serine proteinase gene is thought 
to have fused with copies of the genes for the calcium-binding unit and 
for the kringle domain to produce a composite gene for the new protein. 
Some cases are known where two or more copies of the same gene fused 
together to produce a protein in which the amino acid sequence repeats 
itself along the chain. Although these domains will have evolved so that 
the sequences are now different, their evolution from a common source 
may still be recognizable. For example, if the first third, the central sec- 
tion and the last third of the protein 
are aligned, it can 
be seen that they were produced by this mechanism (Figure 6.6). The 
number of the position at which the same residue occurs in all three seg- 
ments of the chain is small but significant; the gene triplication and fusion 
that gave rise to serum albumin was a very ancient event. Much greater 
similarity can be seen if the domains are compared pair-wise. 
N-t erminus 
Middle 
C-terminus 
N-terminus 
Middle 
C-terminus 
N-terminus 
Middle 
C-t erminus 
N-terminus 
Middle 
C-terminus 
----- DAHKSEVAHR------ FKDLGEENFKALVLIAFAQYLQQCPFEDHVKLVNEVTEF 
--ELRDEGKASSAKQRLKCASLQKFGERAFKAWAVARLSQRFPKAEFAEVSKLVTDLTKV 
FKPLVEEPQNLIKQN---CELFEQLGEYKFQNALL~YT~PQVSTPTL~S~GKV 
.... 
*: 
. . . .  
. . . . . .  
.. 
.. 
. . . . .  
.** 
.. 
. .  
. .  
AKTCVAD---ESAENCDKSLHTLFGD~CTVATLRETYGE~C~QEPE~ECFLQHK 
HTECCHG---DLLECADDRADLAK-----YICENQDSISS~KECCEKPLLEKSHCIAEVE 
GSKCCKHPEAKRMPCAEDYLSWLN-QLC~HEKTPVSDR~KCCTESL~PCFSALE 
* 
... 
. . . .  
*: 
. ** : 
.. 
.. 
D D - - N P N L P R L V R P E V D - - V C T A F H D N E E T F L K K Y L Y E I K  
NDEMPADLPSLAADFVESKDVCKNYAEAKDVFLGMFLYEYARRHPDYSVVLLLRLAKTYE 
VDETYVPKEFNAETFTFHADICTLSEKERQIKKQTALVELVKHKPKATKEQLKAVMDDFA 
* 
* . . :  
* * .:::* 
:*. 
.. 
AAFTECCQAADKAACLLPKLD------------ 
TTLEKCCAAADPHECYAKVFDE----------- 
AFVEKCCKADDKXTCFAEEGKKLVMSQAALGL 
.** * * 
* 
. . .  
Figure 6.6 Alignment of the 
three domains Of human Serum 
albumin (PO2768) 
In summary, then, it seems that the large number of complex proteins 
that we find in present day organisms have arisen by evolution from a 
much smaller set of simpler proteins by a process of gene multiplication. 
The extra copies then mutated until a new function was achieved, or fused 
with other genes to make multi-domain proteins. The evidence for these 
events is there to be seen if we carry out alignment of protein sequences. 

Protein Chemistry In SiIico 
161 
6.6 
Prediction of Three-dimensional Structures 
The holy grail of the protein chemist is to be able to predict three-dimen- 
sional structures from amino acid sequences. The reason for this is that 
DNA sequencing is providing a vast number of protein sequences, but 
to understand how the proteins work we need to know their three- 
dimensional structures. Structure determination by X-ray diffraction is, 
however, a major undertaking, and the structures of only 2000-3000 
different proteins are known. It would be an enormous advance if we 
could predict these structures rather than having to determine them 
experimentally. 
We know that the instructions for protein folding are in some way 
encoded in the amino acid sequence (Section 5.6), but we do not know 
how that code works. One approach might be to assume that a protein 
folds into the conformation of lowest energy, and then to find that 
conformation by calculating the energies of all possible folds. There are 
several things wrong with this. Firstly, the number of folds that would 
have to be considered is simply too large. Secondly, although there are 
ways of calculating the energies of the folded states of proteins, they are 
necessarily imprecise - we do not know enough about the energies of 
interactions within proteins and of interactions with the solvent - and it 
is by no means certain that the structure of lowest energy could be found. 
Thirdly, although it is true that a protein folds to a state of lower ener- 
gy than that of the unfolded form, there is no guarantee that the fold- 
ed state is the one of lowest possible energy. Rather, the folded state 
might be the one that is achieved most rapidly; that is, folding might be 
under 
rather than 
What, then, can be done? The only successful approach at the pres- 
ent time is 
. We have seen in Section 6.5 that pro- 
teins fall into families, such as the serine proteinases, all the members of 
which have related amino acid sequences. The reason why changes in 
amino acid sequence can occur while still retaining the biological activ- 
ity of the members of the family - the ability to hydrolyse proteins in 
the case of the serine proteinases - is that the changes are such as to 
keep the three-dimensional structures essentially unchanged, and to keep 
critical amino acid residues in the right place. Indeed, it turns out that 
three-dimensional structures are much more highly conserved than are 
amino acid sequences. 
Consider, for example, the two structural cartoons in Figure 6.7. The 
one on the left is that of a monomer of triose phosphate isomerase (see 
Section 5.3.2). The one on the right is a monomer from the hexameric 
protein D-ribulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase from potato (Solanurn 
tuberosum, 1RPX8). These two proteins have very distantly related amino 
acid sequences (about 1 5% of identical residues). Nevertheless, their 

i62 
Peptides and Proteins 
Flgure 6.7 Cartoons of the 
three-dimensional structures are related. They share the feature of an 
three-dimensional structures 
triose phosphate isomerase 
and ~-ribulose-5-phosphate 
epimerase (right) 
Of 
(‘ert) 
eight-stranded P-barrel core surrounded by helices. The number and 
arrangement of the helices differ somewhat, but the general pattern is 
similar. These two proteins, therefore, belong to the same structural fam- 
ily, and even though they have evolved to catalyse different types of reac- 
tions on different substrates (but note that the substrate is a sugar 
phosphate in both cases), their three-dimensional structures have 
remained very similar. 
Homology modelling relies on the proposition that if two proteins can 
be shown to be homologous on the basis of sequence similarities, then 
it can be assumed that they share a common three-dimensional struc- 
ture. To be safe in assigning structural similarity, it is usual to require 
that the degree of sequence identity should be at least 25% (although the 
case described above shows that this can be conservative). So suppose 
that we have a new protein whose three-dimensional structure we wish 
to predict. The first move is to carry out a database search to identify 
homologues; in particular, we require homologues for which three- 
dimensional structures have already been determined. If this search is 
unsuccessful, then the project cannot be proceeded with. If the search is 
successful, then the process is as follows. 
3- 
Align the amino acid sequences of the two proteins. 
Assign those stretches of amino acid sequence that are closely relat- 
ed as 
Copy the atomic coordinates of the SCRs from the protein of known 
structure, and use them to construct a partial model of the unknown 
protein. 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
163 
Remove from the model any side chains that are different between 
the two proteins within the SCRs, and replace them with the correct 
side chains taken from a structure library. 
At this stage we will have a partial model of the unknown protein 
consisting of pieces of structure (the SCRs) separated by gaps. The 
stretches of sequence in these gaps are usually referred to as 
. 
To complete the model, the gaps have to be filled in. This can be 
done by 
as follows. 
Determine the geometry of the residues immediately before and after 
the loop. 
Go to a structure database and find a protein that contains a 
sequence of amino acids of the same length, with as nearly as pos- 
sible the same amino acid sequence, and with the same geometry 
before and after it, as the loop we are trying to model. 
Take the atomic coordinates of that stretch of amino acids from the 
protein in the database, and assign them to the loop in the model. 
Again, replace any side chains that differ between the unknown pro- 
tein and the loop from the protein in the database. 
Repeat the process for all of the loops. 
At the end of this process we will have a complete model for the three- 
dimensional structure of the unknown protein. It will almost certainly 
contain some errors - incorrect bond lengths, distorted bond angles - 
because of the way in which it has been built. These distortions can be 
corrected by a process known as 
in which all 
the atoms of the model are allowed to move by a small amount, the 
energy of the molecule is calculated, and the process repeated until an 
energy minimum is reached. This is only a very brief description of 
homology modelling. For a more detailed account, including on-line 
tutorials, see  mart^.^ 
Homology modelling is obviously a computationally intensive process 
and requires specialized commercial software. It also requires the mod- 
eller to be make judgements at various stages during the process about 
such things as the appropriate choice of SCRs, the most suitable loop 
structure from a set of possible ones, and so on. For a protein chemist 
who does not have access to the software, and who simply wants to get 
a rough idea of what a new protein looks like, a fully automated struc- 
ture prediction service called SWISS-MODEL is offered at the ExPASy 
site 
(http://www.expasy.org/swissmod/SWISS-MODEL.html). 
This 
comes with a health warning that the modelling procedure is fully auto- 
mated, with no human intervention to optimize choices, and hence the 
models produced must be viewed with caution! 

164 
Peptides and Proteins 
6.7 
Proteomics 
~~~~~~ 
~ 
Genomics is the study of the structures of the genomes of organisms. 
is the study of which proteins are actually made in a given 
organism, or a in a particular cell type within an organism. That is, it is 
the study of how the genetic information is actually expressed. This is a 
topic of enormous current interest. For example, insights into diseases 
can be obtained by studying the differences in expression of proteins 
between normal and diseased cells. 
The most powerful technique in proteomics is to separate the proteins 
from a cell extract by 
, and then to iden- 
tify the proteins of interest by mass spectrometry. This technique will 
only be outlined here; for a review, see Andersen and Mann.l0 
The first step is the electrophoretic separation. This is carried out using 
polyacrylamide gels. In the first dimension, the proteins are run in a pH 
gradient. Each protein migrates to the point in the gel where it has no 
net charge (the isoelectric point; see Section 1.7) and then stops; this 
technique is called 
. The second dimension is then run 
in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate (see Section 4.2), where the 
proteins run according to their subunit relative molecular masses. Two- 
dimensional electrophoresis is capable of resolving mixtures containing 
more than 1000 different proteins and is very sensitive; proteins can be 
detected at the femtomol (lO-I5 mol) level. There are now databases with 
collections of electrophoresis patterns produced by different cell types, 
and software is available for comparison of a new map with those in the 
database. An example of two-dimensional electrophoresis of a cell extract 
is shown in Figure 6.8; it was obtained from the SWISS-2DPAGE 
database. 
Once a map of the protein mixture is obtained, it remains to identify 
the protein of interest. Sometimes this can be done by searching a 
database which lists proteins by Mr and isoelectric point, both of which 
can be determined from the position of a protein in the map. There are 
problems with this. Firstly, there may be several proteins present with 
similar values for these parameters. More seriously, many proteins are 
subject to post-translational modifications which can alter both the Mr 
and the p1 values. Mass spectrometry provides an answer to this prob- 
lem (sek Section 4.6.2). First the protein is extracted from the gel, and 
then it is digested with trypsin. This produces a set of peptides, the mass- 
es of which can be determined by mass spectrometry. A complete set 
cannot usually be obtained, but that is not a problem. These peptide 
masses are then used to search a database which contains, for every 
known protein, the masses of the tryptic peptides that would be pro- 
duced by digestion with trypsin. What is being looked for is a protein 
in the database which produces peptides with the same masses as those 

Protein Chemistry In SiIico 
165 
Figure 6.8 Two-dimensional 
electrophoresis pattern of pro- 
teins from a human melanoma. 
lsoelectric focusing was carried 
out in the horizontal direction and 
SDS electrophoresis in the verti- 
cal direction. The image was 
taken from the SWISS-2DPAGE 
database” 
used in the search. Generally, if all the masses submitted match with 
those from the protein in the database, and if at least 20% of the sequence 
of the protein is covered, this is considered sufficient to provide unam- 
biguous identification of the protein. This is a good example of how the 
power of modern analytical methods is combined with bioinformatics to 
yield information of great value, not only for understanding how the 
genome is expressed, but also for understanding disease processes. 

j66 
Peptides and Proteins 
Figure 6.9 The amino acid 
sequence of catalase from H. 
py/ori showing in brown the 
tryptic peptides whose masses 
were used to identify the protein 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
167 

168 
Peptides and Proteins 

Protein Chemistry In Silico 
169 

Answers to Problems 

Answers to Problems 
171 

I 7 2  
Peptides and Proteins 

Answers to Problems 
173 

174 
Peptides and Proteins 

Answers to Problems 
175 

176 
Peptides and Proteins 

Answers to Problems 
177 

178 
Peptides and Proteins 

Answers to Problems 
I 7 9  

180 
Peptides and Proteins 

Answers to Problems 
181 

182 
Peptides and Proteins 

Answers to Problems 
183 

184 
Peptides and Proteins 

Subject Index 
Amino acids 
abbreviations 3 
acid/base properties 7 
hydrophilicl 
hydrophobic nature 
9, 125 
stereochemistry 4 
Ammonium sulfate, 
fractional 
precipitation with 52 
Antibodies 49,64, 132 
66 
monoclonal 
P-Barrel 12 1, 
Bioinformatics 
BLAST 151 
Bonds 
hydrogen 1 
33 
144 
7 
hydrophobic 9 
peptide 11 
Buffers 45 
C-terminus 11 
Cahn-Ingold-Prolog 
convention 5 
Carboxypeptidase 86 
Centrifugation 51 
Chromatography 
affinity 49, 58 
column 48 
dyeligand 60 
enzyme affinity 58 
gel permeation 5 1 , 67, 
high performance 
75 
liquid 35 
hydrophobic 
immobilized metal 
immunoaffinity 49,64 
ion exchange 47,54 
lectin affinity 50, 63 
reverse-phase high 
interaction 47, 57 
affinity 62 
performance 36, 85 
Chymotrypsin 158 
CLUSTAL W 154 
Cofactors 60 
Collagen 2, 123 
Crambin 108, 148, 150 
Cyanogen bromide 91 
Cytochrome c 156 
Dansyl-C1 82 
Disulfide bridges 13, 39, 
DNA 93 
77,87, 102 
binding proteins 130 
Edman degradation 83 
Electrophoresis 
diagonal 89 
sodium dodecyl sulfate 
polyacrylamide gel 
61,77 
two-dimensional 164 
Ellman’s reagent 87 
Enzymes 2, 136 
activity 69 
catalysis 138 
Fischer projection 4 
Folding 
entropy 125 
free energy 125, 129 
Glycoproteins 50, 75 
a-Helix 1 1 1, 1 17 
Homology modelling 
161 
Hormones 20 
Immunoglobulins 2, 132 
Insulin 17 
Isoelectric focusing 164 
Lysozyme 136 
Mass spectrometry 
electron impact 96 
electrospray 98 
MALDI 98 
quadrupole 99 
tandem 100 
time-of-flight 99 
Models 113, 147 
backbone 111 
ball-and-stick 11 1 
cartoon 112 
spacefill 110 
wireframe 11 1 
C-termius 12 
N-terminus 12 
Modifications 
N-terminus 11 
Ninhydrin 80 
185 

186 Subject Index 
Overlaps, method of 90 
Peptide bond 
dihedral angles 1 13 
cis 114 
hydrolysis 80 
trans 114 
Peptide synthesis 
deletion products 26 
yields 23 
Phenyl isothiocyanate 83 
Polystyrene 25 
sulfonated 80 
Proenzymes 158 
Protecting groups 21 
Proteinases 90 
serine 139, 158 
Proteins 
circular dichroism 127 
fibrous 122 
fluorescence 127 
regulatory 2 
transport 2 
Purification, proteins 
contribution of genetic 
engineering 70 
purification factor 53, 
69 
tabulation 69 
yield 53 
Ramachandran plot 1 15 
RasMol 109,147 
Ribonuclease 125 
Sedimentation and 
Serum albumin 160 
P-Sheet 
antiparallel 1 18 
parallel 120 
diffusion analysis 78 
P-Strand 111 
Structure 
primary 15,74 
quaternary 75 
secondary 11 1 
tertiary 111 
Subunit composition 75, 
77 
Toxins 2 
Triose phosphate 
Trypsin 90, 102, 158, 
P-Turn 111,122 
isomerase 121, 161 
164 
van der Waal’s forces 
1 24 
Wang resin 34 
X-ray diffraction 1 12 



