

TUTORIAL CHEM ISTRY TEXTS 
16 
Biophysical Chemistry 
A L A N  C O O P E R  
Glasgo w University 
RSeC 
ROYAL SoClEpl OF CHEMISTRY 

Cover images tc) Murray Robertsonjvisual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-480-9 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
4.) The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004 
All rights rescvwcl 
Apurt from any fair deuling fiw the purposes qf research or privatc study, or criticism or 
reviews us perniitted under the trrnzs qf the U K  Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, this publication r n q  riot be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in urij'jorni or hip 
any nieuns, ~citliout the prior permisxion in w)riting qf The Royul Society of Chemistry, or 
in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms oftlie licences 
issued bj' the Copyright Licmsing Agency in the UK, or in uccorcicmce with the terms of 
the licences issued by the uppropriate Reproduction Rights Organization outside the UK. 
Enquiries conccrning reproduc*tion outside the ternis stated here should be sent to 
The Royul Society qf Clieniistrj- at the crddress printed on this puge. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Alden Bookset, Northampton 
Printed and bound by Italy by Rotolito Lombarda 

Preface 
Biology is chemistry on an impressive scale. It is a product of evolution, the 
outcome of countless random experiments, resulting in the exquisite 
complexity of the biological world of which we are a part. Setting aside any 
philosophical considerations, living organisms - including ourselves - are 
simply nothing more than wet, floppy bags of chemistry: complicated 
mixtures of molecules interacting in a multitude of ways. All this takes place 
mainly in water, a solvent that most chemists try to avoid because of its 
complexities. However, we can learn from this. In the course of evolution, 
biology has had the opportunity to perform vastly more experiments than we 
can ever contemplate in the laboratory. The resulting chemistry is fascinating 
in its own right, and we can quite rightly study it for its intellectual satisfaction 
alone. We can also, if we choose, apply what we learn to other areas of 
chemistry and to its applications in biomedical and environmental areas. 
This book is about the physical chemistry of biological macromolecules and 
how we can study it. The approach here is unashamedly experimental: this is 
the way science actually works, and in any case we do not yet have the rigorous 
theoretical understanding perhaps found in more mature areas of chemistry. 
This is what makes it a fun topic, and why it poses fascinating challenges for 
both theoretical and experimental scientists. 
The level adopted in this tutorial text should be suitable for early 
undergraduate years in chemical or physical sciences. However, since this 
interdisciplinary topic is often postponed to later years, the book will also act 
as a basis for more advanced study. Students in other areas of biological 
sciences might also appreciate the less intimidating approach to physical 
chemistry that I have attempted here. 
The term “biophysical chemistry” was brought to prominence by the work 
of John T. Edsall (1902-2002), who died just prior to his 100th birthday. 
Together with Jeffries Wyman, he wrote the original classic text: Biophysical 
Chemistry, Volume I (Academic Press, 1958), but there never was a Volume 2. 
This book is dedicated to him and to the many other physical scientists who 
have dared to enter biological territory. 
With thanks to my family and other animals who have tolerated me during 
the writing of this text, and to my students and other colleagues who have 
checked and corrected some of the material. I did not always follow their 
suggestions - so just blame me. 
Alan Cooper 
Glasgo 1.2, 
iii 

E D I T O R - I N - C H I E F  
Profkssor E W Ahel 
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
E D U C A l I O N A L  CONSULTANT 
Put fessor A G Du vies 
Professor D Phillips 
Projessor J D Woollins 
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of short. single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the 
fundamental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  IN T H E  S E R I E S  
FO R T  H CO M I N G T I T 1- E S 
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Burrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hunson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Sainsbury 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Burratt 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Organic Synthetic Methods J R Hunson 
Aromatic Chemistry J D Hepworth, 
D R Wuring und M J Waring 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
D 0 Hayward 
Peptides and Proteins S Doonun 
Biophysical Chemistry A Cooper 
Natural Products: The Secondary 
Metabolites J R Hanson 
Maths for Chemists, Volume I, Numbers, 
Functions and Calculus M Cockett and 
G Doggett 
Maths for Chemists, Volume 11, Power Series, 
Complex Numbers and Linear Algebra 
M Cockett und G Doggett 
Inorganic Chemistry in Aqueous Solution 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Molecular Interactions 
Biology for Chemists 
Nucleic Acids 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
S E Dann 
J M Seddon and J D Gale 
J M Hollas 
J Burreti 
Further information about this series is uvailable at www.r.sc.orgftct 
Order and enquiries should he sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: + 44 I223 432360; Fax: + 44 1223 42601 7; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
1.1 
Introduction 
1.2 Proteins and Polypeptides 
1.3 Polynucleotides 
1.4 Polysaccharides 
1.5 Fats, Lipids and Detergents 
I .6 Water 
1.7 
1.8 A Note about Units 
Acids, Bases, Buffers and Polyelectroytes 
2.1 
2.2 UV/Visible Spectroscopy 
2.3 Circular Dichroism 
2.4 Fluorescence 
2.5 
2.6 NMR (Brief Overview) 
Electromagnetic Waves and their Interactions 
Vibrational Spectroscopy: IR and Raman 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Ion Sources 
3.3 Ionization Methods 
3.4 Mass Analysers 
3.5 Detection 
3.6 Applications of MS 
1 
2 
7 
9 
10 
11 
14 
17 
21 
28 
40 
43 
55 
59 
70 
71 
72 
73 
76 
76 
V 

vi 
Contents 
4.1 
Density and Molecular Volume 
4.2 Analytical U1 t racen t ri fuga tion 
4.3 Sedimentation Equilibrium 
4.4 Sedimentation Rate 
4.5 Diffusion and Brownian Motion 
4.6 Dynamic Light Scattering 
4.7 Viscosity 
5.1 
5.2 Differential Scanning Calorimetry 
5.3 Isothermal Titration Calorimetry 
5.4 Binding Equilibrium 
5.5 
General Methods for Determining 
5.6 Equilibrium Dialysis 
5.7 Protein Solubility and Crystallization 
A Bluffer’s Guide to Molecular Thermodynamics 
Thermodynamic Properties 
6.1 Basic Kinetics 
6.2 Rapid Reaction Techniques 
6.3 Relaxation Methods 
6.4 Hydrogen Exchange 
6.5 Surface Plasmon Resonance 
6.6 Enzyme Kinetics 
7.1 Chromatography 
7.2 Electrophoresis 
8.1 
8.2 Thermodynamic Fluctuations and 
How Many Molecules Can Stand on 
the Head of a Pin? 
the Ergodic Hypothesis 
82 
86 
87 
88 
91 
94 
94 
99 
103 
107 
108 
110 
114 
115 
123 
127 
130 
132 
134 
136 
143 
148 
155 
157 

Contents 
vii 
8.3 Atomic Force Microscopy 
159 
8.4 Optical Tweezers and Traps 
162 
8.5 Single-molecule Fluorescence 
163 
8.6 Electron Microscopy 
165 


Biological Molecules 
You do not need to know any biology in order to study biological 
molecules, but it does help to have some background. 
This chapter will briefly review the bare bones of biological 
(macro)molecules. By the end, and together with previous knowl- 
edge and background reading, you should be able to: 
Describe the basic chemical structures of polypeptides, poly- 
nucleotides, fats, lipids and carbohydrates 
Explain what is meant by the primary, secondary, tertiary and 
quaternary structures of proteins 
Describe the behaviour of fats, lipids and detergents in water 
Explain the anomalous properties of liquid water 
Recall the fundamentals of acid-base equilibria 
I .I Introduction 
This book is mainly about the experimental methods used to understand 
the physical properties and function of the molecules that make up living 
sys tenis. 
These molecules - proteins, polynucleotides, polysaccharides, lipids - 
are not necessarily any different from molecules we study in other 
branches of chemistry. However, there are some additional factors, 
arising from their biological origin, that we need to be aware of: 
0 
Biological macromolecules are large molecules formed from many 
smaller units, and are (usually) polymers of precise length and specific 
sequence. 
They (usually) fold or associate into specific conformational assem- 
blies stabilized by non-covalent interactions. 
1 

2 
Biophysical Chemistry 
!>-Amino acids are encountered 
only In special instances such as 
bacterial cell walls and peptide 
;in t i D iot i c s 
Figure 1.1 Polypeptide struc- 
ture showing rotatable 4 4  
angles. The planar peptide 
(amide) bonds are shown in bold, 
and are usually trans 
0 
This (usually) happens in water. 
The molecules are the (usually) successful outcomes of biological 
evolution. 
It is this last point that makes things so exciting for the biophysical 
chemist. The molecules we see today are the results of countless random 
(more or less) experiments over millions of years, during which living 
systems have evolved to take advantage of subtle principles of physical 
chemistry that we barely yet understand. By studying such systems we can 
learn much about physical chemistry in general, with potential for 
applications in other areas. 
I .2 
Proteins and Polypeptides 
~~~~ 
~ 
Proteins are polymers made up of specific sequences of L-amino acids 
linked together by covalent peptide (amide) bonds (Figure 1.1). Amino 
acids are chosen from a basic set of 20 building blocks differing in their 
side-chain (Figure 1.2), with occasional special-purpose side-chains made 
to order (e.g. hydroxyproline). 
-Me 
-(CH2)3NHC(=NH)NH2 
pCH2CONH2 
-CH*CO?H 
-CH2SH 
Alanine 
Arginine 
Asparagine 
Aspartic acid 
Cysteine 
I 
(Ala, A) 
R) 
( A m  N) 
(Asp9 D) 
(CYS, C) 
-H 
H 
Me 
/ 
\ 
CH 
Et 
Valine 
(Ser, S) 
(Thr, T) 
(Trp, W) 
(Tyr, Y) 
(Val, V> 
Serine 
I'hreonine 
Tryptophan 
Tyrosine 
- - ._ - - _ .  - - 
_ _  __ _ _ _ _  
~ 
____ 
- 
Figure 1.2 The 20 naturally occurring amino acid side chains (residues) with three-letter and single-letter abbreviations 

Biological Molecules 
3 
Q How many molecules are there in a 1 mg sample of a protein of 
~~~~~ 
~ 
Typical proteins range in polypeptide chain length from around 50 to 
r l ~ -  
t
t
~
~
 
~ 0 1 ~ 1 ' 1 : 1 ~ 1  Nelght 1s not 
5000 amino acids. The average relative molecular mass of an amino acid 
CO'n,nnr,l,, 
c.spec,ally In the 
is around 110, so proteins can have RMMs from 500 to 500,000 (0.5 to 
oldel (blocherrlcal) llteratiire The 
500 kDa) or more, especially in multi-subunit proteins consisting of ~
~
~
~
~~~~~~s~ 
r7tl I(-+ 
~ ( X - I  
I I  ;'I[? 
('.~1t1;/3) bot IS 
specific aggregates (see Table 1.1). 
Table 1.1 Some common proteins 
Name 
No. of amino acids RMM 
function 
Insulin 
51 (2 chains, 
21 + 30) 
Lysozyme 
129 
(hen egg white) 
Myoglobin 
153 
Haemoglobin 
574 
(2 x 141 + 
2 x 146) 
Rhodopsin 
348 
Collagen 
3200 (approx. 
3 x 1060) 
RuBlSCO 
4784 
(ribulose 
(8 x 475 + 
bisphosphate 
8 x 123) 
carboxylase/ 
oxygenase) 
5784 
14,313 
17,053 
61,986 
(2 x 15,126 + 
2 x 15,867) 
38,892 
345,000 
538,104 
(8 x 52,656 + 
8 x 14,607) 
Hormone controlling blood 
sugar levels. A-chain and 
B-chain covalently linked by 
disulfide bonds. Globular 
An enzyme that catalyses 
hydrolysis of bacterial cell wall 
polysaccharides. Found in egg 
whites, tears and other 
biological secretions. Globular 
Oxygen transporter in muscle. 
Contains haem group. Globular 
Oxygen transporter in blood 
stream. Consists of four 
subunits (two CI and two /?J 
chains), with haem. Globular 
Photoreceptor membrane 
protein in the retina of the eye. 
Contains 1 1 -cis retinal as 
chromophore 
Connective tissue protein 
(collagen), skin, bone, tendon. 
Three-stranded triple helix. The 
most abundant protein in 
animals. Fibrillar 
Carbon fixation enzyme of 
green plants and algae; 
16 subunits (8 large, 8 small). 
The most abundant protein 
on Earth 

4 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 1.3 Primary structure of a 
130-residue protein (human 
lysozyme) shown using the 
single-letter amino acid codes 
Figure 1.4 Secondary structure 
Q In a 1 mg cmP3 solution of proteins with RMM 25,000, roughly 
how far apart are the molecules, on average? 
A Volume per molecule = 1 (cm3)/2.4 x 10l6 = 4.2 x 
root of the volume), or 35 nm. 
cm3. 
cm (cube 
So each molecule might occupy a cube of side 3.5 x 
Q How does the answer to Worked Problem 1.2 compare to the 
size of one 25,000 RMM molecule? 
A Mass of 1 molecule = 25000/6 x 
= 4.2 x loA2' g which cor- 
responds to a molecular volume of around 4.2 x 
cm3, 
assuming a density similar to water. This corresponds to a cube of 
side 3.5 nm, approximately. 
So, in a 1 mg ~ r n - ~  
solution, these molecules are separated, on 
average, by about 10 molecular diameters. 
Proteins function as enzymes (biological catalysts), antibodies, messen- 
gers, carriers, receptors, structural units, etc. Their chemical structure and 
molecular conformation are commonly described in terms of: 
Primary structure: the sequence of amino acids in the polypeptide 
chain (see Figure 1.3). This is unique to each protein, and is determined 
(primarily) by the genetic information encoded in the DNA of the 
relevant gene. 
KVFERCELAR TLKRLGMDGY RGISLANWMC LAKWESGYNT RATNYNAGDR 
STDYGIFQIN SRYWCNDGKT PGAVNACHCS ASALLQDNIA DAVACAKRW 
RDPQGIRAWV AWRNRCQNRD VRQYVQGCGV 
Secondary structure: regular, repeating structures such as a-helix, 
,%sheets, etc. (see Figure 1.4). 
I 

Biological Molecules 
5 
'l'crtiar~ structnrc: the three-dimensional arrangement of secondary 
structure elements that defines the overall conformation of the (globular) 
protein (see Figure 1.5). 
()uirtcrnar> structure: in multi-subunit proteins, the three-dimensional 
arrangement of the subunits (see Figure 1.6). 
. 
-__ 
Figure 1.6 Quaternary structure 
Because of rotational flexibility in the polypeptide backbone, primarily 
around the N-C, (4) and C,-C 
(t)) 
angles, there is a very large number of 
possible conformations that any one polypeptide molecule may adopt. 
Unlike most synthetic polymers, however, proteins have the ability to fold 
up (under the right conditions) into specific conformations, and it is these 
conformations (structures) that give rise to their individual properties. 
Figure 1.5 Tertiary structure 
Most proteins do not have a problem folding - they just do it. 
However, we have a problem understanding how they do it and 
predicting what the conformation of a particular amino acid 
sequence will be. 
The complexity of the problem was highlighted some years ago by 
Levinthal,* a computer scientist who was one of the first to tackle the 
problem. 
Each 4 or rG/ angle in a peptide might have roughly three possible 
values, giving 3 x 3 = 9 possible conformers for each peptide (not 

6 
Biophysical Chemistry 
You may be surprised to find thai: 
‘your calculator has trouble doing 
calculations such as 9’”. 
Why? 
How can you get around it? 
The term “random coil” is 
sometimes used incorrectly to 
designate non-regular structural 
elements within a protein 
structure. There is, of course. 
nothing random about this: the 
{)i~,b 
angles are well defined. 
A true ”random coil” is a 
hypothetical state in which the 
conformation (c/dt/j angles) of any 
one peptide group is totally 
uncorrelated with any other in the 
chain, especially its neighbours. 
counting side-chain conformers). For even a small polypeptide of 
100 amino acids, this corresponds to at least 9”’ = 3 x log5 possible 
different conformations of the polypeptide chain, only one of which 
(or a relatively small set) will be the “correct” one. 
Assuming (optimistically) that peptide conformations can switch 
on the femtosecond time scale 
s), it would take a time of 
order 3 x 10’’ s, or about 
years, to search through all these 
possibilities to find the right one. This is a time much longer than the 
known age of the Universe. Yet proteins actually fold quite rapidly, 
in microseconds to minutes, depending on the protein and 
conditions. This is the so-called “Levinthal Paradox”. 
It is not really a paradox, of course. What it means is that 
polypeptides do not need to explore all possible conformations 
before they find the right one. Just as in any other rate process, there 
are kinetic pathways or reaction mechanisms that direct the system 
to the required state; and just as the water molecules in a mountain 
stream do not need to try all possible paths before finding they 
should flow downhill. 
However, what Levinthal was pointing out was that if we do not 
know these pathways for protein folding, a computational search for 
the correct fold - no matter how powerful our computers - is 
doomed to failure. 
Repetition of the same #/$ angles from one amino acid to the next 
gives rise to a regular secondary structure element, of which a-helix and 
P-sheet are the most common examples. In these structures the #/$ angles 
repeat in such a way that hydrogen bonds may form between different 
peptide groups to stabilize the structure. 
Many structural elements such as loops, turns or other motifs that 
determine the tertiary structure of the protein do not have a regular 
repeating #/$ signature, but are nonetheless unique. 
One important feature is that in samples of a particular protein (if pure 
and properly folded), all the molecules will have the same conformation, 
give or take a little bit of variation due to thermal fluctuation. This 
contrasts with the situation normally found in polymer chemistry, where 
the macromolecules rarely have a well-defined structure, and samples are 
made up of a heterogeneous mix of conformations, quite often in 
dynamic interconversion. 
Folded proteins are relatively unstable, and can unfold (“denature”) 
easily, especially with a change in temperature, pH or on addition of 
chemical denaturants such as urea, guanidine hydrochloride or alcohols. 
Denatured proteins have lost their tertiary and quaternary structure, but 

Biological Molecules 
7 
may retain some secondary structure features. They rarely approach the 
true random coil state. 
Unfolded protein is also quite sticky stuff, and has a tendency to 
Traditional animal glues are made 
from denatured skin and bone. 
The main connective tissue 
protein, collagen, takes its name 
aggregate with other denatured proteins or to stick to surfaces. 
This intrinsic stickiness of unfolded polypeptides appears to be one of 
the causes of prion diseases and other amyloid-related conditions such as 
mad cow disease, CJD, Alzheimer’s, and so forth. In such conditions, 
unfolded or misfolded proteins aggregate into lumps or “plaques” that 
interfere with normal cell function. 
from the Greek word for glue. 
I .3 Polynucleotides 
The genetic information which encodes protein sequences is found in 
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), and the transcription and translation 
process involves RNA (ribonucleic acid). Both are polynucleotides 
consisting of long sequences of nucleic acids made up of a phosphoribose 
backbone, with a choice of four different purine or pyrimidine side-chains 
or “bases” attached (see Figures 1.7 and 1.8). 
Adenine (A) 
o=P-0 
I 
Guanine (G) 
Cytosine (C) 
O=P-0 
O
H
 
I 
O=P-0 
I 
O
H
 
I 
O=P-0- 
I 0- 
Figure 1.7 DNA structure 
i I I ustrating the deoxyribose- 
phosphate backbone, to which 
may be attached purine (A, G) 
or pyrimidine (C, T) bases 

a 
Biophysical Chemistry 
illustrating the sugar (ribose)- 
or pyrimidine (C, U) bases 
phosphate backbone, to which 
may be attached purine (A, G) 
H 0 i  {TJ 
I 
N 
0 
0 
OH 
I 
O=P-0- 
I 0- 
_____ 
Adenine (A) 
H OH 
0 
OH (px 
N 
NH2 
Guanine(G) 
I 
O=P-0 
I 
Cytosine (C) 
o=P-0 
0- ‘ WH 
0 
IJracil (U) 
‘N 3 
I 
0 
OH ,/ 
I 
0’ 
O=P-0 
The specific, complementary base pairing in the double-helical 
structures of DNA and RNA (Figure 1.9) is what gives rise to the ability 
to translate and proliferate this genetic information. 
Figure 1.9 Complementary 
base pairing (Watson-Crick) in 
DNA (RNA is similar, with uracil 
Cytosine 
H 
Guanine: 
rep lacing thymine) 

Biological Molecules 
9 
3 x lo9 x 3.4 x lo-’’ = 1.02 m 
When complementary strands of DNA and/or RNA come together, 
they form the characteristic right-handed double-helix structures that lie 
at the heart of molecular biology. In the most common form (“B-DNA”) 
the base pairs stack in a twisted ladder-like conformation, with the 
purine/pyrimidine rings lying flat and perpendicular to the helix axis and 
spaced 0.34 nm apart. The negatively charged sugar-phosphate backbone 
lies to the outside of this cylindrical structure, which is roughly 2 nm in 
diameter. 
I _. 
. . 
__. 
Many other polynucleotide conformations are possible, including the 
left-handed helical “Z-DNA” and more complicated structures thought 
to be involved in chain replication, together with supercoiling and more 
globular structures in single-stranded transfer RNA. 
I .4 
Polysaccharides 
Complex polysaccharides such as starch, glycogen, cellulose, and so 
forth, play an important part in biochemistry, both as energy stores and 
structural components. Many proteins are glycosylated (“glyco- 
proteins”), with oligosaccharide chains (often branched) attached to 
specific amino acid residues, usually at the protein surface. The 
carbohydrate portion of glycoproteins is often involved in antigenicity, 
cell receptor and other molecular recognition processes. 
Polysaccharides (and the smaller oligosaccharides) are polymers 
formed by linkage of individual sugar monomers, and may be linear 
(e.g. cellulose) or branched (e.g. glycogen). 
Although some regular secondary structure is sometimes seen (for 
example, in cellulose fibres), the complexity of chemical composition and 
polymer chain branching leads to much more disordered structures (or, at 
least, structures that are usually too complex to determine). It is for this 
reason that our understanding of polysaccharide structures and their 
interactions is still very poor. 

10 
Biophysical Chemistry 
1.5 
Fats, Lipids and Detergents 
Figure 1.10 A micelle 
Figure 1.11 Lipid bilayer 
Alkaline hydrolysis of the ester 
qroups in triglycerides (e g 
conversion of glyceryl tristearate 
to sodium stearate) has been 
used since ancient times to 
vonvert fat into soap 
Figure 1.1 2 Fats 
Fats and lipids are common terms for those bits of biological organisms 
that are insoluble in water but can be extracted with organic solvents such 
as trichloromethane (chloroform). ethers, etc. They generally consist of a 
polar head group attached to non-polar tails of unbranched hydro- 
carbons. This amphiphilic nature -- hydrophilic head, hydrophobic tail - 
gives this class of molecule important properties that are exploited both 
by biology itself and by biophysical chemists in studying such  system^.^ 
Broadly speaking, the number of hydrocarbon tails governs the 
behaviour in water. 
Detergents generally contain a polar head group attached to a single 
non-polar tail (or equivalent). This allows them to form micelles in water: 
roughly globular assemblies of a number of molecules clustered together, 
with their head groups exposed to water, while their non-polar tails are 
buried inside the cluster and away from direct contact with the 
surrounding water (see Figure 1.10). 
Detergents can solubilize or disperse other non-polar molecules in 
water. In the laboratory they can be used to solubilize membrane 
proteins. Bile salts are detergent-like molecules synthesized in the gall 
bladder and secreted in the small intestine to assist the dispersion and 
digestion of fats. 
Lipids have two tails. This makes it difficult to pack the hydrocarbon 
chains effectively into a globular micelle structure, but they can form lipid 
hilayers instead (see Figure 1.11). Here the molecules form into two- 
dimensional arrays or sheets, in which two layers of lipids bury their tails 
inside, leaving the hydrophilic heads exposed either side to the water. 
These lipid bilayers provide the basic structures of cell membranes. 
The fluid mosaic model pictures biological membranes as dynamic, two- 
dimensional seas of lipid bilayer within which float the multitude of 
proteins and other molecules. These membrane-associated macromol- 
ecules may be partially submerged in the lipid bilayer, or may traverse the 
entire membrane. Other peripheral membrane proteins may be more 
loosely associated at the surface of the bilayer. 
Neutral fats or triglyccrides commonly have three tails (Figure I. 12). 
This makes it difficult to form a compromise between the hydrophilic 
head and the bulky hydrophobic tails, so these substances tend to be very 
insoluble and just form an amorphous mass in water. This is what we 
commonly see as “fat”. 
Triglycerides (“fats”) act as concentrated, long-term metabolic energy 
stores (as opposed to glycogen, which can be metabolized more rapidly, 
but has a lower metabolic energy density). 
The metabolic oxidation energy or “calorific value” of carbohydrates 
(glycogen) is around 17 kJ g-’, compared to about 39 kJ g-’ for fats 

Biological Molecules 
11 
(triglycerides). Moreover, polysaccharides absorb a lot of water - 
typically around 2 g water per gram of carbohydrate - so it takes 
almost 7 g of hydrated glycogen to provide the same energy as 1 g of 
fat (this is why people on long-distance walks to the North or South Poles 
eat a high-fat diet). 
1.6 
Water 
Life evolved in an aqueous environment, and water is the major com- 
ponent in most biological organisms and tissues. Despite its familiarity, 
water is an unusual liquid in many ways, with several apparently ano- 
malous properties. 
Compared to molecules of similar size, water has a much higher 
melting point and boiling point, and the liquid has an unusually high heat 
capacity and dielectric constant. 
Solid water (ice) at 0 "C has a lower density than the liquid, so ice 
floats on water. This volume contraction on melting continues as the 
temperature is increased to about 4 "C, where liquid water has its highest 
density under normal conditions (Figure 1.13). 
The surwal of life on Earth IS often 
attributed to these anomalous 
volurnetr c properties During 
winter. ice flods on the lake 
surface. actir-g as a thermal 
insulator to prevent further 
freezing Meanwhile, the bottom 
of the lake reimains comfortably 
liquid at 4 "C: 
1 .oo 
m 
k 
g 
eo 
2 
Y 0.95 
CI 
.3 
0.90 
Water 
Water 
\- 
1 .ooo 
0.998 
0.996 
0.994 
0.992 
All of these anomalous properties can be attributed to the polarity and 
hydrogen bonding ability of the water molecule. Because of the molecular 
structure, and the ability to act as both hydrogen bond donor and 
acceptor, the most favourable interactions occur in a tetrahedral 
Figure 1.13 The density of ice 
and liquid water as a function of 
temperature (at atmospheric 
pressure). Solid ice has a much 
lower density (0.915 g ~ r n - ~ )  
than water (left panel). Liquid 
water (expanded scale, right 
panel) has a maximum density at 
around 4 " C  

12 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 1.14 The tetrahedral 
crystal structure of ordinary ice 
arrangement in which one water molecule may interact with up to four 
neighbouring water molecules. Consequently, the normal structure of 
crystalline ice involves a quite open tetrahedral lattice linked by hydrogen 
bonding (Figure 1.14). 
I 
I 
0 
I 
I 
I 
Most substances expand on heating, because the increased thermal 
motion leads to larger average intermolecular distances. However, when 
ice melts (at 0 "C), some of the hydrogen bonds break, the lattice becomes 
more flexible and dynamic, and some of the molecules can fall into the 
interstitial gaps to give a denser structure. This continues until around 
4 "C, where the gradually increasing thermal motion takes over, and the 
more usual thermal expansion occurs. 
However, hydrogen bonding and residual tetrahedral structure 
persist in the liquid, although now in a much more dynamic and less 
ordered fashion, and to a lesser extent as the temperature rises, This 
residual hydrogen bonding contributes to the high heat capacity of liquid 
water. The heat capacity of a substance represents the energy required to 
raise the temperature of the substance by a given amount. In the case of 
liquid water, some of the energy goes into breaking intermolecular 
hydrogen bonds rather than molecular kinetic energy, so it takes 

Biological Molecules 
13 
more energy to bring about a rise in temperature than would otherwise be 
the case. 
The diclcctric constant or relative permittivity (Er) of a substance is a 
measure of its polarizability in an electric field. For water at room 
temperature, Er == 80 (compared to 1 for a vacuum). This very high value 
arises because the dipolar water molecules tend to reorient and align 
parallel to the electric field (Figure 1.15). This has the effect of partially 
cancelling the electric field and results in a weakening of electrostatic 
interactions between charged groups. 
+ 
Figure 1.15 Molecular dipoles 
tend to align parallel to an electric 
field. Thermal motion will tend to 
disrupt this reorientation 
Remember that the electrostatic (Coulomb) potential energy between 
two charges, ql and q2, separated by a distance r, is given by: 
Consequently, the high value of E, has a significant effect on interactions 
between charges in water. 
T t w  I X  \sL~\y 
c L i i t s  ctrrl soltiblc and 
tontj to ris% cic?tn i.>tn ions in 
?i;?tt>r I-ilit 
+ t r i  1e.r; Iinlar 
I .6.1 Hydrophobicity 
Because water molecules have such a high affinity for each other, non- 
polar molecules have difficulty fitting into aqueous solutions. This is 
known as the hydrophobic effect. We know from experience that oil and 
water do not mix. Non-polar molecules are unable to form hydrogen 
bonds, so they cannot be accommodated easily within the partially 
hydrogen bonded structures of liquid water. This leads to an apparent 

14 
Biophysical Chemistry 
The attractive force between an 
isolated water molecule and a 
nearby non-polar molecule in a 
vacuum IS probably greater than 
between two non-polar molecules 
II n d e r s i m i lar c i rc urn s tan ces , 
c)wing to dipole-induced-dipole 
interactions That is why the build 
up of s'atic electricity tends to 
attract d us t 
Tho bare proton ( H i  ion) does not 
ieally exists as a free entity in 
iolution, but is better represented 
-IS H {O+, 
[H304]* or other 
romplex species However, H' is 
:I convenient shorthand 
Strictly speaking. we should talk in 
terms of ' activity" rather than 
concentration" here The 
I hermodynamic activity of a solute 
:, its concentration, multiplied by a 
fudge factor (called "activity 
1:oefficient ) that takes account of 
;ome of the intermolecular 
riteractions in solution For dilute 
;elutions the difference is rarely 
g n if ic an t 
repulsion between water and non-polar molecules, such that the non- 
polar groups tend to be insoluble in the water and form separate phases or 
aggregates with other non-polar groups. 
It is not that the individual water molecules repel the non-polar groups 
(they do not), but that the collective affinity of the water molecules for 
each other tends to exclude others that do not have similar hydrogen 
bonding tendencies. 
One peculiar property of hydrophobic interactions is that they appear 
to get stronger with increasing temperature, at least at low tempera- 
tures. This is illustrated by the observation that the solubility in water 
of many non-polar compounds becomes smaller as the temperature is 
r a i ~ e d . ~  
I .7 
Acids, Bases, Buffers and Polyelectrolytes 
The acid-base properties of water, together with its solvent polarity, 
mean that free charged groups (ions) are common, and most biological 
niacromolecules must be regarded as polyelectrolyes: large molecules 
with multiple charges. 
Water itself can dissociate: 
To summarize: 
H,0(1) + H'(aq) + OH-(aq) 
and the equilibrium constant for this [remembering the thermodyna- 
mic convention that the activity of H20(1) = I] is Kw = [H+][OH-] = 
For 
hypothetically 
pure 
water 
at 
25 "C, [H+] = [OH-] = 
Hydrogen ion concentration is more conveniently expressed using the 
mo12 dm-6 at 25 "C. 
mol dmP3. 
logarithmic pH scale, in which pH = -loglo[H+]. 
I 
Q The measured pH of "ultrapure" laboratory water is frequently 
below pH 7. Why might this be? 
A Several reasons: (a) dissolved atmospheric C02 (carbonic acid) 
if the water has been left standing for a while; (b) pH not measured 
at 25 "C (H+ dissociation increases with temperature); (c) conta- 
mination from an unwashed pH electrode; (d) pH meter wrongly 
calibrated. 

Biological Molecules 
15 
Acidic and basic groups in solution can take part in this equilibrium 
exchange of protons: 
A H = A - + H +  
with the acid dissociation constant: 
and: 
PKA = -l0g1OKA 
The pKA of any group is most conveniently viewed as that pH at which 
the conjugate acid is 50% dissociated ([A-] = [AH], so that KA = [H+] in 
these circumstances). 
In proteins, the relevant groups are the acidic and basic amino acid 
side-chains, and the N- and C-terminal peptide groups (Table 1.2). As a 
consequence, the overall charge on a protein molecule will depend on 
the pH. 
Table 1.2 Typical pKA and charge state for protein amino acid residues and other 
groups in watera 
C-terminus 
Glu, Asp 
His 
N-terminus 
CY S 
LY S 
TY 
Arg 
R = CH2(OH)CH(OH)CH,O 
Phosphog I ycerol, 
-COOH 
-COOH 
-ImH' 
-NHl 
-NH,f 
-SH 
-C6H4OH 
-WH2)2f 
R - P( OH)O, 
3 
4 
6 
a 
a 
11 
11 
12.5 
5.6 
-coo- 
-coo- 
-Im 
-NH2 
-S- 
-NH2 
-C6H40- 
-Cw-"H2) 
R-PO$- 
aSee Figure 1.2 for amino acid structures and abbreviations. 
Q Lysozyme is a small globular protein with antibiotic activity, 
found in a variety of biological fluids. Typically it consists of a single 
polypeptide chain of around 129 amino acids (RMM = 14,300), 
Interactions with other groups and 
change in solvent environment 
can affect actual ph values. 

16 
Biophysical Chemistry 
i kc' equivalent for Dasic bcifrers is 
!.j tnix the weak base and its sall 
;it11 a strong acid ( e  g etliylaniine 
edid et!'lylamine hydrochlor iae), or 
-0 t:traie the U,;eak base soltitim? 
,'.::I. S!rorlq ac,d. 
containing 2 glutamic acid (Glu), 7 aspartic acid (Asp), 6 lysine 
(Lys), 11 arginine (Arg), 3 tyrosine (Tyr) and 1 histidine (His) 
residues, in addition to numerous other groups. What total charge 
might this protein have at pH 2, pH 7 or pH 12? 
A At pH 2 (below the typical pKA of all the protein groups), Arg, 
Lys, His and N-terminal groups are positively charged; all the others 
are neutral. Consequently, the total charge on the protein is: 
6(Lys) + 1 l(Arg) + l(His) + l(N-terminus) = + 19. 
At pH 7 (pH > PKA for Asp, Glu, His and C-terminal groups, 
but pH < PKA for others), the total charge= -2(Glu)-7(Asp)- 
1 (C-terminal) + 6(Lys) + 1 1 (Arg) + 1 (N-terminus) = 4- 8. 
At pH 12 (pH > PKA for all groups other than Arg), the total 
charge = - 2(Glu) - 7(Asp) - 1 (C-terminal) - 3(Tyr) + I 1 (Arg) = - 2. 
Note that these are only approximate estimates, since actual pKA 
values will depend on local environments within the protein. 
At low pH, most proteins will carry a net positive charge, whereas their 
overall charge will be negative at very high pH. The intermediate pH at 
which the net charge is zero is called the isoelectric point, PI. At this pH, the 
numbers of positively and negatively charged groups just balance. This will 
depend on the actual composition and conformation of the protein, and 
will determine its behaviour (mobility) in an electric field or in certain 
chromatographic processes (see Chapter 7) as well as its functional 
properties. 
DNA and RNA carry a net negative charge at neutral pH because of 
the phosphate backbone (the purine and pyrimidine bases themselves are 
uncharged). 
Many lipids and carbohydrates may contain acidic or basic groups, so 
their charges may also depend on the pH. 
Because of the way in which molecular charge can affect biological 
properties, it is usually necessary to control the pH. Buffer solutions 
contain mixtures of conjugate acids and bases that can tolerate 
addition of H +  or OH- without a great change in the pH. Buffering 
power is greatest when the desired pH is close to the pK of the buffer 
components. 
Aqueous buffer solutions are frequently made up by adding similar 
amounts of a weak acid and its salt with a strong base (e.g. ethanoic acid 
and sodium ethanoate) to water (Table 1.3). Alternatively, one may start 
with a solution of weak acid (say) and titrate to the desired pH by 
addition of base. 

Biological Molecules 
17 
Table 1.3 Typical buffers and their useful pH ranges 
~~ 
Buffer 
PKA 
AH 
A- 
pH range 
[AH]/[A-] = 10 
[AH]/[A-] = 1 
[ A H ] / [ A - ]  = 0.1 
~~ 
Ethanoic acid/ 
4.8 
CH3C02H 
CH3CO; 
3.8 
4.8 
5.8 
Na ethanoate 
Na carbonate 
NaH2P04/ 
7.2 
H2POi 
HPOZ- 
6.2 
7.7 
8.2 
Na2HP04 
ethylamine-HCI 
Carbonic acid/ 
6.4 
H2C03 
HCOS 
5.4 
6.4 
7.4 
Ethylamind 
9 
C2H5NH; 
C2H5NH2 
8 
9 
10 
lowest 
best 
highest 
useful pH 
buffering pH 
useful pH 
Buffering in aqueous solution is based on a weak acid-base 
equilibrium: 
AH + A- + H+ 
KA = [A-] [H+]/ [AH] 
If [AH]/[A-] = 10, then [H+] = 10 x KA and pH =pKA- 1 
If[AH]/[A-]=I, then[H+]=lOxKAandpH=pKA 
If [AH]/[A-] = 0.1, then [H '1 = 0.1 x KA and pH = PKA + I 
[Reminder: p(something) = -l~g~~(something)] 
Buffering capacity is best around pH = pKA since there is likely to be 
sufficient [AH] and [A-] in solution to accommodate the addition of 
small amounts of strong base or strong acid without the pH straying 
outside this range. 
1.8 
A Note about Units 
Scientists are (mostly) human. Although we try to be systematic, logical 
and consistent, we do have occasional lapses (sometimes for sheer 
laziness, sometimes for practical convenience). Consequently, and 
especially in an interdisciplinary subject such as this, you will encounter 

18 
Biophysical Chemistry 
non-standard units and different terminologies. Although you will be 
familiar with SI units - and we will try to be consistent in their use here - 
you will already know that they are not always used elsewhere. For 
example, despite metrication, we still buy petrol in litres, not cubic 
decimetres (dm3). 
Here is a (partial) list of commonly used units and terms, together with 
their more consistent (SI) equivalents: 
Non-standard 
Standard (Sl) 
Length 
micron, pm 
Volume 
litre, L 
Angstrom unit, A 
mL 
microlitre, pL 
mg per mL, 
mg mL-’ 
M, molar, molarity, 
Concentration 
moles per litre, mol L-’ 
Relative molecular mass 
“molecular weight” 
1 Dalton, 1 Da 
m 
IOP” m 
dm3 
cm3 
pdm3 
mg cmp3 
mol dmP3 
RMM 
1 amu 
I 
I 
1. Biological systems are made up of structured macromolecules of 
specific sequence (proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides) and of 
smaller molecules (lipids, etc.) that self-assemble into larger 
structures. 
2. 
interactions involve non-covalent forces. 
Secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures, assembly and 
3. Water plays a dominant role in these interactions. 
1. C. Levinthal, Are there pathwaju for protein.folding? in .I. Chin?. Phys., 
1968, 65, 44. 
2. S .  Mitchell and P. Carmichael, Biology for Chemists, RSC Tutorial 
Chemistry Text, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 2004. 
3. C. Tanford, The Hjjdrophohic Efect: Formation oj’ Micelles and 
Biological Membranes, Wiley-Interscience, New Y ork, 1973. 

Biological Molecules 
19 
J.M. Berg, J.L. Tymoczko and L. Stryer, Biochemistry, 5th edn., Freeman, 
K.E. van Holde, W.C. Johnson and P.S. Ho, Principles qf Physicul 
N.C. Price, R.A. Dwek, R.G. Ratcliffe and M.R. Wormald, Physical 
San Francisco, 2002, Chapters 1, 3, 5, 11, 12. 
Biocheniistry, Prentice Hall, New York, 1998, Chapter 1. 
Chmzistry.for Biochemists, 3rd edn., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
2001, Chapter 5. 
York, 2000, Chapter I .  
Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 2002. 
D. Sheehan, Physicul Biochemistry: Principles and Applicutions, Wiley, New 
S. Doonan, Peptides and Proteins, RSC Tutorial Chemistry Text, Royal 
1 .l . Serum albumin (RMM approx. 65,000) is present in blood at 
a concentration of around 45 mg ~ m - ~ .  
Roughly how far apart are 
the protein molecules, and how might this compare to their size? 
1.2. (a) How many possible conformers are there for a polypeptide 
made up of 100 amino acids? (b) Assuming that these conformers may 
switch on a femtosecond timescale (about the fastest possible for 
bond rotations), how long might it take to explore all possible 
conformers? 
1.3. How high might an average 70 kg person climb (or jump) on 
the energy provided by (a) 10 g of sugar; (b) 10 g of fat? Is this 
realistic? [Reminder: “calorific values” are around 39 kJ g-’ for fat 
and 17 kJ g-’ for carbohydrate.] 
1.4. The average resting male produces about 7000 kJ of heat 
energy per day. How much fat might he therefore lose by just sitting 
around and doing nothing? [Reminder: the “calorific value” of fat is 
around 39 kJ g- .] 
1.5. Why is the water temperature at the bottom of a (partially) 
frozen lake usually around 4 “C? 
1.6. (a) List some of the anomalous properties of water that can 
be ascribed to hydrogen bonding. (b) Is this the bond that sank the 
Ti tank? 

20 
Biophysical Chemistry 
1.7. 
What is the electrostatic potential energy between a pair of 
Na+ and C1- ions, 0.5 nm (5 A) apart: (a) in vacuum; (b) in water? 
1.8. (a) Why does the relative permittivity (dielectric constant) of 
water decrease with temperature? (b) How might this affect the 
strength of electrostatic interactions between opposite charges in 
water? (c) Are such interactions endothermic or exothermic? 

Spectroscopy 
The interaction of light with matter is the way most of us see the world 
around us, and spectroscopic techniques provide some of the more 
powerful experimental methods for determining the structure and 
properties of molecules - not just biological ones. 
In this chapter we shall revise the basic properties of electromagnetic 
radiation and explore experimental spectroscopic methods for 
studying biomolecules in solution. By the end you should be able to: 
Explain the nature of electromagnetic radiation and its 
interaction with matter 
Describe the basic mechanisms of absorbance, fluorescence, 
circular dichroism, Raman, magnetic resonance and related 
spectroscopies 
Describe instrumental methods for each of these techniques 
Explain how different factors affect the observed spectral 
properties of biomolecules 
Apply this understanding to the interpretation of biomolecular 
properties 
alters speed or direction. This is a consequence of the laws of 
electromagnetism, formulated by Michael Faraday and James Clerk 
Maxwell in the 19th century and first demonstrated experimentally by 
Hertz. The same principles still apply today, though sometimes modified 
in detail by quantum effects. 
c 01'111 l l ( I l i  ltllll 
21 

22 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 2.1 Sketch of a simple 
radio antenna (“aerial”) in which 
an oscillating charge or electric 
current produces a radiating 
electromagnetic field 
The heating effect in a microwave 
oven is mainly due to induction of 
molecular rotations in water 
molecules in the sample. The 
rotating water molecules quickly 
collide with neighbouring 
molecules to generate the more 
random molecular motions that b e  
know of as heat. Most other non- 
conducting materials are 
transparent to microwaves at this 
frequency, so the heating effect 
can he distributed throughout. 
Figure 2.2 Cartoons of mol- 
ecular “antennae”: the move- 
ment of charges responsible for 
emission and absorption of 
electromagnetic radiation at the 
molecular level 
The most familiar everyday example is a radio transmitter aerial (or 
antenna). In its simplest form, this is just a length of wire acting as 
conductor for an oscillating electric current (Figure 2.1). As the elec- 
trons oscillate up and down the wire, they produce an oscillating electric 
and magnetic field (at right angles to each other) that propagates 
outwards as an electromagnetic wave. The frequency in this case is 
determined by the resonant frequency of the electrical circuitry that 
drives the oscillations. 
Absorption of electromagnetic radiation by the receiver is just the 
opposite of this process. When the oscillating electromagnetic wave 
encounters an appropriate antenna, an oscillating charge (electric 
current) and/or magnetic dipole is induced in the antenna. This 
absorption of electromagnetic energy is most effective if the antenna is 
“tuned” to match the frequency of the incoming radiation (or some 
multiple “overtone” of that frequency). 
This analogy may be applied on the molecular scale as well. For 
example, in the absorption of ultraviolet (UV) and visible (vis) radiation 
by atoms and molecules, the “antennae” may be visualized as the 
outermost electrons hopping between orbitals (Figure 2.2). For infrared 
(IR) it is usually the bond vibrations of dipolar groups that give rise to the 
effects, and rotations of such groups (or polar molecules) can be related to 
absorption of microwave radiation. At the nuclear level, reorientations of 
nuclear magnetic dipole moments of certain atomic nuclei (acting like tiny 
bar magnets or compass needles) can also act as antennae for 
electromagnetic radiation, usually in the radiofrequency or microwave 
range. 
For UV/visible radiation, the “antenna” 
corresponds to valence electrons 
moving up or down between atomic or 
molecular orbitals 
Infrared (IR) is associated with the 
oscillation of molecular dipoles 
Microwave spectroscopy involves the 
rotation of molecular dipoles 
I 

Spectroscopy 
23 
NMR arises from the “rotation” or 
inversion of magnetic dipoles (mini 
bar magnets) associated with atomic 
nuclei aligned in a magnetic field 
t 
Synchrotron radiation is generated when 
high-energy particles (usually electrons) 
are confined to circular or oscillating 
paths within particle accelerators 
Figure 2.2 Continued 
All electromagnetic radiation, regardless of its source, travels at 
the same velocity (“the speed of light”) in a vacuum. However, the 
electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 2.3) covers a wide range of frequencies 
and wavelengths connected by the equation: 
c =  f i  
where,fis the frequency (in Hertz, Hz, or s-I), A is the wavelength (in 
metres) and c is the velocity of light ( = 3 x lo8 m s-’ in a vacuum). 
Figure 2.3 The electromagnetic spectrum 
For convenience, wavelengths are also often quoted in other units such 
its nanometres (nm), microns (1 micron = 1 micrometre = 1 0 - ~  m) or 
Angstrom units (A, 1 A= lo-’’ m). It is also customary (in vibrational 
spectroscopy) to refer to the reciprocal wavelength or wavenumber (l/A) 
as the “frequency” (in cm- ’). 
The velocity of light in transparent materials (e.g. water, glass) is less 
than in the vacuum, and this difference in velocity is measured by the 
“refractive index” of the material (n): 
n = speed of light in the material/c 

24 
Biophysical Chemistry 
TI-ie FAiotoelectric effect is ‘tie 
cmiss on of electrons fron-i metal 
sr:rfaces exposed to 1141-it. 
S 
11 r 13 r i s i n g I y. t t is t 1-1 e w av r? I c I I CJ t I i 
( i 
tht: Ii!jbt, not its irltctisity ti-int 
This gives rise to the phenomenon of “refraction”, where a beam of light 
may be bent when it encounters a change in refractive index. In general, n 
depends on the wavelength or frequency of the electromagnetic radiation, 
and this gives rise to familiar “dispersion” effects in lenses or prisms, 
where a beam of light may be split into its component wavelengths or 
“spectrum”. 
Electromagnetic waves have all the properties of waves in general: 
reflection, refraction, interference, diffraction. However , through the 
magic of quantum theory (“wave-particle duality”), they may also behave 
like quantized particles or “photons”. The energy (E) of any photon is 
related to its frequency: 
E = hf = hc/A 
where h is the universal Planck constant (h = 6 . 6 2 6 ~  
J s). These 
quantum effects give rise to observations such as the photoelectric effect, 
which is impossible to understand by wave theory alone. 
Most of the time, this wave-particle duality allows us to use either 
photons or waves to describe phenomena, whichever is more convenient 
or easier to visualize. 
Q The human retina is most sensitive to light at around 500 nm. 
What is the energy of a single photon of this wavelength? What does 
this correspond to in kJ mol-’? How does this compare to typical 
bond energies? 
A For one photon: 
E = hf = hc/L = 6.626 x 
x 3 x 108/500 x lop9 = 4 x 10-19J 
Multiply by N A  to give, for 1 mole of photons: 
E = 4 x 
x 6 x 1023/1000 = 240 kJmol-’ 
This is somewhat below the energy typically required to break a 
covalent bond (C-C bond energy is around 340 kJ mol-’, for 
example). 
2.1.1 Absorbance: The Beer-Lambed Law 
The extent to which electromagnetic radiation is absorbed by a sample is 
expressed in terms of the absorbance, A ,  or transmittance, T. 

Spectroscopy 
25 
If I(, is the intensity of the incident radiation, and I is the intensity 
transmitted, then the transmittance (usually expressed as a percentage) 
and absorbance are given by: 
T( Yo) = 100 x 1/10 
A = - log,(J(Z/Zo) = - log( T) 
The absorbance is a particularly useful quantity since it is directly 
proportional to the optical density or thickness of the sample. The reason 
for this is shown in Figure 2.4. 
Imagine the object split in two (Figure 2.4), each with a transmit- 
tance (say) of 20%, just as an example. The absorbance of each half 
would therefore be -log(0.2)=0.699 in this example. Of the 20% 
transmitted by the first half (I,), only a further 20% gets through the 
second half, giving a final transmittance for the whole sample of just 
4%. The absorbance of the whole sample, on the other hand, is 
-log(0.04)= 1.398 = 2  x 0.699, or just the sum of the two separate 
absorbances. 
By imagining the sample sliced into arbitrarily small sections 
(Figure 2.5), it can be shown that the light intensity falls off exponentially 
with distance through a homogeneous substance. 
In the particular case of uniformly absorbing samples such as solutions 
or gases, this leads to the Beer-Lambert Law: 
A = ECI 
where 
E is the (molar) extinction coefficient, c is the (molar) 
concentration of the absorbing species and I is the path length or 
thickness of the sample (usually in cm). The extinction coefficient is a 
number characteristic of the absorbing molecules at the wavelength 
of the incident radiation. It can also depend on the environment 
in which the molecules are located, e.g. solvent polarity (see later). 
The advantage of using absorbance is that, unlike transmittance, it 
is directly proportional to the concentration and path length of 
the sample. 
2.1.2 Absorption Cross-section 
I 
loo% - 
*O' 
Figure 2.4 
Figure 2.5 - 
I 
It is sometimes useful to picture the extinction coefficient, E ,  as the 
(hypothetical) cross-section area of the chromophore that is absorbing 
the light. The absorbance cross-section (a) is numerically related to E as 
follows: 
0 = 3.8 x 10-?-'~ cm2 

26 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Q Prove that a= 3.8 x lop2’& cm2 (requires some competence with 
calculus). 
A Consider a volume element in the solution of 1 cni cross-section 
area and length dl (in cm). The number of molecules (chromo- 
phores) in this volume element will be 10-3NAc x dl, where c is the 
chromophore concentration (in mol dmP3). If each of these 
chromophores has an absorbance cross-section a, then the fraction 
of light absorbed by this volume element is: 
dI/I = --olO-’NAcdl 
Integration over a finite path-length, I, gives: 
ln(I/Io) = -oi0-3~Aci 
However, from the definition of absorbance and the Beer-Lambert 
law: 
A = -loglo(I/Io) = -ln(I/Io)/2.303 = o x  10-3NAc//2.303 = ECI 
o = 2.303~/10-’N~ = 3.8 x 1OW2’~ 
cm2 
Hence: 
Q What is the absorbance cross-section, a, at 280 nm for the 
tryptophan chromophore whose molar extinction coefficient is 
&280= 5600 (mol dm-3) cm-’? How does this compare to the actual 
physical dimensions of this molecule? 
A 
o = 3.8 x 
corresponding to a square of side -5 nm (0.5 A). This is much less 
than the actual molecular dimensions. 
x 5600 = 2.1 x 10-17cm2 
2.1.3 Turbidity and Light Scatter 
Often the passage of radiation (“light”) through material is reduced not 
by absorbance but by scattering of the radiation by suspended particles 
or other inhomogeneities (Rayleigh scattering). For example, very little 

Spectroscopy 
27 
light passes directly through a glass of milk because of (multiple) 
scattering off the fine protein/fat globules in the milk. None of the 
components in the milk actually absorb much light in the visible region, 
but they are in the appropriate size range to scatter visible light. That is 
why the milk “looks” white in colour: what we see is the light scattered 
back to our eyes. 
The mathematical treatment of absorbance in such turbid samples is 
quite complex, and the simple Beer-Lambert law does not necessarily 
apply, except as a useful approximation in certain cases. 
Ilynamic light scattering (see p. 95) can be used to give information 
about the size and heterogeneity of small particles and macromolecules in 
solution or suspension. 
2.1.4 lsosbestic Points 
Often a sample may be made up of a mixture of two species in equilibrium 
with each other, with different but overlapping absorbance spectra. In 
such cases there will be one (or more) wavelength(s) at which the 
absorbances of the two species are the same. This is known as an 
isosbestic point (Figure 2.6). If the equilibrium shifts (as in the A + B 
example in Figure 2.6) the superimposed spectra will all cross at this 
point. The existence of an isosbestic point is a good indicator of a true 
equilibrium process, and the absorbance at this wavelength can be a 
useful experimental reference point. 
I 
! 
Wavelength 
I 
Figure 2.6 
Superimposed 
spectra showing an isosbestic 
point 

28 
Biophysical Chemistry 
(klour is not always due to 
absorbance of ligtit. For exarnple 
the brilliarit tiues seen in butterfly 
.;uirqs or bird feathers are often 
due to diffraction or interference 
effects arising fron I structural 
regularities, as in diffractlor 
gratirigs or oil filtms. 
Consider a mixture of compounds (A, B) in stoichiometric 
equilibrium with each other: 
A = B  
The absorbance of this mixture at any wavelength, A(A), will depend 
on the concentrations of each of the substances and their molar 
extinction coefficients at that wavelength: 
A(A) = &A 
+ &B (A) LB1 
If there happens to be some wavelength, Aiso, at which both the molar 
extinction coefficients are the same [that is, where the two spectra 
overlap, &A(Aiso) = &B(Aiso)], then the absorbance at this wavelength 
will be fixed: 
A(&,) = &(Aiso)([A] 
+ [B]) = constant 
since the total concentration ([A] + [B]) remains constant at 
equilibrium regardless of the composition. 
2.2 
UVNisible Spectroscopy 
Absorption of light in the visible or UV regions of the spectrum is usually 
due to electronic transitions in the molecules or substituent groups. For 
example, the familiar red colour of blood is due to absorption of visible 
light around 410 nm by the haem group in the oxygen transport protein, 
haemoglobin. Plants appear green because of long-wavelength red light 
absorption by chlorophyll and other photosynthetic pigments. Indeed, 
the mechanism of vision itself relies on photon absorption by 
photosensitive pigments (“rhodopsins”) in the photoreceptor cells of 
the retina at the back of the eye. 
Light in the near-UV region (around 250-300 nm) is absorbed by 
aromatic side-chains in proteins and by the purine and pyrimidine bases 
of nucleic acids, whilst most chemical groups will begin to absorb in the 
far-UV (<250 nm). We shall look in more detail at the characteristic 
spectra of these groups later. Here we will consider how to measure these 
experimentally. 
2.2.1 Measurement of Absorbance 
Spectrophotometers 
Spectrophotometers for the measurement of absorbance in the UV/ 
visible range come in a variety of configurations. The most common 

Spectroscopy 
29 
routine laboratory instruments are single- or double-beam devices made 
up of a light source, monochromator, sample compartment, detector, 
data processor and display (Figures 2.7 and 2.8). 
The light source is commonly a tungsten filament lamp (covering the 
visible region of the spectrum, typically 340-800 nm) or a deuterium 
discharge lamp for the UV region (200-350 nm). For some applications, 
more intense sources such as a xenon or xenon/mercury arc lamp, or even 
lasers, may be required. 
With the exception of lasers, light from such sources covers a wide 
spectral band, and some wavelength selection is required. The light 
from the source is focused through the monochromator - usually a 
diffraction grating, or simple colour filters in more basic instruments - 
and on to the sample (S) or reference (R). In single-beam instruments, 
the sample and reference solutions must be switched manually in or out 
of the beam and measured for each wavelength separately. In double- 
beam devices the light beam is split so that sample and reference 
solutions may be monitored simultaneously. Light then enters the 
detector so that the intensity passing through the sample (I) and through 
the reference (lo) 
may be compared and analysed electronically to give T 
or A ,  as required. 
Liquid samples (solutions) are normally contained in a rectangular 
quartz (UV) or optical glass (visible) cell (called a “cuvette”), with 
transparent faces and defined path length. Disposable plastic cuvettes 
are also available for more routine work. The reference cuvette is 
used to measure the light transmitted in the absence of sample (lo). 
Figure 2.7 Single-beam 
spectrophotometer; S is the 
sample and R is the reference 
Figure 2.8 Double-beam 
spectrophotometer 

30 
Biophysical Chemistry 
-V r 
Figure 2.9 A photomultiplier 
It should, therefore, match the optical properties of the sample cuvette, 
and would normally contain just the solvent or other appropriate 
control. 
For routine assays requiring analysis of large numbers of samples, 
“micro-titre” or “multi-well plate readers’’ have been developed. These 
consist of single-beam instruments in which the samples are contained in 
standard 96-well (8 x 12) plates, each well containing a separate sample. 
This allows large numbers of samples to be measured rapidly, often 
automatically under robotic control. The multi-well/micro-titre plates 
themselves are often coated with specific reagents so that particular 
analyses may be done rapidly and routinely in situ. 
Photodetectors: Photomultipliers, Diode Arrays and CCDs 
The photodetector is central to any photometric method, and a number 
of techniques are used. 
A photomultiplier (Figure 2.9) is an electronic device for detecting 
photons based on the photoelectric effect. It is made up of a series (or 
“cascade”) of photo-emissive electrodes under high vacuum, with a clear 
glass (or quartz) window for the light to enter. The electrodes are under 
successively higher voltage (up to around 1200 V), so that any electrons 
emitted by one electrode are accelerated to hit the next. When a photon of 
sufficient energy strikes the first electrode in the series, a photoelectron is 
produced which is then accelerated towards the next electrode in the 
cascade. Collision of this electron with the electrode ejects further 
electrons, and so on down the cascade to produce a measurable large 
pulse of electrons at the final electrode (hence the term “photomulti- 
plier”). For relatively intense light, this may be measured as a continuous 
electric current. Alternatively, for low light detection levels, the 
photomultiplier may be operated in “photon-counting” mode whereby 
the discrete electronic pulses produced by single photons may be counted 
electronically. The quantum efficiency of such systems is very high, and 
detection of single photons is frequently only limited by the thermal 
“noise” in the system (thermionic electron emission from the electrodes, 
etc.). This can be reduced by cooling the photomultiplier to low 
temperatures. 
One disadvantage of photomultipliers is that they do not have spatial 
resolution, so the spectrum must be scanned to measure light intensity at 
each wavelength in turn. This can be overcome using diode array or 
charge-coupled devices (CCDs) in which the intensity distribution across 
the entire wavelength field of the spectrometer may be captured 
simultaneously . 

Spectroscopy 
31 
Photo-diodes are semiconductor devices whose electrical resistance is 
reduced when exposed to light. This can be detected by suitable 
electronics. Modern fabrication methods allow construction of arrays 
of such diodes (in one or two dimensions), each of which may be 
interrogated separately. This allows simultaneous measurement of light 
intensity over the array area. 
Charge-coupled devices are efficient, silicon-based semiconductor 
photoelectric devices in which photon absorption creates photoelectrons 
or electron-hole pairs in the semiconductor, leading to the accumulation 
of charge at specific locations (“pixels”) on the silicon wafer. Using 
electronic methods, this charge is transferred to sensor electrodes and 
measured one pixel at a time to build up an electronic image of the light 
intensity across the array (these devices are now widely used as the 
imaging elements in digital cameras). 
Spectrophotometers based 
on array detectors differ slightly 
in configuration from those described above. In particular, the dispersive 
element or monochromator comes after the sample, so that the entire 
spectrum emerging from the sample may be imaged onto the detector 
array (Figure 2.10). 
Light 
I 
source 
+ Monoc hromator 
EZl 
Analysis 
& display 
2.2.2 Experimental Limitations: The Stray Light Problem 
As with any laboratory instrument, there are fundamental limitations to 
the accuracy of the information given by spectrophotometers. Even 
though the absorbance reading may appear quite precise - especially 
with digital and/or computer display - how do we know it is telling the 
truth? 
Wavelength and absorbance calibration can be checked using standard 
filters. However, even with a well-calibrated instrument and properly 
prepared samples, things can go wrong. Look at the graph in Figure 2.1 1, 
which shows the actual measured absorbance at 280 nm for a series of 
standard protein solutions of different concentrations. 
Figure 2.10 Single-beam 
spctrophotometer with an array 
detector 
Remember the difference 
between precision and accuracy? 
A digital quartz watch may 
display the time precisely to 
fractions of a second, but will still 
tell the wrong time if not properly 
set. A correctly adjusted analogue 
watch (with hands!) may only 
display the time to the nearest 
minute, but it can still be the more 
accurate. 

32 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 2.1 1 Absorbance at 
280 nrn as a function of concen- 
tration for a typical protein 
solution, showing linear 
behaviour at low concentrations 
(/eft) but deviations from 
Beer-Lambert behaviour due 
to stray light effects at higher 
absorbances 
I .5 
5 
z 
$1.0 
0 
s e 
2 
0.5 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
c/mg mL-’ 
At low concentrations the graph of A versus c is quite linear, and obeys 
1, 
tl(Jtt) ~pos~itvc 
allti ricqativc) 
I1 
d c , o  W’( Ill t,ocaLisc. of 
1 ( I I 1 i 
I? t r ;I t I on - d r y  c t i d c’ n t 
r ~ t ~ 3 1 , c ~ r ~ i c 2 q  \Ilc s~11,,,31~3. 
stjctl 
the Beer-Lambert law. However, at higher concentrations, when the 
absorbance approaches 2 or more, we begin to see values lower than we 
should expect, eventually reaching a plateau above which the absorbance 
I imio 1omer-cilmer e:qulllhrl~~rn. 
1’1,it (.an altcr spactral propetties 
apparently remains constant regardless of concentration. This is an 
example of the “stray light” effect in spectrophotometers and is a major 
instrumental limitation. 
This stray light effect can be visualized as follows. When measuring the 
transmitted light ( I )  we assume that all the light reaching the detector is of 
the correct wavelength and has actually passed through the sample. 
However, what if the sample compartment is not properly light-proof, or 
if the monochromator allows through some light of a different wavelength 
that is not absorbed by the sample? In such instances, the amount of light 
hitting the detector is greater than it should be. Consequently, it appears 
to the measuring circuitry that the absorbance of the sample is less than it 
truly is. Most routine spectrophotometers are usually reliable up to 
A = 1.5, but rarely, except in specialist instruments, can one measure 
values exceeding A == 2 with any confidence. Samples must be chosen so 
that measurements lie within appropriate instrumental limits. 
Q The visual pigment chroniophore retinal (vitamin A aldehyde) 
has a molar extinction coefficient (in ethanol) of 43,000 at 375 nm. 
(a) What should be the absorbance at 375 nm of a 45.0 pmol dm-3 
solution of retinal in a 1 cni cuvette? (b) If, due to stray light 

Spectroscopy 
33 
__ 
_. 
._.. __ 
__ - 
problems in the spectrophotometer, 0.5% of the light reaching the 
detector had not passed through the sample, what would be the 
measured absorbance? Assume that this spectrophotometer has a 
display reading to 3 decimal places. (c) What would the results be for 
a 20 pmol dm-3 solution in the same instrument? 
A (a) Using the Beer-Lambert law: 
(b) In the absence of stray light, the proportion of the light reaching 
the detector should be: 
A375 = ~375cZ = 43000 x 45 x 
x 1 = 1.935 
Z = ZO X 
= 0.01 1610 
However, an additional 0.005Z0 (0.5%) is reaching the detector from 
other sources, so the actual light entering the detector is 
I(measured) = (0.01 16 + 0.005)10 = 0.01 6610. 
Consequently, the measured absorbance would be: 
This corresponds to an almost 9% error (low reading). 
43000 x 20 x 
A(measured) = - log(Z/l0) = 1.780 
(c) For a 20 pmol dm-3 retinal solution the true A375= 
x 1 = 0.860 and I= 0.138Z0. Hence: 
Z(measured) = (0.138 + 0.005)Zo = 0.14310 
A(measured) = 0.845 
corresponding to less than 2% error in the measured absorbance 
under these conditions. This emphasizes the need to be aware of 
specific instrument limitations. 
2.2.3 Electronic Absorption: UVIvis Spectra 
UV and visible absorbance spectra arise from electronic transitions in 
atomic or molecular orbitals (Figure 2.12). 
Excited state 
Ground state 
~~ 
Interatomic distance 
Figure 2.12 Absorption of a 
photon of appropriate energy 
can promote an electron from a 
lower energy ground state into a 
range of closely spaced excited 
states, from where it may decay 
back to the ground state, usually 
dissipating the energy as heat 

34 
Biophysical Chemistry 
2.2.4 Spectral Characteristics of Biomolecular 
Chromophores 
The word “chromophore” derives 
from the ancient Greek chroma 
(colour) and phoros (bearing). It is 
the term used to signify any group 
or part of a molecule that is 
coloured or has UVhisible 
absorbing properties. 
See Chapter 1 for the structures of 
the aromatic side chains. 
Figure 2.13 Typical UV spec- 
trum for a globular protein in 
aqueous solution. The near-UV 
region (>240 nm) is also shown 
on an expanded scale, for clarity 
Most biological macromolecules are colourless to the human eye and 
only reveal their spectral characteristics when viewed in the UV range. 
Absorption spectra are characterized by their shape, the peak wavelength 
(A,,,) 
and the peak height or molar extinction coefficient ( E ) .  Spectra of 
amino acids, nucleic acids, proteins, DNA and other chromophores are 
described in the following section. 
Amino acids, Peptides and Proteins 
A typical UV spectrum of a simple globular protein in solution is shown 
in Figure 2.13. This particular protein contains no groups other than the 
constituent amino acids, so all the spectral characteristics arise from the 
amino acid groups themselves. The absorbance at very short wavelengths 
(<240 nm) is due mainly to K-K* 
transitions of the peptide amide and 
related groups, and is not normally of much direct interest (though see 
Circular Dichroism in Section 2.3 below). The more useful near-UV 
region (Figures 2.14 and 2.15, Table 2.1) shows the characteristic 
absorbance spectrum arising from a combination of aromatic side chains 
(tryptophan, tyrosine, phenylalanine) and, to a lesser extent, cysteine 
residues. 
180 
200 220 240 
260 280 300 
320 340 
360 
3 
I
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
 
180 
200 220 240 
260 280 300 
320 340 
360 
Wavelength, itlnm 
~
~
_
_
_
_
~ 

Spectroscopy 
35 
- 
Phe 
- 
- - 
I
I
I
I
 I
1
 I
l
l
 
240 260 280 300 320 
6000-' 
I 
I ' ' ' 
I ' 
I
-
 
-300 
200 
100 
0 
240 260 280 300 320 
I
I
I
"
 
I
'
I
'
I
l
 
v 
0 
1
1
'
 1
1
 1
1
1
 
e 
RNase - 
e -  
s: 
< 
a -  
- 
- 
1 
I
l
l
 I
I
 I 
I
I
 - 
5' 
2 
Y 2000 
* 1000 
2 
k 
0 
X 
.- 
Y 
c 
0 
5 - 
240 260 280 300 320 
Wavelength, Unm 
6000 
5000 
4000 
3000 
2000 
1000 
0 
240 260 280 300 320 
One important application of UV/vis spectroscopy is in measuring 
concentrations, either using intrinsic chromophores or by observing the 
coloured product of a suitable reaction. 
240 260 280 300 320 
I 
i 
240 260 280 300 320 
7 
Wavelength, Unm 
~ 
Figure 2.1 4 Near-UV absor- 
bance spectra for aromatic 
amino acid side chains. When 
superimposed on the same scale 
(bottom right panel), the domi- 
nant contribution from tryptophan 
and tyrosine residues becomes 
more obvious 
Accurate measurement of protein 
concentrations in particular is 
surprisingly difficult, and a 
number of metClods have been 
devised Howcver, except in 
special circumstances, it is rarely 
possible to estimate protein 
concentrations in solution to 
better than +5% accuracy 
Figure 2.15 Typical near-UV 
absorbance spectra for proteins 
(lysozyme, ribonuclease) and 
nucleic acids (DNA, adenine, 
thymine). Notice how the lyso- 
zyme spectrum (6 Trp, 3 Tyr, 
3 Phe) is dominated by the 
tryptophan absorbance, whereas 
ribonuclease (RNase; 0 Trp, 6 Tyr, 
3 Phe), which (unusually) 
contains no tryptophan residues, 
is more characteristic of the 
tyrosine side chains 

36 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Table 2.1 Approximate Amax and E for biological chromophores in the near- 
UV/visible region under physiological conditions 
Nucleotides 
A 
C 
G 
U 
T 
Amino acids 
TrP 
TY 
Phe 
CY s 
Others 
Retinal (in rhodopsin) 
Haem (in haemoglobin), oxy- 
Haem (in haemoglobin), deoxy- 
NAD 
NADH 
Chlorophyll 
259 
27 1 
252 
262 
267 
280 
276 
257 
<250 
500 
41 4 
432 
260 
340 
418 
15,400 
9200 
13,700 
10,000 
10,200 
5690 
1400 
160 
60 (at 280 nm) 
42,000 
131,000 
138,000 
18,000 
6200 
1 11,000 
If the amino acid composition of the protein is known, then we can 
use the molar extinction coefficients of the chromophoric side-chains 
to estimate the extinction coeEicient of the entire protein.' This is 
normally done at 280 nm, where the accepted &280 values are: 5690 (Trp), 
1280 (Tyr), 60 (Cys; half cysteines only). Phe does not absorb signifi- 
cantly at 280 nm. 
Q 
A globular protein of RMM 23,500 contains 6 Trp, 4 Tyr and 
3 Phe residues. (a) What is the &280 for this protein and (b) what 
would be the absorbance at 280 nm for a 0.5 mg cm-3 solution in a 1 
cm cuvette? 
A (a) &280 = 6 x 5690(Trp) + 4 x 1280(Tyr) + O(Phe) 
= 39260 mol-' dm3cm-' 
(b) Molar concentration: 0.5 nig cm-3 = 0.5 g dm-3 = 0.5/23500 
= 2.13 x 10-5mol dm-3. 
Hence: 
A280 = ~
2
8
~
~
2
 
= 39260 x 2.13 X 
x 1 = 0.836 
_ _ _ _ _ _ - ~  

Spectroscopy 
37 
Various colorimetric methods are also available, based on non-specific 
dye binding to polypeptide chains, one of the more common being the 
“Bradford” assay.* One drawback with such methods is that the actual 
colour intensity (absorbance) developed is not absolute, but depends on 
the specific protein. Calibration can therefore be a problem if accurate 
concentrations are required. 
Strictly speaking, each of these methods measures only the polypeptide 
concentration, taking no account of whether the protein is correctly 
folded or active. 
Nucleic Acids 
Nucleic acids (DNA, RNA) have strong UV absorbances around 260- 
270 nm arising from n-n* transitions in the aromatic purine (A, G) and 
pyrimidine (U, C, T) rings of the nucleotide bases. The sugar phosphate 
backbone groups absorb only in the far-UV. 
DNA and RNA spectra are quite sensitive to conformation, since the 
regular stacking of the nucleotide chromophores in helical structures 
leads to the phenomenon of “hypochromicity”. 
Because of base-stacking interactions that perturb the spectroscopic 
properties of the closely packed aromatic rings, helical polynucleotides 
have a lower absorbance in the 260 nm region than would be expected 
from the free nucleotides alone. In particular, double-stranded helical 
DNA has a lower AZ6* than the denatured single strands. The increase in 
absorbance can amount to as much as 40%, and this is very useful for 
measuring the thermal unfolding or “melting” of polynucleotides in 
solution (Figure 2.16). 
‘\\ -- 
I 
I 
I 
I 
240 260 280 300 
Wavelength, mnm 
Temperature 
Figure 2.16 Hypochromism 
and the “melting” of DNA. The 
left-hand panel shows the UV 
spectra of a solution of DNA at a 
low temperature (25 “C, say) 
compared to the same solution at 
a higher temperature (typically 
>60 “ C ) .  The difference is due to 
the unstacking of the base pairs 
as the DNA double-helix unfolds 
(or “melts”) at higher tempera- 
tures. This can be used to follow 
the unfolding process with 
temperature (right-hand panel) 

38 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Prosthetic Groups and Other Chromophores 
I llc-: fmiliar rusty-brown colocir 0’ 
1 
tioodstains is due to oxidation 
I ) I  irc)n( II) to iron(ll1) in the haem 
-1; oily, 3f the protein haeimglobin. 
!Everyday experience tells us thai 
r m .  in combination with oxygen 
.jinti water. reacts easily to form 
ron(lllr oxides, or “rust”. This is 
very bard to reverse. and would 
Lit? literaliv fata! if it were to occur 
lo any great extent in our 
I~at?moglobin myoylohin or other 
!-inem-containing oxygen 
! ransport proteins One of the 
I rv:iatkable properties of such 
i!rotcins is the way in which the 
inacrmolecular structure is so 
tirrmcl.?ci as to allow easy access 
lor tiinding and release of O? to 
ilw iron(ll) while at the same time 
rxluding the water that might 
[ ;at a I y se oxidation. W he t i  the 
protein is denatured (as in old 
Iilood! this protection is lost. 
In addition to the intrinsic chromophores of proteins and nucleic acids, 
there are a number of other co-factors and prosthetic groups that have 
characteristic absorbance properties in the UV and visible regions. For 
example, the familiar colour of green plants is due primarily to the 
absorbance of red light by chlorophylls and other photosynthetic 
pigments, mainly bound in specific protein structures. The mammalian 
haem proteins (haemoglobin, myoglobin) have a characteristic red 
colour arising from absorption at the blue end of the spectrum by the 
iron-porphyrin prosthetic group (haem) also responsible for oxygen 
binding. 
The spectral properties of prosthetic groups are frequently modified 
by covalent and non-covalent interactions with their host protein. For 
example, the major chromophore of the visual pigment protein 
rhodopsin is retinal (vitamin A aldehyde). This is a conjugated 
polyene molecule which is incorporated into the protein, usually (in the 
dark) as the 11-cis isomer which, on exposure to light, is photo- 
isomerized to the all-trans form as the first step in the visual process. 
Retinal in its free state absorbs only in the near-UV (around 370 nm) 
and, as such, would be ineffective for detecting light in the visible 
region. However, when bound to the protein it forms a covalent 
protonated imine (Schiff base) linkage to a specific lysine side-chain 
which, together with non-covalent interactions with other amino acids in 
the binding site, shifts the absorbance imax 
into the 400-600 nm visible 
region. 
The oxidized and reduced forms of important electron transfer co- 
factors such as NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) differ in their 
UV absorbing properties (see Table 2.1). This is very useful in following 
the redox state of these prosthetic groups during metabolic pathways, and 
the UV absorbance changes are often used to advantage in developing 
methods for measuring the kinetics of enzyme-catalysed reactions 
involving such groups. 
Lipids and Carbohydrates 
Most lipids and carbohydrate rnolecules lack the extensive electron 
delocalization or aromatic groups necessary for the relatively low-energy 
electronic transitions required for near-UV or visible absorbance. 
Consequently they usually absorb only at very short wavelengths 
(< 200 nm), except when chemically degraded (as, for example, in the 
“caramelization” of sugars). Moreover, the insolubility of lipids in water 
and their tendency to form bilayers and other aggregates gives rise to light 

Spectroscopy 
39 
scattering, particularly at shorter wavelengths, that makes it difficult to 
measure their true absorbance properties. 
2.2.5 Factors that can Affect UV/vis Spectra 
The factors that determine the wavelength and intensity of UV/visible 
absorption are complex, and we have already seen above how base 
stacking interactions can modify the absorbance of nucleic acids (the 
t 1 
The imax 
depends primarily on the available electronic molecular 
energy levels for a particular chromophore, whereas E is determined by its 
ahorption cross-section (a). Although both of these are intrinsic quantum 
mechanical properties of the molecular orbitals, both can be affected by 
the surrounding molecular environment, and there are some simple 
physical considerations that can be helpful. 
Excitation of valence electrons to higher energy levels inevitably 
involves separation of negative charge (the electron) from the positively 
charged atomic nuclei. Consequently, there is a change in (electric) dipole 
moment in going from ground to excited state, and excited states nor- 
mally have a higher dipole moment (known as the transition dipole). 
Simple electrostatics dictates that the work needed to separate these 
charges will depend on the polarity or dielectric constant (relative 
permeability) of the surroundings. For example, if a chromophore is 
surrounded by a very polar solvent such as water, the energy required to 
form the excited state dipole will be less than for the same process in a 
non-polar environment. As a result, the energy level differences will be 
slightly smaller for the chromophore in water, and the absorption spec- 
trum might be expected to be shifted to lower energies/longer wave- 
lengths. Similar considerations apply to the intensity of absorbance. 
These effects can be very useful in following conformational changes or 
binding processes in biological macromolecules. For example, when a 
globular protein unfolds the aromatic side-chains (Trp and Tyr), usually 
partly buried within the relatively non-polar interior of the protein, 
become exposed to the more polar aqueous environment. This brings 
about small changes in the UV absorbance spectrum in the 270-290 nm 
region that may be used to determine the extent of unfolding under 
specific conditions. Changes in UV spectra may also come about when 
something binds in the active site of a protein. For example, the binding 
site cleft of the enzyme lysozyme contains a number of tryptophan side- 
chains that are partially exposed to water. When a trisaccharide inhibitor 
is added to the solution, it binds in this active site and reduces the polarity 
of the Trp environment, bringing about a small shift in the overall 
spectrum. 
H: t i r ( ) I n ic c tfec t ) . 

40 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Difference Spectra 
Because these changes in UV/vis spectra are relatively small, they can 
often be difficult to see directly from the spectra themselves. In such cases, 
difference spectra can be useful. This involves subtraction of the original 
spectrum from the spectrum of the perturbed sample. Often this is best 
done directly in the spectrophotometer, by loading a portion of the 
original sample in the reference cuvette (rather than solvent) and then 
performing the perturbations on the same material in the sample cuvette 
(Figure 2.1 7). 
Figure 2.17 
Example of differ- 
ence spectrum. The upper panel 
shows two (almost identical) 
protein spectra. The difference 
spectrum (6A), obtained by 
subtract ion, highlights the 
differences more clearly 
’ /e 
rei:i!ed tecliniyues of optical 
rotation ai-id optical rotatory 
dispersion (ORD) - that is optica 
,‘ot;iticrI as a furictiori of 
;~aL~c:l~:i~g~li 
- are less frequently 
.1 se d t iowa d a y cj for s t 11 ci y i t i  (4 
!) 101: 10 I ec u I es 
LLlght is said to be circularly 
;)oI a r i zed w t i  el I the osc i 1 la t i t ig 
c: I ec t r I (3 f i e I d vcc t o r rot ate s- e i t t i  e r 
! : J  ttie left or to the rigtit-ahcut the 
.; r o p q  a t iu t I a x  is c f t tie 
,
~
~
I
~
~
~
~
~
r
~
i
t
~
i
~
~
~
~
t
i
~
~
i
i
~
;
 
LWIVF: 
so It iat tlic 
240 
260 280 300 320 340 360 
E 
t 
i 
240 
260 280 300 320 340 360 
Wavelength, Unm 
2.3 
Circular Dichroism 
Chiral molecules may respond differently to left or right circularly 
polarized light. In particular, there may be slight differences in absor- 
bance of UV/visible light; these provide the basis for circular dichroism 
(CD) spectroscopy. 
Circular dichroism is defined as the normalized difference in molar 
extinction: 
AE = ( E R  -- 
EL)/(ER -k EL) 
where I R  and EL refer to the molar absorbance at a particular wavelength 
for right or left circularly polarized light, respectively (Figure 2.18). 

Spectroscopy 
41 
For historical reasons related to the phenomenon of optical rotary 
(Ikpcr4oii (ORD), it is conventional to describe CD in terms of the 
t~llipiit-ii>, 
8= 32982 x AE, in units of millidegrees. 
CD spectra are measured in an instrument (“spectropolarimeter”) that 
is, in principle, similar to a single-beam spectrophotometer, but using 
circularly polarized light. However, because CD effects are usually quite 
small, and observations need to extend into the far-UV, much more 
intense light sources are required, and the instruments are rather more 
specialized (Figure 2.19). 
Electro-optic 
@ 4  
modulator 
-
1
 
U 
‘ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ I  
U R ?  
Figure 2.19 Sketch showing the different components of a typical spectropolarimeter 
Normal linear polarized or unpolarized light is made up of a 
superposition of circularly polarized photons of different handedness. 
L- or R-polarization can be selected using an electro-optic modulator (or 
photoelastic modulator) in which a piezoelectric crystal of quartz, or 
other optically active material, is subjected to an alternating electric field 
which distorts the crystal in such a way as to transmit left or right 
circularly polarized light alternately. This passes through the sample and 
into the detector and analysis circuitry, which are electronically 
synchronized with the modulator so that light transmitted in L- or 
R-polarization may be measured separately. The cuvettes for liquid 
samples are of similar construction to those used for normal UV 
spectroscopy, though frequently of much shorter path lengths for use in 
the strongly absorbing far-UV range. 
Typical CD spectra for proteins and nucleic acids are shown in Figures 
2.20 and 2.21. It is important to remember that only chiral samples can 
give rise to circular dichroism or other optical activity phenomena. 
Because circular dichroism is made up of a difference between 
absorbances, a CD spectrum may be positive or negative depending on 
wavelength, and the shape of the spectrum is generally characteristic of 
the conformation of the molecules involved. 
. 
4 
Figure 2.18 Path traced out by 
the electric vector in circularly 
polarized light 

42 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 2.20 Circular dichroism 
spectra for the A, B and Z forms 
of double-helical DNA 
Figure 2.21 Characteristic 
shapes for the CD spectra of 
some different types of second- 
ary structure conformations 
found in polypeptides and 
proteins 
The purine and pyrimidine bases of nucleic acids are not intrinsically 
chiral, but DNA and RNA do nonetheless give significant CD spectra in 
the near- and far-UV regions. This is because the double helix and other 

Spectroscopy 
43 
chiral conformations place the bases in a chiral environment that is 
reflected in their optical response to polarized light. This is illustrated in 
Figure 2.20, which shows the characteristically different CD spectra 
observed with the A, B and 2 forms of DNA. The B-form is the right- 
handed double-helical conformation that is most commonly present 
under physiological conditions. If the water content of the sample is 
reduced (typically by adding alcohols, or by dehydrating DNA gels), 
then the conformation switches to the A-form, with the base pairs tilted 
with respect to the helix axis. The Z-form of DNA is a much rarer left- 
handed helical conformation, usually seen at high salt concentrations 
and first observed experimentally from its markedly different CD 
spectrum .3 
Proteins are made up of amino acids which are (with the exception of 
glycine) intrinsically chiral. In addition, secondary structure elements 
such as the a-helix and fi-sheet impose additional chirality on the 
polypeptide chain. This gives rise to CD effects in the far-UV (190- 
240 nm), arising mainly from the peptide backbone groups, that are 
characteristic of the overall secondary structure of the protein. In the 
near-UV range (240-300 nm), although the side-chain groups are not 
inherently optically active, induced (conformational) chirality in chro- 
mophoric residues such as tryptophan and tyrosine can give rise to C D  
effects in this region. Prosthetic groups or other chromophoric ligands 
bound to the protein may also show CD effects in the UV/vis region, 
either because they are intrinsically optically active, or because of 
chirality induced upon the molecules when closely bound to the optically 
active protein. All these effects will be sensitive to the secondary or 
tertiary structure of the protein, and CD has proved to be a very useful 
analytical technique for estimating conformation and for following 
conformational change.' 
Methods are available to estimate the secondary structure content of 
proteins from their characteristic CD profiles. These algorithms use a 
library of known proteins with well-defined secondary structures to 
estimate the proportions of a-helix, fi-sheet, fi-turn and other confor- 
mational elements. 
2.4 
Fluorescence 
~~~~ 
~~ 
~ 
After photon absorption to (singlet) electronically excited states, most 
atoms and molecules decay non-radiatively back to the ground state, 
transferring the excess energy to the surroundings, generally as heat. 
Some molecules, however, display fluorescence, in which a (small) 
proportion of excited molecules return to the ground state with the 
emission of a photon (Figure 2.22). 

44 
Biophysical Chemistry 
I 
I 
x 
3 
8 
I 
Interatomic distance 
Figure 2.22 Energy level 
diagram illustrating electronic 
excitation followed by 
fluorescence emission. After initial 
(vertical) excitation from the 
ground state, the system rapidly 
relaxes to the energy minimum of 
the excited state 
T nc' Frank-Condon principle 
:,ir ('P atomic iiLi( It I ire much 
11 e a v it' r than c? I P c t I ( )n :, e I e c t r on i c 
i r c j  
I I :, i t ions II s II;~ 
I I y oc c IJ r ve r t i c a I I'J 
i SCX Figure 2 71) before the nuclei 
have tirnc to move Changes in 
bond I?nglli take place mote 
s I nw I y 
Figure 2.23 Sketch of a typical 
spectrofluorimeter 
I t i  fluorescence microscopy thc 
4 ; 
p t x  t i of I I lor i meter bec on ie:, part 
of ?lip riiicroscope optic:; 
i r c L PI 1 t I y IJ S 
I I ) 4 opt I c ;1 I f I It C! r s 
lti:J(mi ot the niore curntmsoiwe 
I w ~ i o c ,  
hromators Detect ion 
';ystcn-ls rmy I I S ~  video carxias 
o r  othcr area detectors possibly 
with iriiage intensifiers to enhance 
I/ic> intrinsically weak signal from 
- n I c: rf : op I (- s a m 1 I I es 
Fluorescence radiation is emitted in all directions. It is characterized by 
the quantum yield (+), or intensity of the fluorescence, and by its maxi- 
mum wavelength (Amax). For energy conservation reasons, the emitted 
photon must always be of equal or lower energy (longer wavelength) than 
the exciting light. 
Fluorescence is normally measured using a spcctrofluorirnctcr. This is 
made up of a light source and excitation monochromator to provide the 
light beam of selected wavelength to focus on the sample, followed by an 
emission monochromator and detector to monitor the light emitted from 
the sample, usually at right angles to the exciting beam so as to minimize 
the effects of scattered light (Figure 2.23). 
4 
k. 
: 
d 
I 
I 
.
.
 
i 
"
I
,
 
1 Light I - 
I 
Excitation 
1 +;m'- + 
source 
Monoc hromator 
I 
I 
,
I
.
.
 
,
I
.
 
bt' 
: 
'4 
U 
& display 
The light source is usually a high-intensity xenon arc lamp, though for 
more specialized applications a laser or tunable laser might be used 
instead (in which case the excitation monochromator is not needed). The 
detector might be a photomultiplier or array detector, as described in the 
spectrophotometer section (Section 2.2). 
Samples for fluorescence in conventional experiments- usually 
solutions-are 
placed in a rectangular cuvette with four optically clear 
faces. Light from the excitation monochromator, at a wavelength (Aexc) 
within the absorbance band, is focused on the centre of the sample. Any 
light coming at right angles (from fluorescence or any other source) is 
focused onto the entrance slit of the second (emission) monochromator so 
that the spectrum of the emitted light may be measured (Aem). 
An emission spectrum is obtained by exciting the sample at a fixed 
wavelength (A,,,) 
and observing the spectrum of the emitted light. 
Alternatively, for an excitation spectrum, one scans the range of excitation 

Spectroscopy 
45 
wavelengths while observing the light intensity emitted at a fixed Aem. 
Since the light intensity from the source will vary with wavelength, for 
accurate quantitative work it is necessary to correct the observed spectra 
for these variations in source intensity. 
Typical fluorescence excitation and emission spectra are shown in 
Figure 2.24. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 1 
h 
Aqueous buffer 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
450 
500 
Wavelength, Alnm 
Points to note here are that the excitation spectrum is very similar to 
the absorbance spectrum, as it should be since fluorescence can only occur 
if the sample actually absorbs photons at the excitation wavelength. The 
emission spectrum, on the other hand, comes at longer wavelengths, and 
is roughly a mirror image of the excitation spectrum. This is characteristic 
of all fluorescence spectra. The large emission intensity at longer 
wavelengths, peaking here at about 342 nm, is characteristic of the 
strong fluorescence from tryptophan residues in the protein. 
The baseline signal from the buffer alone highlights the presence of two 
additional features which are not from fluorescence, but which must be 
accounted for. Firstly, there is a (relatively) small peak at the same 
wavelength as the exciting light. This is simply due to scattered light from 
the sample and corresponds to photons that have been elastically 
scattered (i.e. without loss of energy) from the sample molecules or from 
dust or other scattering contaminants. A second small feature, peaking 
here at about 320 nm, arises from the Raman inelastic scattering of 
photons from the solvent water. The energy loss in the Raman scattered 
photons corresponds to the vibrational energy excited in the water 
molecules as they interact with the incoming photons (see Section 2.5 for 
more on Raman spectroscopy). 
Figure 2.24 Typical fluor- 
escence excitation and emission 
spectra for a globular protein in 
aqueous buffer at room tem- 
perature. The excitation wave- 
length, &, 
is 290 nm (arrow). 
The excitation spectrum baseline 
measured with buffer in the 
absence of protein is shown 
offset for clarity 

46 
Biophysical Chemistry 
2.4.1 Inner Filter Effects 
Figure 2.25 Fluorescence 
emission spectra (i,,,, = 290 nm) 
of tryptophan in water and in 
ethanol solutions 
Spurious fluorescence spectra may sometimes be seen with samples that 
are too concentrated. This is due to the inner filter effect, in which a 
significant proportion of the excitation beam is absorbed by the sample 
before it reaches the centre of the cuvette (where the collection optics 
are focused), or the emitted light is similarly re-absorbed before it 
gets out of the cuvette. A useful rule of thumb is that the absorbance 
( A )  of the sample at the excitation/emission wavelengths should be less 
than 0.2. 
2.4.2 Fluorescence Shifts 
One of the more useful aspects of lluorescence as a biophysical tool is the 
way in which both fluorescence intensity and wavelengths are sensitive to 
chemical and environmental effects. 
The wavelength of maximum emission (imax) 
is determined by 
the energy difference between the ground and excited states of the 
fluorescent molecule, and this can be affected by the polarity of the 
surrounding solvent in exactly the same way as described for absorbance 
(see Section 2.2.5). An example of this is given in Figure 2.25, which 
compares the fluorescence emission spectra of tryptophan in different 
solvents. In general, because of the excited state transition dipole effect, 
a more polar environment will reduce the energy separation and will 
give a more red-shifted fluorescence emission spectrum (larger Amax). 
On the other hand, a non-polar environment will tend to give a blue- 
shifted spectrum (shorter A,,,). 
Such qualitative effects can be very 
useful in interpreting conformational and interaction properties of 
macromolecules. 
Emission wavelength, il,,lnm 
L 

Spectroscopy 
47 
~~ 
2.4.3 Fluorescence Intensity: Quantum Yield and 
Quenching 
The fluorescence quantum yield (4) = (number of photons emitted)/ 
(number of photons absorbed). It can be related to the absorbance 
properties of the molecule and the fluorcswiicc lif'ctiiw (z) as follows: 
4 = 9/50 
where zo is the fluorescence lifetime of the excited state in the absence of 
non-radiative processes. The overall fluorescence lifetime (z) is just the 
total lifetime of the excited state, taking into account all possible decay 
modes, and is typically up to 10 ns for most fluorophores. 
The longer the molecule exists in the excited state, the more chance it 
has of fluorescing. Anything that reduces this lifetime, by providing an 
alternative. non-radiative path back to the ground state, will reduce 4 and 
will lower the fluorescence intensity. This is known as fluorc~ucciicc 
(1 wnc hi ng . 
The fluorescence quantum yield can be expressed in terms of the 
relative rates of radiative (kr) and non-radiative (knr) decay of the excited 
state: 
The combined rate of decay of the excited state is related to its 
I i fet ime: 
and there are a number of factors that may contribute to the rate of 
non-radiative decay (knr) that we may write as follows: 
linr = kinwinsic + kenvironrnental + kdynarnic quench + kstatic quench 
Think of the excited state electrons as objects on a shelf. The electrons 
will have a natural tendency to fall off the shelf at a rate (kintrinsic) 
that 
will depend on the specific molecular structure. If, in addition, the shelf 
is being rattled by the continual Brownian motion bombardment 
of surrounding molecules and groups, then the electrons may be 
displaced by environmental interactions. The rate at which this occurs 
(kenvironmeutal) will depend on the frequency of molecular collisions 
(temperature) and on the size and polarity of the colliding species. For 
example, more polar molecules in the surrounding solvent will tend to 
interact more readily with the excited state electrons owing to 
electrostatic forces. So we might anticipate that fluorescence intensities 
will be reduced by an increase in temperature or by transfer to a more 
polar solvent. 

48 
Biophysical Chemistry 
1. A -1% the ohservat(on of dyramic 
~;Liw~ctling 
by t7ioIecular oxygen 
I : Iiyptophari residues buried 
itliiii cjlohular proteins that gave 
1 I )IT ti of the first experimental 
i I r i i (- n t 11:) 
t i  s that pro t e I n structures 
t it' not iigid but undergo 
' lgt 1fic.m dynamic fluctuations 
There can be more specific quenching effects also. Some molecules or 
groups, such as oxygen (02), 
iodide (I-), acrylamide (propenamide) and 
succinimide (pyrrolidine-2,5-dione), will accelerate non-radiative decay if 
they come in contact with the excited fluorophore. Such quenching may 
be dynamic, involving transient collision between the molecules, or static 
if the quencher molecule (Q) forms a longer-lived complex with the 
fluorescent group. 
In the case of dynamic quenching, the rate depends on the frequency of 
collisions and will vary with quencher concentration: 
kdynarnic quench = h y n  [QI 
where k d y n  is the pseudo-first-order rate constant for diffLrsiona1 collisions 
of the quencher, Q, with the excited group. Consequently, in the absence 
of specific quenching, we may write the fluorescence quantum yield (or 
intensity) as: 
40 = k r / ( k r  + kintrinsic + kenvironrnental) 
and in the presence of dynamic quenching: 
4 = kr/ ( k r  + kintrinsic + kenvironrnental -k kdyn [Q] ) 
The ratio of fluorescence intensities in the absence or presence of a given 
quencher concentration may be written as: 
This is the simplest form of the Stern-Volmer equation, where the Stern- 
Volmer coefficient (Ksv) is given by: 
KSV = k d y n / ( k r  + kntrinsic -k kenvironmental) 
Static quenching involves the formation of an equilibrium complex 
between the quencher (Q) and the fluorescent group (F): 
where K is the association constant for the complex. Assuming that 
only the uncomplexed molecules may fluoresce, the relative fluores- 
cence intensities in the absence or presence of static quencher will be 
given by: 

Spectroscopy 
49 
These equations relating dynamic or static quenching to quencher 
concentration are of the same form, and a plot of &/q5 versus [Q] will be 
linear in each case (for a Stern-Volmer plot, see Figure 2.26). 
Consequently, it can be difficult to discriminate between these two 
quenching mechanisms. Dynamic quenching can be sensitive to viscosity, 
since it depends on the rate of diffusional collisions, and comparison of 
Stern-Volnier plots from experiments in solvent mixtures with different 
viscosities can sometimes be helpful. In practice, however, Stern-Volmer 
plots are frequently non-linear, with the curvature indicating the presence 
of a number of different fluorophores in different environments, and that 
a number of quenching mechanisms may be involved. Nonetheless, 
qualitative comparison can be useful in identifying the locations of 
fluorescent groups such as tryptophan residues in protein structures. 
0 
[QI 
2.4.4 Intrinsic Fluorescence 
Intrinsic fluorescence is relatively rare in biological molecules. Most of 
the naturally occurring nucleic acids, carbohydrates and lipids show little 
or no useful fluorescence in the normal UV/visible region. In proteins, 
fluorescence can only be seen from tryptophan residues and, to a lesser 
extent, tyrosine side chains. This intrinsic protein fluorescence can be used 
in a number of practical applications. Typical Trp and protein emission 
spectra are shown in Figures 2.24 and 2.25. Some proteins contain 
intrinsically fluorescent prosthetic groups such as reduced pyridine 
nucleotides and flavoproteins, and the chlorophylls from green plants 
show a red fluorescence emission. 
2.4.5 Fluorescence Probes 
Figure 2.26 Stern-Volmer 
plots for quenching of 
fluorescence in: (a) tryptophan 
in solution; (b) tryptophan 
residues in a globular protein, by 
quencher molecule, Q. The 
smaller slope ( Ksv) for the protein 
indicates that the Trp residues 
are less dynamically accessible 
than the same groups in solution, 
consistent with burial of the Trp 
side chains within the folded 
conformation of the macro- 
molecule 
Because of the rarity of intrinsic fluorescent groups in biological 
molecules, it is frequently necessary to introduce unnatural fluorophores 

50 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 2.27 Some common 
fluorescence probe molecules 
or fluorescent probes. A large number of such probes have been 
developed to cover a variety of applications. Examples are shown in 
Figure 2.27. 
I 
NMe2 
I p 
S02CI 
5-(Dimethy1amino)naphthalene- 1 -sulfony 
chloride (dansyl chloride) 
,,QPNH2 
- - 
Ethidium bromide 
How
/ /  
oco2
Fluorescein 
NH 
S03H 
I 
1 -Anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic 
acid 
(1,8-ANS) 
Some of these, like ANS and ethidium bromide, will bind non- 
covalently to particular regions of proteins and nucleic acids, with large 
changes in their fluorescent properties. ANS tends to bind to 
hydrophobic patches on proteins and partially unfolded polypeptides, 
with a blue shift and increase in fluorescence intensity. Ethidium bromide 
molecules intercalate between the base pairs of double-stranded DNA, 
resulting in a large increase in fluorescence that is used routinely for 
detecting and visualizing bands of nucleic acids in gel electrophoresis, for 
example. 
Other fluorescent probes, like the dansyl group for example, are often 
used to covalently label an appropriate ligand, protein or other 
macromolecule. Such labels can then be used as reporter groups to 
detect binding, conformational changes or other effects (see Section 5.5, 
for example). 

Spectroscopy 
51 
2.4.6 Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer 
Another kind of fluorescence quenching can occur when the fluorescence 
emission spectrum of the excited molecule overlaps with the electronic 
absorbance of another nearby group (Figure 2.28). Depending on the 
distance and relative orientation of the two groups, this can give rise to 
direct energy transfer from the excited “donor” molecule to electronically 
excite the “acceptor”, with the donor molecule returning to the ground 
state without photon emission. This can either simply quench the 
fluorescence emission or, if the acceptor molecule is itself a fluorophore, 
give secondary fluorescence at a ;Imax corresponding to the acceptor. This 
effect can be used to identify nearby groups in macromolecular systems, 
or even to measure the separation between donor and acceptor groups 
in favourable cases, since the quenching efficiency (E) is a strong function 
of distance (R). 
The fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) quenching 
efficiency is defined as: 
E = I - ~ D A / + D  
where +DA and 4 D  are the (donor) fluorescence intensities measured in 
the presence and absence of acceptor, respectively, under otherwise 
identical conditions. 
The Forster mechanism of resonance energy transfer describes the 
effect in terms of dipole-induced-dipole interactions between the donor 
and acceptor molecules, leading to an inverse 6th power (l/R6) 
dependence: 
Figure 2.28 Spectral overlap 
and fluorescence energy transfer 
E = 
+ Rh) 

52 
Biophysical Chemistry 
where Ro is a constant for a particular donor/acceptor pair, giving the 
separation distance at which quenching is 50%. The value of Ro depends 
on a number of factors, including the quantum yield of the donor, the 
spectral overlap between the donor fluorescence and acceptor absorbance 
spectra (shown as the shaded area in Figure 2.28) and the relative 
orientations of the donor/acceptor groups. Typical Ro values are in the 
range 2-6 nm. 
One major technical challenge associated with this technique is how to 
introduce the donor and acceptor groups without perturbing the system 
too much. 
Q Wu and Stryer' used FRET to estimate molecular dimensions of 
the visual pigment protein rhodopsin. They attached various 
fluorescent donor molecules at specific sites on the protein, and 
used the intrinsic retinal chromophore as the acceptor group, For 
one particular fluorescent donor, attached to site B on the protein, 
Ro was 5.2 nm and the observed fluorescence quenching was 36%. 
What is the distance between site B and the retinal chromophore? 
A Rearranging the above equation gives: 
R6/Rg = 1/E - 1 = 1.78 (sinceE = 0.36) 
Therefore: 
R = Rox (1.78)'16 = 5.7nm 
2.4.7 Fluorescence Depolarization 
If a fluorescent sample is excited using linearly polarized light, then 
predominantly only those molecules with transition dipoles oriented in 
the direction of polarization will be excited. Similarly, when the molecule 
fluoresces, the polarization of the emitted photon reflects the orientation 
of the transition dipole. Consequently, if the molecule is tumbling or 
rotating, and changes its orientation during the lifetime of the excited 
state, then the polarization of the emitted light will be different from that 
of the exciting beam. This is known as fluorescence depolarization. Since 
the effect depends on how fast the fluorescent group is tumbling, 
measurements of fluorescence depolarization can be used to obtain 
information about the dynamics of macromolecules in different 

Spectroscopy 
53 
environments. See Chapter 4 for details about rotational diffusion and 
rotational relaxation times. 
2.4.8 Fluorescence Recovery after Photobleaching 
Many fluorophores are sensitive to light and can be bleached if the 
irradiation is too intense. This can be an experimental inconvenience. 
However, it can also be turned to advantage by providing a method for 
following the diffusion of molecules on a microscopic scale. This is the 
basis of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). Imagine a 
protein in a cell membrane that has been chemically labelled with a 
suitable fluorescent probe. Observation in the fluorescence microscope 
will show the distribution of this protein in the membrane. Now bleach a 
small area of the membrane using an intense flash of (laser) light. The 
photobleached molecules will no longer fluoresce, but, if they and the 
surrounding molecules are free to move, the bleached area will gradually 
recover by molecular diffusion in the membrane. The kinetics of this 
recovery process can give information about the lateral mobility of 
macromolecules and other components of the membrane. 
For two-dimensional diffusion, the average distance travelled by a 
molecule in it membrane in time t is given by: < x > = (4Dt)”2, where D 
is the diffusion coefficient. 
2.4.9 Phosphorescence and Luminescence 
In some molecules, electrons in the singlet excited state may undergo 
a process known as “intersystem crossing” to form a lower energy 
triplet state in which the spin state of the electron becomes reversed 
(Figure 2.29). 
Interatomic distance 
Figure 2.29 
Energy diagram 
illustrating intersystem crossing 

54 
Biophysical Chemistry 
For such systems, return to ground state is formally forbidden by the 
Pauli exclusion principle, and the lifetime of the triplet excited state is 
much longer than the more common singlet state. The return to ground 
state - when it eventually occurs - can also be accompanied by the 
emission of a photon. This is the phenomenon known as phosphor- 
escence, in which objects can appear to glow in the dark for long periods 
of time. 
T 
11gt11 i ~triittecl tiv c:o(it III 
iq 
fit Pflll >:I 
1:; 
ct l ~ ~ l l l l l ~ l l ~ l l l ~ ~ ? ~ ~ ~ ; i  
'I)(%( 
( J ~ l I ~ O t : ~ i ( ~ d  
tly tt 10 l L l C I f ~ ~ l ~ i ' ~ ( '  
( ' 1 , q : I i f :  
( cilaly/eti r)xi(ioiioti of ; i t 1  
O:q<llII( L > L l t ) c ; t f : 4 t ( '  
I~lr,lf(wI1 1 1 ' 9 1 1  ( j  
A1 F' ,I, I t i t \  cmcrqy w
i
i
t
r
t
b
 
The triplet state can be induced by chemical processes in the absence of 
light, and this is the basis for the phosphorescence or chemiluminescence 
of many marine organisms. 
2.4.1 0 Fluorescence and Confocal Microscopy 
One particularly useful application of fluorescence has been in the area of 
microscopy. Specific labelling of proteins or other components with 
fluorescent probes allows their position to be visualized within biological 
cells or tissues. Using a sharply focused laser beam as the exciting light, one 
can observe fluorescence emission from tiny volume elements within the 
sample. By scanning of the laser focus, both up and down and side-to-side, 
observing the emission intensity at each point, one can build up a three- 
dimensional image of the fluorophore distribution within the sample. 
Even greater depth penetration and resolution can be obtained by 
using t\\o-pliolon c\citatioti (Figure 2.30). Given a high enough light 
intensity, it is possible to achieve electronic excitation of the fluorescent 
group by simultaneous absorption of two photons (each with half the 
required energy), rather than the more usual single-photon process. The 
subsequent fluorescence will take place regardless of how the excited state 
was produced. 
Figure 2.30 Left: one-photon 
excitation; right: two-photon 
excitation, \lo = v1/2 
This has two main advantages here. Firstly, since very high light 
intensities are required for two-photon effects, emission will occur 
predominantly from the focal point of the laser beam where it is most 

Spectroscopy 
55 
intense, and much less from other regions where the beam is less 
focused. Secondly, the longer wavelengths used for two-photon 
excitation (usually in the near-IR region) allow much greater depth 
penetration, with less scattered background light than is normally found 
at the shorter wavelengths used for conventional fluorescence tech- 
niques. 
2.5 
Vibrational Spectroscopy: IR and Raman 
Infrared spectroscopy probes the characteristic vibrational bands of 
chemical groups as the atoms move with respect to one another in 
response to an oscillating electromagnetic field of the appropriate 
frequency. The normal modes of a particular molecule or group depend 
on the molecular structure, interatomic forces (bond strengths) and 
masses of the atoms concerned, but they will only be IR active if the 
vibrational mode involves a change in dipole moment. 
Conventional I R spectrometers follow the same principles as described 
for UV/vis spectrometers, but, bearing in mind that IR radiation is 
basically radiant heat, the detectors are usually sensitive thermocouples 
and the monochromator/spectrometer optics must be adapted to 
transmit in this spectral region. Samples are frequently prepared as 
thin films or solid dispersions between IR transparent optical surfxes 
(KBr discs, etc.). 
Despite the utility of IR spectroscopy in other parts of chemistry, its 
application to biomolecules has been relatively limited. This is mainly due 
to sampling problems. Biomolecules are usually best studied in aqueous 
solution, and are rarely soluble in the solvents normally required for IR. 
Water absorbs very strongly in the IR region and, apart from narrow 
window in the region of 1700 cm-', most of the spectral range is 
inaccessible even with highly concentrated biomolecule solutions. The 
accessible range can be extended a little by using D20 as solvent. Some 
improvements have come about in recent years with the development of 
Fourier transform (FTIR) instruments and multiple internal reflection 
(MI R) sampling methods. 
The advantage of FTIR is that multiple spectral scans over a wide 
range can be accumulated to give a good signal-to-noise ratio even with 
strongly absorbing samples, and the background water spectrum can be 
measured separately and reliably subtracted to give the underlying 
sample spectrum. This is even further improved by placing the sample in 
an MIR device in which, rather than pass through the sample, the IR 
beam is reflected off the under surface of a crystal in contact with the 
sample. The IR beam penetrates only a very short distance into the 
sample at the crystal/liquid interface. 

56 
Biophysical Chemistry 
2.5.1 Raman Spectroscopy 
T l v  dfect was first discovered hy 
ttv: Indian physicist C V Raman, 
w t i  he was awarded thc Nobel 
PI i/c? for this in 1930 
Figure 2.31 Inelastic (Raman), 
scattering 
Itx d f t x t  can he described b y  
classir:al mechanics in term of 
form? vibrations of harmonic 
oci:llliqtors Here. sirlce the? 
ni o I t:c I 1 I a r po I a r I za h i I i t y Y c I i a 11 g es 
sligthtlij as the bond distorts. non- 
lint:ai ttffccts give rise to dipole 
oscill;:itioris at freclL-rencics other 
than the iinposed Irequcncy. 
R m a n  himself seems to have 
txm ied to this discovery, at least 
i r  part. by his theoretical studies 
of the vibrations of musical 
1ri:;traments such as the violin. 
Vibrational properties of molecules can also be studied using Raman 
spectroscopy, which is based on the inelastic watlcring of light 
(Figure 2.3 1). 
Note that the scattering of light by molecules is not to be confused with 
the absorbance or fluorescence described elsewhere. Light absorption 
requires light of specific wavelength or energies corresponding to 
particular electronic or vibrational transitions. Scattering, on the other 
hand, occurs at any wavelength and is just a general property of matter 
depending on electrical polarizability (a). 
Imagine a molecule placed in an (oscillating) electromagnetic field. 
The electric field ( E )  at any one time will induce an electric dipole in the 
molecule, ,u = aE. This oscillating electric dipole will itself act as a little 
radio antenna and will radiate in all directions at the frequency of the 
imposed field, E. If the imposed field is due to light, then the molecule will 
scatter a fraction of that light beam, without change of frequency. This is 
the basis for elastic or Kayleigh scattering of light. In addition, if the 
electrical polarization of the molecule involves stretching or bending of 
chemical bonds, then this might excite normal mode bending or 
stretching vibrations in the molecule itself. In this case, the induced 
frequency of dipole oscillation may be reduced by an amount 
corresponding to the normal mode frequency, and the resulting frequency 
of the scattered light will be reduced accordingly because some of the light 
energy must be used to excite the molecular vibration. This shift in 
frequency (called the Stokes shift) is the basis for Raman spectroscopy. 
The quantum picture of this process is perhaps easier to visualize. Most 
photons (particles of light) encountering a molecule will just pass on by 
unaffected. Occasionally, a photon may bounce off the molecule without 
any change of energy (Rayleigh/elastic scatter), or may set the molecule 
vibrating and bounce off with reduced energy (Stokes--Raman/inelastic 
scatter) (just like when throwing stones at an empty oil drum, the stone 
may bounce off, leaving the drum vibrating at its resonant frequency). 

Spectroscopy 
57 
The process can be described as a yirtual transition to a formally 
disallowed state (see Figure 2.3 l), with a rapid return to the ground state 
once it realizes its mistake, so to speak. The virtual transition occurs 
effectively instantaneously, but can leave the molecule in a different 
vibrational level of the ground state from where it started. 
Occasionally, especially at higher temperatures, the molecule may 
already be in a higher vibrational level, and the scattered photon may 
instead pick up energy from this molecular vibration and appear at higher 
frequency (anti-Stokes shift) (Figure 2.32). 
I 
I1 I' 
I 
Raman spectra are collected using an instrument somewhat like a 
spectrofluorimeter, but using a laser light source to give the intense 
monochromatic beam required (Figure 2.33). 
4 
Monoc hromator 
u 
I I I * 
I 
I 
Analysis & display 
Lo= vo- v 
Visible or near-IR lasers are normally used and since water is 
transparent in this region, biological samples can be examined directly. 
It further helps that Raman scattering from water (unlike IR absor- 
bance) is relatively weak. Examples of Raman spectra are shown in 
Figures 2.34 and 2.35. 
Figure 2.32 
Raman scattering 
with an anti-Stokes shift 
Figure 2.33 
Raman spec- 
trometer 

58 
Biophysical Chemistry 
I 
The population of vibrationally 
excited states is usually small a1 
normal temperatures, and 
decreases at higher frequencies. 
This IS why antt-Stokes scattering 
is weak. 
n 
I 
Rl 
Figure 2.34 A typical Raman 
spectrum consisting of an 
intense Rayleigh line (v,,) and a 
series of lower frequency Raman 
bands corresponding to sample 
vibrational modes. The higher 
frequency anti-Stokes bands fall 
away rapidly and are rarely 
observed deliberately, except for 
special purposes 
Figure 2.35 Raman spectrum 
of a typical protein (collagen, 
1 mg mL-') in water. Note that 
most of the strong IR absorbing 
bands in water do not show up in 
the Raman spectra because of 
different selection rules 
Rayleigh scatter 
Stokes 
h 
c 
0 
U 
.r( 
v) 
Y 
.d 
0 
Relative frequency (vo - v) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1200 
1400 
1600 
1800 
Raman shiftkm-1 
Q What would be the wavelength of the Raman band corres- 
ponding to a carbonyl group frequency of 1650 cm-', assuming a 
laser wavelength of 546.0 nm? 
A 546.0nm = 183155 1650cm-' 
= 16665 cm-' E 600.1 nm (Stokes) 
= 19965 cm-' = 500.9 nm (anti-Stokes) 

Spectroscopy 
59 
2.5.2 Resonance Raman, SERS and ROA 
Raman scattering is inherently very weak, and the complexity of 
overlapping bands from biological macromolecules can sometimes be 
hard to disentangle. However, if the wavelength of the laser light used for 
Raman excitation coincides with an electronic absorbance band in the 
sample, the Raman scattering from the chromophore can be greatly 
enhanced. This resonance Raman effect can be very useful in improving 
signals from dilute samples, or for selectively enhancing the Raman 
spectrum of just one component of a mixture. For example, this has 
been used to great advantage in studies of the visual pigment protein 
rhodopsin, where the Raman spectrum coming from the retinal 
chromophore (which absorbs in the visible region) is intensified by 
resonance enhancement and stands out much more clearly from the 
background protein spectrum. UV lasers are now becoming available 
that permit direct resonance Raman studies of proteins and nucleic 
acids. 
Another way to enhance Raman scattering is to adsorb the sample on 
to a roughened metal surface, or on to the surfaces of colloidal metal 
particles in solution. This is known as surface enhanced Raman scattering 
(SERS). The mechanism is not well understood, but it is probably 
related to the strong local electromagnetic fields that occur when light 
shines on to the metal surface. When light encounters a metal it induces 
surf'tlcc plasmons or intense collective motions of the conduction 
electrons in the metallic surfxe. This amplifies the oscillating 
electromagnetic fields close to the surface so that proteins or other 
molecules adsorbed on the surface experience much greater polarization 
and scatter more strongly. 
In recent years a new technique called Raman optical activity (ROA) 
has been developed with specific applications to biological molecules in 
solution.* The polarizability and light scattering properties of chiral 
molecules will differ slightly, depending on the polarization of the 
incident beam. This gives rise to small differences in the intensity of 
Raman scattering between left and right circularly polarized light. This 
can be used to generate an ROA spectrum that contains information 
about the chirality of the scattering groups as well as their normal mode 
frequencies. 
You know, wliat these people do 
is really bery clever They put little 
spies into the molecules and send 
have to radio back what they are 
seeing ' 
described NMR to Felix Bloch, 
one of the p,ol,eers of 
technique 
2.6 
NMR (Brief Overview) 
radio signals to them, and they 
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) is based on the 
magnetic properties of certain atomic nuclei. It has become a cornerstone 
of modern chemical analysis, and is now of major importance in studying 
hovv Nlels Bohr 

60 
Biophysical Chemistry 
the structure and dynamics of biological macromolecules. The technol- 
ogy involved is quite advanced, and only the barest outline can be given 
here. A related text in this series gives more detail and a more rigorous 
treatment of this topic (see Further Reading). 
Atomic nuclei containing an odd number of nucleons (protons or 
neutrons) can have a magnetic dipole moment (pB) associated with 
their nuclear spin. When placed in a magnetic field (B) they act like tiny 
bar magnets (or compass needles) and tend to line up in the direction 
of the field. Nuclei of particular biomolecular importance are IH, 
13C, 15N and 31P. These are all spin-1/2 nuclei which, according to 
quantum mechanics, may only exist in one of two possible states in a 
magnetic field: either parallel (low energy, E = -pBB) or anti-parallel 
(high energy, E = +pBB). The energy separation between these two 
states is: 
where B is the strength of the magnetic field experienced by the nucleus, 
and pB is the component of the nuclear magnetic moment along the 
field axis. 
The magnitude of the nuclear magnetic moment is related to a quantity 
known as the gyromagnetic ratio (y) (see Table 2.2): 
Normally, of course, the majority of the nuclei will be in the lower energy 
state (see Figure 2.36). However, if an oscillating electromagnetic field is 
applied at the appropriate frequency, the nucleus may switch between the 
states and absorb energy from the applied field. The resonant frequency is 
related to the energy separation: 
hv = AE = 2 p ~ B  
= hyB 
so that the resonant frequency is v = yB/2n. 
E = - ~ B B  
PB 
Figure 2.36 Energy levels of 
nuclear magnetic dipoles in a 
magnetic field, B 

Spectroscopy 
61 
Table 2.2 Gyromagnetic ratios and natural abundances of some nuclei 
y/107 T-' s-' 
Natural abundance/% 
'H 3c 
5N 
19F 
31P 
70 
26.75 
6.73 
-2.71 
-3.63 
25.18 
10.84 
99.985 
1.11 
0.37 
0.037 
100.0 
100.0 
Q What is the resonant frequency for a proton in a magnetic field 
of 14.1 Tesla? 
A For the proton ('H nucleus), y = 2.675 x lo8 T-' s-'. 
Therefore: 
v = yB/27~ = 2.675 x lo8 x 14.1/27~ 
= 6.0 x 10' HZ 
= 600MHz 
This is the basis of NMR spectroscopy. Samples are placed in a strong 
magnetic field, usually between the poles of a superconducting magnet 
(see Figure 2.37), and the resonant frequencies for each of the nuclei 
determined using an applied radiofrequency electromagnetic field 
(usually in the 100 MHz to GHz range). The observed resonant frequency 
(v) for any particular atomic nucleus depends on two factors: the nature 
of the nucleus (pB) and the magnetic field (B) that it sees. It is this second 
fxtor that makes NMR such a powerful tool, since B is made up not just 
of the external applied field from the magnet (Bo) but additional 
contributions (6B) from other nuclei and chemical groups. This is because 
nearby atoms and groups, themselves acting like small magnets, will 
screen or shift the local magnetic field experienced by the nucleus. 
Consequently, NMR resonant frequencies are extremely sensitive to the 
chemical environment of the particular atomic nucleus, and this can be 
used to give accurate structural information. The chemical shift and spin- 
spin coupling (J-coupling or fine structure) are ways of describing these 
additional contributions (6B), and the characteristic patterns for specific 
chemical groups and different nuclei are well described in other books. 
Protoil NMR 15, most mmw11 
~~~~~~1~~ 
~
~
~
)
gyrornayrietic, r,itro stLJdltl>$ wt 
Other nLJ(:1f31 
L K ~ ~  
as 
lC 
cirlci 
of ttlt-, s<41 
, l F ) l c 2 ~ ~  
often require ~ A o p i c  
oiwctirwiit 

62 
Biophysical Chemistry 
__ 
_- 
-. 
- - 
__ 
. 
__ _- _ _  - - 
Sample 
Figure 2.37 Sketch of a typical 
RF coils 
NMR spectrometer 
NMR :;pectronicters are often 
classitied according to their 
resonant frequency for protons 
For example ;i '600 MHL' NMR 
instrument would comprise a 
14 I T rridynet in which 'H nuclei 
would resonate at roughly this 
frequency Ott ler nuclei would 
h w e  tl iff erent f req ue t i  c I es 
S 
pi n-1 at t i ce an I so trop y effects arE 
c:vcri more significant with solid 
:.~;arnples or biological 
iernhanes, where solutioii 
lurmbling is very slow or m t i -  
..:xisterr 111 sucli cases, 
!cchniclues of solid-state NlLlR 
I ivolvlng magic angle spinning 
,-!lid ottier specialist methods have 
t :I eel I1 d eve I0 p e ti . 
In a basic NMR spectrometer, the resonant frequencies are obtained 
by scanning the applied magnetic field and detecting the values at which 
the oscillating field is absorbed. This is known as the continuous wave or 
CW approach. It has the disadvantage that only one frequency is 
examined at a time, and scanning across the entire spectrum is time 
consuming. In order to overcome this disadvantage, the more powerful 
modern instruments use a somewhat different approach called pulse or 
Fourier transform (FT) NMR. Here the applied magnetic field is kept 
constant, and the magnetic nuclei in the sample are perturbed by applying 
a short (1-20 ps), broad-frequency microwave pulse that excites a range 
of different nuclei at once. The way in which the perturbed nuclear spins 
relax back to their equilibrium positions - called free induction decay 
(FID) - can be followed using field coils or probes placed close to the 
sample in the NMR spectrometer. The rate of decay of any particular 
nucleus to its equilibrium orientat ion is related to its resonant frequency, 
v ,  so the FID signal consists of a superposition of exponentially decaying 
oscillations made up of components arising from every perturbed nucleus 
in the sample. This can be analysed mathematically using Fourier 
transform methods to give the entire spectrum very rapidly. Since each 
pulse contains information about all nuclei simultaneously, data 
collection is very efficient, and data from multiple pulses can be 
accumulated to give much greater sensitivity and improved signal- 
to-noise ratios. 
The way in which a perturbed nucleus relaxes to its equilibrium state in 
a magnetic field depends on a number of factors. An isolated nucleus 
cannot reorient by itself, since the process requires transfer of spin 
angular momentum, and NMR relaxation times depend on interactions 
of the perturbed nucleus with its surroundings. The spin-lattice relaxation 
time ( T I )  is related to the fluctuations in local magnetic field perceived by 
the nucleus as a consequence of other nearby nuclei, either in the same 
molecule or in the surrounding solvent. This means that T, values depend 
on how fast the molecule or group containing the nucleus is tumbling or 
rotating in the sample. Measurements of NMR relaxation times can give 

Spectroscopy 
63 
important information about dynamic process in molecules such as 
rotational diffusion and the rates of conformational fluctuations and 
other internal motions within macromolecules. 
The spin-spin relawtion time (7'2) is related to exchange of spin between 
equivalent nuclei. This is essentially a quantum mechanical effect that 
does not lead to loss of energy to the surroundings, but merely transfer of 
the magnetization to a nearby nucleus. Because of the Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle, this leads to a broadening of the spectral line, so 
that the width (Av) is roughly equal to l/.nT2. Spin-spin relaxation tends 
to be more efficient (T2 is smaller) for slowly tumbling molecules and 
leads to significant broadening and overlap of NMR lines if rotational 
diffusion is slow on an NMR timescale. This is of particular significance 
when studying large proteins or other macromolecules in solution. 
I 
~
~
_
_
~
 
___-_____ 
- _ _ _  
~ 
- 
I 
Q What is the rotational diffusion (tumbling) time for a rigid 
spherical macromolecule of radius 1.5 nm in water at 20 "C? How 
does this compare to a typical NMR timescale? (The viscosity of 
pure water at 20 "C is q = 1.002 x 
N s m-2) 
A 
z , ~ ~  
= 8nqR3/2kT 
Using the methods described in Chapter 4 (Section 4.5): 
= sn x 1.002 x 
x (1.5 x 10-~)~/(2 
x 1.381 x 
x 293) 
= 1 x IO-*S (Ions) 
Therefore: 
1 /trot F 100 MHz, comparable to typical NMR frequencies. 
_ _  
_______ 
_ _ _ _ _ ~ _ _ _ _ _  
~ 
Spin-spin interactions can affect the intensities of NMR spectral lines 
in addition to affecting the chemical shift and relaxation properties of a 
given nucleus. One example of this is the nuclear Ovcrhauser effect (NOE), 
in which the magnetization state of one nucleus can affect the spin 
population, and hence the NMR absorbance, of another nearby nucleus. 
The magnitude of the effect depends on a dipole-dipole interaction 
between the two nuclei, and is therefore very sensitive to the distance 
between the nuclei, with a l/r6 dependence. This makes it possible to 
measure distances between specific atoms and forms the basis for 
determining three-dimensional molecular structures. 
In addition to enhanced sensitivity, pulse FT-NMR techniques have 
given rise to numerous ingenious methods whereby, using different 

64 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 2.38 An example of a 
2-D NOESY spectrum of a DNA 
fragment in D20 (courtesy of 
Dr. Brian Smith). This is a two- 
dimensional contour map show- 
ing how efficiently nuclear 
magnetization can be transferred 
from one 'H nucleus to another 
nearby in the structure. Each off- 
diagonal peak corresponds to a 
pair of protons, and the size of 
the peak can be related to the 
distance between them (the 
bigger the peak, the closer they 
are together in the molecule) 
sequences of microwave pulses, different features of NMR spectra can be 
enhanced or suppressed in a controlled fashion. Such techniques are 
particularly powerful when combined with multinuclear NM R, involving 
other nuclei such as I3C and "N, in addition to 'H, often requiring 
isotopically enriched samples. These experiments give rise to multi- 
dimensional NMR spectra in which the chemical shifts and intensities of 
NMR lines for different nuclei are plotted along different axes. Correla- 
tions and interactions between different nuclei show up more clearly in 
such representations, and a large number of acronyms are used to 
designate different pulse sequences and methods. For example: COSY 
(correlation spectroscopy); TOCSY (total correlation spectroscopy); 
NOESY (nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy); HSQC (heteronuclear 
single quantum coherence); and so on (see Figure 2.38). 
V 
*l 
b 
;t 
-
4
 
V 
8 
VA 
I 
I I I 
I t 
I I I 
I I I I I 
I
d
 I 
I I 
1 1 . 1  
I I I I I 
1
1
.
1
 
I 
I I I 
I I I 
I I I I I I
]
 
~ 
~ 
~ 
--~__ 
~ 
~ 
-- __ ~
~
-
-
~
_
_
_
 
One of the more important current applications of high-resolution 
multinuclear NMR is in the determination of the three-dimensional 
structures of proteins and other macromolecules in solution. These 
techniques are complementary to crystallographic methods. A typical 
experimental procedure is described in Box 2.2. 

Spectroscopy 
65 
1. Sample preparation. Sample concentrations in the range 0.5- 
2 mM (several mg ~ m - ~ )  
are usually required, and samples must be 
enriched in other NMR nuclei (I3C, 15N). This can be achieved by 
recombinant DNA methods in isotopically enriched media. 
2. Data acquisition andprocessing. Collect NMR data using high- 
resolution (500 MHz or more) spectrometers, using different pulse 
sequences and multiple nuclei. 
3. Sequence-speczjk assignment. Each peak in the NMR spectrum 
(of which there will be thousands) corresponds to a particular atom 
(H, C, N, etc.) in the structure. These can be assigned to specific 
backbone or side-chain residues in the sequence using chemical shift 
data and correlation methods (COSY, TOCSY, HSQC, etc.). 
4. NOE cross-peak identijication and assignment. Use NOESY to 
determine pairwise distances between specific nuclei in the structure. 
5. Structure calculation, model building and refinement. The large 
number of pairwise distances should be sufficient to define a 
topologically consistent three-dimensional structure for the protein. 
What results, usually, is a family of closely similar structures, all 
of which are consistent with the NOESY data. Within the limits of 
experimental error, this family of structures represents the dynamic 
conformational population of the protein in solution, and quite 
often emphasizes the inherent flexibility of biological macromol- 
1 
ecules (see Figure 2.39). 
Figure 2.39 Typical protein 
NMR structure, showing popu- 
lation of conformations (courtesy 
of Nicola Meenan) 

66 
Biophysical Chemistry 
1. Spectroscopy is based on the interaction of electromagnetic 
waves with matter, and different frequency ranges will probe 
different electronic and magnetic properties of molecules. UV/visible 
absorbance and fluorescence spectroscopy is based on electronic 
transitions. Raman spectroscopy gives information about vibra- 
tional bands in the IR region, while NMR uses radiofrequency 
transitions of nuclear dipoles to give detailed structural information. 
2. Biological chromophores have characteristic UV/visible absor- 
bance and fluorescence spectra that can give general information 
about molecular environments. 
3. 
secondary structure in proteins and nucleic acids. 
Circular dichroism measurements can give information about 
4. 
Vibrational spectroscopy: conventional IR spectroscopy with 
biological molecules in water is difficult, but this can be overcome by 
using laser inelastic light scattering (Raman) techniques. 
5. 
mation and dynamics of biological macromolecules in solution. 
Multinuclear NMR methods are used to study the confor- 
1. S. C. Gill and P. H. Von Hippel, Calculation uf protein e-vtinction 
coqficients,from amino-acid sequence duta, in Anal. Biochem., 1989, 182, 
2. M. Bradford, A rupid and sensitive method .for the quantitation of 
3 19-326. 
m icrogram yuan tit ies of protein utilizing the principle of pro tein-dy e 
binding, in Anal. Biochcm., 1976, 72, 248- 254. 
3. F. M. Pohl and T. M. Jovin, Salt-induced cooperative conformational 
change of' u synthetic DNA. Equilibrium and kinetic studies with poly- 
(dG-dC), in J. Mol. Biol., 1972, 67, 375-396. 
4. S. M. Kelly and N. C. Price, Applications ojcirculur dichroisn? to studies 
of protein jolding and unfolding, in Biochirn. Biophys. Acta, 1997, 1338, 
5. J. R. Lakowicz and G. Weber, Quenching o j  protein .fliiorescenc~~ 
by 
oxygen. Detection c?f'.struc.turul.Puctuations 
in proteins on the nanosecond 
timesc.uk, in Biochemistry, 1973, 12, 41 714179. 
6. H. Y. Tsien, The greeii.fluorescent protein, in Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1998, 
161-1 85. 
67, 5 09-544. 

Spectroscopy 
67 
._ 
.._ 
. 
__ 
___ 
7. C. W. Wu and L. Stryer, Proximity relationships in rhodopsin, in Proc. 
8. L. D. Barron, A. Cooper, S. J. Ford, L. Hecht and Z .  Q. Wen, 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA., 1972, 69, 1104-1 108. 
Vibrational Raman optical-activity of enzjvnes, in Faraday Discuss. 
Chem. Soc., 1992,93,259-268, 
~ 
-________ 
G. Fasman (ed.) Circular Dichroisni and the Conformational Analj*sis of' 
Biomoleculcs, Plenum, New York, 1996. 
J. M. Hollas, Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectrosc.opy, RSC Tutorial 
Chemistry Text, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 2002. 
P. Kelly and J. D. Woollins, Multi-element N M R ,  RSC Tutorial Chemistry 
Text, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 2004. 
J . R. La kowicz, Principles of F1rrore.s.cenc.e Spclctroscopy, Plenum, 
New York, 1983. 
P. R. Selvin, The renaissance o[fluorescence energy trunsfcr, in Nut. Struct. 
Bid., 2000, 7, 730-734. 
D. Sheehan, Physical Biochemistry: Principles and Applications, Wiley, 
New York, 2000, Chapter 3. 
I. Tinoco, K. Sauer, J. C. Wang and J. D. Puglisi, Physical Chenzistrj*: 
Principles and Applications in Biological Sciences, 4th. edn., Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2002, Chapter 10. 
Bioc*l~emistry, 
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1998, Chapters 8-1 2. 
K. E. van Holde, W. C. Johnson and P. S. Ho, Principles of Physicul 
2.1. What is giving rise to the electromagnetic radiation coming 
from: (a) red hot charcoal; (b) a fluorescent light bulb; (c) a micro- 
wave oven; (d) an X-ray generator tube; (e) a laser; (f) a synchrotron; 
(8) a mobile telephone? 
2.2. 
Without using a calculator: what fraction (YO) 
of light would 
pass through a sample with an absorbance ( A )  of: (a) 1; (b) 2; (c) 5; 
(d) O? 
2.3. (a) What is the absorbance corresponding to the following 
transmittances: I%, 5%, 25%, 50%, go%, loo%? (b) What fraction 
of light would be transmitted by samples having the following 
absorbances: 0.2, 0.5, 1, 1.5, lo? 

68 
Biophysical Chemistry 
2.4. A typical laboratory spectrophotometer is quoted as having a 
“stray light rejection of 0.1 %”. What absorbance reading would this 
instrument give for samples with a (true) absorbance of A = 1,0,2.0 
or 3.0? 
2.5. 
Why is the “stray light effect” more significant at high 
absorbance values? 
2.6. (a) Estimate &280 for each of the following proteins: lysozyme 
(6 Trp, 3 Tyr, 3 Phe); insulin (0 Trp, 4 Tyr, 3 Phe); ribonuclease 
(0 Trp, 6 Tyr, 3 Phe); human serum albumin (1 Trp, 18 Tyr, 3 1 Phe). 
(b) In each of these, which amino acid (if any) makes the dominant 
contribution? 
2.7. For a particular recombinant protein solution (produced by 
genetic engineering methods), the total concentration estimated by 
280 nm absorbance measurements is 0.8 mg mL-’. However, bio- 
logical activity measurements suggest that the concentration is only 
0.6 mg mL-’. What are the possible reasons for this discrepancy? 
2.8. 
concentrations? 
What other methods might be used for measuring protein 
2.9. The experimental CD spectra of two proteins (called 
“ABA-1” and “RS”) of unknown structure are shown below. 
What is the likely dominant secondary structure in each case? 
Wavelengtldnm 
2.10. 
Mixtures of amino acids derived by acid hydrolysis of 
proteins are optically active, whilst mixtures of nucleotide bases are 
not. Why is this? 

Spectroscopy 
69 
2.1 I. Some experiments attempting to simulate the origin of life 
by chemical synthesis from inorganic starting materials have yielded 
mixtures of amino acids (and other molecules) similar to those found 
in biology. However, the solutions do not show any circular 
dichroism. Why is this? 
2.1 2. 
of the excitation wavelength (Aexc). Why is this? 
Fluorescence emission spectra (&,) 
are usually independent 
2.13. 
Suggest why A < 0.2 is recommended to minimize inner 
filter effects in fluorescence spectroscopy using a standard 1 cm 
pathlength cuvette. (Hint: calculate the % transmission.) 
2.14. Typical molecular thermal energy is of order kT per degree 
of freedom (RT per mole). What vibrational frequency would this 
correspond to at room temperature? 
2.15. The fluorescence spectrum of a protein (Figure 2.24) excited 
with 285 nm light shows a small Raman band around 318 nm 
coming from the solvent water. What vibrational band does this 
correspond to? 

3 
Mass Spectrometry 
Mass spectrometry (MS for short) is rather different from the other kinds 
of spectroscopy that we have been considering in the previous chapter. 
Instead of using electromagnetic radiation, MS separates and analyses 
mixtures of molecules - or molecular fragments - on the basis of their 
mass (m) 
and charge (2). This is done using a combination of electric and 
magnetic fields to control the flight paths of molecules in a vacuum 
chamber, in much the same way as beams of electrons are manipulated in 
a television picture tube. The results can give quite detailed information 
about molecular structure and interactions. 
In this chapter we explore the theoretical and experimental basis of 
various mass spectrometry techniques and their applications to 
biomolecules. By the end you should be able to: 
Explain how charged particles move under the influence of 
electric and magnetic fields 
Outline the basic components of a mass spectrometer 
Describe different ways in which particles may be separated 
according to their m/z ratios 
Describe how molecular ions are produced experimentally 
Use MS data to determine relative molecular masses of proteins 
and other (macro)molecules 
3.1 
Introduction 
J. J. Tho~s0n's 
studies of the 
tieflection of "cathode rays" by 
electric ;and magnetic fields led to 
Mass spectrometry is based on two fundamental physical properties of 
charged particles: 
Prize in 1906 He went on to obtain 
the first mass spectra of "positive 
rays" of inert gases and other ions 
direction of the field. 
(ii) Charged particles moving through a magnetic field (B) will 
by similar techniques. 
experience a force at right angles to their direction of movement. 
70 

Mass Spectrometry 
71 
i 
7 
Sample 
Ion 
inject +- 
source 
sample ionization source, 
acceleration electrodes to 
Mass (dd ---- -)-- 
- - 
electromagnetic focusing and 
analy ser( s) 
Q Why does a mass spectrometer require a high vacuum? 
A To avoid molecular collisions that would disrupt the ion flight 
path. 
According to the kinetic theory of gases, the mean free path 
(i.e. the average distance travelled before colliding with another 
1 = kT/(2 ' 2 P ~ )  
where P is the gas pressure and u is the collision cross-section area 
for the colliding gas molecules. Typical collision cross-sections 
for small molecules are around 1 nm2. For atmospheric pressure 
(1 atm, 1.013 X lo5 Pa) at 300 K, this gives a mean free path of 
I = 3 x 
m (30 nm, 300 A), so molecules would collide after 
travelling just a few molecular diameters. For a typical unimpeded 
flight path in a mass spectrometer in excess of 1 metre we would 
require a pressure (P) 
inside the instrument of less than 3 x 
atm. 
molecule) is given by: 
1 
3.2 Ion Sources 
The experimental challenge for MS is how to get a stream of molecular 
ions into the high vacuum of the instrument in a suitable form for mass 
analysis. Sample ionization techniques have proven to be the key to 
successful applications of MS to biomolecular problems. Most com- 
pounds, especially high RMM and polar materials, have a very low 
vapour pressure and do not easily evaporate, even under the high vacuum 
in the mass spectrometer. With small compounds it is usually possible 
to produce volatile versions by careful chemical derivitization (e.g. 
permethylation, acylation, esterification), and this is the basis for most 
routine chemical applications of MS. However, this is rarely satisfxtory 
for larger biomolecules, and alternative strategies have to be adopted. 

72 
Biophysical Chemistry 
3.3 
Ionization Methods 
3.3.1 Electron Impact and Chemical Ionization 
These methods usually require chemical derivatization to produce 
volatile species with sufficient vapour pressure to form a gas in the MS 
sample compartment. The sample may be introduced either by itself, 
for electron impact (EI) methods, or mixed with a large excess of 
another gas for chemical ionization (CI). The volatile sample mixture is 
bombarded with a beam of electrons with energies (typically up to 
100 eV) which may be captured to produce negatively charged species 
(M-), or where electron impact is sufficient to displace electrons and 
produce positive ions (M+). This may also result in fragmentation of 
the unstable radicals produced from the sample molecules, and the 
characteristic fragmentation patterns are frequently useful in structural 
identification. 
Gentler ionization (CI) may be achieved by mixing the sample with a 
suitable carrier gas (e.g. methane or ammonia) to reduce sample fragmen- 
tation. Here the carrier gas takes the brunt of the electron bombardment, 
creating positively charged CH;, NH; and other ions which can then 
transfer positive charge (H+) to the sample molecules by more gentle 
collisions. The resulting molecular ions (MH ' 
) are also intrinsically more 
stable than the ions produced by direct electron impact, so molecular 
fragmentation is reduced. This simplifies the resulting mass spectrum and 
makes accurate mass determination easier, but reduces the often useful 
structural information that may be obtained by analysis of fragmentation 
patterns. 
Both these ionization methods are best suited to relatively small 
molecules, and have been used extensively for analysis of simple per- 
methylated carbohydrates. They cannot usually be applied to much less 
volatile species such as peptides, proteins or other macromolecules. 
3.3.2 Fast Atom Bombardment 
Sputter to emit particles in 
In fast atom bombardment (FAB), the sample is introduced as a viscous 
liquid - often dissolved in a solvent such as glycerol (propane- 1,2,3-triol) - 
which is then bombarded with a stream of energetic atoms or ions 
(typically argon or xenon at energies up to 30 keV) rather than electrons. 
This results in sputtering of molecules from the sample, and a proportion 
of them are also ionized. Fragmentation may also occur during collision 
and ionization. This cloud of ions is then directed into the mass 
spectrometer for analysis. This method is typically useful for peptides or 
small proteins of RMM up to about 10,000. 
I 
6 uplostve rnanrier 

Mass Spectrometry 
73 
3.3.3 Electrospray Ionization 
In electrospray ionization (ESI), the sample is injected as a dilute solution 
through a fine orifice or capillary to produce a fine spray or stream of 
droplets. A voltage may be applied to the capillary and surrounding 
electrodes so that the droplets carry electrostatic charge. The solvent is 
driven off by a stream of dry gas in the sample chamber; as the solvent 
evaporates, electrostatic repulsion breaks the droplets up further, leaving 
the charged particles - frequently single molecules - to be directed into 
the high vacuum chamber of the spectrometer. This is a relatively gentle 
ionization method, and is particularly useful for proteins and other large 
molecules. However, although little or no fragmentation occurs under 
optimal conditions, each macromolecule does give rise to a number of 
peaks in the mass spectrum because of the range of charges that molecules 
may carry (MH+, MHg+, and so on). This has to be taken into account 
during interpretation of the spectra. The advantage, however, is that it 
does give a number of peaks from which more accurate mass data may be 
calculated. An example of this is given in Figure 3.5 below. 
Variants of this method can be used to sample directly the eluant from 
chromatographic separations. 
3.3.4 Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption Ionization 
In this method, abbreviated MALDI, the sample is incorporated into a 
solid matrix made up of a UV- or light-absorbing compound such as 2,5- 
dihydroxybenzoic acid. An intense pulse of laser light (typically around 
390 nm) is focused onto the surface of this matrix, where the absorbed 
energy produces local heating and desorption of some of the matrix, 
These desorbed molecules, many of them thermally ionized, are then 
directed into the MS chamber. Again, this relatively gentle desorption 
technique is particularly useful for potentially fragile macromolecules. 
The pulse of ions produced by this method makes it particularly suited to 
“time-of-flight” (TOF) analysis methods (see below). 
Nowadays, the more sophisticated MS instruments combine a range of 
ionization and analysis methods. 
3.4 
Mass Analysers 
Once the molecular ions are produced they are usually accelerated and 
focused, using high-voltage electric fields and suitable electrodes, prior to 
injection into the mass analyser. A number of different mass analysis 
methods are now in use, and new techniques are continually being 
developed. However, all the methods described here share one thing in 
common: they all separate ions on the basis of the mass/charge ratio (m/z). 

74 
Biophysical Chemistry 
3.4.1 Magnetic Analysis Methods 
Earlier versions of mass spectrometers were based on magnetic 
separation, and this is still in use today (Figure 3.2). 
Centrifugal 
force 
force 
Figure 3.2 Charged particles 
moving in a magnetic field 
perpendicular to the page 
A charged particle (ze) moving in a uniform magnetic field will tend to 
follow a circular trajectory in which the (inward) magnetic force (zevB) is 
balanced by the (outward) centrifugal force (mv2/r): 
mv2/r = zevB 
(3.1) 
so that: 
r = mv/zeB 
The velocity (v) is determined by the voltage on the electrodes used to 
accelerate the ions. The kinetic energy gained by the particle passing 
through an electrostatic potential ( V )  is equal to zeV: 
'12 mv2 = zev 
(3.3) 
r = (2m V/zeB2)'l2 
(3.4) 
Rearrangement of equations (3.2) and (3.3) gives: 
showing how the radius of the ion trajectory, or displacement of the 
particle in the magnetic field, depends on m/z (since all other terms in 
equation 3.4 are fixed). 
3.4.2 Time-of-flight Methods 
Direct measurement of the velocity (v) of the charged fragments is used in 
time-of-flight (TOF) techniques. The kinetic energy gained by the particle 
passing through an electrostatic potential (V) is equal to zeV, so that: 
1/2 mv2 = zeV or v = (2ze~/m)'/* 
(3.5) 
The time-of-flight of the particle along a fixed path will depend on the 
inverse of its velocity: 

Mass Spectrometry 
75 
For this kind of analyser, a discrete pulse of molecular ions is injected into 
a field-free “drift tube”, measuring the time taken for ions to reach the 
detector (see Figure 3.3). This method of analysis is particularly suited to 
MALDI ionization methods, and can be used for quite large macromol- 
ecules. As before, the separation of molecular ions is on the basis of their 
mass/charge ratio (m/z). 
Figure 3.3 Time-of-flight 
1 
separation of particles with 
- _ - ___ 
______ 
different velocities in a drift tube 
3.4.3 Quadrupole Analysers 
Quadrupole separation relies on the movement of ions in a non-uniform 
electric field. The beam of ions is directed into the non-uniform electric 
(“quadrupole”) field formed in the cavity between four parallel 
cylindrical electrodes (Figure 3.4). 
An oscillating potential of +(Yo+ Vcos(cot)) is applied to these 
electrodes, causing the molecular ions to follow complicated motion, 
most of which will result in collision with the electrodes or the cavity wall. 
For a given combination of voltages (V, Vo) and frequency (co), only ions 
with particular m/z will pass through to hit the detector. Typical values 
are: Vo = 500-2000 volt, V =  0-3000 volt and cc) = 1-2 MHz. 
3.4.4 Ion Trap and Ion Cyclotron Resonance 
FT-MS methods 
Figure 3.4 Quadrupole 
analyser 
A number of more sophisticated variants of quadrupole and other 
analysers based on complex ion optics have been developed in recent 
years. 
Ion trap methods use a combination of electrodes to form electrostatic 
fields within which ions are trapped in specific orbits, depending on m/z 

76 
Biophysical Chemistry 
and the applied field. Ions with specific m/z ratios may be detected by 
varying this applied voltage. 
Ion cyclotron resonance is related to quadrupole techniques, but with 
the addition of a strong magnetic field, B. This induces the ions into 
(roughly) circular orbits with angular frequency: 
co = v / r  = zeB/m 
(3.7) 
Application of an oscillating electric field of the same frequency, co, leads 
to cyclotron resonance in which the ions absorb energy from the electric 
field and move increasingly faster, with increased orbital radius, whilst 
keeping v/r constant. Ions of particular m/z are therefore selected on the 
basis of the frequency of the applied field. This makes this method 
particularly appropriate for frequency-domain Fourier transform (FT) 
analysis, and gives potentially very high resolution. 
3.5 
Detection 
Early mass spectrometers used photographic plates to detect the posi- 
tions of molecular ions. Nowadays these have been replaced with more 
sensitive and convenient electronic detectors such as photomultiplier 
tubes in which (just as in the detection of photons) ion collision with the 
photomultiplier plate ejects a pulse of free electrons. This electron pulse is 
then accelerated through a cascade of electrodes, where collision at each 
stage amplifies the number of electrons in the pulse (hence the term 
“photomultiplier”) to give a measurable electronic signal (see Figure 2.9 
for a diagram of a photomultiplier). 
3.6 
Applications of MS 
Because mass spectrometry can determine RMMs with high precision, it 
has found numerous applications in areas where other techniques can 
give only vague answers. The following gives some practical examples. 
3.6.1 Relative Mass of Proteins 
Figure 3.5 shows part of a typical ESI-MS profile for a pure protein, with 
m/z values given in Table 3.1. Each peak in the spectrum corresponds to a 
different mass/charge ratio produced on the molecular ions during the 
electrospray process. Adjacent peaks will usually differ in both charge 
and mass by one unit. How can we interpret such data? 

Mass Spectrometry 
77 
I 
--- 
1 
+14 
+13 
- 
I 
+12 
I 
+ 10 
4-L 
800 
900 
lob0 
iioo 
1200 
mlz 
Table 3.1 Data for Figure 3.5 
Measured 
Calculated 
m/z 
A 
Z 
m 
M = m-z 
1 193.41 7 
108.38 1 
10.0021 
1 1936.66 
1085.036 
90.353 
10.9978 
1 1932.99 
994.683 
76.437 
12.0000 
1 1936.22 
918.246 
65.517 
13.0001 
1 1937.31 
852.729 
56.782 
14.0000 
11938.19 
795.947 
49.685 
14.9997 
1 1939.00 
746.262 
- 
Mean 
s.d. 
1 1926.66 
1 1922.00 
1 1924.22 
11 924.31 
11924.19 
1 1924.00 
1 1924.23 
1.48 
I 
Q Use the mass spectrometry data from Table 3.1 to determine 
the RMM for the protein. 
A Select any peak. This will have the value m/z, but we do not 
yet know either m or z separately. Its neighbouring peak will corres- 
pond to the molecular ion with mass/charge ratio (m + l)/(z + l), so 
the difference between them (A) will be given by: 
A = (m/z) - (m + l)/(z + 1) = (m/z - l>/(z + 1) 
Figure 3.5 Example of mass 
spectrometry data for an intact 
protein of theoretical RMM 
1 1924.2 (solid bars) with 
calculated charge (z) indicated. 
The shaded peaks indicate 
possible impurities 

78 
Biophysical Chemistry 
which may be rearranged to give: 
z = (m/z - 1)/A - 1 
This gives us z for the chosen peak, so we can then calculate rn for 
that peak. The mass of the (neutral) parent species is M=m-z. 
The results of such a calculation (Table 3. I) give M =  11924.23 
( f 
1.48), compared to the theoretical value of 1 1924.2 (calculated 
from the amino acid composition). 
It is important to use a series of peaks in such data in order to obtain 
consistent results. For example, the shaded peaks in Figure 3.5 (with 
m/z of 1060.1 and 1160.3) would not fit into a consistent pattern with 
the other data. They probably arise from impurities or degradation 
products. 
3.6.2 “Ladder” Sequencing 
Mass spectrometry may be used to determine primary sequences. Partial 
sequential chemical or enzymic degradation of peptides or proteins can 
yield a mixture of peptides with progressively shorter sequences. For 
example, consider the following (hypothetical) polypeptide sequence that 
has been partially digested with a proteolytic enzyme (carboxypeptidase) 
to yield the following “ladder” of fragments: 
Polypeptide sequence 
Mass/am u 
A 
Amino acid 
X-Ser-Gly-Trp-Glu-Asp-Leu4 le-Lys-Met 
X-Ser-Gly-Trp-Glu-Asp-Leu4 le-Lys 
X-Ser-Gly-Trp-Glu-Asp-Leu-lle 
X-Ser-Gly-Trp-G lu-Asp-Leu 
X-Ser-Gly-Trp-G lu-Asp 
X-Ser-G ly-Trp-G Iu 
X-Ser-G ly-Trp 
X-Ser-Gly 
X-Ser 
X 
10531 
10400 
10272 
10159 
10046 
993 1 
9802 
961 6 
9559 
9472 
131 
128 
113 
113 
115 
129 
186 
57 
87 
Met 
Ly s/G In? 
Leu/lle? 
Leu/l le? 
ASP 
Glu 
TrP 
G lY 
Ser 
Mass spectrometry of the mixture gives a series of peaks of decreasing 
mass, each with a mass difference ( A )  corresponding to the loss of one 
amino acid from the C-terminus. Since the mass of each amino acid 

Mass Spectrometry 
79 
residue is known accurately, one can work backwards from this to 
construct the partial amino acid sequence of the original polypeptide. 
This is known as ladder sequencing, and similar approaches can be used 
for sequencing DNA and polysaccharides. 
Note, however, that the method is not entirely unambiguous because 
some amino acids have the same residue mass. For example, in this case, 
one cannot distinguish lysine from glutamine ( A  = 128) or leucine from 
isoleucine ( A  = 1 13) by MS alone. 
In practice, it is rarely possible to sequence lengths of more than 20 or 
so amino acids by these methods because the mixtures become too 
complex, and degradation patterns are uneven. However, a range of short 
sequences from a collection of different peptides from the one protein 
(“peptide mapping”) is often sufficient to identify the protein. If the 
different peptide sequences overlap, then the entire protein sequence can 
be determined. 
3.6.3 Proteomics 
Now that the human (and other) genome sequences are available, it is 
important to be able to identify the proteins associated with each of the 
genes, and their interactions. This is generally known as “proteomics”. 
A biological cell contains thousands of different proteins, and mass 
spectrometry can be used to identify them. Since different proteins usually 
differ in size and charge, they can be separated using chromatographic or 
electrophoresis methods (see Chapter 7). For example, 2-D gel 
electrophoresis of the proteins from disrupted cells gives 1000 or more 
separate spots, each corresponding to a different protein. Using the MS 
techniques described above, it is possible to analyse the amino acid 
sequence of’ each of these proteins and, since we know the genetic code, 
identify the genes from which they are derived. The advantage of mass 
spectrometry here is that it is very sensitive, and requires only very small 
amounts of sample. 
Peptide “mass fingerprinting” can also be used to identify proteins 
f’lO*t’(Jllll(X 
I , ti\p st!lijy of 
~ ~ $ ~ , { { ~ ~ ‘ ’ ‘ ~ ’ ’  
f’x~)rc?x:ic’c’ 
A protease - < t i l l  ~ v i z w t i l ‘ ~  
:liLi1 
after treatment with specific proteases (Figure 3.6). For example, trypsin 
is a proteolytic enzyme (protease) that specifically cleaves Arg-Lys ~~~~~~~~
~
~
‘
~
,
~
~
L
~
~
~
t
~
~
;):);$;,’ 
!‘, 
prott>iriL, P C ~  
:, 17 ,Illti :p+itl 
peptide bonds. Consequently, trypsin digestion will give a range of 
t~‘~l’c 
t1lLJ 
! \ I  
‘‘IotC, 
~,y\’C~ll 
:(’” 
fO-“’(i I” ‘ ” I ’  
peptides corresponding to cleavage only at such sites, and the MS pattern 
of the peptide mixture (the mass fingerprint) that will be specific for a 
given protein sequence. This fingerprint can then be compared to a 
database of theoretical peptide fingerprints, predicted from genome 
sequence data, to identify the protein. 

80 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 3.6 Peptide mass 
finger p r i n t i n g . Try p s i n c I eaves 
only at adjacent Arg-Lys resi- 
dues to give a mixture of 
peptides with a characteristic 
m/z pattern 
Trypsin 
MS 
i 
m A f - g  
Ly s W
A
 
rg 
___-__) 
Lyx-Arg 
L
y
s
W
 
mlz 1 
Proteins (or other molecules) that interact strongly with each other in 
the cell may become tightly associated and co-purify in cell extracts. Mass 
spectrometry of purified complexes can help identify the interacting 
partners. 
1. Mass spectrometry separates molecular ions on the basis of their 
mass/charge ratio (m/z). 
2. A range of gentle ionization methods and mass analysers are now 
available to study biological macromolecules. 
3. Primary sequence and interaction information can be obtained. 
1. M. Tyers and M. Mann, From genomics to proteomics, in Nature, 
2003,422, 193-197. 
R. Aebersold and M. Mann, Muss spectrometry-based proteomics, 
E. de Hoffmann, J. Charette and V. Stroobant, Muss Spectrometry, 
in Nature, 2003, 422, 198-207. 
Wiley, Chichester, 1996. 

Mass Spectrometry 
81 
A. Dell and H. R. Morris, Glycoprotein structure determination by muss 
M. Mann, R, C, Hendrickson and A. Pandey, Analysis of proteins und 
spectrometry, in Science, 200 1, 291, 235 1-2356. 
proteornes by mass spectrometrjq, in Annu. Rev. Biochem., 200 1, 
70,437473. 
New York, 2000, Chapter 4. 
D. Sheehan, Physical Biochemistrjq: Principles and Applications, Wiley, 
3.1. In a mass spectrum of an intact protein, why do adjacent 
peaks differ in mass by 1 amu? What protein groups most likely 
carry these charges? 
3.2. How fast might the following ions be travelling after accelera- 
tion through a potential of 20 kV: (a) a proton (H+); (b) a leucine 
cation (m= 132, z= +1); (c) a 14.5 kDa protein with z= +4 
[e=1.6 x 
C; 1 amu = 1.66 x 
kg]. 
3.3. 
of-flight along a 1.5 metre path? 
For each of the above (Problem 3.2), what would be the time- 
3.4. 
the radius of trajectory in a magnetic field (B) of 4 Tesla? 
For each of the 20 kV ions in Problem 3.2, what would be 
3.5. The angular frequency of the orbit of an ion in a magnetic 
field is given by (equation 3.7): 
co = v/r = zeB/m 
Show how this follows from equation (3.2) 
3.6. A recombinant protein (13,700 RMM) has been synthesized 
as a fusion product with another protein (GST, 12,500 monomer 
RMM). After cleavage of the fusion protein and (partial) 
purification, analysis by SDS gel electrophoresis (Chapter 7) 
shows that, in addition to the expected product with RMM 
13,700, there is an additional protein component with RMM of 
around 26,000-28,000 RMM. Unfortunately, gel electrophoresis is 
not sufficiently accurate to determine whether this impurity is a 
dimer of the expected product or uncleaved fusion protein. How 
might MS be used to resolve this? 

Hydrodynamics 
Hydrodynamics is about the movement of water. Both in the bulk liquid 
and at the molecular level, this can be affected by the presence of other 
molecules in the liquid. The way in which macromolecules move in 
solution, and the way in which they change the way the solution flows, 
gives rise to a range of hydrodynamic techniques that can be used to study 
their structure and properties. 
This chapter deals with a variety of hydrodynamic techniques of 
particular importance in the study of biological macromolecules. 
By working through this material you should be able to: 
Describe how the density of a liquid mixture may be measured 
and how it depends on the composition 
Explain the movement of macromolecules during analytical 
ultracentrifugation and understand the differences between sedi- 
mentation equilibrium and sedimentation velocity experiments 
Appreciate the thermal basis for molecular diffusion and 
Brownian motion 
Describe how viscosity and dynamic light scattering experiments 
might give information about molecular size 
4.1 
Density and Molecular Volume 
The movement of molecules through a fluid depends on the size, shape 
and mass of the molecules, as well as on the physical properties of the 
surrounding solvent. Aqueous solutions of proteins, nucleic acids or 
carbohydrates are generally more dense than pure water under the same 
conditions. The macromolecules themselves act as if they were denser 
than water, and this is the basis for various ultracentrifuge techniques 
described in this section. 
82 

Hydrodynamics 
83 
Imagine a mixture made up of molecules (“components”) in solution 
(Figure 4.1 ). The total volume of a mixture of two components (where 
the labels 1 = solvent and 2 = macromolecule, say) is given by: 
v = VInl +V2n2 
where nl and n2 are the number of moles of each component in the 
mixture, and: 
is the partiul itiolal volume of each component. This can be viewed simply 
as the increase in total volume (per mole) upon addition of a tiny amount 
of one component, while keeping everything else (temperature, pressure, 
other components) constant. 
An equivalent expression, using the mass of each component, gj 
(in grams), defines the partial specific volume, Vi : 
where M i  is the relative molecular mass of component i. 
The density, or mass per unit volume, p, of a mixture is given by: 
Note that the total volume is not (necessarily) the sum of the volumes of 
the two separate (pure) components. This can be for several reasons. 
Firstly, if the solvent and solute molecules are of different sizes, then 
there may be voids in the pure components that may become filled when 
the two are mixed. 
Secondly, the solute molecules may affect the structure of the solvent in 
their vicinity (solvation/hydration effects), and that may affect the overall 
density of the solution. For example, charged groups or ions in solution 
will seriously disrupt the normal hydrogen-bonded structure of liquid 
water, giving a more dense packing of solvent molecules in their hydration 
shell. Non-polar groups are generally thought to have the opposite effect, 
Figure 4.1 
Volumetric effects 
of mixing 

84 
Biophysical Chemistry 
as the water molecules tend to pack into more "ice-like" clusters in order 
to accommodate the hydrophobic group. 
The observed partial molar volumes of macromolecules (see Table 4.1 
for examples) will depend on a number of factors. For globular proteins, 
for example, it will depend on how well the native protein is folded 
and how many interior void spaces there might be within the structure, 
as well as the hydration effects arising from interactions with solvent at 
the surface. 
Table 4.1 
Examples of protein partial specific volumes' 
Protein 
Mr 
i7,/cm3 g.-' 
Ri bonuclease 
13,683 
0.728 
Lysozyme 
14,300 
0.688 
Ovalbumin 
45,000 
0.748 
Serum albumin 
65,000 
0.734 
Haemoglobin 
68,000 
0.749 
Collagen 
345,000 
0.695 
Myosin 
493,000 
0.728 
Q What is the density at 25 "C of a solution made up of 5.0 mg 
of a protein with a partial specific volume of 0.725 cm3 g-' in 
1.0000 cm3 of water? The density of pure water at 25 "C (po) is 
0.99705 g ~ m - ~ .  
A The mass of 1 .O cm3 of pure solvent (water) is gl = po = 0.99705 g. 
For the protein: 
V2 = 0.725 cm3 g-' and g2 = 0.0050 g. 
It is a reasonable approximation for such dilute solutions to assume 
that the partial specific volume of the solvent (water) in the mixture 
is the same as for the pure liquid. Consequently, the total volume of 
the mixture will be given by: 
V = 1 .OOOO + V2g2 = 1.003625 cm3 
Therefore: 
p = (gl + gZ)/V = (0.99705 + 0.0050)/1.003625 = 0.99843 g cm-3 
or about 0.14% more dense than pure water. 

Hydrodynamics 
85 
4.1 .l Measurement of Fluid Densities and Partial Volumes 
C I assical Met hods 
The densities of liquids and liquid mixtures are conventionally measured 
using pycnometer or hydrometer methods (Figure 4.2), but these are rarely 
accurate enough for the dilute macromolecule solutions normally 
encountered in biophysical studies. 
I 
-- 
- 
I 
A 
B 
Figure 4.2 
A A pycnometer (or 
“specific gravity bottle”) is an 
accurate volumetric flask whose 
weight change when totally filled 
with liquid gives the density of 
that liquid. 6 A hydrometer 
measures the buoyant density of 
the fluid by the level at which it 
Vibrating Tube (Paar) Densimeter 
A more precise and convenient method for measuring solution densities, 
from which partial molal/specific volumes may be calculated, is based on 
measuring the vibrational frequency of an oscillating quartz tube filled 
with the solution (Figure 4.3). 
The resonant frequency ( v )  of any harmonic oscillator is proportional 
to (k/M)’’2, where M is the effective mass of the system and k is a restoring 
force constant for the oscillator. 
__ -~ 
The vibrating tube densimeter (Paar densimeter) consists of a quartz 
capillary tube in the form of a loop, clamped at the ends so that it might 
Figure 4-3 Oscillating capillary 
of a vibrating tube densimeter 
vibrate like a tuning fork. Filling the tube with fluids of different density 
causes the resonant frequency of the vibrating tube to change, and this 
can be measured electronically with great precision. The period of these 
oscillations (z = l/v) is related to the square root of the liquid density, or 
for two fluids of different density: 
z: - Ti = k’(p, - p2) 
where k’ is a calibration constant that may be determined using standard 
fluids of known density. 
Q 
A Assume that: 
Show that T: - zi = k‘(pl - p2) 
v = (k/M)l/2, so T~ = l / v 2  = M / k  

86 
Biophysical Chemistry 
1 I w  Meselson Stahl experiment 
cotilltined the theory of DNA 
Icr~li(,diori for which Watson arid 
Crick were ,$warded the Nobel 
I7t I/( 1 
-- 
Now: 
M = M ( ) + V p  
where Mo is the effective mass of the empty tube and Vis its volume. 
Consequently : 
T 2  = (Mo + Q ) / k  
7: - 7; = (P1 - P 2 ) W  = k’(P1 - P2) 
and for two fluids of different density: 
Density Grad i ent Met hods 
Archimedes, reputedly while sitting in his bath, showed that the tendency 
for any object to sink or float is determined by the mass of fluid that the 
object displaces. 
The buoyant mass (m’) 
of an object is given by its actual mass (mo) 
minus the mass of fluid that it displaces: 
m’ = mo - movp 
where i j  is the partial specific volume of the object and p is the density of 
the liquid it is displacing. 
This is the basis of density gradient methods for determining density. 
Particles sedimenting (falling) through a liquid of increasing density will 
continue to fall until they reach a region where their buoyant mass is zero 
and their density matches that of the surrounding solvent. This is usually 
done in a centrifuge (see below), and the density gradient in the centrifuge 
tubes can be created using, for example, concentrated solutions of sucrose 
or CsC12. 
One historically important application of density gradient methods is 
the classic Meselson and Stahl (1 958) experiment2 in which DNA strands 
of different densities (incorporating natural 14N or enriched with 
I5N isotopes) were used to demonstrate the semi-conservative replication 
of the DNA double helix that is central to molecular biology. 
4.2 
Analytical Ultracentrifugation 
Centrifuge methods for the separation and analysis of biomolecules 
depend on the centrifugal forces, analogous to gravitational forces but 
generally much larger, that can be imposed on solutions rotated at 
high speed. This is the basis of analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC). 
A centrifuge is simply a device comprising a rotor in which samples may 

Hydrodynamics 
87 
be spun at high speed about a vertical axis. The sample tubes are inserted 
into compartments in the rotor (either fixed slots or swinging buckets), or 
samples may be enclosed in special wedge-shaped cells for analytical 
methods (Figure 4.4). 
The (outward) force exerted on an object of mass rn, rotating at a 
distance r from the axis with angular velocity m, is equal to mrco’. This is 
equivalent to an acceleration of ru2. 
Q What is the effective acceleration (in g) at a radius of 10 cm in a 
centrifuge rotor spinning at 15,000 rpm? 
A 
per second. 
15,000 revolutions per minute (rpm) = 15,000+60 = 250 cycles 
Therefore: 
LC) = 2n: x 250 = 1570 radians per second 
r =  10 cm =0.1 m (in SI units); g (acceleration due to gravity)= 
9.81 m s --~ . 
So the centrifugal acceleration is: 
rw2 = 0.1 x 15702 = 2.47 x lO’m~-~ 
F 25,000 x g  
4.3 
Sedimentation Equilibrium 
Sedimentation equilibrium methods measure the concentration gradients 
of molecules in solution when spun at high speed in a centrifuge. Samples 
are held in special cells in the rotor, with optically flat clear windows and, 
in current instruments, several samples (including controls) may be run 
simultaneously. The concentration gradient, as a function of radius (r), is 
measured using UV/visible absorbance, fluorescence or refractive index 
methods, using optical systems mounted outside the rotor. 
The tendency for molecules to fall under gravitational or centrifugal 
forces is offset by thermal diffusion or Brownian motion that tends to 
disperse them. At equilibrium, the balance between these opposing forces 
is determined by the Boltzmann probability expression which, for 
equilibrium sedimentation, means that the relative concentrations of 
macromolecules at different positions in the centrifuge tube (or cell) can 
be written as: 
Figure 4.4 
Analytical 
ultracentrifuge rotor 
where m‘ is the huo!mit mass of the molecule. 

88 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Equation (4.1) arises as follows. The Boltzmann equilibrium 
expression for the relative probability of finding an object at any 
point depends on the potential energy difference (El -E2) between 
the two points, so that c(l)/c(2) = exp{ -(El -E2)/RT). 
The force on an object of mass m at radius r is equal to mrco2. 
Consequently, the potential energy difference, or work done in 
moving the object from one radius to another, is given by integrating 
the force x distance: 
El - E2 = g
2
 
mrco dr = m(rl 
2 - r;)co2/2 
rl 
4.4 
Sedimentation Rate 
Unlike sedimentation equilibrium methods, measurement of sedi- 
mentation rates - how fast the molecules fall in the centrifugal field - 
can give information about both macromolecular shape and the size. 
These methods use relatively high centrifugal forces and measure the 
concentration profiles within the centrifuge tube (cell) as a function 
of time. 
Imagine a sedimenting macromolecule. The centrifugal force on the 
molecule (m’rco’) is opposed by the frictional drag ( F )  as the molecule 
tries to move through the surrounding liquid (Figure 4.5). In the case of 
relatively slow motion (as here), this frictional force is proportional to the 
velocity (v) of the molecule with respect to solvent: 
F =f; 
where .f is the “frictional coefficient” of the molecule. The frictional 
coefficient depends on a number of factors, including the size and shape of 
the molecule and the viscosity of the surrounding liquid. 
Figure 4.5 
Opposition of 
frictional and centrifugal forces 
Frictional drag 
F = f v  

Hydrodynamics 
a9 
In the steady state, these two forces just balance, so that: 
2 
f v  = m'rw 
and the sedimentation rate is: 
v = m'rco2/f 
In line with expectation, this equation shows that heavier particles 
(molecules) will sediment faster, while increasing frictional drag (f) 
will 
tend to slow them down. 
The sedimentation coefficient (s), which should be independent of rotor 
speed or radius, is defined as: 
2 
s = v/rco = m'/f 
the units of which are seconds. It is more conventional to express 
sedimentation coefficients in Svedberg units (S), in honour of the Swedish 
scientist T. Svedberg (Nobel Prize 1926) who pioneered much of the early 
work in this field (I S = 
The frictional coefficient depends on the size and shape of the 
molecules, as well as the temperature and viscosity of the surrounding 
solvent. This is expressed in the general relationship: 
s). 
.f = RT/NAD 
where R is the gas constant, T the absolute temperature, NA is 
Avogadro's number and D is the diffusion coeficient of the macro- 
molecule. 
The size and shape dependence of the frictional coefficient is given by 
the general expression: 
f = ~ J T V R ~  
where q- is the viscosity of the solvent, and Rs is the Stokes radius of 
the molecule. 
For a truly spherical molecule, the frictional coefficient is: 
h = 6WRO 
where Ro is the actual radius of the sphere. However, for other shapes the 
relationship is more complicated, and the deviation from apparent 
spherical behaviour is expressed by the frictional ratio,ffo. In such cases 
the Stokes radius can be viewed as the radius the molecule would have if it 
were to behave as a sphere. In genera1,f') 
is greater than one.' 
The Stokes radius will also depend on the solvation of the 
macromolecule. Even for a perfectly spherical molecule, the solvent 
molecules in the immediate vicinity will tend to stick to the macromol- 
ecule surface, creating a solvation or hydration shell that will travel with 
the molecule. Consequently, Rs will often appear larger than the apparent 
Einstein tleribed this equation for 
his 1905 paper on the molecular 
basis of t3rownian motion. During 
this same yea- in an incredible 
burst of scientific creativity. he 
also published his famous papers 
on the yiianttim theory of the 
photoelectric effect and on the 
special theor !I of relativity. 

90 
Biophysical Chemistry 
molecular radius determined by other techniques. This can be very useful 
in estimating the extent of hydration. 
A typical sedimentation rate experiment will begin with the sample 
solution uniformly distributed within the centrifuge cell. However, under 
the influence of the centrifugal force, any molecules denser than the 
solvent (water) will begin to move en nzassc towards the bottom of the 
tube. Typical concentration profiles as a function of time are sketched in 
Figure 4.6. There are two main features to note. Firstly, the boundary 
between solvent and solution moves down the tube at a steady rate, and 
this is the measured sedimentation rate ( v ,  measured at the mid-point of 
the trailing edge). 
Distance ( r )  
Meniscus 
I 
Bottom 
of tube 
1 
Figure 4.6 Macromolecular 
concentration profiles during a 
sedimentation rate experiment 
Secondly, the boundary becomes more diffuse as time goes on. This 
second feature is due to diflusion of the macromolecules at the trailing 
edge. Although the molecules are all subjected to the same centrifugal 
forces, each molecule is separately under the influence of random thermal 
motion from surrounding solvent so that each macromolecule takes a 
slightly different track, and the edge between solvent and solution 
becomes more diffuse. This can be analysed to give the diffusion 
coefficient (D) 
of the macromolecules. 
Consequently, sedimentation velocity experiments can give both v (and 
hence s) and D, which may then be used in the above equations to 
determinef and m'. 
Mixtures of Molecules 
When the sample contains a mixture of molecules, with different 
hydrodynamic properties, then the concentration profiles observed in 
both sedimentation equilibrium and velocity experiments become more 

Hydrodynamics 
91 
complex. However, these can frequently be analysed to determine the 
individual molecular properties and interactions. For example, a mixture 
of two different sized macromolecules might, in the simplest case, give 
two separate boundaries in a sedimentation velocity experiment, each of 
which might be analysed to give s and D for the separate molecules. If, 
however, these molecules were to interact strongly (bind to each other) in 
solution, then this would be seen as a single boundary corresponding to a 
much larger particle. If the interaction were weaker, involving a dynamic 
equilibrium between bound and free species, then the boundary shape 
becomes more diffuse. Techniques are now available to analyse these 
various models and determine interaction parameters. 
4.5 
Diffusion and Brownian Motion 
All molecules are in constant thermal motion and are never completely at 
rest (except at absolute zero, 0 K). This random molecular motion is what 
we call "heat", and objects will feel hot or cold depending on whether 
their molecular motions are more or less agitated than the surroundings. 
We cannot sensibly predict the exact motion of all the molecules in an 
object, but we can estimate average properties quite exactly. For example, 
a useful rule of thumb is that the average thermal energy (ignoring 
quantum effects) is 1/2kT per available degree of freedom, so that the 
average thermal kinetic energy of a gas molecule (3 degrees of freedom) is 
3kTi2 per molecule (see Chapter 5 for more on this). 
Q Calculate the average thermal velocity of a water molecule in air 
at room temperature. 
A For a single H 2 0  molecule (RMM = 18; molar mass = 18 x 
kg mol-'): 
Now: 
rn = 18 x 10-3/NA = 3.0 x 
kg 
'I2 
rn <v2> = 3kT/2 
Thus: 
<v2> = 3kT/rn = 3 x 1.381 x 
= 4.1 x lo5 m2 s - ~  
x 300/3.0 x 
The root mean square velocity is then: 
<v2>1/2 = 644ms-' 

92 
Biophysical Chemistry 
In 182r’a Scottish botanist, Robert 
Brown, described the perpetual 
random motion of small particles 
inside grains of pollen. Although 
he was not the first to observe this 
motion, his careful experiments 
with dead pollen, particles of soot 
arid other inert microscopic 
object:; showed - contrary to 
popular belief that the grains were 
i3live - that it was a universal 
proper:y of microscopic particles 
i
-
 
I 
Figure 4.7 
A diffusional 
random walk 
As a consequence of this random thermal motion, any object - large or 
small - is subject to constant buffeting from its surroundings. This is the 
source of “Brownian motion”, the random, chaotic movement of 
microscopic particles in liquids or gases. 
At the macroscopic (everyday) level, we experience this motion as 
“atmospheric pressure”. As the above calculations show, the molecules in 
the air around us are travelling at several hundred metres per second, and 
will be constantly colliding with the surface of our skin. We do not feel 
each collision - there are too many of them, and each impact is, in any 
case, rather small - but we do feel the sum total of all these collisions as 
the pressure exerted by the atmosphere. 
At the molecular level, this random chaotic movement gives rise to 
“diffusion”: molecules gradually (and irreversibly) get mixed up. 
The process of diffusion (in liquids or gases) is described mathemat- 
ically by Fick’s (first) law: 
ac 
ax 
Diffusive flux = J = - D -  
which describes how molecules with diffusion coefficient D will tend to 
flow in the direction opposite to any concentration gradient g. 
At the molecular level this may be viewed as a random walk in which 
the molecules move in a series of random, uncoordinated steps 
(Figure 4.7). In 1905, Einstein used this concept to derive the equation 
that describes how particles will move under such motion. The mean 
square displacement (distance moved) of a spherical particle in any 
direction over time t is given by: 
<x2> = 6 D t  
where <x2> is the mean square displacement in any direction. 
This equation accurately describes the Brownian motion of micro- 
scopic particles, and was used by Jean-Baptiste Perrin in a classic series of 
experiments (from 1908) to estimate Avogadro’s number (NA). He was 
awarded the Nobel Prize for physics in 1926. 
The diffusion coefficient (D) 
for a macromolecule depends on its size, 
shape, flexibility, and the viscosity and temperature of the surrounding 
fluid. Consequently, it is generally difficult to estimate theoretically, but a 
number of models have been developed. In general, the diffusion 
coefficient is just another way of expressing the frictional coefficient (f): 
D = RT/NA f = kT/f 
so that, for an idealized spherical particle with (Stokes) radius Rs: 
which is the Stokes-Einstein equation. 

Hydrodynamics 
93 
Q The diffusion coefficient measured in water at 20 "C for the pro- 
tein lysozyme is about 10.4 x 10- ' ' m2 s-l. What is Rs for this mole- 
cule, given that the viscosity of water at 20 " C is 1.002 x l 0-3 N s m-2 ? 
A Rearranging the above equation: 
Rs = RT/GzNAvD 
= 8.314 x 293/(6n x 6 x 
= 2.1 x 10-9m (2. I nm) 
x 1.002 x 
x 10.4 x lo-") 
Note that, in addition to translational motion, other kinds of motion 
will be subject to random thermal fluctuations as well. In particular, the 
tumbling of (macro)molecules in solution can be described in terms of 
rotational diffusion, for which equivalent rotational diffusion constants 
can be defined. By analogy with translational diffusion described above, 
the rotational diffusion coefficient (Drat) and rotational friction coefficient 
(Aot) are related by the expression: 
For rotation of an ideal sphere of radius R, in a fluid of viscosity y, it has 
been shown that: 
Drot = kTlL01 
Lot = 8WR' 
It is often useful to imagine how fast a macromolecule might be rotating 
or tumbling in solution. Obviously such motion will be quite chaotic, and 
only average values can be estimated, but this is given by the rotational 
relaxation time: 
which, for an ideal sphere, becomes: 
Trot = '/'zDrot 
Trot = 8nvR3/2kT 
Q What is the rotational relaxation (tumbling) time for a globular 
protein of radius 1 nm in water at 20 "C? [The viscosity of pure 
water at 20 "C is v = 1.002 x 
A Trot = 8nyR3/2kT 
N s m-2] 
= 8 z x  1 . 0 0 2 ~  
1 0 - 3 ~ ( 1  
x 10-9)3/(2~1.381 x 10-23~293) 
= 3 x I O - ~ ~  
(3 ns) 

94 
Biophysical Chemistry 
4.6 
Dynamic Light Scattering 
The diffusional or Brownian motion of molecules in a liquid or gas gives 
rise to fluctuations in density or concentration that can be observed by 
optical methods. 
Imagine a small volume element in a solution of macromolecules. At 
any moment in time, some molecules will be diffusing into this volume, 
while others are diffusing out (Figure 4.8). If the volume is large enough, 
or the observation period is long enough, then these numbers moving in 
or out will cancel. However, for small volumes over short time intervals 
this will not always be the case and fluctuations in density or concen- 
tration will occur. For a beam of light passing through the sample, these 
fluctuations will be seen as fluctuations in refractive index and some of the 
light will be scattered. This scattered light will appear to “twinkle” as the 
number of molecules in the volume element fluctuates UD or down. The 
L- 
Figure 4m8 Diffusion in and Out 
of a small volume element 
rate at which this twinkling occurs will depend (amongst other things) on 
the rate at which the molecules are diffusing in solution. 
This is the basis of the technique known as “dynamic light scattering” 
(DLS). A laser beam is passed through the solution of macromolecules, 
and the time dependence of the light scattered from a small volume within 
the sample is recorded (Figure 4.9). 
Figure 4.9 Example of fluctu- 
ating intensity of scattered light in 
a DLS experiment 
Density fluctuations in the Earth’s 
atmosphere are responsible for 
the familiar blue colour of the 
(cloudless) sky. White light from 
the Sun hitting the upper 
atmosphere is scattered (in all 
directions) by these fluctuations in 
volume elements about the size of 
the wavelength of light. Since the 
relative magnitude of the density 
fluctuations is bigger for smaller 
volume elements, shorter 
wavelengths (blue light) tends tc 
get scattered more than longer 
wavelengths (red light). What WE 
see when looking up into the sky is 
this scattered blue part of the 
Analysis of the shape and frequency of this flickering pattern gives the 
“autocorrelation time ” (z), which is related to the diffusion constant (D) 
of the molecules. This information can be used to determine the relative 
molecular masses and heterogeneities of macromolecular samples. 
4.7 
Viscosity 
Solutions of macromolecules tend to be more viscous than the pure 
solvent, and this forms the basis for one of the earliest experimental 
methods for determining the shape properties of biomolecules. There are 
a number of ways to measure solution viscosities, but the simplest uses a 

Hydrodynamics 
95 
capillary (or Ostwald) viscometer (Figure 4.10). Other techniques include 
the falling sphere method, which involves measuring how fast a heavy 
sphere falls through the liquid, and the Couette yiscometer, which 
measures the torque or force generated between concentric rotating 
cylinders with the test solution filling the gap. 
Sun c; spectrum Conversely, 
Inoking direclly into the Sun at 
sunrise 0 1  sunset (do not do this at 
any other tinicsi) we see the 
redder end of the spectrum after 
the blue light has been scattered 
oul of the beam Pollution stmall 
particles in th.3 atmosphere tends 
to enhance tt-is effect 
A 
B 
Load 
The rate of flow under 
A 
I 
B 
gravity of a liquid through a capillary tube 
depends on a number of factors, including the viscosity (q) and density ( p )  
of the liquid as well as the size and shape of the tube. For a standard 
capillary viscometer (see Figure 4.10) the time taken (t) for a set volume of 
liquid to flow between points A and B is proportional to y / p  so that, after 
appropriate calibration with known liquids, the viscosity of any sample 
can be determined from its flow time, t. 
Q The flow time (to) for water at 20 "C in a capillary viscometer 
was 27.3 s. For a dilute protein solution under the same conditions, 
t = 30.4 s. What is the viscosity of the protein solution? 
A The viscosity of pure water at 20 "C is qo = 1.002 X lop3 N s mP2. 
Assuming that the liquids have (almost) identical densities (which 
is reasonable for dilute biomolecular solutions): 
tlto = r h o  
so: 
y = yot/to = 1.002 x loP3 x 30.4127.3 = 1.118 x 10-3Nsm-2 
Figure 4.10 Capillary 
viscometry 
Viscositim arf' still sotiletimes 
giver) in tion 
units called 
poise F n a m d  after a French 
physician Je<iri Poiseuille ( 1797 
1869) who cl(veloped a method 
for nieaswng blood pressure and 
who was responsible for 
fundatnental stLidies of liquid flow 
l P - 0 1 N ~ 1 1 1 '  

96 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Viscosities are often expressed relative to the viscosity of the pure 
solvent by introducing the terms relative viscosity (qr), specific viscosity 
(qsp) and intrinsic viscosity ([q]), defined as follows: 
Relative viscosity: qr = q/qo 
Specific viscosity: qsp = (y - qo)/qo = qr - 1 
Intrinsic viscosity: [y] = ysp/c (as c +, 0) 
where c is the concentration of macromolecules. Because of molecular 
interactions and other non-ideality effects in solution, [q] is normally 
determined by extrapolation to zero concentration from a range of 
measurements (Figure 4.1 1). 
Concentration (c) 
Figure 4.1 1 Variation of 
intrinsic viscosity, qs,/c, with 
concentration 
The relationship between [y] and macromolecular shape is difficult to 
determine theoretically, except in special cases, but a number of empirical 
rules have been derived.' 
1. Aqueous solutions of macromolecules are more dense than pure 
water, and the density is determined by the partial molar volumes of 
the different components. 
2. The sedimentation of macromolecules in high-speed centrifu- 
gation can be used to estimate the shape, size and homogeneity of 
macromolecules in solution. 

Hydrodynamics 
97 
3. Translational and rotational diffusion of molecules in solution, 
and the related Brownian motion of larger particles, is due to 
random thermal motions and can be related to size and shape. 
4. Additional hydrodynamic properties such as viscosity may also 
give size and shape information. 
1. C. Tanford, Physical Chemistry of Macromolecules, Wiley, New York, 
2. M. Meselson and F. W. Stahl, The replication ofDNA in Escherichia coli, 
1961. 
in Proc. Nutl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1958, 44, 671-682. 
P. W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry, 6th edn., Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1998, Chapter 23. 
J. M. Seddon and J. D. Gale, Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics, 
RSC Tutorial Chemistry Text, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 
2001. 
New York, 2000, Chapter 7. 
Principles and Applications in Biological Sciences, 4th edn., Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2002, Chapter 6. 
Biochemistry, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1998, Chapter 5 .  
D. Sheehan, Physical Biochemistry: Principles and Applications, Wiley, 
I .  Tinoco, K. Sauer, J. C. Wang and J. D. Puglisi, Physical Chemistry: 
K. E. van Holde, W. C. Johnson and P.S. Ho, Principles of Physical 
4.1. 
7.5 mg of a protein were dissolved in 5.000 g of water and the 
density of the resulting solution at 25 "C was found to be 
0.99748 g ~ m - ~ .  
What is the partial specific volume of this protein 
under these conditions? [The density of pure water at 25 "C is p1= 
0.99707 g cmP3] 
4.2. This same protein unfolds irreversibly when heated. After 
such treatment, the density of the solution when cooled down to 
25 "C changes to 0.99752 g ~ m - ~ .  
What does this indicate about the 
changes in partial specific volume upon unfolding? 

98 
Biophysical Chemistry 
4.3. 
upon unfolding? 
Why might the partial specific volume of a protein decrease 
4.4. 
When running samples in a centrifuge, why is it necessary to 
ensure that the weight is distributed symmetrically around the rotor? 
4.5. 
High-speed centrifuges are heavily armour plated. Why? 
4.6. 
Calculate the rotational kinetic energy ( ~ ~ / ~ r n r * w ~ )  
of a 2 kg 
centrifuge rotor, with an effective radius of 15 cm, spinning at 
40,000 rpm. The explosive energy of TNT is about 4.6 x lo6 J kg-'. 
Compare. 
4.7. 
Estimate the diffusion coefficients (D) 
in water at 20 "C for 
the following: (a) a spherical molecule with radius 0.3 nm; (b) a 
globular protein of radius 2.5 nm; (c) a bacterial cell of diameter 
10 pm. [The viscosity of water is q = 1.002 x 
N s m-2 at 20 "C] 
4.8. Under the same conditions, how far (on average) would the 
objects in Problem 4.7 travel in water under Brownian motion over a 
5 min interval? 
4.9. 
Why are the distances in Problem 4.8 smaller than might be 
expected from the thermal velocities of these particles under the 
same conditions? 

Thermodynamics and 
Interactions 
Like all material things, the structure and behaviour of biological 
systems are governed by the interplay between thermal motion of 
molecules and the various interaction forces between them. This chapter 
reviews the basics of thermodynamic equilibrium at the molecular level, 
leading to ways in which we can measure the various components of 
thermodynamic forces in biomolecular systems. 
After working through this chapter you should be able to: 
Explain the molecular basis of heat and thermodynamics 
Describe microcalorimetric methods for the direct determi- 
nation of the thermodynamics of biomolecules 
Show how spectroscopic and other methods may be used 
indirectly to estimate thermodynamic parameters 
Explain equilibrium dialysis methods for measuring binding 
equilibrium 
Describe the thermodynamic basis for protein solubility and 
crystallization 
5.1 
A Bluffer’s Guide to Molecular Thermodynamics 
Thermodynamics is a mature subject and it is sometimes difficult not to 
get bogged down in the details. The basic ideas were laid down in the early 
19th century, at a time when atoms and molecules had scarcely been 
heard of, and when optimization of the steam engine and other marvels of 
the industrial revolution were of prime concern. What follows here, 
though less rigorous than you will find in most textbooks, will be enough 
to place thermodynamics in a molecular context. 
99 

100 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Work is the organized motion of 
i t o n i c ,  and molecules “Heat” is 
ttie disorganized motion of a t o m  
and molecules 
Figure 5.1 Things tend to want 
to roll downhill: AH tends to be 
negative 
Figure 5.2 Thermal (Brownian) 
motion tends to kick things uphill: 
A S  tends to be positive 
Thc internal energy ( U )  of a 
system is just the total kinetic and 
potential energy of all the atoms 
:ind molecules in the sample, 
i nc 111 cl i n g trans la t ional mot ions 
rotatio7s and vibrations, and the 
forces between them 
Thermodynamic equilibrium represents the balance between the 
natural tendency for things to fall to lower energy (Figure 5.1), together 
with the equally natural tendency for random thermal motion at the 
molecular level (i.e. heat) to oppose this (Figure 5.2). 
Most things in the everyday world take place at constant pressure, so 
the appropriate energy quantity to use is enthalpy, H =  U + P V ,  which 
comprises the internal energy (U) plus a pressure-volume corrections term 
(PV) to take account of any work done with the surrounding if there is a 
change in volume. Changes in enthalpy during any process will be 
indicated by AH. 
The disrupting effects of thermal motion at the molecular level are 
expressed in terms of the entropy changes, AS. These effects will tend to 
get bigger as the temperature rises. 
The balance between these two opposing effects is expressed in the 
change in Gibbs free energy: 
AG = AH - TAS 
At thermodynamic equilibrium, when these two effects just balance, 
AG=O, and, although the individual atoms and molecules are still in 
motion, the overall average situation undergoes no further spontaneous 
change. 
In statistical thermodynamics, recognizing that we can only talk about 
the probabilities of things happening at the molecular level, these effects 
are expressed in the Boltzmann probability: 
where p(H) is the probability that a system of molecules will have an 
enthalpy, H (expressed per mole), at a temperature T (in K), and R is the 
universal gas constant (R=8.314 J K-’ mol-’). The quantity w, some- 
times known as the degeneracy, is the number of different ways in which 
the system can adopt the enthalpy. As we shall see shortly, it is related to 
entropy. 
The exponentially decreasing term in the Boltzmann expression would 
seem to favour the very lowest energy states. However, this would lead to 
the paradoxical situation in which everything in the Universe should be at 
zero enthalpy. This can be resolved as follows. 
The total energy of the Universe is not zero. At the instant of the Big 
Bang (or whatever) the world was endowed with a large amount of 
energy. This energy will never go away, no matter how hard we try. So it 
must be distributed somehow. But how does that fit with the Boltzmann 
expression? It is all to do with “w”. 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
101 
There are not many ways you can obtain low energies. At very low 
energies, things do not move very much, molecules tend to crystallize and 
everything is nice and ordered; “w” is small. 
However, at higher energies things are much more exciting. Molecules 
move around a lot, or rotate or vibrate: lots of things happening at once. 
So there are lots of different ways of getting the same energies; ‘‘w” 
is big. 
The combination of these two effects can be seen graphically 
(Figure 5.3). 
exp(-HIRT) 
- 
X 
W 
- 
w exp(-HIRT) 
- h 
The average thermal energy of molecular motion is related to the 
absolute temperature, T. For example, the mean thermal kinetic energy of 
any object (molecule) of mass m is given by: 
where < v2 > is the mean-square velocity of the molecule, and k is the 
Boltzmann constant. 
Q What is the average thermal velocity of a molecule of nitrogen 
(N2) in the air around us? 
A For a single N2 molecule (RMM = 28; molar mass = 28 X lop3 
kg mol- ’): 
rn = 28 x 10-3/NA = 4.7 x 
kg 
< v2 >= 3kT/m = 3 x 1.381 x 
x 300/4.7 x 
= 2.6 x lo5 m2 s-2 
The root mean square velocity is < v2 > 1/2 = 514 m s-’, i.e. about 
half a kilometre per second. 
Figure 5.3 The product of “w” 
(increasing with energy) x the 
exponential (decreasing with 
energy) gives a probability dis- 
tribution that means that most 
objects spend most of their time 
at some average energy away 
from zero 
The situation is a little more 
corn p I i c a ted +o r mot ec u I a r 
iotatiom and vibrations, where 
quatiturn effests need to be taken 
into accnunt However, for low- 
energy motions the general rule is 
that the average thermal energy is 
about ’ , kT per degree of 
freedom 
The Boltrmar in constant is related 
to the gas constant and 
Avogadro’s number 
k 
R Nr, = I  381 x 10 “’J K ’ 
You might bcb wondering if the 
rnoleculcs in the air around us are 
moving so fast how come we 
don t feel thc effects of them 
colliding with us? Well, we do We 
call it atrnospheric pressure 

102 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Such thermal motion is not, of course, all in a straight line, or at least for 
not very long, since such rapidly moving molecules soon collide with their 
neighbours and the surroundings, so that the motion is a much more 
chaotic random walk. This is why molecules diffuse. It is also why proteins 
and other biological macromolecules are quite dynamic structures, con- 
stantly undergoing fluctuations due to collisions from their surroundings. 
5.1 .I Chemical Equilibrium 
Consider a simple chemical equilibrium: A e B. 
The reaction never really stops (at the molecular level), but equilibrium 
is reached when the rate of the forward reaction just matches that of the 
reverse reaction. Thus we have a dynamic equilibrium in which the 
situation can be described in terms of the probabilities of the molecules 
being in one state or the other (A or B) at any one time. 
What is the relative probability of finding molecules in either state A or 
state B? Using the Boltzmann rule: 
Probability of state A : p(A) = wA exp( -HA/R7') 
Probability of state B : p(B) = WB exp(-HB/RT) 
where 
with enthalpies H A  and HB, respectively. 
probabilities of the two chemical forms is: 
and ivB are the "numbers of ways" for each molecular form, 
So, combining these two equations, the ratio of the relative 
p(B)/p(A) = exp(-AH"/RT) x w B / u ~ A  
where AH" = HB-HA. 
constant, K, for this reaction: 
However, this ratio is what we would normally call the cyuilihrium 
K = [ B ] / [ A ]  = p(B)/p(A) = exp(-AHYRT) x wB/wA 
Now let us do some algebraic rearrangement to get this into something 
more familiar. First, take natural logarithms (In) of both sides of this 
equation : 
This result is identical to the classical definition of the staizdard Gibbs free 
energy change: 
AGO = AH" - TAS" = -RTlnK 
providing we make the connection AS" = R In (WBIWA). 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
103 
This shows how entropy is actually related to the degeneracy, w, or the 
number of ways in which molecular systems can exist with a particular 
energy. 
5.1.2 Heat Capacity 
Both enthalpy and entropy are fundamentally related to the hcat capacit! 
(or ywcific hcat) of an object: 
T 
AH( T) = AH( Tref) + J ACp d T  
Trd 
and 
where AC,, is the heat capacity change at constant pressure, which is 
related to the temperature dependence of both entropy and enthalpy: 
ACp = aAH/aT = TaAS/aT 
Heat capacity is the quantity which tells us how much heat energy (H) we 
need to add to a system in order to increase its temperature. It is also 
related to entropy (S) 
because, if 1.1' is high, there are lots of different ways 
in which the added energy might be distributed without raising the 
temperature, and the heat capacity is consequently also high, 
Both enthalpy (AH) and entropy (AS) changes are important in 
determining chemical and physical equilibrium, and this is particularly 
the case in biomolecular systems dominated by non-covalent interactions, 
where the intermolecular forces are relatively small and comparable to 
entropic effects arising from molecular dynamics and solvation changes. 
I f '  we want to understand how biological molecules behave, live must 
somehow determine the diflerent thennodynamic contributions to 
the .forces that control their structure and interactions. 
The consequence of all this (the bottom line?) is that: 
This is primarily an experimental problem, and the following sections 
show how it can be done in various ways. 
5.2 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry 
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is an experimental technique to 
measure directly the heat energy uptake that takes place in a sample 
during controlled increase (or decrease) in temperature. At the simplest 

104 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 5.4 A differential scan- 
ning calorimeter for measuring 
thermal transitions in dilute 
solution 
level it may be used to determine thermal transition (“melting”) 
temperatures for samples in solution, solid or mixed phases (e.g. 
suspensions). However, with more sensitive apparatus and more careful 
experimentation it may be used to determine absolute thermodynamic 
data for thermally induced transitions of various kinds. It is particularly 
useful in studying the thermodynamics of unfolding transitions in dilute 
solutions of proteins and nucleic acids, or the phase transitions that can 
take place in biological membranes. 
Figure 5.4 shows the typical layout of a DSC instrument. Sample and 
reference solutions are contained in identical calorimetric vessels, or cells 
(labelled S and R), typically around 1 cm3 in volume. In a DSC 
experiment the sample solution, S (typically a protein at a concentration 
of 1 mg cmP3 or less in modern instruments) is heated at constant rate in 
the calorimeter cell alongside an identical reference cell (R) containing 
buffer. Both sample and reference solutions are kept under a small 
positive pressure, P (1-2 atm), to inhibit bubble formation from dissolved 
gases as the temperature is increased. The temperature differences 
between S and R (AT,) and the surrounding jacket (AT2) are measured 
by sensitive thermocouples which provide a voltage, proportional to the 
temperature difference, that may be sensed and amplified by external 
electronics. The entire system is heated at constant rate by the jacket and 
main heaters, and each cell (R and S) may be heated separately using 
feedback heaters. The power supplied to these heaters (voltage and 
current) is measured and recorded. 
Thermal 
shield 
Feedback 
heaters 
(AC,) 
Main 
heaters 
Jacket (AT2) 
heaterkooler 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
105 
Picture what happens as the sample and reference solutions are heated 
up at a constant rate. Initially, if both sample and reference behave the 
same, there will be no temperature difference between them. At some 
temperature the protein molecules in the sample solution (for example) 
may begin to thermally unfold, and some of the heat energy from the 
main heaters will be used to bring about this endothermic transition, 
rather than in raising the temperature. Consequently, there will be a 
temperature lag (ATI) between the sample and reference cells. This is 
detected by the external electronics, and additional heat is supplied to S 
(using the feedback heater) to correct this imbalance. The electrical heat 
energy supplied to the sample is, in this case, a direct measure of the 
enthalpy change in the sample due to the temperature change. 
Q What might be the temperature difference between sample and 
identical buffer reference solutions for a sample comprising 
1 mg C M - ~  of a protein of RMM 50,000 undergoing a thermal 
transition with AH= 80 kJ mol-'? 
A 
1 mg = 1 x 10-3/50,000=2 x lo-* moles of protein x AH 
= 1.6 x 
J heat energy uptake per mg of protein. 
The specific heat capacity of water (assume identical for buffer 
Assuming that all this heat energy is absorbed by the 1 cm3 
and protein solution) = 4.2 J K- cm-3 
sample: 
AT1 = 1.6 x 10-3/4.2 = 3.8 x 
"C 
(In practice, thermal transitions in biomolecules do not occur all at 
once, but take place over a finite temperature range. This means that 
temperature changes observed by DSC are usually very much smaller 
than this.) 
In general, differences in heat energy uptake between the sample and 
reference cells required to maintain equal temperature correspond to 
differences in apparent heat capacity, and it is these differences in heat 
capacity that give direct information about the energetics of thermally 
induced processes in the sample. 
An example of the sort ofdata obtained by DSC for the thermal unfolding 
of a small protein in water is shown in Figure 5.5. This shows the measured 
heat capacity of a protein in solution as a function of temperature. At low 
temperatures the heat capacity (C,) is relatively small. However, above 

106 
Biophysical Chemistry 
about 40 "C in this case, the protein begins to unfold endothermically. This 
requires heat energy, and the heat capacity curve rises sharply, reaching a 
maximum at the mid-point temperature of the transition ( Tm), before falling 
to a new baseline level once all the protein molecules are unfolded. 
Figure 5.5 Typical DSC data: 
protein unfolding 
The integrated area under the C ,  transition peak gives the total heat 
energy (enthalpy) required to bring about the observed transition. The 
shape of the curve gives experimental information as well. For example, 
the fraction of protein unfolded at any temperature can be estimated from 
the relative areas under the curve (Figure 5.6). 
Figure 5.6 Integrated areas 
under a DSC peak are related to 
the extent of the transition 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Temperature (T) 
The increase in baseline heat capacity (AC,) is characteristic. It shows 
that the heat capacity of the unfolded polypeptide chain is greater than 
that of the folded protein. This is typical of what one sees during the 
melting of hydrogen-bonded solids (Figure 5.7), and is also what is 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
107 
expected for the increased exposure to water of hydrophobic amino acid 
side chains in the unfolded state.' 
't 
-il 2l 
CH3C02H ' 
00 
I 
2 4l 
Ammonia ' 
I 
5.3 Isothermal Titration Calorimetry 
The thermodynamics of interaction between molecules in solution can be 
measured using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC; Figure 5.8). 
Thermal 
shield 
Injection syringe 
and 
stirrer motor 
I 
Feedback- 
heaters 
Jacket ( ATz) 
heaterkooler 
Figure 5.7 Left: examples of 
absolute heat capacities for pure 
solid and liquid compounds as a 
function of temperature, plotted 
relative to the normal melting 
point (AT= T-- TJ. Right: protein 
unfolding data (in aqueous sol- 
ution) for comparison, plotted on 
a similar heat capacity scale 
Figure 5.8 Isothermal titration 
calorimeter 

108 
Biophysical Chemistry 
The ITC instrument is very similar to the DSC apparatus described 
above. However, in this case, instead of changing the temperature, the 
sample (and reference) are kept at constant temperature (hence 
“isothermal”). The sample cell is fitted with an injection syringe so that 
small amounts of another solution may be mixed with the sample. 
Typically this might be used to measure the heat of binding of a drug or 
inhibitor molecule to an enzyme. 
Typical ITC data for binding of a small inhibitor molecule to an 
enzyme are shown in Figure 5.9. Note how, initially, quite large heat 
pulses are observed with each injection. This corresponds to the heat 
energy liberated when the inhibitor molecules bind to the protein active 
site. However, with subsequent injections, the heat pulses become 
smaller as eventually all the available binding sites are occupied. 
General methods for analysing data such as these are described in 
Section 5.5. 
Figure 5.9 Typical ITC data for 
binding of a trisaccharide inhibi- 
tor (tri-N-acetyl-glucosamine; tri- 
NAG) to hen egg white lysozyme, 
in 0.1 mol dmp3 ethanoate buffer, 
pH 5. Each exothermic heat 
pulse (upperpanel) corresponds 
to injection of 10 p~ (0.01 cm3) of 
tri-NAG (0.45 mmol dmP3) into 
the protein solution (36 pmol 
dmP3). Integrated heat data 
(lower panel) constitute a differ- 
ential binding curve that may be 
fit to a standard single-site bind- 
ing model to give, in this 
instance, the stoichiometry of 
binding (number of binding 
sites), N= 0.99; binding affinity, 
K,,, 
= 3.9 x lo5 (mol dmP3)-’ 
(KdlSs=2.6 pmol dm-3); and 
enthalpy of binding, 
AH= 4 1 . 7  kJ mol-’.2 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
1
O -  
r 
-2 - 
3
-
 
%4 
- 
-6- 
r” 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
Molar ratio 
5.4 
Binding Equilibrium 
Suppose we know the equilibrium constant for binding of a ligand to a 
protein. How do we know how much is bound under particular 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
109 
conditions? Typically, we might know the total protein and total ligand 
concentrations, but how much is bound? 
For protein-ligand binding (or anything equivalent): 
P + L + P L  
The dissociation constant is: 
K = [PI [LI / [PLI 
and the total ligand concentration is: 
C L  = [L] + [PL] 
Now the total protein concentration is: 
c p  = [PI + [PL] 
Using equation (5. I), this becomes: 
c p  = K[PL]/[L] + [PL] 
and using equation (5.2): 
c p  = K[PL]/(CL - [PL]) + [PL] 
[PLI2 - (C, + CL + K)[PL] + CPCL = 0 
[PL] = [(Cp + CL + K )  5 {(Cp + C L  + q2 - 4cpcL}'/2]/2 
Rearrange to give a quadratic equation for [PL]: 
For which the two solutions are: 
By inspection, the minus sign is the physically correct solution, giving the 
exact expression for protein-ligand 
complex formation, [PL], as a 
function of the total protein and ligand concentrations: 
[PL] = [(Cp + C L  + K )  - {(Cp + CL + q2 - 4cpcL}'/2]/2 
If there are n binding sites per mole of protein, then Cp = nCo, where Co is 
the estimated protein concentration, giving: 
[PL] = [(nCo + CL + K )  '' { (nCo + CL + q2 - 4 n c o c p 1 / 2  
Thefraction ($) of sites occupied at any ligand concentration is given by: 
d G L )  = [PLI/nCo 
= [(nc0 
+ cL + K )  - 
+ CL + K)* - ~ ~ C ~ C L } ' / ~ I / ~ ~ C O  
(5.3) 
Binding lo r-nultiple tmclirig sites 
on h iolo y ical ~1 x ro 1710 I <?i: 
i I les 
often involve>; iimw ccmplr:x 
b I n ci I I 1 g sc hc 1 1  ic's , p o :;s i t:) I y 
involviml cooperativity or 
allosteric interactions t)etwr:t:r! 
bin CI i ricj sites These s i I u a  t 10 I 3 s 
give risc to I! Iorc coiril,lic;atecl 
binding r:xpr.:tisions ttiat will riot 
be explored 'wrf: 

110 
Biophysical Chemistry 
5.5 
General Methods for Determining 
Thermodynamic Properties 
Figure 5.10 Effects of a 
chemical denaturant (GuHCI) on 
the intrinsic fluorescence and 
circular dichroism intensity of a 
protein in solution 
Figure 5.1 1 Fluorescence 
emission intensity versus tem- 
perature for a typical protein 
(lysozyme) in solution. The 
inflection point (T,) indicates 
thermal unfolding at about 55 " C  
in this example. The dashed 
(coloured) lines indicate the 
general decrease in Trp fluor- 
escence emission with increase 
in temperature for both the folded 
(low-T) and unfolded (high-T) 
states 
There are many different ways in which the changes in conformation of a 
macromolecule or binding of ligands can be observed experimentally. 
Some of these methods, such as the calorimetric techniques described 
above, give thermodynamic information directly. Other methods, many 
of them based on spectroscopic changes (see Chapter 2), are more 
indirect, but we can still obtain useful thermodynamic data provided we 
have a reasonable idea about what is going on in the process. 
For example, increasing the temperature or addition of chemical 
"denaturants" such as urea or guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl) 
produce changes in fluorescence or circular dichroism spectra of 
proteins in solution consistent with unfolding of the protein structure 
(Figures 5.10 and 5.1 1). 
100 - 
w 
I 
I
l
l
1
 I
I
I
I
I
I
 I 
I 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4
5
 6 
[GuHCl]/mol dm-3 
t 
-I 
1 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Temperature/ "C 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
111 
Binding of ligands to DNA strands or protein active sites can also 
result in spectral changes, either in the ligand or the macromolecule, 
that depend on the extent of binding. (see Figure 5.12 for an 
example). 
L 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
4 
8 
12 
[Protein]/pmol dm-3 
.____ 
__- 
. 
. 
~~~ 
How might we analyse such data to obtain useful thermody- 
namic information? The following sections illustrate how this can be 
done. 
5.5.1 Folding/Unfolding Transitions 
For a two-state unfolding transition: 
N U 
K = [U]/[N] 
the equilibrium constant at any particular temperature can be determined 
from the experimental data in Figure 5.13 as follows: 
from which the free energy for unfolding can be calculated in the standard 
way: 
AGinf = AH;,, - T'AS;,,- = -RTlnK 
Figure 5.12 Binding of a fluor- 
escence-labelled fatty acid 
(dansyl-undecanoic acid) to a 
lipid-binding protein. Addition of 
increasing amounts of protein 
causes an increase in fluor- 
escence emission of the ligand. 
The fluorescence intensity 
reaches a plateau when all ligand 
molecules are bound 
Measurements of K across the temperature range can be used to derive 
AH:,f and AS:,f 

112 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 5.13 General two-state 
transition curve. The observable 
(F) can be any experimental 
parameter (heat uptake, fluor- 
escence intensity, UV absor- 
bance, CD intensity, etc.). The 
variable (x) is whatever is bring- 
ing about the transition (e.g. 
temperature, pressure, concen- 
tration, pH). The dotted lines give 
the extrapolated baselines, 
showing what Fwould be for the 
initial or final states in the 
absence of any transition 
Figure 5.14 The graph shows 
some typical data for the UV 
absorbance (in arbitrary units) of 
a macromolecule that undergoes 
an unfolding transition with 
increase in temperature. This is 
the sort of curve one might see 
for the "melting" of a DNA double 
helix, for example 
Q 
the K and AG;nf at 35 "C? 
In the example in Figure 5.14, Fo = 50 and Finf= 75. What are 
A At 35 "C, F (from the graph) = 53.8. 
.*. K(35 "C = ( F -  FO)/(F,,f - F )  = (53.8 - 50)/(75 - 53.8) 
= 3.8/21.2 = 0.179 
:. AG:,f = -RTln K = -8.314 x (273 + 35) x ln(0.179) 
= +4.4 kJmol-' 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
113 
The same approach may be used to determine K and AG:nf at other 
temperatures, giving the following results (check these for yourself): 
7" 
C 
F 
K 
AG"/kJ mol-' 
35 
40 
45 
53.8 
62.5 
71.9 
0.18 
1 
7.1 
+4.4 
0 
-5.2 
Note here that, at the mid-point of the transition, Tm=40 "C, 
A rough estimate of the enthalpy and entropy of unfolding can be 
K =  1 and AG;nf=O. 
made using: 
with data at two different temperatures. For example: 
AG:,f = AH:,f - TAS:,,f 
At 35 "C: AG:,, 
= AHlnf - 308 x AS&f = +4.4 kJ mol-' 
At 45 "C: AG:,f = AHEnf - 318 x AS:nf = -5.2 kJ mol-' 
Using the method of simultaneous equations, subtracting 
from the other gives: 
10 x ASinf = +9.6 kJ mol-' 
AS:nf = +0.96 kJ mol-' K-' 
Hence: 
ne 
We can now use this value to estimate AHi,f by substitution into 
one of the free energy equations. For example: 
At 35 "C: AG&, = 
Hence: AH:nf = +300 kJ mol-' 
A H  and A S  often vary with temperature.) 
- 308 x 0.96 = +4.4 kJ mol-' 
(Bear in mind that these are only approximate estimates, since 
5.5.2 Ligand Binding 
For simple ligand binding equilibrium (such as described in the earlier 
Section 5.4), the extent of binding is proportional to the change in 
experimental observable. Consequently, for any particular total ligand 
concentration, CL, we can determine the fraction bound from the 
experimental curve (Figure 5.1 5). 

114 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 5.15 Ligand binding 
titration curve. This shows the 
change in some experimental 
observable (F) with increasing 
ligand concentration. Eventually, 
f reaches a constant plateau 
value (6nr) when all binding sites 
are full 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
- 
0 
Total ligand concentration (C,) 
The,fraction (4) of sites occupied at any ligand concentration is given 
Unfortunately, since we do not know the free ligand concentration ([L]), 
but only the total (CL), it is necessary to use a fairly complicated 
expression (such as equation 5.3 from Section 5.4) to estimate K from 
this. However, in cases of relatively weak binding, when [PL] is small 
compared to the total ligand concentration, then we might make the 
approximation that [L] ==: CL. 
5.6 
Equilibrium Dialysis 
One problem with the indirect methods for ligand binding described in 
the previous section is that we rarely know the actual concentrations of 
free ligand or complex, for example. Rather, these are inferred from 
indirect observations. l*~qiiilil)rimi 
cli;il!~sis is a technique that gets around 
this problem in some instances. 
A simple equilibrium dialysis cell is made up of two compartments in 
which the solutions are separated by a semi-permeable membrane (Figure 
5.16). This membrane contains small channels that allow free diffusion of 
solvent and small solute molecules, but through which larger molecules 
such as proteins cannot pass. In a typical experiment, one would place the 
protein (or other macromolecule) solution into one compartment, with 
solvent (buffer) in the other, and then add ligand. The (small) ligand 
molecules (L) are free to move through the membrane, but the protein (P) 
and the protein ligand complex (PL) are confined to one side. Once 
equilibrium is reached, the experiment involves measurement of the total 
protein and total ligand concentrations in each of the compartments. 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
115 
. I  
0 
I 
I 
With the configuration given in Figure 5.16. For the right-hand 
(a) Total concentration of L: CL(right) = [L] 
compartment: 
For the left-hand compartment: 
(b) Total concentration of L: CL(left) = [L] + [PL] 
(c) Total concentration of P: Cp(left) = [PI + [PL] 
Hence: [PL]=(b) - (a); [P]=(c) - [PL] 
and K =  [PL]/[P][L] 
Equilibrium dialysis methods often involve the use of radioactively 
labelled ligands, so that very small concentrations and very tight binding 
can be measured directly. 
5.7 
Protein Solubility and Crystallization 
In addition to the fairly specific interactions we have considered so far, 
there are numerous non-specific interactions that make proteins and 
polypeptides quite “sticky”, with a tendency to adhere both to each other 
and to other surfaces. As a consequence, proteins and polypeptides 
usually have quite low solubilities that are sensitive to changes in pH, 
ionic strength and other solutes. This is important in both experimental 
and practical applications, since most proteins are only properly active in 
solution. Some general guidelines are as follows. 
A saturated solution is what we obtain when equilibrium is reached 
between the solid phase of a compound and its solution in a particular 
solvent. As always, this is a battle between the tendency for thermal 
motion to shake apart any aggregates, opposed by any net attractive 
forces holding the aggregates together. At low enough concentrations, the 
thermal disruptive (entropic) effects always win (given time), because 
dilute solutions or mixtures have a high entropy. However, at high 
concentrations a limit is reached wherein no further solute will dissolve. 
Figure 5.16 Equilibrium dialy- 
sis cell, showing the rnacro- 
molecules (P) and complex 
confined to one side, whilst the 
smaller ligand molecules are free 
to diffuse across the semi- 
permeable membrane (indicated 
by the dashed line) 

116 
Biophysical Chemistry 
In thermodynamics, this can be related to the standard free energy of 
transfer from the solid to solution (AGzolution): 
AG~olution 
= -RT ln(solubi1ity) 
Anything that increases this free energy will reduce the solubility, and 
I tle solubility of any component is 
i e  concentration of solute 
:,rlol drn 
3 )  
the solution phase 
-it equilibrium and in contact with 
11io solid phase 
vice versa. 
5.7.1 Electrostatic Effects on Solubility 
Electrostatic interactions between charged groups on proteins appear to 
be one of the main factors controlling their solubility in aqueous systems. 
The charges on proteins are due (mainly) to the weakly acidic and basic 
side-chains and consequently depend on the pH of the solution (see 
Chapter 1). Proteins tend to carry either an overall positive charge (low 
pH) or negative charge (high pH), and the resulting electrostatic 
repulsions will tend to overcome any more specific attractive interactions 
between the molecules. However, at intermediate pH values, particularly 
at the isoelectric point when pH = PI, the proteins carry a net zero charge 
and this overall repulsive effect will be minimized (see Figure 5.17). 
Hence, as a general (but not universal) rule, proteins tend to be least 
soluble at their isoelectric point. 
Figure 5.17 Effect of pH on 
electrostatic attractionshepul- 
sions between proteins 
PH - 
5.7.2 %alting In” and %alting Out” 
The effects of added electrolytes (salts) on protein solubility are 
complex. At low concentrations (typically with salt concentrations 
below about 0.5 mol dm-3), electrostatic screening by the small ions in 
solution tends to reduce electrostatic interactions between the macro- 
molecules, and the solubility of protein increases. Historically, this is 
known as the “salting-in” effect. However, at higher salt concen- 
trations the solubility of protein tends to decrease due to the “salting- 
out” effect. 
,qltt,ouyh the surfaces of prote,r, 
nmlecules tend to be relatively 
Salting out is an indirect thermodynamic effect due more to the strong 
affinity of electrolytes for water rather than to specific interactions 
polar, the main bulk of the protein 
rs rnade up of non-polar material 
of low (Slielectric constant. 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
117 
between proteins. Small, highly charged ions are strongly solvated in 
polar solvents such as water. They prefer a high dielectric environment, 
and will tend to repel non-polar molecules. 
There are two (roughly equivalent) ways of looking at this from a 
thermodynamic viewpoint. Dissociation of salts into small ions in 
solution occurs more readily in a polar environment: salts “prefer” to be 
in a very polar medium like water. The presence of non-polar material 
such as protein will tend to reduce the overall polarity of the medium, 
and will be thermodynamically unfavourable for small ions. Conse- 
quently, especially at high salt concentrations, non-polar substances 
such as proteins will be forced out of solution so as to maximize the 
overall polarity of the medium. Alternatively, one may imagine that at 
high salt concentrations there is insufficient water available to solvate 
both the small ions and the protein surface. Consequently, protein is 
forced out of solution to release more water molecules for solvation of 
the salts. 
Both salting-in and salting-out effects depend on the size and charge of 
the ions in solution. Particularly for salting out, small highly charged ions 
tend to have a greater effect (because of their higher solvation). This has 
given rise to the Hofmeister or lyotropic series comparing the relative 
effectiveness of different anions or cations on salting out. A typical 
Hofmeister series, in decreasing order of effectiveness in salting out 
proteins from aqueous solution, is given below for common anions and 
cations. 
Anions: citrate2- > SO:- > HPOi- > F- > Cl- > Br- > I- > NO, 
> ClO, 
Cations: A13+ > Mg2+ > Ca2+ > Na’ > Kt > Cs’ > NH; > N(CH3); 
(Note that the actual sequence can vary slightly depending on protein 
and other conditions.) 
Salting out or precipitation by varying the salt type and concentration 
is often used in the early stages of purification of proteins from complex 
mixtures. 
This emp:rica series arises iroii i 
experiniwits (lorie iii 1888 t)y ttc 
Aus t I-0-Gt.r 171 ;I I- c her ni st F ra nz 
Hofnieister ( 1  3!)0 1922). wtm W’IS 
interested 111 tI ie relative 
effectiverxss :)f differeiil salt:; in 
precipitating i)loteiii:; froni cgg 
white,. The alttmative riame, 
lyotropic series. derives frori-i tlw 
Greek mxmil ~ c j  roirylily 
’ ’ pert ai :I I i -,g 
to x)Iveri I ;3ff i r 1 it y ’ 
5.7.3 Non-polar Additives 
Since solubility in water is generally mediated by the polar groups on the 
protein surface, it follows that any reduction in solvent polarity might 
tend to reduce protein solubility. This is generally the case. Addition of 
non-polar solutes such as ethanol, methanol or polymers such as 
poly(ethy1ene glycol) (“PEG”) usually lowers the protein solubility 
(Figure 5.18). 

118 
Biophysical Chemistry 
5 
D 7 D 4  Protein Crystal I izat ion 
Proteins normally precipitate out of solution as amorphous aggregates. 
However, under carefully controlled conditions, single crystals of purified 
proteins may be obtained. This is a crucial step in the determination of 
protein structure by diffraction methods. 
The process can be described by reference to the phase diagram 
(Figure 5.18). At low concentrations of protein and salt (or other 
precipitant) the protein is below the solubility limit and remains in 
solution. At high concentrations, however, the solution becomes 
thermodynamically unstable (supersaturated) and, once nucleation 
takes place, the protein will precipitate out of solution until the 
concentration in the liquid phase falls back to the solubility limit. If this 
happens too quickly, then the precipitate tends to be amorphous or just 
composed of very tiny crystals. 
Figure 5.18 Phase diagram 
illustrating the effects of salt or 
other precipitant concentration 
c 
.3 
U 
e 
8 
e 
Y 
aJ 
d 
Q) 
.H 
U 
n 
I Swersaturated I 
I 
a region 
I 
L =  
Metastable reg 
Solubility 
7 
limit 
I 
I region I 
P 
Salt (or precipitant) concentration 
Nucleation is the key to more controlled crystal growth. In the 
supersaturated region of the phase diagram, nucleation is easy but 
haphazard, and subsequent crystal growth rapid and hard to control. 
However, in the “metastable” region, at concentrations slightly above the 
saturation limit, small nuclei are unstable but larger nuclei may grow at 
the expense of smaller ones. Most protein crystallization methods attempt 
to achieve this by slowly increasing the protein and precipitant 
concentrations until the solution approaches this metastable region. 
Several practical methods have been devised, mostly based on liquid or 
vapour phase diffusion processes. The “sitting drop” technique is one 
example (Figure 5-1 9). 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
I19 
Vapour phase 
Protein 
+ 
In the sitting drop method a small volume of protein solution is mixed 
with an equal volume of precipitant solution (which may be a 
concentrated solution of salts or other precipitants) and placed in a 
chamber surrounded by a larger volume of the precipitant solution. 
Water will evaporate from the protein droplet and pass through the 
vapour phase into the more concentrated precipitant solution. This 
gradually increases the concentrations of both the protein and the 
precipitants in the drop, until the precipitant concentration equals 
that of the surrounding reservoir. Under the right conditions 
(which are usually achieved by trial and error) this slow increase in 
concentration (typically over many days) allows growth of well-formed 
crystals. 
__ - 
__ 
__________ 
- - 
-. 
- - 
- - - - - -- - 
- 
I 
Precipitant 
Figure 5.19 Sitting drop 
method for protein crystallization 
/' ' 
/precipitant 
ll;O 
4 
\ 
i 
1 
1. The conformation and interactions of biological macromolecules 
1 
are governed by thermodynamic forces involving a balance of 
' 
entropic and enthalpic effects. 
! 
2. The thermodynamics of biomolecular stability and interactions 
can be measured directly using microcalorimetry methods. 
3. Spectroscopic and other indirect methods can also be used to 
determine thermodynamic properties. 
4. Equilibrium dialysis methods can be used to measure binding 
interactions directly. 
5. The solubility of proteins (and other macromolecules) can be 
understood in terms of thermodynamic phase equilibria. 

120 
Biophysical Chemistry 
1. A. Cooper, Heat capacity of hydrogen-bonded networks: an alternative 
view of protein .folding thermodynamics, in Biophys. Chem., 2000, 85, 
2. A. Cooper, C. M. Johnson, J. H. Lakey, M. Nollmann, Heat does not 
come in dierent colours: entropy-enthalpy compensation, free energy 
windows, quantum conjinement, pressure perturbation calorimetry, 
salvation and the multiple causes of heat capacity eflects in biomolecular 
interactions, in Biophys. Chem., 2001, 93, 21 5-230. 
25-39. 
A. Cooper, Microcalorimetry of protein-protein interactions, in 
Biocalorimetry: the Applications of Calorimetry in the Biological 
Sciences, ed. J. E. Ladbury and B. Z. Chowdhry, Wiley, New York, 
A. Cooper, Microcalorimetry of protein-DNA interactions, in DNA-Protein 
Interactions, ed. A. Travers and M. Buckle, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 2000, pp 125-139. 
microcalorimetry, in Protein-Ligand Interactions: Hydrodynamics 
and Calorimetry, ed. S. E. Harding and B. Z. Chowdhry, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 2000, pp 287-3 18. 
G. A. Holdgate, Making cool drugs hot: isothermal titration calorimetry as a 
tool to study binding energetics, in Biotechniques, 2001, 31, 164-186. 
D. Sheehan, Ph-ysical Biochemistry: Principles and Applications, Wiley, 
New York, 2000, Chapter 8. 
J. M. Sneddon and J. D. Gale, Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics, 
RSC Tutorial Chemical Texts, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 
2001. 
Principles and Applications in Biological Sciences, 4th edn., Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2002, Chapters 2-4. 
chemistry, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1998, Chapters 2-4, 15. 
1998, pp 103-1 11. 
A. Cooper, M. A. Nutley, A. Wadood, Di#erential scanning 
I. Tinoco, K. Sauer, J. C. Wang and J. D. Puglisi, Physical Chemistry: 
K. E. van Holde, W. C. Johnson and P. S. Ho, Principles oj Physical Bio- 
5.1. What is the average thermal velocity of the following: (a) an 
O2 molecule at 25 "C; (b) a water molecule at 25 "C; (c) a protein 
molecule of RMM 25,000 at 37 "C? 
5.2. How might we feel or otherwise detect such motion in the 
molecules around us? 

Thermodynamics and Interactions 
121 
- . - _ _  - 
__________ 
5.3. Thermal stability studies have given the following (partial) 
thermodynamic data for unfolding of a protein in aqueous solution 
at pH 7.4 at different temperatures: 
~ 
~ 
T/"C 
K 
AG"/kJ mol-' 
AH"/kJ mol-' 
AS"/J K-' mol-' 
45 
0.133 
5.33 
150.0 
? 
50 
? 
2.86 
175.0 
? 
55 
? 
0 
200.0 
609.8 
60 
3.22 
? 
225.0 
? 
(a) Complete this table by supplying the missing data (?) where 
possible. 
(b) What fraction of the protein molecules would be unfolded at 50, 
55 and 60 "C, respectively, under these conditions? 
(c) What does the temperature dependence of the unfolding enthalpy 
(AH") suggest about the forces responsible for stabilizing the folded 
protein conformation? 
5.4. The complete genome sequence of a simple nematode worm 
(Candida elegans) has been completed. One of the major tasks now is 
to identify the function of many of the gene products. Scientists have 
identified one protein that might have metal-binding properties. 
Describe different biophysical techniques that might be used to 
investigate the binding of metal ions to this protein in solution. 
5.5. The following experimental data have been obtained for the 
fluorescence intensity (F) and circular dichroism intensity (CD) of a 
protein solution at different temperatures. 
Tl" C 
/=(arbitrary units) 
CD (arbitrary units) 
20 
30 
40 
46 
50 
56 
60 
70 
80 
65.0 
65.0 
64.7 
58.8 
40.0 
17.8 
15.5 
15.0 
15.0 
-1310 
-1310 
- 1304 
-1186 
-810 
- 366 
- 320 
-310 
-310 

122 
Biophysical Chemistry 
(a) What is the Tm of this protein? 
(b) What fraction of the protein might be unfolded at 46 "C? 
(c) What is the Gibbs free energy of unfolding at this temperature? 
(d) Explain what molecular properties are being monitored by the 
two different sets of data. 
(e) Do the transitions monitored by fluorescence and CD necessarily 
have to occur at the same temperature? If not, explain why not. 
5.6. For binding of a ligand (L) to a protein (P) to form a 1:1 
complex (PL), show that: cp/[PL] = 1 + l/flL], where K is the 
equilibrium constant and cp is the total protein concentration. 
Explain how this expression might be used to analyse equilibrium 
dialysis data. 
5.7. In an equilibrium dialysis experiment to study the binding of 
a new organic ligand to a soluble receptor protein, the following 
data were obtained: 
Left-hand (protein + ligand) compartment: 
Total protein concentration = 8.3 x loM9 M 
Total ligand concentration = 3.9 x lo-' M 
Right-hand (ligand only) compartment: 
Total ligand concentration = 3.5 x lo-' M 
What is the equilibrium binding constant for binding of the ligand? 

Kine tics 
Thermodynamics describes what should happen at equilibrium. Kinetics 
tells us how fast we are getting there. Living things are never at 
thermodynamic equilibrium. Biology succeeds because of the very careful 
way in which the rates of biochemical processes are controlled. 
In this chapter we shall look at some of the experimental methods 
used to measure the rates of biomolecular reactions, together with a 
revision of background theory. By the end, together with previous 
studies, you should be able to: 
Explain the factors that affect how fast a reaction proceeds 
Describe basic methods for measuring reaction rates 
Describe methods for following fast reactions 
Understand the basic kinetic equations of enzyme catalysis and 
inhibition 
6.1 
Basic Kinetics 
~~~ 
~~~~~~ 
~~ 
Any chemical or physical system not already at thermodynamic equili- 
brium will tend to move to restore that equilibrium. However, the manner 
in which it does this, and how fast it gets there, depend on numerous 
factors. Rates may be extremely fast, like the explosive reaction of 
hydrogen with oxygen, or imperceptibly slow, like the erosion of marble 
by acid rain. Reaction kinetics are dealt with more rigorously elsewhere. 
Here we shall summarize just the basics in order to set the scene for 
later sections . 
In order for any reaction to proceed at the molecular level, generally 
three conditions must be fulfilled: (a) molecules must collide, (b) in a 
correct orientation and (c) with sufficient energy to overcome the 
activation barrier to reaction (Figure 6.1). 
123 

124 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Reaction path - 
Figure 6.1 Typical energy 
landscape for a simple chemical 
reaction pathway. Reactant mole- 
cules (X and Y) must come 
together with sufficient energy to 
surmount the activation barrier 
(EA) and form an activated com- 
plex, or intermediate, (XY), 
before proceeding to product (Z) 
These conditions are expressed in the basic rate equations. Consider, 
for example, the elementary reaction: 
X + Y - + Z  
The rate of reaction at any time is defined as the overall rate of formation 
of products, or loss of reactants. For homogeneous reactions in solution, 
this is expressed in terms of the concentrations of reactants or products: 
Rate = d[Z]/dt = -d[X]/dt = -d[Y]/dt 
The rate equation for this elementary reaction would be: 
Rate = k[X][Y] 
where k is the rate constant and [XI and [Y] are the molar concentrations 
of reactants. It is important for these basic equations to express the 
concentrations in molar units (moles per dm3 rather than, for example, 
grams per dm’), because this expresses the way in which changing 
the actual number of molecules in the mixture will directly affect the 
probability of intermolecular collisions. 
The rate constant, k, encapsulates the other factors required for 
reaction, expressed in the classic Arrhenius equation: 
k = A exp(-EA/RT) 
where the pre-exponential quantity, A ,  is a collision factor that depends 
on frequency and orientation of the colliding molecules, and EA is the 
activation energy for the reaction. The exponential energy term expresses 
the (Boltzmann) probability that the colliding molecules will have 
sufficient energy to overcome the activation energy barrier at any given 
absolute temperature (T). 
The temperature dependence of the rate constant is sometimes 
expressed in terms of a more rigorous transition-state theory which, 

Kinetics 
125 
although strictly correct only for ideal gas reactions, can be useful in some 
circumstances. The relevant equation is: 
k = (kBT/h)exp(-AG#/RT) 
= (kB T/h)exp(AS#/R)exp( -Aff# / R T )  
where AG#=AH#-TAS# is the activation free energy, made up of 
the ac*tivation ciithalpy and activation entropy, and can be pictured as 
the thermodynamic free energy required to form the transition state 
complex for the reaction. The activation enthalpy, AH#, is analogous 
to the Arrhenius activation energy, EA, whereas the orientation and 
other fxtors appear explicitly in the pre-exponential as the activation 
entropy, AS#. 
Reactions can go backwards as well, and the overall reaction rate is a 
balance between the forward and reverse reactions. For the elementary 
react ion : 
the overall rate = k][X][Y]-k2[Z]. 
Equilibrium is reached when the rates of forward and backward 
reactions just balance, and the overall rate is zero, Consequently, when 
the concentrations have reached their equilibrium values: 
k l  [X]equilib[Y]equilib - k2[Z]equilib = 
which rearranges to give: 
kl /k2 = [Z]equilib/[X]equilib[Y]equilib 
where K is the equilibrium constant for the reaction. 
More complex reaction mechanisms may proceed in a sequence of 
elementary steps that cannot be predicted, necessarily, from the overall 
balanced equation. This may involve transient reaction intermediates and 
rate-limiting steps that control the observed kinetics. Consequently, a 
more general rate expression is of the form: 
Rate = k[X]”’[Y]” 
where rn and n are the order of reaction with respect to reactants X and Y, 
respectively . 
Solution (“integration”) of the appropriate rate equation will tell us 
how the concentrations of reactants and products should vary over time. 
For a siniple first-order reaction: 
d[X]/dt = - k [ X ]  
hH is h e  Boltzmann constant 
Reactions do not stop when 
equilibrium IS reached The 
individual molecules contiiiiie to 
react in both forward and 
backward dirtxtions, but the 
overall concentrations no longer 
change 
See Chapter &) for more on 
equilibwm Remember thdt K will 
usually have units, unless the 
power:, of the concentration t e r m  
in the rlumeraior and denominator 
exactly cancol 
the concentration of reactant, X, decreases exponentially with time: 

126 
Biophysical Chemistry 
where [XIo is the concentration at time zero. 
Higher order reactions lead to more complicated expressions. 
However, for most of the biomolecular reactions studied the kinetics 
are either first order (or simpler), or experimental conditions are arranged 
so as to make the process pseudo-first order. A pseudo-first-order reaction 
is one which behaves as if it were first order in just one of the reactants, for 
example by keeping the concentrations of all other reactants constant or 
in excess. 
of a 
reaction, which is the time taken for the concentration of a given reactant 
to reach half its original value. For first-order reactions this is 
independent of absolute concentrations: 
A sometimes useful concept is the half-life or half-time 
t l / 2  = 0.693/k 
We might ask: how fast can a reaction possibly go? In other words, if 
every molecular collision resulted in a reaction, how fast would that be? 
This is known as the diffusion limit, and it provides a useful number with 
which to compare what we see in practice. 
Molecules in solution move haphazardly under the influence of thermal 
motion, and the rate at which they encounter one another will depend on 
their size and their diffusion coefficients (see Section 4.5 for details of 
diffusion). Large molecules will present larger targets for collision, but 
will also tend to have smaller diffusion coefficients, so will diffuse more 
slowly. This leads to an expression for the diffusion-controlled collision 
frequency: 
Adiffusion = 4nNArXY 
( D X  -k D Y )  
loo0 
tie factor of 1000 I I I  this eyiuation 
i:oriver,s the SI units ot volume 
where Dx and Dy are the diffusion coefficients of the reacting molecules, 
and r x y  is their encounter distance, giving the range within which they 
have to be for reaction to occur. 
Adifiusion would be the pre-exponential factor in the Arrhenius equation 
in the absence of molecular orientation, attraction or other effects. It 
provides an estimate of the upper limit of reaction rates under diffusional 
control with zero activation energy (EA = 0). 
(171 ) to dt71 
Q Diffusion coefficients for small molecules in water at room 
temperature are about 1.5 x 
m2 s-'. What would be the 
diffusion controlled collision frequency assuming an encounter 
distance of 0.5 nm? 

Kinetics 
127 
. - - _ _  
Adiffusion = 4nNArXY 
(DX + DY) 
loo0 
= 471 x 6 x 
= 1 x 10" mol-' dm3 s-' 
The collision frequency = Adi~usion[X][Y]- 
x 5 x lo-'' x 3 x 1 OP9 x 1000 
A 
___ - 
-. -- 
Q What half-life would the above answer correspond to 
for a (pseudo) first-order reaction with reactant concentrations of 
1 x lop3 mol dm-3? 
A 
Rate = k = Adiffusion[X] = 1 X 10"X 1 X low3 = 1 X 10 7 S -1 
:. tl12 = 0.693/k =: 0.693/1 x lo7 = 6.9 x lO-*s (69 ns) 
Molecular diffusion in one or two dimensions is, in principle, Faster 
than the three-dimensional diffusion calculated here. This has been used 
to explain the rapid kinetics of some reactions taking place on biological 
membranes (two-dimensional) or on DNA strands (one-dimensional 
diffusion), for example. 
Of course, in most living organisms, the reactions are taking place 
in a much more complicated environment than the laboratory flask. The 
cell is divided up into numerous compartments, reactions take place 
on membranes or adsorbed to other molecules or surfaces, and so 
forth. In such circumstances the equations describing kinetic processes 
become very complex. Nevertheless, the basic principles described here 
will still apply. 
The experimental challenge is to devise techniques that reliably measure 
rate processes in biomolecules, usually under conditions pertinent to their 
biological function. For slower reactions, many of the traditional tech- 
niques of chemical kinetics may be used, and reactions can be followed 
using a range of spectroscopic methods described in earlier chapters. In 
the following sections we will look at some of the more specialist methods 
that have been developed or adapted for biomolecular kinetics. 
6.2 
Rapid Reaction Techniques 
~~~~ 
~~ 
-~ 
Many reactions are too fast to follow by conventional mixing of reagents 
and, in any case, one often wishes to look at the very earliest stages of a 

128 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 6.2 Sketch of continu- 
ous flow apparatus 
reaction (pre-steady state kinetics). Such experiments require rapid and 
efficient mixing of reagents, together with some means of following the 
subsequent reaction over a period of time. 
6.2.1 Continuous Flow 
One of the most straightforward ways of doing this is by continuous 
flow methods (Figure 6.2). Reagent solutions, X and Y, are pumped 
separately at a constant flow rate into a mixing chamber from which 
the reacting mixture emerges and flows down the exit tube. The reaction 
time at any point downstream from the mixing chamber will depend 
on the combined flow rate and the dimensions of the exit tube. By 
positioning the detector at different positions along the tube, or by 
varying the flow rate, one can monitor the reaction as a function of time. 
Detection might be by UV/visible absorbance, fluorescence or other 
suitable method. 
Q For a combined flow rate of 10 cm3 m i d ,  using tubing of 
0.1 mm internal diameter, what reaction times could be followed 
with a flow tube 1-10 cm downstream from the mixing chamber? 
A Tube volume = nr2Z = n x (0.005)2 x 1 = 7.8 x 
cm3 per cm 
Volume flow rate = 10 cm3 min-' = 10000/60 = 0.167 cm3 s-l 
Linear flow rate = (7.8 x 10-5)/0.167 = 4.7 x low4 s cm-' 
Thus: 1 cm downstream = 0.47 ms 
10 cm downstream = 4.7 ms 

Kinetics 
129 
One advantage of continuous flow methods is that the actual detection 
system can be quite unsophisticated, since it merely has to monitor the 
steady concentration levels at a particular point in the flow tube. Reaction 
time is determined by the geometry and flow rate. One potential 
disadvantage, however, is that it can use up large quantities of reagent, 
especially at the rapid flow rates needed to cover the millisecond time 
scale. 
6.2.2 Stopped Flow 
I n  stopped-flow kinetics, small volumes of reagent solutions are mixed 
rapidly in a flow cell by injection from separate syringes (Figure 6.3). 
The flow cell is typically fitted with transparent quartz windows so that 
UV/vis absorbance or fluorescence can be followed as a function of time. 
Circular dichroism (CD) kinetics can also be measured in some 
instruments. The injection pulse is controlled by a stopping syringe 
which, when it hits the end stop, electronically triggers the detector to 
start recording. 
-4 
Stopping 
syringe 
1 ’rigger 
.
-
 
Detector 
- -_--____ 
The typical “dead-time” for most stopped-flow instruments is around 
1 ms, and is limited by the size of the flow cell and the efficiency of mixing. 
Reactions which are complete within this dead time cannot be measured, 
though more efficient mixing techniques are being developed to improve 
on this. 
Stopped-flow devices of this kind have been used in many applications 
to study the initial steps in enzyme-catalysed reactions or ligand binding 
to biological macromolecules. In such experiments, one reservoir syringe 
would typically contain the enzyme or macromolecule solution and the 
other would contain the substrate or ligand dissolved in the same buffer. 
The progress of the reaction over time (e.g. 1-1000 ms) would be followed 
using colour or UV absorbance changes as the substrate is converted into 
product, or fluorescence changes in the protein in response to ligand 
binding. In many cases of enzymic reactions, the reaction of interest 
Figure 6.3 Typical stopped- 
flow kinetics apparatus. Reser- 
voir syringes and flow cell would 
normally be thermostatted to 
control the temperature 

130 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 6.4 
Example of 
stopped-flow fluorescence 
changes for refolding of a 
globular protein in solution 
might not have a convenient spectral change associated with it, but might 
be ‘‘coupled’’ to a second step by addition of an excess of another enzyme 
or reagent mixture that can be used to monitor the primary reaction 
without disturbing its kinetics. 
Stopped-flow methods are now commonly used to study the rates 
of folding or unfolding of proteins in solution by mixing with solutions 
that cause a pH jump or change in denaturant concentration. For 
example, proteins can be denatured (unf’olded) by high concentration 
(2-6 mol dm-’) 
solutions of chemical denaturants such as urea or 
guanidinium hydrochloride. Stopped-flow dilution, by mixing with a 
large volume of buffer (using different size injection syringes), reverses 
this and allows the rapid kinetics of refolding to be followed (Figure 6.4). 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
Time/ms 
6.3 Relaxation Methods 
Not all reactions can be initiated by flow methods, and the limitations 
imposed by inefficient mixing mean that much faster reactions are hard to 
study by such methods. An alternative approach is to take a mixture 
already at equilibrium, then rapidly perturb it, and watch the kinetics of 
its return to equilibrium. This is the basis for a number of relaxation 
met hods. 
Imagine a simple reaction: 
kl 
A
e
B
 
k - ,  
If the reaction is at equilibrium: 
and: 
k l  [A]equilib = 
I [Blequilib 

Kinetics 
131 
If, however, the reaction is not quite at equilibrium, with the concen- 
tration perturbed slightly: 
then the return to equilibrium will be described by the rate equation: 
since kl[A]quilib = k- 1[B]equilib and [SB] = [SA] in this case. 
This shows that the return to equilibrium after a small perturbation 
is first order, with a rate constant equal to (kl +k_.,). If the equili- 
brium constant, K, has been determined by other methods, then it is 
possible to get both forward and reverse rate constants from this 
experiment. 
Relaxation processes can be very fast, and measurements are limited 
only by the speed at which one can perturb the system and by how fast 
the detection system can follow the changes. Reaction kinetics on the 
microsecond time scale are normally feasible. 
Various perturbation methods are used. Perhaps the most common is 
tcmpcraturc jump (T-jump), in which the temperature of the sample is 
increased by a small amount (typically 5-10 "C) by passing a brief 
discharge of electric current through the solution, or by irradiation with a 
brief pulse of light from an infrared laser. Pressure jump (P-jump) 
perturbation can be done by first pressurizing the system using 
hydrostatic pressure (up to 1000 atm) and then releasing the pressure 
by breaking the seal. Some dye molecules change their affinity for 
hydrogen ions (H+ ) when electronically excited, so absorption of light 
will bring about a change in pH of the solution. This can be used in pH 
jump experiments in which the sample solution, containing the dye 
molecule, is perturbed by brief irradiation from a pulsed laser at the 
appropriate wavelength to excite the dye. 
6.3.1 Photochemical Reactions 
For reactions that can be initiated by light, the start of the reaction 
(photon absorption) is essentially instantaneous. This means that the 
kinetics of such processes can be observed on much faster time scales, 
without the practical limitations imposed by having to mix solutions, for 
example. The technique, commonly called flash photolysis, involves 
exposure of the sample to a brief, intense pulse of light at an appropriate 

132 
Biophysical Chemistry 
~~ 
~ 
wavelength, following which the course of the reaction is followed by 
spectroscopic observation (absorbance or fluorescence). 
These methods have been applied to studying various natural light- 
induced biomolecular processes such as photosynthesis and vision. With 
modern pulsed-laser techniques one can use light pulses as short as a few 
femtoseconds, or less, and this gives information about the very earliest 
1 fs 
10 If's 
stages of important photochemical reactions. 
r-- 
Q How far does light travel in 1 fs? 
A Speed of light (in vacuum) = 3 x 10" m s-l 
:. Distance travelled in 1 fs = 3 x 10" x 
[Note: the diameter of a human hair is about 50-100 pm] 
= 3 x 
m = 30 pm 
Flash photolysis methods can also be applied in other areas. For 
example, it has been found that intense pulses of laser light can displace 
carbon monoxide (CO) molecules bound to the haem groups in proteins 
such as haemoglobin and myoglobin. Once displaced, they migrate back 
to their original sites. This re-binding can be followed spectroscopically, 
giving information about the ways in which small molecules can diffuse 
through proteins. 
Some dye molecules have a different pK, in the electronically excited 
state, so that they release or take up H f  ions when exposed to a flash of 
light. This can be used to bring about rapid pH changes in solution. Such 
pH-jump experiments can be used to follow the kinetics of biomolecular 
processes. Other kinds of photochemical reactions can be used to 
overcome mixing problems in rapid kinetic experiments. One example of 
this is the use of "caged" ATP compounds that only become available for 
enzyme reaction, for example, when exposed to an intense light flash.' 
6.4 
Hydrogen Exchange 
( 7 t 1 ~ ~ 3 1  
yroups such as -W or 
The hydrogen atoms on some groups are exchangeable and, using D20 
for example, isotope exchange can be detected by techniques such as 
J H  (hut not -CH), involviny 
hvtlroanns attached to 
cllcctrorqptrve atoms, rapidly 
l a v l  reversibly) exchange to -NLI 
ot -OD when exposed to D,O 
( t  leavy water) 
NMR, mass spectrometry, IR and Raman spectroscopy. Normally this 
exchange is very rapid (microseconds or less), but can be much slower if 
the group is protected from solvent by hydrogen bonding or burial within 

Kinetics 
133 
a macromolecular structure. This is particularly significant in the case of 
globular proteins, where amide hydrogen exchange of buried peptide 
groups can take days, or longer. This can be exploited to gain information 
about the rates of conformational fluctuations in macromolecules. 
A typical experiment involves mixing of the protein solution with 
isotopically enriched solvent (usually D20) under carefully controlled 
temperature and pH conditions, followed by sampling at timed intervals 
to monitor the extent of H-D exchange. Groups exposed to solvent at, or 
near, the surface of a globular protein will exchange rapidly, whereas 
those in more protected chemical environments will change more slowly. 
The mechanism of slow H-D exchange in these systems is quite 
complicated, but one simple model relates it to the rate of transient 
conformational (unfolding) transitions of the protein. During such 
conformational changes, groups that are normally protected become 
briefly exposed to solvent and can undergo isotope exchange. 
Remember that proteins (and other biological macromolecules) are 
quite dynamic, flexible molecules. Even at equilibrium, and just like all 
chemical equilibrium processes, this equilibrium is dynamic, since 
thermal motion never stops. For a two-state process, the exchange 
kinetics may be described by: 
where N represents the “native” or folded form of the protein, and U its 
unfolded state. kl and kPl are the forward and reverse rate constants for 
the unfolding transition, and kint is the intrinsic rate constant for H-D 
exchange in a group fully exposed to solvent. The letters “H” and “D” 
indicate whether the protein group is labelled with hydrogen or 
deuterium, respectively. 
Assuming that the U + N process is rapid (as it would normally be), 
then the rate of isotope exchange for the folded protein would be: 
-d[N(H)]/dt = d[N(D)]/dt = kin,[U(H)] 
In the steady state, (kl + ki,,)[U(H)] = kIIN(H)], so that: 
-d[N(H)l/dt = d[N(D)l/dt = kint[N(H)]kl / ( k - ~  + kint) 
and the observed rate constant for isotope exchange is: 
kex = kintkl /(k-l + kint) 
Once a protein is unfolded, even transiently, then isotope exchange is 
likely to occur rapidly, before it has chance to refold (kjnt > k,), 
SO 
kex =r kl . Under such conditions, measurement of isotope exchange rates 
in folded proteins can give information about the rates of naturally 
occurring conformational changes. 
L l  n t t‘. 
+- 

134 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 6.5 Interaction of an 
electromagnetic wave with a thin 
metallic film 
Of course, if this simple two-state model were entirely correct, then all 
exchangeable groups within a given protein would show the same 
exchange kinetics. Experimentally this is not usually the case, but there 
are numerous other exchange pathways that involve less extreme 
transient fluctuations in conformation with only partial unfolding of 
smaller regions of the protein. 
6.5 
Surface Plasmon Resonance 
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is a relatively new technique that 
exploits some of the unusual physical properties of thin metallic films. 
When light reflects off a metal surface, a small proportion of the 
electromagnetic field penetrates into the metal where it interacts with 
the conduction electrons. In thin metal films this gives rise to collective 
motions of electrons, or plasmons, in the metal layer that can alter 
the reflective and other optical properties of the film (Figure 6.5). The 
magnitudes of these optical effects are very sensitive to the refractive 
index of the medium immediately in contact with the back face of the film. 
This is because the “evanescent” or decaying electric field from the 
plasmon oscillations penetrates a short distance into the underlying 
medium (typically by about 300 nm). 
Metal film 
t 
e-----+ 
At certain incident angles the wavelength of the light matches the 
plasmon frequency and resonance occurs. This reduces the intensity of the 
reflected light, and the magnitude of the effect depends on the refractive 
index of the material into which the evanescent wave penetrates. 
This is the basis for SPR “biosensor” chips for measuring the binding 
kinetics of biological molecules. The biosensor consists of a thin metal 

Kinetics 
135 
film (typically gold, deposited on a glass slide) to which proteins such as 
antibodies or other macromolecules may be attached (Figure 6.6). 
I Flow 
I 
Buffer, containing other molecules which may bind, flows continually 
over this surface at a fixed rate, usually 1-100 pdmP3 min-’. If any 
molecules in the solution bind to the immobilized molecules on the gold 
film, this produces a change in refractive index at the interface which is 
detected as a change in light intensity reflected from the film. This is usually 
measured in arbitrary response units (RU), which can be calibrated in 
terms of the mass of material bound per unit area of the chip (Figure 6.7). 
3 
p! 
“I 
‘I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
100 
Time/s 
Figure 6.6 Typical experimen- 
tal arrangement for an SPR 
experiment to measure the bind- 
ing of solute molecules (spheres) 
to immobilized receptors 
Figure 6.7 A typical sensor- 
gram, recording RU as a function 
of time, illustrating the basic 
procedure 

136 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Buffer solution is first flowed over the sensor chip to establish a blank 
baseline (A). Flow is then switched to the same buffer containing the test 
molecules (B). As these bind to the surface, the sensorgram response 
increases until an equilibrium level is reached. The shape of this binding 
or association phase may be analysed to give the kinetics of association 
(ken) of the free and immobilized molecules. The flow may then be 
switched back to buffer (C) to wash off the (reversibly) bound molecules. 
The shape of this phase gives the kinetics of dissociation (k,ft). For simple 
reversible binding processes the ratio of k,, to k,ft gives the equilibrium 
constant for the binding reaction, K = kon/koK, which can be related to 
thermodynamic properties in the usual way. 
Various methods are available for attaching macromolecules or other 
ligands to the gold surfaces of sensor chips, either directly or by using 
other linker molecules. The advantage of SPR methods is that they can be 
very sensitive, and only very small amounts of material are needed to do 
the measurements. Also, from a carefully controlled experiment, both 
kinetic and equilibrium parameters may be determined. A potential 
disadvantage is that immobilization of one of the components might affect 
its binding or other properties, and data must be interpreted with care. 
Figure 6.8 Sketch of the basic 
steps in the Michaelis-Menten 
model in which the substrate 
molecule (coloured) forms an 
equilibrium complex by binding 
at the enzyme active site. Cata- 
lysis at the active site results 
in product formation and 
dissociation 
6.6 
Enzyme Kinetics 
Enzymes are proteins that catalyse biochemical reactions with high specifi- 
city and efficiency. Enzymic processes can be quite complex, but the basic 
mechanism in all cases requires one or more discrete steps involving enzyme- 
substrate binding, followed by subsequent catalysis and release of reaction 
products (Figure 6.8). This means that the rate laws will be somewhat 
different from those normally found for simpler, non-catalysed reactions: 
kl 
k? 
E + S e E S A E + P  
k-l 
This is the classic Michaelis-Menten model of enzyme catalysis from 
which simple steady-state rate laws may be derived. 
- -. 
i 
+ Products 

Kinetics 
137 
The rate of this reaction, 1.1, that is the rate of formation of product, 
depends on the concentration of the enzyme-substrate complex, ES: 
v = k2[ES] 
and [ES] may be rewritten in other terms using the normal steady-state 
assumption: 
d[ES]/dt = k ,  [E][S] - (k-I + k2)[ES] = 0 in the steady state 
If we define the total enzyme concentration as CE = [El + [ES], this 
gives: 
where KM == (k I +k2)/k1 is known as the \lichaelis constant. 
reaction varies with substrate concentration should be: 
[ES] = CE/(I + KM/[s]) 
Consequently, the way in which the rate of the enzyme-catalysed 
V = k2[ES] = kZCE/(I + KM/[Sl) 
vtnax/(l + KM/[sl) 
where v, 
= k2CE is the maximum rate of the reaction when all available 
enzyme active sites contain bound substrate ([ES] = CE). 
Figure 6.9 shows how enzyme catalysed rates are expected to increase 
hyperbolically with substrate concentration. Although many enzymes do 
not necessarily follow this simple mechanism, the overall picture is 
nonet heless useful. 
'J'''' t ' ~ r ' ' '  
( ' ' I  ' ""ti"t"''' 
' ' t ' l f  
K M  is a useful parameter that depends on both the enzyme and the 
substrate involved, as well as more general conditions like temperature, 
pH, ionic strength, etc. It can be conveniently visualized as the 
concentration of substrate that gives 50% of the maximum rate. It can 
also be related to the apparent binding affinity of the substrate to the 
Figure 6.9 Graph showing 
typical Michaelis-Menten beha- 
viour for the change in reaction 
rate with increasing substrate 
concentration, [S] 

138 
Biophysical Chemistry 
enzyme. Since the dissociation constant for the enzyme-substrate complex 
formation is given by: 
Kdiss = [E][S]/[ES] = k-l/kl 
it follows that: 
KM = h s s  ( 1 + k? / k ~  
) 
and, if k2 << k l :  
KM 
&iss 
At low substrate concentrations, the rate appears pseudo-first order in [S]: 
V %  v,,,[s]/K~ 
(for [s] << K,) 
whereas at very high substrate concentrations the process appears to be 
zeroth order, since it no longer changes with [S]: 
V 
V,,, 
= k 2 C ~  
(for [S] >> K M )  
The specific activity of the enzyme (sometimes designated kcat) is: 
k2 = vrnax/CE 
kcat 
and the catalytic efficiency or specificity constant is indicated by the ratio 
kcat/KM. Generally speaking, catalytic efficiency is enhanced by tighter 
initial substrate binding (lower KIM) followed by a more rapid reaction of 
the ES complex (higher k2). 
6.6.1 Competitive Inhibition 
Many natural and synthetic compounds (drugs, for example) can 
compete with a substrate for binding at the enzyme active site, and this 
will inhibit the effectiveness of the enzyme. In simple competitive 
inhibition with inhibitor I, the enzyme may bind either I (to form EI) 
or S (to form ES), but never both together: 
Either 
E + I + EI 
with KI = [E][I]/[EI] 
or 
E + S e ES -+ 
E + P 
Following the same steady-state method, but now with CE = [El + 
[ES] + [EI], we obtain: 
v = k2CE/( 1 + K,'/[S]) 
where: 
KM1 = K M ( l  + [lI/KI) 
So, the effect of adding a competitive inhibitor to the reaction mixture is 
to reduce the apparent binding affinity of the enzyme for substrate 
( K M '  > K M ) .  Note, however, that vmax is unaffected. 

Kinetics 
139 
6.6.2 Other Kinds of Inhibition, Activation, Cooperativity 
and Allostery 
There are numerous other ways in which the basic catalytic functions of 
The fastest F orrnula 1 racinq car 
enzymes may be altered by other molecules, Indeed, the ability to control 
~
~
~
,
~
~
~
the activities of enzymes is at least as important as the catalytic activity 
rjlrcctlorl 
itself. 
Non-conipetiti\c inhibition, in its simplest form, comes about when 
binding of an inhibitor affects the catalytic rate (vmax), rather than the 
binding affinity for substrate ( K M ) .  This might happen, for instance, 
if the inhibitor molecule binds at some other site on the protein, 
but induces some change at the active site that affects the catalytic 
activity. More generally, however, inhibitors can affect both K M  
and v ~ ; , ~ .  
It is equally important to be able to enhance enzymic rates under 
some circumstances, and numerous activators or co-factors behave in 
this way. Often, especially in multi-subunit enzymes, these effects can be 
coopcrativc or illlostcric, meaning that the binding of effectors or inhibi- 
tors on one subunit can affect the binding or catalytic properties on 
another subunit. The mathematics of such processes can get very compli- 
cated (and we will not do any of it here), but in such cases the simple 
Michaelis--Menten behaviour no longer applies. The advantage of such 
cooperative or allosteric effects is that they allow much tighter control of 
binding and catalytic processes. 
6.6.3 Double-reciprocal Plots 
Although computer software is now readily available to fit enzyme kinetic 
data to the Michaelis-Menten and related equations, it can be instructive 
to use simple graphical methods in some cases. The most convenient of 
these (though not necessarily the most accurate) are based on double- 
reciprocal methods that convert the hyperbolic rate equations into much 
simpler linear forms for plotting. 
If we take the reciprocal of the Michaelis-Menten equation (that is, 
turn both sides upside down) we obtain: 
l / v  = ( l  -k KM/[s])/vtnax 
or: 
l/v = l/vrnax + K~/[SIvrnax 
This is the equation for a straight line plot of l / v  versus 1/[S] with an 
intercept of l/vmax and a slope KM/v,,,. 
A similar plot in the presence of a 
competitive inhibitor would also be linear, with the same intercept but 
greater slope (Figures 6.10 and 6.11). 
For ,,lstor,c.i reasons, 
dotitic-reciprocal graphs arc 
f:;:," 
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
,
,
first ciwsed their use 

140 
Biophysical Che,mistry 
Figure 6.10 Double-reciprocal 
plot for simple competitive 
inhibition 
Figure 6.1 1 Double-reciprocal 
plot for simple non-competitive 
inhibition 
T 
J 
+ Inhibitor 
.i / 
-r 
I 
Deviations from linear behaviour usually means that the simple 
Michaelis-Menten mechanism is not appropriate, and curved double- 
reciprocal plots may indicate the presence of cooperative or allosteric 
effects in the enzyme. 
I---------------- 
1. Biomolecular kinetics follow the same rules as elsewhere in 
chemistry . 
2. Experimental methods for following fast reactions are based on 
rapid mixing, relaxation and photochemical effects. 

Kinetics 
141 
3. Other techniques, based on isotope exchange and plasmon 
resonance, can also give information about protein dynamics and 
binding kinetics. 
4. The kinetics of simple enzyme catalysis and inhibition can be 
analysed using the Michaelis-Menten model. 
1. J. A. Dantzig, H. Higuchi and Y. E. Goldman, Studies of molecular 
motor,\ using cuged compounds, in Method&r Enzymol., 1998, 291, 
30 7 --3 34. 
A. Fersht, Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme 
N. C. Price, R. A. Dwek, R. G. Ratcliffe and M. R. Wormald, Physical 
Cutalysis and Protein Folding, Freeman, New York, 1999. 
Chcvni.rtry ,fbr Biochemists, 3rd edn., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
2001, chaps. 9-1 I .  
PrinciplcJs and Applicutions in Biological Sciences, 4th edn., Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2002, chaps. 7 & 8. 
I .  Tinoco, K .  Sauer, J. C. Wang and J. D. Puglisi, Physical Chemistry: 
- .__ 
. 
- 
-- 
6.1 . The translational diffusion coefficient (D) 
for small globular 
proteins in water at room temperature is about lo-'' m2 s-'. What 
might be the diffusion-controlled rate constant for encounter of such 
proteins with a membrane receptor or DNA target site with an 
encounter distance of 1 nm? 
6.2. What would be the rate and t y 2  for the process in Problem 6.1 
with a protein concentration of 1 pmolar (1 x lop6 mol dmp3)? 
6.3. Sometimes, reactions are found to have rate constants higher 
than the theoretical diffusion-controlled rate. What might be some 
possible reasons for this? 

142 
Biophysical Chemistry 
i.4. The first step in the light-activated isomerization of retinal in 
he visual photoreceptor protein, rhodopsin, occurs in less than 6 ps. 
3ow far would a beam of light travel in this time? 
1.5. 
Surface plasmon resonance experiments on the kinetics of 
inding of a peptide (in solution) to an immobilized receptor protein 
:ave the following rate data: 
[Peptide]lnmol d m 3  
Rate of associationls-’ 
1.2 
3.6 
4.8 
0.023 
0.068 
0.091 
a) Show that this is consistent with the association being first order 
n peptide concentration. 
b) What is the rate constant for association, k,,? 
c) When the ligand solution was replaced by pure buffer solution, 
he half-time for dissociation of the bound peptide was found to be 
‘.2 s. What is the rate constant for dissociation, k,R? 
d) What is the binding affinity constant for this peptide-protein 
,ornplex? 

Chromatography & 
Electrophoresis 
Chromatography and electrophoresis are general methods for character- 
izing and purifying molecules on the basis of their size, charge and other 
properties. They are widely used in research and industry for the analysis 
and preparation of biomolecules. 
You will probably be familiar with the analytical uses of paper 
chromatography or TLC (thin-layer chromatography) from other 
branches of chemistry. Here we will consider mainly those aspects of 
chromatography and electrophoresis most relevant to biomolecules. 
After completing this chapter you should be able to: 
Describe the basic principles of chromatography and electro- 
phoresis 
Explain how these techniques can be used to characterize 
biological molecules 
Describe some of their applications 
Make rational choices about the most suitable methods for 
separating molecules on the basis of their size, charge or other 
physicochemical properties 
0 
0 
7.1 
Chromatography 
The 1993 I UPAC definition of chromatography is: “Chromatography is a 
physical method of separation in which the components to be separated 
are distributed between two phases, one of which is stationary while the 
other moves in a definite direction”. Consequently, the basic arrange- 
ment for any chromatographic separation may be viewed as shown in 
Figure 7.1. 
PW f) a l ~ d  ~
W
~
~
e
~
 
Ct1erl1lstr~ 
Tha telfTj c tiromatography 
( Lolacir ) ci i d  graphem 
( bbrl:,l,,J 
R~1sslar-i boianlst M
l
k
~
 
Stmeri SVIC’I Tsvett ( 1872 19 19) 
to describe 111s separation of plmt 
pigmerits on columns of firiely 
d I L I cl cd ca I c I 11 r n  car bor I d te 
frCr; the Greek chro’7~n 
11 Lvas first used by the 
143 

144 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 7.1 Chromatographic 
separation involves a supported 
stationary phase, over which 
flows a mobile carrier phase. 
Solute molecules may move back 
and forth between stationary and 
mobile phases 
Mobile 
phase 
Stationary 
phase 
Support 
Within this general scheme, there is much flexibility in the kind of 
stationary and mobile phases that may be used, but the basic principles of 
separation remain the same. Consider a molecule dissolved in the mobile 
phase flowing over the stationary phase. If the solvent (mobile phase) is 
moving at a velocity vs, then the solute molecule will be carried along at the 
same speed. If, however, the solute molecule partitions into, or binds to, 
the stationary phase, then - for the fraction of the time it spends in the 
1 it situition IS rather like 
stationary phase - it will remain stationary. Consequently, as the molecule 
hops back and forth between the two phases, its rate of flow will be 
<,!I q ) I  i i r i q  on or off a moving 
i 1 II L’6?YOF belt your actual rate of 
i
t
-
l
J
~
L
l
 w II depend or1 what fra(;tiori 
- tlie !irne you spend on the 
reduced depending on how much time it spends in the stationary phase. 
This can be quantified using ideas from phase equilibrium, rather like 
the solvent extraction or phase separation methods used in synthetic 
chemistry. The partition or distribution coeficient, K, is defined as follows: 
‘ I  ’ I W K )  t,c:it 
K =[concn. of solute in mobile phase]/[concn. of solute 
in the stationary phase] 
where the square brackets indicate equilibrium concentrations. In this 
dynamic equilibrium, the fraction of the time the molecule spends in the 
mobile phase will be K/( 1 + K). Consequently, the actual flow rate of the 
solute molecule will be: 
v = v,K/( 1 + K )  
1 ! L: 1948 Nobel Prize in Chem stry 
j,, s awarded to the Swedish 
lii.: critist .4rne Tiselius “...for his 
I’tt:,c:arcn on electrophoresis and 
,3: 
J s o r  ption analysis. especially for 
/I discoveries concerning the 
i:i:mplex 
nature of the serurn 
IItiiteltls ’ 
Different molecules, with different affinities or partition coefficients, will 
therefore move at different rates with respect to the solvent front. This is 
the basis for separation. 
Chromatography can be performed on thin sheets, as in paper or thin- 
layer chromatography, in which case the sheets are often stained to show 
the relative positions of the separate compounds. Alternatively, and 
nowadays more frequently with biomolecules, the chromatographic 
medium can be packed into columns through which the mobile phase 
flows, and the separated molecules are detected as they emerge (or 
“elute”) from the column. 

Chromatography & Electrophoresis 
145 
In paper or thin-layer chromatography, the absorbent paper or layer of 
finely divided silica acts as both a support and a stationary phase, also 
trapping stationary solvent as the bulk solvent passes through by 
capillary action. In gas chromatography (GC) the stationary phase is 
usually a thin layer of oil on the inner surface of a long capillary tube, 
through which is pumped an inert carrier gas (the mobile phase) carrying 
the volatile sample molecules. 
The following sections will describe some of the various methods of 
liquid chromatography suitable for separation and analysis of bio- 
logical (macro)molecules. Such systems often use high pressures and 
rapid flow rates, and are sometimes loosely described as HPLC (high 
performance liquid chromatography) or FPLC (fast protein liquid 
chromatography). 
7A 1 Gel FiltrationBize-exclusion Chromatography 
Gel filtration separates molecules in solution on the basis of their size 
(Figure 7.2). A gel filtration/size exclusion column is packed with a gel or 
slurry of fine particles of insoluble cross-linked carbohydrate materials 
(usually based on cellulose, agarose or dextran). These particles are 
carefully prepared so that they each contain a labyrinth of various 
size pores or cavities. The stationary phase, in this case, is simply the 
solvent buffer that is trapped within these cavities. The size range of the 
cavities is such that some macromolecules may enter, but larger ones are 
excluded. Consequently, as a solution of macromolecules is pumped 
through the column, smaller molecules may follow a longer and more 
tortuous path through the matrix, whereas larger molecules flow through 
more rapidly. 
I 
1 
0 
I 
Detector 7 
Figure 7.2 Size exclusion 
chromatography: molecules of 
different sizes will follow different 
paths through the matrix. Larger 
molecules follow the shorter path, 
- 
I 
so will emerge first 
-
~
-
 

146 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Gel filtration/size-exclusion columns may be calibrated by measuring 
the elution volumes of standard proteins (or other macromolecules) of 
known size. They may then be used to estimate sizes of unknown samples. 
Quite often this can be useful in determining whether a particular protein 
exists as a dimer, or other oligomer, in solution. Although we might know 
the size of the monomer (from its amino acid or DNA sequence), this tells 
us nothing about its tertiary or quaternary structure, so experimental 
methods like gel filtration are needed here. We can also use these methods 
to detect binding between different molecules in solution, since they will 
tend to travel together down the column, regardless of individual size, 
7.1 .2 Ion Exchange Chromatography 
Ion exchange chromatography separates molecules on the basis of their 
charge. In ion exchange chromatography the stationary phase is a matrix 
of chemically modified cross-linked polysaccharides or resins carrying 
a net positive (anion exchange) or negative (cation exchange) charge. 
The accompanying counter ions (Cl- or Na+, for example) are free in 
solution as part of the mobile eluting buffer phase (Figure 7.3). 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 0  
Anion exchanger 
Cation exchanger 
Figure 7.3 Ion exchange 
beads with associated counter- 
ions 
When a solution of charged macromolecules is passed through such a 
column, they will tend to displace the small counter-ions (hence “ion 
exchange”) and stick to the column matrix by electrostatic interaction. In 
many cases the attachment is so strong that the macromolecule sticks 
firmly to the column material and elution requires a higher ionic strength 
buffer (to weaken the electrostatic attraction by ionic screening) or a 
change in pH (to change the charge on the protein) to recover the sample. 
By careful optimization of buffer pH and concentrations, including salt- 
or pH-gradient elution, it is possible to separate quite complex mixtures. 

Chromatography & Electrophoresis 
147 
The decision whether to use anion or cation exchange columns depends 
on the charge(s) on the molecules to be separated. This in turn depends, 
for proteins in particular, on the pH and amino acid composition and 
structure of the protein. 
You will recall from Chapter 1 (Section 1.7) that the PI is defined as the 
pH at which the protein molecule carries a net zero charge (equal 
numbers of positive or negatively charged groups). At this pH it would 
normally have a relatively poor attraction for an ion exchange medium. 
At a higher pH (pH > PI), H + ions will dissociate and the protein will be- 
come more negatively charged. This would tend to bind better to an anion 
exchange medium. Conversely, at lower pH (pH <PI), the protein will be 
net positive charge and would bind better to a cation exchange column. 
7.1 13 Affinity Chromatography 
Affinity chromatography exploits the specific binding properties of 
macromolecules to separate on the basis of their affinity for particular 
groups or ligands (Figure 7.4). One example would be an antibody affinity 
column containing immobilized antibodies specific for the molecule of 
interest. Other approaches might use small immobilized groups that 
resemble the substrate or receptor for specific enzymes or other proteins. 
Many proteins are nowadays produced by recombinant DNA 
methods, and frequently these are prepared as “fusion proteins” 
specifically designed to assist in purification by affinity chromatography. 
One common approach is to use “histidine tagging”, in which a short 
sequence of histidine residues (typically 6--10 His) is attached on the end 
of the polypeptide chain. In most cases this allows the protein to fold 
naturally, but, at the same time, provides a means of isolating the protein 
on an affinity column that will specifically recognize the terminal histidine 
sequence. The imidazole side chain of histidine has a particular affinity for 
binding metal ions, nickel especially. Nickel chelate columns, involving a 
stationary phase of nickel ions bound to an inert resin, will bind His- 
tagged proteins in a mixture. Proteins and other components in the 
mixture will wash straight through the column, and the required protein 
can then be recovered from the column either by changing the pH (which 
changes the metal ion binding affinity) or by displacement with free 
histidine or imidazole in the mobile buffer phase. 
Many other strategies involving affinity techniques have been devised. 
TI1 14 Reversed Phase Chromatography 
I 
A 
_ _  
i-- 
~- 
Figure 7.4 Affinity 
chromatography matrix. 
Functional groups or receptors on 
the stationary phase mimic the 
natural binding target for the 
chosen protein. Those proteins 
lacking this binding site will pass 
through the matrix unimpeded 
The term “reversed phase” IS 
used because, in conventional 
chromatography, the statlo,,ary 
phase is usually the imore polar. 
Reversed phase chromatography separates molecules on the basis of their 
hydrophobicity or polarity. The stationary phase here consists of an inert 

148 
Biophysical Chemistry 
I 
---1 
. 
. . ~  
~. 
Figure 7.5 Reversed phase 
chromatography matrix. 
Hydrophobic molecules in 
solution (coloured) tend to 
associate with the non-polar 
hydrocarbon chains attached to 
the stationary phase 
‘lit? term “electrophoresis” may 
bw roughly translated to mean 
charge migration ’ It derives 
lioiii the Greek words electton 
: ,imbar ’) and phoreas 
% ~arrqiriy ’) Amber is the 
I; i 
t u r a I I y occur r i n g ins u I a t i n (j 
I ticjterial, formed from the 
fI~s~ili/ecl 
sap or resin from 
itmerit trees, that was known to 
fw,ily ,acquire a static electric 
I. harcje when rubbed 
Figure 7.6 
Motion of a charged 
particle in an electric field 
support material (usually silica) to which is attached long-chain hydro- 
carbons (typically 8-1 8 CH2 groups). Hydrophobic molecules (in water) 
will tend to bind preferentially to this non-polar stationary phase, and 
mixtures will be separated according to their hydrophobicity (Figure 7.5). 
Often it is necessary to use non-polar solvent mixtures and solvent 
gradients (acetonitrile-water, for example) for elution. 
Reversed phase chromatography is often used for the analysis of 
peptides and other relatively small biomolecules. Other kinds of 
hydrophobic interaction columns, using polysaccharide supports modified 
with less hydrophobic groups (phenyl groups, or shorter hydrocarbons), 
are used for protein separations. 
7.2 
Electrophoresis 
Charged molecules in an electric field will tend to move towards the 
positive or negative electrode, depending on the sign of the molecular 
charge (Figure 7.6). For molecules in solution, this motion will be 
opposed by viscous drag from the surrounding environment, so the 
resulting electrophoretic mobility will depend on a number of factors, 
including the overall charge, size and shape of the molecule. This is the 
principle of electrophoresis. 
+ 
Electric field E 
- 
Electrophoresis 
velocity v 
-----------_ 
4 
Frictional drag 
Electrostatic force 
F =fv 
Using the same ideas that we have introduced earlier when discussing 
sedimentation rates (Section 4.4), in the steady state for a particle with 
charge +y in an electric field E, the electrostatic force on the particle will 
be exactly balanced by the viscous drag, so that: 
f v  = qE 
and the electrophoretic velocity of the particle is: 
= 9E/f 

Chromatography & Electrophoresis 
149 
wheref‘is the frictional cocficient defined earlier (Section 4.4). In reality, 
the situation is a little more complicated than this, because of the 
movement of counter-ions and other electrolytes. However, this does 
illustrate the basic principle that a bigger charge or smaller size (lowery) 
will lead to a more rapid electrophoretic migration. 
7.2.1 Gel Electrophoresis 
For practical purposes, most electrophoresis of biological molecules is 
done in gels rather than just using the solution. This cuts down on the 
diffusion and convection that would interfere with sharp separations in 
liquids. It also makes it easier to stain and detect the samples at the end of 
the experiment (Figure 7.7). 
Buffer reservoir & 
negative electrode 
I 
I 
. . . . .  
. . . . . . . 
I 
Buffer reservoir & 
positive electrode 
+ 
The rectangular slab gel is normally just a few millimetres thick, and is 
made of cross-linked polymeric materials such as polyacrylamide or 
agarose. The gel is mainly water (buffer), containing just a few percent 
(5-15%) 
of the polymer material. However, this is sufficient to give a 
relatively rigid gel (a stiff jelly) that will retain the sample after the 
experiment, but yet allows relatively free passage of macromolecules (and 
buffer) through the gel matrix. 
The sample bands are not usually visible during electrophoresis (unless 
intrinsically coloured or fluorescent), but are normally visualized 
afterwards by immersing the gel in specific staining solutions. For 
DNA samples, intercalating fluorescent dyes such as ethidium bromide 
(see Section 2.4) are used, whereas proteins can be visualized using 
histological stains such as Coomassie blue or more sensitive silver stains. 
Proteins come in all shapes and sizes, and their charges (both sign and 
magnitude) will depend on the particular protein and the pH used. 
Consequently, there is usually no way to predict where a particular 
Figure 7.7 Slab gel 
electrophoresis. Each end of the 
gel is immersed in aqueous buffer 
solution that also acts as an 
electrode and allows application 
of a high voltage ( V )  across the 
gel (top to bottom in this diagram). 
Samples are injected as small 
volumes into the rectangular 
“wells” at the top of the gel. When 
the voltage is applied, negatively 
charged molecules (in this case) 
migrate into the gel and move 
down as different “bands”, 
depending on their 
electrophoretic mobility. Several 
sample ”lanes” (four in this 
diagram) are generally used to 
allow direct comparison of several 
samples and standards 

150 
Biophysical Chemistry 
C d  electrophoresis of DNA 
fragments is a major tool in 
deter ni in i n g gene sequences 
Frederick Sanger's 1980 Nobel 
Prize in chemistry (his second) 
and the subsequent elucidat on of 
human and other genomes 
depended on this 
SDS 
sodium dodecyl sulfate 
[Me(CHc,)loCH20SOr,0 Na'], 
also known as sodium lauryl 
sdlfate, is a common component 
of household detergents and 
shampoos, PAGE = polyacryl- 
m i d e  gel electrophoresis 
Figure 7.8 Idealized view of 
the clustering of SDS molecules 
around a denatured protein 
molecule (shaded) 
protein band might appear in this kind of electrophoresis (but see SDS- 
PAGE, below). 
Nucleic acids are a little simpler. DNA molecules are generally rod- 
shaped, with a net negative charge (arising from the phosphate backbone) 
that depends only on the length of the chain. Consequently, it is found 
that the electrophoretic mobility of DNA is just proportional to the 
length of the chain. DNA fragments differing by as little as one nucleotide 
can be seen as separate, adjacent bands, and this has been used 
extensively for DNA sequencing. Anything that perturbs this simple 
relationship between mobility and chain length - such as a change in 
conformation, or binding of another molecule - will show up as a shift in 
the normal band position. This has been used to develop band-shift assays 
to measure DNA-protein and other interactions by electrophoresis. 
7.2.2 SDS-PAGE 
The lack of information regarding protein size in normal (non- 
denaturing) electrophoresis (see previous section) can be overcome by 
denaturing (unfolding) the protein in a strong detergent solution, Sodium 
dodecyl sulfate is a strong detergent that disrupts the native structure of 
proteins in solution and forms a micelle encapsulating the unfolded 
polypeptide chain (Figure 7.8). 
This micelle usually contains a mass ratio of SDS to protein of around 
1.4: 1, corresponding to roughly 0.5 detergent molecules per peptide 
group. Consequently, these micellar particles have a size and (negative) 
charge roughly in proportion to the size of the original protein molecule, 
and will therefore migrate accordingly in electrophoresis. 
SDS denaturation of proteins for SDS-PAGE is normally done by 
heating in the presence of thiol reducing agents in order to break any 
disulfide cross-links in the protein structure. Subsequent electrophoresis 
uses the same arrangement as described in the previous section, but with 
the addition of SDS to the electrophoresis buffer (Figure 7.7). 

Chromatography & Electrophoresis 
151 
70,000 
50,000 
30,000 
20,000 
t 
1 lo*ooo 
I
I
I
I
I
I
 I
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
Relative mobility (distance migrated) 
It is found experimentally that the electrophoretic mobility under these 
conditions is roughly proportional to the logarithm of the protein RMM 
(Figure 7.9), and this can be used to estimate the apparent size of an 
unknown protein.' However, this generally only gives a rough estimate of 
the size of the polypeptide chains, and is dependent upon the validity of 
the assumptions regarding SDS binding. Different families of proteins, 
especially those with significant chemical modifications, cross-links, 
glycosylation, etc., show deviations from this simple behaviour. 
7.2.3 lsoelectric Focusing 
Isoelectric focusing (IEF) is electrophoresis using a pH gradient. Proteins 
(and other molecules) will only move in an electric field if they carry a net 
electrical charge. This charge is zero when the pH of the solution equals 
the pl (isoelectric point). Protein molecules undergoing electrophoresis in 
an isoelectric focusing gel will migrate through the pH-gradient gel until 
they reach their PI. At this point they have zero net charge, and will 
migrate no further (Figure 7.10). 
I -- 
I 
+ 
- - _ - - - -  
High pH 
Sample loaded - 
Low pH 
Before 
+ 
After 
Figure 7.9 
Relative mobility of 
proteins of different sizes on 
SDS-PAGE 
Figure 7.10 Electrophoresis in 
a pH gradient: isoelectric focus- 
ing of a mixture of proteins with 
different pl values 

152 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Figure 7.1 1 Two-dimensional 
electrophoresis of a complex 
mixture of different proteins. In 
this hypothetical example, only 
six different bands are seen in the 
first dimension (IEF). However, 
when further separated on the 
basis of size (SDS, second 
dimension), many more different 
protein bands appear 
The pH gradient in the gel is created by using proprietary mixtures of 
small ampholytes with good buffering capacity. 
During electrophoresis the ampholytes will themselves migrate to their 
PI in the gel and, because of their buffering capacity, will establish the pH 
gradient. Alternatively, the ampholyte groups may be covalently attached 
or immobilized in the gel matrix, and the gradient formed by carefully 
pouring a gradated mixture of components before the gel sets. 
7.2.4 Two-dimensional Gel Electrophoresis 
It is possible to combine different methods of electrophoresis to give 
much better resolution of complex mixtures of proteins. For example, it 
has been estimated that the number of different proteins in an individual 
cell may be between 5000 (bacteria) and 50,000 (human). Many of these 
will have similar size or charge or PI, and resolution of so many bands on 
a single gel would be impossible. 2-D electrophoresis combines the 
techniques of SDS-PAGE and isoelectric focusing to give improved 
separation (Figure 7.11). 
I EF 
Low pH 
- 
High pH 
m 
f 
I 
Y 
High M, 
Low M, 
The protein mixture is first separated by IEF (first dimension). This 
gel is then laid alongside a rectangular SDS slab gel, and electrophoresis 
run perpendicular to the original direction. Proteins are therefore 
separated in two dimensions on the basis of both their apparent size 
(SDS-PAGE) and PI (IEF). Several thousand different proteins can often 
be resolved in this way. 

Chromatography & Electrophoresis 
153 
1. Chromatography is the separation of molecules according to the 
way they partition between stationary and mobile phases. 
2. Different chromatography methods may separate molecu 
the basis of their size, charge, polarity, binding affinity 
combination of such factors. 
es on 
or a 
3. Migration of molecules in an electric field (electrophoresis) 
depends on the charge, size and shape of the migrating particles. 
1. K .  Weber, J. R. Pringle and M. Osborn, Measurement of molecular 
weights by electrophoresis on SDS-acrylamidr gel, in Methods Enzymol., 
1972,26, 3-27. 
D. Sheehan, Physical Biochemistrji: Principles and Applications, Wiley, 
I. Tinoco, K. Sauer, J. C. Wang and J. D. Puglisi, Physical Chemistry: 
New York, 2000, chaps. 2 & 5. 
Principles and Applications in Biological Sciences, 4th edn., Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2002, chap. 6. 
- - - __ __ - - - - 
- 
- - - __ - 
- - __ . 
- __ - 
__ - 
7.1. A research team has used recombinant DNA methods to 
clone and express an unusual protein from a parasitic worm. This 
protein has a sequence of histidine residues at its N-terminal end 
and, for laboratory purposes, is produced in bacterial cells. How 
might this protein be purified from a mixture of other proteins in the 
bacterial expression system? 
7.2. The DNA and amino acid sequence gives a relative molecular 
mass of around 15,000 for the polypeptide chain of the protein in 
Problem 7.1, but it was initially thought that the protein might occur 
as a dimer in the native state. How might this be checked 
chromatographically? 

154 
Biophysical Chemistry 
7.3. Could electrophoresis methods be used to help resolve this 
question (Problem 7.2)? 
7.4. The natural protein from the worm is known to bind long- 
chain fatty acids, but the recombinant protein from the laboratory 
was initially found to have less binding affinity than expected. One 
possibility was that the recombinant protein site was already 
occupied by fatty acids from the bacterial cell system. How might 
such contaminants be removed? 

Single Molecules 
We rarely get the opportunity to see how individual molecules behave. 
Mostly, what we see are the average effects of large numbers of molecules. 
Molecular structures determined by crystallographic or NMR methods 
are time and number averages of a large population of molecules. Yet the 
behaviour of a living cell may be the result of just single molecule 
interactions: the binding of just one repressor protein to a single DNA 
site, for example, can affect the entire behaviour of the cell. How might we 
study this? Molecules are always in motion, and it is very hard to pin 
down individuals. This chapter covers some of the methods now being 
developed to tackle this problem. 
After working through this section you should be able to: 
Estimate the numbers of molecules present in various circum- 
stances 
Appreciate the fluctuating nature of single molecules 
List some of the methods used to study single molecules 
Describe the basic principles of atomic force microscopy and 
optical trapping 
Discuss single molecule fluorescence 
Outline the technique of electron microscopy 
How Many Molecules Can Stand on the Head 
of a Pin? 
Theologians used to speculate about how many angels might stand on the 
head of a pin. However, since few people had ever seen an angel, it was 
difficult to resolve the question. Few people have ever seen a single 
molecule either. Can we count them? The following worked examples 
should remind you how we do this. 
155 

156 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Q How many molecules are there in 1 cm3 of a 1 mg cm-3 solution 
of macromolecules of relative molecular mass 50,000 ? 
A 
1 mg = (1 x 
g)/50,000 = 2 x 
moles x 6 x 
= 
I .2 x 1 0 ' ~  
molecules per per cm3 
Q 
of such a solution? 
A 
12,000 molecules. 
How many molecules might be found in 1 cubic micron (1 pm3) 
1 cubic micron = (1 x 10-4)3 cm3 = 1 x 
cm3 
This wouldcontain 1 x 10-l2 cm3 x 1.2 x 10'6moleculescm-3 = 
Q Imagine a typical small bacterial cell of diameter around 
1 micron (1 pm). What would be the effective molar concentration of 
a particular compound if there were just one such molecule per cell? 
A Approximate volume of the cell (since we do not know its exact 
shape) will be of order (diameter)3 = 1 x 
m3 = 1 x lo-'' dm3 
(1 m3= 1000 dm3). 
One molecule in 1 x 10- ' dm3 corresponds to 1 /( 1 x 10- ' 5, = lo' ' 
molecules per dm3 = 1015/NA = 1015/(6 x 
moles 
per dm3 = 1.7 nmol dm-3. 
= 1.7 x 
Q A typical small globular protein is about 2 nm in diameter. How 
many such molecules might pack side-by-side on: (a) a 1 cm square 
postage stamp; (b) the head of a pin, 1 mm across; (c) the fine point 
of a very sharp pin, 10 nm across? 
A Assuming a square, two-dimensional array, each molecule 
will occupy an area of about 2 x 2 = 4 nm2 = 4 x 
cm2. 
Consequently: 

Single Molecules 
157 
r 
(a) A postage stamp can hold 1/(4 x 
(b) A pinhead can hold 0.1 x 0.1/(4X 
(c) A pin point can hold 
= 2.5 x lOI3 molecules. 
= 2.5 x 10" molecules. 
x 10-6/(4x lO-I4) = 25 molecules. 
Q As we saw in Chapter 1, the 3 billion (approx.) bases in the 
human genome would extend about 1 metre if stretched out end-to- 
end. What might be the diameter if this were coiled up as tightly as 
possible into a single ball? 
A Very roughly, assuming that each DNA base has a relative 
molecular mass of around 300, the RMM of the entire genome is 
about 3 0 0 ~ 3 ~ 1 0 ~ = 9 ~ 1 0 "  
g mol-', or about 1.5x10-l2 g per 
molecule. 
The density of organic matter is roughly 1.4 g cm-3 (compared to 
1.0 g cm-3 for water), so 1 genome molecule will occupy about 
cm3 (remember, we are only interested in round figures). This 
corresponds to a cube of side 
cm (1 micron, 1 pm). 
8.2 
Thermodynamic Fluctuations and 
the Ergodic Hypothesis 
Atoms and molecules are never at rest (except at absolute zero, 0 K). 
Everything at the molecular level is in a constant state of turmoil: moving, 
rotating, vibrating, colliding with neighbours under the influence of 
thermal motion. This is what we call heat. For normal, everyday objects, 
this turmoil is imperceptible. The things we feel, like hotness, coldness, 
pressure, etc., are a consequence of these molecular motions, but we do not 
feel the individual fluctuations because they all average out among the vast 
numbers of molecules involved. What is it like at the single molecule level? 
rhelt\ IO of (
t
 KISC 
~
U
~
~
I
I
~
L
I
~
I
~
 
:;': 
'
~
~
~
~
'
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
l
~
~
' I '  
clac1sic;-i/ 
s C ? ~  :,? 
, 
Q The average thermal kinetic energy of any object is 3kT/2. What 
i 
is the root-mean-square velocity of translational motion of a 
' 
macromolecule of RMM 25,000 at 37 "C? 
i 
A Mean kinetic energy = !hrn <v2> = 3k7'/2 
1 
Therefore, r.m.s. velocity = <v2> 
1/2 = (3I~T/rn)'/~ 
! 
__ 

158 
Biophysical Chemistry 
l>ot) t torgct to convert "C trito t<1 
For a single macromolecule: 
rn = 25,000/NA= 25000/6 x 
and T=273+37=310K. 
:. <v2>'l2 = (3 x 1.38 x 
4.2 x lop2' g = 4.2 x 
kg 
x 310/4.2 x 10-23)'/2= 17.4 m s-' 
In solution, of course, the molecule does not travel very far at this 
speed before colliding with other (solvent) molecules and changing 
both speed and direction. 
~ 
Q For a rotating object, rotational kinetic energy is %Iw2, where 
cu is the angular velocity of rotation and I is the moment of inertia. 
What is the r.m.s. speed of thermal rotation at 37 "C for a spherical 
protein molecule of RMM 25,000 and radius 1.0 nm? 
A Mean thermal rotational energy = %Iw2 = 3kT/2 
Therefore, r.m.s. rotational velocity = <w2> 1/2 = (3kT/I)*l2. 
The moment of inertia of a uniform density sphere of mass m and 
For the single protein molecule: 
radius r is I=2rnr2/5. 
I=2x4.2x10-23x(10x10-'o)2~5 
= 1 . 7 ~ 1 0 - ~ ' k g r n ~  
. * . < c r ~ ~ > * / ~  = (3 x 1.38 x 
x 310/1.7 x 10-4')1/2 
= 2.7 x 10" rad s-l 
= ca.5 x lo9 rotations s-' 
Again, in solution this motion will be very jerky and severely 
damped by collisions with surrounding solvent molecules (see 
rotational diffusion, Section 4.5). However, this sort of tumbling 
frequency may be typical for macromolecules in a vacuum, such as 
when being analysed in a mass spectrometer. 
This sort of thermal translation and rotational motion is what is 
responsible for the random, chaotic Brownian motion observable in 
microscopic particles. 
More generally, perpetual collisions with molecules in the surrounding 
environment gives rise to thermodynamic fluctuations. 

Single Molecules 
159 
For example, the mean-square energy fluctuations of any object as it 
exchanges thermal energy to-and-fro with its surrounding are given by: 
<SE2 > =kPch 
where c' is the heat capacity of the object. These energy fluctuations can be 
comparable to the free energy of folding for globular proteins.' 
Most of the time we do not see all this thermal chaos going on at 
the molecular level. All these fluctuations tend to cancel out when 
dealing with the large populations of molecules in typical experimental 
samples. 
However, this raises the question: how valid is it to study the 
average effects of large populations of molecules, when in reality they 
do their real job just one at a time? This is a classic dilemma in the 
theory of statistical thermodynamics, and the ergodic h!.pothesis is used 
to get around it. The ergodic hypothesis (or principle) argues that the 
average behaviour of a single particle over a sufficient length of time 
will be the same as the average of a large population of particles at 
any instant of time. This is actually difficult to prove, but it is a very 
useful hypothesis nonetheless. So, to the extent that this is true, do we 
really need to study single molecules? Well, maybe not - but it's fun to 
try anyhow. 
8.3 
Atomic Force Microscopy 
Close your eyes and run your fingers over a surface. Even with your eyes 
closed you can feel the size, shape and texture of objects on the surface. 
This is what atomic force microscopy (AFM) tries to do, only at a 
molecular level (Figure 8.1). 
Laser 
1 \ f  
Can tilever 
& AFM tip 
. . . . . . . 
.......... 
........... 
. . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . 
. ..... 
, . , ....... 
, . .. , . . Photosensor 
. . . . . . . . . . 
.... .. P 
. .... 
Piezoelectric scanner 
X '  
Figure 8.1 Atomic force 
microscopy 

160 
Biophysical Chemistry 
The “finger” here is a very sharp tip that is mounted on the end of a 
flexible cantilever arm (usually made of silicon or silicon nitride). The 
position of the tip is measured by reflecting a beam of light onto a 
photodiode detector so that as the tip is dragged over the sample surface it 
moves up and down, following the height (z) of the sample. By scanning 
in the x-y plane of the sample, a complete contour map of the sample 
surface can be generated. At the same time, bending of the flexible 
cantilever arm can be used to measure the strength of the forces involved 
as the tip interacts with the surface. 
Relative movement of the AFM tip with respect to the sample 
along all three axes (x,y,z) is done by using the piezoelectric effect. 
A piezoelectric material is a substance (usually a crystal or ceramic 
material) that changes dimensions when a voltage is applied. Mounting 
the sample or cantilever arm onto a piezoelectric device allows 
either the tip or the sample support (or both) to be moved by tiny 
amounts, down to 0.1 nm or less in some instances, so that the very 
finest atomic/molecular surface detail can be probed. All this is done 
under very careful computer control so that the tip does not inadver- 
tently push too hard and damage the very delicate surface it is trying 
to probe. 
For simple imaging applications the AFM tip may be dragged across 
the surface as described above (the so called “contact” or “static” mode) 
or, alternatively, vibrated up and down near its resonant frequency in the 
z-direction (“acoustic” or “tapping” mode). The tapping mode gives 
additional information about the elastic and other mechanical properties 
of the material being scanned. 
With suitably sharp AFM tips, almost atomic resolution can be 
achieved, at least in principle, and it has been used to determine the 
shapes of protein and nucleic acid molecules adsorbed on surfaces. One 
major advantage is that the method does work under water, so that 
molecules can be studied under near physiological conditions. 
In more sophisticated experiments the AFM tip can be used to grab 
hold of parts of a tethered molecule to see how it responds to being 
pulled apart. Alternatively, the forces between molecules adsorbed onto 
the AFM tip and those adsorbed onto the surface can be measured. 
This has been used, for example, to measure the forces involved in the 
mechanical unfolding of proteins, antibody-antigen and other protein- 
protein interactions, or the binding of complementary strands of DNA 
(Figure 8.2). 

Single Molecules 
161 
Q In a typical AFM experiment to mechanically unfold a single 
globular protein, the cantilever arm moved by 25 nm with an 
average force of 150 pN as the polypeptide chain unravelled. How 
much mechanical work was done in the process? How does this 
compare to the Gibbs free energy of unfolding? 
A Work = force x distance = 150 x 
(N) x 25 x 
(m) = 
3.75 x 
J (for one molecule). 
This is equivalent to: N A  x 3.75 x 
Under ideal, thermodynamically reversible conditions, this 
mechanical work is equal to the Gibbs free energy change (AG) 
for the process. The numbers obtained here cannot be compared 
directly with the values obtained for molecules in solution using 
bulk thermodynamic methods (Chapter 5 )  because they include 
the additional elastic work involved in stretching the unfolded 
polypeptide as the tethered ends are pulled further apart than they 
would normally be for an unfolded protein free in solution. 
= 2250 kJ mol-'. 
Scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) works in a rather similar way to 
AFM, but the surface is detected by measuring the very weak electric 
current that flows (by electron tunnelling) between the sample and the tip 
when they are very close together with a voltage between them. Unlike 
AFM, this cannot be done under water. 
Figure 8.2 Sketch illustrating 
steps in the mechanical unfol- 
ding of a tethered molecule 

162 
Biophysical Chemistry 
8.4 
Optical Tweezers and Traps 
Figure 8.3 Ray paths (coloured) 
for light beams passing through a 
transparent sphere, with vectors 
(black arrows) indicating the 
transverse (y-axis) and longi- 
~~ 
One of the big problems in single-molecule experiments is how to keep the 
molecule in place long enough to make observations on it, as well as how 
to grab hold of different parts of the molecule in order to manipulate it. In 
AFM and similar techniques the molecules are immobilized by being 
adsorbed on or attached to macroscopic surfaces. Another method relies 
on the properties of finely focused laser beams to act as optical tweezers or 
optical traps to manipulate microscopic particles suspended in solution. 
When a laser light beam is focused on a suspension of particles made of 
dielectric materials with a refractive index greater than the surrounding 
medium, the particles tend to congregate at the focus of the light beam. 
This is an effect arising from radiation pressure, as the change in 
momentum of the photons scattered from the particle creates tiny forces 
that can be sufficient to overcome the normal diffusion or Brownian 
motion of the particle. If the intensity of the light hitting the particle is 
different at different points on the object, then the object will move and- 
perhaps counter-intuitively-the motion tends to be towards the place 
where the light is most intense. The reason for this can be seen as follows. 
Imagine a spherical particle suspended in a liquid (typically this might 
be a latex sphere or polystyrene bead, a few microns in diameter, in 
water). Because the refractive index of the particle is (usually) greater 
than the surrounding medium, beams of light passing through the 
object will be refracted, or change direction, as shown in Figure 8.3. 
Conservation of momentum requires that wherever the light beam (or 
stream of photons) changes direction, there will be an equal and opposite 
transfer of momentum to the particle. This occurs both on entry and exit 
of the beam, as shown in Figure 8.3, and results in forces (radiation 
pressure) on the particle with components both along the direction of the 
beam (x-axis) and perpendicular (y-axis). 
B 
Beam 
\ /' 
tudinal (x-axis) components of 
the forces generated at each 
optical interface 
- 

Single Molecules 
163 
Consider light beams A and B. If the light intensity is uniform across the 
beam, then the transverse radiation forces will tend to cancel, and there 
will be no overall transverse force on the particle (though it will tend to 
move along the x-axis). If, however, the light intensity is greater at A than 
at B, then the transverse forces will no longer cancel and the particle will 
move in the y-direction towards the region of greater intensity. This will 
normally be the centre of the laser beam. Moreover, if the laser beam is 
sharply focused, so that the light intensity varies along the x-axis as well, 
then there will be similar differential forces along the beam that will force 
the particle towards the focus of the beam where the light is most intense. 
In this way the position of small particles can be manipulated with high 
precision over very small distances. 
This effect can be used to position and manipulate single cells or large 
viruses in solution. For other biophysical studies, individual macromol- 
ecules can be tethered to one or more latex or plastic beads and 
manipulated using optical tweezers. Other techniques combine similar 
approaches using small magnetic beads. 
8.5 
Single-molecule Fluorescence 
Once you have pinned your molecule down, you need some way of 
observing what it gets up to. Fluorescence-based methods are usually the 
most sensitive here, because photomultipliers and CCD devices (see 
Chapter 2) can readily detect the single photons emanating from 
individual fluorescent groups. Moreover, the intrinsic fluorescence of 
proteins or other fluorescence probes is very sensitive to conformational 
changes and is well understood for bulk samples. 
With single molecules, however, the fluorescence emission is necessarily 
very weak: just a single photon (at most) from any excitation event. 
-- 
Q Imagine a fluorescent molecule, with a quantum efficiency (4) of 
lo%, excited repetitively at 1 s intervals by an intense laser light 
pulse. What proportion of these pulses would result in a measurable 
emitted photon? 
A One in ten - at most. Even if the excitation pulse were intense 
enough to excite the molecule every time, there is only a 10% 
probability that the electronically excited state will decay radia- 
tively. The rest of the time (go0/,) the decay will be non-radiative, 
and the energy will dissipate as heat. (Note that fluorescence 
lifetimes are quite short, and that decay back to ground state will be 
complete before the next excitation pulse arrives.) 

164 
Biophysical Chemistry 
The problem then arises: how do we know that a given photon comes 
from fluorescence of the single molecule, and not from other sources of 
background light? 
One approach (adopting methods already developed for more 
conventional samples) is to use time-resolved detection methods. Most 
of the stray photons from a laser pulse come from elastic (Rayleigh) or 
inelastic (Raman) scattering from the solvent and surroundings, and the 
intensity of this can far outweigh the light emitted from the (single) test 
molecule. However, such scattered light occurs essentially instan- 
taneously compared to the fluorescence emission which can take place 
over a longer (p) timescale. Consequently, if we delay measuring photons 
until after the excitation pulse is completed, then we should only see the 
ones we want. This is the basis for numerous time-resolved methods, a 
simple version of which is shown in Figure 8.4. 
t
t
 
x 
I 
t 
Y 
U 
U 
Observation 
w i ndow 
Laser pulses 
- 
Time 
__ 
Figure 8.4 
Pulse sequence for 
time-resolved fluorescence 
measurement 
Figure 8.4 illustrates the light intensity (fluorescence + scatter) as a 
function of time from a sequence of short excitation pulses. During 
the excitation pulse “dead time” (shaded) the intense stray light 
background masks the fluorescence emission. However, if observation 
is delayed (electronically), then later stages of the fluorescence emission 
may be observed free of this stray light contamination. This has the 
further advantage that by varying the timing of the observation 
window, one can measure excited state lifetime properties. For single- 
molecule studies, data from a large number of pulses would be 
accumulated. 
Fluorescence corrcla tion spectroscopy is another technique that takes 
advantage of the sensitivity of laser-induced fluorescence methods to 

Single Molecules 
165 
observe the diffusion and interaction of single molecules in a small 
volume of solution. The method is similar in principle to dynamic light 
scattering (see Chapter 4) and uses the fluctuations in fluorescence 
intensity from a sharply focused continuous laser beam. The volume of 
solution illuminated at the focus of a laser beam can be as little as 
10 l 5  dm3. As individual (fluorescent) molecules diffuse in or out of this 
volume element, the fluorescence intensity will fluctuate, and analysis of 
the frequency spectrum (autocorrelations) within these fluctuations gives 
information about molecular size and diffusion dynamics. 
Q How many molecules are there in 
solution? 
A 
i.e. roughly one per volume element. 
dm3 of a 1 nmol dmP3 
dm3 x lo-’ moles/dm3 x NA = 0.6 
I 
An advantage of this technique is that the single molecules do not 
have to be tethered (unlike AFM, for example) but are free in solu- 
tion. Interactions between single molecules or conformational changes 
(such as unfolding) might be detected by changes in the diffusion 
dynamics. 
8.6 
Electron Microscopy 
Why cannot we simply “see” molecules in the conventional sense by using 
high-magnification optical microscopes? The problem is that typical 
molecular dimensions (0.5-5 nm) are very much smaller than the 
wavelengths of visible light (around 500 nm). This is way below the 
diffraction limit that determines the ultimate resolving power of 
microscopes. Visible images are formed using scattered light. However, 
waves exhibit diffraction and interference effects, and these become much 
more significant with objects the size of the wavelength, or smaller. Below 
this ditfraction limit it is not possible to resolve individual objects by 
conventional optics. 
Why cannot we therefore use electromagnetic radiation of shorter 
wavelength, X-rays for example? Well, we can, but it is not possible to 
make the X-ray lenses that would allow us to focus the scattered beam 
to create an image in the way that an optical microscope does, so we 
have to resort to X-ray diffraction and crystallographic techniques. 

166 
Biophysical Chemistry 
These are very powerful and important methods, but they do not image 
single molecules. 
However, particles can act as waves, and we can focus beams of 
Wave-particle duality w c ~ t )  
first 
electrons using electromagnetic fields. This forms the basis for electron 
microscopy, where beams of electrons (in a vacuum) are used to produce 
I . ~ i r r s e c l  
quantitalivcly by dtx 
- ‘ ~ o ( ) l l k ~  
117 IIIS Pqllatlnrl / z /i//TW 
i I m-t i I elates the ww.?Iik(> 
Q What is the de Broglie wavelength for a 100 keV electron? 
A The de Broglie wavelength for a particle of mass m travelling 
at velocity v is given by il= 
h/mv, where h is the Planck constant 
Kinetic energy= E= %mv2 =(m~)~/2rn, 
so we can write the 
(6.626~ 
10-34 J s). 
momentum as: 
mv = (2mE) ” and A = h/(2mE) ” 
A kinetic energy of 1 eV corresponds to 1.6x 
case: 
J, so in this 
E = 100 keV = 1.6 x 
J 
Now m = 9.1 x 
kg for an electron. Hence: 
il = (6.626 x 10-34)/(2 x 9.1 x 10-3‘x 1.6 x 
3.9 x lo-’* m 
=_ 3.9 pm = 0.0039 nm 
This is much smaller than a typical molecule, so such electron beams 
could be used for conventional imaging, provided suitable lenses 
were available for focusing. 
The transmission electron microscope (Figure 8.5) is rather like a slide 
or movie projector, but using electrons instead of light: the beam of 
electrons is focused through the sample (the “slide”) and projected onto a 
large screen, and magnifications up to 100,OOOx or more can be obtained. 
The sample must be very thin, so as to allow at least some of the electrons 
to pass through, and everything is under high vacuum, otherwise the 
electron beam would be scattered by the air. The image obtained 
represents differences in electron scattering power of different regions of 
the sample. 
I 
I ( [iotiI,iqrwtiC foc IJSIIK~ letw?:; 
, 
‘1 1 ~ 3 1  
II pi inciple lo thoFe 
( i  r l  3 ( I ~ f l V ( ~ l l t l ( ~ f l ~ i  
TV I,lr.ttIItt 

Single Molecules 
167 
Electron gun 
Condenser lens 
Objective and 
projector lenses 
- 
Sample 
Screen 
I 
- 
Viewing port 
\ 
The major technical drawbacks in using electron microscopy to image 
single (macro)molecules are contrast and radiation daniagc. The electron 
density in the sample molecule is usually very similar to the substrate or 
support film upon which it is mounted, so it can be hard to visualize 
against the background. Contrast can be enhanced by using heavy-metal 
stains (with higher electron density), but this also tends to reduce the 
resolution of the image. Exposure of the sample to the electron beam 
also gives rise to damage caused by absorption of some of the energetic 
electrons. This can be reduced by cooling the sample stage (cry)-electron 
microscopy) and by using short exposure times with lower beam 
currents. Despite such precautions, it is rarely possible to obtain a 
clear image of a single molecule, and the most successful methods 
superimpose images from a large number of separate observations, using 
image-reconstruction techniques to generate an overall picture of the 
molecule. 
The surfxe structure of thicker samples can be examined using 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Here a fine beam of electrons is 
scanned across the surface of the specimen, and the scattered secondary 
electrons emitted from the surface of the sample are detected electro- 
nically. Secondary electrons are best produced by electron collision with 
conduction electrons in a metal surface (by analogy with the photoelectric 
effect), so samples for SEM are usually coated by evaporation with a thin 
film of gold in order to make them more visible. This naturally limits the 
fine detail that can be seen. 
Figure 8.5 Basic layout of a 
transmission electron micro- 
scope. Monochromatic electrons 
from an “electron gun” are 
focused through an aperture by 
the electromagnetic condenser 
lens onto the sample. Electrons 
passing through the sample are 
collected and focused by the 
electromagnetic objective and 
projector lenses to form a mag- 
nified image on the viewing 
screen. Images can be captured 
using photographic plates or 
elect ionic devices 

168 
Biophysical Chemistry 
1. Single molecules are very dynamic and difficult to pin down. 
2. Atomic force microscopy and optical tweezer techniques can be 
used to manipulate single macromolecules. 
3. AFM and electron microscopy can also be used to obtain low- 
resolution images of single macromolecules. 
4. Fluorescence is one of the more sensitive optical properties 
suitable for single molecule detection. 
1. A. Cooper, Protein fluctuations and the thermodynamic uncertainty 
2. G. Rhodes, Crystallography Made Crystal Clear, 2nd edn., Academic 
principle, in Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 1984, 44, 181-214. 
Press, London, 2000. 
A. Ashkin, Optical trapping and manipulation of neutral particles using 
lasers, in Proc.. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1997, 94, 485334860. 
C. Bustamente, S. B. Smith, J. Liphardt and D. Smith, Single-molecule 
studies of D N A  mechanics, in Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2000, 10, 
C. Bustamente, Z. Bryant and S. B. Smith, Ten years of tension: single- 
J. N. Forkey, M. E. Quinlan and Y. E. Goldman, Protein structural 
279-285. 
molecule DNA mechanics, in Nature, 2003, 421, 423-427. 
dynamics by single-molecule fluorescence polarization, in Prog. Biophys. 
Mol. Biol. 2000, 74, 1-35. 
Folding-unfolding transitions in single titin molecules characterized with 
laser tweezers, in Science 1997, 276, 1 112-1 1 16. 
J. M. Sneddon and J. D. Gale, Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics, 
RSC Tutorial Chemistry Text, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 
2001, chap. 9. 
spectroscopy in biology using the atomic force microscope, in Prog. 
Biophys. Mol. Biol. 2000, 74, 37-61. 
M. S. Z. Kellermayer, S. B. Smith, H. L. Granzier and C. Bustamente, 
J. Zlatanova, S. M. Lindsay and S. H. Leuba, Single molecule force 

Single Molecules 
169 
8.1. What is the effective molar concentration for one molecule 
contained within: (a) a box of side 10 pm; (b) an icosahedral virus 
capsid (internal diameter -30 nm); (c) a C60 fullerene (cavity 
diameter -0.7 nm); (d) the focal volume of a sharply focused laser 
beam (-10-15 dm3). 
8.2. Estimate the root-mean-square (r.m.s.) energy fluctuations 
at room temperature in a protein molecule of RMM 25,000. 
[The specific heat of protein is typical of organic matter at about 
3 J K-' g-'1 
8.3. What would such energy fluctuations correspond to in terms 
of temperature fluctuation? 
8.4. If AFM is so good, and can achieve atomic resolution, why is 
it not used to determine the three-dimensional structures of proteins 
or nucleic acids? 
8.5. Why is it necessary to use repetitive excitation pulse 
sequences to measure single-molecule fluorescence properties? 

Answers to Problems 
1 .I. Number ofprotein molecules in 1 cm3 = (45 x 10 - 3/(65000) x 
N* = 4.2 x loi7 
Volume per molecule = 1/4.2 x 1017 = 2.4 x 10- l 8  cm3 
Average distance apart = (2.4 x 10 - 18)1'3 = 1.3 x 10 - cm ( 13 nm) 
Mass of 1 molecule = 65000/6 x 
= 1.1 x 10- l 9  g 
which corresponds to a molecular volume of around 1.1 x 10 - l 9  cm3, 
assuming a density similar to water. This corresponds to a cube of 
side 4.8 nm, approximately (or about 6 nm diameter if we assume the 
molecule is spherical, with volume 47cr3/3). 
So, in a 45 mg cmP3 solution, these molecules are separated, on 
average, by about 2-3 molecular diameters. 
1.2. (a) Assume that, because of stereochemical constraints, each 
4 and each t,b angle can adopt three possible orientations (120" 
apart), so that statistically each peptide unit might have 3 x 3 = 9 
possible conformers. 
For 100 peptide units, the number of possible conformers 
9loo = 2.7 x lo9? 
- 
- 
[Note: You may find that your calculator gives an error message 
when you try to calculate numbers such as 9"' 
directly. If so, try 
breaking it down into several steps, for example: 9" x 9'O.I 
(b) 1 fs = 
S .  
170 

Answers to Problems 
171 
_ _  . 
- 
._ 
.. 
. 
Time taken = (number of conformers) x (time per conformer) 
= 2.7 x 
x 
= 2.7 x los0 
==: 9 x 
years (1 year = 30 million seconds) 
For comparison, the estimated age of the Universe is about 15 Gyr 
( I  .5 x 10" years). 
(This is one version of the "Levinthal Paradox" and the protein 
folding computational problem.) 
1.3. AE = mgh (gravitational potential energy). 
:. h = AE/mg = AE/(70 x 9.81) = AEl686.7 
(a) AE = 10 g x 17 kJ g - I (for carbohydrate) = 170.000 J. 
:. h = 250 m (sugar) 
(b) AE = 10 g x 39 kJ g- I (for fats) = 390,000 J. 
:. h = 570 m (fat) 
The calculation assumes that all the metabolic energy is used just for 
the work done in raising the gravitational potential energy of the 
70 kg weight. Actual climbing (or jumping) is less mechanically 
efficient. 
1.4. 7000/39 = 180 g per day. 
1.5. 
Liquid water is most dense at 4 "C and will sink to the 
bottom; any ice or water not at 4 "C will be less dense and will float 
above this. 
1.6. (a) Relatively high melting and boiling points, density 
increases on melting (ice floats), maximum density at 4 "C, high 
heat capacity for the liquid, high dielectric constant, etc. 
(b) Hydrogen bonding in water gives rise to the open, low-density, 
tetrahedral structure of ice, without which icebergs would sink 
rather than float (and therefore not be a potential hazard to ships). 
Furthermore, H-bonded solids are quite strong, giving ice the 
strength to crush or penetrate ships' hulls. 
-19 
I .7. (a) qNa+ = -qcl- = 1.6 x 10 
C; E, = 1 for vacuum; 
0 
10 
r = 5 A = 0.5 nm = 5 x 10- 
m. 

172 
Biophysical Chemistry 
:. Vqq = q1 q2/4mO~,r 
= -( 1.6 x 10-'9)2/(471 x 8.85 x 
x 5 x lo-'') 
= -4.6 x 
J per ion pair (note minus sign, 
attractive interaction) x NA = -276 kJ mol-' 
(b) In water, E, = 80; V,, = -3.5 kJ mol- I .  
This is comparable to thermal energy [kT (per molecule) = RT (per 
mole) == 2.5 kJ mol- '1. This is why salts dissolve readily in water. 
1.8. (a) Increased thermal motion will tend to disrupt the 
reorientation of dipolar molecules in an electric field, with 
consequent reduction in E, at higher temperature. 
(b) The electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged groups 
in water will become stronger as the temperature increases (E, is in 
the denominator of the Coulomb potential; Vqq becomes more 
negative as E, decreases). 
(c) Endothermic (AH positive). The Coulomb potential (V,J is 
the work done, or free energy change, in bringing the two charges 
together from an infinite separation. Applying the Le Chatelier 
principle, any interaction that gets more favourable with increase 
in temperature should be endothermic. This is counter-intuitive, 
but can be rationalized at the molecular level in terms of the 
(endothermic) release of solvation molecules around the individual 
charges as they are brought together. The release of these sol- 
vent water molecules is entropically favourable (AS positive), 
so the overall free energy change is attractive (AG = AH - TAS 
is negative). 
~ 
~~~~ 
2.1 . (a) Thermal atomic/molecular vibrations, black body radi- 
ation; (b) electronic transitions in gas, fluorescence in tube coating 
material; (c) oscillations of free electrons in a cavity (magnetron); 
(d) inner-shell electron transitions induced by collision of high- 
energy electrons with a metal target; (e) stimulated electronic 
transitions in atoms or molecules; (f) acceleration of high-energy 
electron beam (or other charged particle) around a circular path; 
(g) radiofrequency oscillations in electronic circuit. 

Answers to Problems 
173 
2.2. (a)O.l (10%); (b)0.01 (1?40); (c) 10-5(0.001%); (d) l(lOOYo) 
2.3. (a) 2, 1.3,0.6,0.3,0.046,0; (b) 0.63,0.32,0.1,0.03, 1 x 10- lo. 
2.4. 0.996, 1.96, 2.7. 
Calculation: actual transmission of the sample is T0/o = 100 x l o A A  
= 10.0, I .O or 0.1 %, respectively, for each of the samples. However, 
“0.1 YO stray light” means that an additional 0.1 YO of light reaches 
the detector, so the apparent T% = 10.1, 1.1 or 0.2%. 
Apparent (measured) A = - loglo(T%/lOO) = 0.996, 1.96 or 2.7. 
2.5. 
Very little light passes through high-absorbance samples, so 
stray light makes a proportionally great contribution to the light 
intensity at the detector. 
2.6. 
1280 = 5690 x nTrp + 1280 x YtTyr + 60 x nCys (half cysteines 
only). 
Plie does not absorb significantly at 280 nm. No information is given 
for half-Cys (usually insignificant). 
Lysozyme: 
E280 = (6 x 5690) + (3 x 1280) 
Insulin: 
&280 = (0 x 5690) + (4 x 1280) = 5 120 (only Tyr). 
Ribonuclease: E~~~ = (0 x 5690) + (6 x 1280) = 7680 (only Tyr). 
Albumin: 
E~~~ = (I x 5690) + (18 x 1280) = 28,730 (mainly Tyr). 
2.7. Various possibilities, including: protein not all correctly 
folded; impure preparation (contains some other UV absorbing 
impurity, e.g. other proteins or DNA contaminant from prepa- 
ration); incorrect sequence used for cloning; missing co-factor; etc. 
2.8. 
Dye binding, amino acid analysis after total hydrolysis, total 
nitrogen determination (though none of these will tell whether the 
protein is correctly folded). 
2.9. 
a-helical whereas RS is mainly P-sheet. 
2.10. Amino acids (except for glycine) contain a chiral centre (C,) 
and are intrinsically optically active. Predominantly L-amino 
acids in protein, with no racemization during (gentle) hydrolysis. 
[T= 1 0 7 .  
= 37,980 (predominantly Trp). 
By comparison with Figure 2.21, ABA-1 is predominantly 

174 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Purine and pyrimidine bases are achiral, because they have no 
asymmetric carbons or other chiral centres. 
2.1 I. Synthetic mixtures are racemic. 
2.1 2. Frank-Condon principle (see Figure 2.22). The electronic 
excited state lifetime is usually long enough for the system to relax to 
the excited state energy minimum before de-excitation occurs. 
Consequently, no matter how the excited state is created, emission 
will always involve the same (vertical) transition, with the same 
energy. 
2.13. 
= lo-'.' 
= 0.79 for a 
0.5 cm pathlength (remember that we are focusing on the centre of 
the fluorescence cuvette). Consequently, with this absorbance, about 
80% of the exciting light reaches (or leaves) the middle of the sample 
solution. This is (just about) acceptable. Any higher absorbance 
would lead to significant loss of light and distortion of the observed 
spectrum. 
Absorbance A = -log(T); T =  
2.14. k T =  1.38 x 
temperature. 
Vibrational band energy 6E = hc/h. 
:. Wavenumber = l/h = GE/hc 
x 300 = 4.2 x lop2' J at room 
= 4.2 x 10-*'/(6.626 x 
= 21,000 m-' = 210 cm-'. 
x 3 x lo8) 
2.15. 
Therefore Av = 3700 cm-I (0-H overtone region). 
285 nm = 35,100 cm-'; 318 nm = 31,400 cm-I. 
3.1 
states (kl H +) of the acidic and basic residues. 
3.2. From equation (3.5): 
Adjacent peaks (usually) correspond to different protonation 
v = (2ze v/m) 
= (2e V /  1 amu) (z/m> 
'I2 
= 1 . 9 6 ~  
106(z/m)'/2ms-1 
(a) z/m = 1; v = 1.96 x lo6 m s- I .  
(b) z/m = 1/132; v = 1.7 x lo5 m s-'. 
(c) z/m = 4/14500; v = 3.3 x lo4 m s- '. 

Answers to Problems 
175 
3.3. TOF = distance/velocity = 1.5/v. Therefore: 
(a) 0.76 ps; (b) 8.8 ps; (c) 45 p. 
3.4. 
Use equation (3.4): r = (2 r n l / l z t . ~ ~ ) ” ~ .  
(a) For m = 1 amu, z = 1, r = (2 x 1.66 x 
x 20000/1.6 x 
10 - ’’ 
x 42)1i2 = 5.1 x lo-’ m (0.51 cm). Other ions proportional 
to (m/z)li2; (b) 5.8 cm; (c) 30.7 cm. 
3.5. One complete (circular) orbit comprises 2.n radians, or a 
distance (circumference) of 2.n~. Consequently, the angular fre- 
quency (radians per second) for an object moving with velocity v is 
w = 2.n x number of orbits per second = 2n x (v/2nr) = v/r. 
Equation (3.2) (r = nzv/zeB) rearranges to give: v/r = zeB/rn. 
3.6. At least two possible approaches using mass spectrometry. 
(a) Differences in RMM for the protein dimer (2 x 13,700 = 27,400) 
compared to the fusion protein (1 3,700 + 12,500 = 26,200) should be 
detectable by MS (for example, MALDI-TOF). (b) Alternatively, 
peptide mass fingerprinting after proteolysis of the impurity should 
show the presence (or absence) of known GST peptides. 
4.1. 
For a two-component system, the total volume V = Tlgl + 
ir2g2 and the density p = (gl +g*)/V = (gl +gz)/(y~gl + h g d  
Rearranging gives V2g2 = (gl + g z ) / p  - Vlgl. 
For pure water (component I), a density of 0.99707 g cmP3 means 
that: 
- 
vlgl = il x 0.99707 = 1.0000~m-~ 
so the partial specific volume of water is Vl = 1 / p l  = 1.002939 cm3 g-’. 
For the protein solution, p = 0.99748 g cm-3. Then: 
I 
v2 g2 = (gl + gz)/p - vl gl 
I I 
= (5.000 + 0.0075)/0.99748 - ( I  .002939 x 5.000) 
= 0.005456 cm3 
:. 
iz = 0.005456/0.0075 = 0.727 cm3 g-I 

176 
Biophysical Chemistry 
4.2. 
Repeat 
the calculation 
in 
Answer 
4.1 with 
p = 
0.99752 g cm-3: 
V2g2 = (5.000 + 0.0075)/0.99752 - ( 1.002939~ 
5.000) = 0.005254 cm3 
:. 
V2 = 0.005254/0.0075 = 0.701 cm3 g-' 
This corresponds to a volume decrease of around 4% upon 
unfolding. 
4.3. 
Several possible reasons: (i) the folded protein structure may 
contain voids or cavities due to imperfect packing that might 
become occupied by solvent water when the structure unfolds; 
(ii) changes in extent and structure of hydration/solvation layers 
upon unfolding. [Note: in practice, protein volumes are seen to both 
increase and decrease upon unfolding, depending on the specific 
protein and experimental conditions.] 
4.4. An unbalanced rotor causes excessive vibrations and 
mechanical stresses while spinning that can cause breakage. 
4.5. 
The rotational kinetic energy in a spinning rotor (see below) 
can cause injury if the rotor becomes detached. 
4.6. m = 2  kg;r=0.15m;w=2n:x40000/60=42OOrads-'. 
Rotational kinetic energy = 1/2m~2w2 
= 
x 2 x (0. 15)2 x (4200)' 
= 4 x  lo5 J. 
This corresponds to the explosive energy in about 87 g of TNT. 
4.7. 
Use D = R7'/6n;N~qR~ 
(Stokes-Einstein equation) 
= 8.314 x 293/(6n x 6 x 
x 1.002 x lop3 x Rs) 
= 2.15 x I O - ~ ~ I R ~  
rn2s-l 
(a) Rs = 0.5 nm; :. D = 2.15 x 10- 19/0.5 x 
= 4.3 x 10-l' m2 s-'. 
(b) Rs = 2.5 nm; :. D = 2.15 x 10-l9/2.5 x lop9 
= 8.6 x lo-" m2 s-I. 
(c) Rs = 5.0 pm; :. D = 2.15 x 10-l9/5 x lop6 
= 4.3 x l o r i 4  m' s-'. 

Answers to Problems 
177 
4.8. Use < x2 > = 6Dt (where < x2 > is the mean square dis- 
placement in any direction), with t = 300 s. 
Root-mean-square displacement, 
xrms = < x2 > 'I2 = (6Dt)" = 
(1800D)"2 
(a) x,,,, := (1800 x 4.3 x 10- '')I/? 
= 8.8 x l o p 4  m = 0.88 mm. 
(b) xrmS 
:= (1800 x 8.6 x 
= 1.5 x lo-' m = 150 nm. 
(c) x, 
= (1800 x 4.3 x 10- '')1/2 
= 8.8 x lop6 m = 8.8 pm. 
4.9. 
Thermal velocities, calculated from the thermal kinetic energy 
l/2mv2 =: 3kT/2 (Chapter 5), assume no collisions with surrounding 
molecules . 
where m is the mass of a single molecule (in kg). 
(a) 02: RMM = 32; molar mass = 32 x lop3 kg mol- ', T =  298 K. 
m = 32 x 10-'/NA= 5.3 x 
< v2 > = 3kT/m = 3 x 1.381 x 
= 2.3 x lo5 m2s-2 
kg 
x 298/5.3 x 
:. Root-mean-square velocity = <v2> 
= 482 m s - I .  
(b) H20: RMM = 18 x 
642 m s-I. 
kg mol-I, T=298 K; <v2> *I2 = 
(c) Protein: m = 25000 x 10 - 
T =  310 K; <v2> 
(kg mol - ')/N,t, = 4.2 x 10 - 23 kg; 
= 17.6 m s-'. 
5.2. Atmospheric pressure is what we feel as a result of high-speed 
molecular collisions with the air molecules in the atmosphere around 
us. Brownian motion also shows the effects of molecular collisions 
on the (random) motion of small particles. 

178 
Biophysical Chemistry 
5.3. (a) Use AGO = - RT ln(K) = AHo - TAS" to complete: 
TI'C 
K 
dG"/kJ molV' 
dH"/kJ m o l ~  ' 
dS"/J K - '  mol-' 
454.9 
45 
0.133 
5.33 
150.0 
532.9 
0.345 
2.86 
175.0 
50 
55 
1 
0 
200.0 
609.8 
685.4 
60 
3.22 
-3.24 
225.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(b) Fraction unfolded = K/( 1 + K) = 0.26, 0.5 and 0.76, respectively. 
(c) Increase in AHo with temperature (confirmed by increase in AS" 
with T )  signifies a positive heat capacity increment (ACJ, 
characteristic of both hydrophobic and hydrogen-bonded network 
interactions. 
5.4. 
Spectroscopic methods (UV, fluorescence, CD): changes in 
chromophore environment/conformation on binding. Hydrodyn- 
amics (viscosity, sedimentation): changes in gross macromolecular 
properties. Calorimetry (DSC, ITC): direct measure of energy 
changes on binding. Equilibrium dialysis: direct measure of ligand 
binding. 
5.5. 
may use either. 
Both Fand CD follow the same transition in this case, so we 
(a) T, = 50 "C (mid-point of unfolding transition). 
(b) Fraction unfolded = (F- Fo)/(Finf- Fo) = (58.8 - 65)/(15 - 65) 
= 0.124. 
(c) Equilibrium constant for unfolding: 
K = ( F -  Fo)/(F,,f 
- F )  = (58.8 - 65)/( 15 - 58.8) 
= 0.142 
AGin,- = -RTln K = -8.3 14 x (273 + 46) x ln(O.142) 
= +5.18 kJ mol-' 
(d) Fluorescence is probing the polarity of the environment of 
aromatic amino acid residues (primarily tryptophan), which changes 
(non-polar + polar) as the protein unfolds. CD measures secondary 
structure changes (a-helix, P-sheet, etc.). 
(e) These do not necessarily occur simultaneously, since protein 
unfolding may take place in two (or more) steps, e.g. change in 

Answers to Problems 
179 
tertiary structure exposing aromatic groups but retaining secondary 
structure, followed by "melting" of the secondary structure at 
higher temperatures. 
5.6. P + L e PL 
c p  = [PL] + [PI; K = [PL]/[P][L] 
.*.Cp/[PL] = 1 + [P]/[PLJ = 1 + l/K[L] 
The slope of the "double-reciprocal plot" (l/[PL] versus l/[L]) = 
l/KCp. This is useful because only equilibrium dialysis (and related 
methods) gives free the ligand concentration [L] directly. For most 
other methods we need to make approximations, or fit to complete 
binding expression. 
5.78 
compartment) 
Cp = [PL] + [PI = 8.3 x l o p 9  M (from left-hand 
C L =  [PL] + [L] = 3.9 x lo-' M 
Free ligand [L] = 3.5 x 
M (from right-hand compartment). 
... [PL] = 3.9 x lo-* - 3.5 x lo-' = 4.0 x 
M 
so [PI = 8.3 x 
Hence A' = [PL]/[P][L] = 2.7 x 10' M - '. 
- 4.0 x 
= 4.3 x 10W9 M 
6.1 . Use Adiuusion = 4nNArxy(Dx + Dy) x 1000. 
Assume target does not diffuse (Dy = 0), Dx = 10 - l o  m2 s- ' and 
r x y  = 1 nm. Then: 
,4diffusion= 
471 x 6 x 
x 
x lo-'' x 1000 = 7.5 x 10' M-' s-' 
6.2. Rate = Adi~usion[X] = 7.5 x 10' x 1 x 10 - = 750 s - I .  
:. 
t1/2 = 0.693/k = 0.693/750 = 9 x lob4 s (0.9ms) 
6.3. Reaction is not under free diffusion control; or there is pre- 
formed reactive complex; or the diffusion is two-dimensional (on 
surface) or one-dimensional (along a polymer strand); or molecular 
attractions are enhancing collision rates; or the assumed mechanism 
is wrong; or there is an unexpected catalytic effect; and so on. 

180 
Biophysical Chemistry 
~ 
~~~~~~ 
~~~~ 
6.4. 
6 x lo-'* s x 3 x 10" m s-I =0.18 m (18 cm). 
6.5. 
(a) Observed rate is proportional to peptide concentration. 
(b) k,, = rate/[peptide] = 1.9 x lo7 mol-' dm3 s-l (same for all 
concentrations). 
(c) t i p  = 0.693/k = 7.2 S; k,@= 0.693/tlp = 0.096 S - ' .  
(d) K = kon/koff 
= 1.9 x 107/0.096 = 2.0 x 1 O8 mol -' dm3. 
7.1 . Affinity chromatography, using a nickel column (binds 
histidine side-chains); elute with pH gradient or imidazole. 
7.2. 
Gel filtration/size exclusion chromatography, using a column 
calibrated with known proteins in the 10,000-50,000 RMM range. 
If the protein is a dimer (30,000), it will elute sooner than expected 
from the column. 
7.3. Electrophoresis is only partly helpful here. If the dimer is held 
together by covalent bonds (-S-S- bridges, for example, under non- 
reducing conditions), then SDS-PAGE would show a protein band 
at around 30,000. However, non-covalent dimerization of the native 
state would be disrupted by SDS, and only monomer bands would 
be seen. 
7.4. Reversed phase/hydrophobic interaction chromatography. 
The contaminating fatty acids should have a greater affinity for the 
hydrophobic groups on the column, and the protein will pass 
through, leaving the fatty acids behind. 
8.1. 
Molar concentration for 1 molecule in volume Y (in dm3) = 
l/NA V; 1 m3 = 1000 dm3. 
(a) V=(lOx 10-6)3x 1000= 1 x lO-'*dm";c= 1 . 7 ~  
10-i2moldm-3. 
(b) V=4nr3/3 = 1 . 4 ~  
1.2 x 
mol dmP3. 
m3 G 1 . 4 ~  
10-20dm3; c =  

Answers to Problems 
181 
___ __. 
- 
. 
. ... .. -. - - .- 
(c) V =  4 d / 3  E= 1.8 x 
(dj V =  
m3 = 1.8 x 
dm3; c = 9.3 mol dm-3. 
dm3; c =  1.7 x lo-" mol dmP3. 
8.2. 
molecule. 
Use < 6E2 > = kT2c, where c is the heat capacity of the single 
For a single molecule: c = 25000 x 3/NA = 1.25 x 10 - l 9  J K - I .  
37 
2 
:. < 6E2 >= I .38 x 
:. SE,,,, = 3.9 x lO-I9J per molecule = 240 kJ mol-' 
x 3002 x 1.25 x 
1.55 x 10- 
J 
8.3. 6T= 6E/c E= 3.9 x 10-'9/1.25 x 
= 3 "C. 
8.4. AFM only probes the surface, and cannot give details of 
internal conformations. It probes only the top surface, and cannot 
feel underneath. 
8.5. Because the single molecule may only fluoresce a small 
fraction (4) of the time; or the (single photon) emission may not 
always occur within the observation time; or the emitted photon 
may come off in the wrong direction for the detector. 

Subject Index 
Absorbance cross 
section 
25, 39 
Acid dissociation 
constant 
14, 15 
Amino acids 2, 34 
Ampholyte 
152 
Arrhenius 
equation 
124 
Atomic force 
microscopy 
159 
Band-shift assay 
150 
Beer-Lambert law 24 
Bile salts 
10 
Binding 
competitive 
138, 
equilibrium 
108, 
kinetics 
134 
non-competitive 
139, 141 
Boltzmann probability 
Brownian motion 87, 
Buflers 
14 
Buoyant mass 86, 87 
141 
113-1 14 
100, 124 
91 
Centrifugation 86 
Charge-coupled device 
Chroma tograp h y 
affinity 
147 
gel filtration 
145 
ion-exchange 
146 
reverse-phase 
147 
size-exclusion 
145 
30 
143-148 
Collagen 
3, 58, 84 
Collision factor 124, 
Confocal microscopy 
Coulomb interaction 
Crystallization 
1 15 
126 
54 
13 
Density 
1 1, 82 
Density gradient 86 
Detergent 
10, 150 
Dielectric constant 
13 
Difference spectrum 
Differential scanning 
calorimetry 
103 
Diffusion 
53, 90, 91 
coefficient 89 
rotational 93 
40 
Diffusion limit 
126 
Diode array 30 
DNA 7, 35, 37, 42, 
melting 37 
27, 94, 165 
127, 150 
Dynamic light scattering 
Electromagnetic 
radiation 2 1-24 
Electron microscopy 
Electrophoresis 
165-1 67 
148-152 
2-D 
152 
gel 
149 
Electrostatic inter- 
actions 13 
SDS-PAGE 150 
Ellipticity 41 
Enzyme inhi bition 
Enzyme kinetics 
Equilibrium constant 
102, 125 
Equilibrium dialysis 
114 
Ergodic hypothesis 
159 
138-1 39 
136-140 
FAB 72 
Fats 
10 
Flash photolysis 
13 1 
Fluctuations 48, 94, 
Fluid mosaic model 
10 
Fluorescence 43-54 
correlation 164 
depolarization 52 
energy transfer 
5 1 
lifetime 47 
microscopy 44, 54 
probes 49, 111 
quantum yield 47 
quenching 4749 
relaxation 
53 
single-molecule 
163 
157 
Frank-Condon 
FRAP 53 
FRET 51 
Frictional coefficient 
principle 44 
88, 148 
Gyromagnetic ratio 
60, 61 
182 

Subject Index 
183 
Haemoglobin 
3, 36, 
Heat capacity 
103, 107 
Hofmeister series 
I 17 
Hydrodynamics 
82 
Hydrogen exchange 
132 
Hydrophobic effect 
13, 148 
Hypochromic effect 
37,39 
38, 84 
Inner filter effects 46 
I soelectric focusing 
151, 152 
lsoelectric point 
Isosbesticpoint 27 
Isothermal titration 
calorimetry 
107 
16, 116 
Kinetics 
123-140 
continuous flow 
stopped fjow 
I29 
128 
Ladder sequencing 78 
Levinthal paradox 
5 
Lipid bilayer 
10 
Lipids 
10, 38 
Luminescence 
53 
Lysozyme 3, 35, 39, 
84, 108 
Optical rotary 
Optical tweezers 
I62 
dispersion 41 
Partial molar volume 
83 
pH 
14 
Phosphorescence 
53 
Photoelectric effect 
Photomultiplier 30, 76 
PI - see Isoelectric point 
Piezoelectric effect 
Polarizability 
56 
Polyelectrolyte 
14, 152 
Polynucleotides 
7 
Polypeptides 2 
Polysaccharides 9, 38 
Proteins 2 
24 
160 
(see also individual 
protein names) 
folding 5, 110-1 13, 
structure 4-7 
unfolding - .we 
161 
Proteins, folding 
Proteomics 
79, 152 
Pycnometer 
85 
Quantum yield - see 
Fluorescence, 
quantum yield 
Quenching - see 
Fluorescence, 
quenching 
MALDI 73 
Mass spectrometry 
Mean free path 71 
Micelle 
10, 150 
Michaelis-Menten - see 
M icrocalorimetry 
103, 
Myoglobin 
3, 38 
70-80 
Enzyme kinetics 
107 
N uclear Overhauser 
effect 63 
Radiation pressure 
Raman optical activity 
Raman scattering 45, 
Random coil 6 
Random walk 92 
Rayleigh scattering 
26, 56, 164 
Relative permittivity - 
see Dielectric 
constant 
162 
59 
56, 164 
Relaxation methods 
Relaxation rates 130 
Rhodopsin 3, 24, 28, 
36, 38, 52 
Ribonuclease 
35, 84 
RNA 8, 37,42 
Rotational relaxation 
time 93 
130 
Salting in/salting out 
Scanning tunnelling 
microscopy 
16 1 
Sedimentation 
coefficient 89 
Sedimentation 
equilibrium 
87 
Sedimentation rate 
88, 148 
SERS 59 
Solubility 
1 15 
Spectral broadening 
Spectrofluorimeter 
Spect ropho t ometer 
Spectroscopy 
2 1-66 
CD 40 
fluorescence 43 
IR 
55 
NMR 59 
Raman 
55 
UV/vis 28 
116 
33 
44 
28-3 1 
Spin relaxation 
62, 63 
Stern-Volmer plot 
49 
Stokes-Einstein 
equation 92 
Stokes shift 
56 
Stray light effects 
Surface plasmon 
3 1-32 
resonance 
134- 136 
T-jump 
131 
Thermal kinetic energy 
101 

184 
Subject Index 
Thermodynamic fluc- 
U1 tracen t rifugation 
Water 
Thermodynamics 99 
dielectric constant 
Transition dipole 39 
13 
Transition state theory 
Viscometer 95 
heat capacity 
125 
Viscosity 89, 94 
12, 107 
Two-photon excitation 
Volume 82 
structure 12 
54 
tuations 48, 157-1 59 
86 
density 
11 



