

TUTORIAL CHEMISTRY TEXTS 
17 
Natural Products: 
The Secondary 
Metabolites 
JAMES R. HANSON 
University of Sussex 
ROYAL 80C1RY OF CHEMISCRV 

TUTORIAL CHEMISTRY TEXTS 
E D I T O R - I N - C H I E F  
E X E C U T I V E  EDITORS 
- 
. - - - -. -- 
- 
- . 
. - 
E D U C A T l O N A L  C O N S U L T A N T  
Professor E W Abrl 
Professor A G Davies 
6% 
 err^- -- 
-- 
Professor D Phillips 
Profesor J D Woollins 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the 
fundamental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
TITLES IN THE SERlES 
, - -- - - 
. . , - - -- - 
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
S E Damn 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Barrerr 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hanson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Saittshurv 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanios 
J M Seddon and J D Gale 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
J M H o l h  
Organic Synthetic Methods J R Hansotr 
Aromatic Chemistry J D Hep~vorth, 
D R Wnring and M J Waring 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
D 0 Hayward 
Peptides and Proteins S Doonan 
Reaction Kinetics M Robson Wright 
Natural Products: The Secondary 
Metabolites J R Huvson 
FORTHCOMING TITLES 
.- 
-- 
- ---- 
- 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Molecular Interactions 
Lanthanide and Actinde Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multiclement NMR 
EPR Spectroscopy 
Biophysical Chemistry 
Fttrrlter injorntorion about this series is available ar ww~v.rsc.org/tcr 
Order and enquiries sltould be sent lo: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: + 44 1223 432360; Fax: + 44 1223 4260 17; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
1 
The Classes of Natural Product 
and Their Isolation 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 The Classes of Secondary Metabolites 
1.3 Polyketides and Fatty Acids 
1.4 Terpenes and Steroids 
1 .S Phenylpropanoids 
1.6 Alkaloids 
1.7 Antibiotics Derived from Amino Acids 
1.8 Vitamins 
1.9 Chemical Ecology 
1.10 The Isolation of a Natural Product 
I. 1 1 The Stages in Structure Elucidation 
2 
The Characterization and Determinatton of 
the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
35 
2.1 The Characterization of a Natural Product 
3 5 
2.2 Spectroscopic Characterization 
37 
2.3 Simple Chemical Derivatives 
45 
2,4 The Determination of the Carbon Skeleton 
46 
2.5 Spectroscopic Methods in the Oetermination 
of the Carbon Skeleton 
57 

vi 
Contents 
3 
The Location of the Functional Groups 
and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
63 
3.1 
Introduction 
63 
3.2 
Spectroscopic Interrelationships 
64 
3.3 
Chemical Methods 
69 
3.4 The Determination of Absolute Stereochemistry 
7 5 
48 
Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
$5 
4.1 
Santonin 
4.2 
Griseofulvin 
4.3 
Penicillin and Clavulanic Acid 
4.4 
Prostaglandins 
4.5 
Vitamin C 
5 
The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 105 
Introduction 
Biosynthetic Methodology 
The Pathway of Carbon into Biosynthesis 
The Biosynthesis of Polyketides 
Terpenoid Biosynthesis 
The Biosynthesis of Phenylpropanoids 
Alkaloid Biosynthesis 
Other Natural Products Derived from Amino Acids 
Further Reading 
Answers to Problems 
Subject lndex 

The Classes of Natural 
Product and Their Isolation 
The aims af this chapter are to introduce the main classes of natural 
product and to show how they may be isolated. By the end of this 
chapter you should understand: 
The motivation- for examining the structures of natural products 
The distinction between primary and secondary metabolites 
The structural characteristics of the major classes of natural 
product and recognize their biosynthetic building blocks 
The chemistry underlying the methods of isolating natural 
products 
The stages in the elucidation of the structure of a natural 
product 
1 1 
Introduction 
Natural products are organic compounds that are formed by living 
systems. The elucidation of their structures and their chemistry, synthesis 
and biosynthesis are majox areas of organic chemistry. Naturally 
occurring compounds may be divided into three broad categories. 
Firstly, there are those compounds which occur in all cells and play a 
central role in the metabolism and reproduction of those cells. These 
compounds include the nucleic acids and the common amino acids and 
sugars. They are known as primary metabolites. Secondly, there are the 
high-molecular-weight polymeric materials such as cellulose, the lignins 
and tbe proteins which form the cellular structures. Finally, there are 
those compounds that are characteristic of a limited range of species. 
These are the secondary metabolites. Most primary metabolites exert their 
Biological effect within the cell or organism that is responsible for their 

2 
Natural Products: The Secandary Metabolites 
production. Secondary metabolites, on the other hand, have often 
attracted interest because of their bioIogical effect on other organisms. 
The biologically active constituents of medicinal, commercial and 
poisonous plants have been studied throughout the development of 
organic chemistry. Many of these compounds are secondary metabolites. 
A pheromone is a substance 
It has beenestimated that over 40% of medicines have their origins in these 
~ ~ " , " , " ~ ~ ' ~ , " , " ~ ~ ! , " ~ e i n  
natural products. A number of screening programmes for bioactive 
behavl'our by another member of 
compounds exist and have led to new drugs, for example taxol, which is 
the same species. 
used for the treatment of various cancers, Natural products often have an 
ecological role in regulating the interactions between plants, micro- 
Chemotaxonomy involves the use organisms, insects and animals. They can be defensive substances, anti- 
of natural products in the 
classification of species. 
feedants, attractants and pheromones. Chemotaxonomy provides another 
reason for examining the constituents of plants. Phytochernical surveys 
A phytochemical is a natural 
can reveal natural products that are "markers" for botanical and evolu- 
product produced by a plant. 
tionary relationships. 
I .2 
The Classes of Secondary Metabolites 
The polyketide chain is 
assembled from acetate units: 
Isoprene is 3-methylbuta-1,3- 
diene. Some simple terpenes glve 
isbprene on pyrolysis. 
Phenylpropanoids have the 
carbon skeleton: 
At first sight, the structures of secondary metabolites may seem to be 
bewilderingly diverse. However, the majority of these compounds belong 
to one of a number of families, each of which have particular structural 
characteristics arising from the way in which they are built up in nature, 
i.e. from their biosynthesis. The classes of secondary metabolites are: 
Polyketides and fatty acids 
Terpenoids and steroids 
Phenylpropanoids 
a 
Alkaloids 
. Specialized amino acids and peptides 
. Specialized carbohydrates 
Polyketides are formed by the linear combination of acetate (ethanoate) 
units derived from the "building black" acetyl co-enzyme A. Terpenoids 
and steroids are assembled in nature from hoprenoid C5 units derived 
from isopentenyl(3-methylbut-3-en- 
1-yl) pyrophosphate. These C5 units 
are linked together in a head-to-tail manner. They have a characteristic 
branched chain structure. A further group of natural products are those 
containing a phenylpropanoid ( C d 3 )  unit. 
The arnina acids are the building blocks for peptides and proteins. 
Although the amino acids are normally considered as primary metabolites, 
there are some unusual amino acids that are of restricted occurrence. Some 
antibiotics such as the penicillins are formed from small peptides. The 
alkaloids are a structurally diverse group of natural products containing 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
3 
nitrogen. The nitrogenous portions of the alkaloids are derived from 
amino acids such as ornithine, lysine, tyrosine or tryptophan. 
Although sugars (carbohydrates) such as glucose are typical primary 
metabolites, there are other sugars that are of a much more Iirnited 
occurrence. Some of these less common sugars are attached to natural 
products as part of a glycoside. The non-sugar portion is known as the 
aglycone, and may be a terpenoid, alkaloid or polyketide. 
1.3 
Polyketides and Fatty Acids 
Polyketides are natural products that are formed by the stepwise 
condensation of acetate (ethanoate) units. In the resultant carbon 
chain, alternate carbon atoms come from the methyl and carboxyl 
groups of the acetate building block. The acetate origin of these 
compounds leads to a preponderance of even-numbered carbon chains. 
Their biosynthesis is discussed in Chapter 5. Many plant oils and animal 
fats contain long-chain monocarboxyiic acids known as fatty acids. In the 
fatty acids, the carbonyl group of the acetate units is reduced during the 
course of the chain assembly process. Dehydrogenation and oxidative 
processes may subsequently give the unsaturated fatty acids. If some of 
the carbonyl groups are not removed during the biosynthesis, various 
internal aldol-type condensations may occur, leading after dehydration 
and enolization to aromatic compounds. Other cycliza tions may give 
oxygen heterocycles. A characteristic feature of these compounds is 
oxygenation on alternate carbon atoms. 
Fatty acids are found in fats both as the free acids and, more often, 
combined as esters with alcohols such as glycerol and cholesterol. The 
common fatty acids have an even number of carbon atoms, typically Clz- 
CZ0, linked together in a straight chain with up to four double bonds. The 
double bonds usually possess the cis geometry and are not conjugated, In 
plants the fatty acids and the corresponding alcohols are found in leaf 
waxes and seed coatings. Myristic acid (CI4) is found in nutmeg seeds and 
palmitic acid (CI6) is found ill almost all plant oils. Stearic acid (C18) 
occurs in large amounts in animal fat. These exemplify the common 
occurrence of even-numbered carbon chains in fatty acids. The sodium 
salts of the fatty acids are used as soaps. 
Unsaturated fatty acids are important to us in food. Oleic acid (cis- 
octadec-9-enoic acid, 1.1) is the most widely distributed, and is a major 
constituent of olive oil. Linoleic (1.2) and linolenic (1.3) are more highly 
unsaturated and are found in linseed oil. Linolenic acid is easily oxidized 
by air, and is one of the "drying oils" used in paints and varnishes. The 
methylene which lies between the two double bonds is very sensitive to 
radical reactions. Linolenic acid is oxidized by plants to jasmonic acid 
The aldol condensation between a 
carbonyl-activated carbanion and 
another carbonyl group gives a 
p-hydroxy ketone. The 
condensation followed by 
enolization of polycarbonyl 
compounds creates a phenol. 

~~~~ 
T#m W n d a t y  .Metabolites 
?., . 
-- . 
., 
- 
. 
. - 
(1.4). which is a signalling substance that stimulates plant defence 
mechanisms. The unsaturated CZ0 arachidonic acid (1.5) is a precursor of 
the prostaglandin hormones (see Chapter 5). 
The Basidiomycetesarefungiwith 
Some highly unsaturated polyarcetylenes derived from polyketides 
large lrurting bodies They 
are found 
plants of the ~ a h ~ i a  
f&iiiY and in ~asidiomicete fungi. 
the mushrooms, toadstools and 
bracket fung, found growing 
The antibiotic mycornyein (1.6) is a polyacetylene which also contains an 
unusual allene unit. The antifungal agent wyerone (1.7) is produced by 
the broad bean (Vicia fabne) when i;t is attacked by micro-organisms. 
cis 
trans 
HCsC-C=C-CH=C=CN-CHZCH-CFI=CH-CH2C02H 
1.6 
4 lactone is a 
aster f
~
~
~
e
d
 
Large ring lactones, known as macrotidea, are formed by some micro- 
ffom an aloahoi and an acid 
qroun in fie: samemolecule 
organism' The rnacrolides include some important antibiotics such 
as erythromycin (1.8), which is produced by a Streptomycete. 
Other macrolides, such as the avermecfins and milbernycins, are produced 
aommer~ially for the treatment of parasites in animals and as insecticides, 

The Classas of Natural Product and Their lacriation 
5 
Many aromatic natural products with oxygen atoms attached to 
alternate carbon atoms are polyketides. These compounds are grouped 
by the number of their constituent acetate units into tri-, tetra-, penta-, 
hexa- and heptaketides. Some typical examples from micro-organisms are 
the tetraketide 6-methylsalicyclic acid (1.9) from Peniciiiiwn palulunl, the 
"0-desosemine 
pentaketide rnellei~ (1.10) from Aspergillus mellem, the heptaketide 
"0-mycar~s 
antibiotic griseofulvin (1.11) from P. griseofiJvum and mycophenolic acid 
Me 
(1.12) from P. brevicompaz(tum. Griseofulvitl (see Chapter 4) has been 
8.8 
used ro treat fungal infectioris of the skin and rnycopbenolic acid is an 
immunosuppressive agent, 
The aromatic ring may be cleaved to form compounds such as patulin 
(1.13) from P. paiul'um. The aflatoxins [cg. 1.14")rom 
A, flavus are 
among the most dangerous fungal toxins and cause liver cancer. 
Their identification in 1962, as the causative agents of liver cancer in 
Christmas turkeys being fattened on groundnuts which were infected with 
A, fivus, was a rale (of chemical detective work and careful s;tructure 
elucidation. The tetracycline antibiotics (tx.g. tetracycline, 1.15) are 
valuable antibiotics which are produced on a large scale from 
St7eptornyces aureofaciens. 

6 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
- a  
e a  - 
Q Identify the acetate units in the lichen product eugenitin (1). 
OH 0 
:- 
a,,* 
0 
m 
HO 
rn 
1 
2 
A This natural product is a pentaketide possessing oxygen 
functions on alternate carbon atoms (see 2). These act as markers 
for the carbonyl group of the acetate unit. Note that there is an extra 
carbon atom which has probably come from methionine. 
1.4 
Terpenes and Steroids 
The terpenes are compounds that are built up from isoprene units. Their 
structures are divisible into the C5 isoprene units (C-C-C-C) 
linked 
I c 
in a head-to-tail manner. This isoprene rule, developed by Ruzicka in 
1921, provided a useful guide in structure determination. The origin of 
the C5 unit (isopentenyl pyrophosphate, 1.16) is discussed in Chapter 5. 
The terpenes are classified by the number of these C5 isoprene units 
that they contain. The classes are: 
Monoterpenoids, C lo 
Sesquiterpenoids, C1 
Diterpenoids, C20 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
7 
- 
Sesterterpenoids, CZ5 
Triterpenoids, C30 
Carotenoids, C40 
Natural rubber is a polyisoprenoid substance. The steroids are derived 
from the tetracyclic triterpenoids. Isoprene units are sometimes found as 
components of other natural products. 
Most of the terpenes have cyclic structures. The majority of the 
terpenoid cyclizations which take place in living systems are of an acid- 
catalysed type. The branched chain nature of the isoprenoid backbone 
coupled with readily protonated functional groups (e.g. alkenes) lend 
themselves to acid-catalysed rearrangements during the course of these 
biosynthetic reactions. Consequently, there are some terpenoid skeletons 
that do not appear, on first inspection, to be derived from the regular 
combination of isoprenoid units. 
Monoterpenoids are major components of the aromas of plants. These 
volatile natural products, known as essential oils, form the basis of the 
perfumery and flavouring industries. Distillation of these oils meant that 
it was possible to obtain quantities of these terpenes for structural studies. 
The structures of many of the simple monoterpenes were established 
between 1890 and 1920 through the work of Wallach, Wagner, Tiemann, 
Semmler and Perkin. Although modern gas chromatographic analyses of 
these oils often shows them to be highly complex mixtures of terpenoid 
and non-terpenoid natural products, one or two monoterpenes usually 
predominate. Thus geraniol (1.17) is a major component of geranium oil 
(Pelargonium graveolens) and its isomer, linalool(1.18), is found in the oil 
of a garden herb, clary sage. Both enantiomers of linalool occur naturally. 
Citral (1.19), a constituent of lemon oil, is obtained commercially from 
lemon grass oil (Cymbopogonflexuosus). Herbs, including the mints, the 
sages and rosemary, are the source of many terpenes. Menthol (1.20) is 
found in the essential oil of the field mint, Mentha arvensis, and possesses 
useful physiological properties including local anaesthetic and refreshing 
effects. It is used to flavour sweets, tobacco and toothpaste. Terpineol 
(1.21) and a-pinene (1.22) are found in pine oil (turpentine). Camphor 
(1.23), which was isolated from the camphor tree, Cinnamomum 
camphors, but is now made commercially from a-pinene, is used to 
protect clothes from moths. 

8 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Amongst the more highly oxygenated monoterpenoids are a family of 
cyclopentanes known as the iridoids. Some compounds of this series such 
as iridodial (1.24) are found in ants. Iridodial is in equilibrium with its 
hemiacetal. The corresponding lactone, nepetalactone, obtained from 
catmint (Nepeta curaria), is an attractant for cats. The seco-iridoids such 
as seco-loganin (1.25) are precursors of the terpenoid portion of the 
indole alkaloids (see Chapter 5). 
Some sesquiterpenes are found in the higher boiling portions of 
essential oils. These include caryophyllene (1.26) from oil of cloves, 
humulene (1.27) from oil of hops, cedrene (1.28) from cedar wood oil 
and longifolene (1.29) from Indian turpentine oil (Pinus ponderosa). 
These structures illustrate the diversity of the carbon skeletons found 
among the sesquiterpenes. Sesquiterpenoid lactones are common 
The Cornpos~iaeare the largest 
biologically active constituents of plants of the Compositae family. 
f'owerlngPlants Their 
 antd din (1.30) from Arfemisia rnaritima (wormwood) was used in 
flowers have character~stically a 
large number of petals. Typical 
medicine for the elimination of intestinal worms. The evidence for 
exampies are 
daisy aid Ihe 
the structure of santonin is described in Chapter 4. Derivatives of the 
sunflower 
Chinese drug qinghaosu, arteniisinin (1.31), obtained from Artemisia 
annua, have recently been recommended by the World Health 
Organization for the treatment of resistant strains of malaria. This 
compound contains an unusual peroxide which is associated with its 
biological activity. The plant hormone abscisic acid (1.32), which 
stimulates leaf fall and dormancy in plants, was identified in 1965 and 
shown to be a sesquiterpenoid. 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
9 
A number of fungal metabolites are sesquiterpenoids. Some like the 
A phytotoxin IS a substance that 
botrylanes (e.g. botrydial. 1.33), which are produced by the phytopatho- 
IS 'OXIC 'O 
genic fungus Botrytis cinerea, are phytotoxins and others like the 
Botrvtis cir~erea 1s a grey powdery 
trichothecenes (e.g. 1.34). which are characteristic metabolites of ~,~~:~!~',s,S~O~~~,"~"""~ 
Fusariunz species, are toxic to mammals. 
AcO 
Many of the diterpenoids are wood resin products. Abietic acid (1.35) is 
the major component of colophony, the wood rosin obtained from Pinus 
and Ahies species. It is used in varnishes and resin soaps. Although crude 
samples of the resin acids were isolated in the 19th century, there was 
considerable confusion concerning their identity. The carbon skeleton of 
abietic acid was not fully established until the work of Ruzicka in the 
1930s, and the stereochemistry was not clarified until 1948 by Barton. 
Other resin acids include pimaric acid (from Pinus species) and 
podocarpic acid (1.36) from Podocarpus cupressinum. Neutral constitu- 
ents of wood resins include manoyl oxide (1.37). The acids and phenols 
provide protection for the wood against fungal and insect attack. More 
highly oxygenated diterpenoids possessing the clerodane skeleton are 
insect anti-feedants, and are found in the leaves of, for example, A.jrlga, 
Fusarrum species are w~despread 
fungi, many of which are 
pathogerlic to plants A few also 
aflecl msects alid niafi 

10 
Natural Products: The Secondary MettrboIRea 
These plants belong to the 
Salvia, Scurellaria and Teucrium species. The orange and red pigments of 
Larniaceae (also known as the 
Labiatae). mia family of plants 
the leaves of the decorative Coleus species (e.g. coleon B) and the active 
include many common garden 
principles of a Chinese drug, Tan-shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza), are 
herbs such as rnnt, rosemary 
and saoe. Bualeweed is an 
biterpinoid quinones. 
- 
Ajuga Geciesand the Salvras 
are comrrlori docoratlve gardett 
flowers 
I 
The prefix "etit 
to 'enantior I let 
kau~erie 
" is ~bsed to refer 
of", III Il\is case 
Tile fur~gus Gibberella fujrk~~ror 
is 
a serious patt loge: I on rice. 
causlng the planLs to q ~ o w  
rap~dly 
a11d then dle 
Stevia rebaud~ana is a shrub 
which belongs to Ihe Composilae 
farnlly It is grown commercially in 
South Amer ~ca. 
Korea and Japan. 
Plantsof the spurge family belong 
to the Euphorbiaceae A number 
produce an irritar~t latex 
Pornsettlas are Euphorh~as 
Diterpenes occur in both enantiomeri!: series. Diterpenes with the ent- 
kaurene skeleton are widespread. ent-Kaurenoic acid (1.38, R = H) is a 
biosynthetic precursor of the diterpenoid gibberellin plant growth 
hormones. The best known of these plant hormones, gibberellic acid 
(1.39), is also produced in large amounts as a phytotoxin by the fungus 
Gibberella fujikuroi. It is produced commercially and used in the malting 
step in beer manufacture where it stimulates the production of the starch 
hydrolytic enzyme, ot-amylase. It is also used in the production of seedless 
grapes. Steviol (1.38, R = OH) is the aglycone of the natural sweetener 
stevioside, which is obtained commercially from the plant Stevia 
rebaudiana. Stevioside is used in some countries as a non-nutritive 
sweetener in low-calorie drinks. A number of diterpenoids possess 
antiturnour activity. One of these, tax01 (or paclitaxel, 1.40), was 
originally obtained from the bark of the Pacific yew, Taxus brevijblia, 
but it is now made semi-synthetically from more readily available 
taxatles. It possesses powerful activity against a number of tumours and it 
is used in the treatment of breast and ovarian cancer. On the other hand, 
some of the diterpenoid constituents of Euphorbia species have powerful 
skin irritant and co-carcinogenic properties. 

The Classes of Natural Produot and Their Isolation 
11 
The simplest triterpene, squalene (1.41), was first isolated from fish liver 
oils. Subsequently, it has been found in plant oils and mammalian fats. 
The common tetracyclic triterpene lanosterol (1.42) is a major constituent 
of wool fat and its esters are found in lanolin cream. Other triterpenes, 
such as the a- and P-amyrins (1.43), are found in wood resin and the bark 
of many trees. A triterpene laetone, abietospiran, crystallizes on the 
surface of the bark of the silver fir, Abies alba, giving it a grey-white 
appearance. Glycyrrhetinic acid is a triterpene found in liquorice, and has 
Liquorice is obtained from the 
healing properties in the treatment of peptic ulcers. 
roots of Glycyrrhrza glabra. 
Triterpenes have been found in the fruiting bodies of a number of 
fungi, particularly from Basidiomycetes such as Polyporus (polyporenic 
acids) and Ganoderm (ganoderic acids) species. The traditional Chinese 
medicine ginseng (Panax ginseng) contains glycosides of triterpenes such 
as protopanaxadiol. Recently, derivatives of betulin (from the bark of the 
beech tree) have shown interesting activity against the human irnrnuno- 
deficiency virus. 
More highly oxidized and degraded triterpenes are exemplified by 
limonin (1.44), which is a bitter principle obtained from lemon and 
orange seeds. Although limonin was first isolated by Bernay in 1841, its 

12 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
structure was not finally established until 1960 as the result of a 
collaborative effort involving work by Barton in the UK, Jeger and 
Arigoni in Switzerland, and Corey in the USA. Other members of this 
group have been obtained from the heartwood of trees in the Meliaceae 
The Meliacae are a family of trees and Rutaceae families. One of these, azadirachtin, from the Neem tree, 
that provide a number 
has strong insect anti-feedant activity against locusts. Its structure was 
tropical hardwoods which are 
used in furniture 
finally established in 1987 by the work of three groups, those of Ley, 
Nakanishi and Kraus. 
The steroids are derived from tetracyclic triterpenes and possess a 
cyclopentaperhydrophenanthrene backbone (1.45). The availability, 
crystallinity and well-defined conformation of the steroids have meant 
that they have become suitable substrates with which to investigate the 
influence of steric factors on reaction rates and mechanisms. Cholesterol 
(1.46) forms an important constituent of lipid membranes, and the more 
highly degraded steroids include the steroid hormones. Cholesterol is a 
typical mammalian sterol, whereas ergosterol is found in fungi and 
stigmasterol in plant oils. Among the steroid hormones, the progestogens 
(e.g. progesterone, 1.47) and the estrogens (e.g. estradiol, 1.48) are female 
hormones responsible for female sexual characteristics, for the mainten- 
ance of pregnancy and for the control of the menstrual cycle. Modified 
estrogens and progestogens are used in the oral contraceptive. Some 
breast cancers are estrogen dependent. The enzyme system aromatase, 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
13 
which catalyses the conversion of testosterone (1.49) to estradiol, is a 
target for cancer chemotherapy. Androgens such as testosterone are male 
sexual hormones. Among other properties, they have a stimulating effect 
Nandrolone 1s an anabolic sterold 
on the development of muscle (anabolic effect). Anabolic steroids have 
that I s  abused by 'Ome 
been used in stimulating the growth of beef cattle. The cortical steroids 
(e.g. cortisone, 1.50) are produced by the adrenal cortex. They have two 
main functions. The mineralcorticoids (e.g. aldosterone) regulate mineral 
balance, and the glucocorticoids promote the conversion of protein to 
carbohydrate (gluconeogenesis) and its storage as glycogen. Cortical 
steroids have an immunosuppressive activity and reduce inflammation. 
They are used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, asthma and in 
creams for reducing inflammation. The vitamin D metabolite la,25- 
dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1.51) controls gastrointestinal calcium and 
phosphate absorption and promotes the mineralization of bones. 
Many sterols occur as glycosides typified by the steroidal saponins. 
These are responsible for the foaming produced by many plants. 
Diosgenin (1.52), a steroidal sapogenin from the Mexican yam, and 
hecogenin, from sisal, are used as starting materials for the partial 
synthesis of the steroidal hormones. The steroidal alkaloids, such as 
solasodine, occur in plants of the Solanaceae, including the tomato and 
potato. A number of plant steroids possess a useful pharmacological 
activity. These include the digitalis glycosides (cardenolides) from the 
foxglove, Digitalis lanata. These are used in the treatment of heart failure. 

14 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Other steroids, such as the ecdysteroids, are insect hormones whilst the 
brassiaosteroids are plant hormones. 
Some carotenoids are produced 
The carotenoids are red or yellow pigments that are found in many 
commercially as colouring 
matters for foods. 
plants. Thus P-carotene (1.53) provides the red colouring matter of 
carrots and lycopene is the deep-red pigment of tomatoes. The 
carotenoids are important as precursors of vitamin A, which plays a 
central role in vision. The carotenoids are good anti-oxidants and 
contribute beneficial effects to many foods. 
Q Identify the isoprene units in paniculide B (3), a product of 
tissue culture from Andrographis paniculata. 
3 
4 
5 
A The isoprene units are show in 4 and 5. There are two ways in 
which the six-membered ring might be dissected into isoprene units. A 
biosynthetic experiment has been carried out using [l ,2-13c2]acetate 
to show that folding as in 4 occurs. Return to this example when you 
have read Chapter 5 to see how the labelling pattern from 
[l ,2-13c2]acetate would provide this distinction. 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
I 5  
1.5 
Phenylpropanoids 
The recognition that many naturally occurring aromatic compounds 
possessed a three-carbon chain attached to the ring (see 1.54) led to them 
being grouped together as the phenylpropanoids. Their biosynthetic 
origin via shikimic acid (1.55) is discussed in Chapter 5. Aromatic 
compounds that are biosynthesized by this route can be distinguished by 
their oxygenation pattern from those that are of polyketide origin. 
Hydroxylation occurs at the position para to the Cj chain and then in the 
mcta position, rather than on alternate carbon atoms (see, for example, 
1.57). The structures of a number of simple phenylpropanoids, which are 
widespread plant products, were established in the late 19th century. 
Cinnamic acid (1.56, R = H), Chydroxycinnamic acid (coumaric acid, 
1.56, R = OH), 3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid (caffeic acid) and their 
methyl ethers (e.g. ferulic acid) are found in the free state and as their 
esters. Neutral compounds such as eugenol (1.57) (an aromatic 
constituent of clove oil) are comporrents of essential oils. The important 
aromatic amino acids phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan are formed 
by this route. The cyclization of the 2-isomers of the alkenes leads to 
coumarins such as umbelliferone (1.58). Some of these compounds are 
associated with the photosensitizing properties of plants of the 
Umbelliferae. Oxidative coupling of two phenylpropanoid units, such as 
coniferyl alcohol (1.59), leads to the lignan carbon skeleton, exemplified 
by pinoresinol (1.60). Podophyllotoxin (1.61), from the Hindu drug 
Podophylium emodi, is an interesting cytotoxic agent. 
Eugenol can be isolated from 
cloves by steam distillation. 
The Umbellferae are a large 
family in which the flowers are 
grouped in a characteristic 
"umbrella" shape. This family 
includes hogweed, carrots and 
parsnips 
Cytolox~c - toxlc lo cells 

18 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
1.6 
Alkaloids 
Neuroactive = acts on the 
nervous system. Neuro- 
transmitters are local hormones 
that are produced at nerve 
endings and transfer nerve 
impulses across the synaptic 
cleft. 
piperidine 
isaquinoline 
Some of the first natural products to be isolated from medicinal plants 
were alkaloids. When they were first obtained from plant material in the 
early years of the 19th century, it was found that they were nitrogen- 
containing bases which formed salts with acids. Hence they were known 
as the vegetable alkalis or alkaloids. This ability to form salts and to 
complex with metal ions helped their separation and detection in the era 
before chromatography. 
Many alkaloids have neuroactive properties and interact with the 
receptors at nerve endings. This is not surprising, since many alkaloids 
have fragments buried within their overall structure which resemble the 
natural substances (the neurotransmitters) that bind to these receptors. 
Alkaloids may be grouped according to their plant sources, e.g. 
Aconitum, Amaryllidaceae, Cinchona, Curare, Ergot, Opium, Senecio 
and Vinca. Another classification is based on the structure of the ring 
system containing the nitrogen atom (e.g. piperidine, isoquinoline, 
indole). This can reflect their biosynthetic origin from amino acids such 
as ornithine, lysine, phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan 
A group of alkaloids possess piperidine or pyrrolidine rings. Thus the 
hemlock plant, Conium macufatum, produces the alkaloid coniine (1.68), 
which causes paralysis of nerve endings. The hemlock alkaloids are 
derived from polyketides and ammonia. The alkaloid piperine (1.69) and 
its cis,cis isomer chavicine are found in the fruit of the pepper Piper 
nigrum, and are responsible for the sharp taste of pepper. The fruit of the 
betel palm, Areca catechu, produces a mild stimulant, arecoline (1.70). 
The coca plant, Erythroxylon coca, is notorious for the production of 
cocaine (1.71), which has a paralysing effect on sensory nerve endings and 
produces a sense of euphoria. The roots, leaves and berries of a number of 
cocaine b\ocks the re-uptake of 
Poisonous plants of the Solanaceae, including deadly nightshade (Atropa 
the neurotransmitter dopamine in 
the brain and consequently 
belladona), henbane (Hyoscyamus niger) and thorn apple (Datura 
increases 11s effect. The free 
stramonium), have been a rich source of therapeutically important 
alkaloid (crack cocaine) is 
absorbed more easily 
tropane alkaloids. These plants provided some of the hallucinogenic 
"sorcerer's drugs" of the Middle Ages. Atropine (1.72) and the related 
eponide, scopola~ne, are two ex&nples with a powerful biological 
activity. Atropine dilates the pupils of the eye and its derivatives are used 
in opthalmology. 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
1 B 
The tobacco plant, Nicotiana tabacum, produces the toxic alkaloid 
nicotine (1.73), which is the major neuroactive component of tobacco 
smoke. It is also used as an insecticide. 
OMe 
1.73 
1.74 
1.75 
There are many alkaloids that are derived from simple phenylalkyl- 
amine C6-C3 units. The Chinese medicinal herb, Ephedra sinica, has been 
used for many years for the alleviation of bronchial problems, Extraction 
of the plant gave ephedrine (1.74) and its epimer, pseudoephedrine. 
Alkaloids such as mescaline (1.75) have been found in hallucinoge~c 
plants such as the Mexican peyote cactus, Lophophora williamsii (Mescal 
buttons). 
The beozylisoquinoline alkaloids, which are formed via phenylalanine 
or tyrosine, are widespread. Like the anthocyanins, their occurrence has 
been used as a marker in the chemical taxonomy of plants. They have 
been found in various plants from the Annonaceae, Lauraceae, 
Rhamnaceae, Ranunculaceae and Papaveraceae families. The best- 
known source of these alkaloids is the opium poppy, Papaver somniferurn, 
in which they co-occur with the more complex morphine series. Typical 
examples include papaverine (1.76), which has been used as a muscle 
relaxant. Berberine (1.77) is a yellow pigment from Berberis and Mahonia 
species which was used as a mild antibiotic in the treatment of sores. 
Ephedrine was at one time used 
as an anti-asthma drug, but it has 
been replaced by more effectrve 
synthetic analogues such as 
salbutamol Ephed~lne and 
pseudoephedrine are still used In 
some cold remedies. 
Many of the tropical Anponaceae 
produce edible fruits. The 
Rhamnaceae include the 
buckthorns and the 
Ranunculaceae include the 
buttercup. 

20 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
The pain-relieving and narcotic properties of opium were known in 
ancient times. In 1806, Sequin and, independently, Serturner obtained the 
crystalline alkaloid morphine (1.78) from opium. However, despite a 
great deal of work, it was not until 1925 when Gulland and Robinson 
were able to propose a structure for morphine. These alkaloids have been 
the basis of a very large amount of chemistry in an effort to separate the 
valuable pain-killing properties from their addictive narcotic properties. 
Bulbs of the Anzarjdlidaceae (daffodil family) contain alkaloids such as 
lycorine, which is widespread and quite toxic. Recently, galanthamine 
(1.79) has attracted interest because of its potential use in the treatment of 
Alzheimer's disease. 
Malaria, which we now consider to be a disease of the tropics, used to 
be common in Europe. Jesuit missionaries returning to Europe in 1630 
brought back cinchona bark, which cured the disease. In 1820, two 
French chemists, Caventou and Pelletier, were able to isolate the active 
principle quinine (1.80) from Cinchona ledgerianu bark. It contains the 
quinoline ring system and its correct structure was established by Rabe in 
1907. It is used as an antimalarial drug and as a bitter substance in tonic 
waters. 
Another big family of alkaloids is the indole alkaloids. They are derived 
from the amino acid tryptophan and they occur in tropical plants from the 
Apocyanaceae (Asyidosperma, Rau~tolfia and Viptca) and Loganiaceae 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
21 
(Strycl~nos) families. These alkaloids include poisons such as strychnine 
Although most of the 
(1.81), the structure of which was established by Robinson in 1946. Other 
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
compounds in this series have useful medicinal properties. Reserpine 
vinca minor, is one of the few 
from Ranvo@a bark is used in the treatment of mental disease. The 
~
~
~
,
"
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
W
h
dimeric Vinca alkaloids are used in the treatment of leukaemia and other 
cancers. The ergot alkaloids, from the ergot fungus Claviceps purpurea. 
~
~
~
~
n
~
,
"
,
"
i
~
are also indole alkaloids and are amides of lysergic acid (1.82). 
various "murder mysteries" 
The purine carbon skeleton is found in the alkaloids caffeine (1.83) and 
theophylline, which are stimulants that occur in coffee and tea. Kinetin 
: ~ ~ g ~ ~ f ~ ! , " ~ ~ ~ $ ~ ~ , " ~
(1.84) is a cytokinin plant growth substance that stimulates cell division in 
growing on rye caused ergotism, 
plants. 
known In the Middle Ages as St. 
Anthony's Fire, a severe and often 
fatal disease. 
In some alkaloids, such as the steroidal alkaloids and the toxic 
The 
species 
rootsof 
such various 
as A. napellus 
Aconitum 
diterpenoid alkaloids from AconifUiM species, the nitrogen atom is 
 monkshood^ have had 
inserted after the carbon skeleton has been formed. In a biosynthetic 
uses as folk medicines and as 
sense these might be considered as terpenoids. 
poisons. Some species are used 
as ornamental plants. 
The metabolite clavicipitic acid (8) is produced by the ergot 
fungus, Claviceps purpurea. Identify the building blocks. 
A The alkaloid is derived from the amino acid tryptophan (9) and 

22 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
I 
.7 
Antibiotics Derived from Amino Acids 
The alkaloids are not the only group of secondary metabolites that are 
derived from amino acids. Amino acids not only fonn the building blocks 
for the large peptides and proteins but also for smaller peptides that are 
converted iato the J3-lactam antibio&.s such as the penicillins (1.85) and 
cephalosporins (1.86) (see Chapter 4). The diketcipiperazine antifungal 
fiichoder~a and Gliocladium 
agents produced by Tricho&rma and Gliocladium species, such as 
'pecies are 
fungi- 
gliotoxin (1.853, are also derived from amino acids. 
1.8 
Vitamins 
There are a number of natural products that are essential for life but 
which cannot be produced by the body. The recognition by Hopbins, 
Grijns and others at the start of the 20th century that diseases such as 
scurvy, rickets and beri-beri, which arose from deficiencies in the diet, 
might be associated with a requirement for particular compounds present 
in foods, led to the search for these essential factors. These natural 
products became kmwa as vitamins. As each vitamin was isolated, it was 
identified by a letter of tbe alphabet. As their structures became known, 
these compounds acquired a trivial name. 
A Go-enzyme 1s a non-protein part 
A number of vitamins play a role as 'co-enzymes in the function of 
of an enzyme that participates in 
the catalytrc function of the 
particular enzymes such as those involved in biological oxidation, 
enzyme. 
reduction and carboxylation. This biological function of the vitamins 
places them in the class of primary metabolites. However, the elucidation 
of their structures and aspects of their chemistry and biosynthesis link 
them with1 secondary metabolites. 
In the period following 1920, bioassay-guided fractionation using test 
animals led to the isolation of various vitamins. They are present irl their 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their lsolatfon 
23 
natural sources in low concentrations, and consequently very small 
amounts of material were available for structural studies. Nevertheless, 
the structures of many of the vit-ins 
were established in the 1930s and 
confirmed by synthesis. Material then becarne available for biological 
studies and di'etary supplements. 
The presence of the fat-soluble vitamin A in egg and in fish oils was 
established in 1913-191 5, and its structure was elucidated by Karrer in 
1931. The recognition that the disease beri-beri, which was prevalent in 
South East Asia, was a. deficiency disease and that it could be cured by an 
extract obtained from rice polishiis, led Funk in 191 1 to coin the name 
vitamin for these essential dietary factors. Vitamin BL (thiamine) was 
isolated in 1926 and in quantity by Williams in 1934. Its structure (1.88) 
was established in 1936 and confirmed by synthesis. Other members of 
this group of vitamins include riboflavin (vitamin Bay 1,89), pyridaxamioe 
(vitamin Be, 1.90), biotin (1.91), folic acid (1.92) and vitamin B12 (1.93). 
Vitamin B12 was isolated in 1948 and its structure established by a 
combination of chemical work (Todd) and X-ray crystallography 
(Hodgkin) in 1954. It is one of the most potent of the vitamins, beiflg 
active in the treatment of pernicious anaemia at the level of micrograms. 
Vitamin C (ascorbi~ acid, 1.94) (see Chapter 4) is important in the 
prevention of scurvy. Its structure was established in 1932. Vitaxriin D, a 
steroid, has already been mentioned. Vitamin E, tocopherol (1.95), is an 
antioxidant and vitamin I(, a quimne (1961, is an antihaemorrhagic 
factor. 

24 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolttes 
1.9 
Chemical Ecology 
Ecology IS the study of the 
Many natural products were originally investigated because of their 
interaction between an Organism 
medicinal, perfumery or culinary value to man. However, during the 
and its environment. 
latter part of the 20th century, increasing attention has been paid to 

The Classes of Natural Product and Thelr Isolation 
a 
- - 
the biological function of natural products, and to their ecological role in 
regulating interactions between organisms. Developments in instrumental 
methods have meant that very small amounts of material can be detected 
and identified and their effects, particularly on insects, can be observed. 
Some plants exert their dominance of an area by the production of 
compounds which inhibit the germination of seeds and prevent the 
growth of seedlings. This harmful effect of one plant on another, caused 
by the production of a secondary metabolite, is known as allelopathy. One 
of the best-known examples is the production of the quinone juglone 
(1.97) by the walnut tree, Juglms nigra. This compound inhibits seed 
germination and is toxic to other plants. Some monoterpenes, such as 
1,8-cineole (1.98) and camphor (1.23), which are produced by the 
sagebrush (Salvia leucophylla), act as seed germination inhibitors. 
The presence of these monoterpenes allows this plant to dominate the 
vegetation in some of the drier parts of California until it is destroyed by 
bush fires. The monoterpenes produced by Eucalyptus species have a 
similar effect. The alkaloid hordenine (1.99), which is produced by the 
roots of barley, Hordeum vulgare, has an allelopathic effect. 
Fungi attack plants by producing phytotoxins together with enzyme 
A phytoalexin is a natural product 
systems that digest plant tissues. In response to this attack the plant 
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
$
a plant in 
produces phytoalexins, which act as natural antifungal agents. Some 
examples are rishitin (1.100), which is produced by the potato, Solanum 
tuberosum, and phaseolin (1.101), which is produced by the bean, 
Phaseolus vulgaris. Many of the phenols produced by plants give 
protection against microbial attack. 

26 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Fungi competitively colonize the soil. Trichoderma species are 
particularly invasive. Because they are not serious plant pathogens, 
they have been used as bio-control agents to inhibit the development of 
other organisms that are plant pathogens. They achieve this dominance 
by producing volatile antifungal agents, such as pentylpyrone (1.102), 
which permeate the soil around the developing organism. They then 
produce a second "close contact" antifungal agent (e.g. gliotoxin, 1.871, 
which enables the Trichoderma species to compete effectively with other 
organisms. 
~ h o  
synthet~c cnsecticides, such 
Many plant-insect relationships are determined by the presence of 
as permethrin- are based On 
secondary metabolites. These compounds may be either deterrents 
the pyrethrin structure 
or attractants. Plants have developed antifeedants and insecticides as 
defensive agents against insect attack. Some of these compounds, such as 
nicotine (1.731, the pyrethrins (e.g. 1.103) from Clzrysanthemum 
cinear~fbliwn and rotenone from Derris root, have formed the basis of 
commercial insecticides. 
There are some interesting relationships involving the toxic cardeno- 
lides (see p. 13) of the Asclepediaceae (e.g. caliotropin) produced by the 
milkweed, Asclepias curarsavica. These steroidal glycosides are toxic to 
many mammals and insects and can affect the heart. However, Monarch 
butterflies sequester and accumulate these compounds. The glycosides are 
toxic to birds that are predators of the butterflies ,and so they act as 
protective agents. These butterflies also take up the Senecio pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids (e.g. retronecine, 1.104) as protective agents. The toxic alkaloids 
produced by plants can act as feeding deterrents for animals. The Senecio 
alkaloids ate poisonous to horses and cattle and ragwort (Senecio 
jucobaea) has achieved notoriety in this connection. 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
27 
There are examples of insects "borrowing" secondary metabolites 
from plants and then modifying them to make insect trail substances for 
feeding and mating purposes. For example, the bark beetle, Dendroctanus 
breviconzzs, is attracted to a pine tree, Pintis ponderosa, by its volatile 
terpenes. The female produces em-brevicomin (1.105) and the related 
frontalin as attractants, but when the population has reached a particular 
level the beetles begin to modify the a-pinene produced by the plant to 
verbend (1.106), which acts as a deterrent. 
Insects niay be attracted to particular plants by specific secondary 
metabolites in order to lay their eggs. For example, ally1 isathiocyanate 
(1.107), produced from sinigrin in the cabbage, acts as an attractant for 
the cabbage white butterfly, Pieris brassicae. The volatile monoterpenes 
produced by flowers act as attractants for bees, butterflies and moths for 
pollination. The components of the floral fragrance often have a 
synergistic action as attractants. Insects that are involved in the 
pollination of a particular species respond to a specific combination of 
monoterpenes and to the colour of the flower. 
Many aspects of insect behaviour are regulated by chemical stimuli. 
The term semiochemical is used to describe these signalling substances. 
Pheromones are semiochemicals involved in intra-species communication. 
The sex pheromones of moths have received a great deal of attention. 
Many of the compounds, although species specific, are simple esters 
derived from fatty acids or long-chain alcohols, or are derived from 
monoterpenes such as eldanolide (1.108). The aggregation pheromones 
of bark beetles such as ipsdienol(1.109j have been studied because of the 
economic damage caused by these insects. Trail pheromones play an 
important role in comnunication betwen social insects such as ants. 
The leaf-cutting ant (Atta texana) uses a simple pyrrole for this purpose. 
Insects can also produce substances that signal alarm: p-farnesene (1.110) 
is an aphid alarm pheromone. 
A number of natural products are involved in the hormonal regulation 
of insect development. Many insects undergo metamorphosis through 
various juvenile forms before attaining the adult stage. The insect juvenile 
hormones (e.g. 1.111) that maintain this status are related to the 
sesaui,terpenes. but the hormone ecdysone (1.1121, which regulates 

28 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
the development of the adult insect from a cocoon, is a steroid. Curiously, 
plants also produce these ecdysteroids as protection against excessive 
insect populations. 
In this survey of the biological role of natural products it should be 
apparent that any one biological activity is not necessarily confined to one 
specific group of natural products. 
I 
.I0 The Isolation of a Natural Product 
Chemotype = a sub-species 
producing a particular natural 
product which is not necessal 
found in all examples of the 
species 
Secondary metabolites, with some exceptions, occur in amounts that are 
less than 0.01% of the dry weight of the plant. Extraction of I kg of dry 
plant material is likely to yield 'less than 100 mg of a natural product. 
These compounds may be unstable and present as part of a complex 
mixture. The isolation, separation and purification of these natural 
products require considerable skill. 
The source of a secondary metabolite requires proper identification 
and a voucher specimen needs to be retained. Within the same species 
. 
there are sometimes chemotypes, each with a particular composition. 
Some compounds are found in the roots, some are components of the 
bark, and others may be found in the leaves, the flowers or the fruit. Some 
compounds play a seasonal role in the plant, for example as insect 
antifeedants. Thus the part of the plant and the place and date on which 
the plant was collected should all be recorded. 
Micro-organisms are usually deposited in national culture collections. 
The production of microbial metabolites often depends upon the medium 
on which the micro-organism is grown and on other fermentation details. 
Some fungal metabolites are-retained in the fungal mycelium, whilst 
others are excreted into the broth. Insects, marine organisms and fungi 
that were collected in the wild may have stored and modified compounds 
which they had obtained from their food. 
Natural products may be obtained from the crushed biological 
material by extraction with a solvent such as petroleum ether, chloroform 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
29 
(trichloromethane), ethyl acetate (ethyl ethanoate) or methanol. Several 
solvents of increasing polarity may be used. Thus lipid material (waxes, 
fatty acids, sterols, carotenoids and simple terpenoids) can be extracted 
with non-polar solvents such as petroleum ether, but more polar 
substances such as the alkaloids and glycosides are extracted with 
methanol, aqueous methanol or even hot water. Many alkaloids are 
present as their salts with naturally occurring acids such as tartaric acid. 
Commercial extractions may use tonne quantities of plant material, 
and a range of different extraction procedures including steam distillation 
have been used. Recently, commercial procedures have been developed 
using super-critical carbon dioxide as a mild solvent, but because of the 
pressures involved this requires quite complicated apparatus. 
The initial extraction is then followed by a separation into acidic, basic 
and neutral fractions. A typical fractionation is set out in Scheme I. I. 
A solution of the extract in an organic solvent (such as ethyl acetate) is 
shaken with an inorganic base (such as aqueous sodium hydrogen 
carbonate) to remove the carboxylic acids as their water-soluble sodium 
salts. The more weakly acidic phenols may only be extracted with a sodium 
hydroxide solution. Extraction of the original solution with an acid such as 
dilute hydrochloric acid will remove the bases such as the alkaloids as their 
salts. The neutral compounds remain behind in the organic phase. The 
acids and the phenols may be recovered from the a eous solution of their 
sodium salts by treatment with dilute hydrochlori r 
acid and re-extraction 
with an organic solvent, and the bases may be recovered by treatment of 
their salts with ammonia and re-extraction. 
- --a 
- 
. . - 
- -- - - - - . - -- - 
- -. - -- -- -. - - 
--- 
Dissolve extracts in ethyl acetate 
treat with aq. NaHCOz 
treat with aq. HCI 
1 
Acids as water-soluble Na' salts 
1 
Bases as water-soluble HC1 salts 
treat with ilq. NaOH I 
treat with aq. HCI I 
Recover acids in ethyl acetate 
Phenols as water-soluble Na' salts 
t 
1 
Neutral compounds 
treat with aq. HCI 
Recover phenols in ethyl acetate 
1 
treat with aq. NH3 
Recover bases in ethyl acetate 
Scheme 1.1 Separation of an 
extract into acidic, phenolic, 
basic and neutral fractions 
Although some abundant natural products may be obtained merely by 
extraction, a simple fractionation or partition and crystallization, the 

30 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
majority are obtained after further careful chromatography. A typical 
example might involve chromatography on silica or alumina and elution 
with increasing concentrations of ethyl acetate in petroleum ether. The 
chromatographic separation may be monitored by a bioassay or by thin 
layer chromatography (TLC). A number of useful spray reagents have 
been developed which produce coloured TLC spots indicative of 
particular classes of compound. 
An artefact, in this context, is a 
In the course of a separation, reactions such as ester hydrolysis, auto- 
arising from a 
xidation and rearrangement may occur, leading to the formation of 
product by human intervention. 
artefacts. Hence efforts are made to ensure that a separation is chemically 
mild. 
Natural products often co-occur in closely related series, for example 
as the mono-, di- and trihydroxy derivatives of the same parent 
compound. Since this relationship may facilitate structure determination, 
it is helpful to characterize and examine not only the major product from 
an isolation but also the minor components. 
I .I 
1 The Stages in Structure Elucidation 
In examining the strategies for natural product structure determina- 
tion, it is possible to discern four overlapping stages. First there is 
the preliminary characterization in which the physical constants are 
determined, the molecular formula is established and the functional 
groups are identified. At this stage it is often possible to recognize the 
class of natural product to which the compound belongs. It may be 
apparent that the compound is known from another source or is just a 
simple derivative of another compound of known structure. A simple 
chemical interrelationship may then be enough to establish the structure 
of the unknown compound. 
The second stage is one of structural simplification in order to identify 
the underlying carbon skeleton. Chemically, this work involves the 
selective removal of the various functional groups and the dissection of 
the carbon skeleton into identifiable fragments. Spectroscopically, it 
involves identifying adjacent groups of atoms by, for example, their 
NMR characteristics. Evidence may accumulate concerning the position 
of the functional groups on the carbon skeleton. The determination of the 
position and relative stereochemistry of the functional groups forms 
the third phase. There is an interesting contrast in the use of spectroscopic 
and chemical methods between the first and third stages of this strategy. 
In the first stage, the methods are used to obtain information about the 
separate functional groups, but in the third phase the methods are used to 
reveal interactions between groups. The fourth stage involves establishing 
the absolute stereochemistry of the molecule. Although this is sometimes 
assumed, it is important to confirm it in order to understand the biological 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
31 
activity of a natural product. A few natural products are found in both 
enantiomeric forms. 
When a natural product or a simple derivative crystallizes particularly 
well, X-ray crystallography can provide an unambiguous way of 
establishing the structure. Using a modern diffractometer, structures can 
be obtained in a matter of hours rather than days. However, unless a heavy 
atom such as bromine is present or a derivative is made with an optically 
active compound of known absolute stereochemistry, the structure 
determined this way will contain only relative stereochemical information. 
When a structure has been proposed, it is helpful to rationalize this in 
biogenetic terms. An unambiguous partial synthesis from a compound of 
known structure, or a total synthesis, will finally provide the ultimate 
proof of structure. 
1. 
Primary metabolites are natural products that are found in all 
cells, but secondary metabolites are natural products that are 
restricted in their occurrence. 
2. 
Secondary metabolites have been studied because of their 
biological activity, or for chemosystematic or ecological reasons. 
3. 
Secondary metabolites may be classified as polyketides, terpe- 
noids and steroids, phenylpropanoid (C6Z3) compounds, alkaloids 
and carbohydrates, based on their biosynthetic building blocks. 
4. 
Acetyl co-enzyme A, isopentenyl pyrophosphate and shikimic 
acid are the building blocks for the polyketides, terpenoids and 
phenylpropanoid compounds, respectively. 
5. Alkaloids may be classified in terms of the nitrogen-containing 
ring system which may reflect the amino acids (lysine, ornithine, 
tyrosine and tryptophan) which are involved in their biosynthesis. 
6. Natural products are obtained from plant sources in quantities 
of 10-100 mg/kg dry weight by solvent extraction, partition into 
acidic, basic and neutral fractions, and chromatography. 
7. The elucidation of the structure of a secondary metabolite 
involves characterization, determination of the carbon skeleton, 
establishing the position of the functional groups, and determining 
the relative and absolute stereochernistry. 

32 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
1.1. 
To which class of natural product does each of the following 
belong? 
1.2. 
Indicate, using bold lines, the constituent isoprene units in the 
following terpenoids: 

The Classes of Natural Product and Their Isolation 
33 
1.3. Indicate, using bold Iines, the constituent acetate units in the 
fallowing: 
(c) 
OH 0 
1.4. 
Show, by means of a flow chart, how you would isolate the 
alkaloids from a sample of plant material. 
1.5. The fungal metabolite muscarine (A) binds to certain 
receptors for the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (B). Indicate, on 
their structures below, the structural similarity between rnusmrine 
and acetylcholine. 


2 
The Characterization and 
Determination of the Carbon 
Skeleton of a Natural Product 
The aim of this chapter is to describe the information that is used to 
characterize a natural product and to establish its underlying carbon 
skeleton. By the end of this chapter you should understand: 
The role of physical, analytical, chromatographic and spectro- 
scopic criteria in characterizing a natural product 
The role of structural simplification in the determination of the 
carbon skeleton 
The part played by oxidative and reductive degradation, dehy- 
drogenation, elimination reactions and alkaline degradation 
The role of spectroscopic methods, particularly NMR spectro- 
scopy, in determining the carbon skeleton 
2.1 
The Characterization of a Natural Product 
The first stage in the structure determination is to establish the purity and 
to characterize the compound in terms of its elemental composition, 
empirical and molecular formulae. Some of the early literature on natural 
products is confused because the materials being studied were mixtures. 
The criteria of purity and the basic analytical data that are used fall into 
four groups: 
. Physical criteria: melting point or boiling point. optical rotation, 
refractive index. 

36 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Analytical criteria: elemental composition determined by combustion 
analysis or high-resolution mass spectrometry, relative molecular 
mass. 
. Chror~~atographic 
criteria: single spot on thin layer chromatography, 
or single peak on gas chromatography or high-pressure liquid 
chromatography determined in several systems. 
. Spectroscopic criteria: consistent relative integrals in the 'H NMR 
spectrum and consistent absorption in the infrared and ultraviolet 
spectrum. 
Many secondary metabolites occur as mixtures of closely related 
compounds. For example, a-pinene (2.1) from oil of turpentine often 
contains some of its double bond isomer, $-pinene (2.2). The criteria that 
are used to assess purity must be adequate to detect the presence of close 
2.1 a-~inene 2.2 P-Pincne 
The micro-analytical determination of the percentage elemental 
composition gives the empirical formula, which, when taken together 
with the relative molecular mass, leads to the molecular formula. Present- 
day methods of combustion analysis use 2-3 mg of material, with the 
amount of the gases such as carbon dioxide and water that are formed 
being determined by gas chromatography. The molecular formula of a 
compound can be used to establish the number of double bonds or rings. 
The number of double bond equivalents may be calculated from the 
molecular formula as follows. Every time a double bond or a ring is 
introduced into an initially saturated acyclic hydrocarbon which contains 
CnH2,,+ 2 atoms, two hydrogen atoms are removed. Thus, a monoalkene 
contains CnH2, atoms, a diene contains CnH2n-2 atoms, and so forth. 
A saturated monocyclic hydrocarbon may be represented by the gen- 
eral formula C,,Hb. Hexane is C6H 
hexatriene is C6Hs, cyclohexane is 
C6HI2 and cyclohexatriene (benzene) is C6H6. In order to calculate the 
number of double bond equivalents, the actual number of hydrogens is 
subtracted from the theoretical maximum for the corresponding open- 
chain hydrocarbon with the same number ofcarbon atoms. This difference 
is then divided by two. If the molecule contains oxygen, it is disregarded for 
the purpose of the calculation. In this context, a carbonyl group counts as a 
double bond equivalent. If the molecule contains a halogen, it is replaced 
by hydrogen, and if it contains nitrogen, it is replaced by CH. Thus 
pyridine (C5H5N) is equivalent to benzene (C6H6) for the purpose of 
calculating the number of double bond equivalents. 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
37 
Q Carotol, C15H260, is an alcohol which has been obtained from 
carrot seed oil. On catalytic hydrogenation it gives a saturated 
alcohol, C15H280. HOW many rings are present in carotol? 
A A CI5 saturated acyclic compound is C15H32 (CnH2n + 2). There is 
a discrepancy of six hydrogens with carotol and hence there are three 
double bond equivalents. One of these is an alkene and since carotol 
is an alcohol (rather than a ketone) there are two rings. 
2.2 
Spectroscopic Characterization 
The first objective of the spectroscopic characterization of a secondary 
metabolite is to identify the functional groups that are present and 
possibly some significant molecular fragments. This stage will determine 
the course of the subsequent detailed investigation. The initial inspection 
of the spectroscopic data may be followed later by a more intensive study, 
often using specialized techniques as the structure is probed more deeply. 
Although the information from each of the spectroscopic methods may 
be discussed separately, the structural conclusions drawn from the 
various methods must be mutually consistent. Thus the identification of a 
conjugated system from the UV spectrum must be sustained by the 
identification of the corresponding sp2 carbon resonances in the I3c 
NMR spectrum. The identification of a carbonyl group in the IR 
spectrum also has implications in the I3c NMR spectrum. 
It is worth remembering that the majority of spectroscopic correlations 
were obtained empirically by examining the spectra of compounds, 
including many natural products of known structure. For a detailed 
discussion of spectroscopic methods in organic chemistry, the reader is 
referred to one of the standard textbooks on the topic. The following is 
intended only to describe the salient features that affect natural product 
structure determination. 
2.2. I Mass Spectrometry 
The low-resolution mass spectrum may reveal the molecular ion and hence 
A molecular Ion IS an ion 
the relative molecular mass of the compound. For some natural products, 
~
~
~
~
~
$
$
~
h
ionization by electron impact (EI) is too vigorous a process and 
i~ndergonefragmentation. 
considerable fragmentation occurs. Consequently, the molecular ion is 
Chemical ionization Is when the 
of relatively low abundance and may not be detectable. Soft ionization 
substance is ion~zed by 
techniques; such as chemical ionization (CI), may be more rewarding, ~:~~~~'~h,~~~,",~~~~ 
although the ion of highest mass that is obtained may be a composite of 
ammonia or methane. 

38 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
tlelcl uesorptloli 1s wher~ Ions are 
prociclced from tho substarice 
coated on a w ~ r c  
by locd very 
hlyh electrical potcntlals 
Fast atom bomhard~nent 1s when 
the s~~bstance 
usually cllspersea 
~n glycerol. IS 1on17ed by Impact 
wtth hlgh-energy xenon atonis 
- - 
-- 
- 
- 
- 
the molecular ion and the ionizing gas (c.g. A4 + NH4 +). Other techniques 
such as field desorptinn and fast atom bombardment (FAB), which are 
particularly applicable to relatively non-volatile polyoxygenated com- 
pounds, have extended the mass range available to mass spectrometric 
analysis into that of polypeptides and glycosides. 
The elemental composition may be apparent from the molecular ion 
and confirmed by high-resolution analysis of this ion. On the scale 
C = 12.0000, other elements have a non-integer relative atomic mass 
(e.g. H = 1.0078 and 0 = 15.9949). Consequently, the mass of an ion 
measured to four or more decimal places corresponds to a unique 
elemental composition. The isotope distribution of the halogens 
chlorine and bromine is also particularly helpful in the detection of 
these elements. Chlorine possesses two isotopes, 3
5
~
~
 
and 3 7 ~ ~ ,  
in an 
approximate ratio of 3: 1, and those of bromine, 7 9 ~ r  
and "Br, occur in 
a ratio of approximately 1:l. This leads to multiple ions of an intensity 
ratio reflecting the presence of these isotopes. 
The extent to which fragmentation information can be used in the 
preliminary stages of the characterization of a compound depends 
to a considerable extent on the nature of the problem. If the compound 
being examined is one of a closely related series, the fragmentation 
pattern may possess readily identifiable ions. An example of this was in 
the structure elucidation of dehydrogeosmin (2.3), which was obtained 
from the flowers of a cactus, Rebutia marsoneri. The base peak (2.4) in the 
mass spectrum arose by a retro-Diels-Alder fragmentation. Although 
only 6 pg was available for analysis, this mass spectrum was sufficient to 
suggest a target structure for a confirmatory synthesis. Certain classes of 
compound fragment in predictable ways, polypeptides for example 
breaking at the peptide bond. Even if this is not the case, it is usually 
possible to find some helpful fragments based on the loss of a methyl 
group (M - 15), water (M - 18), carbon monoxide (M - 28) and their 
various combinations. The exact mass of the base peak may also be 
particularly informative. 
Mf 180 
nde 126 
2.3 Dehydrogeosmin 
2.4 
The absor~tlon of enerav bv a 
2.2.2 Infrared Spectroscopy 
molec~lle 
I" the IR reg,; 
oilhe 
bllllgs about vlhrall~al The IR spectrum may afford useful information on the presence of 
and rotatlonat changes 
particular functional groups. Although, ideally, spectra are determined in 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
39 
solution in solvents such as carbon tetrachloride (tetrachloromethane) to 
minimize intermolecular interactions, in practice this is often limited by the 
solubility of the natural product and by the fact that no solvent is 
completely transparent throughout the useful regions of the spectrum. The 
use of Nujol (liquid paraffin) as a mull or of a potassium bromide disc is a 
con~promise. However, many spectroscopic correlations were obtained for 
solution spectra. Because a Nujol mull retains intermolecular effects, for 
example hydrogen bonding, which perturb the absorption of functional 
groups in adjacent molecules, the finer details of IR correlations are not 
always applicable. In the case of potassium bromide discs, salt formation 
with alkaloids has sometimes been observed. 
Absorption in the 3200-3650 cm-' region of the spectrum is charac- 
teristic of a hydroxyl group. Sometimes two bands are seen arising from 
the presence of hydrogen bonded and "free" hydroxyl groups. Whereas the 
former is a broad absorption, the latter is often sharp (3550-3650 cm-'). 
The inter- and intramolecular hydrogen bonding of carboxylic acids serves 
to produce characteristic very broad absorption in the region 2500- 
3200 cm-.'. Amino groups absorb in the same region of the spectrum 
(3300-3500 cm-') and amides may produce several bands in the 3050- 
3200 cm- ' region associated with hydrogen bonding effects. Amides and 
carboxylic acids also have significant carbonyl absorption. 
The region of the spectrum around 3000 cm- ' is associated with C-H 
absorption. Acetylenic C-H, relatively rare in natural products, appears 
at 3300 cm-'. Absorption between 3010 and 3090 cm-', associated with 
arenes and alkenes, and between 2700 and 2900 cm-', associated with 
aldehydic C-H, is sometimes detectable, but there are other better 
spectroscopic methods (e.g. NMR) for identifying these groups. The same 
applies to the weak absorption associated with acetylenes (alkynes) and 
nitriles around 2200 cm- '. 
. . 
The region between 1650 and 1850 cm-' is characteristic of the 
carbonyl group. Within this region, absorption due to various types of 
carbonyl group can be distinguished (see Table 2.1). Many of these useful 
correlations were established through the study of secondary metabolites. 
Unsaturation serves to lower the frequency of absorption, but increasing 
ring strain increases it. The deductions drawn for this area of the 
spectrum have obvious implications in the interpretation of the '
3
~
 
NMR 
spectrum, and hence these correlations are also shown in Table 2.1. 
Absorption between I 580 and 1680 cm- ' may be associated with alkenes 
and arenes. Since the intensity of IR absorption is approximately 
proportional to the square of the change of the dipole moment during a 
vibration, these absorptions are usually much weaker than those of a 
carbonyl group. Whereas aromatic rings absorb at 1500 and between 
1580 and 1620 cm-', alkenes absorb between 1620 and 1680 cm-', 

40 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
depending on their degree of substitution. The interpretation of this 
region of the spectrum again has important ilnplicatiolls in the NMR 
spectrum and for conjugated double bonds in the UV spectrum. 
Table 2.1 
IR absorptiona and 
NMR signals of carbonyl compounds 
Ketones 
acyclic unconj. 
acyclic conj. 
cyclic 6-ring unconj. 
cyclic &ring conj. 
cyclic 5-ring unconj. 
cyclic 5-ring conj. 
alkyl aryl 
diary1 
~ldehydes~ 
unconj. 
conj. 
Qu~nones 
Esters 
unconj. 
conj. 
vinyl 
phenyl 
Lactones 
6-ring 
5-ring 
Acids 
unconj. 
conj. 
aryl 
aThe infrared absorption forms the centre of a range ( 2  10 cm-'). Carboxyl groups 
show broad OH absorption in the IF? 
Aldehyde C-H appears at dH 9-10 pprn 
The f~ngerpnnt region of the 
There are a number of useful absorptions that rnay be identified within 
spec'rLrm Is Ihe 
be'ow 
the fingerprint region. including C-0 absorption, particularly of esters. 
1500 crn ' wh~ch contams 
absorptron from skeletal 
Different types of alkene (see Table 2.2) may be distinguished by their 
"lbratrons 
lhat are 
absorption between 650 and 1000 cm-' and there are correlations 
oi rnd~vrdclal compounds. 
associated with the different substitutioll patterns of aromatic rings. 
However, much clearer spectroscopic evidence for this is available from 
the 'H NMR spectrum. 
Table 2.2 
IR absorption and 'H NMR s~gnals for alkenes 
1R (crn- ' ) 
'H NMR (6) 
Ha, 
/HI, 
,fC= c\ 
1000-980 
Ha 5 75-5.95 
H" 
920-900 
Hb 4.85-4.95 
\ 
H, 4.95-5.00 
FCH2 
900-880 
4 60-5.00 
H 
H 
'c & c' 
730-660 
5.30-5.50 
/ 
\ 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
41 
Table 2.2 Continued 
H, , / 
/"='\, 
980-950 
(note: 
J values) 
different 
\ 
1 
850-790 
5.50-5 70 
2.2.3 Ultraviolet Spectroscopy 
The UV spectrum provides a useful means of detecting conjugated 
absorption of energy by a 
unsaturated chromvphores within a ~nolecule such as polyenes, a,& molecule in the UV region of the 
- 
unsaturated ketonesand aromatic compounds. Within particular families 
~
~one 
of compound the position of maximum absorption can reflect the degree 
energy level to another. The eas~ly 
of substitution of the chromophore. These correlations are sunlmarized 
~~~r~~'~~,","~ptlons 
by the Woodward-Fieser rules for dienes and unsaturated kelones, and 
are given in Tables 2.3 and 2.4. Much of this structural information is also 
The chtomophore IS the portion of 
revealed by the 'H and ''c NMR spectra. 
the molecule respons~ble for 
absorb~ng the I~ghl. 
Table 2.3 
Woodward-Fieser rules for calculating UV maxima of dienes 
Transoid dienes 
nm 
Cisoid dienes nm 
Parent: @ 
214 
Parent: 3 
253 
/ 
Increment to be added for each 
Alkyl substituent 
5 
5 
Extra conj. double bond 
30 
30 
Exocyclic component 
5 
5 
- 
- 
Calc. A,,, 
- 
- 
UV absorption is charactc:ristically broad, and the skape of the 
absorptiorl curve, including the presence of shoulders on a band. ]nay be 
diagnostic. This is found in aromatic absorption. It was also particularly 
helpful in detecting the presence of unstable polyacetylenes in culture 
broths of Basidion7~rcele fungi The UV absorption of a common fungal 
metabolite. ergosterol (2.5). is characteristic of its ring B diene. UV 
absorption is associated witn the chroltlophore and not the whole 
molecule. Thus UV absorptiorl would not distinguish between ergosterol 

42 
Natural Produck: The Secondary Metabolites 
Tabk 2.4 Woodward-Fieser rules for calculating UV maxima of u,a-unsaturated 
ketones 
nm 
'H NMR signals (6) 
Parent: -0 
215 
,' 
Increment to be 
added for each 
Hs, 
Extra conj. double bond 
30 
Ha = 5.80 
Alkyl substituent a 
10 
Hb = 6.0-6.2 
P 
12 
Y. 5 
18 
OH or OR 
35 
Exocyclic component 
5 
Extra C=O 
0 - 
Calc. I.,,,,, 
- 
and ergosteryl esters, which often co-occur. In a useful application of UV, 
cleavage of vitamin Bl (thiamine, 2.6) gave two fragments (Scheme 2. I), a 
pyrimidine (2.7) and a thiazole (2.8), which were recognized by their 
spectra and then synthesized. 
Scheme 2.1 
Cleavage of 
vitamin 3, 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
43 
The presence of auxochromes, particularly phenolic and carbony1 
An auxochrame 1s a substltuent on 
the chromophore wh~ch niod~f~es 
groups, modify aromatic chromophores. This can be particularly helpful ,,,, 
of a chrornop,,ore 
in the identification of chromones and flavones. The shifts in the 
absorption of phenols, arising from the addition of a drop of alkali to 
produce the phenolate anion, are quite helpful. Various complexing 
agents also produce useful diagnostic changes in the UV spectrum. The 
UV spectrum may be a summation of chromophores from different parts 
of a polyfunctional molecule, and this should be considered in the light of 
deductions drawn from other spectroscopic methods and chemical 
degradation. An example where this was important was in the structural 
studies on the antibiotic griseofulvin (see Chapter 4). This antibiotic 
contains both a P-methoxy-a,P-unsaturated 
ketone and an acetophenone. 
Destruction of the former left the aromatic chromophore intact, and it 
was then identified. 
2.2.4 MMR Spectroscopy 
The NMR spectra can be the most rewarding of the spectroscopic 
techniques in terms of structure elucidation. At the stage of the pre- 
liminary characterization the problem is often how to handle the wealth 
of data available and to distinguish the significant structural features. In 
tabulating data from the proton NMR spectrum it is worth remembering 
that the chemical shift provides information on the chemical environment 
of the proton. the multiplicity of a signal on the relationship with 
neighbouring protons and the integral gives the relative number of 
protons contributing to a signal. The columns of any table should reflect 
these aspects of the spectrum. The major regions of the proton NMR 
spectrum are given in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5 
Approximate ranges of 'H NMR signals 
S 
5 
Aliphatic C-H 
0.5-2.0 
Alkene C-H 
4.5-6.5 
C-H adjacent to C=X 
1.75-2.5 
Arene C-H 
6.5-8.5 
C-H adjacent to N 
2.1-2.9 
Aldehyde C-H 
9.0-10.0 
C-H adjacent to 0 
3.0-4.5 
Carboxyl 0-H 
10.0-13.0 
From the tabulation of data, it is helpful to determine the number 
and type of methyl group, e.g. C-CH3, X=C-CH3, N-CH3 and 0-CHs; 
the number of protons on carbon atoms bearing oxygen functions, e.g. 
CH,l-O, 0-CH,,-O and CH=O; and the number and type of alkene and 
aromatic protons. This will then leave a number of proton resonances, 

44 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
particularly within the region S 1.0-2.5 (the rnethylene envelope), which 
may not be assigned on the first inspection. At this stage, shaking the 
NMR solution with deuterium oxide may identify the signals for readily 
exchangeable (OH and NH) protons. This may also serve to clarify or 
simplify some of the CH(0H) signals. It is possible to identify adjacent 
systems from common coupling constants. Some characteristic spin 
systems (e.g. the quartet and triplet of an ethyl group) may be apparent. 
Examination of the multiplicity of arene and alkene proton resonances 
may be used to determine their substitution patterns. Simple decoupling 
experiments to confirm these relationships may be carried out at this stage 
of the structure elucidation. It is important to do a "proton*' count to 
check that this agrees with the molecular formula. This may reveal acidic 
protons whose low-field resonances have not been found in the initial 
spectrum. 
The systematic analysis of the carbon-13 NMR spectrum provides 
useful structural information. Two sets of spectra are usually obtained. 
The first is the proton noise dccoupled spectrum in which all the C-H 
couplings are removed. This spectrum contains the chemical shift 
information. The second set of spectra give the number of hydrogens 
attached to each carbon. Using the DEFT (distortionless enhanced 
polarization transfer) pulse sequence, the carbon signals arising from a 
methylene appear with one sign, usually negative, while methyls and 
methines appear with the opposite sign. Quaternary carbon atoms do not 
appear, although other sequences can be used to enhance them. On older 
instruments the off-resonance proton-decoupled spectrum fulfilled the 
same purpose. In this spectrum, a residue of the carbon-proton coupling 
was retained, and methyl signals appeared as quartets (q), methylenes as 
triplets (t), methines as doublets (d) and quaternary carbons as singlets (s). 
The results of attached hydrogen experiments are sometimes quoted as q, 
t, d and s, even though they may have been established using the DEPT 
sequence. The data are then tabulated and a number of assignments may 
be made. Some characteristic chemical shift ranges are given in Table 2.6. 
In particular, aliphatic carbon atoms bearing oxygen functions and the 
carbon atoms of alkenes, arenes and carbonyl groups may be readily 
assigned. Within these groups, some more detailed information may 
be obtained by the use of empirical additivity rules. These relate the 
substituents attached to a carbon and its neighbours to the chemical shift. 
Although these work relatively well for simple molecules bearing one 
functional group, polyfunctional molecules bearing several groups which 
may interact, e.g. ortho substituents on an aromatic ring, give poorer 
agreement. Some useful correlations exist between the nature of a 
carbonyl carbon and its chemical shift. These are given in Table 2.1, along 
with the TR data. 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
45 
Table 2.6 
Approximate ranges of I3c NMR signals 
15 
i, 
sp3 C-C 
10-50 
-C&- 
75-100 
sp3 C-N 
25-75 
>C=C < 
105-1 60 
sp3 C-0 
50-90 
Arene C 
110-155 
sp3 C-ha1 
35-65 
C=O 
see Table 2.1 
In examining the carbon- 13 data, it is in~portant to do a carbon count. 
Some signals, particularly carbonyl signals with long relaxation times, do 
not always appear, and recording parameters may have to be changed to 
detect them. This may also reveal aspects of local symmetry within a 
molecule, such as a para-disubstituted aromatic ring in which some carbon 
atoms have an identical environment and hence identical chemical shifts 
and appear as one signal, It is also possible, using the attached hydrogen 
test, to check the number of hydrogen atoms that have been located. 
When tabulating the data, various protoll-carbon connectivities may 
be apparent. These may be confirmed in later stages of the structure eluci- 
dation by using two-dimensional spectra, a.g. a 2D-COSY (Correlated 
SpectroscopY) spectrum in which the proton signals are plotted against 
the carbon signals. 
Having completed the spectroscopic analysis, the number of degrees of 
unsaturation which have to be iiccomodated in the structure will be clear. 
Inlplicit in the molecular formula is the total number of double bond 
equivalents (see p. 36). The difference between these two gives the number 
of rings, each ring being equivalent to two hydrogen atoms. 
2.3 
Simple Chemical Derivatives 
If there is sufficient material available, a number of simple derivatives 
may be prepared at this stage of the structure determination. The changes 
in the spectra which accompany these reactions may then provide further 
structural information. For example, if hydroxyl groups have been 
detected, acetylation with acetic (ethanoic) anhydride in pyridine can be 
informative. Apart from changes in the chemical shift of the CH-0-R 
resonances, the number of acetyl (CH3C=O) groups that are introduced 
may indicate the number of primary or secondary hydroxyl groups that 
are present. Mild acetylation conditions do not normally acetylate a 
tertiary hydroxyl group or some hindered secondary hydroxyl groups. 
Hence the IR spectrum should be checked for any remaining hydroxyl 
absorption. Oxidation of a hydroxyl group to a carbonyl group may, 
In tw~-d~mens~onal 
spec[ra (hc?~e 
are two freq~iency axes and (wo 
spectra e g the 'H and Iic 
speclra of a compound are 
plotted agalnst each other The 
cross peaks reveal correla\lons 
between s~gnals ~n the Iwo 
spectra 

46 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
from the carbonyl absorption in the IR and from the position of the 
carbon-13 carbonyl signal, reveal the size of the ring bearing the hydroxyl 
group. Changes in the UV absorption may reveal the proximity of the 
hydroxyl group to unsaturation. If a carboxylic acid has been detected, 
methylation with diazomethane should give a methyl ester. The appea- 
rance of new methoxyl signals should correspond with the number of 
carboxyl groups. Esters are often more soluble in organic solvents and are 
easier to purify than the parent acids. 
The presence of an alkene may be confirmed by hydrogenation. Quan- 
titative microhydrogenation can be carried out on quite a small scale (25 
mg or less). Since one mole of hydrogen occupies 22.4 dm3 at STP, it is 
relatively easy to measure the quantities of hydrogen that are absorbed by 
as little as 0.1 ~nmole (2.24 cm3 per double bond). The changes in the 
spectra may reveal those functional groups that are close to the double 
bond. Before spectroscopic methods were available, microhydrogenation, 
peracid titration and iodination were methods that were used quantita- 
tively to establish the number of double bonds in a molecule. Microscale 
ozonolysis, and determination of the formaldehyde (methanal) that was 
formed through its crystalline dimedone derivative, was a useful method 
for establishing the presence of a =CH2 group. 
The hydrolysis of esters and the cleavage of glycosides can also be 
useful preliminary chemical steps. However, there are a number of 
instances in which the methods that were used were too vigorous and led 
to rearrangements that confused the structure elucidation. 
At this stage it is usually clear to what class of natural product the 
compound belongs and a working structure may have emerged. Study of 
the literature may reveal a possible relationship to a known compound, 
which can then be established experimentally. If this is not the case, the 
next phase of structure elucidation aims at establishing the underlying 
carbon skeleton. 
2.4 
The Determination of the Carbon Skeleton 
In determining the carbon skeletorl, the underiyiilg strategy is one of 
structural sin~plification to reveal identifiable fragments which may then 
be linked together. Although the roles of spectroscopic and chemical 
methods in the elucidation of the carbon skeleton are interwoven, it is 
convenient to discuss them separately because the chemical methods 
evolved first. The chemical methods involved degradations to reveal 
identifiable fragments, the structures of which might be confirmed by 
synthesis. Spectroscopic studies seek to identify fragments which might 
then be linked together, i.e. to establish connectivities. 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
47 
2.4.1 Oxidative Degradation 
The vigorous oxidation of natural products by reagents such as 
chromium(V1) oxide, potassium mangdnate(VI1) and concentrated nitric 
acid, followed by the identification of the often acidic products, played a 
major role in classical degradative chemistry. However, much of the 
information is now available from less destructive means. For example, in 
the past, oxidation with chromium(V1) oxide, steam distillation and 
identification of the number of moles of acetic acid which were formed, 
was the basis of the Kuhn-Roth determination of C-methyl groups. This 
information is now available from the 'H NMR spectrum. 
Aromatic rings often survived these oxidations intact, and hence the 
isolation of various aromatic polycarboxylic acids provided evidence for 
the substitution pattern of aromatic rings. Vigorous oxidation of the 
alkaloid papaverine (2.9 in Scheme 2.2) gave firstly papaveraldine (2.10) 
Papaverine 1s one of the malor 
and then dimethoxyisoquinoline-1-cacboxylic acid (LIZ), pyridine-2,3.4- 
COnS'i'L'entS 
Of Ihe 
tricarboxylic acid (2.13), metahemipinic acid (4,s-dirnethoxybenzene- 1,2- 
dicarboxylic acid, 2.15) and vera tric acid (3,4-dirnethoxy benzoic acid, 
2.16). The identification of these fragments, together with the alkaline 
fissioi~ of the Czo alkaloid to a CiL base, 6,7-dimethoxyisoqui~loline 
(2.11), and a C9 ether, 4-methylveratrole (3,4-dimethoxymethyIbenzene, 
2.14), was used in locating the position of the methoxyi groups in the 
alkaloid. Today, the presence and substitution pattern of aromatic rings 
would be revealed by the 'H and '" NMR spectra. 
- 
- 
- 1 
"'9 
MeOyJco" 
"""p 
OMe 
M e 0  
C02H 
OMe 
OMe 
2.15 
OMe 
2.14 
2.16 
L
L
Scheme 2.2 
Degradation of 
papaverine 

48 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
The stepwise oxidation of natural producis with careful analysis and 
characterization at each step provided u useful strategy. 111 this context. 
an alkene often provided the initial site of attack, since it nlay be 
hydroxylated and cleaved or the allylic position may be attacked. The 
-r-P~nc.r)e 
Is J malo1 const1lut:nr 
oxidative degradation of the lnonolerpene a-pinenc (2.1; see Schelnc 2.3) 
- 
, 
illustrates this. Mild oxidation with potassium manganate(VI1) gsvr a 
rote rn the study ot tt~c:: 
glycol and, under more vigorous conditions. a Clo acid, pinonic acid 
rno~~oterpc?~iclrds 
(2.17). The latter, typically for a inethyl ketone, underwent a haloform 
reaction with sodium bromate(1) to give bromoform (tribromomethane) 
and a C9 dicarboxylic acid, pinic acid (2.18). Since there was no loss of 
carbon in the first oxidation, the original double bond was trisubstituted 
and bore a methyl group. This acid was brominated and converted with 
barium hydroxide to an u-hydroxy acid, which was in turn cleaved with 
chromic(V1) acid to a CR dicarboxylic acid. cis-norpinic acid (2.21). Hence 
one of the carboxyl groups of pinic acid was attached to a methylene. On 
heating this dicarboxylic acid with acetic anhydride it readily formed an 
internal anhydride, indicating a cis relationship between the two carboxyl 
groups. The dicarboxylic acid was isomerized with dilute hydrochloric 
acid to a rrcrns isomer, trans-norpinic acid. This dimethylcyclabutanedi- 
carboxyiic acid was then synthesized to confirm its structure. A relation- 
ship with the monocyclic monoterpene a-teryineol (2.19) was established 
by treatment of pinonic acid (2.17) with mineral acid. This led to opening 
of the cyclobutane ring and the formation of homorerpenyl methyl ketone 
r Ic.rprr~enl 
rnl11,d I r l  mnov 
(2.20). a compound which had already beeu obtained from a-terpineol. 
f~SSpi711dl all:? l)<ll ~ 1 t ~ l ~ ' d l I V  
~)lllf. 
011s Its ac'crato IS IJSPC? rn 
This type of degradation was very important in establishing the 
f t a v o ~ l r l ~ i g  
relationship between the monoterpenes during the latter part of the 
19th century and the early part of the 20th century. 
Scheme 2.3 Degradat~on 
of L 
2.19 
2.20 
2.21 
x-pinene 
- 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
49 
I t  is instructive to consider the changes in the speclra and the informa- 
tion which might have been obtained from them. had these methods been 
available at the time. In the oxidation of w-pinene (2.1) to pinonic acid 
(2.17), the alkene signals [dc 144.8 (C) and 1 16.4 (CH) and SH 5.171 
disappeared. The IR spectrum of the oxidation product. [M' 184.1 10, 
CloHl(i03] showed two carbonyl absorptions ( 1731 and 1682 cm - I )  and 
broad hydroxyl absorption (3233 cm-'). together with 
NMR signals 
at dc 178.6 and 207.4, characteristic of a carboxyl and a further carbonyl 
group. The '-'c NMR spectrum contained three methyl signals, two 
methylenes. two methines and a further quaternary carbon. The 'H NMR 
spectrum contained two three-proton singlets at bH 0.83 and 1.28, 
assigned to two isolated methyl groups, together with a three-proton 
singlet at 8" 2.03. typical of a methyl ketone. There was a one-proton 
double doublet at dH 2.84 ( J  = 7.9 and 9.8 Hz) which was coupled to a 
two-proton multiplet at SH 1.90, suggesting the presence of the group 
CH3C(0)CHCH2. There was a three-proton rnultiplet at dH 2.28 which 
was in the range expected for protons adjacent to a carboxyl (CH2C07H). 
Thus even a cursory inspection of the spectra from this single oxidation 
reveals considerable structural in forma tion. 
The presence of a ketone in a ring system has provided the starting 
point for some structurally informative ring cleavage reactions. 
Oxidation of the alkene of the ~nonoterpene b-pinenc (2.2). either with 
potassium tnanganate(VC1) or by ozonolysis, gave the CQ ketone 
nopinone (2.22. Scheme 2.4). Hence the double bond was an exocyclic 
methylene (=CH ?). Today r his information would be obtained from the 
'H, I3c NMR and IR spectra [dH 4.6 (2H): dc 106.0 (CH2), 151.8 (C): 
lll,;,, 1641,873 cm-' (=CH2)]. Further oxidation of the ketone with nitric 
acid led to ring opening and the formation of homoterpenylic acid (2.23). 
linking this compound with the a-terpineol series. 
2.2 
2.22 
2.23 
I 
Scheme 2.4 Degradation of 
- -- 
- - - - 
. - - - - p-ptnene 
The oxidative cleavage of rings to dicarboxylic acids led to a chemical 
method for establishing the slze of rings. In 1907, Rlanc fornlulated a rule 
which stated th-at, if two carboxyl groups occupy the 1.5-positions as in a 
dicnrboxylic acid arising from a cyclopentanone, the dicarboxylic acid on 

50 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
being heated with acetic anhydride is converted into an anhydride. In 
contrast 1,6- and higher dicarboxylic acids, arising from cyclohexanones 
and larger rings, give cyclic ketones with the loss of carbon dioxide. This 
oxidative degradation provided evidence for the size of ring A of the 
steroids, although it gave what turned out to be misleading evidence for 
the size of the more heavily substituted rings B and C. The size of a ring 
containing a carbonyl group is now established by IR and I3c NMR 
spectroscopy (see Table 2.1). 
2.4.2 Reductive Degradation 
Many secondary metabolites belong to one of several common series and 
differ from each other merely in the position of hydroxyl groups on this 
carbon skeleton. One strategy which recognizes this is to remove the 
oxygen functions in a stepwise manner to obtain a hydrocarbon which 
One enantiomer of myrtenol 
may then be identified. For example, rnyrtenol(2.24) and the correspond- 
in sweet Orange Oil and the 
&aldehyde, myrtenal, occur in ; 
number of essential oils. ~reatmlnt of 
other is found in Cyperus 
articuiatus. In some parts of the 
myrtenol with phosphorus pentachloride gave the chloro compound 2.25, 
the dried tubers Of this plant which was in turn converted to a-pinene (2.1) by reduction with sodium in 
are used to perfume clothes. 
alcohol (Scheme 2.5). 
Scheme 2.5 
Interrelationship 
of myrtenol and a-pinene 
CH20H 
CHzCl 
&)-&-,$J 
2.24 Myrtenol 
2.25 
2.1 
2.4.3 Dehydrogenation to Aromatic Compounds 
Dehydrogenation was developed 
Dehydrogenation, particularly with sulfur or selenium to form an aro- 
~~~~'~~~~,l:'t!'~~ ,!,"',": 
matic compound, has provided a powerful means of structural simpli- 
considerable impact on the 
fication. The effect of converting sp3 centres to sp2 centres is to remove 
elucidation Of the structures Of 
problems of stereochemistry from consideration at this stage in the 
polycyclic sesqui-, di- and 
triterpenes. 
structure elucidation. The identity of the aromatic compounds was then 
established by synthesis. The synthesis of aromatic compounds involves 
the introduction of substituents based on well-established rules of 
aromatic substitution. The UV spectra of the different classes of aromatic 
compound are distinctive and can aid their identification. 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton ot a Natural Product 
51 
An example of this is provided by the dehydrogenation of abietic acid 
(2.26), a major constituent of pine resin, which gave the phenanthrene 
retene (2.27, Scheme 2.6). This was then synthesized. In this hydrocarbon 
the carbon skeleton of abietic acid is retained with the loss of only two 
peripheral carbon atoms. The sesquiterpenoids were at one time grouped 
in terms of the naphthalene and azulene hydrocarbons obtained from 
them on dehydrogenation. 
In these examples, quaternary methyl groups were expelled, but under 
milder dehydrogenation conditions such groups may be retained. 
On dehydrogenation, compounds containing carbonyl groups give rise 
to phenols, which were often purified as their methyl ethers. This 
provided a useful means of locating the oxygen function on the carbon 
skeleton. An example came from the determination of the structure of 
allogibberic acid (2.29), which is a degradation product of the plant 
Scheme 2.6 Degradation of 
abietic acid 
Scheme 2.7 Degradation of 
gibberellic acid 

52 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
The structure of g~bberell~c 
acid 
was studled during the 1950160s 
at a time of transltlon between the 
different roles of chemical and 
spectroscopic methods In 
structure determination 
Manoyl oxrde and ketornanoyl 
oxide are obtained from the wood 
oil of the New Zealand silver pine, 
Dacrydium colensoi A more 
highly oxidized relative, forskolin. 
has been obtained from an Indian 
medicinal plant. Coleus forsko111. 
and has attracted interest 
because of its actlon in lower~ng 
blood pressure. 
hormone gibberellic acid (2.28, Scheme 2.7). Ring D was opened by 
ozonolysis to give a keto acid (2.31) in which the carbonyl group marked 
the site of the tertiary hydroxyl group. Dehydrogenation of the keto acid 
gave a methoxyfluorene (2.30), which was synthesized. Note the 
progressive structural simplification in this degradation and in particular 
the elimination of stereochemical problems. 
Another strategy for locating the site of a carbonyl group uses a 
Grignard reaction with methylmagnesium iodide to introduce a methyl 
group at the site of the carbonyl group, so "marking" that position. 
Dehydrogenation then gives an aromatic compound which contains an 
additional methyl group when compared to that derived from the parent 
secondary metabolite. Such a strategy was used to locate the position of a 
carbonyl group in the diterpenoid ketomanoyl oxide (2.32, R = 0). 
The 
carbon skeleton of manoyl oxide (2.32, R = HZ) 
was established by the 
isolation of 1,2,5-trimethylnaphthalene (2.33, R = H) and 1,2,8-tri- 
methylphenanthrene on dehydrogenation (Scheme 2.8). When ketoma- 
noyl oxide (2.32, R = 0) was treated with methylmagnesium iodide and 
the product dehydrogenated, 1,2,5,7-tetramethylnaphthalene (2.33, 
R = Me) and 1,2,6,8-tetramethylphenanthrene were obtained. The extra 
methyl group marked the position of the carbonyl group in the original 
ketomanoyl oxide. 
I 
2.32 
Scheme 2.8 Dehydrogenation 
of ketomanoyl oxide 
.- 
Q Eremophilone is a sesquiterpenoid ketone which was obtained 
from the Australian tree Eremophila mitchelii. On reduction it 
gives an alcohol which on dehydrogenation with selenium gave 
7-isopropyl-1-methylnaphthalene. When the ketone was reacted with 
methylmagnesium iodide and the resultant tertiary alcohol dehy- 
drogenated, the product was 7-isopropyl-1,5-dimethylnaphthalene. 
What is the location of the carbonyl group on the carbon skeleton? 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
63 
A 
The aromatic hydrocarbons are: 
qq+$+ 
Eremophilone 
These naphthalenes have been drawn to show their relationship to 
the eremophilane carbon skeleton. The position of the carbonyl 
group is revealed by the position of the additional methyl group. 
Note that the dehydrogenation led to the loss of one carbon atom. 
The final structure of eremophilone was interesting because it does 
not follow the isoprene rule and a rearrangement has taken place 
during its biosynthesis. 
-- 
-- 
2.4.4 The Removal of Nitrogen 
A nitrogen atom is a site of reactivity in an organic molecule, and can be the 
starting point for informative degradations. The best known of these is the 
Hofmann elimination of quaternary ammonium salts (Scheme 2.9). The 
amine is first methylated with iodomethane to form the quaternary 
ammonium salt. This salt is then heated with moist silver oxide to bring 
about theelimination and form an alkene. The number of IV-methyl groups 
that are introduced distinguishes between a primary, secondary or tertiary 
amine in the starting material. Not only does this reaction have the 
\ 
/ 
- 
C=C 
+ NMe3 + H20 
/ 
\ 
Scheme 2.9 
The Hofrnann 
+NMe3 
elimination 
Scheme 2.10 
Degradation of 
pseudopelletierine 

54 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
advantage of breaking a carbon-nitrogen bond, but it also generates an 
alkene which may form the basis for further degradations. The Hofmann 
elimination has played a very important part in the determination of the 
structure of alkaloids. An example of its use comes in the structure 
elucidation of the alkaloid pseudopelletierine (2.34. Scheme 2.10). 
Oxidation of pseudopelletierine with chromic(V1) acid gave N-methyl- 
granatic acid (2.35). This dicarboxylic acid retained the nine carbon atoms 
of the alkaloid. Two successive Hofmann eliminations gave the 
unsaturated acid (2.36), which was reduced to the known straight-chain 
C8 dicarboxylic acid suberic acid (octandioic acid, 2.37). The first synthesis 
of the interesting hydrocarbon cyclooctatetraene (2.38) started from 
pseudopelletierine (2.34) and used a sequence of Hofmann eliminations. 
An alternative degradation, the von Braun reaction, converts the 
nitrogen into a good leaving group by reaction with cyanogen bromide. 
The cyanoammonium salt then undergoes a nucleophilic substitution by 
bromine. The course of these two degradations can be compared in the 
Hydrocotarnine IS an alkalo~d 
work on the alkaloid hydrocotarnine (2.39, Scheme 2.1 1). Another 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ " , " ~ P ~ , " , " , b ~ " , " , " , ~ ~ ~ ~ t ~ ~ ~  
degradation. the Emde degradation, involves the reductive cleavage of a 
of another constituent, narcotine 
quaternary ammonium halide with sodium amalgam. 
Scheme 2.1 1 Degradation of 
hydrocotarnine 
- 
1 
OMe 
<qN
I 
OMe 
Br 
Q 
The alkaloid derivative isothebaine methyl ether (1) gave, after 
two Hofmann degradations, the vinylphenanthrene 2. Give a 
I mechanism for these eliminations. 
I 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
55 
A 
A quaternary ammonium salt (3) is formed first and then, under 
the influence of a base, this undergoes an elimination reaction. In 
each case the P-hydrogen atom that is eliminated is adjacent to an 
aromatic ring and the extra double bond that is introduced is in 
conjugation with the ring: 
M e 0  
M e 0  
\ - 
M
e
O
a
 
M e 0  
\ 
NMe2 - 
M
e
O
a
 
\ <he) 
M e 0  
/ 
M e 0  
/ 
M e 0  ' 
3 
,, 
p~ 
1 
2 
2.4.5 Alkaline Degradation 
Many of the base-catalysed condensation reactions of synthetic organic 
chemistry are reversible. Retro-Claisen and retro-aldol reactions have 
played an important part in the degradation of natural products. The 
polyhydroxylated flavones include some of the major pigments of fruits, 
I 
OH 
OH 
Me 
2.41 
R = COMe or C02H 
2.42 
2.43 
- -. - 
. . . . - 
- - 
- . -- 
-- -- 
. .. 
. -- 
Scheme 2.12 Alkaline 
degradation of luteolin 

56 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
flowers and the wood of some trees. Their structures were established 
chiefly by means of alkaline degradation followed by synthesis of the 
degradation products and then the flavanones themselves. Conjugate 
addition of a nucleophile to the chromone ring (t..g. 2.40, Scheme 2.12) 
leads to a rapid hydrolysis to form a P-diketone. The final products 
obtained by alkaline fission of the diketone depend upon whether 
anhydrous ethanolic potassium hydroxide or aqueous potassium 
hydroxide are used. Whereas the former led to fission of the 2.3-bond, 
the latter brought about fission of the 3,4-bond. A substituent at C-3 also 
affected the course of the fission. 
Luteolln IS a yellow cfyustuf~ w111c-11 
The structure of luteolin (2,40), which is one of the oldest natural 
was used as a 11atural yty~rtt~~it 
and was obi~~riecl 
froni the 
dyestuffs, was established by alkaline degradation (Scheme 2.12). It was 
Mcd~terranear. plarrt dyer's 
degraded by fusion with alkali to phloroglucinol (1,3,5-trihydroxy- 
weed (Rcserla ktleola) 
benzene, 2.41) and protocatechuic acid (3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, 2.42) 
and by 50% aqueous potassium hydroxide to phloroglucinol (2.41) and 
3,4-di hydroxyacetophenone (2.43). 
2.4.6 Acid-catalysed Degradations 
Although acid-catalysed degradations have provided methods of struc- 
tural simplification, they have also been the source of some conf~~sion. 
particularly because of the propensity of natural products such as the 
terpenoids to undergo rearrangements under these conditions. Although 
not necessarily leading lo the final structure, these rearrangements have 
t~evertheless shed a fascinating light on the chemistry of the conlpounds 
Tl~e Waq~~cr 
-M15erwelrl 
concerned. The Wagner- Meerwein rearrangements were discovered in 
rt.arrarlycnier?ts were or~glnally 
discovered I,, the conversion of 
the context of structural studies on the bicyclic nzonoterpenes. The 
-1 ~)IIIc:~I~: 10 bornyl chlnr~de 
rearrangement of the sesquiterpenoid santonin (2.44, Scheme 2.13) to 
HO 
ld,,,, .' - wo 
*+,,,A 
+ 2.29 
I 
COzH 
C02H 
Scheme 2.13 
Ac~d-catalysed 
2.28 
2.46 
degradations 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
57 
des~notroposantonin (2.45) is an example (see Chapter 4). We have already 
noted the acid-catalysed cleavage of pinonic acid (2.17) to homoterpenyl 
methyl ketone (2.20). which played an important part in the inter- 
relationship of the monoterpenoids. 
The elucidation of the structure of the plant hormone gibberellic acid 
(2.28) involved the study of its acid-catalysed decomposition products, 
allogibberic acid (2.29) and gibberic acid (2.46). These degradation 
products, while retaining the underlying carbon skeleton of gibberellic 
acid, had lost the conlplicated structural features associated with ring A. 
This was a very useful structural simplification. 
2.5 
Spectroscopic Methods in the Determination 
of the Carbon Skeleton 
Over the last 30 years there has been a gradual change in emphasis in the 
role that spectroscopic methods have played in the determination of the 
carbon skeleton of a natural product. Spectroscopic methods were used 
to follow a chemical degradation; the chemical change came first and its 
spectroscopic consequences were then analysed, that is the strategy was 
essentially chelnically based. However. particularly with the advent of 
two-dimensional NMR methods making connectivity studies easier, 
leading to the spectroscopic identification of fragments of a molecule, the 
strategy is increasingly based on spectroscopy. 
2.5.1 NMR Spectroscopy in Determining 
the Carbon Skeleton 
NMR spectroscopy dominates the determination of the structures of 
natural products. NMR has been used as an adjunct to chemical 
degradation since the late 1950s. Oxidative degradation, by introducing 
functionality into the molecule, produced a greater spread of 'H and I3c 
NMR signals, enabling groups adjacent to reactive centres to be 
identified. Furthermore, the use of spin decoupling techniques enabled 
adjacent protons to be recognized. and hence significant structural 
fragments could be identified. 
Within a related series of compounds it is often possible to identify 
certain characteristic structural fragments from their spectroscopic 
fingerprints. For example, the gibberellin plant hortnones (2.28) have a 
characteristic AB double doublet which is assigned to H-5-H-6. 
'H-'H and 'H-'~c correlations can be made using two-dimensional 
NMR studies. This has opened up new strategies of structure deter- 
mination which can be led by spectroscopy. In these studies, part or even 
the conlplete structure may be derived from internal evidence, with less 

58 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
reliance on analogies to other compounds. The homonuclear techniques 
are known by the acronyms of 'H-'H COSY (correlation spectroscopy), 
which reveals coupling information, and NOESY, which reveals nuclear 
Overhauser effect interactions (see p. 66). The heteronuclear COSY 
experiment reveals 'H-I" 
correlations, and may be used to identify both 
one-bond and, separately, long-range couplings. These correlations reIy 
on the transfer of magnetization between coupled or sterically interacting 
nuclei. 
With the variety of methods that are available, it is important to 
establish a strategy which does not waste material or instrument time. 
A typical strategy might be the following. Firstly, from the I3c NMR 
spectrum and the attached hydrogen experiment (e.g. the DEPT 
spectrum, see p. 44), identify those carbons that are methyls, methylenes, 
methines and quaternary atoms. Secondly, from the 'H-"C 
hetero- 
nuclear chemical shift correlation spectrum, identify those proton signals 
that correspond to methylenes, i.e. those protons that tnight be geminally 
n coupled. Thirdly, using the above information, identify those signals from 
n 
H, 
the 'H-'H COSY spectrum that are vicinally coupled and relate these to 
H, 
,H 
their respective carbon atoms using the two-dimensional heteronuclear 
/
C
~
 'rI'c\ 
spectrum. The identification of vicinal couplings may need separate 
ge~ninal 
vicinal 
coupli,,p 
coupling 
homonuclear spin decoupling or selective population transfer exper- 
iments to identify the magnitude of the coupling and distinguish between 
vicinal and long-range couplings. In this way it is possible to build up a 
series of related spin systems. 
This strategy will yield some structural fragments which may reach a 
terminus in a quaternary carbon atom. These quaternary carbon atoms 
may then be identified by using a long-range 'H-'~c correlation 
(HMBC = heteronuclear multiple bond correlation). This may provide 
the opportunity to link fragments that have been identified. A further way 
of linking structural fragments utilizes the nuclear Overhauser effect. This 
relies on a steric interaction rather than a bonding interaction and hence it 
can give different information on the relative position of protons in a 
n~olecule. The nuclear Overhauser effect is of considerable value in deter- 
mining stereochemistry and we will therefore return to it later (see p. 66). 
The keto diol2.47 was obtained from the culinary fruit of the dill plant, 
Aneth~un graveolens. In establishing its structure a 'H-'H COSY NMR 
6po 
experiment 
heteronuclear 
linked 
correlation 
H-l to (HETCOR) 
H-6 and H-7 linked 
and H-3 
these 
to proton 
H-4 and 
resonances 
the 'H-'~c 
to 
5 
their respective carbon signals. The three-bond heteronuclear multiple 
bond correlation (HMBC) was then used to link H-1 and H-3 to the C-2 
9 
carbonyl group and H-4, H-9 and H-10 to the quaternary carbon at C-8. 
lo 
CH2OH 
OH 
The links between these resonances led to the structure 2.47 for this 
2.47 
con~pound. 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
59 
1. 
A natural product may be characterized by physical, analytical, 
chromatographic and spectroscopic data. 
2. This information will provide the molecular formula, the 
number of double bond equivalents, and lead to the identification 
of the functional groups (OH, C=O, C=C) and other salient 
structural features such as C-methyl, N-methyl or 0-methyl groups. 
3. The underlying strategy for establishing the carbon skeleton of a 
natural product involves structural simplification to reveal identifi- 
able fragments. 
4. 
Oxidative degradation, reduction to a parent hydrocarbon, 
dehydrogenation, elimination reactions and alkaline fission play an 
important role in establishing the carbon skeleton. 
5. Spectroscopic methods, particularly NMR, 
play a major role in 
the identification of structural fragments. Two-dimensional corre- 
lation spectroscopy (2D-COSY) and heteronuclear multip1e bond 
correlation spectroscopy (HMBC) NMR techniques have become 
important in relating groups of hydrogen and carbon atoms. 
.- 
. J 
2.1. 
How might (i) a physical and (ii) a chemical method be used 
to distinguish between each of the following pairs: 

60 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
CH20H 
CH20Ac 
1 
and 
I 
(d) 
CHOAc 
CHOH 
I 
I 
CH20H 
CH20H 
G 
H 
2.2. 
A volatile plant product M, C8HI40, has strong IR 
absorption at 1717 cm-'. It possesses 'H NMR signals at SH 1.65 
(3H, s), 1.72 (3H, s), 2.15 (3H, s), 2.4 (4H, m) and 5.20 (lH, t). On 
ozonolysis, compound M gives, among other products, propanone, 
and on treatment with iodine and alkali it gives triiodomethane 
(iodoform). What structural information can be obtained from: 
(a) its molecular formula; (b) its IR spectrum; (c) its 'H NMR 
spectrum; (d) its chemical reactions? (e) In the light of these answers, 
deduce a structure for compound M. 
2.3. Hydrolysis of a natural product gave an aromatic compound 
N, 
C9H 
which was soluble in aqueous sodium hydrogen carbo- 
nate. It had IR absorptions at 2700 (broad), 1690 and 1600 cm-' . In 
the 'H NMR spectrum there were signals at dH 3.85 (6H), 6.62 (1 H) 

The Characterization and Determination of the Carbon Skeleton of a Natural Product 
6 1 
and 7.15 (2H) and a broad single-proton signal at dH 10.2 which 
disappeared when the sample was shaken with ' ~ ~ 0 .  
Careful ins- 
pection of the signal at SH 6.62 showed that it was a narrow triplet 
(J = 1.5 Hz). while that at SH 7.15 was a narrow doublet ( J  = 1.5 Hz). 
Suggest a structure for conlpound N, and account for the multiplicity 
of the signals. 
2.4. 
A monocarboxylic acid 0 ,  C6H604, has been obtained from a 
Xestosporzgia species. It possesses IR absorption at 3300 (broad), 
1730 and 1700 cm-', and intense UV absorption at 217 nm. It 
possesses 'H NMR signals at dH 2.78 (2H, d, J = 7 Hz), 5.40 (lH, 
tn),6.10(fH,d, J = 5  Hz), 7.75(1H,ddY J =  2and 5 Hz)and 10.15 
(1 H, exchangeable with ' ~ ~ 0 ) .  
In a spin decoupling experiment, 
irradiation of the signal at dH 5.40 converted the signal at dH 2.78 to 
a singlet and the signal at dH 7.75 to a doublet, J = 5 Hz. When 
compound 0 was heated with sodium hydroxide and the solution 
carefully acidified, a dicarboxylic acid P, C6H805, was obtained. 
Account for this observation and deduce a structure for 0. 
2.5. 
Sherry lactone, C6H1003. had IR absorption at 3500 and 
1750 cm-'. The 'H NMR spectrum contained signals at dH 1.25 (3H, 
d, J = 6.8 Hz) and one-proton multiplets at dH 2.05,2.26,2.50,2.70, 
3.78 and 4.38. Analysis of the multiplet at dH 3.78 showed that it was 
a quartet (J = 6.8 Hz) of doublets (J = 6.0 Hz), while that at dH 4.38 
was a triplet (J = 7.0 Hz) of doublets (J = 6.0 Hz). Irradiation of the 
signal at dH 3.78 converted the signal at dH 1.25 into a singlet and 
that at SH 4.38 into a triplet (J = 7.0 Hz). Oxidation of sherry lactone 
with pyridinium chlorochromate gave solerone, C6H8o3, vmax 1750, 
1700 cm-'. This oxidation product had 'H NMR signals at SH 2.0 
(3H, s), 2.1-2.7 (4H, n-~) and 4.65 (IH, t, J = 7.0 Hz). Propose 
structures for sherry lactone and solerone. 
2.6. 
A sesquiterpenoid Q, with a structure that obeys the iso- 
prene rule, has the formula C15H280 and possesses 1R absorption 
at 3500 cm-'. On treatment with acetic anhydride, it gave a 
compound C17H3002 with IR absorption at 1730 cm-'. Dehydro- 
genation of the sesquiterpenoid with selenium gave 7-isopropyl- 1 - 
methylnaphthalene. Treatment of the sesquiterpenoid with chro- 
mium(V1) oxide gave a compound, C15H260, 
with IR absorption at 
1700 cm-'. When this compound was reacted with methylmagne- 
sium iodide and the product was dehydrogenated with selenium, 

62 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
7-isopropyl-1,2-dimethylnaphthalene was obtained. Suggest a 
structure for sesquiterpenoid Q and indicate possible dissections 
into the isoprene units in this structure. 
2.7. 
A volatile component R, C8H8O2, of the secretions of a beetle, 
Phorocantha semipunctata, had IR absorption at 3100, 1670, 1622 
and 1580 cm-I and UV absorption at 2 10 and 270 nm. The compound 
had 'H NMR signals at dH 2.61 (3H, s), 6.75 (lH, d, J = 8 Hz), 6.95 
(lH, d, J = 8 Hz), 7.42 (IH, t, J = 8 Hz), 10.25 (lH, s) and 11.98 
(lH, s). The signal at JH 11.98 disappeared when the sample was 
shaken with 2 ~ 2 0 .  
Compound R formed a red 2,4-dinitrophenyl- 
hydrazone. It was obtained, along with a second product, compound 
S, when m-cresol(3-methylphenol) was treated with tsichlorometh- 
ane and sodium hydroxide. Account for these observations and 
deduce the formulae of the natural product R and the compound S. 
2.8. 
Compound T, C6Hs02, obtained from the insect Sigara 
falieni, had IR absorption at 2840,2740,1690,1621 and 980 cm-'. It 
gave a silver mirror on treatment with moist silver oxide, and it 
formed a bis(2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone) derivative. The 'H NMR 
spectrum showed signals at JH 1.17 (3H, t, J = 7.3 Hz), 2.74 (2H, q, 
J = 7.3 Hz), 6.78 (lH, dd, J =  7.1 and 16.6 Hz), 6.89 (lH, d, 
J = 16.6 Hz) and 9.85 (lH, d, J = 7.1 Hz). Identify the adjacent 'H 
NMR signals from their coupling patterns and assign a structure to 
compound T. 
2.9. 
A sesquiterpenoid U, C15H240, had IR absorption at 
1680 cm-' and UV absorption at 239 nm. The 'H NMR spectrum 
included signals at JH 0.90, 1.0 and 1.05 (each 3H, d), 1.80 (3H, s) 
and 5.2 (lH, s). On catalytic hydrogenation, compound U gave 
compound V, C1 5H260, which had IR absorption at 17 10 cm-' and 
which lacked the UV absorption at 239 nm. Further reduction with 
sodium borohydride gave compound W, C15H280, which had IR 
absorption at 3500 cm-', Dehydrogenation of W with selenium gave 
4-isopropyl- l,6-dimethylnaphthalene. Reaction of V with methyl- 
magnesium iodide gave X, CI6H3()0, which on dehydrogenation 
with selenium gave 4-isopropyl-1,6,8-trimethylnaphthalene. 
What 
are the structures of compounds U-X? 

The Location of the 
Functional Groups and the 
Molecular Stereochemistry 
The object of this chapter is to outline the general strategy for 
establishing the position of the functional groups and the stereo- 
chemistry of a natural product. By the end of this chapter you 
should understand: 
The role of spectroscopic methods, particularly NMR spectros- 
copy, in establishing interrelationships between functional 
groups 
* 
The use of chemical methods including specific oxidations, retro- 
aldol and retro-Claisen reactions and cyclization reactions 
which reveal interactions between functional groups and hence 
their relative stereocheniistry 
The use of stereochemical correlations, asymmetric induction 
and spectroscopic methods in determining absolute stereo- 
chemistry 
3.1 
Introduction 
-- 
The first two phases in the elucidation of the structure of a natural 
product lead to the identification of the functional groups and the 
structure of the carbon skeleton. Information often accumulates during 
these stages on the position and stereochemistry of functional groups. 
Consequently, it is often helpful to reconsider the initial spectroscopic 
data which characterized the functional groups to see what additional 
interpretations might be made in the light of the structure of the carbon 
skeleton. 

64 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
The sterords have a well-defiricd 
rlgld carbon skeleton arrd forn~ 
valuable models for exploring the 
stereochernlcal aspects of 
spectroscopic nlethods ar~d 
c:hernical reactlolls 
The nucleus 1s surrour-t:led by an 
electror-I cloud wli~ch "shields" ~t 
frorn (lie applied rnagrlel~c l~clci 
The nlore der-ise the electrorl 
cloud, the yrealer that sh~eld~rlg 
and the lower the cllerrilcal sl11ft 
(4). SubslltuenLs which decrease 
the electron denslty e g [hose 
whlch are electroi~egatlve. are 
deshield~riy arla lead to a hlyher 
chernlcal shlft. e g. CH.,I iil, 
2 2. 
CH:,F (i,, 
4 3 
- - -  
- - 
Whereas the identification of the functional groups in the preliminary 
characterization involves chemical and spectroscopic properties that are 
specific for individual groups in isolation, in this later phase of the study 
we are concerned with those properties that reflect interactions between 
functional groups, or between a functional group and a spectroscopically 
clearly identifiable part of a structure such as a methyl group. Although 
the information on relationships between groups may be considered 
under the separate headings of spectroscopic and chemical data, the two 
overlap and the spectroscopic changes consequent upon a chemical 
reaction are often very informative. 
3.2 
Spectroscopic Interrelationships 
3.2.1 NMR Methods 
The chemical shift, multiplicity and integral mode of the NMR spectrum 
can each be used to give information on the detailed environment of a 
nucleus and its relationship to its neighbours. 
The chen~ical shift of a proton resonance is a reflection of the magnetic 
environment of that nucleus. Apart from major effects arising from 
changes in the immediate environment, for example the insertion of a 
hydroxyl group, more subtle effects can reflect intramolecular inter- 
actions. The 'H NMR signal of a methyl group on the carbon skeleton, 
particularly one attached to a fully substituted carbon atom as in many 
terpenoids and steroids, makes a useful structural probe. For example, 
the angular methyl groups of the steroids at C-10 and C-13 (H-19 and 
H- 18, respectively) are susceptible to transannular interactions with 
functional groups at many of the positions on the steroid nucleus (Scheme 
3.1). These methyl groups provide characteristic singlets in the 'H NMR 
spectra of the steroids in the range CjH 0.70-1.30. The detailed position of 
the methyl group resonance within this range reflects these interactions. 
Thus a 1,3-diaxial interaction with a hydroxyl group can produce a 
significant deshielding of 0.2-0.3 ppm. These contributions to the 
chemical shift of the methyl group have been analysed for many hundreds 
of steroids. An assumption is made that the contributions for individual 
functional groups are approximately additive, provided that the groups 
are sufficiently separate from one another. Using these tables, known as 
the Zurcher tables, it is possible to predict the position of a methyl 
resonance for variously substituted steroids and compare this with the 
observed value. The susceptibility of the chemical shift to 1,3-diaxial 
interactions is not restricted to methyl groups. For example, the 3cc- 
proton resonance is significantly affected by a 5or-hydroxyl group. 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
65 
- 
- 
- - - - 
- 
- -- 
-- 
Although these effects are well established with the steroids, this type 
of reasoning can be applied to any series of related secondary metabolites 
and their derivatives. 
I 
Scheme 3.1 Transannular 
I 
1 
interactions 
The electronic effects of substituents on an aromatic ring are reflected 
in the chemical shift of the aromatic proton and carbon resonances. 
Here again there are approximate additivity relationships which may 
allow assignment of the orientation of specific functional groups to be 
made. 
Relationships, particularly 1,3-diaxial interactions, that affect the 
chemical shift of key proton resonances may be augmented by the use of 
aromatic solvents which selectively solvate polar groups. The aromatic 
solvent induced chemical shift differences of resonances between spectra 
that are determined in deuterochloroforn~ and deuterobenzene or 
deuteropyridine can be quite revealing. Furthermore, they can help by 
resolving complex overlapping multiplets. Shift reagents such as 
europium tris(heptafluorodimethy1octanedione) [(E~(fod)~] 
have a simi- 
lar effect. These reagents fuilction by associating with the non-bonding 
electrons in a substituent, e.g. a hydroxyl group. The effect on the 
chemical shift arises from paramagnetism associated with the unpaired 
electron on the europium. This through-space effect falls off as the cube of 
the distance between the nucleus concerned and the europium atom. 
In the carbon-13 NMR spectrum, a substituent such as a hydroxyl or 
carbonyl group has a significant effect on the chemical shift not just of 
the carbon to which the oxygen is attached but also to that of adjacent 
carbons. A carbon attached to a carbonyl group may be deshielded by up 
to 10 pptn compared to the deoxy derivative. Since the nature of the 
carbon atoms which show these changes (methyl, methylene, methine or 
quaternary carbon) may be known from the DEPT experiment (see p. 44), 
this may facilitate the location of the functional group. Furthermore, 
the hydroxyl group may have a shielding effect of up to 4 ppnl on a 
y-carbon atom which possesses a guuche rela tionship (see Scheme 3.2). 
This y-gctrrclte shielding can be useful in both locating a hydroxyl group 

66 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
and in establishing its stereochemistry. These features are illustrated for 
6P-hydroxytestosterone (Scheme 3.2, R = OH) compared to testosterone 
(Scheme 3.2, R = H). 
R=HorOH 
R is y-gauche to C-8 
Scheme 3.2 y-Gauche effects 
1 
The nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) can play a useful role in locating 
a hydrogen atom. A proton may relax from its upper spin state by giving 
out a signal or by the transfer of its magnetization energy to another 
nucleus. If the internal transfer of energy is prevented by raising the 
recipient nucleus to its upper spin state by a second irradiation, the 
original nucleus can no longer relax by this internal mechanism and has to 
give out more signal. The difference between the spectra determined in the 
irradiated and unirradiated modes reveals only the signals of those 
protons that relax via the specific internal transfer that is blocked by the 
irradiation. An axial methyl group may interact with a number of protons 
on the carbon skeleton and hence receive energy from them. If the 
protons of this methyl group are irradiated and transferred to their upper 
spin state, they can no longer accept this energy and the signals from the 
protons with which the methyl group interacts are enhanced (see Scheme 
3.1). A two-dimensional NOESY spectrum may be plotted linking the 
various modes of relaxation of hydrogen atoms in a molecule. The 
coupling patterns which interlink adjacent protons make a valuable 
method for interrelating functional groups. 
The Karplus equation, J =  kcos28 + constant, relates the magnitude 
of the coupling constant J and the dihedral angle 8 between two 
adjacent protons (see Figure 3.1). The original paper emphasizes that 
the angles obtained from this formula are approximate but are sufficient 
to distinguish between axial and equatorial substituents (see Table 3.1). 
An immediate result is that an equatorial proton (i.e. an axial 
functional group) with only small diequatorial and equatorial-axial 
couplings will produce a significantly narrower signal than an axial 
proton (i.e. an equatorial substituent) with larger diaxial couplings. The 
influence of adjacent protons on the shape of a signal is sufficiently 
characteristic in the steroid series to enable, for example, the sites of 
microbiological hydroxylation to be established from the shape of the 
CkJOH signal. 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
67 
Figure 3.1 The variation of 
coupling constant (J) with 
dihedral angle (19) 
Table 3.1 The magnitude of 'H-'H coupling constants 
Geminal coupling 
Vicinal coupling 
Axial-axial 
Axial-equatorial 
Equatorial-equatorial 
cis Alkenes 
Long-range coupling 
Allylic 
trans Alkenes 
ortho Ar-H 
meta Ar-H 
para Ar-H 
In some rigid systems (e.g. Scheme 3.3), long-range 4~ (four-bond) 
Bridged ring systems occur in a 
couplings can provide useful information. These couplings are significant 
~ , " ~ ~ ? ~ ! t : ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ , " f , " , " ~ a ~ n g -  
(ca. 2 Hz) when there is a "W" relationship between the hydrogen atoms 
useful in assign~ng the 
concerned. 
stereochemistry of hydrogen 
atoms on these bridges. 
Scheme 3.3 
Long-range 
I 
coupling 
The relationships that are suggested by the coupling patterns may be 
confirmed by spin decoupling experiments. 
The magnitudes of the alkene coupling constants are characteristic 
of the geometry of the allcene and may be used to distinguish 

68 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
cis- (J = 5- 10 Hz) and trans-alkenes (J = 11-19 Hz). Furthermore, the 
multiplicity may provide information on the number and relationship of 
the allylic protons. There are also long-range couplings through a double 
bond to the allylic protons. These also have an angular dependence. 
Q The lactone bakayanolide has the two-dimensional structure 1. 
The coupling constants between H-6 and the two hydrogen atoms 
H-7 are 8.6 and 10.9 Hz, respectively, and there is a long-range 
coupling of 1.8 Hz between H-2 and H-6. There are NOE 
interactions between H-1 I, H-6 and H-9. What stereochemical 
information can be deduced from these data? 
A The long-range coupling between H-2 and H-6 requires a "W" 
relationship between these protons and hence an equatorial 
conformation for H-6. The coupling constants correspond to 
dihedral angles of ca. &I 0" and 1 50-1 80" (see Figure 3.1) between 
H-6 and the hydrogen atoms H-7. The NOE interactions require 
H-l 1, H-6 and H-9 to be on the same side of the molecule. This leads 
to the stereochemistry shown in 2. 
3.2.2 Infrared Spectroscopy 
The IR spectrum not only reveals the presence of specific functional 
groups, such as the hydroxyl and carbonyl groups, but it can also show 
interactions between them. When a hydroxyl group is involved in 
hydrogen bonding, as in the case of 1,2-glycols, correlations have been 
established between the length of the hydrogen bond and the position of 
the hydrogen bonded 0-H absorption in the IR spectrum. This was at 
one time proposed as a method for determining the relative stereo- 
chemistry of vicinal glycols, but it has been superseded by more powerful 
NMR methods. The carbon-oxygen single-bond stretching absorption in 
the region of ca. 1000 cm-' can be used to distinguish between axial and 
equatorial epimers. 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
69 
3.3 
Chemical Methods 
In this section we will describe some general chemical strategies which can 
reveal useful information on the position, relationships and stereochem- 
istry of a functional group on the underlying carbon skeleton. 
3.3.1 Oxidative Strategies 
The spectroscopic changes that accompany the oxidation of an alcohol 
with chromium(V1) oxide to give a ketone, or an aldehyde and then an 
acid, can be very useful. The IR absorption and 13c NMR signals 
associated with the new carbonyl group (see Table 2.1), the changes to 
adjacent carbon resonances, and the changes in the multiplicity of proton 
resonances are all features which may serve to locate the original 
hydroxyl group. Base-catalysed deuterium exchange has been used to 
determine the number of hydrogen atoms on the carbon atoms adjacent 
to a carbonyl group. For example, one piece of evidence for the location 
of a ketone at the biosynthetically unusual C-2 position of ketornanoyl 
oxide (3.1, Scheme 3.4) came from the incorporation of four deuterium 
atoms (analysed by mass spectrometry) in a base-catalysed exchange 
experiment. The C-2 position is unique in this carbon skeleton in being 
flanked by two methylenes. This information supplemented the 
dehydrogenation experiments described earlier (see p. 52). 
Scheme 3.4 The location of a 
-
2
 
ketone 
Oxidation of the position adjacent to a ketone with selenium dioxide 
can give an ol-diketone. The forlnatio~i of a non-enolizable x-diketone 
(3.3) by oxidation of gibberic acid (3.2, Scheme 3.4) indicated that 
the methylene ketone of the five-membered ring was attached to fully- 
substituted centres, preventing the diketone from enolizing. 
The Baeyer--Villiger oxidation of ketones to lactones with a peroxy 
Apoarornacier;drene was 
acid has provided a way of opening a cycloalkanone during structural 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ , " ~ r , " ~ , " , n $ $ ~  
2. 
work. For example, it was used to open the seven-membered ring of 
w~despread sesquiterpene f o ~ n d  
apoarornadendrene (3.4, Scheme 3.5) to give 3.5. This procedure is useful, 
In, 
examp'es 
Oil 
since it allows a stepwise degradation of a ring via 3.6 and thus the 
location of substituents, in this case the cyclopropane ring in 3.7. 

70 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Scheme 3.5 
Degradation of 
apoaromadendrene 
The removal of the acetyl group in the degradation of clavatol (3.8, 
Scheme 3.6) with alkaline hydrogen peroxide to give 3-hydroxy-2,6- 
Clavatol is a metabolite of the 
dimethylbenzoquinone (3.9) was used to establish the structure of this 
fungus Aspergillus clavatus 
fungal metabolite. 
Scheme 3.6 
Oxidation of 
clavatol 
Oxidation reactions can reveal a number of relationships between 
functional groups. Oxidation of a 1,2-diol with chromium(V1) oxide gives 
firstly a 1,Zdiketone and then a dicarboxylic acid. Pyrolysis of the dicar- 
boxylic acid derived from a cyclohexanone can lead to a cyclopentanone. 
Sodium iodate(V1l) (or periodic acid) is a specific reagent for the 
cleavage of a 1,2-diol (e.g. 3.10, Scheme 3.7) to a diketone (3.1 1). Since the 
reagent forms a cyclic intermediate involving both hydroxyl groups, there 
are specific stereochemical requirements for this reaction. In particular, a 
trans diaxial diol does not undergo reaction. Cleavage reactions of this 
type have played an important role in determining the structures of 
variously modified sugars, particularly those in which some of the 
hydroxyl groups are methylated. An example of its use came in 
establishing the position of the free hydroxyl group in the novioside 
The antiblotlc novoblocin is a 
derivative 3.12 which was obtained from the antibiotic novobiocin. When 
coumarin glycoside which is 
the anomeric methoxyl group was present, there was no reaction with 
obtained from Streptomyces 
spheroides and is used in 
sodium iodate(VI1). However, when this group was hydrolysed, the 
veterinary mediclne 
product 3.13 reacted with sodium iodateWII), showing that the free 
hydroxyl group was adjacent to the anomeric position. 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
71 
The products that are obtained by the oxidation of variously 
substituted 1,3-diols can reveal their relationship. A P-hydroxy ketone 
obtained by the oxidation of a secondaryltertiary 1,3-diol can undergo 
dehydration to an a,bunsaturated ketone with identifiable spectroscopic 
characteristics. The formation of a P-hydroxy ketone or a 1,3-diketone 
permits a number of carbon-carbon bond-cleavage reactions by retro- 
aldol or retro-Claisen reactions. 
The structural feature shown in 3.14 (Scheme 3.8) is quite common 
amongst the di- and triterpenoids. One example is the plant hormone 
gibberellin AI3 (3.15). Oxidation with chromium(V1) oxide gave a P-keto 
acid which readily underwent decarboxylation. The IR spectrum of the 
product (3.16) was typical of a cyclohexanone, but the 'H NMR spectrum 
revealed a change in multiplicity (singlet to doublet) for the methyl group. 
Ths provided some of the evidence for the structure of the ring A in the 
original natural product (3.15). 
Me0 
W
O
M
e
 
H2NC0 
OH 
H2NC0 
OH 
I I 
I I 
O 
3.12 
O 
3.13 
HO 
3.14 R = CH20H, CHO or C02H 
C02H 
3.16 
3.17 
Scheme 3.7 
Oxidation of diols 
with sodium iodate(Vl1) 
Scheme 3.8 Degradation of 
gibberellin AI3 

72 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Scheme 3.9 
Acetonide 
Salicylic acids (2-hydroxybenzoic acids) are fornlally the enols of P-keto 
acids and undergo decarboxylation on heating, revealing a relationship 
between the phenolic hydroxyl group and the carboxyl group. 
Mild oxidation of allylic alcohols to cx,P-unsaturated ketones. which 
nlay be detected by their spectroscopic characteristics, can show that a 
hydroxyl group is adjacent to a double bond. 
3.3.2 Ozonolysis 
The oxidative cleavage of a double bond by ozone has been a valuable 
degradative method. Many natural products contain an exocyclic 
methylene (C=CH2). On ozonolysis this affords formaldehyde and a 
ketone, which can then be the starting point for a further degradation. 
Thus ozonolysis of gibberellin Alj (3.15) established the presence of the 
exocyclic methylene on the five-membered ring. 
3.3.3 Ring-forming Reactions 
The formation of cyclic structures can serve to show the relationships 
between functional groups. Geometrical constraints limit the relative 
positions of participating groups, and thus the formation of a cyclic 
structure becomes a powerful method for establishing stel-eochemical 
relationships. 
The formation of acctonides from 1,2-diols and acetone (propanone) 
requires a cis relationship between the participating hydroxyl groups. In 
the pyranose form of glr~cosr (3.18, Scheme 3.9), this can only be achieved 
by utilizing the C-1 (anon~eric) and C-2 hydroxyl groups. Acetonide 
formation involving the diequatorial hydroxyl groups at C-3 and C-4 
introduces too much angle strain. Diacetone glucose (3.19) therefore 
involves the furanose form of glucose. In contrast, the C-3 epimer of 
glucose, gi~lactosc. (3.20), forms a diacetonide in the pyranose form. 
formation 
I 
Si:oplrle 1s Ihc ba:,~c cor~slili~c~ril 
of 
the alhaloicl scopo:ar?i~rie 
An example of ether formation in structure determination involved the 
(rlyosclr:e) 
ScoPolarnll'e Is a 
acid-ca talysed conversion of the tropane alkaloid scopine (3.21) to 
tropic: ac~d ester which O C C I I ~ . ~  
III 
varlolrs Datljra ([horn apple) a,,d 
scopoline (3.22) (Scheme 3.10). This defined the relationship between the 
H y n s c ~ a n ~ ~ l s  
(henbane) species 
hydroxyl group and the epoxide in this relative of cocaine. 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
73 
The intramolecular esterification of a hydroxyl group by a carboxyl 
oup to form a lactone carries with it stereochemical implications. 
milady, the relationship between two carboxyl groups may be 
tablished by the formation of cyclic anhydrides. Thus the C-19 and 
-20 carboxyl groups of gibberellin AI3 (3.15) were linked by anhydride 
rmalion (see 3.17). 
3.21 
3.22 
Q The alkaloid platynecine (3) is readily converted into the ether 
anhydroplatynecine (4) by thionyl chloride. What stereochemical 
conclusions can be drawn from this? 
Scheme 3.10 Ether formation 
in structure determination 
A In order for the ether to form the ring system, the substituents 
must have the relative orientation as shown in 5. 
Q Ozonolysis of the sesquiterpenoid iresin 6 gives an acetal (7) 
involving the hydroxyl groups and the aldehyde derived from 
cleavage of the ring B alkene. What stereochemical conclusions can 
be drawn from this? 
-- 
- 
--- 
- 
1 

74 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
HO No 
CH20H 
0 (I 
6 
7 
A Both hydroxyl groups and the 5,6-bond must lie on the same 
face of the molecule, as shown in 8. 
3.3.4 Reaction with Acid 
A number of rearrangements take place on treatment of an alkene with 
acid. Many of these are of a Wagner-Meerwein type. Although they have 
been a source of confusion in the early days of structure elucidation, the 
study of these rearrangements has subsequently shed important light on 
the chemistry of natural products, and it has led to useful interrelation- 
ships between groups of compounds. 
One example is the acid-catalysed steviol-isosteviol rearrangement 
(3.23 to 3.24, Scheme 3.1 1) which, apart from providing structural 
evidence linking the alkene and hydroxyl groups, also served to link the 
ent-kaurene and beyerene families of diterpenoids. Isosteviol (3.24) was 
Scheme 3.1 I 
Acid-catalysed 
rearrangement in structure 
determination 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
75 
converted to the beyerene diterpenoid monogynol. A comparable 
rearrangement played an important role in establishing the structure of 
gibberellic acid. 
3.3.5 Rates of Reaction 
The rates of many simple reactions such as ester fornlation and ester 
hydrolysis are influenced by the steric environment of a functional group. 
The success of the application of these measurements to structure 
elucidation involves the selection of appropriate models. The differences 
in rate may enable seiectivity to be achieved and a distinction to be made 
between, for example, two hydroxyl groups. Thus 3P,6a-dihydroxychol- 
estane (two equatorial hydroxyl groups) readily forms a dicarbonate ester 
on treatment with ethyl chloroformate. The 6P-epimer with an axial 
hydroxyl group only forms a 3P-monocarbonate. 
One example of the use of the rates of reaction in establishing 
Podocarp~c acld IS themajor 
- 
stereochemistry came from a comparison of the rates of hydrolysis of ~~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~e 
methyl vinhaticoate (3.25, Scheme 3.12) with methyl podocarpate (3.26). 
Vlntiaticoic acid was obtained 
The former was hydrolysed much more rapidly, and so it was suggested  tree 
that it was an equatorial ester. Methyl podocarpate was known to possess 
structure was of loterest because 
the axial hindered configuration. 
~t does riot obey the ~soprene rule. 
equatorial 
axial 
3.25 
3.26 
Scheme 3.12 The rate of 
- - 
hydrolysis of esters 
3.4 
The Determination of Absolute Stereochemistry 
Most natural products possess an asymmetric centre, and normally they 
occur as only one enantiomer. Where both enantiomers are known they 
may be obtained from different sources and have different biological 
properties. For example, the R(-)-enantiomer of carvone (3.27) tastes of 
spearmint whilst the S(+)-enantiomer tastes of caraway. Although the 
majority of amino acids occur in the L-form. inversion to a D-amino acid 
occurs in some biosyntheses, such as that of penicillin. The determination 
of the absolute stereochemistry of a natural product is an important 
aspect of structural work. 

76 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
C H O  
H
V
O
H
 
CH~OH 
3.28 
The possession of chirality by a n~olecule carries with it the ability to 
rotate the plane of plane-polarized light. This information is used to 
characterize the enantiomers of a chiral molecule. The specific rotation 
[alD2" of a molecule is defined as the rotation in degrees of the plane of 
polarization of plane-polarized inonochromatic light [measured at the 
sodium D line (589 nm)] for a solution of one gram of the material in 100 
cm' o f a  solvent in a cell of 1 decimetre length at 20 OC, i.r. [ulD2' = 100a/ 
/c, where a is the observed rotation, c is the concentration in g/lOO c m h n d  
I is the pathlength (in decimetres). The molecular rotation [MIt, is given by 
[cc][RMM]. To give smaller numbers, this is often quoted as 10-'[MI. 
The development of a systematic stereochemical classification of the 
monosaccharides, firstly by Fisclier,in 1891 and then in 1906 by Rosanoff, 
led to the convention that the sugars could be divided into two 
enan tionleric series based on their relationship to either (+ )-glyceralde- 
hyde (3.28) or its enantionier. (+)-Glyceraldehyde was arbitrarily 
assigned the absolute stereocl~emistry shown in 3.32. In 195 1, Bjivoet 
determined the absolute stereochemistry of sodium rubidium tartrate by 
an X-ray method. This had been related to glyceraldehyde, and by a 
fortuitous coincidence the earlier arbitrary assignment of an absolute 
stereochemistry to ( + )-glyceraldehyde turned out to be correct. 
The abw~lute stereochelaistry of many of the major groups of natural 
products was established by a series of careful i~lterrelationships with 
(+)-glyceraldehyde. A degradation which establishes the absolute 
stereochen~istry at one centre of a molecule is sufficient to determine 
the absolute stereochemistry of the whole molecule, provided the relative 
stereochemistry is known. Thus the absolute stereoclzeiilistry of a number 
of simple branched-chain alcohols and carboxylic acids was established 
by interrelationships in which the chirality of the asymmetric centre was 
not disturbed. These simple derivatives included (-)-2-methylbutan- 1-01. 
(+)-2-methylbutanoic acid, (+)-methylbutanedioic acid and ( + ) - 3 -  
methyll~exanedioic acid. These compounds then formed useful reference 
points for the degradation of the monoterpenoids. 
3.4.1 Molecular Rotation Differences 
The molecular rotation of a molecule may be regarded as the sum of the 
contribution to the rotation by each of its constituent chiral centres. If two 
similar asymmetric molecules belonging to the same enantiomeric series 
are chemically altered in the same way, the change in the molecular 
rotation will be in the same direction ( + ve or -ve) in each case, and will 
often be of the same order of magnitude. For example, in the sugars it was 
observed that if the change in the molecular rotation for the conversion of a 
lactone to the corresponding hydroxy acid was positive, the absolute 
stereschemistry of the carbon atom bearing the masked hydroxyl group 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
77 
was as shown in 3.29. A series of n~olecular rotation differences following 
acetylation. benzoylation and oxidation of alcohols was used in the 
steroids and triterpenoids to correlate the stereochemistry of secondary 
alcohols. 
3.29 
3.4.2 Asymmetric Induction 
The induction of asymmetry through the addition of a Grignard reagent 
Atrolact~c ac1d=2-llydroxy 2 
to a carbonyl group forins the basis of the atrolactic arid method of 
pbe'y''"o"no'C 
aC'cI 
determining absolute stereochemistry. Thus when a phenylglyoxalate 
ester (3.30, Scheme 3.1 3) of a chiral alcohol is subjected to a Grignard 
reaction and the product (3.31) hydrolysed, the chirality of the resultant 
atrolactic acid can be determined from its rotation. This reflects the 
chirality around the original alcohol. The validity of this method depends 
upon the ester preferring the conformation shown in Scheme 3.13. 
Me O H  
S = srilall 
M = medium 
0 
S
M
 
Scheme 3.13 The atrolactic 
3.30 
acid method of determining 
- - 
. .- - - - - -. - - - - - 
absolute stereochemistry 
Horeau's method involves the selective esterification of a chiral 
secondary alcohol with excess racemic 2-phenylbutanoic anhydride. 
One enantioiner of the 2-pl~enylbutyl group reacts preferentially, 
depending on the steric environment of the secondary alcuhol. The 
optical rotation of the residual 2-phenylbutanoic acid reflects the absolute 
configuration of the alcohol. 
3.4.3 Optical Rotatory Dispersion and Circular Dichroism 
The studies that have been described so far relate to the measuren~ent of 
optical rotation at the sodium D line (589 nm). However, optical rotation 
varies with wavelength, a phenomenon known as optical rotatory 
dispersion. Stereochemical information can be deduced from this. For 
some compounds, such as chiral acids, the change of molecular rotation 
with wavelength is a plain curve in the readily accessible region of the 
spectrum (Figure 3.2a). For other chiral compounds, particularly those 
containing a ketone, the curve shows a change of sign (Figure 3.2b), 
known as the Cotton effect, in a region of UV absorption. The sign of the 
Cotton effect (+ve or -ve) reflects the chiral environment of the carbonyl 
group. The contributions of various substituents to the Cotton effect have 
been evaluated and the results summarized in the octant rule. The ketone 
is viewed in a specific manner (Figure 3.3a) and the space around 

78 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
the ketone is divided into octants by intersecting orthogonal planes. For 
the majority of ketones the substituents lie in some of the four rear 
octants, and their contribution may be evaluated as shown in Figure 3.3b. 
Figure 3.2 Graph of molecular 
rotation [MI against wavelength 
Although there is some theoretical justification for the effect, the 
correlations have been established empirically, and the value of the 
method lies in the selection of appropriate model compounds. Other 
functional groups such as a,P-unsaturated ketones, lactones and dienes 
also show Cotton effects. 
Figure 3.3 The octant rule 
Related to this is another phenomenon known as circular dichroism. 
When the difference between the absorption of the left-handed and right- 
handed components of circularly polarized light is plotted against 
wavelength, the curve shows a positive or a negative peak in the region of 
the Cotton effect. The sign of this curve has been correlated with the 
chiral environment of the absorbing group. 
The spatial interactions between two chromophores such as two 
benzoate esters may also give rise to a Cotton effect. Examination of the 
dibenzoates of chiral 1,2-diols revealed an intense split n-n* Cotton effect 
at 233 and 219 nm. The relationship of the sign of these Cotton effects to 
the absolute configuration is known as the excitou chirality method. The 
sign of the Cotton effect around 233 nm is in accordance with the 
chirality: a negative anticlockwise chirality is associated with a negative 
Cotton effect. 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
79 
3.4.4 NMR Methods 
NMR methods have been developed for the determination of chirality. 
These use chemical shift differences between esters and amides derived 
from chiral derivatizing agents, or use chiral shift reagents such as those 
based on camphor derivatives. Many of these methods have been 
developed in the context of resolving NMR signals in order to establish 
the enantiomeric excess of a new chiral centre generated by an asymmetric 
synthesis. 
A useful method has been developed to establish the absolute 
stereochemistry of secondary alcohols and primary amines using the 
differences between the chemical shifts of the protons of (R)- 
and (59-2- 
methoxy-2-phenyl-2-(trifluoromethyl) acetate (MTPA acetates, 3.32; 
Scheme 3.14). The (R)- and (9-0-metllylmandelate esters of secondary 
alcohols are also used. The effects arise from the shielding influence of the 
aromatic ring. The model is shown in 3.32. The A6 values (as - dR) for 
protons adjacent to the secondary alcohol are diagnostic. They are 
negative for the protons oriented on the left-hand side of the MTPA plane 
but for those located on the right side the values are positive. These rules 
rely on the ester or amide taking up the ideal geometry shown in Figure 
3.3a. Although this geometry may be adopted for esters and amides of 
relatively unhindered equatorial substituents, this is not always the case 
for more hindered axial substituents. 
Scheme 3.14 MTPA method of 
determining absolute stereo- 
- 
chemistry (Masher's method) 
Q The chemical shifts of the neighbouring protons of the 4-(R)- and 
4-(S)-MTPA esters of rosiridin (9) are as follows. 4-(R)-MTPA ester: 
H-5 aH 2.13,2.24; H-10 aH 1.72.4-(9-MTPA ester: H-5 dH 2.17,2.28; 
H-10 SH 1.69. What is the absolute stereochemistry of rosiridin? 

Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
9 
A In the model (3.32) for the (a-MTPA ester 10, HA is shielded 
relative to the (R)-MTPA ester whilst HB 
is deshielded. Hence HA is 
H- 10 and HB is H-5, 
i.e. the absolute stereochemistry is as shown in 
11. Using the sequence rule the alcohol has the (R) configuration. 
3.4.5 Crystallographic Methods 
Modern X-ray methods utilizing heavy atom derivatives, such as those 
containing bromine, enabled the absolute stereochemistry of a number of 
natural products to be established. However, X-ray methods can be used 
in the absence of a heavy atom if a derivative of the natural product is 
prepared using a chiral reagent of known absolute stereochernistry. The 
chiral information associated with the derivative can be extended to the 
molecule as a whole, and the final X-ray structure gives the absolute 
stereochemistry of the natural product. 
1. 
'H and 13c NMR methods can be used to establish the position 
and stereochemistry of a functional group on the carbon skeleton. 
2. 
The magnitude of the coupling constant (J) reflects the dihedral 
angle between two protons. Nuclear Overhauser effects play a useful 
role in elucidating stereochemical relationships in a natural product. 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
81 
3. Oxidation reactions can reveal a number of relationships 
between functional groups, e.g. 1,2-diols. 
4. 
Retro-aldol and retro-Claisen reactions and the decarboxyla- 
tion of P-keto acids reveal particular 1,3-relationships, 
5. Ring-forming reactions e.g. ether, acetal and lactone formation, 
can reveal cis relationships between functional groups. 
6. Stereochemical correlations, molecular rotation dfierences, 
asymmetric induction and spectroscopic methods, such as optical 
rotatory dispersion (ORD) and circular dichroism (CD) and NMR 
methods, play a role in establishing the absolute stereochemistry of 
natural products. 
3.1. A monoterpenoid A, Cl0Hi8O2, had IR absorption at 3450 
cm-' and, in the 'H 
NMR spectrum, among other resonances there 
were signals at SH 1.25 (3H, s), 1.65 (3H, s), 3.65 (2H, s) and 5.20 
(1 H, t). On catalytic hydrogenation, compound A took up 1 mole of 
hydrogen. On oxidation with iodic(V11) acid, compound A gave B, 
C9Hi40, which had IR absorption at 1700 cm-'. Compound B 
underwent the iodoform reaction to give a carboxylic acid C, 
CSHl2o3, which was dehydrogenated to give 4-methylbenzoic acid. 
What is the structure of the monoterpenoid A and the structures of 
compounds B and C? 
3.2. 
The coupling constants between the ring A protons of an 
iridoid glucoside, 5-deoxypulchelloside, are shown in D. What is the 
relative stereochemistry of the substituents? 

82 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
3.3. The ethyl N-carboxymethyl ester E derived from the tropane 
alkaloids readily cyclizes to form a lactone F. The isomer in which 
the methyl group and carboxymethyl group are interchanged does 
not form a lactone. What conclusions can be drawn concerning the 
relative stereochemistry of the hydroxyl groups and the nitrogen 
bridge? 
0 
Et02CCH2 
O 3 7 / M e  kOH
E 
F 
3.4. Alkaloid G, C8H13N0, is a tertiary base, It had IR absorp- 
tion at 3500 cm-' and 'H NMR signals at SH 3.0 (5H, m), 3.8 (2H, s) 
and 5.4 (IH, t, J =  7 Hz). It can be oxidized under mild conditions 
with manganese(1V) dioxide to compound H, C8HI lNO, which had 
IR absorption at 1680 cm-' and UV absorption at 229 nm. 
Compound H formed a deep-red dinitrophenylhydrazone. On 
catalytic hydrogenation, G absorbed 1 mole of hydrogen to give I. 
This readily formed a monotoluene-p-sulfonate, which on reduction 
with lithium aluminium hydride gave J, C8H15N. When J was 
submitted to three successive Hofmann degradations with a hydro- 
genation after each stage, the C8 hydrocarbon 3-methylheptane was 
obtained. What is the structure of G? 
3.5. Alkaloid K had IR absorption at 1717 cm-' and 'H NMR 
signals at SH 1.5-1 -7 (4H, m), 2.4 and 2.8 (each 2H, m), 2.5 (3H, s) 
and 3.45 (2H, m). It reacts with two moles of benzaldehyde in the 
presence of base to produce L, C22H21N0. The alkaloid undergoes 
vigorous oxidation to produce an acid M, C8Hl3NO4. The acid M 
reacts with excess iodomethane to give a quaternary ammonium 
salt. This salt when heated with silver oxide gives an unsaturated 
acid, which was reduced to heptanedioic acid (pimelic acid), 
H02C(CH2)5C02H. Deduce the structure of the alkaloid K and 
the compounds L and M. 
3.6. On treatment with acetone and toluene-p-sulfonic acid, 
adenosine (N) forms an acetonide involving the secondary alcohols 
of the ribose. The primary alcohol then gives a toluene-p-sulfonate on 

The Location of the Functional Groups and the Molecular Stereochemistry 
treatment with toluene-p-sulfonyl chloride. When the toluene-p- 
sulfonate is treated with sodium iodide, a cyclonucleoside salt (0) is 
formed. What stereochemical information can be deduced from this? 
3.7. 
Antibiotic P, C7Hl lN03, had IR absorption at 3120, 2600 
and 1650 cm-I and 'H NMR signals at dH 1.23 (3H, d, J=6.5 Hz), 
3.82 (lH, d, J= 2.6 Hz), 5.19 (lH, quintet, J =  6.5 Hz), 5.42 (lH, dd, 
J=2.6 and 4 Hz), 5.83 (lH, t, J=6.5 Hz) and 6.16 (lH, dd, J = 4  
and 6.5 Hz). Irradiation at JH 5.19 collapsed the doublet at dH 1.23 
to a singlet and converted the signal at 5.83 to a doublet (J= 6.5 Hz). 
Irradiation at SH 6.16 also collapsed the signal at 5.83 to a doublet 
(J= 6.5 Hz) and that at 5.42 to a doublet (J= 2.6 Hz). Irradiation at 
dH 3.82 collapsed the signal at SH 5.42 to a doublet (J= 4 Hz). The 
antibiotic was soluble in base and also gave a hydrochloride. On 
hydrogenation the antibiotic gave compound Q, C7HI3NO3, the 'H 
NMR spectrum of which lacked the signals at dH 5.83 and 6.16. On 
reaction with diazomethane and then with methyl iodide, compound 
Q gave compound R, C1 1H221N03. Reduction of this with lithium in 
liquid ammonia gave a compound C7Hl4O2, which was identified by 
synthesis as 2-(1-hydroxyethy1)-5-methyltetrahydrofuran. What are 
the structures of the antibiotic P and compounds Q and R? 
3.8. 
A fungal metabolite S, CIZH1202, 
had IR absorption at 1685 
and 1610 cm-I and 'H NMR signals at dH 1.7 (3H, s), 3.0 and 3.35 
(each lH, dd, J = 9  and 16 Hz), 5.0 (2H, br s), 5.3 (lH, I, J = 9  Hz), 
6.90 and 7.6 (each IH, d, J = 8  Hz), 7.72 (lH, s) and 9.83 (lH, s). 
Irradiation of the signal at dH 5.3 collapsed the signals at dH 3.0 and 
3.35 to doublets (J= 16 Hz) and irradiation at JH 7.72 produced 
nuclear Overhauser effect enhancements of the signals at SH 3.0,3.35 
and 9.83. Reduction of compound S with sodium borohydride gave 
compound T, Cl2Hl4o2. 
This compound lacked the IR absorption 

34 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
at 1685 cm-', but had instead a new absorption at 3620 cm-'. In the 
'H NMR spectrum the signal at JH 9.83 had been replaced by a two- 
proton singlet, dH 4.6, and an exchangeable resonance at dH 2.21. 
The signals at aH 7.6 and 7.72 in S had shifted to aH 7.2 and 7.26 in T. 
Ozonolysis of compound T gave formaldehyde and compound U, 
C H 203, which underwent the iodoform reaction. Suggest a 
structure for compound S. 

Some Examples of Structure 
Elucidation 
The aim of this chapter is to exemplify the strategies of structure 
elucidation from the various classes of secondary metabolite. By the 
end of this chapter you should understand the role of chemical and 
spectroscopic methods in providing structural information in the 
context of some specific examples. 
4.1 
Santonin 
The scsquiterpenoid saritonin (4.1, R = H) has attracted considerable 
Afrei'?is'a 
a l e  ~
~
'
~
'
~
~
l
I-ierhs (if 
Ilie Colr~pnsitae 
interest since it was first isolated from "wormseed" in 1830. It is the best 
A ",,t.,er 
arc llse-J In [lie 
known of a family of sesquiterpenoid lactones which occur in various 
preparation of various medlclnes 
and dr~nks A abs~rlth/f.rr)~ 
was 
Artemisicr species (Compositae) such as A. 117nritirnn. Santonin has a 
(,-,,, 
bar.,ncd) In ,he 
powerful anthelmintic action and has been used for this purpose in 
proparatlot1 ot abs~nttle. wtrllsl ~11~: 
medicine. 
herb tarragon IS A o'l.acwlculus 
Ai-I antheini~nltc IS a coiiiyour~d 
that 1s loxrc lo ~~itest~rial 
wornis 
Much of the earlier work on the chemistry of santonin was carried out 
by Italian chemists in the latter part of the 19th century and the earlier 
part of the 20th century. A correct two-dimensional projection of the 
structure of santonin was proposed in 1929. and the full stereochemistry 

86 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
was finally established by X-ray crystallography in 1962. The studies on 
the structure of santonin exemplify many of the classical chemical 
strategies that were used in the era before the dominance of physical 
methods. These studies were made more complex because santonin 
undergoes a number of rearrangements. The chemistry of these proved to 
be very interesting.'** 
The molecular formula was established by combustion analysis and 
relative molecular mass determination as CI 
The oxygen functions 
A lactone IS an Internal ester A 
were characterized as a ketone and a lactone. Santonin formed ketonic 
y-lactone contalns a I~ve- 
Ilien?hered rlng and a ii.lactone 
derivatives such as an oxime, and the lactone was hydrolysed with alkali 
a SIX men.~bered r~r.~g 
to santoninic acid, C15H2004. 
The lactone was regenerated from this by 
treatment with acid. Santonin readily took up two moles of hydrogen to 
give a mixture of two saturated ketonic lactones, a- and P-tetrahydro- 
santonins, C15H2203. 
Hence there were two C=C double bonds. Since a 
CI5 acyclic saturated hydrocarbon would be C15H32, there are seven 
double bond equivalents in santonin (H32 - H18 = H14 = 7 db equiv). The 
alkenes account for two of these, the carbonyl groups account for two 
more, and the lactone ring accounts for one. Two double bond 
equivalents remained, and hence santonin contained two further rings. 
Thlswork was carrled o ~ t  
before 
Evidence for the structure of the carbon skeleton came from 
the discovery of more modern 
reduc~ng agents 
dehydrogenation and oxidation experiments. Reduction of san tonin 
with red phosphorus and hydrogen iodide led to hydrogenolysis of the 
lactone ring and the formation of santonous acid, CISH2003. 
Dehy- 
drogenation of this with zinc gave 1,4-dimethylnaphthalene (4.2, R = H) 
and 1,4-dimethylnaphthalen-2-01 (4.2, R = OH). The formation of the 
dimethylnaphthalene accounts for 12 of the carbon atoms, although, as 
we shall see later, one carbon atom has undergone rearrangement. 
Nevertheless, this established much of the underlying carbon skeleton of 
santonin. 
The stepwise re~noval of the oxygen functions also provided some useful 
structural evidence. Reduction of santonin oxime with zinc and sulfuric 
acid gave santoninamine, which on treatment with nitrous acid gave an 
aromatic compound, hyposantonin, ClsHl8o2. This was subsequently 
formulated as 4.3. Vigorous oxidation of hyposantonin with potassium 
manganate(VI1) gave 3,6-dimethylbenzene-1,2-dicarboxylic acid (4.4). 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
87 
When this evidence was taken in conjunction with the formation of 1,4- 
naphthalen-2-ol(4.2, R = OH), it was apparent that the double bonds and 
the carbonyl group of santonin are on one ring and the lactone ring was 
attached to the other. The site of attachment of the latter became clear 
when the lactone of hyposantonin was hydrolysed to the corresponding 
hydroxy acid. Dehydrogenation of this gave 7-ethyl- l,4-dimethylnaphtha- 
lene (4.5, R = Me). The isolation of4.5 led to the suggestion that a phenolic 
product of hydrogenolysis of santonin, santonous acid, possessed the 
structure 4.6. This was confirmed by synthesis. 
A number of structures based on this skeleton were proposed for 
The Isoprene rule states that the 
santonin. However, in 1929. Clemo, Haworth and Walton, in the light of ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ , " , " ~ ~ ~ , " ~ ~ ~ P ~ ~ , " i ,
the isoprene rule that had been proposed by Ruzicka, suggested that 
Isor,rene units l~nked 
I" a head-to- 
- 
- 
santonin might be a regular sesquiterpenoid containing a carbon skeleton 
tatl'~anner 
(See chapter l )  
which was constructed from three isoprene units. It was suggested that 
the formation of a number of santonin degradation products involved the 
rearrangement of a methyl group from the quaternary angular position 
(C-10) to C-I. Evidence for this was obtained by the reduction of 
tetrahydrosantonin to deoxytetrahydrosantonin. This compound lacked 
the dienone which provided the source of the rearrangement. Dehy- 
drogenation of this reduction product gave a naphthalene which lacked 
the 4-methyl group, 7-ethyl-1-methylnaphthalene (4.5, R = H). 
Two structural features remained to be established. These were the 
point of attachment of the lactone ring and the position of the angular 
methyl group. The point of attachment of the lactone ring was established 
through the synthesis of desmotroposantonin (4.3, R = OH). 
The location of the angular methyl group followed from the stepwise 
oxidative degradation of the dienone of santonin via its epoxide to give 
heptane-2,3.6-tricarboxylic acid (4.7), which was synthesized. 

88 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
The eudesr nanc ser les of 
sesa!~ilerpenes have Ihe skeieton 
TIie cadiila~ie and gl,aiar-le 
skelelons are a so clclile ccj~~r~rlur~ 
The absolgte stereoche~nrstry uf 
I\-cypero:le had In turn been 
llnked to lhat of the sterolcis 
There are four asymnletriccentres it1 santonin, C-6. C-7. (2-10 and C-I 1 .  
Because of the coinplexity of the rearrangement reactions which santonin 
undergoes, the final elucidation of the stereochet~iistry took a further 30 
years. 
Many of the stereochemical arguments were concerned with the 
stereochemistry of the lactone ring of santonin. When ring A is converted 
to an aromatic ring, epimerization of the lactone ring can take place by an 
acid-catalysed mechanisn~ that involves the forination of a planar 
benzylic carbocation at C-6. Other centres (C-7 and C-11) may be 
epimerized by elimination-rehydration sequences and by enolization of 
the lactone carbonyl. A rationalization of the formation of a series of 
compounds led to the suggestion that santonin possessed a trans lactone 
ring. The controversy regarding the stereochemistry of santonin was 
ultimately resolved by an X-ray crystal structure of 2-broino-a-santonin 
(4.1, R = Br). 
The absolute stereochei~~istry of santo~lin was established by linking it 
to other nlen~bers of the eudesmane series of sesquiterpenes, and in 
particular to P-cyperone (4.8). Molecular rotation differences and optical 
rotatory dispersion studies showed that these compounds had the same 
absolute stereochemistry at C-10 as the steroids. 
It is helpful to see how much structural information can be obtained 
from a straightforward examinatioi~ of the spectroscopic data, i.e. what 
could be deduced from these data were the structural problem to be 
examined today. The 1R spectrum of santonin contains absorptions at 
1784, 1656, 1627 and 1610 C ~ I - I .  which are typical of a y-lactone and 2.p- 
unsaturated ketone. The UV spectrum shows intense broad absorption at 
A,;,, = 236 nm, which would confirm the prcsence of an a,P-unsaturated 
ketone. The 
NMR spectrum shows 15 signals, which from the DEPT 
spectrum correspond to three methyl groups, two n~ethylenes, five 
inethines and five carbons without an attached hydrogen. Two of the 
latter (Bc 186.7 and 178.0) are present as carbonyl groups, and two (SC 
15 1.4 and 129. I )  are present as alkene resonances. Two of the methine 
signals are alkene resonances (iSc 155.3 and 126.3) and one at dc 81.6 is 
a signal for a carbon bearing oxygen. The 'H NMR spectrum contained 
three methyl group resonances [hH 1.22 (doublet, J =  6.9 Hz). 1.28 
(singlet) and 2.08 (singlet)], corresponding to a CH-CH3, a C-CH3 and a 
C=C-CH3, respectively. There were two alkene hydrogen signals (dH 
6.19 and 6.65) which were coupled together ( J  = 9.9 Hz). The chemical 
shifts of these signals corresponded to those of an u,P-unsaturated ketone. 
There was a CH-0 signal (dtI 4.75) which appeared as a doublet (J = 1 1.0 
Hz), and a doublet of quartets (hH 2.37) assigned to the CH-CH3 group. 
Spin decoupling experiments showed that both the signal at Sil 
4.75 
and that at SH 2.37 were coupled to the same resonance at (jH 1.75. 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
89 
This information provides evidence for the presence of the fragments 4.9, 
4.10 and 4.1 1 and from the magnitude of the coupling constants suggests 
that H-6 and H-7 are o.ur-rs to each other. 
If this problein were being studied today, the next steps in the structure 
elucidation would then be to establish connectivity between these 
fragments. A two-dimensional 'H-'" 
COSY experiment would confirm 
the interrelatioi~ship of the 'H and 
signals. Since a nuinber of the 
fragments terminate in fully substituted carbon atoms, an appropriate 
NMR sequence might be a heteronuclear multiple bond correlation 
(HMBC) experiment to link these fragments. 
4.2 
Griseofulvin 
Griseofulvin (4.12, Scheme 4.1) was first described in 1939 as a metabolite 
of the fungus P~nic.illiw~l 
g~.i.rc~c,j~~/\'irtii. 
I1 is an important polyket~de 
antibiotic which has been used for the treatment of fungal diseases in 
animals and in man. The structure was elucidated by a combination of 
chemical and spectroscopic methods. 1R and UV spectroscopy played an 
important part both in the critical evaluation of some early structural 
proposals and in establishing the correct structure in 1 95Z3 
Analytical and relative molecular mass determinations showed that 
griseofulvin was C1 ,H 7C106. The preliminary chkrracteriznfion of 
griseofulvin revealed the presence of three nlethoxyi groups, aild the 
formation of a 2.4-dinitrophenylhydrazone derivative showed that it 
contained a reactive carbonyl group. Microhydrogenation established the 
presence of an alkene. One of the methoxyl groups in griseofulvin was 
hydrolysed under both acidic and alkaline conditions. This hydrolysis 
gave a weakly acidic product known as griseofulvic acid, C16HISC106, 
which behaved as a 1,3-diketone, indicating that griseofulvin was a 
p-methoxy-a,p-unsaturated ketone. Griseofulvic acid was subsequently 
shown to have the structure 4.13 (Scheme 4. I). Catalytic reduction of thc 
hydrolysis product gave a tetrahydro derivative, C 16H 19C10h. This 
compound was a diol and il still retained an unreactive carbonyl group. 
The UV spectrunl showed that this ketone was conjugated with an 
Grlseofulvin was llsed a:; 
F~:lcin 
ft.,r 
1 1 1 ~  
II&~~=III~I~W~~ 
t 11 i j*ic!.?l 
~-iIeclii.~nt; 
oi in? sli n e CJ 
I-II-ICILI~O~I~ 
An sp2 C: CI bond IS much Inore 
cl~lf~ct~ll 
to cleave under 
nuclenphllic corldil~ons rhar? an 
sp:' C Cl bond 

90 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
- 
aromatic ring. Thus five of the oxygen atoms were accounted for in three 
methoxyl groups and two carbonyl groups. Since the ZR spectrum of 
griseofulvin did not contain hydroxyl absorption, the remaining oxygen 
atom must be present as an ether. The chlorine atom was inert towards 
powerful nucleophiles, and hence it was an aromatic substituent. 
Scheme 4.1 Degradation of 
griseofulvin 
The formula C17Hj7C106 
requires nine double bond equivalents. One of 
these was accounted for in the alkene, two in the carbonyl groups and 
four in the aromatic ring. This left two double bond equivalents 
unaccounted for, and so apart from the aromatic ring, there were two 
more rings in griseofulvin. 
The carbon skeleton and relative position of the functional groups in 
An en01 ether IS electron 
and 
griseofulvin were established by a series of degradations. Typical of a 
sensltlve to acidic hydrol~sls The 
polycarbonyl compound, the most informative of these were a series of 
P-poslt~on of an 2.P-unsaturated 
kefone Is sensltlve to nucleophlllc 
alkaline cleavage reactions. Fusion with potassium hydroxide gave orcinol, 
add~tion 
3,s-dihydroxymethylbenzene (4.16, R = H), and sodium methoxide gave 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
91 
orcinol nionomethyl ether (4.16, R = Me) and the acid 4.15. The latter 
The en01 of a 1 (3-d~ke~nne 
w~ll 
were C8 and Cp compounds and together they accounted for all 17 carbon 
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
-
atoms of griseofulvin. A characteristic reaction of a 2-hydroxybenzoic acid 
(salicylic acid) is the loss of carbon dioxide on heating. The C9 acid gave 2- 
chloro-3.5-dimethoxyphenol (4.14), which was identified by synthesis. 
This fragment contained two of the methoxyl groups and the third was in 
the orcinol methyl ether. The isolation of the orcinol methyl ether served to 
relate the methyl group, the methoxyl group and one of the carbonyl 
groups of griseofulvin. The base-catalysed cleavage of griseofulvin follows 
the pathway shown in Scheme 4.2. 
(?Me 
OMe 
I 
OMe 
I 
A stepwise oxidative degradation of griseofulvic acid (4.13) clarified the 
relationship of the two six-membered rings. Firstly, oxidation with 
alkaline hydrogen peroxide gave the dicarboxylic acid (4.18, R = C02H), 
which behaved as a P-keto acid and underwent decarboxylation. The 
product 4.18 (R = H) contained an easily oxidizable C-H adjacent to the 
carbonyl group. This was hydroxylated with potassium manganate(VI1) 
to give 4.18 (R = OH). Finally, oxidation with iodate(VI1) gave the acid 
4.15 and (+)-methylsuccinic acid (4.17). Since this degradation was 
performed on griseofulvic acid, it did not distinguish between two 
Cl 
Scheme 4.2 The base- 
catalysed cleavage of 
griseofulvin 

92 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
alternative en01 ether structures 4.12 and 4.19. These were distinguished 
by the isolation of 3-methoxy-2,5-toluquinone 
(4.20) from the oxidative 
degradation of griseofulvin with chromium(V1) oxide. 
The stereochemistry of griseofulvin was established in a number of 
studies. The isolation of (+)-methylsuccinic acid (4.17) established the 
absolute stereochemistry at one centre. Griseofulvin undergoes epimer- 
ization at the spiranic centre. Examination of this equilibrium, and 
rationalization in terms of the interactions between the secondary methyl 
group or a hydrogen atom and the acetophenone carbonyl, suggested that 
the stereochemistry of griseofulvin was 4.12. X-ray crystallographic 
analysis of 5-bromogriseofulvin completed the structural work. 
A number of the structural features of griseofulvin are apparent in the 
NMR spectrum, and again it is helpful to review this information to see 
how the structure might be established today. The 'H NMR spectrum 
revealed the methyl group doublet (bH 0.93, J =  6.6 Hz) and three 
methoxyl signals (bH 3.58, 3.94 and 4.00). There were two singlets, one for 
an alkene (aH 5.51) and one for an aromatic proton at hH 6.1 1. There were 
three other aliphatic proton resonances. A double doublet at bH 2.39 
( J =  16.5 and 4.4 Hz) and bH 3.01 (J= 16.5 and 13.6) were coupled to 
each other and to a multiplet at bH 2.8 1. The latter was also coupled to the 
methyl group doublet at bH 0.92. From their chemical shift and 
multiplicity, this indicated the presence of the system Me-CH-CH2- 
C=O. The '% NMR spectrum of griseofulvin has been assigned by using 
appropriate models, 2-methoxyacetophenone and 2-methoxychloroben- 
zene for ring A and the ethyl ether of dimedone (4.21) for ring C. 
However, these NMR data on their own would not lead directly to the 
structure of griseofulvin. Other experiments based on chemical degra- 
dation and heteronuclear multiple bond NMR correlations would be 
4.21 
required. 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
93 
- 
4.3 
Penicillin and Clavulanic Acid 
In the summer of 1928, Fleming made the observation that a fungus, 
Penicillium nofafum, which was a chance infection of a bacterial culture, 
was producing a substance that inhibited the growth of various 
Staphylococci. During the 1930s, several efforts were made to isolate 
this substance and these came to fruition in 1938 with the work of Florey 
and Chain. However, the early work was confused because the material 
that was isolated was a mixture of penicillins. Indeed, owing to the crude 
nature of the penicillin concentrates which were purified as their barium 
salts for analysis, the presence of sulfur in the antibiotic was at first 
missed. Because of the importance of the antibiotic, a major effort to 
establish the structure was made during the 1939- 1945 war.4 
Various penicillins were isolated, not only from P. notatum but also 
from P. chrysogenum and other Penicillia and Aspergilli. Much of the 
degradative work was carried out with pent-2-enylpenicillin (penicillin F, 
C14H2004N2S), which was produced on surface culture, and with 
benzylpenicillin (penicillin G, C16H1804NZS), 
which was produced in 
submerged culture. 
Hydrolysis of the penicillins (4.22) with acid produced an a-amino acid, 
penicillamine, C5HI ,O2NS (4.23), and a penaldic acid (4.25). Penicillamine 
was identified as P,P-dimethylcysteine (4.23) by synthesis, and shown to 
possess the unusual D-amino acid configuration. 
0 
H
H
 
1 1 H i  
R-C-N 
4.22 Penicillin R = P~CH*- $- at 
4.23 Penicillarnine 
0 
Me 
I 1  H 
R-C-NCHCHO 
I 
C O ~ H  
C O ~ H  
4.24 Penicilloic acid 
4.25 Penaldic acid 
It became apparent that the penicillins differed amongst themselves in 
the non-penicillamine portion of the molecule, and the view emerged that 
there existed a penicillin nucleus (C9H1104N2S-R) to which the various 
substituents (R) were attached. A number of degradations were carried 

94 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
out. A useful sequence centred on the structure of the penaldic acid 
fragment 4.25. Alkaline hydrolysis of a penicillin gave a penicilloic acid 
(C9H 305N2S-R, 4.24), which behaved as a dicarboxylic acid containing 
a basic amino group. Further alkaline hydrolysis led to the loss of the 
penicillamine unit 4.23 and the formation of the penaldic acid 
(C4H404N-R, 4.25). Treatment of the penaidic acid with acid led to 
the loss of carbon dioxide and the formation of a penilloaldehyde 
(C3H402N- R, 4.27). This was behaviour that was typical of a P-keto acid. 
0 
II H 
R-C 
-NCH2CH0 
4.26 Penilloic acid R = P~CH* -5- - or 05- 
4.27 Penilloaldehyde 
The penilloaldehydes were also obtained in another way. Treatment of 
penicilloic acid (4.24) with acid led to the evolution of carbon dioxide and 
the formation of a monocarboxylic acid, a penilloic acid (C8H1303N2 
S-R. 4.26). Hence the penicilloic acids were masked P-keto acids. 
Removal of the sulfur from the penilloic acid with mercury(I1) chloride 
and hydrolysis of the product gave the penilloaldehydes 4.27. 
The penilloaldehydes gave carbonyl derivatives and also behaved as 
amides. The significance of the isolation of phenylacetic acid from the 
degradation of benzylpenicillin then became apparent, and led to the 
synthesis of the corresponding penilloaldehyde. 
Since the penaldic acids behaved as P-keto acids, they were formulated 
as RCO-NH-CH(C02H)-CHO. 
The question was then posed as to how the penicillamine unit, a 
cysteine, might be joined to the penaldic acid to give a masked aldehyde. 
Both amines and thiols add to aldehydes, and hence a structure was 
The th~azolrd~ne 
rrny is a masked 
proposed for the penicilloic acids which contained a thiazcrlidine ring 
When this is Opened, '' 
(see 4.24). The penilloic acids were the decarboxylation products of this. 
can provrde the pathway for the 
decarboxylat~on of 
penicillolc 
The formation of the penicilloic acid from the penicillin involves the 
addition of water. Although it may at first sight seem surprising, it took 
some time for this to be seen as the hydrolysis of a cyclic four-membered 
ring amide. Eventually a p-luctam structure 4.22 for the pencillins 
was accepted. Part of the reason for this difficulty lay in the structure of 
this f3-lactam ring, which is strained and bent so that there is relatively 
little amjde character in it. The p-lactam is consequently much more 
reactive than a normal amide, and so were a number of reactions that it 
was difficult to rationalize when the structure was under investigation. 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
95 
Since the discovery of the penicillins, a number of other p-lactam 
antibiotics, such as the cephalosporins (4.28), have been discovered. 
H
H
 H 
n 
H 
COzH 
0 
COzH 
4.28 Cephalosporin C 
4.29 Clavulanic acid 
The enzymatic hydrolysis of the P-lactam ring by fi-lac(;~ni~~scs 
is one 
of the major deactivation routes for the penicillins. The development of 
resistant strains of bacteria possessing these enzyme systems has become a 
major problem with these antibiotics. The discovery of clavuls~lic arid 
(4.29), a metabolite of Srrepto~nj~ces 
clcvuligerzts, which is an inhibitor of 
the p-lactamases, was a significant step forward. Its structure deterini- 
nation is typical of a more modern strategy involving spectroscopic 
methods.' 
Clavulanic acid (4.29) gave a monomethyl ester, the high-resolution 
mass spectrum of which ( M +  = 21 3.0635) established the tnolecular 
formula of the ester as C9HIINOS. The IR spectrum contained 
absorption at v,,,, 
= 3500 (OH), 1800 (p-lactam) and 1750 cn1-' 
(ester). There was also enhanced ulkene absorption at 1695 cm-' 
which was attributed to an en01 ether (-0-C=C), thus accounting for 
the five oxygen atoms. The 'H NMR spectrum contained signals at aH 
3.05(J= 17.5and 0.8 Hz), 3.54(J= 17.5 and 2.8 Hz)and 5.72 (J=2.8 
and 0.8 Hz), which were assigned to an ABX system Z-CH2CHX-Y. 
There was also a two-proton signal at dH 4.21 which appeared as a 
doublet (J = 7 Hz) coupled to an alkene resonance, dH 4.93. The latter 
also showed a small allylic coupling, J = 1.2 Hz, to a signal at bH 5.07. 
Taken together with the TR evidence for the presence of an alcohol and 
an en01 ether, this suggested the presence of partial structure 4.30. 
The 13c NMR spectrum contained nine signals. Those at ac 167 and 174 
ppm were assigned to the J3-lactam and ester carbonyl groups and those at 
Sc 152 and 100 (CH) were assigned to the en01 ether. There were two CH 
signals at dC 87 and 60 which were assigned to the fragments 0-CH-N 
and O=C-CH-N. Two CH2 signals appeared at ac 57 (CH20H) and 46 
(O=C-CH?) and the methyl ester was at dc 53. When these were pieced 
together they led to the gross structure 4.29 for clavulanic acid. The final 
structure, including the absolute stc.~.eochernistry, was elucidated by X-ray 
crystal structure determinations of the 4-nitro- and 4-bromobenzyl esters. 
Clav~,lanic ac~d is co forrn~~lated 
w~lll a penicillin such as 
an1oxy~1lI111 
In Auyr~~el~lir>, 
vcli~cli 
IS 
used lor It;+? 
treatm~nl of serl(xIC; 
~rllecl~rlns 

96 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
4.4 
Prostaglandins 
- -- - 
- - - . - - 
. 
- - 
- 
- - 
Proslaylal~d~i: 
preparatrons such 
The prostaglandins are an important family of hormones that occur in 
as Ornoprost have been used In 
, 
, 
, ,,,,,, 
, of 
many animal  tissue^.^ They possess a wide range of biological activities 
Idhour 
which include the stimulation of smooth muscle and the regulation of 
gastric secretions. The prostaglandins and their relatives, the prostacyclins 
and thromboxanes, also have effects on cardiovascular activity. Their 
biosynthesis (see Chapter 5) is inhibited by aspirin. The concentrations 
of the prostaglandins in human seminal plasma are of the order of 10-20 
~ ~ ~ / c m '  
and they are present in various tissues at levels of 0.5 pg/g dry 
weight. Hence the amounts of material that were available for structural 
work were very limited. The methods that were used involved micro-scale 
techniques, including the combination of gas chromatography and mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS). 
The prostaglandins are named as PGA ... PGE, PGF, etc., in the 
sequence in which they were isolated, with the last letters indicating 
the nature of the functional groups. Subscript numbers 1,2, etc., indicate 
the number of double bonds. 
Microanalysis and relative molecular mass determination for prosta- 
glandin El (4.31) showed that it had the molecular formula C20H3405, with 
four double bond equivalents. Examination of its IR spectrum, together 
with the formation of a methyl ester and a diacetate, showed that it 
contained a carboxyl group, a cyclopentanone, two hydroxyl groups and 
one tr-artsdouble bond. The compound absorbed one mole of hydrogen on 
catalytic reduction. and on reduction with sodium borohydride the ketone 
was reduced to give the trio1 PGFI. CZOH3605 
Three of the double bond 
equivalents were therefore accounted for by the ketone, the carboxylic acid 
and the alkene. Hence prostaglandin El had one ring, the cyclopentanone. 
Prostaglandin El did not have significant UV absorption, and hence the 
double bond was not conjugated with the cyclopentanone. However, when 
prostaglandin El was treated with alkali, a compound with strong UV 
absorption at 278 nm was obtained. The wavelength of this absorption in 
the UV spectrum indicated that a conjugated dienone (4.32) had been 
formed. This degradation product gave a monoacetoxy-monomethyl 
ester. i.e. it retained one hydroxyl group and the carboxyl group. 
Ozonolysis of the double bonds in this derivative and oxidative work-up, 
followed by separation and identification of the products by GC-MS, gave 
monomethyl suberate (octandioate, 4.33), succinic acid (butanedioc acid, 
4.34) and 2-acetoxyheptanoic acid (4.35). These fragments account for all 
but one of the carbon atoms of PGEI. Another derivative (4.36) was 
obtained by treatment of dihydro-PGE, with alkali. This compound was 
an u.P-unsaturated ketone (A,,,, 
237 nm). Ozonolysis of the monoacetoxy- 
monomethyl ester of this compound gave monomethyl suberate (4.33) 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
97 
and 7-acetoxy-4-oxododecanoic acid (4.37). The structure of the latter was 
established by its mass spectroscopic fragmentation pattern. 
When this information was brought together, it led to a structural 
proposal for prostaglandin El (4.31). The formation of the dienone may 
be rationalized in terms of the elimination of the hydroxyl group of a 
P-hydroxy ketone followed by isomerization of the double bond, as 
shown in Scheme 4.3. 
Scheme 4.3 The formation of a 
dienone in the degradation of 
prostaglandin E, 

98 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
The stereochemistry was established by X-ray crystallographic analysis 
of the tris(4-bromobenzoate) of the methyl ester of the reduction product 
PGF,, and it has subsequently been confirmed by numerous syntheses. 
The optical activity of the 2-acetoxyheptanoic acid, which was obtained 
on ozonolysis, originally suggested that the prostaglandins had the " 15R" 
configuration. However, the absolute stereochemistry of the prostaglan- 
dins was revised in the light of biosynthetic studies to that shown in 4.31. 
This degradation, carried out on a very limited amount of material, 
was based on the use of oxidative methods and GC-MS to identify the 
fragments. GC-MS has become very important in the identification of 
small amounts of biologically active substances, including many insect 
pheromones and plant hormones. 
4.5 
Vitamin C 
Scurvy is a major deficiency disease arising from a lack of vitanlin C 
(ascorbic acid) in the diet. Dietary cures for this disease in terms of fresh 
fruit, particularly citrus fruits and green vegetables, were recognized in 
the 18th and 19th centuries. Many efforts were made in the early part of 
the 20th century to isolate the vitamin. Eventually, Szent-Gyorgi was able 
to isolate material from the adrenal glands of cattle and from plant 
sources (paprika), and by 1932 he was able to propose a structure for the 
water-soluble vitamin C, which became known as ascorbic acid (4.37; see 
Scheme 4.6 below).' 
The vitamin had analytical data corresponding to C6H8O6. Therefore 
there were three double bond equivalents. It behaved as a weak 
monobasic acid with the solubility properties of a sugar. Vitamin C 
had strong reducing properties, and was easily oxidized by mild oxidants 
such as iodine to dehydroascorbic acid (4.41). Dehydroascorbic acid 
could be easily reduced to ascorbic acid by mild reducing agents such as 
hydrogen sulfide. This easy reversible redox reactivity was rationalized by 
the presence of an cne-diol in the structure. An ene-diol is tautomeric with 
an a-ketol (Scheme 4.4). 
-- - - 
-. 
. . - 
-. - - -. - - - - - - 
- 
. - - - 
- 
OH 0 
OH OH 
0 0 
Scheme 4.4 Oxidation of an 
I 
I 
101 
I I  
I I  
-CH-C- 
-C=C- - 
-C-C- 
a-ketol 
Typical of many sugars possessing an a-ketol, the easily oxidized 
ascorbic acid reacted with phenylhydrazine to give an osazone, a 
derivative of a diketone (Scheme 4.3). 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
99 
Treatment of ascorbic acid with diazomethane gave a dimethyl ether 
(4.40: Scheme 4.6), which was no longer acidic. Hydrolysis of this 
derivative with aqueous sodium hydroxide gave a hydroxy acid without 
the loss of these methoxyl groups. Hence ascorbic acid contained a 
lactone ring. There were two more hydroxyl groups which were adjacent 
to each other, since the dimethyl ether reacted with acetone (propanone) 
PhHN 
NHPh 
I 
I 
OH OH 
N 
N 
I 
I 
II II 
-c=c- 
----. -c-c- 
to give an isopropylidene derivative. Hence the six oxygen atoms of 
An ~sopropylldene derlvatlve 1s an 
ascorbic acid were accounted for by a lactone ring and four hydroayl zEt: 1;T: 
groups. 
an R C I ~  
catalyst. 
Scheme 4.5 
Osazone 
formation 
CHO 
Scheme 4.6 The degradation 
of vitamin C 

I00 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Hydrolys~s of ih;: lactorle ylves the 
erwl of a I\-ketc. ac:~d 1-h~s 
decarborylates uncier t l ~ e  
ac:lclrc 
cor~d~tions. 
Ac~ci-ca!alysed 
cycl~zaf~or? 
ancl dehydratron glves 
f~r:fural 
The Iocat~on of the rnethoxyl 
groups 111 4.47 was e s t a l l l ~ s h ~ d  
by 
degraclat~on lo 
d~niethoryq 
lyce~alclehyde 
The nature of the carbon chain was revealed by several experiments. 
Firstly, when ascorbic acid was boiled with hydrochloric acid it gave 
furfural (4.39), and so at least five of the six carbon atoms were in a 
straight chain. Secondly, further mild oxidation of dehydroascorbic 
acid (4.41) gave the C2 oxalic acid (ethanedioc acid, 4.42) and the C4 
L-threonic acid (4.43), accounting for all six carbon atoms. The structure 
and stereochemistry of ascorbic acid (4.38) was finally established by a 
degradation of the methyl ethers. The enolic portion was methylated with 
diazomethane, and then the remaining hydroxyl groups in 4.40 were 
methylated with iodomethane and silver oxide to give the tetramethyl 
ether 4.44. The double bond of the en01 ether was oxidatively cleaved with 
ozone, and the resultant ester (4.45) was hydrolysed with methanolic 
ammonia. This gave oxamide 4.46 and 3,4-di-0-methyl-L-threonamide 
(4.47). The methoxyl groups marked the position of the hydroxyl groups 
in the original natural product and the free 2-hydroxyl group marked the 
terminus of the lactone ring. This evidence led to the structure of ascorbic 
acid, which was substantiated by synthesis in 1935. 
The acidic nature of ascorbic acid arises from the enolic system. The 
electron-withdrawing carbonyl group makes acidic the hydroxyl hydro- 
gen of the enolic P-hydroxyl group. The negative charge of the oxygen 
anion, which is then formed by ionization of this hydroxyl group, may be 
delocalized over the carbonyl group of the lactone ring (4.48 ++ 4.49). 
If the structure of ascorbic acid was being examined today. 
considerable structural information could be deduced from spectroscopic 
measurements. The IR spectrum shows four strong hydrogen bonded 
hydroxyl absorptions at 3210, 3313, 3409 and 3525 cm-', carbonyl 
absorption at 1752 em-' typical of a y-lactone, and strong alkene 
absorption at 1672 cm-'. There is significant UV absorption at 243 nm 
which undergoes a shift to 265 nm in the presence of a trace of alkali, 
suggesting the presence of an enolic P-hydroxy-alp-unsaturated 
carbonyl 
group. The 'H NMR spectrum possesses a pair of overlapping double 
doublets at dH 3.44 and 3.45, corresponding to a primary alcohol. These 
are coupled to a one-proton multiplet at hH 3.67, which in turn was 

Some Examples of Structure Elucidation 
101 
coupled to a doublet at dH 4.64. Selective decoupling at SH 4.64 collapsed 
c 
the multiplet at dH 3.67 to a double doublet. J =  6.1 and 7.1 Hz. The 
HOCH2cH(OH)C/H 
n~ultiplicity and chemical shift of these resonances suggests the presence 
\ o 
of the system shown in 4.50. 
In agreement with the presence of this fragment, the '" 
NMR 
4.50 
spectrum contains a methylene at dc 61.8 and two methine resonances at 
68.6 and 75.9, and there is a lactone carbony1 signal at bc 173.0 ppm. The 
remaining two alkene signals at bc 1 17.5 and 155.2 ppm are typical of an 
unsaturated ketone. This spectroscopic evidence would lead directly to 
the structure of ascorbic acid as 4.38. 
4.1. 
Apional, ClZHI2o5, 
has been isolated from parsley. It had IR 
absorption at 1684 and 161 6 cm-' and 'H NMR signals at aH 9.65 
(lH, d, J= 7.8 Hz), 7.63 (lH, d, J =  16.0 Hz), 6.76(1H, s), 6.74(1H, 
dd, J=7.8 and 16.0 Hz), 6.06 (2H, s), 4.01 and 3.89 (each 3H, s). 
The 13c NMR spectrum showed signals at ac 194.2 (CH), 147.6 
(CH), 140.1 (C), 139.5 (C), 138.5 (C), 138.1 (C), 127.7 (CH), 120.0 
(CH), 106.7 (C), 102.4 (CH2), 60.4 and 56.8 (CH3). There was a 
nuclear Overhauser effect enhancement between the resonance at bH 
4.01 and the signal at bH 6.76, and between the resonance at bH 3.89 
and the signal at aH 7.63. What is the structure of apional? 
4.2. 
A natural product A, Cl0Hl4O3, had IR absorption at 3320, 
1630 and 1575 cm-', W absorption at 217 and 279 nm and 'H 
NMR signals at 1.52 (3H, s), 2.21 (3H, s), 3.46 and 3.81 (each lH, d, 
J= 12 Hz), 6.57 (lH, d, J =  8 Hz), 6.60 (IH, s) and 6.82 (lH, d, J = 8 
Hz). In addition, it showed signals at bH 3.0,4.6 and 9.0 (each lH), 
which disappear on shaking with 2 ~ 2 0 .  
On treatment with sodium 
iodate(VII), compound A gave compound B, C9HI0o2, which had 
IR absorption at 3300, 1680, 1630 and 1575 cm-', and 'H NMR 
signalsat6H 2.35(3H, s), 2.59(3H, s),6.71 (lH,d, J = 8  Hz),6.78 
(lH, s) and 7.61 (IH, d, J = 8 Hz). In addition, there was a signal at 
bH 12.3 which disappeared on shaking with 2 ~ 2 0 .  
Compound B was 
identical with the product of the reaction of m-cresyl acetate 
with aluminium trichloride. What are the structures of compounds 
A and B? 
4.3. 
Trachelantic acid (C), C7HI4o4, on methylation with 
diazomethane gave a monomethyl ester (D), C8HI6o4, which on 
treatment with acetic anhydride in pyridine gave E, C12H2006. 


The Biosynthesis of Secondary 
Metabolites 
The aim of this chapter is to outline the major biosynthetic path- 
ways leading to the polyketides, terpenoids, phenylpropanoids and 
alkaloids. By the end of this chapter you should be able to: 
Recognize the major building blocks that are used by nature to 
assemble these secondary metabolites 
Understand the mechanism of formation of the major classes of 
secondary metabolites 
Rationalize the structures of novel secandary metabolites in 
terms of a plausible biogenesis 
5.1 
Introduction 
As the structures of natural products were established, chemists began to 
speculate on their origins. The structural patterns which emerged led to 
the realization that there were some basic building blocks used by nature 
to assemble natural products. The structural relationships between 
natural products suggested common biosynthetic pathways. Although 
this biogenetic speculation was a useful aid in determining structures, the 
means to test these theories were not available until isotopic labelling 
techniques became well established. Biogenetic speculation had never- 
theless led to the proposal of the polyketide, terpenoid (isoprenoid) and 
phenylpropanoid (C6-C3) pathways and the role of amino acids in 
alkaloid biosynthesis. 
5.2 
Biosynthetic Methodology 
A biosynthetic pathway involves the enzyme-catalysed conversion of a 
series of intermediates (A -* 
B -+ C -+ D) to a natural product. 

106 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Biosynthetic methodology can be divided into labelling and enzymatic 
experiments. In the first, a precursor (e.g. A) is labelled with a stable or 
radioactive isotope, and the fate of this precursor is determined when it is 
incubated with the living system. 
~f some srllail urllis ellter ilie 
In order to establish a seauence of events. the label from A must amear 
. . 
ceni~al rnetabol~l, c,ycles, s ~ ~ c l ,  
AS 
the tr~i:arboxyi~c acla cycle tlle 
sequentially in B, C and D. Furthermore, for the pathway A --+ D to be a 
label can becar-r;e scro~nblsd 
true biosynthesis and not a degradation and re-synthesis, the label must 
appear in the metabolites of A specifically at the predicted place and not 
elsewhere. If the site of the label is randomized, this is an indication of 
degradation and re-synthesis. With radioisotopes (I4c and 3 ~ ) ,  
this has 
meant a careful chemical degradation of the biosynthetic product to 
establish the specificity of labelling. With carbon-1 3 and deuterium, this 
specificity may be established much more easily by NMR methods. Mass 
spectrometry may also be used to establish the incorporation and location 
of isotopes such as oxygen-18. 
The use of double-labelling techniques can establish the structural 
integrity of a unit. For example, if a precursor is labelled at two or more 
centres with tritium and carbon-14and the ratio of the tritium to carbon-14 
remains constant between the precursor and the product, it is unlikely that 
the tritium and carbon-14 labels have parted company during the bio- 
synthesis. Similarly if a l3c-I3c 
coupling is retained in the NMR spectrum, 
this unit has probably remained intact throughout the biosynthesis. 
The success of the I3c-"c coupling experiment in identifying 
individual acetate units in a chain rests on minimizing inter-acetate unit 
coupling while observing intra-acetate coupling. This is achieved by 
diluting the labelled acetate with sufficient unlabelled material to 
minimize the chances of two adjacent units in any individual chain 
being derived from enriched material. When the bulk material, made up 
of many individual chains, is examined, the coupling that is observed 
arises from within an acetate unit and not between acetate units. 
Carbon-1 3 can also act as a "reporter" label for deuterium in the NMR 
spectrum. A carbon-13 nucleus attached to or adjacent to a deuterium 
atom shows a very small but detectable isotope shift compared to the 
unlabelled species. The stereochemical fate of a label, particularly deu- 
terium or tritium, provides useful mechanistic insight into specific steps, 
for example whether inversion or reten tion of configuration has occurred. 
interference with the enzymes that mediate biosynthetic events 
provides further information on particular steps. If an enzyme that 
catalyses a specific step is absent, either in a genetically deficient mutant or 
because the enzyme system has been inhibited or poisoned, the 
biosynthetic substrates which it normally transforms may accumulate. 
The product of this particular step then becomes an essential dietary 
factor for the organism to flourish. Living cells in which biosynthesis 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
107 
takes place are highly structured. If the cellular structure is disrupted, it 
may be possible to develop cell-free enzyme preparations which just 
catalyse individual steps. It can be possible to purify the enzyme 
system itself and obtain it in a crystalline form. The enzyme may then 
be examined by X-ray crystallography with or without a bound substrate. 
Now that it is possible to identify the genetic sequences that code for 
1-he! OV~I-explessiorl 
of yerletli: 
specific enzymes and to clone these systems, this has become a very 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ l ~ ~ ~ $ ' ~
powerful tool. The transfer and over-expression of genetic information 
ai~\our)l 
oi a DNA seqtrcnc,e II.IIIO 
into an easily grown bacterium permits the preparation of quantities of 
tile 
osgallsln 
"la' 'I1" 
proteln for whlc!-~ II cocies I S  
the relevant enzyme systems, and enables individual steps in a 
produ<e<i In a useiu~ qua~!lily 
biosynthesis to be studied in detail. 
In studying biosynthesis, the complementary role of labelling and 
enzymatic experiments provides information on building blocks, the 
structures of intermediates together with the sequences, stereochemistry 
and mechanisms of biosynthetic events. 
5.3 
The Pathway of Carbon into Biosynthesis 
Before considering individual pathways in detail, it is helpful to 
consider the overall pathway of carbon from carbon dioxide and the 
photosynthetic formation of sugars. This is shown in Scheme 5.1. In this 
Carbon dioxide 
Shikimic acid 4 
1 
Sugars 
Polysaccharides 
I 
1 
Aromatic compounds 
~hos~hoenol 
pyruvate 
I -Deoxyxylulose 
t 
Polyketides - 
1 
Acetyl co-enzyme A - 
Mevalonic acid 
1 
Fatty acids 
1 
1 
Tricnrboxylic acid cycle ,-- 
lsoprenoids -I 
t 
Terpenoids 
Amino acid meiabolism - 
Alkaloids I 
-Steroids 
Purines and I
\
 
pyrimidines 
L 
Carotenoids 
I 
Nucleic acids 
\ 
Peptides and proteins 
Rubber 
Scheme 5.1 The relationship 
of natural products 

108 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
context a distinction may be drawn between primary and secondary 
metabolic pathways. The former are involved in the storage and release 
of energy and in the synthesis of essential cellular constituents such as 
the amino acids and the nucleic acids. The latter involve the 
biosynthesis of the metabolites which are characteristic of the 
particular species under investigation. It is with these pathways that 
we are concerned. 
5.4 
The Biosynthesis of Polyketides 
Some of the earliest experiments on biosynthesis established the role of 
acetate units in the formation of fatty acids and polyketides. The 
preponderance of fatty acids with even numbers of carbon atoms implied a 
role for the C2 unit of acetate in their biosynthesis. Labelling experiments 
in 1945 showed that a fatty acid, stearic acid, incorporated acetate units 
and the active acetate unit was identified as acetyl co-enzyme A (5.1). The 
observation was made that the biosynthesis was dependent on carbon 
dioxide, biotin (5.2) and magnesium ions, but that the carbon dioxide was 
not incorporated into the final fatty acid. This led to the suggestion that 
malonyl co-enzyme A (5.3) was a precursor, the two carbonyl groups 
serving to activate the methylene for a condensation with an acetate unit. 
The difficulty of detecting intermediates of carbon chain length between 
C4 and CIGIR 
led to the proposition that a multi-enzyme complex existed 
for the biosynthesis of the fatty acids and polyketides. This is shown in 
Scheme 5.2. 
The C4 unit, which is formed at the end of the first cycle, is the substrate 
for the second cycle. The enzyme systems ketosynthase, ketoreductase, 
dehydratase and enoyl reductase may either be discrete catalytic regions 
(domains) in one multi-enzyme complex (polyketide synthase, PKS) or a 
series of single enzymes that are loosely associated. 
A feature of fatty acid biosynthesis is that saturated fatty acids are 
produced first and then dehydrogenation takes place to generate the cis 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
109 
I 
1 
KS = ketosynthase 
ACP = acylcanier protein 
KR = ketoreductase 
DH = dehydratase 
ER = enoylreduc~ase 
Scheme 5.2 The biosynthesis 
of fatty acids 
double bonds typical of unsaturated fatty acids such as oleic acid (cis- 
octadec-9-enoic acid). In the case of polyunsaturated fatty acids, these 
double bonds are not normally conjugated. One such unsaturated acid, 
arachidonic acid (5.4) undergoes an oxidative cyclization (Scheme 5.3) 
that is catalysed by cyclo-oxygenase to form a family of hormones known 
as the prostaglandins (see Chapter 4). This particular enzymatic step is 
inhibited by aspirin. 
When the reductive steps in fatty acid biosynthesis do not take place, 
polycarbonyl compounds are formed which are the substrates for various 
cyclases that lead to aromatic compounds. The formation of aromatic 
compounds, particularly fungal metabolites, from acetate units has been 
established by many radio- and stable isotope studies. Indeed, the 
formation of aromatic compounds by the cyclizatian of polycarbonyl 
compounds had been suggested as the result of model experiments by 

110 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Scheme 5.3 
Prostaglandin 
biosynthesis 
Scheme 5 4  The formation of 
6-methylsalicylic acid 
/ 
OoH \ 
kz 
Thromboxanes 
Prostacyclins 
HO 
OH 
Collie in 1906. Experimental work by Birch in 1953 using '4~-labelled 
acetate established its role in the biosynthesis of 6-methylsalicylic acid 
(5.5; see Scheme 5.4). Subsequently, 6-methylsalicylic acid synthase has 
been examined in detail, and the sequence and stereochemistry of the 
steps in the biosynthesis have been established. 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
111 
The use of carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy has been of major 
importance in defining the folding of polyketide chains. An example of 
these methods comes fro111 work on the ~netabolites of the fungus 
Aspergillus melieus. This fungus produces a group of pentaketide 
metabolites including mellein (5.6) and aspyrone (5.7). When mellein 
was biosynthesized from [I,'>- acetate, it showed the expected five 
pairs of 13c-'" couplings (shown as thick bonds). However, the 
branched chain of aspyrone was more difficult to rationalize. Carbons 1, 
3, 5 and 8 were enriched by [I-I3c]acetate and carbons 2, 4, 6, 7 and 9 
were enriched by [2-'.7~]acetate. When [1,2-'j~~lacetate was the 
substrate, there were three pairs of couplings involving C(2)-C(3), 
C(4)-C(5) and C(8)-C(9). In addition, there was a small two-bond 
coupling between C(1) and C(7), indicating that these two carbons 
had their origin in the same acetate unit which had undergone an 
intramolecular rearrangement (see 5.8) in the course of the biosynthesis. 
The further modification of polyketides by the insertion of methyl 
groups from methionine, of isoprene units from isopentenyl pyrophos- 
phate, and by the cleavage of the aromatic ring and by oxidative coupling 
affords a diverse range of natural products. The oxidative phenol 
coupling of griseophenone B (5.9) to 4-demethyldehydrogriseofulvin 
(5.11), and the transformation of the latter to griseofulvin (5.10), is an 
example (see Scheme 5.5). 
'OH 
OH 
0 
OMe 
Scheme 5.5 The biosynthesis 
L 
. . 
- 
-- 
. 
A 
of griseofulvin 

112 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
5.5 
Terpenoid Biosynthesis 
-- 
Although the "isoprene rule" as an aid for structure elucidation was 
established in the 1920s by Ruzicka, the biosynthetic origin of the C5 
unit was unknown. There are now known to be two major pathways, 
one based on mevalonic acid (5.13; Scheme 5.6) and the other on 
I -deoxy xylulose (5.16; Scheme 5.7). 
Studies on the biosynthesis of cholesterol (5.24; Scheme 5.1 1) from 
acetate showed that the isoprene unit in mammals was constructed from 
three acetate units with the loss of one carboxyl carbon. 
A breakthrough came in 1956 with the demonstration that mevalonic 
acid (5.13), which had been identified as growth-promoting factor for a 
bacteri urn, Lacrobacillus acidopltil~rs, was eficien tly incorporated into 
cholesterol by rat liver slices. It was subsequently shown to be specifically 
incorporated into many other terpenoid substances, particularly by fungi. 
Terpenoid biosynthesis can be divided into four stages. Firstly, there is 
the formation of the isoprene unit isopentenyl pyrophosphate (5.14; 
Scheme 5.6); secondly, there is the association of these units to form the 
(C5),? isoprenoid backbone of the terpenoid families; thirdly, there is the 
cyclization of these to generate the carbon skeletons; and finally, there are 
the interrelationships. hydroxylations and oxidations that lead to the 
individual terpenoids. 
The first irreversible step in terpenoid biosynthesis on the mevalonate 
pathway (Scheme 5.6) involves the enzymatic reduction of (S)-3- 
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl co-enzyme A (5.12, HMG-Co A) with hydro- 
NADH IS a co-enzyme. 11 is the 
gen from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide to produce (R)-mevalonic 
reduced form of nicotlnarnlde 
adenine dinctcleotirfe and 
as 
acid (5.13). The HMG-CoA arises mainly by the condensation of 
a biolog~cal reduc~ng agent. 
acetyl co-enzyme A with acetoacetyl co-enzyme CoA. Two successive 
phosphorylations of mevalonic acid produce the 5-pyrophosphate. 
OH 0 
OH H 
- H02Cu
- H02
0 
SCoA 
0 
Scheme 5.6 
The mevalonate 
pathway to isopentenyl 
pyrophosphate 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
113 
This undergoes a trans elimination of the tertiary hydroxyl group and the 
carboxyl group to form 3-methylbut-3-enyl pyrophosphate (isopentenyl 
pyrophosphate, IPP, 5.14). Careful labelling studies by Cornforth 
established the stereochemistry of this and many other steps in terpenoid 
biosynthesis. 
For many years it was difficult to obtain definitive evidence for the 
intervention of mevalonic acid in the biosynthesis of terpenoids in some 
Streptomycetes and in some plants. Recently, a pathway based on the 
formation of 1-deoxyxylulose (5.16) has come to light. The full details of 
this pathway have yet to be established, but it is shown in outline in 
Scheme 5.7. Thiamine pyrophosphate (5.15) plays an important role in 
Thiarnlne (vitamin Bl) 
pyrophosphate IS a co-enzyme 
the condensation of pyruvic acid (2-oxopropanoic acid) and glyceralde- 
which can mediate the transfer 
hyde monophosphate. 
C2 units ~
n
 
biosynthesis. 
++ 
0 
&C02H 
13r+0@ 
R - $ , f i s  
- 
RWK/ f? - 
R.K 
OH 
5.15 
&O@ 
/ 
@ = phosphate 
A stereospecific but reversible isomerization of the double bond of 
Scheme5.7 The 
IPP (5.14) produces 3-methylhut-2-enyl pyrophosphate (dimethylallyl 
l-deoxyxylulose pathway to 
pyrophosphate, DMAPP, 5.18) (Scheme 5.8). The significance of this 
iSopentenyl 
pyrophosphate 
isomerization is the creation of a reactive allylic pyrophosphate which ,, 
a 
plays an important role in the association of two isoprene units to form the 
pyrophosphate, the double bond 
Clo gernnyl pyrophosphate (5.17). The allylic pyrophosphate is used in an 
~
~
b
~
l
 cent 
enzyme-catalysed (prenyl transferase) alkylation reaction of IPP. The loss 
carbocat~on. 

114 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites - -  -- 
of a pyrophosphate anton to form the alkylating unit together with a 
proton from the IPP generates a further reactive allylic pyrophosphate. 
Labelling experiments have shown that the formation of the new carbon- 
carbon bond between the isoprene units is accompanied by inversion of 
configiiration at the allylic carbon atom. The stereochemistry of the loss of 
the proton from the IPP suggests that this alkylation reaction may take 
place in two steps. It 1s important to note that when an intermediate is 
bound to a chiral enzyme surface, two apparently identical hydrogens lose 
their identity and may be distinguished by the enzyme. Chirally labelled 
mevatonates have played a valuable role in establishing the stereochem- 
istry of these reactions. The addition of further isoprene units.gives 
farnesyl pyrophosphate (5.19, Cis) and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 
(Czo), which are the parents of the sesqui- and diterpenoids. 
: 
5.19 n = 1 Farnesyl pyrophosphate (Cis) 
Scheme 5.8 The formation of 
n = 2 Geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (Clo) 
polyprenyl chams 
- 
Two molecules of faraesyl pyrophosphate are joined together in a "tail- 
to-tail" manner to form squalerle (5.21, C3a). This is the parent of the 
triterpenes and steroids. Phytoene (C4()), the parent of the carotenoids, 
arises from two geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate units. In the course of the 
coupling of the two farnesyl pyrophosphate units, a hydrogen atotn from 
one unit is stereospecifically replaced by a hydrogen originating from 
NADPH Is the reduced 
of 
NADPH. The mechanism of the coupling (Scheme 5.9) involves a 
nlcot~nam~de 
adenine 
dlrlircleoticle phosphate 
cyclopropyl intermediate, presqualene pyrophosphate (5.20). This arises 
by an alkylation of the double bond of one farnesyl unit by the 
pyrophosphate of the other. Rearrangement and reduction leads to 
squalene (5.21). 
The cyclization of squalcnc eposide (5.22) to form the triterpene 
lanosterol (5.23) involves a series of stereospecific cyclizations and 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
11 5 
NADPH 
I 
rearrangements. At one time it was thought that the whole process took 
place in one reaction. However, recent evidence suggests that the 
cyclization is not fully concerted and there may be some discrete inter- 
mediates, as shown in Scheme 5.10. A five-membered ring c is formed by 
a Markownikoff ring closure. This then undergoes a ring expansion 
before the final stages of the cyclization and rearrangement take place. 
Scheme 5.9 The formation of 
squalene 
Scheme 5.10 The cyclization 
of squalene epoxide 

116 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
The conversion of lanosterol (5.23) to cholesterol (5.24), and 
subsequently to other sterols and steroid horomones, follows a well- 
defined sequence of events. Some steps in this pathway are set out in 
Scheme 5.1 1. The demethylation stages involve the oxidation of the C-4 
methyl groups to a carboxylic acid and the decarboxylation of a P-keto 
acid. However, the loss of the C-14 methyl group takes place after it has 
been oxidized to an aldehyde. This particular step is the target for 
inhibition by the azole fungicides, in which the nitrogen heterocycles 
coordinate to iron atoms responsible for the oxidation. The modification 
and removal of the side chain of cholesterol leads to the different families 
of steroid. One late stage which has attracted considerable interest is the 
oxidative removal of C-19 and the conversion of ring A of the steroids to a 
phenol, as in estradiol (5.25). A significant proportion of breast cancers 
are estrogen dependent. Hence this enzyme system, known as aromatase, 
has been a target for cancer chemotherapy. 
Scheme 5.1 1 The formation of 
the steroid hormones 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
11 7 
There are two general modes of cyclization of the acyclic terpenoid 
precursors. In the first, the cyclization is initiated by protonation of an 
alkene or, as in the case of the triterpenoids, an epoxide. In the second 
mode, the cyclization is initiated by electrophilic attack of the allylic 
pyrophosphate or the isomeric pyrophosphate of a 3-hydroxy- I -ene on a 
double bond in another isoprene unit. In the monoterpenoids, this can 
generate the rnenthene skeleton (Scheme 5.12), and in the sesquiterpen- 
oids it can lead to the medium-sized rings of the humulene series. In the 
Hurnulene IS a sesqulterpene that 
diterpenoids it leads to the formation of the macrocyclic ring of the 
IS 
sesqulterpenes 
'Ound 
In 
are 
Many0ther 
iormea by the 
cembrenes. Further cyclizations of these then lead to a wide range of 
further cycl~zar~on 
of hurnulene 
different skeletons. The isolation of the enzyme systems responsible for 
carbocallons 
many of these terpene cyclizations is of considerable value in the study of 
Cemtjrene IS a dlterpene that IS 
their mechanism. 
found ~n pines and ~n tobacco 
__C 
OH 
Scheme 5.12 The cyclization 
of geranyl pyrophosphate 
Some of the sequences of hydroxylatiorls and oxidations that lead to 
the individual terpenoids, such as the gibberellin plant growth hormones, 
have been examined in detail (see Scheme 5.1 3). The gibberellins have a 
very powerful influence on plant growth and development, and as a result 
their biosynthesis has been thoroughly studied. They are present in plants 
in very low concentrations (pg/g). However, the fungus Gibberellci 
fujikuroi produces some gibberellins in large amounts. and it formed a 
useful organism for studying their biosynthesis. A number of plant 
enzyme systems have now been cloned and expressed in bacteria such as 
Escherichin coli so that they are readily available. The gibberellins are 
formed by the stepwise oxidation of a tetracyclic diterpenoid hydro- 
carbon, errt-kaurene (5.28). This hydrocarbon is formed by a two-stage 
cyclization of the CZ0 geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (5.26). Oxidation of 
the hydrocarbon at C-19 and C-7 gives ent-7a-hydroxykaurenoic acid 
(5.27), which is the substrate for a unique oxidative ring contraction to 
form gibberellin A12 7-aldehyde (5.29). Several of these earlier steps are 
targets for plant growth regulators. There are then parallel pathways 
which take place in different species involving hydroxylation at various 
centres, e.g. C-3, and which lead to particular families of gibberellins. 
However, a key stage in all these pathways is the loss of C-20 and 

118 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
the formation of the y-lactone typical of the biologically active hormones 
such as gibberellic acid (5.30). 
Q 
The labelling pattern of the sesquiterpenoid illudin M (I), ob- 
tained from the fungus Clitocybe illudens, where it is biosynthesized 
from [1-13c]acetate and [l ,2-'3~2]acetate, 
is as shown. Show how far- 
nesyl pyrophosphate may be folded to generate this labelling pattern. 
Scheme 5.1 3 The formation of 
the gibberellin plant hormones 
- 
denotes pairs of coupled atoms 
denotes atoms enriched by [1-I3c]acetate 
*,
(1,,,, 
f 
HO 
(118,) 
: H 
C O ~ H  
CHO 
COIH 
5.29 
5.30 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
119 
A 
An isoprene unit is derived via mevalonic acid from three 
molecules of acetate and it is therefore labelled by acetate as in 2. 
Three isoprene units are incorporated into farnesyl pyrophosphate 
(3). A folding of farnesyl pyrophosphate which generates the 
labelling pattern of illudin M is shown in 4. 
L
C
 -- 
m 
m 
\ 
\ 
o@ 
2 
4 
5.6 
The Biosynthesis of Phenylpropanoids 
The existence of a large group of secondary metabolites containing an 
aromatic ring and a three-carbon side chain, the phenylpropanoid C6-C3 
series. was recognized many years ago. An important key to their 
biosynthesis came from an examination of mutants of the bacterium 
Escherichin coli which would grow only on a medium supplemented with 
the C 6 X 3  amino acids phenylalanine or tyrosine. It was found that 
shikimic acid (5.34) was an alternative non-aromatic supplement that 
facilitated the growth of these mutants. The study of this pathway fell into 
two sections, the formation of shikimic acid and the conversion of this to 
the aromatic C6-C3 compounds. Several of the steps in the pathway may 
be rationalized in terms of enolate chemistry. The sequence which has 
been established by labelling studies is set out in Scheme 5.14. 
The initial step involves the enzyme-catalysed condensation of a 
derivative of phosphoenol pyruvate (5.31) with the aldehyde of erythrose 
4-phosphate (5.32) to form a C7 acid, heptulosonic acid (5.33). 
Elimination of the phosphate and a further enolate condensation gives 
~rthouclh [he arornat~c anilno 
A
.
 
3-dohydruquisic acid (5.35). The overall stereochemistry of the elkin- 
~
~
~
~
,
ation of water to give dehydroshiki~nic acid has been shown to involve a 
plays a malor. role in the fownatiol, 
''syn" process and this may therefore be a stepwise sequence involving an 
O1 Inally secor.ldary nle[abO'ttes. 
enolization and elimination. Reduction of the 3-dehydroshikimic acid 
yields shiki~alic acid (5.34). 

1 20 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
P 
@O 5.31 
+ - 
8 0  
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
HO' 
- 
5.33 
5.35 
OH 
5.32 
1 
6 0 1 C 0 2 H  - 
80'" 
80'"' 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
1 
5.34 
OH 
5.37 
5.36 
H+ 
5.38 
Scheme 5.14 
The biosynthesis 
of CrC3 compounds 
Amino nitrogen IS introduced via 
pyrldoxamine in a process known 
as transarnlnatlon. This involves a 
carbonyl--amme condensation. 
Phenylalanlne is formed from 
phenylpyruv~c acid. 
The addition of the three-carbon side chain to shikimic acid 3- 
phosphate to give chorisrnic acid (5.36) starts with the formation of an 
en01 ether from phosphoenol pyruvate. The stereochemistry of the 
elimination of phosphoric acid to form chorismic acid has been shown to 
be an anti 1,4-elimination and it is possible that this also occurs in a 
stepwise manner. The stereochemistry of the Claisen rearrangement of 
chorismic acid (5.36) to prephenic acid (5.38) by the enzyme chorismate 
mutase has been thoroughly studied. The conversion of prephenic acid to 
phenylalanine (5.37) or to tyrosine involves both a decarboxylation and a 
transamination. Since this pathway occurs in plants but not in man, it has 
been the subject of a number of studies in the design of herbicides. 
There are a number of families of natural products that are derived 
from the shikimic acid pathway. The oxygenation pattern of an aromatic 
ring derived from this pathway differs from that of polyketide aromatic 
rings. The C 6 X 3  4-hydroxycinnamoyl unit can act as a "starter" for a 
polyketide biosynthesis, as in the formation of the flavanoid plant 
pigments. The oxygenation patterns of the rings of these compounds (e.g. 
5.39) reveals their different biosyntheses. 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
121 
acetare 
OH 
phenylpropanoid 
Chorismic acid (5.36) is also the source of anthranilic acid (2- 
aminobenzoic acid, 5.41) and the amino acid tryptophan (5.42) (Scheme 
5.15). Anthranilate synthase mediates an addition of ammonia and an 
elimination reaction. Condensation of the anthranilic acid (5.41) with 
ribose 5-phosphate, followed by an isomerization and decarboxylation, 
leads to indole-3-glycerol phosphate (5.40) and thence the amino acid 
tryptophan (5.42). 
5.7 
Alkaloid Biosynthesis 
Scheme 5.15 The formation of 
tryptophan 
Alkaloids are a structurally diverse family of nitrogen-containing bases. 
A unifying feature is the biosynthetic origin of the majority from a limited 
number of amino acids. Alkaloids may be classified into those that 
derived from: (i) lysine or ornithine, (ii) phenylalanine or tyrosine and 
(iii) tryptophan. In addition, there are those alkaloids, such as the 
steroidal alkaloids, in which the nitrogen is introduced after the final 
carbon skeleton has been formed. 
The basic amino acids ornithine (5.41) and lysine (5.42) are the 
precursors of the pyrrolidine and piperidine rings that are found in a 
number of alkaloids. An important aspect of these biosyntheses is the role ~ ~ ~ " , : , " ~ ~  
~
~
-
~
~
~
of the iminium ion in a Mannich type of condensation. The alkaloid 
formation 

122 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
nicotine (5.43) is biosynthesized from nicotinic acid by a reaction of this 
type (see Scheme 5.16). 
5.41 
5.42 
.I. I 
MeN 
H 
5.43 
H 
Scheme 5.16 The biosyn- 
thesis of nicotine 
A large number of alkaloids are derived from the amino acid tyrosine 
(5.44). Amongst these the biosynthesis of morphine has attracted 
considerable interest. The alkaloids that are found in the opium poppy 
fall into two groups: the benzylisoquinoline series such as papaverine and 
laudanosoline, and the more complex alkaloids such as codeine and 
morphine. 
Three pieces of biogenetic speculation guided the biosynthetic studies 
on morphine. The first was the suggestion, by Wintersteiner and Trier and 
by Robinson, of the role of amino acids in the biosynthesis of the 
benzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Secondly, the co-occurrence of the benzyl- 
isoquinoline and morphine alkaloids led to the suggestion by Robinson of 
a structural and biogenetic relationship. Rotation of the benzylisoquino- 
line alkaloids about the axis shown in Scheme 5.17 reveals a possible 
relationship to the morphine skeleton. Thirdly, the suggestion was made 
by Barton that phenol coupling played an important role in the formation 
of the morphine ring system. 
Scheme 5.1 7 The relationship 
of the benzylisoquinoline and 
morphine alkaloids 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
123 
HO 
HO 
HO 
NMe 
Me0 
Me0 
Me0 
5.47 
0 
OH 
5.45 
5.46 
Me0 
Me0 
Me0 
5.49 
5.50 
OH 
5.48 
Biosynthetic experiments by Barton, Battersby and others have 
Scheme5.18 The biosynthesis 
established the pathway outlined in Scheme 5.18. There are several 
morphine 
interesting steps. Firstly, both the benzyl and the isoquinoline rings 
originate from tyrosine (5.44). Secondly, the (a-enantiomer of the 
benzylisoquinoline reticuline (5.47) is formed first and this is isomerized to 
(R)-reticuline (5.46) prior to the phenol-coupling step and the conversion 
to salutaridinone (5.45). Multiple-labelling experiments established the 
significance of the methylation pattern of reticuline, which directs the 
phenol coupling. The formation of the ether bridge of morphine requires 
an elimination reaction involving salutaridinol (5.48). The sequence 
thebaine (5.49), codeine and then morphine (5.50) was established by 

124 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
-- 
briefly exposing the plants to an atmosphere of radioactive carbon 
dioxide and following the appearance of radioactivity in the alkaloids. 
Phenol coupling plays a role in generating the carbon skeleton of a 
number of other alkaloids derived from tyrosine, such as galanthamine 
which is found in daffodils. 
The large family of indole alkaloids include reserpine and strychnine 
and the dimeric alkaloids such as vincaleucoblastine. These alkaloids 
have been shown to be derived from the amino acid tryptophan and a Clo 
unit. The isoprenoid origin of the latter from the monoterpenoid seco- 
loganin was established by labelling studies. 
A 
The biosynthesis of morphine is set out in Scheme 5.18. Two 
molecules of tyrosine are involved in its biosynthesis via reticuline. 
This leads to the labelling pattern as shown below: 
5.8 
Other Natural Products Derived from Amino 
Acids 
A number of other important families of natural products are derived from 
amino acids. The penicillins are an examvle (Scheme 5.19). The venicillins 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
125 
C O ~ H  
Scheme 5.19 The biosyn- 
5.54 
thesis of penicillins and 
I 
cephalosporins 
are derived from a tripeptide, S-(L-a-aminoadipoy1)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine 
(5.51), in which the valine unit possesses the unusual D configuration. This 
tripeptide is cyclized oxidatively by an enzyme system known as 
isopenicillin N synthase to form 5.52. The mechanism of this cyclization 
has attracted considerable interest. The isopenicillin N is converted to the 
penicillins, such as 5.53, and to pencillin N which in turn undergoes a ring 
expansion to form the cephalosporins (5.54). 
Chlorophyll, which is essential for photosynthesis, haem, the oxygen- 
containing component of haemoglobin, the cytochromes and vitamin BI2 
all contain a tetrapyrrole nucleus with various attachments and different 
central metals (magnesium, iron or cobalt). However, the biosynthesis of 
these so called "pigments of life" share some common features in that 
they have a single biosynthetic parent known as uroporphyrinogen 111, 
(uro'gen 111, 5.57). Once this has been formed (Scheme 5.20), it is 
subjected to considerable biosynthetic modification to give the individual 
substances. Uro'gen I11 contains four pyrrole rings and is biosyn- 
thesized from a pyrrole, porphobilinogen (PBG, 5.56). This arises from 

126 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
Scheme 5.20 
The 
uroporphyrinogen Ill 
formation 
the condensation of two molecules of the amino acid 5-aminolevulinic 
acid (ALA, 5.55). The simple linear head-to-tail combination of four 
porphobilinogen units would lead to a tetrapyrrole, called a bilane, with 
alternating acetate and propionate side chains. However, this is not the 
case in uro'gen 111. The four molecules of porphobilinogen are first 
brought together in a linear manner to give a tetrapyrrole by an enzyme 
system known as dearninase (the amine is lost in this process). A second 
enzyme system, cosynthetase, carries out the ring closure of the bilane 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
127 
with rearrangement to form uro'gen 111. The detailed stereochemistry and 
mechanism of the various steps, such as the C-methylations and ring 
contraction that lead to vitamin BIZ and the changes that generate the 
other pigments, are outside the scope of this book. However, the 
underlying theme is that of many biosyntheses in which a common 
building block is assembled in a general manner and then specifically 
modified to give the individual natural products. 
1. Labelling studies using radioisotopes ( 3 ~  
and I4c) and stable 
isotopes (*H, I3c and "0) together with enzymatic methods have 
been used to establish biosynthetic pathways. 
2. Polyketides, including fatty acids and some aromatic com- 
pounds, are derived from the linear condensation of acetate 
(malonate) units. Fatty acid biosynthesis involves a sequence of 
condensations and reductions. Aromatic compounds are formed by 
aldol-type condensations. The biosynthesis takes place in a multi- 
enzyme complex known as polyketide synthase (PKS). 
3. The prostaglandins are formed from arachidonic acid by cyclo- 
oxygenase. 
4. The C5 building block of the terpenoids and steroids is 
isopentenyl pyrophosphate. This may be formed from mevalonic 
acid or from 1 -deoxyxylulose. 
5. The steroids are formed by the cyclization of squalene epoxide to 
lanosterol and the conversion of the latter to cholesterol. 
6. Phenylpropanoid secondary metabolites are biosynthesized via 
shikimic acid. The aromatic ring has a different oxygenation pattern 
from those compounds that are biosynthesized from acetate units. 
7. Alkaloids are biosynthesized from amino acids such as tyrosine. 
The biosynthesis of morphine includes a phenol coupling reaction 
involving a benzylisoquinoline alkaloid, reticuline. 
8. Penicillin is biosynthesized by the oxidative cyclization of a 
tripeptide, L-arninoadipoyl-L-cysteinyl-D-valine. The tetrapyrrole 
ring system, as in chlorophyll, heme and vitamin B12, is formed 
from porphobilinogen. 

?2& 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
5.1. Mark with an asterisk the sites that might be labelled in the 
following natural products when they are biosynthesized from the 
labelled precursors that are given: 
5.2. 
Indicate the biosynthetic structural units [acetate, C1 (meth- 
ionine), C5 (isoprene), C 6 X 3  (shikimate)] that form the carbon 
skeletons of the following compounds. Some of these compounds 
may be formed by the combination of more than one pathway. 

The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites 
129 
(c) ~~y$~ 
\ 
(dl Meop&-lme
Me0 \ 
CH20H OH 
OMe Me 
5.3. The following Clo compound has been isolated from a fungus. 
It may be a polyketide with the extra methyl groups introduced from 
the C1 pool or it may be a monoterpenoid. Suggest a series of 
labelling experiments which might distinguish between the possibi- 
lities, giving the predicted results for each pathway. 
5.4. 
A plausible biosynthesis of the following natural product is 
from a-ketoglutaric acid [2-oxopentane-1,S-dioic acid, H02C- 
C(0)CH2CH2-C02H] and a fatty acid. Indicate the constituent 
units and show how they might be linked together. 

130 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
5.5. 
The carbon skeleton of the sesquiterpenoid fungal metabolite 
trichothecolone might be formed by folding the farnesyl pyropho- 
sphate precursor in either of the modes A or B. When [l ,2-'3~2]acetic 
acid was used as a precursor, the trichothecolone had the coupling 
pattern shown. Which folding of farnesyl pyrophosphate is 
consistent with this labelling pattern? 
5.6. 
The fungal metabolite terrein (C) is biosynthesized from 
[1,2-13c2]acetate with the coupling patterns as shown. The carbon 
atoms that are enriched by [I-13c]acetate are indicated by an 
asterisk. The isocoumarin D is a co-metabolite and is efficiently 
converted into terrein. Which carbon atoms are lost in this 
biosynthesis? 
5.7. 
The biosynthesis of penicillin G from its constituent amino 
acids involves a tripeptide, L-aminoadipoyl-L-cysteinyl-D-valine, in 
which the valine has the unusual D configuration. The isomerization 
from L-valine may take place either before or after the tripeptide is 
formed. Suggest an experiment to distinguish between these 
possibilities. 

Further Reading 
There is a substantial literature on natural products. Amongst the more 
detailed textbooks are Medicinal Natural Products by ~ewick,' The 
Clzemistry of Natural Products by   horns on,^ and Natural Product 
Chemistry by  ors sell^ and The Cl~emistry of Biomolecules by ~immonds.~ 
Textbooks entitled Chemical Aspects of Biosynthesis by ~ a n n '  and The 
Bio.~yntlzesis of Secondary Metabolites by ~ e r b e r t , ~  
as their titles suggest, 
cover the biosynthesis of natural products. 
The series of volumes Comprehensive Naturul Product ~ l ~ e m i s t r ~ ~  
covers the subject in considerable detail. 
There are a number of reference books which cover specific areas of 
natural products, such as Simonsen's ~ e r ~ e n o i d s , ~  
Manske's The 
~ l k a l o i d s , ~  
Pelletier's Tl~e ~lkaloids,'~ 
Fieser and Fieser's steroids," 
Harborne's The ~lavonoids,'~ 
and Fungal Metabolites by Turner and 
~ 1 d r i d ~ e . l ~  
Methods for the extraction and identification of natural 
products are described in P/1j~tocker77ica~ 
Methods by ~ a r b o r n e . ' ~  
The 
biological activity of natural products is described in Murder. Magic ccnd 
Medicine by ~ a n n ' ~  
and in an Introduction to Ecological Biochemistry by 
~ a r b o r n e . ' ~  
There are a number of volumes which appear regularly with reviews on 
natural product chemistry, including Progress in the Chemistry of Organic 
Natural productsI7 and Studies in Natural Product ~1zemistrv.l~ 
A 
number of reference books are devoted to natural products, giving 
structures, physical constants and sources, including the Dictionarj~ 
of Natural ~roducts,'~ 
Dictionary of ~er~enoids~' 
and the Dictionary 
of ~teroids.~' The single volume Merck ~ n d e x ~ ~  
and the ROMPP 
Encyclopedia ofNatural ~roducts'~ 
are also useful sources of information. 
The review journal Natural Product Reports contains regular annual or 
biennial articles covering particular groups of natural products, together 
with a large number of authoritative articles on topics in bio-organic 
chemistry. Natural Product Updates monitors a large number of journals 
for papers of interest to natural product chemists and provides a 
graphical abstract of each paper. Among the specialist journals devoted 
to natural products are Phytochemistry, the Journal of Natural Products, 
the Journal of Antibiotics, Natural Product Letters. the Journal of 

132 
Further Reading 
Chemical Ecology, Steroids, and Phytochemical Methods. Other articles 
appear regularly in the journals devoted to organic chemistry, such as the 
Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin Transactions I and its successor, 
Organic and Biomolecular Chemistry, the Journal of Organic Chemistry, 
Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, Tetrahedron, Tetrahedron Asym- 
metry and Tetrahedron Letters. 
1. P. M. Dewick, Medicinal Natural Products - A Biosynthetic 
Approach, 2nd edn., Wiley, Chichester, 2000. 
2. R. H. Thomson (ed.), The Chemistry of Natural Products, 
2nd edn., Blackie, London, 1993. 
3. K. B. G. Torsell, Natural Product Chemistry, 2nd edn., 
Apotekarsocieteten, Stockholm, 1997. 
4. R. J. Simmonds, Chemistry of Biomolecules, Royal Society of 
Chemistry, Cambridge, 1992. 
5. J. Mann, Chemical Aspects of Biosyntlzesis, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1994. 
6. R. B. Herbert, The Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites, 
Chapman and Hall, London, 198 1. 
7. D. H. R. Barton and K. Nakanishi (eds.), Comprehensive 
Natural Product Chemistry, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1999, 
vols. 1-9. 
8. J. Simonsen, D. H. R. Barton and L. N. Owen (eds.), The 
Terpenoids, 2nd edn., Cambridge University Press, London, 
1961, vols. 1-5. 
9. R. H. F. Manske et al. (eds.), The Alkaloids, Academic Press, 
New York, 1953-2000, vols. 1-53. 
10. S. W. Pelletier (ed.), The Alkaloids, Chemical and Biological 
Perspectives, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1999, vols. 1-14. 
11. L. F. Fieser and M. Fieser, Steroids, Reinhold, New York, 1959. 
12. J. B. Harborne and H. Baxter, Handbook of Natural Flavonoids, 
Wiley, Chichester, 1999, vols. 1 and 2. 
13. W. B. Turner and D. C. Aldridge, Fungal Metabolites II, 
Academic Press, London, 1983. 
14. J. B. Harborne, Phytochemical Methods, 2nd edn., Chapman 
and Hall, London, 1984. 
15. J. Mann, Murder, Magic and Medicine, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1992. 
16. J. B. Harborne, Introduction to Ecological Biochemistry, 4th edn., 
Academic Press, London, 1993. 

Further Reading 
133 
17. L. Zechmeister et al. (eds.), Progress in the Chemistry of Organic 
Natural Products, Springer, Berlin, 1938-2000, vols. 1-79. 
18. Atta-ur-Rahman (ed.), Studies in Natural Prodirct Chemistry, 
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1999, vols. 1-20. 
19. J. Buckingham (ed.), Dictionary of Natural Products, Chapman 
and Hall, London, 1994. 
20. J. Connolly and R. Hill (eds.), Dictionary of 
Terpenoids, 
Chapman and Hall, London, 199 1 .  
21. D. N. Kirk (ed.), Dictionary of  steroid.^, Chapman and Hall, 
London, 1992. 
22. The Merck Index, 12th edn., Merck, New York, 1996. 
23. W. Steglich, B. Fugmann and S. Lang-Fugmann (eds.), 
ROMPP Encyclopedia of Natural Products, Thieme, Stuttgart, 
2000. 


Answers to Problems 
1 1  (a) Polyketide; (b) phenylpropanoid; (c) polyketide; (d) terpene; 
(e) alkaloid; (f) phenylpropanoid; (g) sugar; (h) terpene; (i) alkaloid. 

136 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
1.4. 
Dissolve extract in ethyl acetate 
m 
Extract with dil. HCI 
Neutral and acidic material 
1 
Alkaloids dissolve as salts 
1 
Make basic with ammonia 
1 
Recover alkaloids in ethyl acetate 
1.5. The lower part of the molecule represents the possible 
pharmacophore: 
h e 3  
2 
(a) (i) The 'H NMR spectrum of compound A will contain 
three alkene and two methyl group resonances while B will contain 
one alkene and three methyl group resonances. (ii) Compound A will 
give formaldehyde on ozonolysis. 
(b) (i) The UV spectrum of compound D will show the presence of a 
longer chromophore; or the 'H NMR spectrum of compound D will 
contain a methyl group doublet. (ii) There is only one exchangeable 
proton in compound D when the compound is treated with NaOD/ 
D20; or compound D contains a diene which could undergo a Diels- 
Alder addition. 
(c) (i) The 'H NMR spectrum of compound E will contain a methyl 
group singlet and a CH20 resonance, in contrast to compound F. 
The 'k NMR spectrum of compound E will contain a tertiary 
alcohol resonance. (ii) Oxidation of compound F will give a cyclic 
anhydride. 
(d) (i) Compound G is symmetrical and this will be shown by the 'H 
and 13c NMR spectra, whereas compound H will show separate 
CH20H, CH20Ac and CHOH signals. (ii) Compound H is a 1,2- 
diol and will be oxidized by sodium iodate(VI1). 

Answers to Problems 
137 
(e) (i) The IR spectrum of compound J will show the carbonyl 
absorption of an amide whilst that of compound 1 will be a 
carboxylic acid. (ii) Compound I will dissolve in sodium hydrogen 
carbonate as an acid, while compound J will release ammonia on 
alkaline hydrolysis. 
(f) (i) The 'H NMR spectrum of compound K will contain a 
CH(OH), a CH20H and five aromatic proton resonances, but that 
of compound L will contain four aromatic proton resonances and a 
CH20H signal; or compound L will behave as a phenol, and in the 
UV spectrum there will be a change in the position of A,,, 
on 
addition of alkali. (ii) Oxidation of compound K will give a P-keto 
acid which will readily undergo decarboxylation. 
2.2. 
(a) The molecular formula C8HI40 corresponds to two 
double bond equivalents. (b) The compound contains a carbonyl 
group. (c) The compound contains three isolated methyl groups 
adjacent to unsaturation and a trisubstituted double bond. (d) The 
formation of propanone indicates the presence of the group: 
Me 
"% 
>=> 
Me 
The formation of triiodomechane (iodoform) indicates the presence 
of a methyl ketone (CH3C=O). Therefore the structure of 
compound M is: 
2.3. 
Compound N is: 
MeO t 
@CO2. 
M e 0  
The small couplings are long-range (meta) couplings. 

138 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
2.4. 
Compound 0 is: 
H02C 
- 
Compound 0 contains a lactone ring which undergoes hydrolysis in 
alkali to the corresponding hydroxy acid (P). 
2.5. 
Sherry lactone and solerone are: * 
2.6. 
The sesquiterpenoid Q is: 
HO 
units: a 
There are two possible dissections into the constituent isoprene 
=+ Pk- 
k,.T 
and :y,:+
After you have read Chapter 5, consider how you might distinguish 
between them. 
2.7. 
Compounds R and S are: 
70H 
CHO 
R 
S 

Answers to Problems 
139 
2.8. Compound T is: 
L
C
H
O
 
2.9. Compounds U, V, W and X are: 
4 
U 4 
v 
42 
W 4 
X 
I .  Compounds A, B and C arc: 
$ 
OH 
A CHzOH $ $  
B 
C 
3.2. The stereochemistry of 5-deoxypulchelloside is: 
- 
OGlc 

140 
Natural P r o d u e  The Secondary Metabolites 
3.3. 
The C-6 hydroxyl group which is involved in lactone 
formation must lie on the same (p) face of the molecule as the 
nitrogen bridge. The other hydroxyl group at C-3 is a. 
3.4. 
Alkaloid G is: 
3.5. Alkaloid K is: d 
(TJz 
3.6. 
The formation of the acetonide from the secondary alcohols 
of ribose indicates that they are cis to each other and trans to the 
primary alcohol. The formation of the cyclic salt can only occur if the 
primary alcohol of the D-ribose and the anomeric C-N bond are cis. 
3.7. 
The antibiotic P and the compounds Q and R are: 
H 
+C02Me 
NH2 
NH2 
+NMe3 I- 
P 
Q 
R 
3.8. 
The fungal metabolite S is: 
OHCyJ-&( 
4.1. 
Apional is: 

Answers to Problems 
141 
4.2. 
Compounds A and B are: 
QOH CH20H 
OH 
A 
B 
4.3. 
Trachelantic acid (compound C) is: 
&4C02H 
OH 
4.4. 
Terrein is: 
O
r
 
HO 
OH 
4.5. 
Paeonol is: 
Meo& - 
4.6. 
Pyrenocine C is: 
4.7. Compound G is: 
OH 
OMe 
%o 

142 
Natural Products: The Secondary Metabolites 
(a) 
C02H 
@I Ly-'J 
acetate 
isoprene 
(c) 
\ 
(.) 
Me0 Meo
%acetate 
CH20H OH 
OMe 
acetate + CI 
C6-C3 via tyrosine 

Answers to Problems 
143 
5.3. 
Use [1,2-"~~]acetate and methyl-labelled niethionine. The 
methyl groups will either be labelled by acetate or from methionine 
(the biosynthesis actually takes place via the polyketide pathway and 
extra methylations). 
5.4. 
The constituent units are: 
/C02H 
The association of the two units probably takes place by a carbanion 
process. 
5.5. 
Farnesyl pyrophosphate is labelled by [1,2-'~c~]acetate 
as 
shown, and thus folding A is consistent with this labelling pattern. 
5.6. 
The isocoumarin D will be labelled by the acetate units as 
shown: 
Consequently the atoms that are lost are those shown. 
5.7. 
The experiment might involve feeding a sample of DL-valine, 
in which one enantiomer is labelled with carbon-14 and the other 
with tritium. If the isomerization takes place prior to incorporation, 
both isotopes will be incorporated, whereas if it is after the 
formation of the tripeptide, only one isotope will be incorporated. 
In practice the isomerization takes place after the tripeptide is 
formed. 


Subject Index 
Abietic acid 9, 5 1 
Abscisic acid 8 
Absolute stereo- 
chemistry 75 
Acetonide 
formation 72 
Acetyl co-enzyme A 
108 
Acid-catalysed 
degradation 56 
Aflatoxins 5 
Aglycone 3 
Alkaline 
degradation 
55 
Alkaloids 2, 18, 29, 
I21 
Aikenes (IR, NMR) 40 
Allelopathy 25 
Amino acids 2. 18, 2, 
121, 124 
Amyrins 
1 1  
Anthocyanins 16 
Apoaromadendrene 
69 
- 
Arachidonic acid 4, 
109 
Arecoline 18 
Artemisinin 8 
Aspyrone 11 1 
Asymmetric 
induction 77 
Atrolactic acid 77 
Atropine 18 
Auxochrome 43 
Azadirachtin 12 
Berberine 19 
Biosyn thetic 
methodology 
105-106 
Biotin 32, 108 
Botrydial 9 
Caffeine 21 
Camphor 7 
Carbon- 13 NMR 
spectroscopy 44, 1 1 1 
Carbon skeleton, 
determination 46 
Carbonyl groups (IR, 
NMR) 40 
P-Carotene 14 
Carotenoids 7, 14 
Carvone 75 
Caryophyllene 8 
Cedrene 8 
Cephaiosporin C 95 
Characterization, 
natural products 35 
Chemical 
ionization 37 
Chlorophyll 125 
Cholesterol 12, 116 
Chorismic acid 
120 
Chrysin 
I7 
Circular dichroism 78 
Clavatol 70 
Clavulanic acid 95 
Clerodanes 10 
Cocaine 18 
Coniine 18 
Cortisone 13 
COSY 45, 58 
Cotton effect 77 
Coupling, long-range 
67 
Degradation 
acid-catalysed 56 
alkaline 56 
oxidative 47 
reductive 50 
Dehydrogenation 50 
Dehydrogeosmin 38 
1-Deoxyxylulose 
pathway 113 
DEPT 44,58,65 
Determination, carbon 
skeleton 46 
Dimethylallyl 
pyrophosphate 1 13 
Diosgenin 13 
Diterpenoids 6 
Double bond 
equivalents 36 
Ecdysone 27 
Electron impact 
ionization 37 
Ephedrine 19 
Ergosterol 42 
Erythromycin 4 
Estradiol 12, 116 
Eugenol 15 
Exobrevicomin 27 
Farnesyl 
pyrophosphate 114 
Fast atom 
bombardment 38 
Fatty acids 3 
Fischer 76 
Flavanone 16, 120 
Folic acid 23 
( + )-Glyceraldehyde 
76 
Genistein 17 
Geraniol 7 

1 46 
Index 
Geranyl 
pyrophosphate 
1 13 
Gibberellic acid 
10, 
51, 56, 117 
Gibberellin A13 71. 73 
Gibberic acid 69 
Gliotoxin 22 
Glucose 72 
Glycosides 3 
Griseofulvin 
5, 43, 
89-92. 11 1 
Heptulosinic acid 
1 19 
Hofmann elimination 
53 
Horeau's method 
77 
Humulene 8 
Hydroxy groups 39 
Indole alkaloids 20 
Induction, 
asymmetric 77 
Infrared 
spectroscopy 38,68 
Insect juvenile 
hormone 27 
Ipsdienol 27 
Iresin 
73 
Iridoids 8 
Isopcntenyl 
pyrophosphate 6, 
112 
Isoprene rule 6 
Jasmonic acid 4 
Juglone 25 
Karplus equation 66 
enr-Kaurene 
10, 1 17 
Ketomanoyl oxide 52, 
69 
Kuhn-Roth 
determination 47 
Lignin 
17 
Limonin 
1 I 
Linalool 7 
Linoleic acid 3 
Linolenic acid 3 
Long-range coupling 
67 
Longifolene 8 
Luteolin 56 
Macrolides 4 
Manoyl oxide 9, 52 
Mass spectrometry 
37 
Mellein 5, 11 1 
Menthol 7 
Metabolites 
primary 
1 
secondary 
2 
Methyl podocarpate 
75 
6-Methylsalicylic 
acid 110 
Methyl vinhaticoate 
75 
Mevalonic acid 
1 12 
Microhydrogena tion 
46 
Molecular rotation 
differences 76 
Monosaccharides 76 
Monoterpenoids 6 
Morphine 20, 123 
MTPA esters 79 
Mycophenolic acid 5 
Myrtenol 
50 
Narigenin 
16 
Natural products, 
characterization 35 
Nicotine 
19. 26, 122 
NMR 
spectroscopy 43, 
57,64-65, 79 
Nuclear Overhauser 
effect 58. 66 
Octant rule 78 
Oleic acid 3 
Optical rotatory 
dispersion 77 
Oxidative 
degradation 47 
Ozonolysis 72, 96 
Papaverine 19. 47, 122 
Patulin 5 
Penicillin 22, 93-95, 
124-125 
Phaseolin 
25 
Phenylpropanoids 
2. 
15, 119-121 
Phytoalexins 25 
Pimaric acid 9 
or-Pinene 7, 36, 48 
P-Pinene 49 
Piperine 18 
Podophyllotoxin 
15 
Polyketide synthesis 
108- 109 
Polyketides 2. 3-6, 
108-1 11 
Prephenic acid 
120 
Primary metabolites 
I 
Progesterone 
12, I 16 
Prostaglandins 
96-98, 
110 
Pseudopelletierine 54 
Pyrethrins 26 
Quinine 20 
Reductive 
degradation 50 
Reticuline 123 
Rishitin 
25 
Salutaridinone 123 
Santonin 8, 56, 85-89 
Scopine 72 
Secondary 
metabolites 2 
Sesquiterpenoids 6 
Shikirnic acid 
15, 1 19 
Sodium iodate(VI1) 70 
Squalene 
1 1. 114 
Stearic acid 
3 
Stereochemistry, 
absolute 75 
Steviol 
10, 74 
Strychnine 2 1 
Taxol 
10 
Terpenoids 2, 6-14, 
112 
Terpineol 48 
Testosterone 
13, 11 6 
Tetracyclin 5 
Trichothecin 9 
Triterpenoids 7 
Tryptophan 
12 1 

Index 
147 
Ultraviolet 
Vitamin Bz 23, 125 
Wagner-Meerwein 
spectroscopy 41 
Vitamin B6 23 
rearrangement 56, 
Unlbelliferone 
15 
Vitamin BI-, 23. 125 
74 
Uro'gen 111 
125 
Vitamin C 98-101 
Woodward-Fieser 
Vitamin D 
13 
rules 41 
Verbenol 27 
Vitamin E 24 
Wyerone 4 
Vitamin A 
14, 23 
von Braun 
Vitamin Bl 23, 42 
degradation 
55 

