
A HISTORY OF 
THE GREEK LANGUAGE 
From Its Origins to the Present 
BY 
F R A N C I S C O R O D R I G U E Z A D R A D O S 
B R I L L 
L E I D E N • B O S T O N 
2005 

This book was translated from the Spanish by Francisca Rojas del Canto 
© Francisco Rodriguez Adrados, Historia de la lengua griega, Editorial Gredos, Madrid, 1999. 
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Adrados, Francisco Rodriguez, 1922-
A history of the Greek language : from its origins to the present / by Francisco 
Rodriguez Adrados. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references (p.) and index. 
ISBN 90-04-12835-2 (acid-free paper) 
1. Greek language—History. 2. Greek language. Modern—History. 3. Greek 
language, Medieval and late^History. I. Title. 
PA227.A37 2005 
480'.9^dc22 
2005047104 
ISBN 90 04 12835 2 
© Copyright 2005 by Koninklijhe Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands 
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill Academic Publishers, 
Martinus Mjhqff Publishers and VSP. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written 
permission from the publisher. 
Authorization to photocopy itemsfor internal or personal 
use is granted by Brill provided that 
the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright 
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Suite 910 
Danvers MA 01923, USA. 
Fees are subject to change 
PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS 

For Juan Rodriguez Somolinos 
for his help with this book 
and so many other things 


C O N T E N T S 
P R O L O G U E 
A History o f Greek 
xiii 
Fragmentations and Unifications 
xiv 
Is a History o f Greek Possible? 
xvi 
The Present Book 
xviii 
PART ONE 
F R O M I N D O - E U R O P E A N T O A T T I C 
I. F R O M I N D O - E U R O P E A N T O G R E E K 
3 
1. From the steppes of Asia to Greece 
3 
The Indo-Europeans and Greek 
3 
Diverse theories 
5 
2. From Indo-European culture and lexicon to 
Greek lexicon 
8 
3. Greek within the Indo-European dialects 
10 
The Different Indo-Europeans 
10 
Indo-European IIIA and Greek 
12 
II. G R E E K A T T H E D O O R S O F G R E E C E 
16 
1. More specifications on Greek 
16 
2. C o m m o n Greek (CG) 
17 
3. Essential characteristics of c o m m o n Greek 
19 
III. F R O M C O M M O N G R E E K T O T H E D I A L E C T S 
O F T H E S E C O N D M I L L E N N I U M 
22 
1. Variants within c o m m o n Greek 
22 
2. From the arrival of the first Greek dialects (East 
Greek, EG) to the arrival o f the Doric dialects 
(West Greek, W G ) 
25 
The diffusion o f the Greek dialects 
25 
Greek in the second millennium 
29 
The arrival of the Dorians 
32 
3. Greek and the non-Greek languages in the 
second millennium 
34 
Pre-Greek elements adopted by Greek 
37 

Vlll 
CONTENTS 
IV. G R E E K IN T H E S E C O N D M I L L E N N I U M 
42 
1. East Greek 
42 
2. Mycenaean as a Greek dialect o f the second 
millennium 
45 
What kind o f language is Mycenaean? 
45 
Linguistic characteristics 
48 
3. Achaean epic as a Greek language o f the second 
millennium 
50 
Diverse theories on the Homeric language 
50 
Our view o f the Homeric language 
52 
4. Para-Mycenaean in the second millennium 
56 
V . G R E E K IN T H E F I R S T M I L L E N N I U M : 
D I A L E C T A L P A N O R A M A 
59 
1. The expansion o f the Greek dialects 
59 
T h e first expansion 
59 
Colonization 
61 
2. The diffusion o f Greek 
64 
The alphabet and its diffusion 
64 
Inscriptions, literature and hellenisation 
67 
3. The creation o f the great dialects 
72 
Generalities 
72 
Ionic-Attic 
75 
Arcado-Cyprian and Pamphylian 
77 
Aeolic 
w 
78 
The Doric dialects 
81 
4. T h e unifying isoglosses 
82 
5. Secondary differences 
84 
V I . T H E G E N E R A L L I T E R A R Y L A N G U A G E S : 
EPIC, E L E G Y A N D C H O R A L L Y R I C 
87 
1. T h e literary languages as general languages 
87 
2. T*he first general language: epic language in our 
H o m e r 
89 
Innovations in epic language 
89 
Formulaic diction and the renovation o f epic 
language 
91 
M o r e on the epic language o f the eighth century 
95 
3. The diffusion o f the first general language: the 
language o f hexametric poetry after H o m e r 
97 
General overview 
97 
The different genres 
99 

CONTENTS 
ix 
4. The second general language: the language o f 
elegy and epigram 
102 
Elegy 
102 
Epigram 
105 
5. The third general language: the language o f 
choral lyric 
106 
General ideas 
106 
Analysis o f the fundamental elements o f the 
language o f choral lyric 
I l l 
T h e evolution and variants o f choral lyric 
language 
114 
VII. T H E SPECIFIC L I T E R A R Y L A N G U A G E S : 
LESBIAN, B O E O T I A N A N D S Y R A C U S A N 
118 
1. General overview 
118 
2. The Lesbian language o f monodic poetry 
119 
3. Corinna's Boeotian 
121 
4. The Doric o f Syracuse 
122 
VIII. T H E L I T E R A R Y L A N G U A G E S O F T H E 
A R C H A I C A N D C L A S S I C A L P E R I O D S : 
I O N I C A N D A T T I C 
126 
1. Ionic in the iambographers and in general poetry 
.... 
126 
2. Ionic prose 
129 
Generalities and beginnings 
129 
Herodotus 
135 
T h e ancient Hippocratics 
140 
3. T h e transformation o f the Attic dialect into a 
literary language 
142 
Attic as an oral dialect 
142 
Sources 
144 
Characteristics 
145 
T h e oldest Attic prose 
149 
Mature Attic prose 
154 
Variants within Attic prose 
157 
4. The creation o f the scientific language 
161 
The Presocratics 
161 
T h e Hippocratics 
166 
Attic literature 
168 
Example o f a lexical system 
170 
Conclusion 
171 

X 
CONTENTS 
PART TWO 
F R O M K O I N E T O T H E P R E S E N T 
I. K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R 
L A N G U A G E S 
175 
1. Origin, definition and levels 
175 
2. T h e diffusion o f koine 
180 
The difnision 
180 
The 'koinisation' o f the dialects 
183 
3. Colloquial koine and its variants 
184 
Colloquial 'koine' 
184 
The influence of other languages 
185 
Variants o f colloquial 'koine' 
189 
4. Colloquial koine: general description 
192 
5. Literary koine and its stages 
196 
The first stage 
196 
Atticism 
198 
6. The evolution of the intellectual and scientific lexicon 
203 
Sources 
203 
Description 
204 
7. Greek and Latin in the Republic and the Empire 
207 
The contact o f Greek with other languages 
207 
Greek in R o m e 
209 
8. Hellenised Latin and Greek-Latin 
.Tr* 213 
9. Greek and other languages of antiquity 
220 
The languages revolving around Greek 
220 
Germanic, Slavic and Arabic 
223 
II. B Y Z A N T I N E G R E E K A N D ITS I N F L U E N C E O N 
O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
226 
1. Historical context o f Greek in Byzantium 
226 
Historical data 
226 
Popular and higher literature until 1453 
229 
Literature from 1453 
235 
2. Description o f Byzantine popular Greek 
237 
Phonetics and morphology (until the eleventh 
century) 
237 
Examples of popular texts 
240 

CONTENTS 
xi 
Phonetics and morphology (from the twelfth to the 
fifteenth century) 
242 
Examples o f popular texts 
245 
3. The development o f the Byzantine lexicon 
247 
4. Borrowings in Bfzantine Greek 
250 
Latin borrowings 
250 
Borrowings from Gothic and eastern languages 
252 
Borrowings from western languages 
254 
5. Greek borrowings in other languages 
255 
General ideas 
255 
Borrowings in western languages 
257 
Borrowings in Slavic 
264 
Borrowings in Arabic 
267 
III. G R E E K IN T H E E U R O P E A N L A N G U A G E S 
269 
1. The penetration o f Greek-Latin in the European 
languages 
269 
Generalities 
269 
Hellenisms in the high Middle Ages 
270 
Hellenisms in the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries 
272 
In Castilian 
272 
In French 
275 
In Italian 
276 
In English 
278 
Hellenisms in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries 
278 
In Castilian 
278 
In other languages 
280 
Hellenisms in the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries 
281 
2. Description of the place and function of Greek-Latin 
in present day European languages 
284 
Origins and characteristics o f this lexicon 
284 
Importance for the Spanish lexicon 
287 
A n international character 
289 
IV. M O D E R N G R E E K 
291 
1. The history o f Modern Greek ( M G ) 
291 
2. Description o f Modern Greek 
297 
3. Borrowings and culture words in the Modern Greek 
lexicon 
301 

xii 
CONTENTS 
4. The Modern Greek dialects 
304 
General considerations 
304 
Characteristics o f the principal dialects 
307 
Dialects and M G 
309 
C O N C L U S I O N 
312 
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
317 
B I B L I O G R A P H Y 
319 
I N D E X 
343 

P R O L O G U E 
A 
H I S T O R Y OF G R E E K 
Greek and Chinese are the only languages still known to us after 
three thousand five hundred years that are still spoken today. They 
are not the only languages o f culture that have been spoken and 
written for many centuries - some o f which are still in use today, 
others dead, such as Sumerian, Egyptian, Hebrew or Arabic - but 
they do have a longer history and have had a greater influence. 
There is no doubt that, if judged by the influence it has had on all 
o f the European languages, and continues to have today on all lan­
guages, Greek can be regarded as the most important language in 
the world. T h e direct or indirect influence of its alphabet, lexicon, 
syntax and literature has been and is immense. 
This must be taken into account when embarking on a new his­
tory of the Greek language, after those of Meillet, Hoffman, Palmer, 
Hiersche and Horrocks and Christidis (ed.), among others, and a 
copious bibliography. Greek arrived in Greece and other parts in 
the second and first millennia before Christ and spread with Alexander's 
conquests, although its expansion was soon curbed by the resurgence 
of conquered peoples and, much later, by invaders such as the Slavs, 
Arabs and Turks. 
Earlier, when the Romans had conquered the East, Greek con­
tinued to be spoken there. Indeed, from the second century BC it had 
a great influence on Latin and consequently, directly or through Latin, 
on practically every other language. This was a long process, as a 
result o f which today many of our languages can be seen as a kind 
of semi-Greek or crypto-Greek (as I have noted on other occasions). 
Today, Greek is a living language in Greece, but it also has a 
second life: its alphabet, lexicon, syntax and literary genres can be 
traced in all languages. In a sense, it is through these new forms, 
or avatars, as the Indians would say, that Greek has survived. 
A new history o f Greek must take these matters into account. In­
deed, in dealing with Greek in Ancient Greece and Hellenistic Greece, 
it must highlight the literary, cultural and social factors which have 
conditioned the Greek language and in turn are expressed by it. 

xiv 
PROLOGUE 
In its ancient phase, we know Greek by two means: through epig­
raphy (from the period of Mycenae onwards) and through 
manu­
scripts. Thus, we are able to study the fragmentation o f its dialects 
and the unifying features that penetrated them until they were finally 
absorbed by one o f these dialects, Attic. W e can also study the 
different languages used in Greek literature; the specific languages 
used for the different Greek literary genres. 
I will elaborate. First and foremost, we must place Greek within 
Indo-European: in a specific phase and dialect, and with certain 
starting points. In this book I will develop the ideas that I have 
expressed elsewhere: Greek as descending from the final phase of 
Indo-European expansion in Europe, which introduced a polythe-
matic Indo-European - the Indo-European traditionally reconstructed. 
Within this polythematic Indo-European, Greek descends from the 
southern group, which had still not reduced the verbal stems to two, 
and within this still, from the group that preserved gutturals and a 
system o f five cases. It is at this stage that Greek began to develop 
multiple innovations. 
It is important to make a detailed study o f what we can assume to 
have been C o m m o n Greek, its fundamental characteristics, from which 
it could transform, much later, into the great language of culture. 
FRAGMENTATIONS AND UNIFICATIONS 
This is the starting point o f the history o f the fragmentation o f Greek 
into dialects (perhaps already in progress in C o m m o n Greek), and 
of the successive attempts at unification which culminated in the 
imposition o f Attic, and its derivative koine, as the c o m m o n language 
of all the Greeks - a language which, with some differences, has 
survived to this day and has influenced all languages. 
T h e two main dialects o f Greek are the eastern dialect, which 
penetrated Greece around the year 2000 BC, and the western dialect 
(Doric), which penetrated around the year 1200. This is the first 
fragmentation, 
occurring outside o f Greece and introduced there 
later. But there was a political division at the time (between the 
Mycenaean kingdoms and the later cities) and a dialectal fragmen­
tation within the two main groups, which crystallised in the first 
millennium but which was perhaps already in progress in the sec­
ond millennium. 

PROLOGUE 
XV 
However, this growing fragmentation 
was accompanied by the 
expansion o f certain important c o m m o n isoglosses around the year 
1000. Indeed, there was tendency towards linguistic unity. Actually, 
c o m m o n languages had already been created in the second millen­
nium, linguas francas which had a specific geographic origin but 
which later spread throughout Greece: Mycenaean, an administra­
tive language, and what I refer to as epic Achaean, the language of 
the epic, which evolved, and, in H o m e r in the eighth century BC, 
absorbed later dialectal elements. 
Thus, there were unifying elements and the dialectal differences 
do not seem to have been very marked. But when the 
Dorians 
arrived they drove wedges between the dialects, isolating the East 
Greek o f the Peloponnese from that o f central Greece; at the same 
time, certain dialects of East Greek emerged. From this base, differ­
ences became accentuated: eastern dialects were created which were 
then exported, or had already been exported, overseas; that is, Ionic-
Attic, Arcado-Cyprian, and A e o l i c These dialects were infinitely sub­
divided during the fragmentation of political power among the Greek 
cities. There was also West Greek, Doric, which in turn was also 
fragmented. 
However, the unifying tendencies continued to grow. As already 
mentioned, from about the year 1000 certain isoglosses almost entirely 
invaded both groups o f dialects, eastern as well as western. Although 
the Mycenaean dialect had already disappeared, the lingua franca 
or c o m m o n language of the epic, the Homeric language, continued 
tonexist everywhere in an evolved form. New lingua francas, or com­
mon languages of poetry, were also created: in particular, that of 
elegy (from the seventh century BC) and choral lyric (from the end 
o f the sixth century BC). O f course, these languages had a specific 
geographic origin, but soon they became known and cultivated in 
many parts. Their Ionic element provided the base for the later 
diffusion of Ionic prose, and the latter for that of Attic prose. 
In this way, literature was essential to the unification o f Greek. 
Prose followed poetry, as I observed earlier: first Ionic prose became 
internationally known, then Attic prose, all towards the end of the 
fifth century. Although Athens was unable to impose its political 
hegemony, having lost the war against Sparta, it did manage to 
impose its linguistic hegemony: Attic began to infiltrate and substi­
tute all the dialects, transforming them into koine or C o m m o n Greek. 
It absorbed the Ionic intellectual vocabulary, developed a new one, 

xvi 
PROLOGUE 
and the koine continued in this same path. There was again a 'Common 
Greek
5, the base for all subsequent languages o f culture. 
Curiously, the p o w e r which imposed its political hegemony, 
Macedonia, played a decisive role in the diffusion o f Attic The polit­
ical unity did not last, but when it died out, the linguistic unity con­
tinued. This is essentially the history, albeit in a very abbreviated 
form. 
Yet the history does not quite end there. T h e new split was 
different: that o f educated, literary or traditional Greek as opposed 
to popular or spoken Greek. It is known to us from the Hellenistic, 
R o m a n and Byzantine periods. Both strains continue to this day and 
are referred to respectively as the 'pure
5 (icaBape'OO'oaa) language and 
the 'popular' (SripmiKri) language. At some point (from around the 
end o f the Middle Ages perhaps, it is not known exactly), the 'pop­
ular' language began to split into dialects. A new and final unification 
occurred, based on the popular language spoken in Athens, after 
Greek independence. This saw the emergence o f a new KOIVT|. 
There are many varieties o f the Greek language, and the study 
o f their history is fascinating: from their Indo-European origins to 
C o m m o n Greek, and, subsequently, to the small regional dialects 
and the literary and scientific languages. Sometimes these languages 
need to be reconstructed, other times they can be studied in a more 
or less complete form. In any case, the task o f interpreting their ori­
gins is not always easy. Indeed, at a particular point in time, all o f 
these Greek languages shared common features, such as the Homerisms 
and Ionicisms o f the literary languages, and, later, the elements from 
Attic and the scientific and intellectual languages as a whole. 
Is A H I S T O R Y OF G R E E K POSSIBLE? 
T h e history o f the splits and unifications in the Greek language is 
a rather curious one. It is a story o f the expansion o f the territory 
in which Greek was spoken, and then its reduction, o f political defeats 
and linguistic triumphs. Today, Greek forms the basis o f a practi­
cally international language o f culture. 
There are many conflicting theories regarding the Indo-European 
origins o f Greek, C o m m o n Greek and its dialectal fragmentation, as 
well as Mycenaean and the Homeric language. These topics cannot 
be ignored, yet the main emphasis in this study will be placed on 

PROLOGUE 
xvii 
the literary languages, the socio-linguistic levels and the influence of 
Greek on other languages. 
I will then attempt to describe the eventful journey of the Greek 
language through the ages: its influence on so many other languages, 
its role as the language pf the Eastern R o m a n empire and later the 
Byzantine empire (as the language of the Church and State), and 
finally as the language of the newly independent Greece. 
The influence and very existence of the Greek, within and with­
out Greece, is fundamentally 
due to the cultural role that it has 
played. I cannot emphasise this enough. Other languages may have 
also served as vehicles of culture (some o f which I have already 
cited), but Greek was the language that most transcended its own 
limits, along with the whole culture associated with it. Its acceptance 
at the court o f Macedonia was o f great cultural significance. It would 
later become the second language o f educated Romans, and it was 
used by King Ashoka of India, the khans of Bulgaria and the kings 
o f Meroe in Ethiopia. T o be sure, Berosus, Manetho, Josephus and 
Fabius Pictor, among others, preferred to write in Greek rather than 
in their own languages. 
Greek was often translated into other languages and vice versa. 
Its presence can be traced in the evolution of these languages, their 
literatures and cultures. Indeed, almost from the start, its alphabet 
enabled many agraphic languages to be written for the very first 
time, and it was later adapted to write even more languages, from 
Latin to the Slavic languages. 
•There is also the important theme o f the unity o f Greek, from its 
beginnings to the present day. Greek has no doubt evolved, but if 
we compare the different 'Greeks', from Mycenaean and Homeric 
to the ' c o m m o n ' Greek of today, there are not so many differences 
after all. T h e vocalic system has been simplified (quantities, diph­
thongs and musical accents are gone), the consonantal system has 
evolved slightly, and morphology has been reduced: there has been 
a loss of the dual, dative, optative and infinitive, a fossilisation of 
the participle, a reduction o f verbal inflection to two stems, the devel­
opment of periphrastic forms, and some formal variations. But the 
fundamental 
categories and the essence o f the lexicon remain 
the 
same. 
It is possible to write a history of Greek from its beginnings to 
the present, whereas it would not be possible, for instance, to write 
a history dealing with Latin and Spanish. In the history of Latin 

xviii 
PROLOGUE 
there is a strong differentiation with respect to chronology and geog­
raphy, while in Greek, a fundamental unity has prevailed in both 
o f these aspects. This was because o f the supremacy of the educated 
language, defended by ancient tradition and by the Church and State 
of Byzantium, while in the West it was Latin that prevailed, and 
later became fragmented. 
This is the history that I will attempt to recount: an internal his­
tory o f Greek and an external history regarding its relation to other 
languages. It is a very complex history, across so many centuries and 
so many 'Greeks'. I will expound my arguments in what I hope will 
be a coherent and accessible narrative, based, of course, on my own 
ideas, some o f which I have presented in other publications. But this 
expository phase will occasionally be complemented with 
erudite 
notes in small print, providing information regarding the matter in 
question and the hypotheses put forward against it, as well as a 
bibliography. 
It is not easy to write a history o f Greek. T o begin with, the ear­
liest written records are nearly always documentary texts in the 
different dialects, ranging from Mycenaean o f the thirteenth century 
BC to the various other dialects dating from the eighth and seventh 
centuries BC. Sometimes they are also literary texts, which have been 
handed down to us in Hellenistic and R o m a n papyri as well as in 
Byzantine manuscripts, and whose language or languages are in a 
problematic relation to the epigraphic dialects. These texts evolve 
and respond to various socio-linguistic levels: the lower levels-being 
badly documented. H o w does one go about filling in the gaps and 
connecting all o f this with an Indo-European origin and the later 
tradition? I believe that the main lines can be traced. 
T H E PRESENT B O O K 
The justification for writing this book is clear from the above dis­
cussion: to trace the history of the totality o f the Greek language 
and its influence on other languages. The histories of Greek, already 
mentioned, which we have today stop at Hellenistic and R o m a n 
koine, if not earlier. Indeed, Horrock's new history deals with archaic 
and classical Greek in a very summary way and only goes into depth 
in the phase from koine to the present. Ancient Greek is treated as 
if it was a mere precedent, and this is reflected in the book's cover 

PROLOGUE 
XIX 
illustration of a Pantocrator. All of these works fail to discuss the 
influence of Greek on our languages. 
M y aim is to write a balanced history o f the Greek 
language, 
leaning neither towards ancient nor medieval or Modern Greek. Also, 
I will explore the subject o f the diffusion and influence of Greek, 
and its survival in other languages. 
It is important to point out that one o f the main purposes of this 
book is to stress the crucial role played by the literary languages in 
the two unification processes, corresponding to ancient and Modern 
Greek. Time and again, these languages have triumphed over cen­
trifugal tendencies, transforming 
Greek into the model for all the 
languages of culture. 
This book is divided into two parts. T h e first part will study the 
trajectory from Indo-European 
and C o m m o n Greek to Attic, the 
new language that became the c o m m o n language. The second part 
will study the origin and history of this koine or c o m m o n language 
derived from Attic, and the history of its variants from the Hellenistic 
period until the present day, through the R o m a n and 
Byzantine 
periods. 
However, at times there will be a special focus on the creation 
and diffusion of scientific Greek, which has penetrated all languages, 
whether directly or through intermediate languages. 
Some new bibliography, collected and commented by this author, 
will be found in my paper History of the Greek Language 
1983—2004, 
included in Madrid, C.S.I.C. (forthcoming). 


PART ONE 
FROM INDO-EUROPEAN TO ATTIC 


CHAPTER ONE 
F R O M I N D O - E U R O P E A N T O G R E E K 
1. F R O M THE STEPPES OF A S I A T O G R E E C E 
The Indo-Europeans and Greek 
1. Greek, a rich and flexible language which has served as the model 
for all subsequent languages, is only one o f the descendants of the 
Indo-European language, or rather, the complex o f Indo-European 
languages that were brought into Europe by nomadic hordes, from 
the fifth millennium BC onwards. These hordes came from the plains 
that extend from the Urals to the Tien Shan mountains, which close 
the passage to Xinjiang and the Mongolian interior (today part o f 
China). Other Indo-European hordes, moving south, settled on the 
border o f the Caucasus up to Anatolia, while others later continued 
towards Iran and India (or else arrived in Iran directly). Some went 
East, to the other side of the Tien Shan mountains and the Tarim 
Basin, in what is today Xinjiang, where the Tocharian language was 
later born. 
2. Although there is disagreement on the dates, it is clear that towards 
3500 BC, these peoples, who were already in Europe, destroyed the 
so^alled ancient European culture, as attested in the Balkans by 
lithic representations 
o f phallic gods and animals, copper utensils, 
villages and pre-writing. 
Traces of the Indo-Europeans can be found in the kurgans or tumu­
lus burials, which contain skeletons placed on a bed of ochre beside 
sacrificed horses, and in their fortified settlements 
(for example, 
Vucedol in the North of Yugoslavia, dating towards 3000 BC), among 
others. From the fourth millennium they had a bronze culture and 
horse-pulled chariots, which served as vehicles of transport and war. 
(For more details, see §§ 14 ff.) 
It would seem that the Indo-European dialect from which Greek, 
among other languages, emerged (the language we refer to as Indo-
European III) was spoken to the north of the Black Sea and to the 
south of the Carpathian mountains around the year 3000 BC. They 

4 
CHAPTER ONE 
do not represent the oldest Indo-Europeans. They were a group o f 
peoples which around that time had absorbed the future Thraco-
Phrygian and Armenian peoples, and penetrated the South (no doubt 
along the shore o f the Caspian Sea through the Gorgan plain), giv­
ing rise to Indo-Iranian ~ as attested in Babylonia, Anatolia (Mitanni) 
and in Palestine and Syria towards the mid-second millennium -
like the Greeks did in Greece. The expansion towards Europe from 
the Balkans was more recent. 
3. Within this whole group o f languages, Greek and Indo-Iranian 
are very similar, but they also share common features with Tocharian 
and the European languages. But far more archaic Indo-European 
languages are known in Anatolia, which were certainly separated at 
some earlier date: the so-called Cappadocian tablets from Ktiltepe 
and other places, the oldest dating towards 2000 BC, attest to the 
existence o f these other languages, which would later become known 
as Hittite, Luwian, etc., from the end o f the third millennium onwards. 
This is Indo-European II, prior to Indo-European III, from which 
the Indo-European languages o f Europe, Iran and India, as well as 
Tocharian, are descended. 
4. Thus, within group III, European languages such as Slavic, 
Germanic, Latin and Celtic belong to the group called IE IIIB: they 
are more recent than Greek, Thraco-Phrygian, Armenian and Indo-
Iranian, which come from IE IIIA. Its c o m m o n languages can be 
dated, at the earliest, towards 1000 BC, which does not necessarily 
mean that there were no Indo-Europeans before that date, from pre­
vious waves o f migration — concretely, those who left their trace on 
the European hydronymy studied by H . Krahe and others (which is 
not very old, as there are already signs o f a mastery o f the mascu­
line and feminine opposition), and perhaps the Telasgians', o f which 
traces are trying to be found in the pre-Hellenic toponymy o f Greece 
and in borrowings in Greek. 
5. Most scholars agree that Greek entered Greece from the North 
around 2000; it is thought that one o f its dialects, Doric, penetrated 
much later, around 1200. Actually, it is an indisputable fact that the 
invasion was from North to South in Iran, India, Anatolia, Greece, 
Italy and Spain. In addition to this, everything seems to indicate 
that Europe underwent invasions from east to west, and Asia from 
west to east (by the Tocharians). 

FROM INDO-EUROPEAN T O GREEK 
5 
Note that, in the historic period, Indo-European invasions con­
tinued from Central Asia to the South: Kassites (in Babylonia, fifteenth 
century BC), Cymmerians (Asia Minor, seventh century BC), Kushans 
(India, first century BC), Parthians (Iran, second century AD), and to 
the west (Scythians). Also^, in Europe, the movement of Indo-European 
peoples (Slavic, Germanic and Celtic) to the west and south occurred 
in the midst of the historic period. 
Thus, there is every indication that the Indo-Europeans left from 
the plains o f Central Asia. The linguistic, archaeological and his­
torical evidence coincide. T h e same thing applies to other invasions 
of Asian nomads, from the Huns to the Turks, Mongols, and others. 
6, T o d a y we tend to accept the hypothesis that postulates the plains 
to the east o f the Ural mountains, as opposed to the plains to the 
north o f the Black Sea, as the point of departure. The north of the 
Black Sea, where there are so many traces of Indo-Europeans, was 
merely an intermediate stage or temporary settlement. The horde 
that would introduce the Greeks, Thraco-Phrygians and Armenians 
into Europe came from this area, once it had separated from the 
group carrying Indo-Iranian to the east and later to the south. (See 
also § 25.) 
Diverse theories 
7. For a more elaborate discussion, with a bibliography, see M. Gimbutas's 
thesis on the successive Indo-European invasions, starting from Central Asia 
and crossing along the north of the Black Sea, in F. R. Adrados 1979a 
and 1998a. These papers also contain a linguistic argumentation on the 
migration wave that arrived in Greece around the year 2000 BC. Other 
works by M. Gimbutas, such as those of 1974 and 1989, describe the cul­
ture of the 'old Europe', known through discoveries such as those of Gucuteni, 
Starcevo and Vinca, among others: a neolithic, agrarian civilisation, with 
skills in ceramics as well as copper. See also F. Villar 1996a, p. 73 ff. on 
this culture and the Indo-European occupation. Further on in this book, 
linguistic arguments in support of this view of the Indo-European invasions 
will be presented. 
Of course, the culture of the 'old Europe' of the Balkans is closely related 
to the neolithic cultures of Greece (Dirnini, Sesklo, Lerna), Cyprus (Khirokitia), 
the Aegean islands, Crete (the base of Minoan civilisation) and Asia Minor 
(Qatal Huyiik). All of these cultures, in the Balkans and in Greece, had a 
strong influence on Greek culture: for instance, in the decorative arts and 
its representations of divinities, from phallic to animal (the bull in particu­
lar), including the naked goddess of fertility. They also influenced the Greek 
lexicon, which contains many non-Indo-European elements (or, in any event, 

6 
CHAPTER ONE 
a pre-Greek Indo-European known as 'Pelasgian', although some think it 
is Luwian or Carian). 
8. On the history of the problem of Indo-European expansion (the hypoth­
esis that the Indo-Europeans left from Germania, Lithuania, Scandinavia, 
the Central European Danube region, the Balkans, Ukraine, etc.) and its 
arguments, cf. F. Villar 1996a, p. 28 ff. Here, it can be seen how the old 
arguments in favour of a Nordic origin for the Indo-Europeans, based on 
the names for 'salmon* and 'birch-tree', etc., have been discarded today. 
In addition, a localisation of the Indo-European homeland to the north of 
the Black Sea is accepted (together with the Danubian) by P. Bosch-Gimpera 
1960 and (as a stopover) by Th. V. Gamkrelidze~V. V. Ivanov 1995. 
Actually, the Balkans is considered a second stopover. 
9. See Villar 1996a, p. 56 ff. for a critique of the hypothesis of the British 
archaeologist C, Renfrew (1997, Spanish translation 1990), according to 
which the Indo-Europeanisation of Europe represents, quite simply, its neo-
lithisation (without the need of an invasion) by a group that discovered agri­
culture in Anatolia in the seventh millennium; see a parallel criticism by 
J.J. Moralejo 1990, p. 274 ff., and another by J. de Hoz 1992. Renfrew's 
hypothesis ignores all linguistic data and adheres to the trend that rejects 
the fact of the migration of peoples (contrary to all historical evidence). 
That there can be cultural diffusion without migrations does not exclude 
that there are migrations, for which there is almost infinite evidence. In 
opposition to this trend (also supported by, among others, C. Watkins and 
A. Giacalone-P. Ramat, eds., 1995, p. 64 ff.), cf. Adrados 1979a, p. 34 ff., 
Moralejo 1990, p. 272 ff., 284 ff., De Hoz 1992 and Adrados 1998b. Fur­
thermore, the identification of agriculture with an Indo-European influence 
is purely a priori arbitrariness. 
10. Another recent hypothesis, repeatedly sustained by Th. V. Gamkrelidze-
V. V. Ivanov (in his book of 1995), localises the area in which the Indo-
Europeans originated in the Halaf culture of upper Mesopotamia, between 
the fourth and fifth millennia BC. However, the argument of cultural bor­
rowings (the war and horse chariots, metallurgy) and lexical borrowings 
(Semitic and Kartvelian, if true) does not require such a localisation, these 
things could have come to them from the north of the Caucasus; the same 
can be said of possible common features (lexical, again) between Greek and 
Iranian, Greek and Tocharian. Also, the specific linguistic (morphological) 
arguments are hardly taken into account. 
To be sure, the fact that IE contains borrowings from northern Caucasian 
as well as from Uralic, attests to the localisation of the Indo-Europeans at 
a certain point in the Volga region; cf. H. Haarmann 1996 (who proposes 
the fifth millennium BC). 
Furthermore, Th. V. Gamkrelidze-V. V. Ivanov accept an early sepa­
ration of an Anatolian branch of IE, as I do (cf. pp. 346 and 761). But 
their ideas regarding the migration of the Greeks (without the Dorians who, 
according to them, had gone through the continent) from Anatolia to 

FROM INDO-EUROPEAN T O GREEK 
7 
Greece - a hypothesis held earlier by V. Pisani 1938 (cf. Adrados 1974, 
p. 48) - cannot be sustained. The existence of Common Greek and its 
relation to Indo-Iranian languages rests upon the existence of a continuum 
running from Turkestan to the north of the Black Sea and further to the 
west. On the other hand, there is data available on the incursions and set­
tlements of the Mycenaean Greeks in Asia during the second millennium 
(the Trojan War occurs in this context), but not regarding movements in 
Asia or Europe. On Mycenaean expansion, cf. M. Fernandez-Galiano 1984, 
p. 231 ff; on the Trojan War seen from this perspective, Adrados 1992c. 
M. Sakellariou 1980, p. 67 ff. coincides with our thesis on the existence of 
an Indo-Greek, which, according to him, would have originated in the 
lower Volga region, breaking off later. 
11. As Villar clearly demonstrates, the three homelands that are today pro­
posed for the Indo-Europeans are not so distant: they are located around 
the Caucasus, on either side of it. Both the linguistic and archaeological 
arguments favour the first hypothesis. In any case, it seems certain that the 
invasion that brought the Greeks into Greece came from the North, towards 
the year 2000 BC (see the bibliography in § 44). The most recent discrep­
ancy appears to come from R. Drews 1989, for whom the tombs of the 
inner circle of Mycenae, towards 1600, would correspond to the first Greeks; 
cf. against this view, J. J. Moralejo 1990, p. 281 ff. For other, former pro­
posals of a recent dating of the arrival of the Greeks, and its refutation, 
see M. Sakellariou 1980, p. 32 ff. Although there are no actual linguistic 
arguments that are absolutely valid for choosing 2000 or 1600 as the date 
of the Greek arrival, archaeology inclines towards the first date. C f Adrados 
1998b. Here, I provide a criticism of the idea of a separate Dorian inva­
sion (proposed, of course, by J. Chadwick 1973, 1985, which I also argue 
against in Adrados 1998b and further on in this book in §§ 53 ff.). 
12. I also reject the theses of A. Hausler (lacking any linguistic argumen­
tation whatsoever), which bring up to date the old German thesis propos­
ing the origin of the Indo-Europeans in the plains of eastern Europe: it 
denies any relation to the culture of the steppes to the north of the Black 
Sea. In a large series of works (among others, A. Hausler 1985, 1992a, 
1992b), Hausler attempts to refute the movement of peoples and cultures 
in Germany and Greece, and any relation between the Indo-Europeans 
and the cultures of knotted ceramics and combat axes in eastern Europe, 
the tombs and stele of Mycenae, the war chariot and the horse in various 
places, etc. All is assumed to be indigenous (evolution in situ) or coming 
from Asia Minor. Yet, although the war chariot and the horse may have 
come from there originally, this does not mean we cannot maintain the 
hypothesis of their extension to the Indo-Europeans. Indeed, one cannot 
deny the connection between the Indo-European kurgans and funerary tumuli, 
such as those of the Scythians in the Ukraine, those of Thrace (Kasanlak, 
etc.), Macedonia (Vergina) and Phrygia (Gordium), not to mention the trea­
sure of Atreus. 

8 
CHAPTER ONE 
2. F R O M INDO-EUROPEAN CULTURE AND LEXICON 
TO G R E E K LEXICON 
13. M u c h o f Indo-European culture survived in Greece, as well as 
in the Greek lexicon which also retained some elements that have 
long since disappeared or been forgotten. 
If the Greek language can be seen as the continuation o f Indo-
European, or some o f its dialects to be more precise, Greek culture 
can be seen as a continuation o f Indo-European culture, or a par­
ticular temporal and local phase o f this culture. Indeed, culture and 
language go hand in hand. W e need to examine how a particular 
part o f the Greek lexicon is in effect a continuation o f Indo-European 
lexicon, and the extent to which it continues to reflect that same 
culture, while adapting its semantics to new circumstances. The Greek 
lexicon was supplemented with a new lexicon, borrowed from other 
languages or especially created in order to reflect the changing his­
torical and cultural circumstances. 
14. This is not the appropriate place for an in-depth look at Indo-
European culture, which can be reconstructed to a certain extent 
through archaeology, through a comparative study o f the various 
peoples descended from the Indo-Europeans (including the Greeks), 
and through a study o f the lexicon. The latter study is known as 
linguistic palaeontology: the recovery o f things through words. It was 
initiated by A. Kuhn in the mid-nineteenth century, and its latest 
results can be seen in the work previously cited by Th. V . Gamk-
relidze-V. V . Ivanov 1995, p. 413 ff., and in specialised studies (on 
Indo-European poetry, for example). 
Thus, in very general terms, we can reconstruct the characteris­
tics o f nomadic, warring tribes that travelled in chariots pulled by 
four horses and settled in fortified areas, but never lost their migra­
tory instinct. As mentioned earlier, this was a neolithic culture which 
nevertheless had knowledge o f bronze as well as ceramics, wood­
working, and weaving; it had domesticated animals such as the bull, 
cow, sheep, pig and dog; it cultivated barley, and hunted and gath­
ered various fruit. 
Its social organisation was based on the patriarchal family, which 
was united with other, more primary families within phratries and 
tribes which at times coalesced under the leadership o f a king with 
military, religious and judicial powers, but limited by an assembly 

FROM INDO-EUROPEAN T O GREEK 
9 
of warriors. W e have knowledge o f their religion, with the god of 
day, *Dyeusy their sacrifices and libations, and their oral, epic and 
lyric poetry. 
15. After Kuhn, this line of enquiry was followed by A. Pictet, 1859-63. 
O. Schrader and A. Nehring codified this science in their Reallexicon 
1917-1929. See also later V . Pisani, Pakontologia Linguistics Caligari 1938, 
G. Devoto 1962, the volume Pakontologia Linguistica (Brescia 1977), in addi­
tion to E. Campanile 1990a and 1990b, p. 27 ff., F. Villar 1996a, p. 107 
ff, and Th. V. Gamkrelidze-V. V. Ivanov 1995, p. 413 ff. On the Indo-
European epic, see Campanile (cit.) and Adrados 1992c and the bibliog­
raphy cited there (among others, H. M. Chadwick 1967, the same and 
N. K. Chadwick 1968, C. M. Bowra 1952, J. de Vries 1963, M. Durante 
1966, K. Von See, ed., 1978, R. Schmitt 1967, R. Finnegan 1977). 
16. The Greek language inherited most of the vocabulary that reflects this 
culture. For example, the name for fortified city (%6Xi<;); social and famil­
ial organisation (yevoc; 'family', 7ioxi<; 'lord, husband', rcoxvia 'of the hus­
band, wife', Tiaxfjp 'father' and various other family names); names for house 
(56ucx;), the home (eoxia) and crafts related to working with mud, wood, 
clothing, textiles, etc. (xei%o<;, XEKXCOV, eoGfjc;, etc.); verbs such as 'to cook' 
(7ieaaco), 'to plough' (dpoco, cf. apoxpov 'plough'), 'to spin' (veoo), 'to milk' 
(due^yco). Also, the names for the god of the sky (Zzvq), domestic animals 
(xcropcx;, po\)<;, ot><;, 6i<;, icucov, etc.), 'barley' (£eioci), honey (ueAa), and the 
names for mediums of transport and of war (untoc; 'horse', KX>KXO<; 'wheel', 
6%o<; 'chariots'), etc. 
17. Several observations should be made. Some Indo-European words that 
entered Greek - for instance, the word for 'bull' cited earlier, the word for 
'lion' ?i£(ov), 'wine' (oivoq), perhaps even the word for 'horse' - are proba­
bly 'old words' which both IE and Greek adopted from the Middle East 
as -a result of cultural factors; there are parallels with non-Indo-European 
languages (Sumerian, Kartvelian, Semitic, etc.), cf. Th. V. Gamkrelidze-
V. V. Ivanov, cit. These are considered to be Indo-European words, from 
the point of view of Greek. 
However, when cultural circumstances change, some words survive, but 
with a change in meaning. Thus, the dp%ixeKxcov can build in stone as well 
as wood, the X£i%o<; does not have to be made of mud, the %aXKEvq 'bronze-
smith' becomes a 'smith', the <ppaxf)p is now 'member of the phratry' and 
the 'brother from the same mother' (a$eX<poq) becomes simply 'brother'. If 
*bhagos was once 'beech', as it is thought, there was a change in meaning 
when it became (pryyo*; 'oak, ilex'. Xopxo<; became simply a 'vegetable gar­
den' and lost all relation to 'patio, court', etc. 
Yet, IE should not be regarded as a unity. Culturally speaking, it seems 
clear that although the domestication of the horse and the use of the heavy 
chariot for transport are very old, the light war chariot pulled by two horses 
was probably a recent introduction, from towards the mid-second millen­
nium - the same applies to the word for riding. However, in IE, certain 

10 
CHAPTER ONE 
cultural terms (for example, the name for 'fortress
5 or for 'bronze') appear 
to be dialectal. In turn, Greek terms can differ from one dialect to another. 
But it is not just a question of the lexicon. Today it is widely accepted that 
the first Greek poetry, mostly epic but also lyric poetry, followed the style 
of Indo-European oral poetry, with its formulas, similes, maxims or yvcouai, 
and even its metre. See the bibliography cited in § 15, and for lyric, Adrados 
1984c, and p. 107 ff. 
3. G R E E K WITHIN THE INDO-EUROPEAN DIALECTS 
The Different Indo-Europeans 
18. Given the current scope of our knowledge, we cannot continue 
regarding Greek simply as a derivative of Indo-European - that is, 
o f the unitary and flat Indo-European traditionally 
reconstructed, 
called brugmannian. At most, some features of Greek were consid­
ered to be evidence o f an evolution o f this language. 
There is not one but various forms o f Indo-European, 
arranged 
chronologically and divided into dialects, also arranged chronologically, 
from which the Indo-European languages known to us derive. It is 
important to place Greek within this scheme, and to establish the dia­
lect from which it derives. I have already laid the essential foundations. 
In fact, the idea o f a chronological ladder of IE is not entirely 
new. Meillet, Hirt, Specht and Benveniste, among others, speculated, 
for example, on the evolution of roots, the recent character o f the 
feminine, the aorist, the thematic declension, and, even earlier, on 
an original non-inflectional IE whose traces can be found in the pure 
stems, the first terms o f compounds, and certain adverbs. 
Other 
scholars looked for traces o f agglutination or adaptation in the ori­
gin o f certain inflectional forms. However, they continued to recon­
struct a single IE, 
19. The problem became more pressing with the decipherment of 
Hittite and other Anatolian languages. These differ in many respects 
from the reconstructed IE. 
Sturtevant suggested a first solution with his thesis of 'Indo-Hittite' 
(1933, 1962, etc.): Hittite and Indo-European were seen as two 
different branches o f this ancient Tndo-Hittite
5. However, there was 
no argument that referred to a diachronic difference between the 
two branches, the characteristics of which were dealt with very incom­
pletely. His hypothesis made hardly an impact. It was generally 

FROM INDO-EUROPEAN T O GREEK 
11 
believed that Hittite did not contain certain categories such as the 
masculine and feminine gender, the aorist, the subjunctive or perfect, 
because it had 'lost
5 them. A whole series o f phonetic and morpho­
logical archaisms were not taken into account. 
From 1962 onwards (in my article 'Hettitisch und Indogermanisch'), 
I began to pose the problem in a different way: Hittite as proceed­
ing from a stage in IE in which the following categories had not yet 
been created: the masculine/feminine opposition, the adjective's grades 
o f comparison and the combination of various stems in the verb (the 
present, aorist, perfect and future; the indicative, subjunctive and 
optative). Verbal and nominal inflection was m o n o thematic: as names 
and verbs only had one stem, verbal and nominal inflections (includ­
ing adjectival and pronominal inflections) were deduced with the 
help o f desinences (including 0). 
This monothematic IE (IE II) represents a phase before the poly-
thematic Indo-European (IE III) that corresponds to the traditional 
reconstruction. O f course, it contains more archaisms: from the laryn­
g e a l , the lack in quantity of vowels or the frequent identity of sin­
gular and plural forms outside of N. and A c , and N. and G. singular 
in the thematic names, to certain features of the desinential system. 
Polythematic IE contains, apart from polythematism, various other 
innovations; and there is no lack o f innovations in Anatolian, or 
rather, its branches (Hittite and other languages). In the same way, 
some Hittite archaisms are often found as such in polythematic IE 
(see § 22). 
It must be assumed that the Anatolian branch representative of 
IE II was evidendy separated at a certain point from the rest of IE; 
moving along the Caucasus, it then passed to Asia Minor and was 
immune to the innovations of the rest o f IE to the north of the 
Caucasus (IE III). This coincides with that fact that our oldest Greek 
and Indo-Iranian texts date from around the fifteenth century BC 
and those of Hittite from around the twentieth century BC, as stated 
above (§ 3). But it is the linguistic argument that is decisive. 
20. Of course, a detailed study of the historical aspect of this matter is not 
appropriate here, but it has been dealt with in the following papers: 
Arqueologia y diferenciacion del Indoeuropeo' (1979a) and 'The archaic 
structure of Hittite: the crux of the problem' (1982b), nor is this the appro­
priate place for a detailed argumentation. 
A series of articles on this subject have been collected in my Nuevos estu-
dios de Lingiiistica Indoeuropea (1988a). General expositions can be found in 

12 
CHAPTER ONE 
my Lingiiistica Indoeuropea (1975) and especially in my Manual de Lingiiistica 
Indoeuropea II (1996a). In the work 'The new image of Indo-European. The 
history of a Revolution', I show, with the aid of an abundant bibliogra­
phy, how there are more and more adherents to the new doctrine (often 
attributed to W. Meid 1975, who merely plagiarised me), even though the 
central character of the monothematism / polythematism opposition is rarely 
acknowledged. I must add the following authors to those already cited there, 
Th. V. GamkreHdze-V. V. Ivanov 1995, pp. 344 ff, 757 ff. 
Recently (Adrados 1998a), I have provided a global vision of IE differ­
entiation. Furthermore, polythematism is not the only IE III innovation: 
others include the loss of the laryngeals, the introduction of quantity as a 
phonological characteristic of vowels, the demonstrative pronoun *so, *sa} 
Hod, the personal pronoun *eg(h)d/me, nominal inflection with asigmatic N. 
sg. with a long vowel, etc. But there is still much traditionalism in favour 
of a unique IE and few innovations in Hittite, and there are still those 
who, obviating the bibliography and the data provided there, attempt to 
resuscitate the Indo-Hittite hypothesis (A. Lehrmann 1996). He could have 
at least read my article of 1992, published in the same journal in which 
he writes. 
For the concrete position of Greek, cf Adrados 1975a. 
Indo-European Ilia and Greek 
21. The study o f IE II and its derivative Anatolian, with its various 
languages, is not direcdy relevant in this context: it is clear that 
Greek and the other languages considered in the traditional recon­
struction descend from IE III, the polythematic branch which spread 
from the year 2000 BC through Greece, Iran and India (A), and 
more recentiy through Europe and the Tarim valley (B). It is jjaought 
that this type of IE was formed during the course o f the third mil­
lennium BC: I have identified its expansion with the third of Gimbutas' 
migrations, towards 2300 BC. This does not mean that previous waves 
of migration had not managed to reach Europe: the pre-Germanic 
and pre-Greek Indo-European remains to which I have alluded must 
be attributed to these; I will return to them. 
I would like to stress that the linguistic arguments so neglected by 
archaeologists are essential for an understanding o f the originality of 
IE III. These arguments focus on innovations and choices, although, 
of course, archaisms identical to those o f IE II remain here and 
there: traces o f the laryngeals, the use of the pure stem in L. and 
other functions, the occasional correspondence between N. and G,, 
heteroclitic inflection, verbs conjugated by only one stem (such as 
dux in Gr.), the lack o f the subj. (in Baltic and Slavic), the occa-

FROM INDO-EUROPEAN TO GREEK 
13 
sional lack o f the distinction o f the same and the had. (in Gr., Germ., 
etc.), and so on. 
There are even archaisms which Anatolian had lost (the distinc­
tion of nominal stems in *-o and *-a, 1st sg. in *-d without desinence, 
etc.). The choices are also notable: N. pi. in *-6s and not in 
1st. sg. mid. in *(m)ai arid not in *~a, etc. 
22. However, this is insufficient when it comes to establishing 
the 
genealogy of Greek: considering it a descendant of IE III is not an 
innovation on the traditional arguments that simply considered it a 
descendant o f IE. W e have only pointed out that this IE III corre­
sponds to a recent phase of IE. 
So, the task is to specify from which area of this IE III Greek 
descends. By referring to the previous ideas of, for example, R. Birwe 
1956, and by anticipating the most recent discussions, such as that 
by Th. V . Gamkrelidze-V. V . Ivanov 1995, p. 347 ff., in the pre­
viously cited works I proposed the existence of an IE dialect that 
forms the base of Gr., I.-L, and Arm. (also, certainly of Thraco-
Phrygian). I chose to call this dialect IE IIIA or Indo-Greek, the 
one which has been discussed. Cf. M . Meier-Briigger 1992, p. 65 f. 
Faced with this dialect, languages that have been dated 
more 
recently, or more to the W., i.e. those o f Europe (Bait., Slav., Germ., 
Lat., Ital., Celt.) and the E. ( T o e ) , would represent an IE IIIB, 
which is something fundamentally new: the most important innova­
tion would be the reduction of the verbal system to two stems (apart 
from the fut.), the impf, aor. and perf. merging in the second. 
This is the fundamental division: the old division into centum/satdm 
languages corresponds to a more recent phonetic phenomenon which 
intersects with the IE IIIA/B split and other characteristics. Another 
B innovation is the frequent use of verbal stems in *-e and -a. Yet 
the presence o f archaic features within group B is not excluded (for 
example, the desinence *-r in Lat., Ital., Celt, and T o e ; the lack of 
the act./mid. opposition, of the subj. and perf. in Bait, and Slav., the 
occasional monothematism (as in moli, 2nd~3rd sg. pret.) in Slav., etc. 
O f course, the existence of archaisms in particular groups is not 
excluded: apart from those already mentioned, B also preserves semi-
thematic verbal inflection, while A preserves better the sense of the 
root and the derivation of stems from this root (in this way, various 
aorists may correspond to a single present and vice versa). A also 
preserves the opposition o f the present and imperfect which 

14 
CHAPTER ONE 
+--.0 is marked solely by the desinences, and the richness of the 
system o f derivation and composition. Furthermore, there are inno­
vations and archaisms that are specific to the different languages, 
Gr., I.-L and Arm. in the case o f group A. 
23. The existence o f c o m m o n innovations in group A is fundamen­
tal. For instance, the relative -yoy verbal augment (also in Armenian), 
the elimination o f semi-thematic inflection, the creation of the mid. 
perf. and plusc, the assignment of moods and participles to verbal 
stems, the opposition o f a durative *bhere/o- and a punctual *tude/o-
stem, the future in -s- (also in Baltic), the tendency (completed in 
I.-L) to establish four complete series of desinences (with the dis­
appearance o f the use o f the pure stem, except in the thematics), 
the loss also (with exceptions in I.-L) o f the des. *-r, the lack o f com­
posed verbal stems (except for Gr. -0n) and o f *-e and *a stems 
(except for Gr. -n), etc. 
Greek also often innovates with respect to Sanskrit: for example 
in the assignment o f an infinitive to every verbal stem and in the 
almost complete destruction of the complicated system o f present 
tenses derived from the same root. 
Yet, with all its innovations, the IIIA dialect is fundamentally 
archaic in its preservation o f the four verbal stems of the present, 
aorist, perfect and future. This coincides with its older diffusion. It 
has produced languages with a continuous, southern localisation: they 
spread to Iran and India, to Greece and Asia Minor. In connection 
with this, I have suggested the existence of a southern horde, (or a 
group of them), which penetrated Europe through the south of the 
Carpathian mountains, and certainly advanced westwards at an ear­
lier date than the hordes which penetrated through the north o f the 
Carpathians, creating various European languages of the IIIB type. 
Without a doubt, the predecessors o f the Greeks were at the head 
of the southern horde, which carried IE IIIA: from the Balkans they 
turned southwards, the Thracians trailing behind them as well as 
the Phrygians and Armenians, who crossed to Asia Minor. In con­
trast, the predecessors o f the Iranians and Indians moved (though 
not always) to the East and then descended to Iran and India. 
24. The establishment of the fundamental characteristics of IE IIIA is essen­
tial for determining the archaisms, choices and innovations of Greek. But 
it must be pointed out that the separation of the two branches or dialects 
into A and B is not absolute: there was certainly contact between the two 

FROM INDO-EUROPEAN T O GREEK 
15 
before the continuity of the languages was dissolved, in the Russian or 
European plains. Sometimes all or part of the A branch coincides with the 
B branch. 
The more or less complete satemisation of certain languages of a par­
ticular group, the coincidence in the confusion of the vowels, etc., are good 
examples. As far as morphology is concerned, we can cite, for instance, 
the presence of the superlative suffix *-isto- in Gr., I.-L and Germ.; the 
case desinence 
belonging to group A, which is also present in Lat, 
Celt., etc.; concordance in personal pronouns (G. of 1st pers. Av. mana, 
OSlav. mene, Lith. mane, Ac. OIn. mam, OSlav. me), in the prohibitive nega­
tion *me (in I.-L, Bait.); the future in -s (Gr., L-L, Bait.); participles in -lo 
(Arm. and Slav.); the diffusion of verbal stems in *-e (Gr., Arm., T o e , etc.); 
the creation of a complete inflection for denominatives and deverbatives 
(but not in I.-L); the N. pi. in *-oi in thematic names (in Gr., Lat., OSlav., 
Germ., part of Celtic); the dual (Gr., I.-L, Balto-Slav. and part of Germ.), 
and so on. 
These are thought to be innovations or choices, as the case may be. But 
there are also archaisms, such as the nominal system with five cases and 
a unique form of D.-L.-I. (in Gr., Germ., and Celt.) - although some would 
consider this an innovation - and heteroclitic inflection, of which there are 
traces in Latin. 
All of this is significant in that it lays the foundations for an examina­
tion of the facts surrounding the Greek language, for it is not only a con­
tinuation of IE IIIA, which is not always unitary, but it also coincides with 
particular language of IIIB, as we shall see. This can be seen as distinct 
from its differentiation within group IIIA itself. We believe that, by lead­
ing the IE IIIA hordes, its main contact was with the rearguard of the IIIB 
hordes, especially with the Baltic and Slavic languages: this is revealed in 
their common features. 
For a more detailed account of these ideas, see (among other works) 
Adrados 1979a, 1990b, 1992c and 1996a. 

CHAPTER TWO 
G R E E K A T T H E D O O R S O F G R E E C E 
1. M O R E SPECIFICATIONS ON G R E E K 
25. I would like to stress the relationship between Greek and the 
Indo-European languages. W e have already pointed out that the 
Indo-Greek group or IE IIIA, whether in its entirety or in a certain 
language in particular, often displays similarities with the group IIIB 
languages: whether in archaisms, innovations or choices. I would now 
like to highlight this phenomenon, focusing on the Greek language. 
Sometimes Greek preserves archaisms that were lost in I.-L: gen­
erally, in connection with other languages (this is not surprising, given 
that an archaism may emerge anywhere). For instance, there is declen­
sion into five cases (also in Germ, and Celt.); athematic inflection of 
denominatives and deverbatives in the 3rd pers. pi. -aai, -nai (also 
in Lat., Germ., etc, but in Gr. only in Aeolic); possibly, the lack of 
the personal G. *mene (in phonetics, the character centum). However, 
sometimes it is I.—I. which displays an archaism that was lost to 
Greek, which innovates alone or with other languages: we 
find 
monothematic inflection o f denominatives and deverbatives, one 
infinitive per verb which is not assigned to the stems, the lack of 
verbal stems with the long vowel -e or *-dy etc. 
Here is a short list of the forms which the innovations or choices 
of Greek, together with other languages, may take: the dual, the N. 
pi. in *-oi and verbal stems in *-e and *-d, as cited previously; com­
pound verbal stems (with -0r|, with other variants in Lat., Ital., 
Germ., Sla., Bait., e.g. Lat. amabam, etc); G 
pi. in *-dsdm (in Gr. 
and Lat.); the gentilitious adjective in -os (as an archaism in Gr., 
and also present in Lat.), e t c In addition, in phonetics, the vocali­
sation o f *<r, *1> with 0, as in Lat. (but in Gr., only in Aeolic); and 
the vocalic prothesis before a sonant (only in Arm.). 
26. Given that the horde from which Greek would emerge was in 
the vanguard o f all the hordes that travelled along the northern coast 
of the Black Sea and penetrated Europe through the south of the 
Carpathian mountains, it is not surprising that, on occasion, Greek 

GREEK AT THE DOORS OF GREECE 
17 
should have come into contact with the rearguard o f the northern 
horde o f IE IIIB—corresponding to the Slavic, Baltic, and even 
Germanic and Latin peoples (which in turn came into contact with 
the Italic and Celtic peoples). 
O f course, all o f this implies, firstly, that the future Greek dialects 
could preserve archaisms or introduce innovations of their own accord, 
thereby distinguishing themselves from I.-L They could also come 
into contact, at various points (certainly at a relatively recent point 
in time) with the northern hordes. 
In other words, the unity of IE IIIA was not absolute, and one 
of its branches could evolve at different points in time. Indeed, even 
this branch was not absolutely unified, undergoing internal splits in 
its contacts with the northern and western dialects. Internally, 
a 
process of breaking away or differentiation, which would later advance 
within Greece, had certainly begun, besides the evolutions that affected 
the whole Greek dialect. 
27. For more details, see various of my publications, especially (among other 
earlier works) 'Sanscrito e Indoeuropeo' (1975a), 'La dialectologia griega' 
(1984a) and 'Las lenguas eslavas en el contexto de las lenguas indoeuro-
peas' (1980b), collected in Adrados 1988a; see also 'De la Dialectologia 
griega de 1952 a la Dialectologia griega de 1995' (Madrid, 1998b). 
2. C O M M O N G R E E K 
(CG) 
28. C o m m o n Greek flourished shortly before the year 2000 BC in 
an area of northern Greece. This was a Greek dialect which did not 
display an absolute unity and contained its own archaisms and inno­
vations and choices, linking it, at certain points, to other Indo-
European dialects. This dialect contained various lines o f fracture, 
but it also had its own exclusive innovations, which I must discuss. 
It was normal to speak o f ' c o m m o n languages
5 during a period 
in which the image of the 'genealogical tree
5 (Stammbaumtheorie) was 
dominant as regards the evolution o f languages. Then came the 'the­
ory of the waves
5 (Wellentheorie), which brought expansive waves of 
diverse innovations to our attention, with a tendency to converge on 
a central nucleus, but to organise into 'bundles o f isoglosses
5 on the 
limits: now one could not speak o f c o m m o n intermediate languages. 
A struggle against these was launched in the scientific literature. 
Furthermore, with the arrival of anti-migrationism and the idea that 

18 
CHAPTER T W O 
languages are created through the convergence of various other lan­
guages (for Greek, see V . Pisani and Th. V . Gamkrelidze), the theory 
of c o m m o n intermediate languages tended to be abandoned. 
Faced with this idea, on a number of occasions (most recently in 
Adrados 1998a) I have defended the view that C o m m o n Greek and 
the other 'common languages' did in fact exist. O f course, not as 
absolutely closed and uniform dialects, but as lax units, related to a 
particular region, and other surrounding regions, in which there was 
an incipient internal fragmentation. In fact, there is no such thing 
as an absolutely uniform dialect: why should we expect there to be 
such, in a preliterate period with a merely tribal political organisa­
tion? Many o f us had already long anticipated the ideas of M . Bile-
C. Brixhe-R. Hodot 1984 regarding the lack of total unity in dialects. 
The most curious thing, as far as Greek is concerned, is the pro­
gressively increasing popularity o f the idea that its dialectal frag­
mentation took place exclusively within Greece. This is perhaps an 
understandable (though terribly excessive) reaction to the ideas held 
by Kretschmer, Tovar and myself regarding the origin o f Greek 
dialects outside o f Greece. 
29. However, in various works (especially 1976a and b, 1984a), which 
culminate in my book of 1998b, I have always defended the theory 
o f a C o m m o n Greek: fundamentally unitary, but with budding 
differentiation. This is in no way incompatible with the later origin 
o f certain dialectal characteristics. 
The idea of a convergence of dialects (Pisani, Gamkrelidze)'in the 
creation o f Greek is just as ludicrous as the idea o f Mycenaean as 
the convergence o f dialects (Georgiev) or Chadwick's idea that there 
was only ever one Greek migration: the Dorian peoples would be 
seen as submitted subjects to the Mycenaeans, and at some point 
revolting against them. 
It is evident that the peoples who brought the Doric dialects to 
Greece towards the year 1200 BC formed a part of C o m m o n Greek: 
there is no reason to dispute this traditional view. Doric is essen­
tially an archaic form o f Greek that has not received the innova­
tions and choices peculiar to East Greek, which penetrated Greece 
at an earlier date and from which the other dialects descend. It is 
likely that many o f these innovations and choices would have already 
been present, in statu nascendi, in C o m m o n Greek, for example those 
that join Aeolic with the western Indo-European dialects, IIIB, as 
we have seen. 

GREEK AT THE DOORS OF GREECE 
19 
3. ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF COMMON G R E E K 
30. Here, I will summarise the opinions regarding C o m m o n Greek 
which have been presented in previous publications already cited. I 
will start with the essential characteristics and continue with the inter­
nal variants that they no doubt entailed. Naturally, I will not look 
at those c o m m o n characteristics of Greek that emerged later as a 
product o f internal evolution, such as the creation o f the article. 
I have placed Greek within Indo-European and, more specifically, 
within IIIA. But it is now essential to present its fundamental 
char­
acteristics, which are no doubt present in C o m m o n Greek, in a 
schematic way. These characteristics are present in the most ancient 
dialects, recent innovations not taken into account. They are also 
the result o f the evolution o f Greek as a literary language. 
31. Greek preserved the musical accent o f IE and its system of five 
short and five long vowels. In archaic times, *i and % could have 
the semi-vocalic forms of y, 
*w, which were later lost; whereas the 
vocalic forms of the sonants were lost (although there is a view, 
which I do not hold, that <*r> were preserved in H o m e r 
and 
Mycenaean). The laws o f Osthoff and Grassmann had been fulfilled. 
The three laryngeals in a vocalic position had become vocalised as 
e, a, o (in certain different contexts). 
32. For the supposed preservation of <*r> in Homer and Mycenaean, cf., 
among other bibliography, Heubeck 1972; against this preservation, see 
J.J. 
Moralejo 1973b and my 'Mycenaean...' (Adrados 1976a, compiled 
in Adrados 1988a, cf. p. 450). For the dating of vocalisation in CG, cf. 
my work Adrados 1976b, p. 260 ff, and my statements about this vocali­
sation in my article of 1958 (followed by many others). C f also A. Bernabe 
1977. 
33. With regard to the consonants, it is important to note that in 
C o m m o n Greek the aspirated voiced consonants had become aspi­
rated voiceless consonants, and that the labiovelars, judging by Myce­
naean, were still preserved: thus C o m m o n Greek had three series of 
plosives (voiceless, aspirated voiceless and unaspirated voiced), with 
four points o f articulation: labial, dental, guttural and labiovelar. But 
the appendix o f the laryngeals was lost in certain contexts. 
The s was preserved in groups and final position, but it became 
aspirated h in initial and intervocalic position (lexical borrowings and 
the evolution o f certain groups later enabled the later acceptance of 
s in these positions). Yet, it is possible that certain later evolutions, 

20 
CHAPTER T W O 
such as that o f -ti> -si and that o f certain groups with s andjy, had 
already begun. In other words, the phonological system looked like 
this: 
Vowels: 
a, e, 6,1, u, a, e, I, 6, u 
Sonants: 
y, w, r, 1, m, n 
Consonants: 
b, p, ph 
d, t, th 
g, k, kh 
gw 
k w
h 
Sibilants: 
s 
Aspirates: 
h 
34. Morphology displayed the following characteristics, sometimes in 
combination with other languages: *-s in the N. masc, sg. o f the 
stems in *-a\ *-i N . pi. o f the nouns in *-e/o and -a; G. pi. in 
*-som o f these same stems in *-d; the D . pi. in *-si (not *-su) o f the 
athematic nouns; declension into five cases and three numbers; the 
development and frequent use o f stems in *-eu and the limited rep­
resentation o f those in *-e and *-o; the convergence o f the suffixes 
*-tero and *-yos in the comparative, and the creation o f *-tato in the 
superlative; the inflection o f the pi. o f personal pronouns on *-sme 
and *us-sme; the opposition o f the pronouns 65e/o?>Toc/eK£ivo<;; the 
preservation o f athematic — and the lack o f semi-thematic — inflection 
of verbs; the suffixes -sa- in the aor., -k- in the perfect and the inte­
gration o f *-e and *-ihe- in the pas. aor.; the loss o f the desinence 
*-r; the assignment o f an infinitive to each stem and voice; e t c 
O n e must also point out the existence o f doublets, some o f which 
have already been mentioned. 
It should be stressed that Greek maintained the c o m m o n charac­
teristics o f Indo-Greek, along with its own evolutions, such as: in 
general, the preservation o f the significance o f the root and the mor­
phological use o f accent and alternation; in the noun, the opposi­
tion (though not always) o f masc and fern, stems, and in the adjective 
o f the positive, comparative and superlative; in the verb, the oppo­
sition o f the four stems o f the pres., aor., perf. and fut., and their 
association, in most cases, with the subj. and opt. moods and the 
participles (also, as mentioned, the infinitives); the quadrangular 
system o f the desinences in the four stems, maintaining the middle 
ones having a passive value, although the passive is complemented 
with special forms (Greek, not Indian) in the aor. and fut.; and the 
system o f three aspects. 

GREEK AT THE DOORS OF GREECE 
21 
35. So, Greek has a clear and coherent phonological system, as well 
as a clear and coherent system o f interweaving categories and func­
tions. The problem is the irregularity o f the morphology: allomorphs, 
syncretism, amalgams, the primacy o f irregularity on regular declen­
sions and conjugations. 
This constituted the essence o f Greek, together with a syntactic 
system that, judging from Homer, was similar to that o f Vedic and 
in which the moods preserved their own value in subordination. 
There was still no article and the resources o f lexical derivation were 
still not as developed as they would be at a later stage (neither those 
of the transformation o f noun into verb, adjective and adverb, nor 
the inverse), yet there was already a rich system o f composition and 
derivation, which formed the base o f the later system. 
Indeed, together with its system o f categories and functions, the 
development o f a syntax o f subordination and o f a lexicon were the 
principal factors o f progress in Greek, and those which contributed 
the most to its transformation into the universal linguistic model for 
all languages. 

CHAPTER THREE 
F R O M C O M M O N G R E E K T O T H E D I A L E C T S 
O F T H E S E C O N D M I L L E N N I U M 
1. V A R I A N T S WITHIN COMMON G R E E K 
36. A language, especially one that is spoken by nomadic tribes lack­
ing a centralised organisation or written culture, is never absolutely 
uniform. I believe that, despite trends in the current bibliography, 
variants were already present in C o m m o n Greek. Indeed, it was in 
C o m m o n Greek that some o f the characteristics o f the later East 
Greek, which descended into Greece towards the year 2000, began 
to disseminate. These characteristics appear in Homer, Mycenaean 
and the later dialects (or at least some of them): for instance, -si for 
-ti, oi, od in the pi. pronoun, at), eiai, -(a)av, e t c See § 69. 
Yet, there is still the serious problem o f whether these 'pan-ori­
ental' characteristics were diffused in a part of C G outside Greece, 
or only in East Greek (EG) inside Greece, before the Dorians blocked 
communications; or perhaps only in a restricted part of E G inside 
or outside Greece. 
Then there is the existence of archaisms in C G , although these 
could have been displaced within it, in any location. Ther^-is also 
the presence o f doublets, from among which there was a tendency 
to choose: often, no doubt, within C G , other times in Greece, where 
the doublet was preserved in certain dialects while in others it was 
a choice. 
37. But certain archaisms from some or all of the dialects of East 
Greek clearly come from C o m m o n Greek or part o f it: Horn. Zfjv, 
8cp9ixo, 8duva (with parallels in Lesb. and M y c ) , xoi (also in Dor. 
and part of AeoL), case in -pi or -91 ( M y c , Horn., Thes.), G. in 
-010 (Horn,, M y c , traces in Thes.), patronymics in -10c, (Horn., M y c , 
AeoL), desinence in -xo(i) ( M y c , A r c ) . In addition, there are archaisms 
in which the Mycenaean is accompanied, or not, by other dialects: 
the preservation o f -w-y sometimes of -y- and of -h- descending from 
*-s-. Indeed, these phonemes existed in C G and continued to exist 
in EG, whether inside or outside of Greece. 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
23 
The archaisms did not establish the distinction, for they were also 
(at some point) present in the part that would become West Greek 
(WG). But their presence enabled innovations in a particular part 
of C G or in the later dialects. 
It is clear that doublets, from among which the dialects would 
choose, existed in C G and certainly in the E G within Greece. It is 
difficult to distinguish between the two cases. They often represent 
an old and a new form that coexisted for a certain period (u.exd/ 
mSa/zv/evq, 
oduva/thematic forms) or various attempts to find some­
thing to mark a new category (dv/Ke/ica, a i / d / i ) , jiiv/viv, -vai/ 
-u£v, etc.). They could also represent divergent analogical generalisations 
(aorists in -a- and -i;-, etc.) or phonetic results arising from different 
contexts, striving to become generalised (ocp/op); or even simple hes­
itations within IE (D. sg, *-ei/*-i, 2nd sg. *-es/*-eis). 
This was to be 
expected, see Adrados 1952 and 1998b. 
These doublets were subsequently distributed within E G and W G 
(-u£v/fxec,, -aa-/-^a- desinences in the verb), or within different dialects 
of EG, some accompanied at times by W G : the vocalisation ocp (Ion.-
Att. and Dor.) /op (AeoL, Arc-Cyp., Horn, and Myc. with fluctuations); 
athematic verbs ( M y c , AeoL, at times Horn.) and thematic verbs 
(elsewhere, but also in Horn.), in the deverbatives; D . sg. *-ei ( M y c , 
traces in Horn.) / *-i (other dialects); G. sg. -010/-00 (Horn, and else­
where) /*-os (identical to N., in M y c . and Cyp.); the pronouns ju.iv 
(Horn., Ion.) /viv (Dor.), verbal desinences -eq (Cyp., Dor.) /-eiq 
(other dialects); infinitive in -vat (Horn., Ion.-At., Arc-Cyp.) /-jnev 
(Horn., AeoL, Dor.); the conjunctions ei (Ion.-At., A r c ) / a i (AeoL, 
Dor.) /f| (Cyp., written Boeot. ai); the particle dv (Ion., A r c , Horn.) 
/icev (AeoL) /KGC (only in Dor.); the preposition ev + A c (Arc-Cyp., 
Thes., Boeot.) / + D . (other dialects); etc. 
Sometimes, archaisms are only found in M y c : the preservation of 
the groups -pm-, -tm-> o f the pronoun to-to> etc Or, we find only 
archaic doublets (or doublets consisting of an archaic form and a 
recent form, corresponding to the other dialects): -or- / -or- (vocal­
isations o f <*-r-); the prepositions o-pi / e-pi, me-ta / pe-da; thematic 
and athematic verbal forms; D . sg. -e (<-ei) / 
etc Archaic forms 
may also be present in M y c and other dialects: %%- I %- (in M y c , 
Horn., A r c - C y p . ) . Sometimes, we find correspondences between 
Aeolic and the non-Greek dialects (the timbre o f vocalisations, the 
athematic forms o f deverbatives and denominatives). 

24 
CHAPTER THREE 
38. In other words, both C G and E G contained certain 
fluctuations 
that would spread to the whole or part of EG. Also, both W G and 
E G (or part of it) would have to choose between these 
fluctuations, 
although it is difficult to give an exact date of when this occurred. 
Moreover, as mentioned above (§ 36), some innovations in E G 
could have already taken place in C G , anticipating a future division 
between the two dialects. Those innovations in particular that appear 
in all or most o f the E G dialects, which were separated by large 
intransitable Dorian wedges in archaic times, must come from an 
earlier period: either from C G or, at least, E G in Greece before the 
arrival o f the Dorians (eg., the evolution of -ti > -si; the N. pi. of 
the demonstrative oi, ai; the personal at), etc.). Thus, at the most, 
it can be said that the diffusion o f these innovations had 
already 
begun in C G . 
Certainly, C G would have shown innovatory tendencies and lines 
of fracture in those places where a differentiation of dialectal areas 
was commencing between the later E G and W G (certain isoglosses 
did not coincide with this limit) or between the later E G dialects. 
With respect to these isoglosses, in many cases it is impossible to 
determine the extent to which they correspond to C G or EG, and 
to trace the dialects which began to differentiate 
themselves, and 
which in any case only became defined in Greece after the arrival 
o f the Dorians, with the help of new innovations. 
39. This is but a summary of the doctrine presented in Adrados 1976a and 
b, 1984a, 1998a and b (also 1990a on G. = N. in Myc. and Cyp. thematics 
and 1990b on the system of five cases in M y c , as well as in Gr. in general). 
Cf. also M. Meier-Briigger 1992, p. 67, on the differences in CG. 
For my views on all this and its precedents, see my two works of 1998 
already referred to, as well as the prologue to the reedition in 1997 of my 
book of 1952, La Dialectologia griega como fuente para el estudio de las migraciones 
indoeuropeas en Grecia. In these works, I refer to the stance attributing all 
dialectal differentiation to the period after the Dorian invasion in Greece; 
it derives from the well-known works of W. Porzig 1954 and E. Risch 1955. 
I do not believe that this in any way prevents us from proposing the start 
of differentiation in C G and EG (inside or outside Greece), despite the crit­
icism of the view that a dialectal fragmentation had occurred outside Greece 
(cf, among others, A. Lopez Eire 1989a). It is typical that, for instance, 
J. L. Garcia Ramon 1975, for example, considers Aeolic to be post-
Mycenaean: in my opinion, on the other hand, it became defined at this 
time, but some features are of an earlier date. The methodological issues 
and, more specifically, the concepts of innovation and choice, are studied 
carefully in Adrados 1952 and 1998b. 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
25 
On the critique of J. Chadwick's thesis, in which he denies there was 
ever a Dorian invasion, cf. among others, J. J. Moralejo 1977b, pp. 243-267; 
also Adrados 1998b. 
2. F R O M THE ARRIVAL OF THE FIRST G R E E K DIALECTS 
(EAST G R E E K , EG) 
T O THE ARRIVAL OF THE D O R I C DIALECTS 
( W E S T G R E E K , 
W G ) 
The diffusion of the Greek dialects 
40. W e have discarded the idea that there were no Greek migra­
tions and that everything occurred through simple cultural diffusion 
from Anatolia. Indeed, although this book is devoted to the study 
of the history of the Greek language, not the history of the Greeks 
from an archaeological perspective, it is important to fix the date of 
arrival of the first Greeks in Greece, as well as that of the last Greeks, 
the Dorians. Furthermore, it is necessary to fix the principal dates 
regarding the expansion of the Greeks and Dorians. A history of the 
Greek language would be badly served without this. 
The main stages in the evolution of the Greek language can be 
established from this starting point: Greek in the second millennium, 
from the first entry of the Greeks, which is known to us (though 
imperfectly) by way o f Mycenaean, Homer, and from the retro­
spective conclusions that can be drawn from the Greek dialects of 
the first mellennium; and the Greek dialect which penetrated at the 
end of the second millennium with the Dorians. 
Then, we must examine the split of Greek into different dialects 
during the first millennium, the external diffusion o f many of them 
and the unifying tendencies that, in a second phase, tended to bring 
these dialects closer together. W e must also look at the creation, 
from here, o f the literary dialects or languages o f Greece, in which 
the unifying tendencies were also felt; and lastly, we must examine 
the final unification, from Attic - the so-called koine - which sealed the 
fate of the Greek language in the Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine and 
Modern periods. 
41. The Greek language no doubt arrived in various waves from 
Macedonia and Epirus, in the transition from middle to ancient 
Helladic (or Minoan); that is, around the year 2000 BC, as stated 

26 
CHAPTER THREE 
previously (although perhaps somewhat earlier). This ushered in the 
so-called Mycenaean period, of which more is known from 1620 BC 
onwards, which concluded with the Dorian invasion, from 1200 BC 
onwards. It is contemporaneous with or rather posterior to the destruc­
tion of cities and cultures throughout the East, from Ugarit to Greece 
itself as well as Crete. Only in Egypt was this invasion o f the so-
called
 
fiSea Peoples' successfully contained, due to Merneptah's efforts. 
From the year 2000 BC onwards, Greece, by will o f the Greeks, 
was assimilated into the Indo-European culture o f the kurgans, with 
its tumuli tombs, maces and stone axes, ochre burials, and many 
other things. According to Sakellariou, Balkanic populations related 
to the culture of 'old Europe' also entered with the Indo-European 
Greeks. 
This is the moment in which the great Mycenaean kingdoms of 
Greece were created: above all, Mycenae, Thebes, Athens, Pylos and 
Knossos. It is unclear whether other Mycenaean settlements, such 
as those o f Orchomenoi in Boeotia, Iolcos in Thessaly or Tiryns in 
Argolis consituted independent political units. 
42. Nevertheless, at the outset, the military, economic and cultural 
dominion of Greece was in the hands of the Minoans of Crete, who 
exerted great influence on Mycenaean culture, Thera and Athens 
itself were, no doubt, what Sakellariou refers to as 'satelite cultures'. 
Minoan remains have been found in Thera, and in ancient myth 
Athens figures as a vasall o f Minos, the mythical king o f Crete. 
However, the situation on this island changed after the earthtfuakes 
o f around 1550 and the volcanic eruption of Thera o f the same 
date. It was a terrible explosion, worse than that of the Krakatoa: 
the resulting wave or tsunami devastated the entire Aegean littoral. 
The Mycenaeans on the continent came to possess the 
Cretan 
palaces and created a new culture, adapting, for example, Minoan 
script (Linear A, derived in turn from a hieroglyphic script) to the 
needs o f the Greeks: in this way, Linear B was created. This was 
the great climax o f power for the Mycenaeans: in Crete, with its 
centre in Knossos, and in Greece in the kingdoms mentioned, whose 
archives used this script o f Cretan origin. There is evidence of Cretan 
influence in Pylos 150 years before the destruction of the palaces, 
and it can also be found on islands such as Cyprus and Rhodes. In 
addition, cultural elements from the East, which had influenced Crete, 
were also present among the Mycenaeans. 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
27 
43. This is the phenomenon of Mycenaean expansion, the first Greek 
expansion. It also reached Cyrpus, as I have stated, where 
the 
Mycenaeans settled around 1400. Here, a Cypro-Minoan script had 
been created in the sixteenth century, similar to the Linear A of 
Crete and other islands, for an indigenous language known as 
Eteocyprian. Its use was continued in Amathus, where the indige­
nous population took refuge from the Mycenaeans and, subsequently, 
from the Dorians: it was maintained until the fourth century. Classical 
Cyprian syllabic script is derived from this script, and it is used for 
writing Greek from the eleventh to the third century B C 
A multitude o f Mycenaean remains which date from the same 
period has been discovered in Cyprus and Rhodes; particularly in 
the cemeteries o f Camirus and Ialysos, but let us remember the pres­
ence of a Rhodian hero in the Iliad; Tlepolemus. 
W e have knowledge o f Mycenaean expansion in the whole of the 
Levant, where there is not only evidence o f trade, but also of fixed 
trade setdements, especially in Miletus. Thus, apart from trade, there 
were also setdements and military campaigns. The royal correspon­
dence o f the Hittites and Ugarit attest to relations between 
the 
Ahhiyawa or Achaeans and the kingdoms o f Asia, which sometimes 
asked them for help or made agreements with them. All this occurred 
during the reign o f the Hittite king Suppiluliumas (1380-1340), then 
under Mursilis II and his son Muwatallis (1306-1282) and 
under 
Tuthaliyas I V (1250-1220). 
The Achaean princes, whose names are given on occasion (for 
example, Attarasiyas, or Atreus), carried out expeditions of pillage 
and were sometimes allied with the dissident kingdoms o f the coast 
o f Asia, such as Arzawa, in the southeastern limit o f Asia Minor: 
this occurred during the decline o f Hittite imperial power in the 
peripheral region along the shoreline. 
Another expansion extended to the whole Mediterranean, includ­
ing the Iberian peninsula, by means of trade and the 
establishment 
o f emporia, such as that of Thapsus in Sicily. 
44. On the arrival of the Greeks and Mycenaean expansion, see in addi­
tion to the bibliography previously cited, works by N. G. L. Hammond 
1986b, p. 19 ff; F. Schachermeyr 1980; M. Sakellariou 1980; F. Villar 
1995, p. 289 ff; J.-P. Olivier 1996. These works are also useful in relation 
to the great catastrophe of around 1200, the invasion of the 'Sea Peoples', 
which decimated the Mycenaean kingdoms (see also § 47), and in relation 
to the arrival of the Dorians. On the Ahhiyawa, cf L. R. Palmer 1980, 
p. 67. 

28 
CHAPTER THREE 
On Cyprus, see F. R. Willets 1988 and V. Karageorghis 1991, p. 76 ff. 
The royal correspondence of Egypt and the Hittites with the king of Alasia 
(Cyprus) refers to armed attacks from the continental peoples, cf V. Kara­
georghis 1991, p. 82. On the Cyprian scripts, which include the Eteocyprian 
language (Cypro-Minoan script, from the sixteenth century), Greek (later 
Greek, from the eleventh century), cf. R. Schmitt 1977, p. 15 ff, Th. G 
Palaima 1991, CI. Baurain 1991, M. Meier-Briigger 1992, p. 52 ff., A. 
Sacconi 1991: although it contains elements of the Cretan Linear A, Cypro-
Minoan may proceed from Syria and especially Ugarit, where evidence of 
this has been found. On Crete, cf C. Davaras 1976. On Cretan scripts 
see, in general, C. Brixhe 1991a and J.-P. Olivier 1996 (who identi­
fies inscriptions which are dated earlier and later than the bulk of these, 
in the thirteenth century); on the Phaestus disk (Cretan hieroglyphics), see 
Y. Duhoux 1977; for Eteocretan, see Y. Duhoux 1982. 
On Rhodes, cf. Ch. Karoussos 1973. On Asia, apart from Fernandez-
Galiano 1984, J. Boardman 1973, p. 41 ff, and the excellent revision of 
the later bibliography by V. Alonso Troncoso 1994. Also, E. Akurgal 1985, 
p. 206 ff; and my article Adrados 1992b. With regard to the West, I have 
provided a bibliography in my article 'Navegaciones del siglo VIII, nave-
gaciones micenicas y navegaciones en la Odised (1998c). 
45. The forced expansive movement would certainly have had lin­
guistic implications, so that Greek would have been spoken and 
understood in these settlements. In Crete and Cyprus we can trace 
its expansion from the end o f the second millennium, as in Greece 
itself, although in Homer, as we shall see, traces o f non-Greek pop­
ulations remain. 
Greek was certainly spoken in Miletus and other parts, where the 
Greek dialects became established again in the eleventh century, dur­
ing the Mycenaean period. Indeed, we are told in the Illiad (VI 168 
ff.) how Prcetus, king o f Ephyra in Argolis, sent the hero Bellerophon 
to the king o f the Lycians with a letter containing instrucions to kill 
the messenger. This letter is described as a dyptich o f tablets (made 
o f wood, no doubt) containing Mycenaean signs in Greek, and it is 
significant that the king o f Lycia had no problems understanding it. 
Also, there do not appear to have been any linguistic difficulties 
among the Ahhiyawa and the Eastern princes or among Greeks and 
Trojans. 
For this period, there is archaeological evidence of the diffusion 
of Mycenaean ceramics throughout the Mediterranean, even in Spain, 
in the Guadalquivir valley; other Greek cultural influences are also 
attested, along with, inversely, the Asiatic influence in Greece. But 
there is no data on Greek outside of Greece itself, except for the 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
29 
Mycenaean tablets of Knossos and traces of second-millennium Greek 
in the epic that flourished along the Asian coasts in the beginning 
of the first millennium. 
Greek in the second millennium 
46. Our knowledge o f Greek during the second millennium is scarce 
for a number of reasons. O n the one hand, there was an oral poetic 
tradition which was recorded in writing only much later, in the 
eighth century, mixed with several adventitious and recent elements, 
and greatly altered, so that it is difficult to isolate the linguistic ele­
ments of the second millennium. Linear B could serve somewhat as 
a complement, but it was only used in the palaces, where it had an 
administrative function, apart from the marks on oil jars and such 
like; as we shall see, it was a standardised language, with hardly any 
differences. These inscriptions provide only partial evidence o f sec­
ond-millennium Greek. Moreover, their interpretation is often difficult 
and controversial due to the fact that the writing adapted badly to 
the Greek language, and due to our deficient understanding of the 
cultural context. In contrast, the tablets, evidently organised after the 
model o f the eastern palaces and their archives, do not contain lit­
erary texts as those o f the palaces did. The tablets were not baked, 
and were only preserved because of the fire that destroyed the palaces 
at some point during the end o f the thirteenth century. 
As far as we know, it was only in Cyprus that this script produced 
something approximating a close derivative. The hypothesis attribut­
ing the origin of the Iberian semi-alphabet to a syllabary related to 
that of this script, is almost forgotten today. Even if it were true, it 
cannot be denied that the later Greek alphabetic script had a very 
strong influence. The strong influence o f the Greek language out­
side o f Greece cannot be detected until the later period. It is not 
even easy to provide an image of second-millennium Greek in Greece. 
Finally, when it comes to reconstructing second-millennium Greek, 
the conclusions obtained from the comparative study of dialects from 
the first millennium are not entirely reliable. However, I will refer 
to them to some extent. But the situation is as follows: the language 
or languages spoken in the second millennium were not written 
down. The sung or recited language of the aoidoi was written down 
much later and was much altered; the written language was reserved 
for very limited administrative purposes and possibly was not spoken. 

30 
CHAPTER THREE 
47. It is important first to establish the historical background before 
dealing with the linguistic issue in more detail. I would like to empha­
sise the implications of the pillage, destruction and migrations caused 
by the 'Sea Peoples'. They brought a series o f warrior peoples to 
Egypt around 1200 BC which are cited in Egyptian texts: the names 
are often interpreted as referring to the Lycians, Sardinians, Danaans, 
Dardanians, Cilicians, Tyrsenians, Achaeans and Philistines, among 
others. T o the west they brought the Sardinians and, I believe, the 
Etruscans, who in my view are an Indo-European people from Asia 
Minor, and perhaps also the Elymi, who settled in Sicily. 
After the last Greek offensive in Asia, that o f the Trojan War, 
the Sea Peoples brought about the destruction of the Mycenaean 
cities in Greece itself, and in Crete and Cyprus they interrupted, for 
an indefinite period, trade and relations with the West: this is the 
so-called dark age. But that is not all: this vast commotion is linked 
with the destruction o f Hattusas (today Bogazkoi) and the entire 
Hittite empire, which is attributed to the Phrygians: thus, there were 
great movements o f peoples. Perhaps one of these peoples, also Indo-
European, were the Armenians. 
However, Ugarit and other cities of Asia were also destroyed, such 
as Mersin, Tarsus and Sidon, and the Philistines advanced, occupy­
ing the area which still today is named after them: Palestine. As we 
anticipated and shall soon see, the fall o f the Mycenaean kingdoms 
is related to the Dorian invasion, which in turn is related to the 
emigration o f different Greek populations to Asia Minor, Cyprus and 
Rhodes. 
48. See, in general, works such as those previously cited by Hammond 
(p. 51 ff) and Villar (p. 296 ff), along with specialised bibliography such 
as T. B. L. Webster 1958, p. 136 ff., H. Stubbings 1975, Ch. G. Starr 
1964, M. Marazzi 1985, the book Trqffici micenei. . . (ed. By M. Marazzi 
and others, 1986), a colloquium in the French School of Rome (AA. W . 
1995), etc. On Etruscan as an Anatolian language transported into Italy 
(in opposition to the thesis of M. Pallottino and others attributing to it an 
indigenous origin in Italy), cf Adrados 1989c, 1994c and 2005. On the 
Elymi, see R. Ambrosini 1983 (among other publications) and St. di Vido 
1997. 
49. Although syllabic script died out, the Cyprian syllabary, destined 
to record the Greek language, survived from the eleventh to the 
third centuries. Apart from this, there would be no other way of 
recording Greek in writing until the ninth or eighth century, this 
time with the aid of the alphabet, or alphabets rather, created from 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
31 
Phcenecian, which is often related to the cuneiforme Ugaritic alpha­
bet, which inherited a syllabic script. Thus, this detour had to be 
accepted, for in Greece there was no continuous evolution from the 
syllabary to the alphabet, as there had been earlier in Asia; not even 
in Cyprus, which, however, created the new syllabary for the local 
Greek dialect, based on the previous one, related to Minoan Linear 
A (which in turn inherited the hieroglyphic writing). 
So, the Greeks had to adopt foreign systems o f writing twice. But 
they did manage to perfect the alphabet, making it a vehicle o f their 
literature and exporting it to many different peoples, who, modify­
ing it, created their own alphabets and learned to write. This is how 
the Greeks contributed in this particular context. I shall return to 
this later. 
50. On the history of these syllabaries, cf J. Chadwick 1962, p. 17 ff. On 
Ugarit, cf J. L. Cunchillos-J. A. Zamora 1995, p. 15 ff; A. Curtis 1985, 
p. 27 ff. The fifteenth century is usually accepted as the date of the Cretan 
tablets in Linear B (all from Knossos). L. R. Palmer has fixed this date 
later, in the thirteenth century, the date of those from Greece, but this has 
received little acceptance; the fourteenth century has also been proposed. 
For J.-P. Olivier there are many possible dates, as has been mentioned. I 
refer to the origin of the alphabet in §§ 100 ff. 
C f J. Maluquer de Motes 1968, and J. de Hoz 1969 on the cited hypoth­
esis regarding Iberian script. See in this same article, hypotheses regarding 
the influence of the eastern syllabaries on other Mediterranean scripts. 
51. The Mycenaean syllabary throws some light on second-millen­
nium Greek, but it only allows for a limited understanding o f the 
facts already discussed regarding its standardisation 
and its solely 
bureaucratic use. Literature was oral: it was recorded in writing only 
from the eighth century onwards, after the introduction o f the alpha­
bet. But it is debated to what extent this new epic and lyric inher­
ited the language o f the Mycenaean period and to what extent it 
innovated. Thus, the reconstruction o f second-millennium Greek (or 
Greek dialects) is a difficult task, which involves combining data from 
Mycenaean, H o m e r (eliminating the later elements) and extrapola­
tions from the Greek dialects o f the first millennium. 
52. On Homer and Mycenae cf, among others, T. B. L. Webster 1958, 
C. Brillante 1986 and J. Chadwick 1990; on Mycenaean culture in gen­
eral, J. T. Hooker 197, J. Chadwick 1976, O. Dickinson 1977 and 1995, 
W. Taylour 1983; etc. On possible Mycenaean traces in lyric, C. Trumpy 
1986 and C. Brillante 1987. On the reconstruction of second-millennium 
Greek, see §§ 68 ff. 

32 
CHAPTER THREE 
The arrival of the Dorians 
53. Before attempting this reconstruction, we must examine the events 
o f the end o f the second millennium - the arrival of the Dorians -
as well as the linguistic scene which the Greeks encountered in Greece 
and which must have had an effect on their language. 
The period o f instability - in which palaces strengthened their 
fortifications and, as recorded on the o-ka tablets of Pylos, military 
units were deployed on the coast (events which are 
simultaneous 
with those in Ugarit and the campaigns of Ramses II and Merneptah 
in Egypt) - ended, as stated earlier, with the destruction and aban­
donment o f the palaces, which were at some point occupied by the 
Dorians. 
The arrival o f the Dorians is mentioned by the ancient histori­
ans, especially Herodotus I 56, and also in the myth o f the return 
of the Heraclides, or sons o f Heracles. For a long time, nobody has 
doubted the fact that the Dorian invasion was the cause behind the 
destruction o f Mycenaean culture, and this is still the most widely 
held view. However, it is suggested that, once the Mycenaean palaces 
had been destroyed by the invasions o f the 'Sea Peoples' and their 
society had been disrupted, the Greeks who had remained behind 
in Macedonia and Albania, the Dorians, would in turn have found 
it easier to realise their own incursions o f pillage. 
But it would not be so easy for them, given that the same leg­
end refers to resistance in different parts. Indeed, all the sources 
insist that the Dorians did not succeed in conquering Atticafwhere 
numerous refugees had settled, or the islands o f the Aegean and 
other places. 
54. The same geography allows us to see h o w the Dorians came 
from the N . and W . , and were stopped in Attica and the islands; 
they surrounded the Peloponnese, unable to penetrate its centre, 
Arcadia, but being able to break the connection between the dialect 
o f the latter and that o f Cyprus, whose Mycenaean population evi­
dently departed from the coast o f the Peloponnese before the arrival 
of the Dorians. In any light, the Dorian conquest of Melos, Crete, 
Rhodes, Cos and the coast o f Asia Minor around Halicarnassus and 
Cnidus took place later on. Historic tradition and archaeological data 
support this. 
W e must accept the fact that Attica - 'the most ancient land of 
Ionia', according to Solon (4.2), a region which had prospered and 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
33 
developed after the fall o f Mycenae, as demonstrated by its remark­
able geometric ceramics - took in a considerable number o f refugees. 
The Ionic colonies o f Asia, dated usually in the eleventh century, 
were founded from here. In the same way, new waves of Mycenaeans 
moved to Cyprus from ^the Peloponnese before the Dorians occu­
pied its shores: there is a bronze brooch from the eleventh century 
with a Greek inscription in the Cyprian syllabary which reads O-pe-
le-ta-o '(I am) o f Opheltes'. In addition, Lesbos was colonised from 
the continent, as stated by Thucydides III 2.3. 
55. In conclusion, we must embrace the fact that the Dorians and 
the related people known as 'Dorians from the N. W . ' , descended 
from the N., taking advantage 
of the collapse of the Mycenaean 
kingdoms: they were, in effect, Greeks who had remained behind 
after the invasion, and led a pastoral existence in the 
mountains. 
They had an archaic Greek dialect, which had remained 
immune 
from the innovations of 'East Greek' which had entered Greece from 
the year 2000 and from which Mycenaean, the language of Homer, 
and the different dialects emerged. This dialect coincides with these 
as far as archaisms are concerned, but not as regards innovations. 
Yet, there were no vacant lands in Greece, so the Dorians had 
to superimpose themselves onto the ancient Greek settlements, sub­
stituting their dialects - although traces of these remained at times, 
especially in Crete — or creating mixed dialects in Boeotia and 
Thessaly. By stepping in and driving wedges between the old dialects, 
some of which had been transported to the other side of the sea, 
the Dorians contributed to the isolation o f the settlements and, in 
short, to dialectal differentiation, which is not attested (perhaps for 
a simple lack of data) in either Mycenaean or the Achaean epic o f 
the poets. Many years must have passed before the unifying ten­
dencies re-emerged. 
56. As we know, on the basis of a well-known work by J. Chadwick 1973 
(see also Chadwick 1985), a kind of scepticism has taken root in the aca­
demic world and for some time it has been trendy to deny the Dorian 
invasion. The Dorians are seen as a subjected people who rebelled against 
their Mycenaean masters, and Doric is regarded as a type of Mycenaean. 
Elsewhere (Adrados 1998b), supported by other studies, I have made a 
complete refutation of this hypothesis. Cf. also J. J. Moralejo 1977 and 
P. G. van Soesbergen 1981 (the 'Dorian invasion' is seen as a secondary 
migration of a straggler part of the Greek migration). We have precise his­
torical and archaeological data whereas Chadwick's linguistic arguments are 

34 
CHAPTER THREE 
insignificant. Cf. among others A. Lopez Eire 1984a R. A. Crossland 1985 
and J. Mendez Dosuna 1985, p. 299 ff. See D. Musti 1985b on the way 
in which the arrival of the Dorians should be conceived. On the archaeo­
logical aspect of this matter, see F. Schachermeyr 1980, p. 240 ff, who 
links the Dorians to the ceramics of the 'circle of Buboshti' in Macedonia 
and distinguishes them from the Dorians of the N. W., who are placed 
further to the west. On the Ionic settlement in Attica, cf. the same author, 
p. 374 ff. On pre-Dorian (Achaean) remnants in Cretan Doric, cf. Y. 
Duhoux 1988. 
3. G R E E K AND THE NON-GREEK LANGUAGES IN THE 
SECOND MILLENNIUM 
57. So, we see that the Greeks were established in Greece starting 
from the year 2000. From the first millennium onwards, when we 
are provided with evidence for establishing these events, Greece itself 
is completely Hellenised, However, there are very many non-Greek 
elements in its toponymy and lexicon. 
Indeed, a series o f Greek authors preserved the memory o f non-
Greek settlements o f archaic date: they even indicate that non-Greek 
languages were still spoken in certain parts, especially in the periph­
ery o f Greece. The information is collected in P. Kretschmer 1946, 
p. 146 ff., and O . Hoffmann 1973, p. 25 ff. H o m e r refers to the 
Pelasgians in Argolis, Thessaly and Crete (Iliad II 681 ff., 843 ff; 
Odyssey X I X 179 ff.), and the memory o f the Pelasgians o f the heroic 
period persisted. Herodotus I 56 refers to the Pelasgians as the first 
settlers o f Greece in Thessaly, Attica and Arcadia, c f also I 146, 
VII 94 s., VIII 44; he refers to traces o f them in Placia and Scylace, 
near the Propontis. But Thucydides I V 109 also refers to the Tyrsenians 
of Athens and Lemnos, which Herodotus calls Pelasgians (VI 136 S.); 
he also mentions the Tyrsenians or Etruscans who moved from Lydia 
to Italy (I 94); nevertheless, Thucydides I V 109 distinguishes Pelasgian 
from Tyrsenian in the Athos peninsula. This is confirmed by the 
well-known Lemnos inscription, written in a language that is very 
close to Etruscan. 
So, the Greeks would have been found in Greece together with 
these Pelasgians or Etruscans, who, with some exceptions, later only 
survived in marginal 
territories. 
58. There are written accounts o f Asian settlements in Greece in 
archaic times. Herodotus I 171, Strabo VII 322, 374, XIII 611, 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
35 
Pausanias III 1, 1, V I 2, 4 and the historian Callisthenes (FrGH 124 
F 25) write o f the Pelasgian occupation o f central Greece, Messenia, 
Leucas, Euboea and the Cyclades, as well as almost the whole of 
Ionia. Sometimes their name is considered to be synonymous with 
that o f the Garians (of vjhich there are still linguistic traces in Asia), 
or else they are seen as part of this group or as their vassals. In any 
case, Thucydides I 8 attests that the ancient tombs of Delos were 
o f a Garian type; and Callisthenes mentions a Carian emigration to 
Greece. 
These neolithic settlements must have left a mark on the Greek 
language, something which I shall address further on (§§ 62 ff). 
59. Besides this, there is archaeological evidence in neolithic Greece 
o f settlements of a northern or 'European' origin, in Sesklo and 
Dimini (nude female figurines, certain kinds of ceramics including 
those with stripes, spiral and wavy line designs): see P. Kretschmer 
1946, p. 151 ff., among others. There is also evidence of setdements 
of Asian origin (city planning and fortifications similar to those of 
Troy I and II, ceramics that make use of a varnish known as 'Urfirnis', 
the nude goddesses of Cycladic art). 
It is interesting to note that in the peripheral regions we still come 
across non-Greek settlements in the historic period, living more or 
less in peace with the Greeks. Aside from the information provided 
by historians and the previously mentioned Lemnos inscription it 
suffices to recall the Cypro-Minoan script that from the 
sixteenth 
century onwards recorded an indigenous language; it continued to 
do so until the fourth century among an indigenous population that 
had sought refuge in Amathus from the new Mycenaean invasions 
at the end o f the Trojan W a r (the myth mentions Teucer, founder 
o f Salamis) and from the Dorians, who had arrived in the twelfth 
century and who did not succeed in imposing their language. The 
oldest Greek inscription - dating from the eleventh century, as pre­
viously mentioned - is written in a new syllabic script and in the 
Cyprian dialect, which is related to Arcadian. 
Crete must also be mentioned, where the Mycenaeans and then 
the Dorians arrived: an island with a highly civilised pre-Greek pop­
ulation, as shown by the hieroglyphic and Linear A scripts. The 
Odyssey X I X 176 refers to the Eteo-Cretans: their language contin­
ued to be spoken until the third century BC in Praisos and Dreros, 
and from a certain point it began to be written in the Greek alphabet. 

36 
CHAPTER THREE 
Also, we must not forget Asia, where one need only read Homer 
to appreciate just h o w many different peoples were embroiled in the 
turmoil o f the Trojan War. But there is no record, in the second 
millennium, o f the languages spoken by the peoples on the Asian 
coast, although there is evidence relating to Hittite and Luwian; only 
from the first millennium do we have knowledge of Thracian, Phrygian, 
Lycian, Carian, Neo-Hittite, etc 
60. W e can be certain o f the following: at the close o f the second 
millennium, with the collapse of the Mycenaean kingdoms and the 
Dorian invasion, Greek dominated Greece itself, but it only partially 
occupied the outer region, in Cyprus, Crete and Lemnos, and it was 
certainly in a minority in Asia and other parts which had been 
reached by the Mycenaean expansion. In the N. it was limited by 
Illyrian and Thracian, in Asia by Phrygian. These were Indo-European 
peoples who had arrived in the Balkans at a later date, but who 
may at times have been dragged along by the Greeks: Thucydides 
II 29 and Strabo I X 25 refer to the Thracians and Phrygians. 
Some problems are presented by Macedonian, which was implanted 
in a territory where the Greeks had settled before entering Greece, 
It was Hellenised and began to disappear from the fourth century 
BC However, there is still some doubt as to whether it was an Indo-
European language distinct from Greek, perhaps of the Indo-Greek 
group (such as Thracian or Phrygian), or whether it was a Greek 
dialect that was left behind. 
Macedonian is only known to us through a few glosses that dis­
play certain characteristics, the principal being the conversion of 
voiced aspirated to unaspirated voiced, in contrast to the Greek aspi­
rated voiceless (Sdvoq for 0dvaxo<;), as seen in Illyrian, Phrygian or 
Slavic, among other languages. Other characteristics coincide with 
the Greek dialects or with Illyrian or Phrygian. Furthermore, 
cer­
tain names, such as Parmenon or Berenice, are Greek, the latter 
having an altered pronunciation. 
From this point on, it is generally believed that we are dealing 
with a language that is different from Greek, In fact, the Greeks 
considered the Macedonians to be barbaric, cf, Demosthenes I X 31. 
Yet ultimately, in the context of the debate about the Hellenism of 
Macedonia, Greek scholars have claimed the Hellenicity of its ancient 
language. Macedonian would be a Greek dialect that was left behind, 
a branch that stands in opposition to the language that advanced 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
37 
towards Greece and gave rise to the first dialects considered to be 
Greek. It is difficult to come to a clear decision on this matter, given 
the scarcity o f information available to us. 
61. On Macedonian, after O. Hoffman 1906 see E. Schwyzer-A. Debrunner 
(1st ed.) 1939, p. 69 ff. TJhe new pro-Hellenic position is presented by 
authors such as N. J. Kalleris 1954, B. Dasakalakis 1960, L. A. Giundin 
1987, A. Panayotis 1992 and J. K. Probonas 1992. The interesting inves­
tigations of A. G. Tsopanakis 1993, which look for a Macedonian lexicon 
in Walachian dialects of Macedonia, do not resolve the problem. In any 
case, it is clear that the Greek that spread towards the S. left an empty 
space for this other language - a 'retarded' Greek or a different Indo-
European language - to occupy, which only became Hellenised from the 
fourth century onwards. 
Pre-Greek elements adopted by Greek 
62. The fact is that most of the toponymy o f Greece and the islands, 
not to mention the coast of Asia Minor, is not actually Greek. The 
same applies to part of the Greek lexicon, which sometimes displays 
the same kind of suffixation as the toponymy, and sometimes dis­
plays phonemes in positions that originally were not allowed in Greek. 
A good part of these pre-Greek toponyms find parallels in Asia 
Minor. Let us examine them from various perspectives. 
a) Suffixation. Nouns in -nvoq, -y\vr\ ('AGdvoc, MvKr\vaxy Ileipdva, 
npifrvn, M-uTiA,f]vr|, the Topanvoi that emigrated to Italy); in 
-(G)GOC,, 
-(T)TO<; and its feminines and plurals (ADKOCPTJTTOC,, 
KriquGGoq, AdpiGGa, IlapvaGGOc,, TjuntToc,, etc.; in 
Crete 
Kvcoaaoq, 'AUVI(G)6<;, TDAIGGOC;; in Asia 
KOAOGGOCI, TeAurjGGoc,, 
rvfi)KccA,r[GG6<;, TepjinGGOc;, 'AAucccpvaGGOC,, SaYaAxxGGoq, nepyccGTi, 
MuAaGCc, maybe Kopi)KriGiov); in -vBoq, -vQoq (KopivSoq, ndpvnc,, 
-n9o<; (T(p'uv(;/-iv0oc, in Asia HdvGog)); -Gxoq in Oouoxoc, is no 
doubt a variant; in -ocv8a, -ivSa (perhaps related to the pre­
vious, only in Asia: 'AAav§a, 'AAapdv8a, 'ApuKdv8a, KaAivSa, 
Kapudvoa, AaPpdvSa, IliyivSa), also "AGTtevSoq; in -pvcc (MuKocpva 
in Aetolia; also in Asia: Sjmapva; in Crete: OaAccGapva; in 
Cos: 
'AA-ccGapva). 
b) Phonetics. There are various cases o f non-Greek phonetics: ini­
tial G - (locyoctaxGGoq, EaAocLnc,, Sdp5eiq, XiXXxov); the alterna­
tion o f spiritus lenis/asper (but perhaps this has something to 
do with Greek transcription: 'AA,i/oc-, 'AA-t/oc-), the G - and the 
lack thereof; the alternation of a/i (examples previously cited), 

38 
CHAPTER 
THREE 
pA (TeA^noao^/TepjiinGGOc;), 
y / K , -aa-/-a-. This marks the 
start of a different phonetic system. It seems that certain 
suffixes previously took a K> ('Api>K-dvSa, 'AAi-K-apv-aaaoc,, 
KoDpu-K-fiorov): the transcription of a laryngeal? 
c) Derivation. Sometimes we come across two derivatives from 
the same root or one derived from another: with the roots 
fA5u/oc-, 'AAi/oe-, in nepyn/nepYa^ov/nepivGo^/nepyaori, KoAo-
aaai/KoAocpcov, MuKaAn/MuKaAnaaoq, KopivGoq, Koptucrjcnov, 
napvaaao<;/ndpvn<;/napva>v, etc. Sometimes there seems to 
be an accumulation of suffixes:
 
(AA,iK-apv-aaa6<;, M-uK-dAn/ 
Mi)K-aAr|-aa6(; (maybe the K is phonetic, as I have said). 
d) Morphology. There are m a s c , fern., and n., sg. and pi. forms 
which display Greek morphology. This may be something 
new 
or may just be covering something old. 
e) Roots. W e can deduce the existence of various roots, some 
corresponding to Greek, no doubt as a result of borrowings 
(although sometimes a common Indo-European origin can be 
postulated). For example, 'A?u- and variants, rapu- (cf. Gr. 
KapDa?), Kop- (cf Gr. Kopix;?), AccPp- (Gr, Adpp-uc,), rcapv-, Ttepy-
(the root o f Gr. Tcopyoq?), TepLiVxeAu- (cf. Celtic Termes?), 018-
(Gr. ai&n), aja-op- (in Euupvn, cf. Gr. auupva?), cpda- (cf. Odatc,, 
OdanAiq), %CCA,K- (in XaAicn8cav, ECCAKIC,, cf. Gr. Xahcoq). In addi­
tion, there are toponyms common to Greece and Asia which 
are neither Greek nor appear to be Indo-European: "OXX)\XKO<;, 
0TJp<xi). 
As noted above, the most striking thing is that these formations are 
analogous or identical to those o f theonyms such as 'AGdva, the god­
dess, or common nouns such as Kvnapxaaoq,
 cthe cypress', dadjuivGoq, 
'the bath', PoAivGoq, 'wild bull', epePtv0o<;, 'chickpea', e t c O n e must 
look for etymologies, in whatever sense, which are parallel to non-
Indo-European Greek words such as GdAocjioc,, 'the bedroom', jaiyapov, 
'living-room', (pdAaaaa, 'the sea', religious or poetic terms such as 
SiGupocujioc,, iccjj,po<;, Gpiceujio*;, AaP^pivGoq, pdic%o<;, etc. 
Sometimes we find common terms with non-Greek etymology and 
phonetics, such as aixoc,, 'grain, wheat', aiSnpoi;, 'iron', aiSn, 'pome­
granate', PaorAetx;, 'king'; or simply with a non-Greek etymology, 
such as XfiK-oGoq, 'a vessel', KiGdpa, 'zither' and theonyms such as 
'ATIOAACOV, "Apxeuic;, Ki)pf|pr|, etc. 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE 
DIALECTS 
39 
63. 
There are evidently three possibilities: (i) that these words were 
adopted in the Balkans from the culture of 'old Europe
5; (ii) that 
they were adopted in Greece itself or in Asia; (iii) that they were a 
result o f the cultural influence of peoples from the ancient East. It 
is not necessary to propose a unitary solution. Cultural elements such 
as the bath or Mediterranean plants could come from Greece, or 
sometimes more specifically from Crete (AxxpupivBoc,, ACKTUVVCG); 'iron' 
could come from Asia Minor, where it was introduced; the name o f 
Apollo seems to come from Lydia, and Cybele from Phrygia. Remote 
etymology is another matter. 
64. 
Three theories come to light when we see beyond the details. 
For the first theory, this vocabulary is Indo-European but with 
'Pelasgian
5 phonetic alterations different to those o f Greek: a different 
evolution o f the sonants would explain, for example, tvuPoc, (Gr. 
xdcpoq), a consonantal mutation would explain the forms in -ivBoc, 
(from -nt-, in daduivGoq, with the preservation of -s- at the same 
time and satemisation, cf. Gr. OCKLICOV), (poc?tA,6<; (of *bhel-\ xauiocc; (of 
*dom~, with the alteration o f the vowel at the same time), etc. This 
explains ouc, beside ox;, Foptax; of *ghrdh, *ghordh (cf. OSlav. *gordu 
'city
5, Phryg. Manegordum and the city of Gordium). For the second 
theory the terms are considered to be Hittite-Luwian or Anatolian, 
having emigrated to Greece before the arrival o f the Greeks. The 
third theory postulates a substratum o f non-Indo-European terms. I 
will refrain from adopting any position here. 
65. 
On the Telasgian' hypothesis see, among others, V. Georgiev 1941, 
A. J. van Windekens 1952, W. Merlingen 1955; and further information 
and bibliography in R. Hiersche 1970, p. 33 ff, M. Meier-Briigger 1992, 
p. 69 f On the hypothesis of Minoan, Luwian, and the rest, A. Heubeck 
191, 
L. R. Palmer 1958, G. Huxley 1961. On Semitic borrowings in 
Greek, some of them very old, see § 66 and O. Masson 1967; on Egyptian 
borrowings, see J. L. Fournet 1989. 
66. 
Nevertheless, at least part of this vocabulary was already incor­
porated into Greek in the second millennium BC. The Mycenaean 
vocabulary contains theonyms such as the names of Artemis, Athena, 
Dionysus and Ilitia (e-re-u-ti-jd); phytonyms such as ku-pa-ro and ko-
ri-ja-da-no (lcurceipoq and KopiocvSpov), ku-pa-ri-so (in a toponym); cultural 
words such as si-to, da-pu-ri-to, a-sa-mi-to and qa-si-re-u, 'grain
5, 'labyrinth
5, 
'bath
5, and 'king
5. Also, of course, toponyms such as, among those 

40 
CHAPTER THREE 
described, a-mi-ni-so (Amnisos) and ko-no-so (Knossos) in Crete; and 
anthroponyms such as a-ki-re-u (Achilles). Not to mention words from 
the Semitic, such as 'gold' (ku-ru-so) or 'tunic' (ki-to), or from Egyptian, 
such as 'elephant' (e-re-pa-)y or the group o f 'old travelling' words 
discussed earlier which, no doubt, already existed in IE before enter­
ing the Greek dialects in Greece. 
H o m e r represents, in many cases, a testimony concordant with 
Mycenaean: with regard to toponyms, anthroponyms and c o m m o n 
names. Recall, for example, daduivGoc,, fiaoiXevq, Kvnapioooq, orioq, 
cri§r|poc,. O f course, there are certain Mycenaean terms which are 
lacking in Homer, and in turn certain terms which are lacking in 
Mycenaean, for example, ep8(3w6o<;, GdAaaooc, jjiyapov; and in both 
sources words are missing which appear much later (for example, 
5i6t)pcqx(3oc, in Archilochus, seventh century). This does not mean 
that none o f them already existed in the second millennium, what­
ever their path o f entry may have been. 
Thus, pre-Greek etymology is not always certain, cf. for example, 
for Auxc; and 
AiocKog, A. G. Tsopanakis 
1979. 
67. It is certain that during this period Greek adopted a new vocab­
ulary o f different origins in order to give name to new cultural cir­
cumstances, new gods, plants, animals, products, and metals. But 
even the names o f ancient institutions were replaced by new names, 
whether Indo-European or not (fiaaxXexx; 'king', <pvXr\ 'tribe', xaXxoq 
'bronze'). A n d of course, with the introduction o f a new political 
and cultural system, new words were introduced, generally byderiva-
tion from the Greek (eKKAnata, ap%a)v, ecpopog, $ovXr\, etc). 
The Greek vocabulary was fundamentally 
Indo-European; most 
important o f all, its methods of derivation and composition were 
Indo-European. The additions from this period and the periods before 
and after, taken from other languages, are important culturally but 
not structurally. Indeed, this subject has never been systematically 
studied. The great development o f the Greek vocabulary took place 
much later. 
The morphological and syntactical borrowings from this period 
were o f even less importance, perhaps even o f no importance. There 
was no great advance in this respect from C o m m o n Greek to the 
beginning of the great development of the beginning o f the seventh 
century. It was only later that Greek made a giant leap, becoming 
the international model for all languages. U p to this point it was 

FROM COMMON GREEK T O THE DIALECTS 
41 
merely another Indo-European language that had arrived in a ter­
ritory dominated culturally by Crete and Asia, although it did have 
a well-developed morphology, as explained, which enabled future 
advances. 
f 

CHAPTER FOUR 
G R E E K IN T H E S E C O N D M I L L E N N I U M 
1. EAST G R E E K 
68. East Greek is sometimes referred to as southern Greek, but how­
ever it is called it represents the Greek that entered Greece around 
the year 2000 and left its mark in the second millennium, in 
Mycenaean and whatever is archaic in Homer. It was also the base 
from which the great eastern dialects o f the first millennium would 
spring, that is, Arcado-Cyprian, Ionic, and Aeolic. At one point, until 
the arrival o f the Dorians, it occupied a continuous geographical 
area extending from the S. of Macedonia to Lacedaemon, as well 
as to Crete, Cyprus, Rhodes, and to other islands and certain parts 
of Asia. 
As I have stated, today it is thought that the principal innova­
tions o f Greek are o f a more recent date, the first millennium, as 
opposed to the old view in which the three principal dialects were 
thought to have come from outside o f Greece. Thus, we have Ionic-
Attic features which are only half or partially achieved in certain 
places, for example the conversion o f a into n, contractions and 
metathesis o f quantity, u > u, the treatment o f the groups of**^- and 
sonants and o f -ss-> -ts-, -ty-, or the loss o f the digamma, etc.; Aeolic 
characteristics such as those resulting from the groups o f s and sonants 
mentioned above, the D . p f in -eaoi, the part. perf. in -vx-, etc. (we 
consider others to be archaisms or choices); and others from A r c -
Cyp., as for example innovations such as ev > iv, -o > 
assibi-
lated labiovelar before e, i, dvoc> 6v or choices such as ovo, ovi, ove. 
69. Despite this, I have insisted in my review o f the book by Garcia 
R a m o n (Adrados 1979b) and elsewhere that other 
characteristics 
found in one or various o f the dialects o f the first millennium are 
really either innovations from the second millennium, or choices 
within doublets also from the second millennium: here and there, 
remnants o f the archaic form or the form not chosen are often found. 
T h e presence o f some o f these characteristics in more than one 
dialect or in Mycenaean or H o m e r is a strong argument. Sometimes 

THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
43 
only a few eastern dialects have maintained the archaism, or some­
times only one: Mycenaean, Homer, Cyprian, etc. 
For instance, innovations like -si, but with traces o f -ti (in M y c , 
Horn., AeoL, Pam.), or the 3rd secondary pi. in -(a)av (Ion.-At., 
A r c - C y p . , Horn.), or even \\\xz\q and TJV and their uncontracted forms 
(Ion.-At., Horn.), or ano > dcTru (Arc-Cyp., Lesb., Pamph.), which go 
back to the second millennium. Indeed, also archaisms such as the 
patronymic -xoq (AeoL, M y c , Horn.) or forms o f an old doublet: dv 
(but K8 in AeoL and Horn.), -ocp- (but -op- in AeoL, sometimes in 
M y c . and Horn., and a bit everywhere). Thus, as I mentioned pre­
viously, the three principal dialect groups became defined in the first 
millennium, in isolation, although many o f their characteristics are 
of an earlier date. 
O f course, some characteristics o f E G go back much further, to 
C G : as in the oppositions mentioned, -jiev/-u£<;, -^a-/-oa-, and no 
doubt many o f the ones we have referred to, at least in their initial 
state. Other characteristics no doubt only go back to the period in 
which E G was in Greece: to be sure, its great diffusion and the 
political fragmentation o f Greece into different kingdoms favoured 
dialectalisation. 
70. It is difficult to establish exactly to what extent the first-millen­
nium dialects were anticipated in C G or in E G . There are very 
different isoglosses which could be traced back to E G dialects, but 
which do not coincide. Further on, I will examine those of M y c 
and Homer. However, there are also isoglosses linking Ion.-At. with 
A r c - C y p . , and excluding AeoL (-vcu, dv, et, -(G)OCV, -xe etc; but -ccv 
is found in AeoL, and -xoc is found in Attic); others link A r c - C y p . 
and AeoL, as shown by -op-, 7ce8cc, noxx, athematic verbs instead o f 
the contracted ones, etc O n occasion, there is fragmentation: xeaaepec, 
in Ion. and Arc. (but At. xeaaocpeq seems to be analogical). Sometimes 
the correlation extends to Horn, or M y c , but it can also only affect 
one dialect (£uv in At. and M y c , patronymic -10c. in AeoL, M y c , 
and Horn., -xo(i) in M y c and A r c - C y p . , -91 in Horn, and Thes., 
thematic G. sg. in -o in M y c and Cyp., as I have proposed). There 
is euiv in Dor. and Horn.; also, Pamphylian presents 
similarities 
with M y c . and A r c - C y p . , cf. M . Garcia Teijeiro 1984 and A. Lopez 
Eire-A. Lillo 1982 and 1983. But what do we think about the pre­
vious extension of an archaism such as this, and o f other mono-
dialectal phenomena, such as the preservation of -pm-, -tm- in M y c , 
that of Zf\v in Horn., that o f the thematic G. -o-ne in Cyp.? 

44 
CHAPTER FOUR 
I will not repeat the facts that I have presented in so many other 
works, which sometimes are more significant (the innovations and 
choices) sometimes less (the archaisms). The truth is, it is difficult 
for us to establish today whether there existed a dialect later split 
in Ion.-At. and Arc-Cyp., to what extent these two groups became 
isolated, and h o w this development was related to Aeolic. But we 
will return to this matter. 
71. T h e archaic characteristics o f M y c , which were subsequently 
lost, must be attributed to EG; for example, the preservation o f the 
labiovelars, solutions o f the rh type for groups o f liquids + $ or y. 
W e must account for the transition phase in which certain isoglosses 
became generalised in E G and W G , or part o f these, as a result o f 
contact with the W G which came to Greece towards the year 1200 
(I stress this in §§ 127 ff.). All o f this means that E G , according to 
the dates and locations, must have been markedly different from our 
current idea o f Greek and its dialects. 
Throughout the second millennium, within Greece, this E G would 
have undergone a double process: on the one hand, it became unified 
to a great extent; on the other hand, it became more differentiated. 
The contact with Doric contributed to both processes. This different­
iation created a more or less germinal base dialect o f Ion.-At. and 
A r c - C y p . , with transitions to a germinal Aeolic too, which was later 
invaded by Doric isoglosses. Yet, this split was more or less com­
pleted, and there were other - partly different - dialects close by, 
which have left traces in Mycenaean and in Homer. But here and 
there, archaisms could have existed, later to be lost, hesitations where 
later doublets became simplified, innovations whose limits o f diffusion 
later changed, e t c Also, o f course, archaisms coexisted with so many 
later dialectal innovations. 
72. On the recent character of the dialectal innovations, I would like to 
recall the works of W. Porzig 1954 and E. Risch 1955, to which one can 
add the works of A. Lopez Eire 1989a and A. Negri 1982a and 1982b. 
The latter denies the dialectal units preceding or contemporaneous with 
Mycenaean. These, however, are supported in works such as Adrados 1995, 
Palmer 1980, p. 39, F. W . Householder 1972, p. 59 f, A. Lopez Eire 
1978b, A. Lopez Eire and J. Mendez Dosuna 1971, A. Bartonek 1979, 
1991, 1996, etc. Today the identifications are refuted: Mycenaean is not 
seen as the direct ancestor of any dialect, cf, for example, E. Risch 1979, 
p. 97, and 1990 (on Cyprian). The subject of dialectal differentiation in the 
second millennium is examined more closely in the works cited and in 
§ 39. Above all, see A. Morpurgo 1984b and hesitant positions in K. Strunk 
1997, p. 143 ff 

THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
45 
2. M Y C E N A E A N AS A G R E E K DIALECT OF THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
What kind of language is Mycenaean? 
73. A description of Mycenaean, to add to the many, will not be 
attempted here: instead, we will examine those elements of Mycenaean 
that make some contribution to second-millennium Greek and to 
attempt to establish the position o f Mycenaean within the latter. As 
mentioned earlier, Mycenaean was an administrative language, which 
presents important lacunae for those attempting a description o f the 
Greek language. It is almost uniform from Knossos and Khania to 
Pylos, Thebes, Mycenae and Tyrins (the only places in which it has 
been preserved): although this uniformity is due more to the fact 
that it was an official language that did not reflect the linguistic 
differentiations o f the real language. It was the administrative lan­
guage o f the palaces, not a language of the streets. 
But it seems clear that the differences between the language o f 
Pylos and that o f Knossos are minimal, and that the proposals by 
Risch and others to distinguish a 'normal Mycenaean' and a 'spe­
cial Mycenaean' must be rejected. 
I believe that it was an error to focus on the history o f Mycenaean 
from the perspective of the differences between the dialects o f the 
first millennium in an attempt to establish which o f these was related 
to it. However, c o m m o n sense seems to be gaining ground and the 
need to identify Mycenaean with any of them appears to have dis­
appeared. The fact is, the dialects o f the second millennium cannot 
be interpreted in the light o f the first-millennium dialects. 
Indeed, Mycenaean contains linguistic elements preserved in the 
dialects of the eighth century and sp,, but it does not exactiy pre­
cede any of these dialects, which essentially derive from a later frag­
mentation of East Greek, although some of their characteristics already 
had a dialectal character in the second millennium. The subsequent 
introduction of West Greek was added, as well as the interaction of 
some dialects. All of this, of course, was alien to Mycenaean. There 
were also pan-dialectal innovations affecting a wide range o f dialects. 
But this much is evident: Mycenaean was first recorded in writ­
ing in Crete with the help o f a syllabary derived from that used by 
the Minoan scribes. If scribes, too, o f the Mycenaean palace o f 
Knossos recorded the Greek language for the first time with the help 
of a Cretan syllabary, it seems logical that they would have used 
the Cretan dialect that was familiar to the palace 
administrators. 

46 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Mycenaean is the Greek dialect o f Crete that was subsequently 
brought to the continent as an administrative language, in addition 
to writing; no doubt, the first copyists would have come from there. 
O f course, it is neither a popular nor a literary language, filled 
as it is with standard phrases and administrative formulas, the per­
fect understanding of which would require an understanding of the 
cultural and economic context (which is not our case, since we must 
deduce this from the tablets). Even so, Mycenaean is an invaluable 
testimony o f one o f the dialects o f Greece in the second millennium. 
A n d it is natural for a specialised language, whether 
administrative 
or literary, to have a particular geographical dialect as its base. 
75. On Mycenaean as an administrative or bureaucratic language, cf. 
M. Lejeune 1968, M. Durante 1968 and A. Bartonek 1996. The differences 
between Mycenaean from Knossos and Mycenaean from Pylos have been 
noted, yet they are minimal: cf M. Lejeune 1976 and the bibliography in 
Adrados 1998b. I do not believe in the two dialects proposed by E. Risch, 
the 'normal' and the 'special' (E. Risch 1966, cf. also, among others, 
R. D. Woodward 1986), for they are based on mere hesitations or on dou­
blets; and to consider 'special' Mycenaean as that corresponding to the sup­
posed rebel Dorians is nothing but pure fantasy. See a bibliography and 
arguments in Adrados 1998b and C. Consani 1989 (despite the adminis­
trative character of Mycenaean, there is 'affiorare sporadico' of some forms 
of the spoken language), C.J. Ruijgh 1996, K. Strunk 1997, p. 137 ff and 
recently A. Bartonek 2003. 
Indeed, Mycenaean displays some slight variants (-e and -i in the D. sg., 
a and o as vocalisations of < « > , etc.), which is normal: it was, after all, a 
living language, which grew through variants and innovations. This pro­
vides even less justification for its interpretation as a 'mixed' language, as 
proposed by Georgiev 1964 (and also A. Negri 1981 and, if I understand 
him correctly, A. Bartonek 1987). 
On the Cretan origin of Mycenaean cf some clarifications in J. P. Oliver 
1996. 
On the proposals attributing Mycenaean to a particular dialectal group 
of the first millennium, generally to Ionic-Attic, a bibliography has already 
been provided in § 72. But what the first-millennium dialects do display 
are isoglosses of various extension: whether in the whole of the Southern 
EG or only in Arc-Cyp. (and sometimes Pamph., cf. M. Garcia Teijeiro 
1984) or Ion.-At., often reaching some part of Aeol. (for example, there is 
correspondence with Lesbian in KO-, OXZIC, (OTTK;), -sue, cf. A. Lopez Eire 1987b). 
However, there are rarely any common innovations (cf. nevertheless E. 
Risch 1991, p. 233), most often we are dealing with archaisms and choices 
(sometimes of a recent date, common to WG). I must stress that the asso­
ciation of Mycenaean with a certain group is more that doubtful; see § 79. 
See also the bibliography in K. Strunk 1997, p. 143 ff. 

THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
47 
With regard to its relation with Doric, as proposed by G. Rocca 1984, 
this is really a question of common archaisms. Furthermore, an inheritance 
of Mycenaean in the language of choral lyric, as proposed by C. Trumpy 
1986, does not seem credible, cf. C.J. Ruijgh 1989, p. 85 ff 
For the study of Mycenaean archaisms, see my previously cited works, 
some of which deal with tjie vocalisation of the sonants, starting with my 
1958 article (also A. Morpurgo 1968). 
76. Before embarking on the study o f Mycenaean from this per­
spective, two points need further attention. First is the fact that the 
Mycenaean graphic system contains ideograms and signs for numer­
als, weights, and measures in addition to the syllabary, and that it 
leaves many dark areas so that its interpretation is often controver­
sial. There is no distinction between the quantities o f the vowels, or 
between voiceless and voiced occlusives, while there are various syl­
labic signs with a doubtful interpretation. There are also problems 
and irregularities in the transcription o f the consonantal groups; atten­
tion is hardly ever paid to final -n, -r, and -s. I even think that the 
mark o f final diphthongs is asystematic, and in our transcriptions we 
are sometimes unsure whether a vowel is phonetic or graphic, etc. 
See, for example, M . Meier-Brugger 1992, p. 47 fF. Secondly, such 
incomplete texts with so many gaps simply serve to bring to our 
attention the presence o f certain forms in Mycenaean. Many other 
forms are simply lacking, such as verbal, nominal, adverbial and lex­
ical forms, so that we cannot draw a comparison with subsequent 
dialects or with Homer. W e do not know whether its modal parti­
cle was ke or an, whether the conditional conjunction was ei or ai 
W e are ignorant with regard to the athematic infinitive, etc. Whole 
paradigms are missing. Indeed, statements such as 'Mycenaean has 
lost the augment
5, 'the article and demonstrative which preceded it 
are missing
5, etc., simply could be due to our lack o f information, 
77. O n the characteristics o f Mycenaean in relation to other dialects, 
see Adrados 1976a, 1984a and 1998b. Specifically, on the archaic 
system o f five cases, see Adrados 1990b (regarding syncretism the­
ory, cf. for example, H . Hettrich 
1985). 
From the perspective o f the originality o f Mycenaean, the facts 
presented in detail in these works suggest that, in the first place, 
Mycenaean is characterised by a series o f archaisms that are pecu­
liar to Mycenaean and that one supposes must come from C G or 
E G , as the case may be. They are either Indo-European archaisms 
or evolutionary stages anticipating the whole subsequent evolution. 

48 
CHAPTER FOUR 
In these archaisms, Mycenaean is either isolated from the Greek 
dialects we know, or else accompanied by some of them. But I insist 
that we must assume that these archaisms existed in all of the dialects 
at a certain point before the phase in which we know them. 
Linguistic characteristics 
78. Although no attempt has been made here to provide an exhaus­
tive list, we can point out the following Indo-European archaisms in 
Mycenaean, whether isolated or accompanied by other dialects: 
Phonetics: the preservation o f the labiovelar series; partial preser­
vation of y; lack o f vowel contraction; preservation o f the -pm-, -tm-
groups; pt- beside p- (as in Horn, and Arc-Cyp.). In the s + sonant, 
sonant + s and sonant + y groups, Mycenaean displays the begin­
nings o f a solution with h or 0 which precedes that o f the later 
dialects, as I have proposed. 
Noun: N. sg. in -a o f the 1st. m a s c decl. (uncertain); G. sg. in 
-0 o f the 2nd (= Cyp.; there is also *-o-yo = Horn., Thes.); D.-L.-I. 
sg. -e < * -ei (= Horn., seldom; but there is also the c o m m o n -i), 
p i -a~i (< *-dsi) (= Horn., Ion., archaic At.), -oi < *-oisi (= Horn., 
archaic Ion. and archaic At.); a pure anumeric stem followed by an 
agglutinated particle (po-pi) (= Horn., Thes.). 
Pronoun: the demonstratives to-to (= At.), mi (= Horn., Ion.), the 
reflexive pei (= Horn.). 
Adjective: the patromymic in -io (= Horn., AeoL), the numeral 
e-me, the comparative only in -yo. 
Verb: athematic forms in -a, (te-re-ja; there are also thematic forms) 
(= Horn., AeoL), des. -to(i) (= Arc-Cyp.); perf part, in *-wosa: a-ra-
ru-wo-a. 
Prepositions: ku-su (£6v = Horn., archaic At.), me-ta (also, pe-da = 
AeoL, A r c ) , o-pi (remnants in Ion.-At., also Thes.; e-pi, the c o m m o n 
form, is also present), pa-ro. 
Lexicon: a m o n g others, the words *owosI *owesos 'ear', i-ja-ro 
(= Horn., Ion., e t c before the variant with -e-)\ u-ju (= *i)vuc,); de-re-
u-koy that is, *8A,ei)K0(;, yX- in other dialects; me-re~u-roy d^e^pov in 
other dialects; abundant vocabulary, c o m m o n to Horn, and some­
times other dialects, o f the type wa-na-ka (dva^), i-ja-te (iaxrip, also 
in Cyp.), e t c 
79. All o f these archaic elements, in certain cases, could have occu­
pied all o f C G and E G (or the latter, at least), or part of it. W e 

THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
49 
can see that, besides archaism, Mycenaean contained variants that 
were also present in other dialects. In some cases there are relative 
archaisms: G. -o-yo, which is IE, but here it was more recent than 
the N.-G. -os; and I would like to recall the sonant + s or y groups 
mentioned a b o v e 
^ 
So, none of this indicates a special relation between Mycenaean 
and any other dialect, even when Mycenaean preserves a doublet 
of Greek date: 0/ay or/ar in the vocalisation of the sonants, or when 
it presents a choice: -eus and not -es (in nearly all of Greek, except 
for Arc-Cyp.); G. in -oyo and not -00 (of *-osyo, in Horn, and Thes., 
as mentioned). O f course, this demands broad explanations, which 
I have provided in other works. 
If what I say is correct, then these choices would also be of no 
use to us in classifying Mycenaean. In a period that predates our 
knowledge, the distribution could have been different. 
T h e innovations remain. They are very rare: the creation of a 
secondary yod ($u-za of auKeai; there are close examples in Horn, 
and Cyp.); irregularities in the treatment o f primary yod after the 
occlusive (ka-zo-e < *kafyoses); the dual to-pe-zo; the loss of augment. 
80. Thus, Mycenaean was an extremely conservative dialect, with 
hardly any innovations of its own, although with a few choices, it 
is true, in c o m m o n or not with other dialects. It preserved its archaic 
forms in a time when all or part of these other dialects had either 
lost them or had chosen from among the doublets: this is the most 
remarkable thing. W e cannot establish its exact relation to the para-
Mycenaean dialects, apart from the fact that it is more archaic and 
proceeds in an original way with some choices and innovations. Yet. 
the picture is incomplete without a study of its relation to the Homeric 
dialect. 
Before turning to this, the impression we get is that Mycenaean, 
a bureaucratic form o f the Cretan dialect predating the tablets from 
the continent, maintained an archaism that, no doubt, was absent 
in the spoken language. This would have contained variants (what 
we have referred to as para-Mycenaean dialects) which presaged the 
future dialects of the first millennium. A n official, archaic language 
of remote origin and antiquity would have co-existed with the spo­
ken dialects, somewhat like the co-existence of Latin with the ger­
minal Romance languages at the start of the Middle Ages. 

50 
CHAPTER FOUR 
3. 
A C H A E A N EPIC AS A G R E E K LANGUAGE OF THE 
SECOND MILLENNIUM 
Diverse theories on the Homeric language 
81. There is a second source for the knowledge of Greek in the sec­
ond millennium: the epic language of H o m e r and his succesors. The 
problem is that this language reached its definitive form 
through 
Homer's writing o f it (directly or by dictation) in the eighth century 
BC. Moreover, as it is universally agreed, it was an artificial language 
that was renovated in the mouths of the aoidoi from the second mil­
lennium on, and even earlier, from C G and certainly from IE. 
The Indo-European epic has similar characteristics: it mixes old 
and recent linguistic forms, and old and recent historical data. This 
occurs within a formulaic system that comes from the Indo-European 
epic and that reinforces a partly artificial language by using doublets 
and other artifices. It is, in effect, a system of formulas and stan­
dard phrases within fixed metrical schemes: it may admit different 
forms or it may adapt them to the linguistic evolution; or, in con­
trast, it may modify the formulas and create new ones. 
82. K. Witte 1913 and K. Meister 1921 studied the formulaic and artificial 
character of the Homeric language. After this, M. Parry 1928 studied the 
formulaic system, and a clear presentation of the subject is provided by 
A. Parry 1971. I would like to distinguish J. B. Hainsworth 1968 and 
A. Hoekstra 1969a among the later works that explain how the formulas 
modified and adapted themselves to the evolution of the language. The 
study of formulaic diction in Serbian poetry began from the study of Homer, 
and was undertaken by A. B. Lord 1960. A general picture of formulaic 
diction in the epic of different Indo-European languages is provided in 
Adrados 1986d. 
These studies show that the Homeric formulaic system, despite being 
modified at the end of the Mycenaean age, descends from Mycenaean and 
from Indo-European. So, in the second millennium we can also postulate 
general characteristics of the language of the Greek epic that are similar 
to those known to us through its renovation, its admission of doublets, etc. 
It definitely remains a literary language, whatever the geographic base. See 
also A. Heubeck 1981. 
Furthermore, see the following works on the general characteristics of 
epic poetry, which are reflected in Homer: H. M. Chadwick 1967 and (in 
collaboration) 1968, and C. M. Bowra 1952; also, Adrados 1986d and 
1992b. 
83. Thus, the problem is to distinguish what is ancient from what 
is recent in the Homeric language: what comes from the second mil-

THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
51 
lennium and from the first millennium, that is, from the dialects of 
the latter (Aeolic, Ionic-Attic, and according to some, also Arcado-
Gyprian). It is not an easy distinction to make. The fact is that the 
language of the second millennium, which no doubt had its own 
geographic base (but not the same as Mycenaean, judging from the 
discrepancies between them), later on received various additions from 
the different generations of aoidoi in an age in which the dialects 
known to us already existed. The formulaic system adapted to the 
new needs and admitted this new linguistic material. 
The Homeric language did not yet exist in the form in which we 
know it in the second millennium. Indeed, it is very clear that Ionic 
elements such as n instead o f a, and Aeolic elements such as ocu|ie, 
KeKX-nyovxeq belonged to recent strata of Greek, o f the first millen­
nium. However, it has never occurred to anyone that certain forms 
that could actually be Doric, such as xoi or the inf. in -u£v, were 
in fact Doric: they are simply passed off as being archaisms. 
Not even a form such as 9ed is considered to be Attic: it is sim­
ply regarded as another archaism. In H o m e r there are no innovated 
Doric forms o f the type ejneoc,, nor innovated Attic forms such as 
&7ioxiv8xo)oav. For this reason, the interpretation of the Homeric lan­
guage as a conglomerate of dialects o f the first millennium is a colos­
sal error of investigation, once we acknowledge the existence in this 
language of some simple archaisms (such as ecpGixo, akxo, KeXaai, 
TC£(pi8ea9ca, Zfjv, or certain terms of the lexicon), and some artificial 
forms (verbal forms with diectasis, metrical extensions, etc.). 
This reflects an uncritical continuation o f the interpretations of 
the old grammarians, who in turn reflected the dialectal interpreta­
tion o f the Greeks in general on the basis o f the dialects they knew 
and not of the linguistic situation in the second millennium, which 
they of course ignored. 
For instance, H o m e r occasionally preserved forms such as the 
archaisms just mentioned; and he preserved fluctuations which E G 
in general subsequently eliminated, such as -aa/-a- (without regular 
simplification), xoi/oi, x w n / o i ) . H o m e r also preserved doublets that 
had been eliminated even from Mycenaean, as noted earlier 
(fj'ov/ 
a w , etc.). 
84. The traditional theory is that a first A e o l i c ' phase was succeeded 
by a second Tonic
5 phase. Beside elements from the first millennium, 
which were clearly Aeolic and Ionic, elements from the second 

52 
CHAPTER 
FOUR 
millennium, which cannot be considered Aeolic or Ionic, were con­
sidered as belonging to their dialects. The same goes for the so-
called Achaean (or rather, Arcado-Cyprian) elements, which other 
authors consider to be earlier than the former: these elements tend 
to be simple archaisms, nearly always of a lexical type (atacc, 8S)jia, 
dva^, etc.); cf. R . Hiersche 1970, p. 90. 
According to this theory, a generation of Achaean
5 aoidoi would 
have been followed by another generation o f Aeolic' aoidoi, and this 
by a third generation o f 'Ionic' aoidoi Hardly anything is said about 
archaisms, nothing at all about Doricisms or about artificial forms, 
except to attribute them to very recent phases. Apart from that, 
there can be no doubt whatsoever about the artificial character of 
the Homeric language, its capacity to choose or create forms accord­
ing to metre, etc. 
Our view of the Homeric language 
85. The key problem is that certain characteristics that were, for 
instance, Ionic or Aeolic in the first millennium, were not yet so in 
the second millennium before the dialects we know were shaped. In 
Homer, there is -ti, an archaism, and -si, East Greek in general; 
there is -ap- and -op-, dv and K8, which co-existed, they were not 
yet Tonic' and Aeolic', in the same way that tpv and ovv were not 
yet Attic
5 and Tonic
5 and 
TCT- was not A c h a e a n
5 but simply an 
archaism. In addition, characteristics that began to spread - such as 
-GCCV in the 3rd sec. pf, which later became Ionic (but there' is -ccv 
in Arcadian) - were innovations which had success in certain dialects, 
for they were not yet marked dialectally in any sense. Others, such 
as the D . pi. -eaor, never even had the chance to assign themselves 
to any one dialect. 
W e only know o f other forms through Mycenaean or Homer him­
self: there is no reason to assign them to the dialects o f the first mil­
lennium. Indeed, if certain words are present in H o m e r 
and 
Arcado-Cyprian or Mycenaean, for example, then this means that 
they also existed in some part o f E G from the second millennium. 
If -q>i is present in Thessalian, this only means that it existed in the 
second millennium (Mycenaean is another witness), etc. 
O f course, we must also attribute to the Greek o f that period the 
labiovelars, not their later evolutions, the p, the vowels in hiatus 
without contraction, the groups of s and sonant, and inversely (cf Horn. 

THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
53 
xekaov), 
or of sonant and y (or a phase with h still partially pre­
served in Mycenaean) and not their later evolutions in Ionic or 
Aeolic. 
In other words, the supposed archaic Tonicisms
5, Aeolicisms
5, etc. 
of H o m e r (later, true Ionicisms and Aeolicisms were introduced), 
were simply forms that would later become part o f these dialects, as 
I explain in Adrados 1981. According to Hooker 1983, the epic lan­
guage should be studied without 'dialectal preconceptions': the con­
cepts of 'Ionic' and Aeolic' are inadequate, as demonstrated by TOI 
which does not fit into the system, Chadwick himself (1990) acknowl­
edges that 'the four main dialectal groups cannot be projected onto 
the second millennium'. 
86. The fact is, certain Homeric characteristics descend, indeed, from 
the dialects of the first millennium, that is, from Ionic and Aeolic, 
in whose sphere epic poetry continued to grow (perhaps in the region 
of Asia in which they crossed paths, as proposed by Wilamowitz; cf. 
also C. J. Ruijgh 1995-96). But it is a mistake to assign a dialectal 
label o f the first millennium to archaic Homeric characteristics, from 
a period in which these dialects did not exist. It is true that these 
characteristics were understood in this way: dv, vca were understood 
by later Greeks as Ionicisms; K8, -jnev as Aeolicisms, and modern 
linguists continued this tradition in error. But they did not know 
what to make of TOI or Bed whereas the reconstructed digamma or 
the patronymic in -ioq, simple archaisms, were attributed to Aeolic. 
They also called ccp forms Ionic, and op forms Aeolic. Furthermore, 
the 5e- solution o f *g
ve- was considered Ionic, and the pe- solution 
Aeolic: this is correct, but they are referring to recent transcriptions 
of ancient *^e-, as T^U- and djuu- are recent transcriptions o f <*n$m>, 
etc. 
Thus, certain archaic forms or the characteristics of certain archaic 
dialects were secondarily interpreted as Ionic or Aeolic, for the sim­
ple reason that they were Ionic or Aeolic in the eighth century and 
later on were always interpreted so; they attracted recent Ionicisms 
and Aeolicisms to the epic language, which was always in a state of 
evolution. In the same way, the presumed 'Achaeanisms' of Homer, 
that is, certain morphological and lexical coincidences with Arcado-
Cyprian, are simply archaisms; but these did not attract recent archaic 
forms, it was a non-literary dialect neglected by the aoidoi 

54 
CHAPTER FOUR 
87. On the ancient grammarians
5 view of the dialects, see J. B. Hainsworth 
1967; also G. Scarpat 1952, R. Hiersche 1970, p. 80 (with a quote by Dio 
Chrysostomus XI 23), and C. Consani 1993. 
On the bibliography of the traditional interpretations of the Homeric 
language, see, for example, R. Hiersche 1972 and Adrados 1981, p. 13; a 
standard presentation can be found, for example, in the Grammaire Homerique 
by P. Ghantraine 1942. The truth is, there has been no real progress since 
then. On the polemic surrounding the existence of Aeolicisms, or the lack 
thereof, cf. K. Strunk 1957, A. Wathelet 1970, as well as M. Durante 1968, 
G. C. Horrocks 1987. R. Hiersche 1970, p. 83 ff, is sceptical about a large 
series of proposed Aeolicims (-op-, v < p, -eaai, 
which he regards as 
only 'passing for
5 Aeolicisms). On a possible, older layer of Achaean archaisms 
(based on Arc-Gyp.), cf G. J. Ruijgh 1957 and later works (against this, 
M. Peters 1986); on possible Myceaneanisms, J. Chadwick and G. P. Shipp 
in G. S. Kird (ed.) 1964. Shipp opposes Chadwick in the same volume by 
doubting the Mycenaeanisms, which to him are archaisms. Cf. also in the 
same vein, R. Lazzeroni 1969. See another theory (a Palaeo-Aeolic stra­
tum followed by an Arcado-Cyprian one) in A. Negri 1981b and C. Brillante 
1986. On the 'non-Ionic elements without a clear definition' cf. R. Hirsche 
1970, p. 91. Other studies include: C.J. Ruijgh 1984 and 1995-1996, B. 
Forssmann 1991, O. Panagl 1992. 
The theory presented here is supported in Adrados 1976a (with much 
more detail regarding Achaean Epic) and 1981 (the theoretical foundation). 
These ideas are strongly supported by J. T. Hooker 1983 and also by 
J. Chadwick 1990 (without quoting me, perhaps by coincidence he arrived 
at the same conclusion); they are ignored by K. Strunk 1997, p. 149 f 
Actually, they are an ineluctable consequence of the thesis of the recent 
character of most of the innovations of the dialects: the strange thing is 
that there is a continuous and routine repetition of the same ideas that 
were proposed when those dialects were projected onto the older"tiate. 
88. So, there was an epic language before the dialectal differentiation, 
at a time when the labiovelars were still preserved, there was no 
contraction o f vowels, and archaisms and doublets, later reserved to 
certain dialects, survived. Indeed, the epic language favoured the 
existence o f doublets, which had existed earlier in E G (although some 
were created artificially), but were maintained in places where the 
dialects tended later to choose between the two forms. For instance, 
oio/-6o/-oi), 
ccp/op, -vcu/-uev, Jjuv/auv/ai/ei (previously quoted), 
-Ti/-at (archaic and recent forms), -ac/-a in the first declension, 
-XG- 
(archaism) / forms with a lengthening o f the vowel, forms with 
or without digamma, e t c , normal or artificial forms, e t c All o f this 
represented 
nothing but an exploitation o f the variation 
between 
archaic and recent forms or among parallel forms (phonetic or other­
wise) in EG. 

THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
55 
I am not attempting a study o f the Homeric language as it is rep­
resented in our manuscripts, but a study of its predecessor, the epic 
language of the second millennium. It coincides to a large extent 
with Mycenaean as to the archaisms (patronymics in -10c,, the form 
in -cpi, the doublet ap/opj etc.) and also with the archaisms that can 
be deduced from the study o f the first-millennium dialects (TO(, TO, 
etc). However, it must be granted that, on occasion, this language 
(to the extent that it is known to us) has lost certain Mycenaean 
archaisms; or else has preserved doublets where Mycenaean had 
simplified in a different way. I have provided examples. 
The Homeric language also had its own archaisms o f the type 
Zfjv, ecpGiTO, xzkoov, 
e t c Sometimes, the lack o f Mycenaean data 
allows us to establish a relation. But, on occasion, Mycenaean and 
Homeric archaism, or its choice, only spread to certain dialects: 
-s\)q (-eq in Arc-Gyp.), jxera (except for a group with rceSoc in A r c -
and Lesb.), etc.; or else Homer (or 'our
5 Homer?) chose in accordance 
with all the dialects, against M y c . (D. sg. in -i, with exception) or 
against M y c and A r c - G y p . (verbal des. -xai). At times, archaism is 
preserved in an isolated dialect, against the rest, including Horn, and 
M y c (D. sg. in Cyp. -o-ne). 
Mycenaean archaisms such as the preservation of the labiovelars 
or the preservation of h proceeding from s have been lost in the 
epic language: but perhaps this is just something peculiar to 'our
5 
Homer, not that o f the second millennium. 
With regard to innovations, apart from those that are clearly from 
the first millennium, Homer shares some (which are not in Mycenaean) 
with the southern group: -(G)OCV in Ion-At.-Arc.-Cyp,, concordance 
with Ion., At., and A r c in the treatment o f the groups o f -ss-, -ts-
and 
etc H o m e r also has some innovations of his own, but these 
are not significant enough to establish dialectal relations. 
89. In short, the ancient background of Homer's language comes 
from a conservative dialect o f the second millennium which is not 
exactly Mycenaean, for its archaisms are partly different. As far as 
its choices and innovations are concerned, sometimes it follows nearly 
all of non-Mycenaean EG, sometimes it follows the Ion.-At.-Arc-
Cyp. group (against Mycenaean). But it preserves doublets identical 
to those of M y c , which the different dialects, including Aeolic, have 
simplified (at times in a contrasting way). 

56 
CHAPTER FOUR 
W e cannot establish the geographical base o f this language, nor 
to what extent an older epic language was renovated afterwards by 
various additions. W e can only claim that it was an archaic lan­
guage closely related to Mycenaean and to the language that is some­
times at the base o f the whole o f first-millennium EG, sometimes at 
the base o f just a part o f it (that is, to the para-Mycenaean dialects). 
T h e only thing left for us to do is to attempt to set aside those ele­
ments that were added to the epic language in the first millennium 
in the course o f its evolution. 
Achaean epic, an archaic language, no doubt comes from a different 
geographic area than Myceaean, which comes from Crete. It has 
been proposed that variants in this language left traces in Hesiod 
and lyric, see §§ 151 f. 
It was an area in which a peculiar dialect o f E G began to take 
shape, which did not take part in the tendency to differentiate pre-
Ionic from pre-Aeolic. But, because the archaic forms and the doublets 
o f this dialect often coincide with those o f the later dialects, Ionic 
and Aeolic - or, to be more exact, Asian Ionic and Aeolic - 
the 
epic admitted forms o f these dialects secondarily. Here, the epic lan­
guage continued to evolve. 
Thus, we know the Greek o f the second millennium, directly, 
through a dialect that was brought from Crete to the continent in 
the second millennium with an administrative purpose; and through 
a dialect brought from a certain place to Asia as a poetic language 
in the first millennium (but which, perhaps, had been developing in 
Asia since the Mycenaean period). 
However, we can also to a certain extent reconstruct what would 
have been the spoken language o f the period: the para-Mycenaean 
dialects. 
4. P A R A - M Y C E N A E A N IN THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 
90. Thus, we have a very incomplete knowledge o f Greek in the 
second millennium. O n the one hand, we can draw some conclu­
sions from C G and E G as to h o w much in them is unified and frag­
mented. O n the other hand, we have a direct knowledge o f an 
administrative language, Mycenaean, which provides us with lacu­
nae and problems, and a reconstructed epic language that we can 
deduce from the epic language o f the first millennium. Both lan­
guages definitely have very concrete geographical origins. 

THE SECOND 
MILLENNIUM 
57 
These archaic languages are o f very special and reduced uses, and 
their relation to the spoken languages — the archaic forms o f east­
ern dialects, which I call para-Mycenaean - is difficult to establish 
in any concrete way. Evidently, throughout the whole of Greece 
there must have been a spoken language that was beginning to frag­
ment, just as the political power was fragmenting: some information 
about this has already been provided. 
I would like to highlight certain views. None of the previously 
mentioned innovatory characteristics of Ion.-At. is present in the sec­
ond millennium: they appear later. The same applies to those of 
Aeol. or Arc.-Gyp. The innovations that are c o m m o n to all of them 
come from E G , as we have seen. Also, there are some archaisms of 
Ion.-At. (the prepositions without apocope) or o f Attic (^v, noXei). 
None of this tells us much. But the series o f choices c o m m o n to 
Ion.-At. and A r c - C y p . are important: we can recall the examples 
of ei, TeaGBpec,, -vcti, av, -xe, -ap-, EIKOGI, etc. They evidently go back 
very far, before these dialects were entirely constituted. It seems that 
there was a linguistic territory with c o m m o n characteristics that 
extended from Attica to the Peloponnesus, by way o f the Corinthian 
isthmus. The fact that there was not always complete unity (archaisms 
in Attic or Cyprian or remnants of divergent choices) does not under­
mine this argument. But I do believe it is possible to speak of a first 
hint o f Ionic-Attic and even Arcado-Cyprian and Aeolic before the 
end of the Mycenaean period. 
91. Sometimes, a characteristic that in principle corresponds to the 
complex formed by the later Ionic-Attic and Arcado-Cyprian dialects 
extends beyond these frontiers and is found in an Aeolic dialect: 
\xeia in Thes., -(G)OCV in Boeot,, and I have already touched upon 
those o f Lesbian. But the opposite is more frequent: coincidence 
between Arcadian-Cyprian (or one o f the two dialects) and Aeolic 
as a whole or part o f it, always as regards choices: the pronouns 6Vu, 
ove, ovi, the prepositions 7ce5d, TCOT{, the pronominal element 
- G U C 
In short, some (innovatory) isoglosses of the first-millennium dialects 
reflect something that was peculiar to E G as a whole; some (choices, 
archaisms) excluded the territory that later became Aeolic; some 
reached it in part; and some excluded the dominion o f the later 
Ionic-Attic 
It must be stressed that a great differentiation did not exist. There 
were no great dialectal innovations. Here and there, archaisms and 
choices survived which were also present in distant territories. Indeed, 

58 
CHAPTER FOUR 
archaisms and doublets which were present in Homer and Mycenaean 
may have survived in Para-Mycenaean, or part o f it, in contrast to 
what can be deduced from the later dialects. And there are prob­
lems with Aeolic: the doubt as to whether certain coincidences with 
Ionic-Attic are not an effect of a recent influence, as proposed by 
Porzig; whether certain coincidences o f Boeotian and Thessalian with 
Doric were not an effect o f the influence o f the latter. If these two 
hypotheses were true, the dialectalisation o f E G in the second mil­
lennium would be much clearer than we now think. 
These problems will be discussed in the context o f the study o f 
the first-millennium dialects, which, as we have seen, deepened the 
dialectal differences after the arrival o f the Dorians, who isolated the 
different territories: the territory o f the Peloponnese (reduced to 
Arcadia and to the emigration to Cyprus), that of Attica (and its 
emigration to the islands and Asia), and that o f Thessaly and Boeotia 
(with emigration to Asia and Lesbos). The later dialects correspond 
to these territories, which were Mycenaean kingdoms or groups of 
Mycenaean kingdoms. It appears that there was already a hint of 
them, to a certain extent. Various authors, including myself, have 
proposed this. 

CHAPTER FIVE 
G R E E K IN T H E F I R S T M I L L E N N I U M : 
D I A L E C T A L P A N O R A M A 
1. T H E EXPANSION OF THE G R E E K DIALECTS 
The first expansion 
92. I have specified the circumstances surrounding the 
fragmenta­
tion, in the first millennium, of the relatively unified East Greek that 
was spoken in Greece during the second millennium. This topic must 
be looked at more closely, but to do so it is useful first to examine 
the expansion o f the Greek dialects from the arrival of the Dorians 
onwards, inside and outside Greece, and also to look at the diffusion 
of the alphabet and script. 
T o begin with, the Dorian invasion brought to Greece an archaic 
language lacking the innovations o f East Greek, which had entered 
Greece towards the year 2000 and had Hellenised it during the sec­
ond millennium. Apart from destroying the earlier culture, the inva­
sion also isolated the three regions which had been spared during 
the invasion. These regions developed three dialects — Thessalian 
and Boeotian, Attic and Arcadian - which were later exported to 
Asia and the islands. In their fully developed state, these dialects 
became known as Aeolic, Ionic-Attic and Arcado-Cyprian. 
Indeed, from the ninth century onwards, Greece began to re­
invent itself. It developed a geometric and later oriental style of art. 
This was the age o f the cities, o f the great sanctuaries, commerce, 
and advances in architecture, sculpture, ceramics and painting. The 
aristocracies developed an international way o f life, the alphabet was 
introduced and links were established among the eastern dialects and 
with Doric, which enabled the convergence of dialects and of Greek 
cultural forms, including oral and written literature. But this was to 
be expected, and it will be examined later on. First, I must empha­
sise the dialectal differentiation. 
93. As I have explained, not so long ago it was customary in dis­
cussions on Greek dialectology to propose that the three great dialects 

60 
CHAPTER FIVE 
(apart from Doric) had entered Greece from the North in an already 
fully formed state around the year 2000. Kretschner and Tovar, 
among others, propagated this theory and I myself was not immune 
to it. But from the 1950s onwards, it became increasingly evident 
that the main innovations o f these dialects should only be dated 
starting from the year 1200 BC (in 1952 I had stated that the inno­
vations were essential in tracing the dialectal history). The relevant 
bibliography has been provided. 
T o be sure, some scholars have gone further, presenting C o m m o n 
Greek and second-millennium Greek as absolute units: this is unre­
alistic, as we have shown. Yet the great fragmentation occurred, in 
effect, after the year 1200. 
94. This expansion o f the Greek language was resumed, as we have 
seen, after the great catastrophe that was the destruction o f the 
Mycenaean kingdoms around 1200; and, above all, from the ninth 
century onwards, when the Greeks, in rivalry with the Phoenicians, 
once more began to explore the Mediterranean, to trade there and 
to establish colonies. Different cities with different dialects intervened 
in these processes after the arrival o f the Dorians. 
Actually, the islands and the whole western coast o f Asia Minor 
became a new Greece through the efforts o f the Aeolians, Ionians 
and Dorians; even the southern coast between Lycia and Cilicia, 
Pamphylia. N e w 'contingents' o f Greek dialects from the 
eastern 
groups became established in these parts and in Cyprus. Within 
Greece itself the Dorians occupied, as is well known, Phocis and the 
territories to the west; the whole area surrounding the Peloponnesus, 
from Corinth and Argolis to Elis and Messenia; Crete and neigh­
bouring islands o f Thera, Rhodes and Cos; and also the Ionic islands 
were occupied by the Ionians. In most o f these places the dialects 
were grafted onto the earlier setdements. All o f this took place around 
the eleventh century BC, which is the starting date for the estab­
lishment o f the three great dialects — Ionic-Attic, Aeolic and Doric — 
and also for the implantation o f the isoglosses that tended to either 
merge them or fragment them. 
In Greece itself, the city was now the political centre, whether 
unifying vast territories under its rule (syncecisms such as that o f 
Attica); joining confederations (such as that o f the Boeotians); con­
quering territories and subduing their populations (as Lacedaemon 
did in Messenia, Athens in Oropus and Eleutherae); or promoting 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
61 
wars (between Eretria and Chalcis, Athens and Megara). All o f this 
had linguistic consequences, the main one being that the dialects 
(and alphabets) tended to coincide with the cities. But this is not 
always the case; see § 131 on the Ionic dialect of Asia. 
Colonization 
95. Towards the eighth century the dialects were practically fully 
formed. The colonisation of Magna Graecia was just beginning, with 
Sicily and southern Italy dominated by the Greeks, and this period 
is also marked by the origin and diffusion o f the alphabet. This is 
the point in which the great diffusion o f the Greek language began. 
Outside Magna Graecia, in their colonisation the Greeks gener­
ally only founded isolated cities in the coastal region around the 
Black Sea and almost the whole of the Mediterranean: they would 
setde on small islands or on a promontory on the coast, and some­
times they would extend their dominion to a nearby region on the 
continent. 
The regions dominated by the Phoenicians and Carthaginians were 
an exception: that is, the N. o f Africa to the W . of Cyrene, the W . 
of Sicily, the islands of the western Mediterranean 
and the S. o f 
Spain. The Greeks were driven out of all these places after the bat-
tie of Alalia in 535. The Phocaeans had been the first to arrive in 
this region, according to Herodotus (I 165 ff, I V 152), but 
after 
their defeat in Alalia against the Etruscans and Carthaginians, 
the 
western Mediterranean was closed to the Greeks. 
96. With this exception, the cities o f the Greeks extended along the 
entire coastal region, and were like frogs around a pond, to use 
Plato's expression {Phaedo 109 b). Various Greek dialects, but prin­
cipally Doric and Ionic, were spoken there. 
The Greeks left inscriptions very early on: the phenomenon of 
colonisation follows only a little later that of the diffusion of the 
alphabet. The inscription on the cup o f Pithecusa from the eighth 
century is perhaps the oldest Greek inscription, followed by that of 
the oinokhoe from the Dipylon in Athens, somewhat later. Also, liter­
ature arrived from Greece and a new literature was created, from 
the eighth century onwards in Asia and from the seventh century 
in Sicily, and the arts flourished. These Greek cities were in constant 
contact with the indigenous peoples of the interior who, from here, 
borrowed so much from Greek culture, the alphabet being one of the 

62 
CHAPTER FIVE 
most important cultural loans (but this will be examined further on). 
The founding o f the Greek colonies marked the culminations o f 
the resumption o f the travels of exploration and commerce. In Pontus, 
Asia and the West, the Greeks had followed in the footsteps of the 
Mycenaeans and the exploration myths o f the Argonauts, of Heracles 
and Odysseus. T h e Odyssey described the navigations of Odysseus in 
the western Mediterranean, linking the Mycenaean navigations and 
those o f the eighth century (cf Adrados 1998c). Stesichorus intro­
duced the account of Heracles's voyage to the West to Tartessus, 
which would have been familiar to Greeks o f that period, who traded 
there. It is even possible that in places such as Miletus or Thapsus, 
the Greek dialects from the Mycenaean period would have survived 
and served as a base for the new Greek dialects. 
T o d a y we have a better understanding o f trade in the archaic 
period, which in effect continued the former trade routes 
through 
Pontus and the East. Between such distant locations as al-Mlna, Tell 
Sukas, Pithecusae and Naukratis we can find traces of Greek trade 
from the ninth century onwards, where Greeks later coexisted with 
the Phoenicians and the local populations. Subsequendy, Greek empo-
ria proper emerged, and later real cities. 
A community o f Greeks and Phoenicians existed in more archaic 
times; a ship could transport mixed merchandises. Only later was 
there a strong rivalry between them, and even war (I have discussed 
the apportionment o f the Mediterranean 
above). 
97. It is a complicated phenomenon. The oldest o f the cittes that 
founded colonies were Euboea, Chalcis and Eretria, which estab­
lished colonies in Corcyra, the gulf of Naples (Pithecusae, Cumae), 
the E. o f Sicily and Italy (Naxos, Leontini, Catana, Rhegium) and 
Chalcidice (Torone, Mende, Methone); Corinth, which displaced the 
Chalcidians in Corcyra and founded Potidaea and Syracuse (the lat­
ter together with the Lacedaemonians); Megara, which founded 
Megara Hyblaea in Sicily and Byzantion and Chalcedon at the 
entrance to the Black Sea; the cities o f Asia Minor, Miletus (which 
colonized the Black Sea) and Phocaea (which colonized the West); 
and afterwards Thera (Cyrene), Lacedaemon (Tarentum), etc. 
Some colonies, in turn, founded other colonies, for example Massilia, 
the Phocaean colony; and sometimes, two cities united to found one 
colony (I have cited the case of Syracuse). There was even an entire 
city, Phocaea, which towards the year 540 displaced itself to Corsica, 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
63 
to Alalia (which had been founded around 560), fleeing from the 
Persians. In short, most frequently, one or various cities founded a 
colony in a planned way, in order to relieve the strain of an excess 
population or to create a fulcrum for their trade or power. 
This is not the appropriate place for a detailed look at Greek 
colonisation and its enormous cultural repercussions in Greece itself. 
The oldest colonies in the mid-eighth century are those of Pithecusae 
(really an emporium) and Cumae (757) in Italy, Naxos in Sicily (734), 
followed by Syracuse (733) and later by many more. The colonies 
of Miletus and other cities around the Black Sea are almost con­
temporary; Naukratis, a trading post in Egypt, dates from the seventh 
century; more recent are the colonies of the W . , first Massilia, cited 
previously, towards 600, and from there Emporion in Spain 
and 
others. 
98. For an echo of the colonization in the Odyssey, cf. my article, previ­
ously cited, 'Navegaciones. . ( 1 9 9 8 c ) ; on Stesichorus and Tartessus, Adrados 
1978, p. 261 ff. On Greek trade and the founding of colonies see, among 
various works, the book by J. Boardman 1973 and other works previously 
cited; the collaborations of T. F. R. G. Braun and of J. M. Cook in the 
re-edition of Cambridge Ancient History, 1982, and of A. J. Graham in the 
same work, 1983; G. Pugliese Garratelli 1985; F. G. Fernandez Nieto 1983; 
S. Deger-Jalkotzy (ed.) 1983 and 1992; P. G. Descoeudres (ed.) 1990; 
P. Rouillard 1991; G. Tsetskhladze-F. de Angelis (eds.) 1994; etc. The book 
by N. G. L. Hammond, as cited previously, contains not only a good expo­
sition on p. 109 ff, but also an impressive account of the Greek colonies 
in the eighth to the seventh centuries (p. 657 ff). V. Alonso Troncoso 1994 
provides more references. On the Greek vocabulary of the colonisation, see 
M. Casevitz 1985. 
99. The colonisation should be regarded as a new Greek expansion, 
which went far beyond that initiated in the Mycenaean period. It 
should also be seen as the start o f the expansion o f Greek culture -
arts, a way of life - and of the Greek language, which to us is par­
ticularly 
reflected in writing. Yet this was but a repetition on a 
grander scale o f the Mycenaean expansion and the continuation of 
the diffusion o f the eastern Greek dialects and of the western dialects 
in Greece itself, where the new dialects were formed. The intro­
duction of the alphabet in the mid-eighth century in Greece and 
Asia, as well as in the large islands of the Aegean and in Ionia, 
Sicily, and Italy, along with all the colonies, marked the start of a 
great diffusion of Greek, or of different Greeks. 

64 
CHAPTER FIVE 
2. T H E DIFFUSION OF G R E E K 
The alphabet and its diffusion 
100. The different Greek dialects of the first millennium are known 
to us from the eighth century BC onwards, whether directly, through 
inscriptions in stone and ceramics in particular, or indirectly, through 
the literary tradition which is reflected in the manuscripts. There are 
two kinds of texts: those in the Greek that was spoken in the different 
cities, which has been transmitted to us mainly through inscriptions; 
and those in literary Greek, the c o m m o n languages that have been 
transmitted to us through inscriptions to some extent and also through 
manuscripts. 
This is based on a fundamental fact: the invention of the Greek 
alphabet, a derivative o f northern Semitic alphabet, to which, as we 
know, it adds the vowels. It was probably the invention o f only one 
person (or if there were various alphabets, then only one was diffused) 
for trade purposes. It must have originated in a place where Greeks 
and Phoenicians coexisted: A l - M m a has been proposed (perhaps 
ancient Posideion, on the coast o f Syria), Rhodes and Crete, in par­
ticular. Trade is better conducted with the aid of written documents, 
and we have evidence o f such, although o f a later date, and also o f 
the transmission o f the Greek alphabet to the West. 
However, the hypothesis that the Greek alphabet was introduced 
in order to write the poems o f the aoidoi is entirely unlikely; although 
it is true to say that it was used in the same century (eighth) for 
poetic inscriptions (dedicatory, funerary). This must have been a stage 
preceding its systematic use by the aoidoi. 
The fact is, it is thought today that from the end o f the ninth 
century the Greek alphabet was spread out over the whole of the 
Greek world and was beginning to penetrate the neighbouring regions. 
I have referred to the most ancient inscriptions o f Pithecusae and 
Athens from the eighth century. Thereafter, very early inscriptions 
are found in Thera, Crete, Naxos, Kalymnos, Aegina, Boeotia, Argolis, 
Corinth and Corcyra; and also derived alphabets in Etrutia, Caria 
and Phrygia. 
101. It is widely accepted that the Greek alphabet derived from the 
Phoenician alphabet: the ancients knew this, c f Herodotus V 58, 
and Tacitus, Annates X I 14, (poivucriioc 'letters' in an inscription in 
Teos (Schwyzer 710.B.37) and the verb rcoiviKd^ev 'write' in Crete, c f 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
65 
SEG 26.631.A5 (there are related forms). In effect, it is very close 
to the Phoenician alphabet, which we know from the thirteenth-cen­
tury inscription in the sepulchre o f King Ahiram o f Byblos. There 
is some debate regarding the relation between this alphabet and the 
cuneiforme alphabet o f Ugarit, which was created in the fourtheenth 
century. As far as the date is concerned, most authors incline towards 
some point in the eighth century, although an older date is often 
still proposed. 
It is also believed that the Greek alphabet differs from the Phoenician 
in that it derives the five vowels: a} e> o from the three laryngeals, 
u and i from wau and yod. Another difference is that it possesses only 
one sibilant phoneme. Its most archaic form can also be found in 
the alphabet o f Crete, Thera, Melos and Sikinos, which lacks the 
letters to mark the labial and guttural aspirated occlusives and the 
double letters (\|/ and Q, which were introduced by later alphabets; 
likewise, some o f them lack the marking o f the quantities of the e 
and o, have other uses o f double consonants, etc. T h e Ionic and 
western alphabets are the most evolved. 
In any case, it is clear that the Greek alphabet was created by a 
speaker o f a dialect that was not psilotic and did not lack p. It is 
also evident that it was diffused through Crete in various directions, 
among others, by way o f Corinth, towards the west. It seems that 
the variants o f Eretria and Aegina arrived in Attica and were con­
taminated there. 
102. The principal work on the history of the alphabet is by L. H. Jeffrey 
1990 (2nd ed.): it proposes that the Greek alphabet was taken from the 
Phoenician in Al-Mma, as cited previously. Other proposals are Rhodes 
and Crete or Rhodes through Crete, or Crete proper (Rh. Carpenter in 
G. Pfohl (ed.) 1968a, pp. 1-39, M. Falkner, ibid., pp. 143-171, M. Guarducci, 
ibid., pp. 197-213); M. G. Amasdasi 1991 refers more vaguely to Syria 
and Asia Minor. Cyprus (where Greeks and Phoenicians coexisted in Citium) 
seems to be excluded because the syllabary continued to be used there (but 
there are those who think that it was precisely the mark of the vowels in 
this syllabary that was the source of inspiration for the creator of the 
alphabet). 
With regard to the date, the eighth century is generally considered the 
most probable, as sustained by Carpenter and Jeffrey in the works cited 
and by R. Wachter 1989; also, I. B. S. Iselin 1991 and M. G. Amadasi 
1991. J. de Hoz (forthcoming) adheres to the end of the ninth century. 
However, there are those who propose older dates, even the twelfth century 
or earlier: for instance, B. L. Ullmann (in G. Pfohl 1968b, p. 40 ff.) and 
J. Naveh 1982. On the Ugarit and Phoenician alphabets, see O. Eissfeldt 

66 
CHAPTER FIVE 
(in G. Pfohl 1968b, pp. 214 ff and 221 ff.), M. Dietrich and O. Lorentz 
1991, and A. R. Millard 1991. 
It is also generally accepted that the alphabet was acquired first and fore­
most for trade purposes, although the data available is of a later date: mate­
rials such as lead, wooden tablets, ostraca, etc. were used. But B. B. Powell 
1991 thinks that its primary purpose, in view of the frequency of verse epi­
grams in archaic times, was to record Homeric poetry. See, in contrast, R. 
Schmidt, Kratylos 37, 1992, p. 69 ff A secondary use, such as that of sepul­
chral, honorific and even ludic inscriptions, was followed by a tertiary use: 
by the aoidoi. 
The subject of the discovery of the vowels by the Greeks can be con­
sidered as completely elucidated. Various factors contributed to this: the 
knowledge of the marking of vowels in Cyprian and Ugaritic; the need to 
write syllables of the type VC-, nonexistant in Phoenician, and the non­
existence, in turn, of the glottal attack (the laryngeals) in Greek; and the 
existence of certain Phoenician inscriptions which transcribe Luwian names 
using aleph and wow to mark the vowels and initial % aleph and yod to indi­
cate vowels of internal syllables. The road ahead was prepared, there was 
a need and there were models. For more details on the adaptation, see C f 
Brixhe 1991b. 
103. T h e fact is, as soon as the practice o f trade and politics was 
resumed, when intellectual life began to flourish and the diverse 
dialects were almost fully constituted, the alphabet spread very quickly, 
enabling the recording and archiving o f commercial transactions as 
well as of political and private documents and literary works, although 
the methods o f oral diffusion did not disappear. This was a huge 
advantage for the development o f Greek life, language and culture, 
and for its diffusion among neighbouring peoples, Greece itself, and 
indeed the whole Greek world. 
For a second time, the Greeks, in this relaunching of their his­
tory (more dynamic and with a greater projection than the first) 
adopted a graphic system from a foreign people. But they would use 
it in a more general way and not just as an administrative instru­
ment. This would enable scholars o f the Greek language to gain 
direct access to the geographical and literary dialects through inscrip­
tions and the manuscript tradition. Indeed, the indirect knowledge, 
through H o m e r and the dialects o f the first millennium, of a dialect 
from the second millennium is possible thanks to this script. 
T h e dialects o f so many peoples would become alphabetised as a 
result, at this point or during the Hellenistic period, thus opening 
the way for the diffusion of Greek language and culture. 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
67 
Inscriptions, literature and hellenisation 
104. Let us make a few observations on the inscriptions (including 
graffiti) and the literary texts that were produced or created from 
this point on, from which we obtain our knowledge of Greek lan­
guage and culture. Here,Kve are dealing with private or public texts; 
whether in prose, in the local alphabets and dialects, in verse, or in 
the poetic languages of Greece (literary prose dates from the sixth 
century, as we know). These texts have been preserved in manu­
scripts and inscriptions on various materials (stone, ceramic, metal, 
wood, even ivory; the oldest papyri are from the fourth century). 
Yet the manuscript tradition does not shed any light on the official 
documentation that was kept in the archives, only the inscriptions 
are able to do so. A n d there is an almost complete lack of data on 
the economic use o f the new script. 
It must be stressed that the Phoenician inscriptions (followed by 
the Punic inscriptions) offered a model for the Greek ones, not just 
with regard to letters but also the writing of the text. A m o n g the 
oldest are the sepulchral inscriptions such as that o f King Ahiram, 
expository inscriptions by kings about their wars and exploits (for 
example, king Mesha o f Moab), dedicatory inscriptions such as that 
found on the bronze helmet discovered in Cyprus; and others. T h e 
Greeks dispensed not only with the syllabic scripts but also with the 
use o f mud or brick tablets. The introduction o f parchment 
com­
pletes the picture. 
Books such as that by Jeffrey 
1990, previously cited, and by 
Guarducci 1967, not to mention the large collections, illustrate the 
enormous diffusion o f Greek inscriptions, their numeric increase from 
century to century and the immense variety of their content. Individuals 
could engrave sepulchral epitaphs, dedications to the gods, there are 
inscriptions denoting ownership (such as the Pithecusae cup), inscrip­
tions of artists, lovers, and we find school excercises or simple lists 
o f names such as those of the Greek soldiers who engraved their 
names in the colossi of Abu Simbel around 668 BC. 
However, public inscriptions from cities or temples are more fre­
quent: these include all kinds of lists (of archons, priests, ephori, war 
casualties, etc.; inventories of temples, etc.) decrees and laws, con­
cessions of honours and priviledges, texts relating to sport competi­
tions, to festivals or sacrifices, or to the erection o f monuments, 
official letters and even chronicles such as that o f Lindos or the 
Marmor Parium. 

68 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Cities or individuals could also engrave literary texts, as for exam­
ple Archilochus's passages in a heroon which the people of Paros ded­
icated to him, or Sappho's ostracon. T h e variety o f content increased 
as time went on. 
Cities, sanctuaries, and mere individuals now had an instrument 
with which they could use the Greek language in their daily lives, 
which they could make accessible to people in other cities and ages, 
and to non-Greek peoples too. The utility o f the script accounts for 
its sudden, great success. 
105. However, it is important to note that the use o f the script in 
literature was only gradual. Here, the papyrus had a more impor­
tant role to play, despite the fact that we only have samples from 
the fourth century onwards. But we must assume that, from 
the 
archaic period onwards, it was greatiy used in the private, public 
and literary spheres. 
T o be sure, the book as such did not exist until the fifth century 
and the diffusion o f literature was mainly oral. But private copies 
existed, which were copied for use by aoidoi who recited epic poems 
or by performers o f lyric, including the commensals who sang ele­
gies and skolia in particular. O f course, there is some debate about 
whether H o m e r and Hesiod, in the eighth century, either wrote 
poems or dictated them; in any case, from this point on, writing was 
at the service of the transmission and diffusion o f literature. Homer 
was known everywhere, and elegy and choral lyric were written 
everywhere in the appropriate dialect. 
The best illustration o f this can be found in the inscriptions and 
epigrams in verse, which had such a great diffusion from the very 
start of writing: the two oldest Greek inscriptions, o f Pithecusae and 
Athens as cited, are in verse. A collection such as that of Hansen 
1983, which contains inscriptions in verse from the eighth to the 
fifth century, demonstrates their wide diffusion and abundance. They 
are mainly sepulchral and votive, but also honorific, agonistic, relat­
ing to ownership, constructions or foundations, artists, etc. 
106. From the language perspective, it is important to emphasise 
that inscriptions partly reflect the local dialects, but that, particularly 
in the case o f inscriptions in elegiac distichs, the most numerous by 
far, the international language of elegy of which I have spoken is 
mosdy imposed. 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
69 
The diffusion o f the great dialects (Ionic and Doric, Aeolic in Asia) 
and their local variants, sometimes modified in the colonies, is impor­
tant in the inscriptions. W e know the variants represented by Pam-
phylian, Syracusan or for example the language o f Cyrene, variants 
which are not always ea^y to interpret with respect to origin. 
W e would hardly know o f these variants without the inscriptions, 
for only a few o f the Greek dialects cultivated literature. They were 
languages for daily life and for registering official and private doc­
uments, whose use was thus not much wider than that o f Mycenaean. 
So, the case o f prose inscriptions written in the dialect o f each 
city, and o f inscriptions in literature is different. The latter used, on 
the one hand, the local dialects, which were hardly diffused exter­
nally: the iambi used Ionic (but Solon's is in Attic); Alcman used 
Laconian; Sappho and Alcaeus used Lesbian; Corinna used Boeotian; 
Epicharmus and Sophron used Syracusan, always with a generally 
strong Homeric and literary influence. It was only later, from the 
sixth century onwards, that Ionic prose was created and diffused into 
all regions; and towards the end o f the fifth century, Attic prose. 
Yet, the world o f literature - which was cultivated in a few cities 
from the end o f the eighth century onwards, and particularly in the 
seventh and sixth centuries — was an international world that prin­
cipally cultivated international languages: the Homeric language, first 
and foremost, which we believe to be an evolution o f the epic lan­
guage o f the previous millennium in Asia Minor; subsequentiy, the 
language of elegy, which contains many Homeric and Ionic elements; 
and the language o f choral lyric, based on Doric, but also very 
Homericised. W e must turn our attention to these languages. 
Thus, it could be said that to a certain extent the linguistic situ­
ation in the Mycenaean period was repeated here. Local dialects 
existed, some o f which at times had a literary cultivation. But inter­
national poetic languages also existed. Poets attended the great fes­
tivals - in Sparta, Delphi, Delos, Athens - or were called to the 
courts o f kings and tyrants - Corinth, Samos, Syracuse - and there 
they sang in these international languages. Poetry contributed to the 
reunification o f the Greek dialects, and also established 
relations 
between the different dialects, thereby making them intelligible. 
107. On Phoenician inscriptions, cf. Rh. Carpenter 1968, previously cited. 
A general overview of Greek inscriptions can be found in the book by 
Jefferey 1990 and also in M. Guarducci 1967 and Hansen 1983. 

70 
CHAPTER FIVE 
For the diffusion of Greek literature, see Adrados 1953b. The script of 
the Homeric text and its oral character is discussed in §§ 140 ff; on oral-
ity in general, among an abundant literature, see J. A. Fernandez Delgado 
1983, W. Kullmann and M. Reichel (eds.) 1990 and E. A. Havelock 1986, 
1990. 
It is important to stress that the alphabet was first used to write down 
local dialects, presenting local variants too. Its use in the international 
diffusion of literature represents a second phase, which gave privilege to 
the alphabets in which the literature was expressed and, of course, to the 
literary languages we have referred to above. 
108. There was a proliferation of Greek inscriptions throughout the 
Mediterranean. Even non-Greek peoples wrote in Greek, while oth­
ers borrowed the Greek alphabet, in a more or less modified form, 
to write their own languages, following the Greek model in every 
way (as regards the type o f inscription, formulas, syntax and certain 
lexicon). 
T o cite the point furthest from Greece and least Hellenised, the 
Iberian peninsula, we find in Ampurias and its surrounding areas 
(Pech M a h o , in France) around the year 500 commercial letters and 
documents written in lead (there is also a defixio) or terracotta, in 
addition to inscriptions o f the private kind (such as a donation) in 
ceramic vases. There are numerous inscriptions on ceramic vases in 
Huelva, Malaga and Alicante, indicating the owner, a dedication or 
other data; and other inscriptions on oil amphoras brought directly 
or indirectly from Attica. 
This is not all. Iberian inscriptions were written in GreekJetters 
(as, similarly, Celtic inscriptions were so written in Gallia). O f course, 
different alphabets or semi-alphabets were created to record Iberian, 
Tartessian and Celto-Iberian, with a great predominance o f Greek 
letters, although this is a complicated topic. The Greeks definitely 
alphabetised Hispania and commercial reasons probably made this 
expansion necessary and inevitable, as in the case of Italy. 
109. See the edition of the Inscriptiones Graecae Antiquissimae Iberiae by 
H. Rodriguez Somolinos 1998b and the article by De Hoz 1970 on Attic 
inscriptions. For the Greco-Iberian inscriptions of Alicante, see the same 
author 1987 (but they correspond to the fourth century). With regard to 
the origins of the scripts of the pre-Roman languages, there is an abun­
dant bibliography, cf a summary in de Hoz 1969, who dates some of these 
back to the eighth century (p. 113), as well as another work of 1979. In 
addition, see the two recent works by the same author, 1991 and 1996, in 
which he places the Phoenician alphabet before the Greek as regards the 
origin of the Hispanic semi-alphabets. 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
71 
110. This is but a minor example o f what was happening through­
out the Mediterranean. There were similar events in Europe and 
Asia. In Phrygia, for instance, inscriptions have been discovered dat­
ing from the eighth century onwards in an alphabet that is derived 
from the Greek, and one notices both Greek influences in Phrygian 
and Phrygian influences in Greek (there is also a trilingual Greek-
Lycian-Aramaic). The same goes for Thracian, for which we have 
inscriptions with Greek letters in gold rings and silver vessels from 
the sixth to fifth centuries BC; for Garian, for which we have inscrip­
tions in a semi-Greek alphabet from the the seventh century onwards; 
and for Lydian, known from the same date, and many others. 
In Sicily and Italy the case is similar. T h e Greek origin o f the 
Etruscan and Latin alphabets is well known; they are believed to be 
independent o f each other, although some think that the Latin alpha­
bet derives from the Etruscan. In any case, we are dealing with 
alphabets of the western kind, taken from the Chalcidians o f Euboea, 
probably in Cumae. The Etruscan alphabet is known to us from the 
seventh century, the Latin alphabet from the sixth century. 
T h e alphabet had become established in Etruria before the arrival 
of the Corinthian Demaratus, father o f the first Etruscan king o f 
R o m e , Tarquinius Priscus (according to ancient sources, Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus, A.R. Ill 46, Livius I 34). Demaratus had arrived 
through Pithecusae, accompanied by three Corinthian craftsmen who 
displayed their art in Italy. Yet, it is not only the Etruscan 
(from 
Etruria) and Latin alphabets that derive from the Greek alphabet o f 
Cumae, but also the Etruscan alphabets o f Campania, the Oscan 
alphabet and the Umbrian. Cf. G. Devoto 1968, p. 89. 
This is but one o f the many examples o f profound Hellenisation 
in Etruria from the seventh century onwards and somewhat later in 
R o m e : from the fifth century onwards, Greek terracotta (or terra­
cotta o f Greek inspiration), Greek cults and Greek words (sometimes 
with an Etruscan influence, such as triumpe, amurca, sporta, persona) are 
found in R o m e . The two languages were penetrated with Greek (In 
the case o f Etruscan, particularly as regards theonyms and the names 
o f heroes, but also c o m m o n names). In Latin, there are Greek bor­
rowings from archaic times: words such as those cited and other old 
borrowings such as camera, gubernare, oleum, Pollux. 
111. For Phrygian, see C. Brixhe in E. Vineis (ed.) 1983, pp. 109-133; for 
Thracian, V. Georgiev 1981, p. I l l ff; for Lycian, G. Neumann in E. 

72 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Vineis (ed.) 1983, pp. 135-151; for Garian, I. J. Adiego 1993 and M. E. 
Giannotta, et al. (eds.) 1994. For the languages of Asia Minor in general, 
G. Neumann 1980 and the corresponding chapters in F. Villar 1996a. On 
the Etruscan alphabet c f G. and L. Bonfante 1985, p. 60 ff., and 
D. Briquel 1991 (where it is considered as being introduced by nobles, as 
an object of prestige); on Latin, F. Sommer, 3rd ed., 1948, p. 23 ff. A large 
series of Greek borrowings in Etruscan can be found in M. Pittau 1994, 
p. 257 ff; for older Greek borrowings in Latin, see §§ 291 ff. Yet there 
are also inscriptions of various pre-Latin languages of Sicily (those of the 
Sicani, Siculi and Elymians) with Greek letters, cf R. Ambrosini 1979, 
1983. 
3. T H E CREATION OF THE GREAT DIALECTS 
Generalities 
112. T h e three dialectal groups known to us as Ionic-Attic, Arcado-
Cyprian and Aeolic were created within EG; W G , which is not part 
o f this group, arrived later and tends to distinguish between Doric 
and N . W . Greek. 
As we have seen, there were differences within this EG, perhaps 
before it entered Greece, but certainly within Greece. Characteristics 
that affected all o f E G or a particular part o f it are reflected in Ion.-
Att. and A r c - C y p . , or in the latter and AeoL Yet these character­
istics did not always affect all o f the dialects within each group, 
although we are uncertain whether this is an old or a more recent 
development. The differences between Doric and N . W . Greet pre­
sent similar problems. 
However, turning our attention to EG, we have said that the char­
acteristics referred to are actually archaisms that have been preserved 
or choices between doublets, and not innovations. Innovations were 
developed and the dialects finished forming themselves in the post-
Mycenaean period, when the Dorian invasion had isolated the cen­
tral nuclei o f these dialects: Attica (but see § 118), Arcadia and 
Thessaly, the regions from which a migration to Asia and 
the 
islands would depart. But they should not be regarded as unitary 
dialects, for we find archaisms, choices and innovations only in parts 
of them. 
As I have repeatedly shown, the attribution of a post-Mycenaean 
origin to the three great dialects has become a general doctrine, 
based on the works o f Porzig and Risch in the 1950s. Garcia R a m o n 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
73 
has made a strong case for Aeolic in particular. I insist that this 
view is correct, but only if one accepts an earlier base, and the start 
of the differentiation in the Mycenaean period. 
The key method for the study o f this 'dialectal genealogy' (for 
both E G and W G , in genpal) lies in demonstrating the ancient sim­
ilarity of the two dialects because they share innovations; the choices 
also have a probationary character, but to a lesser degree. The more 
serious problem is that o f establishing which characteristics are inno­
vations and which are not; in doublets one must also determine 
whether one o f the two forms is an innovation. Furthermore, 
in 
some cases, a relative chronology must be established. 
There has been much progress in this field as regards the estab­
lishment o f relative and absolute chronologies. But doubts remain, 
as in the case o f the secondary extension of the isoglosses. 
113. In my small book La dialectologia griega como fuente para el estudio de las 
migraciones indoeuropeas en Grecia, published for the first time in 1952 (2nd ed. 
1997), I still followed the old theory of Kretschmer and Tovar, perhaps 
due to a traditional inertia, which proposed that Ionic, the most evolved 
dialect, was the first to penetrate Greece. However, I established two prin­
ciples which I believe have been essential to all subsequent investigation: 
the existence of an EG with three main dialects and of a W G (in addition 
to the criteria of supporting this investigation on the different probationary 
value of the innovations, choices and archaisms, and in the chronology). 
This book is at the base of subsequent investigations, such as those of 
Porzig and Risch, cited previously, and others. Sometimes I am frequently 
cited, as in R. Schmitt 1977, p. 125, E. Risch 1979, p. 94, and A. Lopez Eire 
and J. Mendez Dosuna; sometimes not at all, as in W. Porzig and E. Risch 
in the works cited, and J. Chadwick 1956, who nevertheless follows my 
doctrine. In the prologue to a re-edition of my book, cited above, I pro­
vide the proper base for the whole theory of innovations and choices, and 
trace the history of the investigation. At times, surprising discoveries are 
made: R. Hodot 'discovers' (in E. Crespo 1993, p. 207) that av and 
KE 
coexisted in ancient times, something which I have been saying since 1952. 
In the prologue cited, I also draw attention to my criticism of certain 
modern currents of thought that attempt to undermine the genealogical 
study of dialects. Although a very detailed and exact study of the data is 
essential, it must be added that without this other study the history of the 
Greek language cannot be written. See also my observations in Adrados 
1994e. 
The chronology of the dialects has been examined by A. Bartonek 1979 
and 1987 in particular, as well as A. Lopez Eire 1977, 1989a, etc. But 
today, practically every study on these subjects is based on chronology, 
which is essentially linguistic in nature; the archeological arguments (the 
lack of Dorian remains in Attica, etc.) and those of ancient tradition are a 
secondary support. 

74 
CHAPTER FIVE 
For the evolution of the studies on Greek dialectology, see Adrados 1998b; 
also R. A. Santiago 1997. For tendencies that insist on the importance of 
description - that is, sociolinguistic description (which is relevant, but not 
if it involves a hypercritique of the genealogical study), cf M. Bile 1990a 
and b, and Gl. Brixhe 1990a and b. The distance that is sometimes pro­
posed between the Greek of the second and the Greek of the first millen­
nium, and between Mycenaean and subsequent dialects is excessive. 
114. Certainly, problems persist with regard to the three great dialects 
of E G , not just regarding to what extent they were prefigured in 
second-millennium E G and to what extent they were once unitary. 
There are also problems that affect W G . 
O n e problem is the origin of certain differences within the dialects. 
Some scholars even deny A r c - C y p . ever existed, and there are diver­
gent opinions regarding the relation between Doric and N . W . Greek. 
With respect to Aeolic, Lesbian sometimes coincides with Ionic, 
Boeotian and Thessalian (or parts o f them) with D o r i c Are these 
recent phenomena through a secondary diffusion o f isoglosses, or, in 
some cases, a result of the superimposition of peoples? This has also 
been proposed with regard to Cretan Doric, which seems to have 
retained Achaean characteristics; 
and with regard to 
Pamphylian, 
where today the existence of Doric characteristics are 
nevertheless 
denied, see § 120. 
Characteristics which are considered to be Doric may be found 
outside these dialects. The facts must be examined carefully because 
sometimes, as in the case of Pamphylian, we are dealing with archaisms 
or coincidences in the choice which may not be related but inde­
pendent o f each other. It serves to recall the theoretically possible 
Doricisms in Homer. 
O f course, this makes the definition o f the four great dialects 
difficult, as does the establishment of their ancient limits and of pos­
sible modern movements o f borders. 
In any case, we will schematically divide the study o f the dialects 
into three parts, which follow a more thematic than chronological 
scheme: first, the differentiation of Ionic-Attic, Arcado-Cyprian and 
Pamphylian, 
Aeolic and Doric; second, the characteristics 
which 
helped to bring them closer together at some point; third, the new 
differentiations. The first part is studied in this section on 'The cre­
ation o f the great dialects'; the other two parts are considered in the 
following sections. 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
75 
115. A very complete overview (though somewhat outdated today) of Greek 
dialectology and the particular aspects cited can be found in R. Schmitt 
1977 and J. L. Garcia Ramon (1999). The great traditional treatises are 
by F. Bechtel 1921-1924, A. Debrunner-A. Scherer 1969 and, within Greek 
grammar in general, E. Schwyzer 1939 ff. We will provide the most recent 
bibliography of note with regard to each dialect. 
The reader should not expect a detailed study in this book. This pur­
pose is served by the general treatises of dialectology, which not only pro­
vide the relevant data but also the sources and bibliography, in addition 
to historical interpretations. Here, we are interested in outlining the char­
acteristics of the linguistic history of Greece, with its successive processes 
of dialectal differentiation and unification and the interplay of the spoken 
and literary dialects peculiar to it. 
Ionic-Attic 
116. Ionic-Attic occupied Attica, the islands, the coast of Asia Minor 
facing Greece and the colonies of the cities situated there. It is known 
to us from ancient inscriptions o f the eighth and seventh 
centuries 
BC, but no doubt it originates from an earlier date. It continued the 
old Mycenaean dominion in Athens and in parts o f Asia Minor, such 
as Miletus. 
Athens possessed a Mycenaean palace in the Acropolis, but myth 
presents the city as a vassal of Minos. It must have been more impor­
tant in the Mycenaean period itself and, judging by the archaeo­
logical remains, especially in the post-Mycenaean and geometric 
period; a vase from this period contains a very ancient Greek alpha­
betic inscription, to which I referred earlier. There is no trace, whether 
in archaeology, myth, or history, o f a Dorian invasion. Isolated from 
the Dorians, with w h o m they did not even share a c o m m o n border 
(Boeotia was Aeolic territory, another derivation of para-Mycenaean), 
Athens developed its own dialect. Athens was also isolated from 
Peloponnesian para-Mycenaean, from which Arcado-Cyprian de­
scended. Thus, what could have constituted the beginnings of a para-
Mycenaean dialect c o m m o n to Attica and the Peloponnese became 
fragmented. 
117. However, the dialectal complex did not just extend to Attica 
but also to the islands and Asia Minor, Following Sakellariou, I have 
already discussed the great emigration to Asia by the Greeks from 
the Peloponnese, who had been invaded by the Dorians. Yet Solon, 
as we saw, describes Athens as 'the oldest land of Ionia' and Herodotus 
(VTI 2) refers to emigration from Attica to the Asian Ionia. But 

76 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Herodotus himself depicts other traditions regarding the Ionians who 
departed to Asia from central Greece and the Peloponnese: Orcho-
menus, Euboea, Messenia, Phocis, etc. In the Peloponnese, toponyms 
and various mythical names can be found that recall the name of 
the Ionians. 
The fact is, there is a series o f innovations of Ionic-Attic, partic­
ularly phonetic ones, which were transmitted by sea from some point 
and were not always totally consolidated in the seventh century. 
According to A. Bartonek 1977, p. 121 ff, they only became diffused 
from 900 BC onwards. 
A list of the main innovations and choices can be found in Adrados 
1976b, p. 272 s., R. Schmitt 1977 or in A. Lopez Eire 1977 and 
1989: a > r| (incomplete in the Ionic o f the islands in the sixth and 
seventh centuries), ephelcistic -v, lengthenings o f the type -eou- > 
-81JLI-, vocalism and the prothesis of eiKocu, PO\)A,OLXOCI, etc., the ei, ox> 
lengthening before a sonant plus f, the hiatus abbreviation 
and 
metathesis o f quantity, fiueec, and v\i&ec, (and contractions), exepoc;, in 
addition to the innovations that the dialect shares with others. 
In this way, the Ionic-Attic dialect was formed on a c o m m o n para-
Mycenaean base but with innovations that became diffused by sea 
and which we cannot date before the ninth century BC. 
Nevertheless, apart from the differences in Eretria and Oropus 
(see § 118) there are also differences between Ionic and Attic. The 
latter dialect preserved archaisms such as £6v, KQ\ZI> 
the aspiration 
and the dual, and there are choices which have been brought to 
the very end (xeaaocpeq, iepoc,, the metathesis o f quantity). Also, its 
own innovations: the return o f n to a after p, i, e; the G. sg. 
veavioi), certain innovations in the lexicon, etc. A progressive differen­
tiation undoubtedly took place, perhaps in an archaic phase, within 
Attica (cf. A. Lopez Eire 1972-1973 and 1985). Also, Attic shares 
some innovations with neighbouring dialects, as in the creation of 
re, pp. 
118. On the ancient traditions relating to the origin of the Ionians, cf 
A. Tovar 1994, p. 289 ff. Bonfante 1984, p. 205 states that Homer 'hides' 
the name of the Ionians (he only mentions them once, in relation to Attica), 
as well as that of the Dorians (he also mentions them only once, in rela­
tion to Crete). 
On Ionic-Attic, in addition to the bibliography cited, cf A. Lopez Eire 
1971 (with J. Mendez Dosuna), 1972-1973, 1984a, 1985, 1987b and 1989, 
M. Negri 1981a and 1982a and b, and W. S. Allen 1987: different con-

THE 
FIRST MILLENNIUM 
77 
tacts must be added to its innovations. Elsewhere, there are those who see 
Ionic-Attic as a synthesis of two dialects rather than a differentiation. For 
the elimination in Attic of the common lexicon of other dialects, cf Adrados 
1953a and 1957. There is a clear relation between Attica, the islands, and 
the Asiatic continent in archaic times, symbolised by the role of the Delos 
sanctuary (from the seventh century onwards, it is believed) and the Attic 
colonisation of Troas (from the sixth century onwards). 
Naturally, the problem of Lesbian should not be forgotten, as well as 
that of the subdialects (Eretria, Oropus) and of the isoglosses with central 
Greece (we must return to this, in particular). Also, of course, there is the 
problem of whether there were different dialects within Ionic; and of the 
'Atticisation' of Ionic, which led to the creation of koine. There is no trace 
of differences within Attic, as a result of the strict unification of the terri­
tory under Gleisthenes (and before him, mythically, under Theseus). 
See, for Aeolic in Asia, C. J. Ruijgh 1995-1996, who postulates the exis­
tence of Ionic influences in Aeolic; for example, the inf. in -vcu would be 
due to a contamination with the inf. in -uevca. 
Arcado-Cyprian and Pamphylian 
119. Clearly, Arcadian was left isolated in the centre of the Peloponnese 
by the Dorian invasion, and before it was entirely carried out, peo­
ples from the Peloponnese settled in Cyprus, where Mycenaean set­
dements had already been established; and, no doubt, in Pamphylia, 
judging by similarities in the dialects. This is supported by myth, 
which present the hero Teucer, founder o f Salamis o f Cyprus, going 
to Cyprus. Perhaps this dialect extended to Rhodes and Crete before 
the arrival o f the Dorians (cf. §§ 131 f ) . 
The 
existence o f an Arcado-Cyprian dialect group, though dis­
puted at times, is generally accepted; so too is its link to the group 
that also included Ionic-Attic, which has been discussed. 
Aside from the archaisms, innovations, and choices c o m m o n to 
other dialects, we can provide some specific Arcado-Cyprian mate­
rial along with the characteristics that go back to EG. I would like 
to recall archaisms such as the preservation o f the p or of the ver­
bal desinence -to(i); choices such as the names in -nc, (instead o f 
-euq), the Cyp. pronoun o-ni/Arc. 
ove, e t c But, above all, innova­
tions such as £v > iv, -o > -v (also in Pamphylian), the sibilant 
solution of the labiovelar before the vowels e, i, dvoc > 6v, the con­
junctions and prepositions po-se/noq, 
ka-selK&C,. 
O f course, this also 
applies to archaisms in only one dialect (Cyp. pt-, G. sg. -o, o-ne, 
dual in A r c ) or innovations also in only one dialect ( A r c -Kpeinc,, 
Cyp. 
alXoq). 

78 
CHAPTER FIVE 
In fact, the innovations o f Arcado-Cyprian are not so numerous 
compared to those o f Ionic-Attic, which are more conspicuous too. 
It often hesitates where the latter chooses in a decisive way: for 
example, in the aor. and fut. o f verbs in -£co (Ion.-At. -aa, -aco, here 
sometimes occurs). Arcado-Cyprian is a relegated dialect, which 
did not have a literary development and even adopted an archaic 
script in Cyprus, the Cyprian syllabary. Indeed, Ionic-Attic was the 
dialect that stood out from the rest and made its mark, whereas 
Arcado-Cyprian can be seen as the archaic remnant that remained 
isolated, although it does contain some characteristics o f its own. 
Ionic-Attic, with a series o f ancient c o m m o n characteristics, sep­
arated from the rest, and in its Attic variety came to form the cen­
tre o f the Greek language. 
120. For Arc.-Cyp., see, in addition to the bibliography cited, A. Lillo 1979, 
who (like A. Lopez Eire and J. Mendez Dosuna 1971 and myself since 
1952) considers it a derivative of the group that it formed part of at an 
earlier date, together with Ionic-Attic (as we have seen, for some authors 
there are pre-forms of both dialects in the second millennium). J. Chadwick 
1988 and E. Risch 1988 tend to understate - excessively, I believe - the 
links between Arcadian and Cyprian. 
With respect to Pamphylian as a derivative of the same group, but with 
later elements, I have already cited the works of A. Lopez Eire and A. 
Lillo 1982 and 1983, and of M. Garcia Teijeiro 1984. Pamphylian may 
preserve certain archaisms alien to Arc.-Cyp., such as -ti. Possibly, it comes 
from an area of the Mycenaean world related to the dialect that we call 
Mycenaean and with the later Arcado-Cyprian dialect; but it does not 
appear to be influenced by Doric or Aeolic, the coincidences with these 
are archaisms. However, in the phase in which it is known to us, it does 
contain influences from the koine. 
Aeolic 
121. As we have seen, the Aeolic dialects — Thessalian, 
Boeotian 
and Lesbian—continue various isoglosses o f the Mycenaean period, 
some o f which they share with what would later become the Ionic-
Attic dialects, and some which are their own. However, it is difficult 
to establish a chronology for Aeolic, or resolve the problem o f its 
partial coincidence with Doric. 
Before we examine this, let it suffice to say that Boeotia (Thebes, 
Orchomenus, etc.) as well as Phthia and Iolcos, in Thessaly, have a 
strong Mycenaean tradition, as attested by archaeology and myth; 
and that tradition recounts h o w the conquest o f Lesbos was under-

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
79 
taken by Achilles from Phthia. There are strong links between the 
dialect o f Lesbos and that of eastern Thessaly, Pelasgiotis, and also 
between the dialects o f Thessaly and Boeotia. 
It seems that the centre o f this dialect was in Thessaly, where, 
according to myth, King Aeolus ruled and where the name of Aeolia, 
given to the Asian coast in which this dialect was spoken, originates. 
Thucydides I 12 writes that the Boeotians were expelled by the 
Thessalians who, according to Herodotus V I I 176, had come from 
Thesprotia (which Thucydides III 102 calls Aeolia), in the N . W . 
Balkans. Were the Thessalians Greek Dorians, later pardy Aeolicised, 
as proposed by R . Schmitt 1977, p. 74? Did the Boeotians bring a 
second-millennium dialect to Boeotia that was more or less evolved 
in Thessaly, and did they superimpose themselves onto the Mycenaean 
dominion o f that region? O r was it, in contrast, the Dorians who 
superimposed themselves onto the Aeolian dominion of Thessaly (in 
the W . , Thessaliotis) and Boeotia (especially in the S.W.)? O r did 
these isoglosses only penetrate by peaceful means? 
W e will return to this, showing the great diversity that exists within 
and among these dialects, resulting, no doubt, from both external 
influences and the absence o f a political unity between these regions. 
However, there are some isoglosses that unify them, although it 
remains doubtful to what extent they result from a Mycenaean dialect 
in the whole area or from the modified version o f the same appear­
ing in Thessaly and later exported to Boeotia and Lesbos. 
122. As I have explained, citing the book by J. L. Garcia R a m o n 
1975, for this author and others Aeolic has a post-Mycenaean ori­
gin. Personally, I have dealt with this topic in depth in Adrados 
1976b and I have discussed it earlier (§ 39). I believe that, despite 
the existence of recent characteristics (although most o f them are 
peculiar to the different dialects), the principal c o m m o n feature found 
in Aeolic is that of the ancient isoglosses consisting o f archaisms or 
choices, whether belonging to the whole of E G or only to these 
dialects (or one of them). 
Sometimes, these Aeolic characteristics are also found in H o m e r 
and/or in Mycenaean, and they are not Aeolic in these sources: they 
are simply c o m m o n to some Aeolic archaisms and choices. There 
are also archaisms c o m m o n to Doric, as well as c o m m o n charac­
teristics, of an older date it seems, with Ionic-Attic and Arcadian, 
as has been mentioned; other, recent c o m m o n characteristics unite 
one dialect with a part of Doric or Attic. 

80 
CHAPTER FIVE 
I consider the characteristics c o m m o n to all of Aeolic, which are 
rare, to be almost entirely made up of archaisms or ancient, Mycenaean 
choices: I cannot repeat the argumentation in detail, so I refer the 
reader to my previous publication as cited. These characteristics are 
mainly: the vocalisation op, oA,; the choice of -Lxev as desinence of 
the 1st pL; and the patronymic in -10c,. They are characteristics that 
put Aeolic and Doric in opposition, and approximate, according to 
each case, Aeolic to E G in general, or to Mycenaean or Homer. 
Archaisms and choices, which could be common, are added only 
in certain dialects: athematic instead o f thematic inflection in the 
verb (more or less diffused in Aeolic, as in A r c - G y p . and Homer), 
thematic inf. -fxev (eastern Thes., Boeot., Horn.), ice (Thes. and Lesb.), 
neda (Boeot., Lesb. and Thes., but here also uexd), -(pi (Thes.), nxoXiq 
(Thes.), -o(o, ov-/av-, u£CT7io8i (eastern Thes.), ove (Thes. and A r c -
Gyp.), ev + A c . (Boeot., Thes.). 
123. With regard to innovations, I have considered those o f the sec­
ond millennium: *k°e > Tie-, pe > pi, the perf. part, in -OVT-, and 
the D . pi. in -eoor (going far beyond Aeolic); see my argumentation 
in Adrados 1976b, p. 261 ff., and for the last form also J. J. Moralejo 
1984 and P. Wathelet 1991. There are also partial innovations, such 
as the evolution o f the nasal or liquid group with s or y > gemi­
nate (Thes., Lesb.), -vx- > -v0- (Thes., Boeot.). Not to mention those 
of the different dialects. 
In other words, during the Mycenaean period the Aeolic dialects 
had already either accepted the archaisms and choices o f the -pest of 
E G or adopted new ones. Later on, they introduced some c o m m o n 
characteristics through archaism, choice or innovation. But it was 
never a matter o f a perfectly defined dialect, whether in relation to 
other dialects or internally. 
124. Specifically, the Doric innovations (see § 125) did not penetrate 
A e o l i c Certain characteristics c o m m o n to Doric and all or part o f 
Aeolic (-xi, -GG-, *^el-, inf.-jiev in athematics, the conditional ai, spir-
itus asper, ev + A c , etc) are but c o m m o n archaisms (although they 
could have been introduced secondarily by Dorian peoples or Dorian 
isoglosses). I have proposed this hypothesis as being the most prob­
able due to the fact that the real innovations of Doric did not pen­
etrate Aeolic (although much earlier, in Adrados 1952, I had referred 
to transition dialects). 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
81 
In conclusion, a very divided Aeolic dialect was created on the 
foundations o f para-Mycenean, whether through developments in 
Boeotia and Thessaly or through developments in Thessaly and later 
diffusion. It was simultaneously related and in opposition to the rest 
of the dialects descended from East Greek. 
These dialects are known almost exclusively through inscriptions, 
except for the case of Lesbian and recent Boeotian (Corinna). For 
reasons that are not entirely clear, a part of these dialects are close 
to Doric (Boeotian and Thessalian o f the Thessaliotis) or to Ionic 
(Lesbian). 
The Doric dialects 
125. Once the reality o f the Dorian invasion has been established, 
as it has been in this volume, and once the type o f Greek language 
that it brought with it has been defined as an archaic Greek, little 
remains to be said about the Doric dialects. It is clear that if there 
is a coincidence with H o m e r in TOI, -XI, euiv, e t c or with others 
with different dialects based on the archaism, this is only a reflection 
o f the c o m m o n preservation of an archaism, and nothing else. The 
main problem is whether Doric as such and the so-called N . W . 
Greek (from Phocian to Elean) are secondary fragmentations 
within 
Greece or whether they are a product of older differentiations. 
A. Bartonek 1972 attempted to demonstrate this for a few cases. 
But the majority view (E. Rich 1985, A. Lopez Eire and J. Mendez 
Dosuna 1982, J. Mendez Dosuna 1985, and various o f my own pub­
lications) inclines towards the contrary thesis. 
Indeed, the innovations o f these dialects are rare: euioc,, euiv, 
a\)xoaai)x6v, xfjvoc,, the word order in caxlqiax, the generalisation o f 
in the fut. and aor. of the verbs in -£co (a choice), perhaps the 
act. voice of the pas. fut. (Cret. dvaypacprioei), the so-called Doric 
fut. Sometimes, there are problems regarding the origin o f an inno­
vation, as in the case of the D . pi. -eooi (Doric and Aeolic dialects). 
There are also very clear and emphatic examples of choices in 
the Doric dialects, as compared with EG, no doubt made outside 
Greece: des. 1st p f 
-JLLEC;, inf. -uev, 
K C C ; other choices leave traces o f 
the least favoured form, as for example uexd, 68e, rcoxi, *g°els, at. 
The N . W . dialects sometimes created clear differentiations, 
with 
innnovations such as those o f Elean or Laconian. They were devel­
oped within Greece, and the same surely applies to those of N . W . 

82 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Greek: characteristics such as -G9 > GT, ep > ocp in addition to others 
that invaded Aeolic (D. sg. them. -01, the same and the D . pi. athem. 
-oi<; in Boeot.). 
126. It should be noted that the arrival of the Dorians gave rise to 
three different linguistic situations: 
(a) A clear, sharp linguistic border, proof o f a recent and sec­
ondary encounter: as between Attic and Megarian. 
(b) Phenomena o f the substratum, such as those in Cretan; ear­
lier forms can be seen underlying Doric. 
(c) Permeable borders, whether as a result of invasions or sim­
ple advances o f certain isoglosses (the case o f W . Thes. and 
Boeotian). 
The fact is, the Doric dialects barely had a literary development 
(with exceptions, as we shall see), but the peoples that spoke these 
dialects were artistically and, above all, politically important in rela­
tion to the Ionians. Yet, despite the defeat o f Athens in the Pelopon-
nesian W a r , the city was able to impose its dialect through 
a 
complicated process, thus unifying Greece. 
4. T H E UNIFYING ISOGLOSSES 
127. From the 1950s onwards, it was increasingly demonstrated that, 
along with the differentiating isoglosses o f Greek (of the great dialects 
and, subsequendy, other local dialects), unifying isoglosses began to 
diffuse: between Doric and Ionic-Attic in general, but also broader 
or more reduced isoglosses than these, as well as others that crossed 
local dialectal borders. 
This tension between differentiation and unification 
characterises 
the evolution o f the Greek language from its beginnings. The first 
unifying example is the development, in the languages spoken in 
Greece, o f isoglosses that pardy unified Doric with all or some of 
its rivals. 
This is due to the fact that the c o m m o n existence o f the Greeks, 
in spite o f the brutal chasm caused by the fall o f the Mycenaean 
kingdoms and the Dorian invasion, was slowly restored. I have dis­
cussed h o w the alphabet was diffused almost instantaneously in the 
eighth century, or perhaps earlier. Dorians and Ionians were rivals 
in the founding of colonies and in trade. Ceramic styles, from geo-

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
83 
metric to orientalising and the later ones, reached every point of the 
globe that was accessible to the Greeks. Styles of architecture and 
of sculpture were diffused and influenced each other in a reciprocal 
way. From the eighth century onwards, certain sanctuaries and local 
oracles began to attract a^ll o f the Greeks. Pilgrims, artists and poets 
began to travel, aristocrats visited each other and established close 
relations with each other, thereby uniting families: for example, the 
Alcmseonidae family and the tyrants of Sicyon. Cities began to overflow 
with exiles and metics, and their armies sometimes fought side by 
side: in the Medic Wars, the Peloponnesian Wars, and others. Trade 
too, and so many other things, enabled close relations to develop. 
Then there was literature. Epic was sung everywhere, later iam-
bos, elegy, and lyric, always in languages or dialects penetrated by 
H o m e r and with c o m m o n musical instruments. 
In short, there were generally c o m m o n types of society and pol­
itics, although the solutions attempted often varied. Myth and reli­
gion also had a unifying function. Thus, Greece, despite its divisions, 
confrontations and peculiarities, became a cultural unit which sought 
in vain for a degree of political unity, just like medieval Europe. 
Historical facts and anecdotes point to a very high degree of recip­
rocal intellegibility in the sanctuaries, cities, kings' courts (it serves 
to recall the anecdote about the competition for the wedding of 
Agariste in Sicyon, in Herodotus V I 126 ff), and in other places 
in which various dialects and literary languages were spoken or 
heard. 
128. H o w , in such a situation, could there not be a convergence of 
the dialects, particularly when they contained identical or approxi­
mate forms? Not just literature, but also administrative documents 
demanded some kind of standardisation corresponding to the recip­
rocal approximation of the dialects, since there was a similarity in 
the form and formulas of the documents. 
In the long run, this led to the birth of the international lan­
guages, which culminated in the koine. But, earlier, it had led to the 
diffusion of unifying isoglosses that crossed all the dialects. 
129. M y book o f 1952, p. 45, E. Risch 1955, J. Chadwick 1956 and 
the later bibliography (among others, Adrados 1976b, p. 251, and 
1984a, p. 236; A. Lopez Eire and J. Mendez Dosuna 1984) concur 
with the following: the existence o f a series of characteristics 
com­
mon to Doric and E G (and sometimes only to Ion.-Att.) that can 

84 
CHAPTER FIVE 
only be attributed to recent innovations or choices. Dates around 
1000 BC have been proposed. 
For instance, the following characteristics were chosen: oep (not op) 
in Ion.-At. and Dor., the derivatives o f *ens> -TOU not -TOI (this choice 
reaches AeoL, not Arc.-Cyp.), the types -evq and -68e (the same 
observation applies), the thematic conjugation o f the denominatives 
(as in Ion.-At.), etc. Apart from penetrations in the border zone of 
AeoL, the part o f E G which Doric most easily made contact with 
was Ion-At. (and less frequently, Arc.-Cyp.). W e cannot determine 
exactly through which route this occurred, but it could have been 
a maritime route or through coexistence in the international world 
that was being created. It is significant that the same date is attrib­
uted to innovations that created inner fragmentations within each of 
the three great dialects. Included were innovations that crossed bor­
ders and created isoglosses shared by dialects that were located in 
close proximity to each other: the -TT- of Attic and Boeotian, the 
fjvGov o f Doric o f the Peloponnese 
in Arcadia and Delphi, the 
a 
before ae in Doric, Aeolic and Boeotian, etc.: I studied these and 
other examples in Adrados 1952. In addition, there are the Aeolicisms 
of Asian Ionic, derivatives from the bilingualism of the speakers of 
these languages. Cf. M .
a P. Hualde 1997. 
O f course, sometimes there are doubts, for instance, about the 
relation between Doric, on the one hand, and Boeotian and Thessalian, 
on the other; or regarding the proposals by Porzig in favour of bor­
rowings from Ionic to Lesbian (-TI > -or, etc,, npoq; c f against this, 
A. Lopez Eire 1978b, p. 465, and J. J. Moralejo 
1996). Doubts 
increase in cases where there is a wider diffusion of the isoglosses, 
such as the D . pi. in -eaor and the evolution o f -pa- > -pp-, which 
I discussed in my book of 1952. 
It should be noted that physical contact, as it were, between the 
dialects is not essential for the diffusion o f isoglosses: one has to take 
travel culture into account, as well as relations in general, politics 
and the epigraphic models. 
5. SeCONDARY DIFFERENCES 
130. Along with the unifying currents, particularising currents also 
existed in Greece. As we have seen, neither E G nor W G were per­
fectly defined and unitary dialects; nor, generally speaking, were 

THE FIRST MILLENNIUM 
85 
Ionic-Attic, Arcado-Cyprian, Aeolic, or Doric. The differences became 
more marked as time went by, when the different dialects emigrated 
to the other side of the sea and when all kinds o f oppositions and 
confrontations emerged (Ionians, then Athenians, and Dorians; within 
these, Spartans and Argjves, etc.). It can be said that in general 
terms, the most important differences occurred after the expansion 
of the Ionic-Doric isoglosses around the year 1000; but general rules 
cannot be provided. 
In places with highly organised states, such as Athens, Corinth or 
Sparta, dialectal units tended to form which, in turn, tended to 
differentiate 
themselves strongly from their neighbours. W h e n this 
was not the case, internal differences emerged: as in Boeotia, Thessaly 
in particularly, but also in Crete and other parts. The existence of 
a c o m m o n dialect has even been the object of debate, as in the case 
of Saronican. At any rate, Greece became fragmented into a mul­
titude of more or less differentiated dialects, with all kinds of tran­
sitions. They tended to be written in different alphabets. As we have 
seen, most of these dialects never became literary dialects, they were 
mainly used for internal, colloquial and official purposes. 
The whole subject of dialectal fragmentation, which accompanied 
the diffusion of the unifying isoglosses, has often been the subject o f 
great discussion, 
131. Chronology is one of the problems: determining whether N . W . 
Greek is differentiated 
secondarily from Doric, within Greece, or 
whether some differential characteristics came from outside of Greece. 
As I have noted, some scholars (A. Lopez Eire and A. Negri) believe 
that Attic and Ionic were two dialects that later unified, which is 
the opposite o f what one would normally think. I have also discussed 
Pamphylian. Take the doubts regarding the language o f Oropus, a 
place in Attica affected by Attic, Eretrian and Boeotian influences: 
to what extent are the Eretrian characteristics old or a product o f 
recent contacts? This is no doubt the case of dialectal 'mixtures' as 
in the Doric region of Asia Minor. 
This brings us to the subject o f dialectal substrata, which tend to 
differentiate certain dialects (approximating them, certainly, to oth­
ers). There are conflicting opinions regarding Doric elements in 
Boeotian and Thessalian and Ionic elements in Lesbian (cf. §§ 121 
f. and 132); and also regarding Mycenaean or Achaean elements, as 
the case may be, apparently unquestionable, in certain parts o f 

86 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Crete; I would like to add the Lesbianisms o f Ionic in 
Smyrna, 
Phocaea, Erithrae and Chios, and, allegedly, Cyrene. Nevertheless, 
there is a dominant scepticism today with respect to the Ionic ele­
ments (or Achaean elements, as we would say today) in the Doric 
dialect o f the Peloponnese, as proposed by A. Tovar 1944, but per­
haps it is worth restating the question. 
It is impossible to examine these topics in any depth here, I only 
wish to mention them. The influece o f non-Greek languages would 
have to be added, as in the Ionic o f Hipponax of Ephesus, and one 
would have to show that, due to our limited sources, our knowledge 
o f not only the history o f the dialects, but also of the dialects them­
selves, is very 
fragmentary. 
T h e case of Ionic demonstrates this most effectively. There is a 
statement by Herodotus I 142 that the Ionic of Asia was divided 
into four dialects: but this is not confirmed by literature or the inscrip­
tions, where we only find small differences due to archaism or choice 
and a few minimal innovations in Chios and Erithrae, and others 
in Chios and Miletus. O r had a c o m m o n written language already 
been created? Yet, we come across differences between Ionic of Asia, 
o f the islands and, naturally, Attic and Euboean. 
132. I will not touch upon the subject of the Doric (or supposedly Doric) 
elements of Thessalian and Boeotian, the Ionic elements of Lesbian, or the 
subject of Pamphylian. 
For the dialectal fragmentation in Thessaly, see R. van der Velde 1924 
and J. L. Garcia Ramon 1987; for Saronican (which is questioned), M. E. 
Perez Molina 1986; for the problems of Cretan, E. Rizzi 1981, "Si. Bile 
1988, I. Hajnal 1987 and 1988, Y. Duhoux 1988, C. Brixhe 1991a; for 
those of Lesbian, J. J. Moralejo 1996, C.J. Ruijgh 1995-96; for those of 
Cyrene, A. Striano 1987 (who questions the substratum); for those of Euboean 
and Oropus, M. L. del Barrio 1987, 1988, 1994; for the Doric of Asia, 
W. Blumel 1993; for the subject of the Ionic dialect of Asia, K. Stiiber 
1996, M. P. Hualde 1997. 
Also of useful reference are: for Aeolic, W. Blumel 1982 and R. Hodot 
1990a; for Arcadian, A. Lillo 1979, L. Dubois 1983 and C. Cosani 1989; 
for western Argolic, P. Fernandez Alvarez 1981; for N.W. Doric, J. Mendez 
Dosuna 1985; for Delphian, J. J. Moralejo 1973a; for Aeolic, J. Mendez 
Dosuna 1980, J. Garcia Blanco 1988 and A. Thevenot-Warelle 1988; for 
western Locrian, R. Garcia del Pozo 1983; for Laconian, E. Bourguet 1927; 
for the Doric of Sicily, U. Sicca 1924; For the Ionic of Magnesia, E. 
Nachmanson 1903; for that of Miletus, B. Bondesson 1936; for that of 
Erithrae, K. A Garbrach 1978; for Attic, L. Threatte 1980-1996. 

CHAPTER SIX 
T H E G E N E R A L L I T E R A R Y L A N G U A G E S : 
EPIC, E L E G Y A N D C H O R A L L Y R I C 
1. T H E LITERARY LANGUAGES AS GENERAL LANGUAGES 
133. The unifying tendencies within the Greek dialects, of a very 
ancient date, have been discussed; so too, the social and cultural 
forces that stimulated this approximation, which grew progressively 
until the Attic dialect was imposed, in its koine variant, as the gen­
eral language of the Greeks. 
So, a factor which contributed decisively to the mutual under­
standing of the Greeks and to the approximation of the dialects was 
the creation of more or less general literary languages that were 
understood by everyone in the cultural sphere. First, there were 
poetic general languages: the Homeric language, that of elegy and 
choral lyric. Then, the particular languages that were nevertheless 
understood in all parts: Ionic, Lesbian and some others. Finally, the 
languages of prose, first Ionic (which was on the brink o f becoming 
a general language), then Attic (which succeeded in doing so). 
There are degrees of generality, so to speak. If a poet from any 
part of Greece, a speaker of any dialect, sat down to compose poetry 
of the epic kind, or one of the related genres, he would do so in 
the Homeric language. From a certain point in history, any poet 
who composed elegies would do so in the language o f elegy; and 
the choral poets, in the language of choral lyric. In contrast, other 
poetic genres were written only in restricted territories, mainly in the 
local language, whereas the genres of which I have just spoken were 
composed, sung, heard and imitated everywhere. The same occurred 
with the diffusion of Ionic and Attic prose. 
134. Hesiod, a Boeotian, wrote in the epic language of Homer, as 
did the authors of the Epic Cycle poems, such as Stasinus of Cyprus 
or Arctinus of Miletus, and the poets of the so-called Homeric Hymns, 
recited in Delos, Delphi and other parts. Indeed, H o m e r was recited 
in the Athens of Pisistratus, in the Sicyon of Cleisthenes and practically 

88 
CHAPTER SIX 
everywhere. Ceramic pottery attests to the knowledge o f Homer at 
least from the ninth century onwards, and the oldest inscriptions 
starting from the one on the cup of Pithecusae, are influenced by 
him (cf, Iliad X I 632-637). 
Similarly, epigraphy gives evidence that elegies were written every­
where: sometimes, first in the local dialects and then in the general 
language o f elegy. Indeed, the Sicilian Stesichorus, the Boeotian 
Pindar, the Ionians Simonides and Bacchylides, and the Attic trage­
dians all composed their poems in the language o f choral lyric. 
O f course, these languages admitted modifications and evolutions, 
as well as major or minor influences from the language of the poets: 
for example, the case o f the tragedy from Attic. But they were essen­
tially unitary. It is notable that the oldest language - the Homeric 
language, as it was written in the eighth century - influenced them 
all. It influenced elegy, iambos, choral lyric, the monody o f Sappho 
and Alcaeus, even the Ionic o f Herodotus. Subsequently, 
Ionic 
influenced literary Attic. 
135. It should be noted that Homer, with the Ionic and Aeolic lin­
guistic forms that had penetrated his language (and the old forms 
that were interpreted in this way), helped to make certain dialects 
comprehensible. Likewise, these dialects were penetrated by Homerisms 
as a natural development, in so far as they looked like a continua­
tion of Homer. 
Even the Ionic philosophers were influenced by Homer when cre­
ating their new intellectual lexicon. Thus, due to his diffusion and 
influence in the various literary languages, Homer was an important 
factor in the linguistic unification of Greece. Given that Aeolic was 
relegated to Lesbos and a small region of Asia, first Ionic and later 
Attic, as opposed to Doric, became the true successors o f Homer, 
H o m e r gave Attic legitimacy, for instance in the case o f the Mace­
donians and even the Dorians, and he helped to impose it. 
From different geographic areas in Greece the literary languages, 
which modified the local dialects with the aid of linguistic forms with 
great diffusion, opened increasingly larger areas to intellectual 
and 
cultural communication, as well as just plain communication between 
the Greeks. There was a cumulative process, which relegated many 
dialects to simple languages for internal use. 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
89 
All o f this resulted in the imposition of Attic, favoured by histor­
ical circumstances, although not as the general language of prose 
(the old forms remained in use for poetry) but as the general lan­
guage in the everyday life o f the Greeks. T h e unity that had been 
broken within East Greelf in the second millennium was now recon­
structed. 
2. T H E FIRST GENERAL LANGUAGE: 
EPIC LANGUAGE IN OUR H O M E R 
Innovations in epic language 
136. As we have seen, there is an epic language o f the second mil­
lennium, proceeding from a long evolution of the 
Indo-European 
epic language and subjected to an evolutionary process of which 
we know very little, and another epic language of the eighth cen­
tury, when H o m e r wrote or dictated his poems. It is significant that 
the epic language tradition, known to us through Homer, was not 
the only one that existed. Hesiod, the Homeric Hymns and even the 
lyrics bring oral traditions to mind that are somewhat 
different. 
Furthermore, our H o m e r o f the eighth century suffered some alter­
ations in transmission which to a certain extent have disfigured him 
in our eyes. 
However, leaving the background, parallels and later alterations 
aside for a moment, the fact is that the literary language of the 
eighth century, of our Homer, was soon known and imitated in the 
entire Greek world. 
137. It is a well-known fact this epic language was an artificial lan­
guage, not the actual dialect of a particular place, and that it was 
much conditioned by metre and formal diction. Traditionally, it has 
been analysed by two, not always clear, schemes: the first opposes 
archaic/recent/artificial forms, and the second opposes Aeolic (some­
times, earlier, Achaean)/Ionic. Our analysis will be a bit different: 
the forms that descend from the second millennium cannot be classified 
as Achaean, Aeolic or Ionic, This has been considered in a previous 
chapter, and the relevant bibliography was also provided. 
W e can only classify them as archaic forms, sometimes occurring 
in doublets, which are sometimes artificial and, indeed, are very 

90 
CHAPTER SIX 
conditioned by metre, which forces the choice between 
~ G - / - G G - , 
CXV/KE, 
etc. 
In contrast, forms (phonetic or morphological) that were only con­
solidated in the first millennium are Ionic and Aeolic: such as the 
evolution o f *k°e- > m (Aeolic) or xe (Ionic), the pers. pron. o f the 
2nd A c . pi. ujxjLie (Aeolic)/ujjice<; (Ionic, but aspirated), the evolution 
o f a > t| (Ionic, like the contractions, metathesis of quantity, etc.), 
with the observation that a and the previous forms are not Aeolicisms 
but archaisms. 
138. Naturally, the exact date o f an innovation cannot be fixed in 
all cases, but it is clear that Aeolicisms and Ionicisms did exist: they 
are the innovations or choices o f these dialects in the first millen­
nium. I have presented my theory: if in this recent date the archaic 
forms Ke, -op-, -EGGI, the f (and its occasional derivative -u-) were 
interpreted as Aeolicisms, this would open the way for the entry of 
mew Aeolicisms
5; at first, whenever they were needed, since the con­
temporary language rejected certain archaisms; then, indiscriminately. 
For it is a characteristic o f epic language and o f epos in general to 
absorb recent cultural and linguistic forms, without shrinking before 
doublets or contradictions. 
The same applies to the Ionicisms, given that, as mentioned ear­
lier, forms such as ocv, ei, -voci and so many others were interpreted 
as Ionicisms. But it is significant that, as I also mentioned earlier, 
some forms from epic language o f the second millennium could, in 
themselves, be classified as Achaeanisms (especially lexical forms) or 
Doricisms: xo(, inf. -jiev, etc. Nevertheless, 'recent
5 forms of Arc.-
Cyp. or Doric (for example, £juioc,) have not entered our Homer. 
This means that the Homeric language grew in an environment 
in which only Aeolic (essentially, that o f Lesbian and o f Asia) and 
Ionic (also o f Asia: there are but a few rare Atticisms, no doubt as 
a result o f the transmission) were known and accepted as literary 
languages; perhaps in the region o f Asia Minor around 
Smyrna, 
where the two dialects coexisted, as proposed by Wilamowitz and 
supported by C . J . Ruijgh 1995-96, who proposes the existence of 
Ionic influences in Aeolic. 
From our point o f view, the important thing is that the local 
dialects were rejected in the entire Greek world when it came to 
writing about elevated, mythical or philosophical themes, in favour 
o f this artificial and traditional language with greater prestige. The 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
91 
Homeric language was associated with these themes, without any 
Umitations o f time and space. Since each dialect, including the Doric 
dialects, found some of its own forms in the Homeric language, it 
was at the same time both familiar and strange to them, intelligible 
and obscure, like all religjous and literary languages in general. Thus, 
differing from the everyday language, it provided a base for the cre­
ation of the general literary languages which shall be discussed. 
139. Another topic of interest is the relative chronology of Aeolic 
and Ionic elements. A m o n g the latter, there are very recent exam­
ples, such as the new a that penetrated the Homeric language after 
the a > n evolution had taken place: naq, Kakoq; and there is a lack 
o f recent Lesbianisms such as 7taiaoc. 
This is not a conclusive fact. Nevertheless, there are arguments to 
suggest that although the successive strata o f the second millennium 
are pure fantasy, the Aeolic forms o f the first millennium generally 
entered before the Ionic forms. The Aeolic forms replaced the archaic 
forms; the Ionic forms replaced the archaic forms preserved (or not) 
by Aeolic, and often the Aeolic forms, although they also mixed 
indiscriminately at a certain point. Also, at times, neither of them 
were sufficient, so that artificial forms were introduced. But I will 
return to this. 
Formulaic diction and the renovation of epic language 
140. I must first add something to what has already been stated 
about the formulaic diction that dominates the tradition of the Indo-
European and Greek epic. In principle, there is a criterion of econ­
omy: a single person or action requires the same formula in the 
same metrical space, and different formulas in different 
metrical 
spaces; and actions or things (behaviour, weapons, locations, etc.) 
can have identical formulas wherein words having the same metri­
cal scheme substitute each other. O n e formula has other parallel for­
mulas when we go from the N. to other cases, from one person to 
another, etc. Thus, it would seem to be a closed, mechanical sys­
tem, which is how Parry described it; a system that is, in principle, 
barely permeable to linguistic evolution. 
In fact, sometimes linguistic evolution does not affect the formu­
laic system: for instance, when the labiovelar is substituted by labial 
or dental results or when ^cpGepyco is substituted by (pOeppco or (pGeipco 
or -uav by jif)v or -ee- by -ei- (where metre accepts double short as 

92 
CHAPTER SIX 
well as long) or Ur[hr{iaba *A%iA,fjoc, by rir|Xr|id88co 'A%iA,fjoc.. Whether 
an Aeolic or Ionic form is introduced depends on criteria that have 
nothing to do with the formulaic system. O n the condition that nei­
ther the formulaic system nor the metre is altered; a preferred lin­
guistic element is introduced because it is contemporary. Indeed, a 
mixture o f archaism and innovation is preferred in the epic. 
In contrast, recent forms which destroyed this system or metre 
were, in principle, blocked: for example, -aav of the 3rd pi. sec. in 
Ionic. But if certain contemporary forms that were not blocked by 
the formulaic system managed to enter, this produced a tension when 
other modern forms were unable to enter. 
141. In effect, the formulaic system was subjected to the pressure of 
new lexical and grammatical forms, and also of the forms that were 
not accepted into the formulaic transformations: a formula in N. naxpxq 
apoupa cannot be transformed into a formula of G. ^rcaxpiooq apouprjc, 
because the metre does not allow it (the poet must say naxpidoq 
ai'ac,). Also, transforming a formula which contains a verb in a certain 
tense or m o o d to another with a different tense or mood, or chang­
ing the adjective o f a nominal formula or elaborating, reducing, or 
changing the metrical position of a formula can produce problems 
because certain contemporary forms and words are avoided. 
This was gradually resolved through the adaptation of the for­
mulas: the creation o f new formulas that favoured both poetic cre­
ation and the introduction o f new linguistic material. A. Hoekstra 
1969 described recent formulas for forms without digamma 6*r with 
ephelcystic -v or with various linguistic, stylistic and metrical pecu­
liarities. J. B. Hansworth 1968 has written extensively on the flexibility 
o f the formula: it can change position, be reduced, widened, can 
divide into two, etc. The book by P. Chantraine 1942 acutely describes 
the problem o f the new forms and metrical schemes, showing that 
there is adaptability. 
142. Yet, the formulaic system is not absolutely economic, as alternative 
formulas can be created, see P. Edwards 1971, p. 55 ff Also, authors such 
as H. Patzer 1972, G. S. Kirk 1976, J. M. Bremer 1987, B. Peabody 1975 
have shown very clearly that the poet uses the formulaic system very skill­
fully, and that it is not simply mechanical. This applies equally whether 
we accept that Homer dictated his poems or believe that he wrote them. 
In any case, this modification of the formulaic systems and the introduc­
tion of new forms into them has been a gradual process, a continuation of 
a very old evolution, not just a case of one individual poet. C f also 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
93 
P. Ghantraine 1942, p. 27 ff., L. Palmer 1980, p. 80 ff, M. Leumann 
1950. 
143. The epic language of our Homer, the end point of that long 
evolution, is recognisable once we take away the thin covering that 
the later tradition left on jt. It displays a fundamentally Ionic aspect, 
and includes Aeolic forms, as well as some artificial ones, others 
archaic. It must be emphasised that the latter should not be given 
dialectal denominations, in spite o f the fact that they were under­
stood in this way by the poets who introduced the true Aeolicisms 
and Ionicisms and, without doubt, by their listeners; the same applies 
to the ancient grammarians (and, sometimes, modern linguists). 
This fundamentally Ionic character, as I explained in § 135, opened 
the way in Greece for the prestige and understanding o f Ionic and 
for the subsequent expansion of Attic. 
But in this context, it should be recalled how the innovations of 
these two dialects penetrated the epic language o f the second mil­
lennium, as it passed into the first millennium, without forgetting the 
archaisms and doublets which could be interpreted as being from 
one or the other dialect. 
Obviously, whenever the phonological system had been trans­
formed (a phoneme or a group was no longer admissible), it had to 
be replaced by the new one, as in the case of the labiovelars. In 
Homer, we find Ionic phonetics in xeaaepec,, xeioxxi, xekoq, etc. (and 
x- is c o m m o n to the two dialects in xiq, xeo) but Aeolic phonetics in 
rceXoop (x£A,cop is just a gloss o f Hesychius), neko\iai 
(beside xeAXojicu, 
etc.), KiaupeQ (beside xeaaepeq). From the *ghw- group, we have Or|p 
and (pfjp (in relation to centaurs). It is clear that Ionic and Aeolic 
competed with each other to impose their phonetics when a phoneme 
or combination of phonemes was no longer possible. Similarly, in the 
results of %m-: aujaec/fijueic; (metrical equivalents before a consonant). 
However, sporadically, an archaism alternating with an innova­
tion could be preserved: eicepaev, but aTteicelpaxo (Ionic) and 6(peM,eiev 
(Aeol. opt. aor.). 
144. T h e problem is the relation between archaic forms, on the one 
hand, and Aeolic and Ionic forms, on the other. T o begin with, it 
is evident that the archaic forms (pseudo-Achaean or pseudo-Aeolic) 
were difficult to substitute for Aeolic or Ionic forms when they did 
not coincide metrically and, additionally, when they were too 
representative of epic poetry. For instance, in the case of pseudo-

9 4 
CHAPTER SIX 
Achaean or pseudo-Arcado-Cyprian lexicon (avcci;, ouaoe, (pdayavov, 
etc.) and in pseudo-Aeolic morphological forms such as ice, Gupacov, 
rccdSeaoi, eooxxca, etc.: that is, in the remnants of second-millennium 
EG, which did not need adjectives. Here, neither Ionic nor Aeolic 
forms (the real ones, from the first millennium) could enter when 
they differed. 
In the case o f non-alteration o f the metre, a choice could be made 
between an Aeolic or Ionic form, as we have seen: the reasons for this 
are not exactly known, there was certainly in some cases an ancient 
Aeolic tradition, as in (pfjpec,, 'centaurs', and perhaps in other forms. 
The case o f Ionic forms, by far the most frequent, is different, as 
we know. Examples have been provided in which they replaced other 
identical archaic forms from a metrical and formulaic perspective; 
and others in which the metre did not allow them (there is IloaeiSawv, 
but not rioaeiSeoov) or in which they would form a doublet with 
other forms (archaic or Aeolic) when they were metrically equiva­
lent (dv/K8, i)|aei(;/a^|ie^, -a-/-aa-). 
The most interesting case, however, is when an archaic form is 
replaced by nothing other than an equivalent Ionic form, whether 
regularly or not. For example, n is introduced for a (but not always: 
there is xXaoq, noXmXaq); A c . pi. in -ouc, (< -ovc,): in this case, with­
out an Aeolic alternative. 
But recent Aeolic forms could in fact enter when this did not 
involve an alteration o f the metre, as in some examples already men­
tioned 
and a%e\)E (for a%eff e), perf. part, -ovxec, (for -©xec;), £pc- (for 
*dya-). 
1 4 5 . Nevertheless, sometimes the Ionicisms involved metrical alter­
ations that were tolerated: if two breves are contracted, this means 
that now the foot is an spondee and not a dactyl (uncontracted forms 
still existed). But beyond this the fall o f a digamma may produce 
the creation o f a hiatus in principle antimetric (similarly, for exam­
ple, 01, ai instead o f xoi, xcd); the metathesis o f -no- (which is some­
times preserved, ai^noq) in -eoo- involves the alteration of the metre; 
etc. Although, on occasion, the restitution o f the ancient form has 
been proposed: for example, in the case o f nrjA,r|ia8ecD (for -a, as 
cited previously) and those o f //. V 21 &8eA,(peio
;o Kxocjjivoio (for 
-eoo), Od. X 
6 0 AioXou KXUXOC Scbjiaxa (for -oo), //. I X 6 4 kn\by\\do\) 
oKpuoexoq (for -{oo Kp-). 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
95 
The most serious are those cases in which, as mentioned earlier, 
the Ionicisms implied a clear alteration in metre and, therefore, a 
need for new formulas. I cited the 3rd pi. sec. -oocv beside the archaic 
form -ev. Many other forms can be added: apart from those related 
to the contractions, metathesis and other phenomena relating to vow­
els (which left numerous examples of archaic use), morphological 
forms o f the type N. pi. i)u.eic,, fijueic. when followed by a vowel 
(against *yusmes or *yuhmes, Aeol. uujiec, and similarly in the 1st pers.), 
and A c . pi. in -eac,. 
It would seem then that at a certain point there was conflict 
between, on the one hand, the archaism and the new form, and on 
the other hand, in this second case, between Aeolicism and Ionicism. 
At one point, certainly in a more archaic date, both dialects com­
peted with each other and sometimes one, sometimes the other would 
triumph, although Aeolic generally had the advantage (but mixed 
forms were created of the type f]uPpoxe); Aeolic (that is, the recent 
Aeolic, which is the true Aeolic) does not seem to have altered metre. 
Later, Ionic began to triumph with greater frequency, but without 
eliminating the archaic or Aeolic forms completely. This process was 
linked to the renovation of the formulas. T h e frequency of Ionic, its 
stronger corrosive effect on the formulaic tradition, and its inclusion 
o f very recent forms shows that if Aeolicim and Ionicism had coex­
isted at some point, it was Ionicism that later imposed itself. 
More on the epic language of the eighth century 
146. The history o f epic language can be studied from the succes­
sive renovations, which together with the archaic core, introduced 
contemporary forms. However, it is an entirely different thing to 
establish how the language as a whole was understood by contem­
poraries (of the eighth century, that is), ancient grammarians and by 
modern linguists. 
It was undoubtedly known that the epic language, apart from 
purely Ionic forms, contained anomalies, among which there were 
all kinds of hesitations and doublets. These anomalous forms were 
usually interpreted as Aeolicisms, some as Achaeanisms by certain 
modern linguists; this interpretation was marred by the idea that 
H o m e r displayed a mixture of dialects o f the first millennium. Indeed 
many of his forms, the most archaic, were neither Ionicisms nor 

96 
CHAPTER SIX 
Aeolicisms in the second millennium, although they would have been 
so in the first millennium. 
Nevertheless, it must be stressed that many of these anomalous 
forms (whether archaic or recent) were really artificial forms, result­
ing from the adaptation to metre of forms that did not fit into it. 
Actually, the date o f some o f these artificial adaptations is some­
times difficult to establish: as, for instance, f|vio%fja (for -%ov), TTOV-
Torcopeuco (for -eco), dvocmjioc, (for avoaxoc,); or metrical enlargements 
such as dGdvaxoc,, SDGOXOC,, drceipecuoc,, oupecc, etc. Some presuppose 
certain recent phenomena: for instance, diectasis (fjpobovxec;, f|(3daa9e) 
represents a transaction between the contraction and the desire to 
maintain the ancient metrical scheme. 
In any case, there is an attempt to avoid the tribrach (three short 
syllables) and the cretic (long-short-long), which do not fit into the 
hexameter. The epic tradition does not hesitate in introducing false 
forms. I have shown how, at times, beneath these forms there could 
be archaic regular forms: for example, (poiviKoeic, with I probably 
substituted (poivncp evx-. 
147. Furthermore, the epic poets could misinterpret the words of 
their ancestors: this was highlighted by M . Leumann 1950 with regard 
to the interpretation 
o f H o m e r by the Hellenistic poets, and also 
with regard to misinterpretations within the epic tradition. For exam­
ple, terms such as ic6jj,pa%o<; 'the top o f the helmet' (//. X V 536), 
later understood as 'of the head
5 (of a person, //. V 586); or 7iocpf|opoc, 
'tied at the side
5, referring to the exterior carthorse (//. X V I 471), 
later interpreted as 'scattered, with outstretched arms
5 (//. VII 156). 
All o f this is evidence o f an evolution within the epic tradition. 
For the listeners, these forms, together with the archaisms (inter­
preted sometimes as Ionic or Aeolic, but also simply as epic) and 
the doublets merely formed part o f the characteristics of the epic 
language. T h e exercise o f choice was not entirely free, for metre and 
the formulas made their presence and influence felt; but they were 
rather susceptible to modification. A n Ionic that was blended and 
modified in this way was understood as an epic language and, as 
such, was recited and listened to in all the corners of Greece. W e 
have an idea of what it was like in the second millennium and what 
it must have looked like in the first millennium. 
148. However, the epic language o f the eighth century, the language 
of Homer, has not reached us intact. At the very least, we should 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
97 
draw attention to the effects o f the shift from the initial Greek alpha­
bet to the later Ionic alphabet; and to its journey through the Attic 
tradition and Alexandrine editions. 
A m o n g other things, the letters E and 0 in the primitive Greek 
alphabet designated each^ what would later become three vowels: 
e/ei/n and o/ou/co. Thus, lengthenings such as those mentioned ear­
lier could be prosodic, but not graphic. EOE could be interpreted in 
various ways: r\oq, eioq, ecoc,. Furthermore, ^eivoq, fjyvoiaev were not 
written with -ei- and n-, nor there were forms with diectasis. Indeed, 
since gemination went unnoticed, it is doubtful whether Ionic forms 
such as Keipoo, dt^yeiovoc, and Aeolic forms such as ocpeMxo, epavvoc, 
were introduced by the pre-Homeric poets or simply by subsequent 
copyists. 
Then we have the Atticisms (which are rare and much debated) 
that must have penetrated the text during the period in which it 
was copied and diffused in Athens (after Pisistratus, according to tra­
dition). The following forms are generally considered to be Attic: 
KEIVTO against Ionic Keioa'; also, (pepoin, (ptAmri and a few others. 
Nevertheless, these and a few other forms, including the prolifer­
ation of contractions, metathesis of quantity, lengthenings, diectasis, 
etc. can also be attributed to the editions by Aristarchus and the 
other Alexandrine philologists. This subject will not be examined 
here. In any case, the fundamental characteristics o f the epic lan­
guage from Homer's own mouth, so to speak, in the eighth century 
are very clear. Here, we have attempted, on the one hand, to estab­
lish their origin, and on the other hand, the interpretation they 
received. 
3. T H E DIFFUSION OF THE FIRST GENERAL LANGUAGE: 
THE LANGUAGE OF HEXAMETRIC POETRY AFTER H O M E R 
General overview 
149. Homer represents a key, divisive moment in the evolution of 
the Greek epic, in which it achieved a written form and produced 
great poems o f a dramatic kind in the language that we have stud­
ied. Epic poetry had existed before Homer, and poems such as 
Memnoneia or Achilleid and Meleagria have even been cited as having 
influenced the Iliad. It is important to note that the human and 
divine epic (the conflict between the gods) is accompanied in Homer 

98 
CHAPTER SIX 
by traces o f cosmogonic poetry (II X I V 200 ff. and 274 ff, X V 
185 ff.), by hymns and prayers to the gods, and by maxims and 
didactic elements (cf. //. X X I I I 542, Od. I 132 ff, etc.). 
After Homer, still within the archaic and classical period, there is 
a continuation o f hexametric poetry: 
(a) Firstly, there is Hesiod, who is placed in the same century 
(eighth), a little after Homer (he is placed before the Odyssey 
by some) and who, in his principal poems, Theogony, Works 
and Days, The Shield, and Catalogue of Women, writes cosmogonic 
poetry, genealogy, divine and heroic epic, hymns, with the 
first two genres predominating. 
(b) Secondly, the epic, which is brought together under the con­
cept o f the Epic Cycle: a series o f poems with various themes 
(above all, Theban and Trojan themes, themes relating to 
the return o f heroes, Heracles, etc.) which are dated between 
the seventh and sixth centuries: the most cited being the 
Cypria by Stasinus o f Cyprus, the Aethiopis by Arctinus of 
Miletus, the Little Iliad by Lesches o f Pyrrha or Miletus, and 
the works o f Eumelus o f Corinth, Panyassis of Halicarnassus 
and Choerilus o f Samos. The problem for the study of the 
language is the terribly fragmented state in which these 
poems have been handed down to us. 
(c) Thirdly, the hymns: the so-called anonymous Homeric Hymns, 
which are dated from the seventh century onwards. Also, 
the hexametric prayer of Solon 28. 
(d) Fourthly, the philosophic hexametric poems, derived from 
cosmogonic and didactic poetry: by Xenophanes of Colophon 
( V I / V ) , Parmenides (V), Empedocles (V); also, the maxims of 
Phocylides (VI). In sum, a relatively small number of hexameters. 
(e) Finally, parody is represented by the Batracomyomachia, the 
battle of the frogs and the mice, which today is often attrib­
uted to the Hellenistic period. Cf. also Hipponax 135. 
150. All o f these genres, including the last, continued to be culti­
vated in the Hellenistic period; and the epic above all during the 
R o m a n period, although philosophy began to be written in prose in 
the same century (the sixth). So, all this hexametric poetry follows 
the language o f H o m e r very closely, and this also applies to mixed 
hexametric poetry (a combination of the hexameter and pentameter 
in the elegy, with the catalectic trochaic tetrameter in the Margites, 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
99 
various combinations o f dactylic elements in Archilochus, etc.), which 
will be discussed in §§ 155 ff. T h e great diffusion o f Homerisms 
throughout Greek poetry and even Ionic prose comes from these 
genres. 
By focusing only on pyre hexametric poetry, it can be said that 
it maintained the essence of the Homeric language and that it was 
a fundamental element in the development o f Greek poetry 
and 
thought. T o a large extent, it continued Homeric themes, as we have 
seen, although Hesiod and other authors place greater emphasis on 
particular themes. 
Nevertheless, there are sufficient differences to warrant some expla­
nation, especially since theories have emerged according to which 
the language o f Hesiod and the Homeric Hymns has a different ori­
gin, at least in part, from that o f Homer. In general, I would say 
that the characteristics of the new epic language display a degree of 
modernisation, an adaptation to themes, and a slight approximation, 
at times, to the local dialects of the poets. 
All of this poetry - like H o m e r himself, we assume - proceeds 
from Asia Minor: from there it spread to Boeotia (Hesiod came from 
Cyme), Sicily (Xenophanes came from Colophon), Corinth (Eumelus), 
Athens (Solon, perhaps the Hymn to Demeter). 
The different genres 
151, There is a whole theory proposing that Hesiod and the Homeric 
Hymns correspond to a western, not Homeric, epic tradition: the 
Homerisms would be a result of a later transmission. There has been 
much discussion regarding a series o f Hesiodic forms, in particular, 
which are considered Boeotian, Doric, or simply 'western'; some­
times this tradition is identified with one that is thought to have also 
been at the base o f Aeolic poetry. But I will return to this later. 
The discussion centres on some forms that are rather doubtful: 
A c pi. -de;, -oc, in the 1st and 2nd declensions 
(ante-consonantal 
forms preferred in Thes., A r c , and the western dialects); athematic 
A e o l i c ' verbs, absent from H o m e r (for example, aivnui), Tetopce 
(the only clear Doricism), d\jnv (supposedly Aeolic), G. pi. jneAadv 
(Dor. or AeoL), e8ov, r\v (supposedly Doric, but probably archaisms), 
KaXoq (At. or western). The degree o f modernisation or avoidance 
of archaisms is great, but sometimes there is a drop in frequency. 

100 
CHAPTER SIX 
As mentioned before, there is much debate about this and today 
there is a tendency to incline towards scepticism. For me, these non-
Homeric forms are a recent introduction — whether from Aeolic (in 
which territory Hesiod originated), Boeotian or the West - and a 
slight local influence, such as that of Ionic in Homer, would not 
have been strange; nor, for example, would it have been strange 
had Hesiod preserved some archaism not found in Homer. 
The most characteristic feature o f the language of Hesiod is its 
modernisation: the reduction o f the frequency of archaisms. The loss 
of the digamma, for example, is more frequent than in Homer, even 
though it is preserved in Boeotian. 
152. For the precedents of Homer, see Adrados in A A . W . 1984, p. 80 ff 
For an analysis of the work of Hesiod see Adrados 1986c. The Cycle is 
edited by A. Bernabe 1996, and Antimachus of Colophon (fifth and sixth 
century) must be added in particular. 
As far as the system of formulas is concerned, it is logical that Hesiod 
uses a different series than Homer: formulas linked to cosmogonic and 
genealogic but also didactic topics. Curiously, some of them coincide with 
those of the Homeric Hymns. There is a good collection of data in F. 
Kraft 1963 and a series of conclusions in J. de Hoz 1964; I drew my own 
conclusions in an article (Adrados 1986c), in which I proposed the exis­
tence of this kind of oral poetry in Greece (cosmogonic, genealogic, reli­
gious, didactic, poetry) which was thematically influenced by well-known 
models from Eastern literature (Mesopotamic and Egyptian), but which had 
developed those formulaic systems within Greece. 
Evidendy, hexametric oral poems flourished. Our Homer followed the 
central epic line, but others could contain formulaic and lexical systems 
that were pardy different. O f course, the poets of the first millennium could 
broaden or modify these systems and also copy each other. It is very clear, 
with respect to the lexicon, that Hesiod included much colloquial and tech­
nical agricultural lexicon, cf. H. Troxler 1964, p. 240 ff. There is also 
another lexicon that coincides with that of the Hymns, cf. R. Hiersche 1970, 
p. 101. The philosophical poets had to create a vocabulary fit to express 
their thought, cf. R. Hiersche 1970, p. 104 ff. I will return to this subject 
when I look at the creation of the Greek intellectual lexicon. 
The history of the subject of the language of Hesiod and the Hymns can 
be found in H. Rodriguez Somolinos 1998a, p. 15 ff The idea of a 'con­
tinental epic' (with a confused mixture of Doric and Aeolic elements) comes 
from A. Hoekstra 1957, and was elaborated, in exaggerated terms, by 
C. O. Pavese 1972 and 1974 (but see p. 111 ff on the recent elements). 
A very clear and decisively sceptic study is provided by G. P. Edwards 
1971, cf. also R. Hiersche 1970, p. 99 ff. and L. R. Palmer 1980, p. 101 ff. 
For R. Janko 1982, Hesiod is purely Homeric. For a rejection of 'Doricisms', 
cf A. Morpurgo 1964. For the language of the oracles, cf J. A. Fernandez 
Delgado 1986. 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
101 
There are parallel conclusions regarding the Hymns, in which the mod­
ernisation of the language predominates. According to A. Hoekstra 1969, 
the language and style of the Homeric Hymns is essentially derived from 
Homer, although it may contain some archaisms. There are even misun­
derstood Homeric expressions. Also, the Atticisms are centred on the Hymn 
to Demeter, perhaps of Attic prigin. C f O. Zumbach 1955. 
153. So, this and the succeeding poetry inherited certain themes, a 
lexicon and formulaic expressions from the second millennium: whether 
the same as in H o m e r or different. However, the small differences 
that can be found in the language are the result of a recent evolu­
tion which tended to reduce archaisms and, in rare cases, introduced 
local forms, as had occurred in Homer, In short, it was the Homeric 
language, in a more or less updated form, which became the liter­
ary language in the whole of Greece by means of hexametric poetry 
and the elegy derived from it. 
These conclusions, based on Hesiod and the Hymns, can hardly 
be modified with the study o f the minimal remains o f the Cycle. In 
these and in the Hellenistic epic and that of the R o m a n period, the 
language of H o m e r remained more or less intact. 
With respect to philosophical hexametric poetry, it must be stressed 
that it essentially offered the same language, nearly always elimi­
nating exclusively Homeric and not Ionic forms. However, modifica­
tions are admitted, and not just in the lexicon and the formulas. 
T h e philosophers take great liberties: in Xenophanes, we find the 
D . pi. Gneaxeoox, 
the infinitive cpuv; Empedocles prefers yevTo (Hes.), 
creates QaXeioxq from 0dA,eia, etc. Sometimes, archaic and recent 
forms alternate; and as mentioned earlier, new meanings are given 
to the lexicon, as in cases such as eov (Parm.) and (pi^uSinc, (Emp.). 
154. The language o f these authors was essential for the later evo­
lution of the philosophical and intellectual lexicon, but we will deal 
with this in a later section, c f §§ 227 ff; but also with the rhetor­
ical language and the Attic prose of Gorgias, cf. A. Traglia 1952, 
p. 41 ff., on Empedocles. These poets, following Homeric phraseol­
ogy to a large exent, were at the same time great creators. 

102 
CHAPTER SIX 
4. T H E SECOND GENERAL LANGUAGE: 
THE LANGUAGE OF ELEGY AND EPIGRAM 
Elegy 
155. The study o f the first general language of the first millennium 
has been completed: Homeric and epic language. The second gen­
eral language, that o f elegy, is derived from the first. 
O f course, this are not the appropriate place to study the origins 
o f elegy, which are in any case much debated. It is a fact that from 
the seventh century onwards we come across - in the Ionic world 
but also in the Doric and subsequently in all of Greece — poems in 
elegiac distics, a slight variation o f the hexametric rhythm given that 
the hexameter is followed by a pentameter: this is called the elegeion, 
a derivative o f the elegos, which for some scholars means a 'lament' 
and comes from Phrygia. 
Indeed, because there is variation in the metre there is also vari­
ation in the language, although not o f a radical kind: we are deal­
ing with an Ionicised epic language, or Ionic language influenced by 
epic; and with poems sung to the music o f the flute. For instance, 
in Callinus and Archilochus in the seventh century. There is also 
variation in the content. W e have a mythic or mythic-historic elegy 
in Mimnermus and Antimachus, among others, but usually it is a 
lyric in the first person which adresses a second person: urging them 
to war, politics or a particular conduct, thinking or expressing feel­
ings - all o f this took place at banquets, at funerary rituals or var­
ious events (for example at the Pythian Games), before an assembly 
or the army, e t c Thus, there was a need for a more agile rhythm 
and a more agile and more accessible language as well. 
It was in Ionia, as mentioned, that, from the middle of the sev­
enth century onwards, various popular genres passed into the hands 
o f the poets, receiving the new rhythms, execution and language: 
the Ionicised epic, as I mentioned. Tyrtaeus in Sparta, Solon in 
Athens, Theognis in Megara and others (allegedly Sacadas in Argolis 
in the seventh/sixth century, but no fragments remain) followed this 
model: the language o f the elegy became, I must stress, the second 
'general language' o f Greece. So much so that elegiac distics were 
composed by all kinds o f personalities. In the fifth century, elegiac 
distics were composed not only by elegiac poets such as Euenus o f 
Paros, Ion of Chios, Antimachus of Colophon, Dionysius Chalcus 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
103 
and Critias o f Athens, but also by Simonides, Bacchylides, Anacreon, 
Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Plato, Aristotle, Grates (at times, o f 
dubious authenticity). And there is a legion of elegiacs in the Hellenistic 
period. 
156. There is some confusion between elegy and epigram. The lat­
ter term simply indicated an inscription, such as those at the end o f 
the eighth century, as we saw, whether in prose or verse: the aim 
was to transmit news or a message (an epitaph, dedication, owner, 
etc.) in a short and succinct form. In Homer, we find evidence o f 
funerary steles or dedications o f weapons to a god, but the Phoenician 
inscriptions, with their content as well as their alphabet, had the 
greatest influence in Greece. 
The most ancient inscriptions in verse are hexametric: H o m e r was 
the model in hand when it came to writing in a solemn way. But 
from the year 500 onwards, elegiac distic predominates; epigraphs 
are anonymous until approximately 350 B C , although Simonides 
already c o m p o s e d epigrams as did, later, the poets previously 
mentioned. 
With respect to the language, it has to be said that the epigram 
was first written in the local dialects, always with the influence o f 
the Homeric language; but soon it became contaminated with the 
language of elegy and, at a certain point, there was no longer any 
linguistic distinction (since the borders between the two genres are 
blurred). 
157. For archaic elegy, see Adrados 1990a, B. Gentili-C. Prato 1979-85, 
M. L. West 1989 (E. Diehl 1950 is still useful today); for epigram see 
P. A. Hansen 1983 and the great collection of metrical inscriptions of 
W. Peek 1955, as well as various other collections. On the origin of the 
genres, see, in addition to what I say in the Introduction to Adrados 1990a, 
the various dissertations included in the volume by A A . W . 1969; among 
them, that by A. E. Raubitschek regarding 'Das Denkmal-Epigramm' and 
that by B. Gentili, 'Epigramma ed elegia' (against the threnetic origin of 
the latter and about the blurred limits with the epigram). On the language, 
different works in this volume, in A A . W . 1963 on Archilochus (above all, 
A. Scherer and D. Page) as well as B. Kock 1910, B. Snell 1969, O. 
Hoffmann 1973, p. 102 ff, R. Hiersche 1970, p. 106 ff, L. R. Palmer 
1980, p. 105 ff, among others. 
158. Let us begin with the elegy, whose prime representative, Callinus-
who differs little from Archilochus — transformed the Homeric heroes' 
discourses into exhortations to his citizens to fight against 
the 

104 
CHAPTER 
SIX 
Cimmerians. It should be pointed out that the elegies of both writ­
ers are essentially epic, although the features that are distant from 
Ionic have generally been eliminated. In contrast, other features are 
perfectly preserved, such as those which are at the same time both 
epic and Ionic, for example, uouaecov and other forms without con­
traction, Em\ 
dv, the loss o f digamma leaving a hiatus, etc. Yet 
Aeolicisms such as maupec;, dpyevvoc,, dufieq do not appear. Certain 
non-Ionic Homeric forms are, exceptionally, found linked to Homeric 
formulas and metre: for example, the G. in -010, TOGGOV, 
K&XXIKOV 
(Arch.), Kev, taxcp, onnoxe (Call.). Yet archaic forms and words disappear. 
Contemporary Ionic rarely enters: KOT' and KGX; appear in Callinus, 
and there is much discussion regarding 8opi (< *-pf-) in Archilochus, 
which is considered to be Attic by some, also insular Ionic by others. 
-e7iovr|0r|, 8GK£, etc. and much o f the lexicon is not epic. 
It is very clear that Archilochus's elegies are full o f epic formu­
las, as has been clearly shown by D . Page 1963 and L. R . Palmer 
1980; 
but the latter describes the introduction o f new popular 
vocabulary. 
159. W e do not come across great differences in the case o f Tyrtaeus, 
who 
exhorted the Lacedaemonians to fight against the Messenians. 
W e do not know whether he was Laconian or, as others would have 
it, Milesian or Athenian, but in any case, his language was under­
stood in Sparta. H e uses Ionic -n, some recent Ionicisms such as 
\|/u%8cov, most times ignores f (which was preserved in Laconian!), 
uses epic forms such as pocGiAxjocc,, KccA-d, cpeuyov (and some ''which 
are also Laconian, such as Xaoq), but there is once again a lack o f 
archaic or Aeolic epic forms that are absent from Ionic. A small 
number o f Doricisms enter, particularly in the A c . pi. in -de, o f the 
1st deck and Kaioceiuevoc;. 
Consequendy, Tyrtaeus is full o f Homeric formulas, some o f which 
have sometimes altered in meaning, as in Archilochus. 
The scene is always the same: an epic language in which the most 
archaic or strange elements are eliminated, apart from formulaic 
exceptions, and in which small samples o f the local language 
are 
introduced: Ionic in Mimnermus, Doric in Theognis, Attic in Solon. 
Sometimes, strange elements are introduced in Solon and X e n o -
phanes, such as -eGGi, formular -oio, dcov, ice in Xenophanes, etc.; 
in Solon, epicisms such as KaMi7toiui, 
OGGOV, and fi?iu0e enter, but 
not ice or -ceo. 

EPIC, ELEGY AND CHORAL LYRIC 
105 
W e can find traces o f the local dialects in Semonides (the Ionicisms 
OKODj KOT', etc.), Theognis (Doricisms such as the G. Ei) parrot, the inf. 
(peuyev and r|uev, etc.), Solon, although the manuscript tradition is 
unreliable. Atticisms such as 'Iaoviac;, uftepncpaviav, fjuepa, 
(but 
6ppiLT07tcVcpri, a Homerism) ueaov, and some Ionicisms such as 
(popeujuevoq) were no doubt introduced secondarily. Atticism domi­
nates over Ionicism or Homerism: -a- against a single oaoo<;, -ou-
(against -eo-, perhaps archaic), in addition to a substantial Attic lex­
icon, cf. Adrados 1953a, p. 138 ff. 
Thus, a slightly different Ionic language was formed, with some 
unobtrusive Homeric remnants, but increasingly fewer, and with min­
imal contemporary dialectal forms. All of this tended to disappear 
in elegy and epigram from the fifth century onwards. What remained 
fixed was this quasi-Ionic which was cultivated and understood even-
where: an updated Homer, but still remote from the local dialect; 
or an Ionic dialect provided with borrowings and 
internationalism 
by epic diction. 
This was the route of general diffusion o f the Ionic dialect into 
very c o m m o n poetic genres. There was another route, more advanced 
in Ionicisation but less diffused, that of the iambos, which opened 
the way for Ionic prose (which in turn opened the way for Attic, 
and Attic for koine). 
Epigram 
160. The language o f epigram underwent the reverse process, but 
in the end there was a convergence. Instead of a Homer approxi­
mated to the Ionic dialect, we are dealing with inscriptions in non-
literary dialects which, when written in elegiac distics, were influenced 
by the language of H o m e r and elegy. It was a process which led to 
the assimilation of the epigram's language into that of elegy (and 
often to the practical confusion of the genres). 
In the beginning, epigrams in distics used Homeric formulaic lan­
guage, translating it into the local dialect; this is best illustrated when 
an epigraphic version and a version of the manuscrit tradition are 
available for the same epigram, as in the case of the well-known 
c o m m o n burial of the Corinthians in Salamis, Hansen 131 (for exam­
ple, 7COK' evaioii.ec, instead of TCOT' evcdojuev). So, KepotMrjvocq ueyaGuuoDt; 
in //. 631 becomes KeyaXkavaq jneyaBujiioq in Hansen 391; formulaic 
Koupn (Aioc, y^ctt)K07ci8i K.) becomes Kopei (Hansen 215); other well-

106 
CHAPTER SIX 
known formulas see the introduction o f IloTeSdpovi (Corinth, Hansen 
357), KXzfoq, 
a7i0iTov (Crisa, Hansen 344), etc. 
161. In other cases, Homerisms entered these formulas, which had 
been imitated from Homer: as in Hansen 145 (Corcyra) e V 'Apd00oio 
pnofcaor, The fact is, Ionicisms such as ^eivoc,, eiveica. etc. entered 
the Doric dialects through Homer. 
It should be noted that, occasionally, the archaism of the Doric 
dialects in these inscriptions allows us to rediscover Homeric forms 
which are older than those present in our manuscripts: as, for instance, 
in Hansen 367 r|iAifo[i 9u]jnio, with digamma (or ^evpoc,, beside 
^eivoc,, as we have seen, also in Doric inscriptions). But an Ionic 
poet such as Semonides, in his epigram about the seer Megistias 
(Herodotus VII 228), written in pure Ionic, nevertheless preserved 
the Homerism Kxeivav. 
Consequently, as we have seen, the influence of elegy was great. 
In the work by Gentili 1969, p. 69, there is a list of loci similes com­
mon to epigram and elegy. The language of elegy and that of epigram 
eventually became unified: although this occurred at a point in which 
the Ionic o f iambos and of prose, freed of Homerisms to a greater 
extent, had become the most widely used literary language. It would 
be dethroned by Attic, which it had helped to diffuse. 
5. T H E THIRD GENERAL LANGUAGE: 
THE LANGUAGE OF CHORAL LYRIC 
General ideas 
162. Choral lyric was a religious lyric sung in large public festivals, 
in contrast to melic lyric, which was sung in festivals o f hetairiai, thia-
soi or groups, or in special circumstances in which a city or an army, 
etc, asked for the arrival or intervention o f the gods. 
At the start, the song o f the choregos or chorus leader was impro­
vised, as we are told by Archilochus 219; the chorus responded to 
him, above all with refrains, when they were not just marking time 
or dancing. Later, both the song of the choregos and that of the cho­
rus became literary, the work o f a poet. This corresponds to the 
mixed lyric, as attested in Alcman and Stesichorus, I believe. But at 
some point, the chorus began to sing the whole song, multiplying 

EPIC, E L E G Y A N D C H O R A L L Y R I C 
107 
groups of strophe/antistrophe/epode: this corresponds to choral lyric, 
whose main representative is Pindar. 
Another variant is provided by dialogic lyric (between two chore-
got or two choruses) or, within one chorus, in the multiplication of 
the unit formed by a son^ by the choregos followed by a song by 
the chorus. There are traces o f all this in popular lyric and also in 
theatre lyric 
T h e fact is that improvised lyric, with its variety of possibilities, 
was just as old as epic, and also oral; there are clear allusions to it 
in H o m e r and Hesiod, who occasionally adapted it to their hexam­
eters, in literary lyrics and in other authors. Parallels exist, such as 
the Hymns of the Veda, which attest to its antiquity; and traces have 
been preserved o f old popular lyric, often in various re-elaborations. 
O n the other hand, the rhythms o f choral lyric (and of monody or 
Aeolic melic too) are inherited, and were not invented by the poets 
who transformed this whole lyric, starting from the eighth 
century 
(Eumelus of Corinth), but above all during the seventh century, into 
the personal poetry written by the 'poets' or creators. I have dealt 
with the origins o f the lyric in detail elsewhere. 
163. However, with regard to the language, it must be said that we 
are in a worse situation now than when we spoke of Homer and 
epic language in general. With it we were able to establish 
with 
some degree o f certainty what the epic language of the second mil­
lennium must have looked like and to understand how, from this 
language, the language o f eighth century was created; and, further­
more, h o w the latter evolved into elegy and iambos. Here, we are 
practically limited to the literary lyric of the seventh century onwards. 
Very litde remains o f popular lyric, and the little that has reached 
us is very influenced by the lyric o f the great authors. 
Indeed, the attempts that have been made to link the language 
of choral lyric with Mycenaean have not attracted many followers. 
An example is the theory of Pavese and others, cited earlier in ref­
erence to Hesiod, which proposes the existence o f a western poetic 
language to which non-Homeric phonetic and morphological char­
acteristics of Hesiod and the Homeric Hymns are attributed, as well 
as some others of choral lyric and the language of the (monodic) 
Lesbian lyric, and even o f oracles, cf. J. A. Fernandez Delgado 1986. 
T h e Homeric elements o f all this poetry are recent. 

108 
C H A P T E R 
SIX 
Although it is evident through the study of phraseology that non-
Homeric traditions existed - this can be seen in Hesiod and 
the 
Hymns but also in the rich formation of words in choral lyric - for 
phonetics and morphology things are more complicated, but we will 
return to this later. It is also clear that Homeric influence was essen­
tial in choral lyric as a whole and in Lesbian monody. 
The most we can venture to say is that, evidentiy, a Doric pop­
ular lyric existed which avoided becoming too similar to the local 
dialects and also to Ionic. It possibly united certain characteristics 
that were widely diffused in Doric and N . W . Greek, such as the A c . 
pi. in -oc, and the D . pi. in -eoai (some were also Aeolic), with the 
elimination o f Doric characteristics which were too specific and which 
distanced the city dialects from each other as well as from Homer. 
Yet H o m e r must have exerted an influence from an early date, for 
knowledge of H o m e r is attested in the few fragments o f popular lyric 
and in metrical inscriptions from the very outset. 
164. So, it would seem that we are facing a continuation of the oral 
lyric of West Greek, which was continued in the continent where it 
received contributions which were also diffused in the Aeolic dialects 
of Boeotia and Thessaly (from which they went on to Lesbos) and 
others descending from Homer. From this point on, new forms were 
able to enter, among them Aeolicisms. These gave rise to the entry 
of post-Homeric Lesbianisms, such as 
-OIGOC. 
The oldest choral lyric should be conceived as a minimal lyric, 
brief invocations to the gods, extremely brief refrains: thei*e is no 
reason why it should be combined with Hesiod or the Lesbian poets. 
It was influenced from the start by Homer, as I noted, but also 
undoubtedly by Lesbian monody, judging from the Lesbianisms in 
choral lyric as a whole. I have referred to this in §§ 162 ff. All this 
is deduced from a comparison o f the language of different 
choral 
lyric poets, who share a 'generic
5 Doric, minimal continental ele­
ments which are difficult to define, a lack o f Ionicisms and Homeric 
and Lesbian elements. 
In contrast, no Ionic or Aeolic choral lyric has been preserved: 
we can only point this out. It is possible that it may have existed 
as Archilochus would have sung his dithyrambs in Ionic: his 'Hymn 
to Hercales and Iolaus' has Ionic and Homeric resonances and its 
monodic strophes - which unite dactylic, iambic and trochaic rhythms -
presupposes the previous existence of chorals, just like those of Sappho 

EPIC, E L E G Y A N D C H O R A L 
L Y R I C 
109 
and Alcaeus; in this case, in addition, what we have are the rem­
nants o f the epithalamium sung in Lesbian by choregoi and choruses, 
at least, this is my theory. But the only one that has been preserved 
for us is Doric choral lyric 
165, T o gain a better understanding of this, it is important to study the 
origins of Greek lyric, to which I have dedicated a book, Adrados 1986a. 
Fragments of popular and ritual Greek hymns can be found in the Poetae 
Melici Graeci by D. Page 1967 and 1974, in J. U. Powell 1970 and in H. 
Lloyd-Jones and P. Parsons 1983, among others; in translation, with bib­
liographic information and notes, in Adrados 1980. On the metre, cf 
A. Meillet, 1975, p. 145 ff. The dependency of the language of lyric on 
Mycenaean has been studied, recently, by G. Triimpy 1986, see the cri­
tique by C. J. Riujgh 1986 and that by G. Brillante 1987 (who provides 
bibliographic precedents). 
With regard to the theory of the western poetical language', refer back 
to § 163. This theory is supported by, for example, Gh. Verdier 1972 with 
respect to the non-epic Aeolicisms of Pindar. I believe (see § 169) that, on 
a base of Homeric Aeolicisms, new Aeolicisms were progressively incorpo­
rated into the lyric ones from an Aeolic tradition which evidently existed, 
but which must not be confused with the continental Doric choral (which, 
I insist, displays hardly any specific characteristics; there are hardly any 
Boeotisms, for example), and is not really Doric. Another point is that ele­
ments such as ai, the inf. in -|iev, D . pi. -eaai, or uzha go beyond the 
limits of Aeolic: these are choices within a wider dominion. Above all, this 
theory does not take sufficiendy into account the role played by the influence 
of epic language and the progressive character of the incorporation of 
Lesbianisms and other elements. 
For the different Doric dialects, see the works cited in the bibliography. 
For the language of the choral lyric, see, among others, A. Meillet 1975, 
p. 208 ff.; O. Hoffman 1973, p. 125 ff; R. Hiersche 1970, p. 128 ff; L. R. 
Palmer 1980, p. 119 ff; M. Nothiger 1971. For Pindar, see, specifically, 
B. Forssmann 1968; Gh. Verdier 1972; P. Hummel 1993 (on syntax in par­
ticular). For Simonides, see O. Poltera 1997. On the role of the language of 
choral lyric in tragedy, F. R. Adrados 1953a and 1975c, also G. Bjork 1950; 
on phraseology, compounds, etc, in the language of theatre choruses, F. R. 
Earp 1970 and 1972, A. Long 1968; and W. Breitenbach 1934. 
166. T h e fact is that in the eighth century with Eumelus, and then 
in the seventh century with Alcman, in the seventh/sixth 
century 
with Arion, in the sixth century with Stesichorus and Ibycus, in the 
sixth/fifth with Simonides, Pindar and Bacchylides, we see the full 
flourishing o f choral lyric, continued by tragedy, which is known to 
us beginning with The Persians by Aeschylus, from 472. Then come 
some minor poets and ritual lyric, anonymous or not, which was 
sung at various celebrations. 

110 
C H A P T E R 
SIX 
It should be noted that very little by Eumelus has been transmitted 
to us (a very small fragment, which combines Doric a, Homeric enXexo 
and two Lesbianisms in -oiaot), that nothing has survived by Arion, 
and that the textual tradition of the authors who transmit quota­
tions from these poets is often suspicious, and vastly different from 
that o f the papyri which have been handed down to us. The same 
was noted with regard to the epigrams transmitted through literary 
quotations and their epigraphic versions. This complicates our task. 
T w o things should be pointed out. First, that the great festivals 
where this poetry flourished took place in Dorian countries: Delphi, 
Corinth, Sparta, Argolis, Sicyon and only secondarily (since Pisistratus), 
Athens; whereas the poets, with the exception o f Eumelus, are not 
Dorian — unless Alcman is taken to be Dorian; we are told that he 
came to Sparta from Lydia. Stesichorus and Ibycus came from 
Himera and Rhegium, respectively, the former city having a mixed 
language (Ionic and Doric, cf. Thucydides, V I 5), the second, Ionic. 
Simonides and Bacchylides were Ionic and came from Ceos. Pindar 
was Boeotian. 
So, neither the native dialects o f the poets nor those o f the cities 
in which they lived or performed (Stesichorus in Sparta, Ibycus in 
Samos, Simonides, after having been in Syracuse with Pindar and 
Bacchylides, in Thessaly, etc.) managed to influence the language of 
their poems. These were internadonal artists who sang for an inter­
national public in an international language with a Doric base, which 
was accorded prestige and intelligibility by a very strong Homeric 
component. In substance, it was a 'diminished' Doric with Homeric 
and, to a lesser extent, Lesbian elements. There are hardly 
any 
Laconisms in Alcman, Boeotisms in Pindar, etc.; Ionic hardly entered 
(except when it came from Homer), with some exceptions in Ibycus 
and Bacchylides. 
In short, we are dealing with an artificial poetic language 
filled 
with a polymorphism which offered doublets and even triple forms 
from which the poets could choose. It is the Doric counterpart o f 
the other literary language, epic, which was succeeded by elegy, also 
international. Quite simply, it was meant for another type o f poetry, 
other kinds o f festivals and ceremonies, wherever it was practiced 
and whatever the native origin o f the poet. Both lines o f the poetic 
language shared a Homeric and, in part, Lesbian component: they 
differed because o f the Ionic accent in the former, and the Doric 
accent in the latter. 

EPIC, E L E G Y A N D C H O R A L L Y R I C 
111 
167. In summary, the language of choral lyric contained an enor­
mous amount of polymorphism, which included: 
(a) Homeric elements, with Ionic and Aeolic doublets (but not 
all), including those which can also be interpreted as D o r i c 
(b) Non-Homeric D6ric (or continental) elements. 
(c) Non-Homeric Aeolic elements. 
Thus, the difference with respect to the epic language is that, on 
the one hand, it was restricted (as in elegy), on the other hand, it 
was extended with 'new Doricisms
5 and 'new Lesbianisms
5 justified 
by the existence in H o m e r of forms which can be interpreted as 
Doric or Aeolic, to which other non-Homeric forms were added. 
There must have been an interplay between a Doric or continental 
language and a Homeric language which displayed c o m m o n forms 
and, through these, justified the introduction of new forms, as for 
example that o f new Lesbianisms. 
So, this language was not absolutely uniform. In general terms, it 
should be pointed out that the Doric element tended to become 
reduced and the Ionic element to expand (forms which were at the 
same time Homeric, with exceptions, as mentioned above). This evo­
lution may be followed from Alcman to tragedy. 
Analysis of the fundamental elements of the 
language of choral 
lyric 
168. A general revision will be provided, eleborated later with ref­
erences to the evolution of this language and its peculiarities in each 
author. I think it is more practical to start with the Doric elements. 
1. Non-Homeric Doricisms, understood in the general sense: they 
appear frequentiy in the various dialects of West Greek, and even 
in those of N . W . Greek; some are at the same time A e o l i c The list 
is all encompassing - some of these 'Doricims
5 are lacking in some 
poets - but it is certainly not a complete list. 
So, we have the contractions ox > n and oco/co > oc (in the stems 
in -a, the G. sg. -a, pi. -av); the preservation o f - T I in 8i8coxi; 
pi. -vxi; the accent Tcai8a; the pronouns ajLiec,, xu, xiv, xo(, viv; the 
verbal forms evxi, r\q; the adverbs 
O K O C , 
TCOKOC; forms such as yXecpapov, 
opvi%a, (Jbpavoc,. 
T o reduce the impression of anti-Homerism, it can be said that 
in Horn, there is xuvn and nouns that preserve -xi; that in the more 

112 
C H A P T E R 
SIX 
archaic script there was no accent and AMOX was so written, the 
addition o f accents and writing ano<; or au^oc, came later. The same 
can be said for ox*/®-. 
It is important to point out that certain characteristic Doricims 
were avoided (in a general sense): the aor. in -£oc- of dental stems, 
the fut. in -Geco, the desinence -jnec;, KOC, the pronominal G. as in 
xeoc,, eixeog. Specific 'western' forms are also absent, such as -pa- > 
-pp-, D . pi. -oiq, and in all this there are sometimes differences with 
respect to certain local dialects, including Laconian and Boeotian, 
which were spoken by Alcman and Pindar. 
2. Doricisms (in the same sense) which are found in Homeric dou­
blets: as in aspiration/o, f/ 
0, a/r\ (the first being c o m m o n in our 
poets), 
K O C X O C ; / K a k o q , cd/ei, ueacoc/uiaoc;, xoi/oi, D . pi. -or/ 
- E G G I , 
- O I G I / - O I < ; , -aiai/-cac,, e{3av, inf. in -|iev/-uevai/-vai, Lxexd/7i:85a. 
Here, our poets occasionally preferred (but there is variation) forms 
within the Homeric doublets which were identical to the Doric ones, 
although this is not the case in Homer: their presence there serves 
as a support for their use. It is evident that a goes far beyond its 
use in H o m e r (but in the choruses of the tragedy it is restricted in 
turn) and the use o f n is much more limited. It is also clear that f, 
although it was maintained in the Doric dialects, was rarely pre­
served in our poets; that Ionic variants such as -vai tended to be 
rejected; and that, in contrast, other forms were accepted, such as 
-eoai and 7te5d, qualified as Aeolic, but really belonging to conti­
nental Greek. There is -eaor where metrically it would not fiVin the 
hexameter. At any rate, the use of certain forms is justified by their 
presence in Homer. 
3. Other Doricims which appear in doublets. I am referring to forms 
such as M S a a / M o u o a / M o i a a , to the inf. (pepeiv/cpepryv, cpepev, and 
the A c , pi. -ac/-a<;, -wc>/-ox><;/-Qq. O n c e again, it must be observed 
that the old graphia did not distinguish where we now distinguish 
and it is difficult to establish what was ancient, later there was a 
tendency towards 'Doric' forms; and to the post-Homeric Aeolic 
forms o f the type Moiaa, including fern, participles in -oioot, 3rd pi. 
-oiat. It seems clear that the existence o f Aeolic forms in Homer, 
interpretable as such, attracted new Lesbianisms: a process that ran 
parallel to others we looked at in the Homeric language. 
169. Archaic, Aeolic, and Ionic forms (or forms of another type), 

EPIC, E L E G Y A N D C H O R A L 
L Y R I C 
113 
have entered by means o f Homeric polymorphism. Sometimes, the 
polymorphism continues and both forms are accepted. 
In the case o f archaisms we are presented with, for example, the 
alternation between verbal forms with or without augment or o f the 
G. in -010 (rare, but present in the lyric); Lesbianisms, K E V alternating 
with dv, a|H|i£c/fiu£ic;, (potevvoq/cpaeivoc,, Moioa and others. In the 
case o f Ionicisms (although the term may be rather narrow), we are 
presented with ore, ^eivoc/^evoc,. Pure Homerisms may substitute a 
Doric form, as in the case o f -010 or the name o f the goddess "Apxeinq. 
But these are rare, just as the non-Homeric Ionicisms, as mentioned 
earlier. 
T w o things must be stressed with respect to (potevvoc; first, that 
the graphia with geminate is not old and that the accent may or 
may not be so; second, that, nevertheless, this phonetic treatment 
has a wider diffusion in choral lyric than in Homer. In effect, it has 
eliminated certain Aeolicisms or archaisms (G. in -oco, -dcov), but has 
widened the dominion o f Aeolicism, on a base o f Aeolicisms from 
Homer, including those which, as we have seen, were Doric or con­
tinental at the time. 
170. This much is definite: a general and diminished Doric, justified 
by H o m e r or not incompatible with it in general, dominates the 
whole scene; the choral lyric certainly goes further than H o m e r in 
certain details, in others there is variation depending on the poets. 
Aeolicisms are also justified by H o m e r - when they are not, it is 
due to their presence in 'Doric' dialects - and they increase in num­
ber; Ionicisms are also justified in this way, but they hardly increase 
in number. This is the general definition o f this language, a Doricising 
variant o f the language o f epos. 
Yet, compounds, phraseology and syntax must be examined, as 
well as phonetics and morphology. Here, Homeric influence is con­
siderable, although hexametric formulas do not often exactiy fit. But 
there is a proliferation o f new compound words, new phraseology 
and a daring syntax, full o f interruptions and stylistic uses, with lit­
tle subordination: cf, for example, M . Nothiger 1971, p. 162 ff. and 
P. Hummel 1993. All this differs markedly from the Homeric lan­
guage, as Hesiod also differed in part. It is believed that there are 
also traces here o f an independent tradition, that o f the oral type 
of choral lyric from continental Greece, most fully developed by our 
poets, culminating with Pindar. 

114 
CHAPTER SIX 
It must be pointed out that, from what we can see, this language 
is more or less the same as popular choral lyric and ritual lyric. The 
former is known to us through quotations from later authors who 
have sometimes disfigured it; nevertheless, Doric a and other char­
acteristics may be found in the song o f the Elean women (PMG 871), 
in the old men's hymn to Aphrodite (PMG 872), in the hymn of the 
Chalcidians in honour o f Gleomachus (PMG 873: together with 
tax%ex' without augment and a Hesiodic epithet o f Eros, Xvoi\iEfa(\q), 
in the Locrian song o f adultery in PMG 853 (there is both a and 
djLUi'), etc. Some o f these passages are monodic. 
However, there is obviously less regularisation: the Rhodian song 
o f the swallow (PMG 848) repeatedly makes use o f the 1st pi. in -u.ee,. 
Similarly, we find ritual lyric in engraved inscriptions in temples, 
to be sung by the faithful, in Delphi, Dion, Palaikastro, etc, from 
the fifth to the second century. These are 'editions', as it were, of 
the same texts, often accompanied by musical notation (in the trea­
sury o f the Athenians in Delphi). T h e y take a, -oiai/ -OK;/ -eacu, 
-ouc/ -oq, I I O O T I M V , 7iaidv/7iaicov, forms lacking augment such as yeivaxo, 
e t c , and always 1st pi. in -ixev and Homerisms such as obpae, %6Xi\oq. 
The evolution and variants of choral lyric language 
171. T h e evolution o f this language is recorded from Alcman to 
Bacchylides. It consisted in more Homerism, more Ionicism (but in 
Homeric terms, barring exceptions) and less Doricism (but while cer­
tain Doricisms from Alcman decrease in number, others increase 
with Homeric support); while Lesbian elements, in general, also 
increase. This is particularly well illustrated in M . Nothiger's statis­
tics, but also in the rest of the bibliography cited. 
This evolution is often reflected in the doublets according to the 
statistics provided by M . Nothiger: for example, the preference for 
ei after Stesichorus and Ibycus, for Ttpoc, increasingly, until Pindar, 
the progressive increase o f the proportion in favour of -oic,, the pro­
gressive tendency towards oxe; from Simonides onwards, there is 
almost only uexd, etc. Forms from Ionic and even Attic (including 
Boeotian) increase in number, but only when they are supported by 
Homer. From Alcman onwards, there is a reduction in Doricisms. 
Ionic-Homeric variants increase in number from Simonides onwards, 
so that even -vou enters; little o f Doric is left in Simonides and 
Bacchylides (-a, -av, viv, xiv, rare -^oc-, and not much else), -ev and 

EPIC, E L E G Y A N D 
C H O R A L L Y R I C 
115 
-ai disappearing; 
and Pindar also inclines towards ei, rcpoc,, -ovq, 
wtXoq. However, earlier in Stesichorus, Doricisms from Alcman such 
as f-, 
- T I and the Doric pronouns are absent (but some epic forms 
are present: -010, o%ea(piv, a hybrid (bpotvoGev). So, there was an 
increase in pure Homerisms, which were hardly present in Alcman. 
At the end o f the evolution, a few non-Homeric Ionicisms entered: 
G. -ecov in Ibycus, O I K E U O T , xkzooq, fiopryioq in Bacchylides. Some more 
Lesbisms also entered o f the type £7ioeivrj|Lii and o f those with -oic,-
and -vv-. 
T h e recent b o o k by O . Poltera 
1997 allows the study o f the 
differences (which in any case are slight) between the choral poets. 
Simonides is closer to Pindar in language and phraseology, both 
being more 'Doric' and Homeric than Bacchylides. Simonides is 
more advanced than the latter, for example, in his use of K 8 and the 
G. sg. in -ou. Exceptionally, he introduces Ionic n ('AQnvoucoi). Yet, 
the differences between the papyri and manuscript tradition as well 
as textual problems often make it difficult to reach any exact 
conclusions. 
172. The process o f leaving a minimum o f Doricisms and increas­
ing Homerisms and even Ionicisms has advanced the most in the 
choruses of tragedy, studied by Bjork 1950. A is limited to a few 
traditional roots and suffixes; n is also present and there are hybrid 
forms ((pf}ua). Other Doric forms include G. in -a, -av and -£oc, xoi. 
Besides these, there are also H o m e r i c forms (eiv, eue0ev, epccv, 
-jneoGa, i|AA)0ov, apeicov, verbals forms without augment), Homeric-
Aeolic forms (aujii, eujuev) and Homeric-Ionic forms (^eivoq, Soupaxoq). 
In this way, we have a useful polymorphism (vaoq/vecoq, ^evoc/^rivoc,, 
ajxui/ajLiiv, -oio/ou, etc.). Homeric vocabulary and phraseology is 
added. 
Atticisms also entered, as they had earlier in Solon, and these are 
studied in my articles Adrados 1953a and 1957: -aim, f]v, Swn, 
OTComa, yfipax;, phonetics that are archaic Attic and Homeric at the 
same time (-pa-, -aa-), and an abundant archaic vocabulary. This 
tends to distinguish the sacred language o f Attic choral song (which 
was more or less common, but also elevated), from the trimeters. 
Yet, there is a clear evolution in phonetics and morphology in an 
approximation to the common language. Nevertheless, the phraseology 
and new lexicon in poets such as Pindar and Aeschylus create an 
environment that is very distant from that o f prose. 

116 
C H A P T E R SIX 
173. Mention must also be made o f ritual lyric, to which I have 
alluded earlier and for which we have epigraphic evidence from the 
fourth century B C onwards (and from the fifth century in later copies). 
It is important to note that a similar language was used throughout 
the Greek world: the 'diminished' Doric, previously discussed, in 
addition to some Homerisms. 
T h e same occurs when it comes to engraved poems in Delphi, in 
Epidaurus, Palaikastros (Crete) or in Athens. Here, for example, the 
hymn o f Macedon to Apollo and Asclepius in an inscription in the 
temple o f Asclepius, contains, along with D o r i c forms such as 
eixpapexpafv, Homeric forms such as yeivaxo, oveiap, uepOTieaai, aiiv; 
and doublets such as Koupoi/KOpoi. Doricisms such as (3B(3(XK£C;, xeov, 
Kaxfj%e, Tiovxocpopoc, (Ac. pi.), but -u^v, KOup£, are present in the hymn 
to Diktaian Zeus o f Palaikastro. 
In the hymn o f Philodamus o f 
Scarphea to Dionysus, in Delphi, the same mixture appears, in addi­
tion to a vocabulary with Homerising compounds such as dA,ioq>£YYfi<;. 
174. There was a gap through which the c o m m o n language o f the 
poet and his audience could enter, as in the case o f Hesiod, Tyrtaeus 
and Theognis, among others. This also occurred in older choral lyric, 
but only to a small degree, for the c o m m o n and international lan­
guage which we have been discussing was always dominant. 
So, we do not come across any o f the typical Laconian forms 
which we might expect, such as aspirated -a-, yet we do come across 
aioq. Also Boeotian phonetics, which have a large presence in Corinna, 
are absent in Pindar, for example, des. -ovGi, pavd, 7C£xxapec; "in this 
and so many other things, such as the lack o f attention to digamma, 
Pindar follows H o m e r instead o f the local dialect. Few forms are 
attributed to the latter, and even these are uncertain, for example 
xd 'such as', Ttep, 
KOCV, vouov, 5i8oi, The native Ionic poets only 
rarely introduced this dialect in places where it differed from Homer. 
Thus, we have seen that there is a gradual distancing from purer 
Doric and an approximation to Ionic (and to some extent, Lesbian) 
where it coincides with Homer. This means that the two poetic lan­
guages o f Greece - the Ionicising language o f Homer, elegy and 
iambos (with gradual differences), and the Doricising language o f 
choral lyric - apart from sharing c o m m o n elements, tended to con­
verge. The more abrupt epicisms, Doricisms and Lesbianisms dis­
appeared, and the c o m m o n nucleus grew increasingly larger. 

EPIC, E L E G Y A N D 
C H O R A L L Y R I C 
117 
O n this base, one o f the subdialects, the Ionic of iambos (which 
we have not yet discussed and which, to a large extent, dominated 
both) would gradually become the c o m m o n language of prose, fol­
lowed by one of its variants, already known to us, which had pen­
etrated into Solon and the theatre: the somewhat Ionicised Attic. 

CHAPTER SEVEN 
T H E SPECIFIC L I T E R A R Y L A N G U A G E S : 
LESBIAN, B O E O T I A N A N D S Y R A C U S A N 
1. 
G E N E R A L 
O V E R V I E W 
175. W e have seen h o w the majority o f the Greek dialects are not 
literary in form, and h o w general literary languages emerged: the 
epic language in its various states and languages with either an Ionic 
or Doric base, but very influenced by Homer and very evolved. 
Three literary dialects developed alongside these, and they origi­
nated in particular territories, although the literary works were often 
composed in different parts o f Greece. T h e most important 
was 
Lesbian, that is, the Aeolic dialect that was transplanted to the island 
of Lesbos from Thessaly and the language used in the monodic lyric 
of Alcaeus and Sappho. 
It only survived in this area, aside from later imitations by Theocritus 
and Balbila. Next to it was the Boeotian dialect, used by the poet­
ess Corinna; and the Syracusan dialect used by Epicharmus 
and 
Sophron, Theocritus and in the prose of Archimedes and by some 
Pythagoreans and Sophists. These dialects were created to satisfy 
local needs, although their influence spread to the rest of Greece. 
These literary dialects, although they inherited much from Homer 
(and the two latter dialects, also from Lesbian), are on a very different 
level to the 'general' literary dialects previously discussed. Their geo­
graphic and popular 'base' is clear; all that was done was to elevate 
it to a literary level with the help of foreign influences. Therefore, 
they can be qualified as 'artificial' or international dialects only to 
a very small degree. Whatever the secondary diffusion of this liter­
ature, it is clear that it was intended for very concrete, monolingual 
populations. 
These 'specific' literary languages are mere episodes within the 
evolution o f the Greek language, whose central line passes, as dis­
cussed earlier, through the 'general' literary languages. 
O f course, we must distinguish them from the use of certain dialects 
in literature for documentary or parodic purposes: as, for example, 

LESBIAN, B O E O T I A N A N D S Y R A C U S A N 
119 
in Aristophanes (Megarian and Theban in Achamians and Laconian 
in Lpsistrata); and from their renewed use from the Hellenistic period 
onwards, when the geographic dialects had, or were about to, become 
extinct. 
2 . 
T H E 
LESBIAN L A N G U A G E O F M O N O D I C P O E T R Y 
1 7 6 . Although the Lesbian literary language is known to us only 
through Alcaeus and Sappho around the year 600 B C , it originated 
in the local Lesbian dialect which is clearly much older; even mon­
ody is older. 
The Lesbian language must have arrived from Thessaly after the 
fall o f the Mycenaean kingdoms. It supposes the existence of an oral 
poetic tradition within East Greek: actually, m o n o d y broke away 
from the choregos/chorus 
complex, extending the monodic interven­
tion of the former. Its metre, the so-called Aeolic metre, has been 
compared by Meillet to the metre of the Veda. Indeed, we have seen 
how the Homeric language and the language of the choral lyric soon 
came under the influence of the Aeolian dialect. 
Furthermore, Terpander, at the beginning of the seventh century, 
diffused Lesbian monody in Sparta and Delphi (not to mention the 
epic poet Lesches o f Pyrrha or Mytilene). He played an essential 
role: the invention o f the bdrbitos, a kind of lyre in seven chords, has 
been attributed to him, as well as the creation of the structure of 
the nomos, the lyric monody, and the adaptation of hexametric com­
positions to music. 
In the time o f Archilochus, the Lesbian 'paean' was already famous 
(cf. Archilochus 2 1 8 ) , and Sappho 1 0 6 refers to the Lesbian singer 
who travelled in strange lands. 
Therefore, Lesbian poetry was based on a tradition 
of oral 
poetry o f the East Greek, but it soon achieved its independence and 
exerted the aforementioned influences. It did not identify this tradi­
tion with the Dorian or Western tradition, although it is clear that 
Boeotia and Thessaly became linguistically and poetically closely 
related to the West, and that the Lesbian language of poetry would 
subsequendy influence all literary languages. It would influence choral 
lyric later than Homer: an increasingly greater number of Lesbian 
(and even post-Homeric) forms entered it from Alcman on. 

120 
C H A P T E R 
SEVEN 
It is believed that monody was able to develop in Doric and Ionic 
territtory in a parallel manner, but few traces remain, except in 
Anacreon and in other places, which will be discussed later (§ 190). 
Thus, the poetic genres were divided between dialects, with few 
exceptions:- there was Ionic iambos, Doricising choral lyric and Lesbian 
monody. The first two genres were diffused throughout Greece while 
the latter was limited to Lesbos, although its influence extended 
beyond the island. Each genre is linked to one of the three afore­
mentioned literary languages, themselves being closely related to each 
other through the influence of Homer. 
177. For the Lesbian dialect in general and that of the inscriptions in par­
ticular, see W. Blumel 1986 and R. Hodot 1990; for the Lesbian dialect 
of the poets, see G. A. Mastrelli 1954 and E. M. Hamm 1957. For the 
history of the interpretations of the Lesbian dialect of the poets, cf J. J. 
Hooker 1977 and A. M. Bowie 1981, but in particular, H. Rodriguez 
Somolinos 1998a. See the relevant pages of the repeatedly cited manuals 
on the history of the Greek language: A. Meilet 1970, p. 206 ff, O. Hoffman 
1973, p. 84 ff., R. Hiersche 1970, p. 118 ff. and L. R. Palmer 1980, 
p. 113 ff. For Terpander, cf. A. Gostoli 1990. The points of discussion are: 
the alleged Aeolic or Aeolic-continental lyric; the alleged Homeric origin 
of certain forms; and the existence of two types of poems in Sappho (as 
proposed by Lobel), one being more Homerising than the other. 
178. The language of Lesbian poetry was not quite the equivalent 
to the popular Lesbian which is known to us, to some extent, from 
the inscriptions. Notable examples of Homerisms should be added 
with respect to phonetics, morphology and vocabulary. However, this 
study will not examine the issue o f whether, in certain narrative 
poems such as the Marriage o f Hector and Andromache by Sappho 
(44 v.), Homerisms appear in greater number or the issue of how 
they were assimilated. Additionally, there are other forms and words 
that create some problems. 
It is not a question of listing all the characteristics o f Lesbian that 
are known to us from our study o f the dialects and o f Homer: the 
(partial) preservation o f p, the treatment o f the labiovelars and vocalic 
sonants, the treatment o f the groups -ee-, -a- + nasal and -pa-, the 
peculiarities o f the pronouns and o f certain verbal and lexical forms. 
Post-Homeric Lesbianisms should also be added, for instance, inter­
nal -a8-, -auog, the feminine participles in -otaoc and the A c . pi. 
-oiq, -ouc,, Zovvaaoc,, OTutara. Furthermore, some which are rare in 
H o m e r but c o m m o n here, such as baritonesis, verbs in -r\\i\ instead 
o f contracted forms, the D . pi. -eaai or the perf. part, in -ovt-. 

LESBIAN, B O E O T I A N A N D S Y R A C U S A N 
121 
It should be noted that some o f these forms go beyond the lim­
its o f Lesbian, as we have seen, and that some 'Homerisms' may be 
Lesbian archaisms (a, G . -010, -arov, perhaps D . pi. -oic,, -ccic, and 
verbal forms without augment; and, o f course, a normal Lesbian 
form such as -OG- whicri only continued the Homeric phase. This 
'coincidence', once again, enabled the fusion o f the two dialects with 
the acceptance of non-Homeric Lesbianisms. 
Certainly, other forms used by the Lesbian poets are clearly 
Homeric: for instance, metric enlargements such as ocGdvaioc;, the 
occasional long e or o before -v/p-p (faced with the normal Sepa, 
yova), the G . nf|A,eoc,, the Ionic forms n6Xr\oq, eooicocv, etc. Indeed, 
it was only through Homer that 'Ionic' forms were able to penetrate. 
179. However, Homeric influence is most noticeable in the lexicon 
and phraseology, and the same applies to Hesiod's influence and 
even that of the Homeric Hymns ((pouvo^ic,, euatparcoc,). In spite of this, 
as the study by Rodriguez Somolinos demonstrates, a third of the 
total number o f words in the Lesbian poets appear for the first time. 
Some o f these words (which number around five hundred, of which 
100 hapax) may be archaisms which were preserved here. 
T o be sure, it is easy to find traces of the Aeolic tradition we 
have been discussing when certain phrases keep appearing: oc%co 
Qeomoia, 
%puGoaTe<pavo<; (of Aphrodite). It should be noted that some­
times the Lesbian poets consciously depart from Homer: divvococ,, 
d%co, 6%0oc, instead of devvococ,, f)%f|, 6%0a. 
All the same, other words come from the popular and colloquial 
language or from the 'technical' language relating to trades and 
everyday life. 
So, the agreements between Lesbian and H o m e r enabled the for­
mer to be used for literary purposes, with the preservation of only 
a few Homerisms and the elimination of others. In this way, a local 
dialect was elevated to the status o f a literary language. 
3. 
C O R I N N A ' S 
B O E O T I A N 
180. Perhaps it was this model that was adopted by Corinna, the 
Boeotian poetess of the fifth century or perhaps earlier, in order to 
transform the popular feminine poetry of certain rituals into a per­
sonal and literary written poetry in the dialect o f her homeland 
(another poetess, Myrtis, is only known to us by name). After all, 

122 
C H A P T E R 
SEVEN 
the case o f Sappho is no different; other poetesses, such as Praxilla 
o f Sicyon, do not appear to have attempted such an undertaking 
(but we do not have sufficient data on this). 
However, Telesilla o f Argos wrote monodic poems in the Doricising 
language o f choral lyric: xdv jiotxepa, obpavco, but Homeric KOCX' oiipea, 
Lesb. (peuyoiaa. Similarly so with Timocreon o f Rhodes; and we 
come across the same language in small monodic fragments such as 
the song o f the Elean women and others mentioned above (§ 170). 
M o n o d i c lyric followed different paths in each location (it serves to 
recall the Ionic o f Anacreon and we will look at the Attic o f the 
Attic scholia, which display some Doric features). 
181. On popular feminine poetry, see E. Gangutia 1994 and my books, 
Adrados 1986a and 1995a. Unfortunately, as with the rest of popular poetry 
(collected, with introductory studies, in Adrados 1980), the pitiful state in 
which it has been handed down to us prevents us form forming any con­
clusions about the language. 
182. Corinna's principal fragment, about the dispute between Mount 
Helicon and Mount Cithaeron, has been transmited to us in a papyrus 
with Boeotian orthography from around 200 B C , and not in the 
orthography that she must have used around 500 B C . All the same, 
the language used was the Boeotian dialect, which had gready altered 
phonetics and many notable characteristics which distance it from 
Doric and Aeolic, with which it nevertheless shared many features, 
as we know. It contained pccvd
 
cwoman
5 for yuvri, TCOKOC for note, 
0icov for 0ecbv, 7ipdxoi for rcpcbxcp, -xx- for -aa-, -v0i, -v0n for -vxi, 
-vxooi, viv, <pepeu£v, etc. Corinna goes beyond the limits of choral 
lyric by using the G. with the -q o f the pronouns (xeouq). 
It is true that Corinna's dialect is not less interspersed 
with 
Homerisms than the rest: xoaov, &0avdxa)v, D . pi. in -oici, -ouai, forms 
without augment, ephelcystic -v, epic words o f the type dyKoi)ta>jieixao; 
as well as n e w words based o n the H o m e r i c m o d e l , such as 
tayoupoKcbxiJtoc,. Once again, it is the existence o f ambiguous Homeric-
Boeotian forms that justifies the use of this dialect. Yet it remained 
isolated and did not influence the future o f the Greek language. 
4. 
T H E 
D O R I C O F S Y R A C U S E 
183. Syracuse was the only city in western Greece that managed to 
use its language for literary purposes. Elsewhere in the West, written 

LESBIAN, B O E O T I A N A N D S Y R A C U S A N 
123 
literature used the same literary languages with which we are already 
familiar. W e have mentioned the poets Stesichorus and Ibycus. Pindar, 
Simonides, Bacchylides and Aeschylus would come to the court o f 
Hieron in Syracuse. 
However, Syracuse was a great city which experimented with its 
own language in mime and comedy, created here by Sophron and 
Epicharmus, respectively, encouraged by the establishment o f democ­
racy after the death o f Hieron in 478. Only fragments remain, but 
enough to give us some idea o f what this language was like: essen­
tially, a stricter Doric than that o f choral lyric, but not strictiy the 
Corinthian one might expect, given the foundation o f the city. W e 
are certainly dealing with a popular kind o f Doric koine which used 
the popular iambic and trochaic rhythms in parallel with Ionic 
and Attic. It was, in effect, a local phenomenon which influenced 
new Attic comedy, yet it was not, in the long run, its rival or a rival 
of Attic language in general. 
The fragments of Epicharmus and Sophron can be found in A. Olivieri 
1930. On their language, see A. Meillet 1975, p. 223 ff. and R. Hiersche 
1970, p. 159 ff. For the language of the Sicilian inscriptions, see V. Sicca 
1924. 
184. T h e well-known Doric phenomena are not worth 
repeating 
here. But it is useful to stress the presence o f Doricisms which are 
absent or practically absent in choral lyric, such as the des. o f the 
1st pi. -ueq or personal pronoun forms such as ejieoc,, duec,, uuec,, 
\|/iv, words such as Afjv 'to wish
5. Less c o m m o n forms include ioa\xx 
'I know
5, the inf. in -ixeiv (apparentiy from Rhodian), xdppcov, TjvGec;, 
KEKOG%E, 
etc. All o f this points to a mixed and evolved 
D o r i c 
dialect. 
As always, it must be pointed out that some Doricisms such as a 
or -GO- or -eaai are shared by Homer, and that, in this way, other 
Homerisms entered, not the more characteristic ones but rather those 
that were at the same time Ionicisms, such as -eo- (not -10- as in 
Doric), -a- next to -aa-, ot next to xo(, ephelcystic -v, youvaor (but 
KOpoq). Ionicisms or Atticisms such as rcctpfjaav, euou, (if we can rely 
on tradition) entered through this route. 
O f course, the Homeric lexicon and phraseology was accepted, as 
well as words imitated from H o m e r , often c o m i c or parodic: 
T O ^ O % V C C O V 8 C , , 8pocaTO%ociToc (applied to Poseidon). There is a prolific, 
popular creation o f compound words such as eJiaiocpiAocpdyoc, 'who 

124 
C H A P T E R 
SEVEN 
likes to eat olives', jjxxKpOKairjiuXauxnv 'with a long twisted neck', 
yuvctiKdvSpeeai 'women-men', etc. 
Until the third century, there continued to be representations o f 
the phlyakes, a type of mime that is found on characteristic vases. 
Lexicographers preserve some words with Doric forms, such as e%coaoc, 
Kcuvav, (pocivo^av (formerly, in the Homeric Hymns and in Sappho), 
beside KoGocpoc, (in inscriptions) and the vulgarism bXioxaxv: in all 
cases, the same phenomenon. 
185. But it was not just the comedians (in the general sense) who 
made the dialect o f Syracuse literary. Theocritus, the creator of 
bucolic poetry in the third century BC, wrote idylls not only in epic 
and Lesbian dialects, but also in the Doric o f Syracuse. This was 
dependent on the influence o f the popular origins o f the genre, as 
in the adoption o f the song o f the Sicilian shepherds, or on the 
influence o f Hellenistic realism, as in the presentation o f Syracusan 
hetairai trying to win back the lover w h o abandoned her ('The 
Witches'), or o f the two women o f Syracuse who attend Adonis's 
festival in Alexandria ('The Syracusan Women'). All of this was imi­
tated by Bion and Moschus. 
O f course, realism was not absolute, Theocritus is tinged with epic 
and Lesbian poetry. In the first of his idylls, "Thyrsis\ we find, among 
other forms: 
(a) Doricisms such as a, ee > n, xav, Kcopa, oaaov; 
K C C , dv-, Ttoti, 
TCOKCC; 
T O , xr)va, toi; I7iv5co, raupcoc,, 7iap08voc, ( A c pi.); eao;i, 2nd 
sg. -ec,, 1st pi. -u.ee,, inf. -ev, fut. 5caaS, Xr\\\ff\. 
(b) H o m e r i s m s such as 7toto:uoio, a i , duiia, copeoq (Doricised), 
A D K C C O V I S C C O , aXaea, Xim, 
eyevxo. 
(c) Non-Homeric Lesbianisms: jneAaa8eToci, Moiaou, yeXcuaa. 
(d) Ionicisms: (pepeu. 
O n c e again, we are faced with a local dialect that is influenced by 
the great literary currents which spread throughout 
Greece: the 
Homeric, Lesbian and Ionic currents. However, it was a discovery 
which had minimal impact outside o f Syracuse. 
186. Finally, we should take note of the attempt by Archimedes, 
who was living in Syracuse at the same time as Theocritus, to cre­
ate a scientific prose in Syracusan Doric. Although he also wrote in 
koine (in the text found in a Jerusalem palimpsest), the works that 
have been handed down to us through manuscripts are in Syracusan 

LESBIAN, B O E O T I A N A N D 
S Y R A C U S A N 
125 
Doric - though very altered, it must be said, whether due to the 
influence of koine or through medieval transmission. Some Pythagoreans 
and Sophists also wrote in Doric, as previously mentioned (the dialexeis). 
This romantic attempt was doomed to fail. Attic koine, which had 
begun to penetrate early on and would b e c o m e universal in the 
fourth century, was strictly and persistently imposed in Syracuse, as 
it had been in Lesbos, Cyprus, Laconia and the entire Greek world. 
Soon, Sicily would become Roman. 

CHAPTER EIGHT 
T H E L I T E R A R Y L A N G U A G E S O F T H E A R C H A I C A N D 
C L A S S I C A L P E R I O D S : I O N I C A N D A T T I C 
1. 
I O N I C 
IN T H E I A M B O G R A P H E R S A N D IN G E N E R A L P O E T R Y 
187. After the language of epic and elegy, the third general lan­
guage o f the Greeks, a literary language with a dialectal base, is the 
Ionic o f the iambos. It is not an updated and Ionicised epic lan­
guage, but an Ionic language with epic ingredients, although this is 
not always easy to see. In contrast to the language o f elegy, this lan­
guage is only recorded in Ionia, although Stesichorus no doubt also 
used it in his iamboi. But Ionia also refers to Attica, for the literary 
Attic o f Solon and o f drama is a variant of Ionic, and it is the pre­
decessor o f an Ionic language which had a greater diffusion: that of 
Ionic prose, which, as discussed earlier, in turn opened the way for 
Attic prose. 
The term iambos, certainly not a Greek word, is used to refer to 
a series o f genres in either iambic rhythm (a foot containing two syl­
lables, short and long) or trochaic rhythm (the reverse). The iambic 
trimeter had a great diffusion, as well as the choliambic (the, same, 
but with a long penultimate syllable), the catalectic trochaic tetra­
meter, epodes or distics which combine iambic or trochaic kola or 
'members' with dactylic or other kola. 
This popular poetry was cultivated by Archilochus o f Paros (sev­
enth century), Semonides o f Amorgos, Hipponax o f Ephesus 
and 
Solon o f Athens (sixth century), and subsequendy by Attic comedy 
(from Susarion in the sixth century onwards, allegedly). It 
flourished 
in certain popular cults, like those o f Dionysus and Demeter, in the 
context o f jokes and free conversational language. Although the 
themes are partly similar to those o f elegy, there is more freedom 
here in the treatment o f the same themes and in the language. For 
the first time, we encounter a language of the people in a register 
that is a cross between the colloquial and satirical, and is sometimes 
even vulgar. 

I O N I C A N D 
A T T I C 
127 
188. 
This, in general terms, constituted the Ionic dialect, only it 
received a literary character with the help o f epicisms which were 
not so remote from conversational language. 
I will not deal with the Ionic o f Stesichorus's iamboi, which is 
difficult to reconstruct because the material we have is Atticised (cf. 
Adrados 1982a). Archilochus, to begin with, used contracted froms 
(particularly -eu- for -eo-), crasis, so-called Attic declension (nXmq), 
forms of the type 
O K O I U V , D . (predominandy) in -oiai, thematic oXXvo), 
etc. 
There is no G. in -oco, -acov, apocope o f the type 
K & X X U T O V , 
infinitives in -jnev, -uivou, case in -(pi, Aeolic forms with 
- L X U - nor K£ 
(with one exception), e t c ; only in parodic or cultural contexts do we 
find AuDvuooi', loXaoq, Xim. There are Homeric forms, but these 
are assumed to be archaic Ionic before contraction, such as oce0A,ov, 
or before metathesis (7tocpf|opoc;). 
It is interesting to see the innovations o f the lexicon: old words 
with a new meaning, popular vocabulary, sometimes obscene (adGn, 
uuicnc,, 'prick
5) or from the countryside (A,uiepvf|X£C,, 'poor
5) or bur­
lesque (Kepo7tA,doTnc, 'with a hairstyle in the form of a horn', pdpocJ; 
'charlatan
5), occasionally of non-Greek origin (Lrupxov 'mirth', u/opov 
'unguent'). A n d yet, Archilochus's iamboi, as demonstrated 
by 
D. Page 1963, are full o f Homeric formulas and echoes, sometimes 
with a change in meaning. 
Similar observations can be made with respect to Semonides. For 
instance, there is no -eaor, -oio, we find 
O K C G Q and related forms, 
forms without contraction (sometimes with synizesis), e t c But there 
are sporadic Homerisms such as eemev, ynpaoxuev, aw, oupeaiv. A 
new 
vocabulary appears, sometimes popular (oavXa Pocivcov, 'walk­
ing effeminately', doP6?ir| 'ash', Poucicdpi 'Lydian unguent', Aaxocpyoc, 
'who 
runs quickly
5, etc). 
Hipponax is clearly Ionic ('AxxdJteo), Kpeaaov, O K O D ) ; the Homerisms 
are parodic (duuopoq). There is an abundance 
of popular words 
(Tiuyecav 'ass', Kaxcou6%ocvo<; 'homosexual') or borrowings from Lydian 
or Phrygian (K&X\XV<; 'chief, rauric, 'priest', PeKoq 'bread'). Here, instead 
of a lexicon o f the Greek substratum we have a substratum from 
other languages. But, instead o f the colloquial Ionic o f the 
other 
iambographers, here we find above all a truly vulgar Ionic, full of 
foreign words and obscene terms. 
189. 
Solon presents an even more interesting case, because in his 
words we see how, with slight modifications, the language of the 

128 
C H A P T E R 
E I G H T 
iambos has become Attic, something which would develop into two 
different varieties: comedy and tragedy. Here, we find pure -a and 
the contraction -eo- > -ou-; but there is also Ionic n through Homeric 
reminisence (dvayKairiq) and a contraction -eu- (1, 45), probably cited 
from an Ionic iambographer; there are also the Ionic forms uouvov, 
eepSov, no doubt from Homer, as well as archaic Attic vocabulary, 
as one would expect (cf. Adrados 1953a). 
The fact is that within the Ionic territory, including Attica, the 
popular language became literary for the very first time, albeit with 
certain epic touches (hardly ever archaic or Aeolic). In Ionia itself 
this type o f poetry was soon exhausted, but it continued in Attica 
in comedy; and, with less popularity, in tragedy. This limited route, 
together with that o f Ionic prose, which soon spilled over Ionian 
borders, contributed to the creation of literary Attic, otherwise favoured 
for historical reasons linked with the commercial and political expan­
sion o f Athens. 
I would like to draw attention to the enormous impact of the cre­
ation, for the very first time, of a literary Attic in Solon's work, as 
a variant o f the Ionic o f the iambos. It was an innovation o f enor­
mous transcendence, as its political creation had been, democracy. 
For, when tragedy was created - an Attic invention in which the 
chorals o f lyric or 'Doric' language were accompanied by iambic 
dialogue — there was a model to write these iamboi in Attic: Solon. 
Subsequently, the model of tragedy and also o f satyrical drama made 
an Attic iambos possible in comedy when it was created in 485. 
This was one o f the precedents for Athenian prose at the end of 
the fifth century. 
There is another precedent: the Attic skolia. The collection which 
is preserved dates back to between the end o f the sixth century and 
an indeterminable date in the fifth century. However much they 
depend on the language of choral lyric, containing Doric and Homeric 
forms (especially a, emiev, K ' , eyevx', dvaaaa, etc.), they also contain 
forms which are either Ionic-Attic or simply Attic: contracted forms 
(oivo%oeiv, KccTeoGieiv, eABeiv, Em^fjGoD, nXovieiv, cppoveiv) alternat­
ing with uncontracted forms, D . pi. -oic,/-oiai, -ueaGcc, and, above 
all, the dual (KTotvernv, %ocip£Tov, etc.). 
T o be sure, models o f Attic or semi-Attic prose were created in 
a rather surreptitious manner. 

I O N I C A N D 
A T T I C 
129 
190. 
It is still worth recalling that melic poetry was also composed 
in literary Ionic: concretely, in Anacreon o f Teos, who fought in 
Abdera, Thrace, lived in the courts of Polycrates o f Samos and 
Hipparchus of Athens, and died in Thessaly. His poetry travelled to 
all these places. 
Anacreon's poetry was written in a purely Ionic language with 
uncontracted forms (ejiiCTpecpeai, ouiAicov, but also the Ionic con­
traction Aeuvuae), n (jcopcpupfi), D . pi. in -not, crasis 
( K & K O T C O V ) , and 
variants such as TroAafixnc,. It accepted much satirical and popular 
vocabulary, as in the p o e m against Artemon ( P M G 43). But, o f 
course, it also contained some rare Homerisms: ttTepx>Y£aai, 6%dvoio, 
SocKpuoeaaav, also in the lexicon, with poetic or Homeric compounds 
created on the latter. There are also rare Lesbianisms such as KoiXoq, 
Xpuoocpaevvcov. In short, we are faced with an Ionic that is slightly 
coloured with archaisms or Homeric and Lesbian forms, as in the 
lyrical tradition in which Anacreon is included. 
2. 
I O N I C 
PROSE 
Generalities and beginnings 
191. 
Prose for literary purposes began to be written in Greece from 
the mid-sixth century B C onwards (this should be distinguished from 
the diverse types of prose mentioned above used in inscriptions). The 
writings were either philosophical (including cosmogonic) or histori­
cal. 
They have been preserved in a very incomplete form, in small 
fragments, with the exception o f the last 
flowering 
of this prose, 
which has been transmitted to us through the medieval manuscripts 
of Herodotus and the Corpus Hippocraticum. The transmission is defficient 
and there are serious doubts about the origin o f the Attic forms 
found in it. 
Evidentiy, the origins of the prose can be traced back to a change 
of mentality. The documentary prose of inscriptions was set aside, 
as the new individualistic and rationalistic culture sought to create 
an entirely different way of thinking and a history that consciously 
departed from the ancient myths. Occasionally, poetry also aspired 
to this (in X e n o p h a n e s or Parmenides). This was accompanied 
by 
an approximation to the everyday colloquial language and a 
rejection, at least in part, of the old models (although those models 

130 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
continued to exert an influence, in their distance from the everyday 
and the trivial). 
192. It should be added that this Ionic prose was universal, being 
the only existing Greek prose at the time, and was adopted by writ­
ers o f Doric origin or by others, whatever their origin, who lived 
and worked in non-Ionic speaking cities. 
That is, there were Ionic writers: among others, the logographers 
who wrote in the Asian cities and in the islands (Hecataeus of Miletus 
is the most well-known), Pherecydes o f Syros (the author of a cos­
mogony), the Milesian philosophers, Heraclitus of Ephesus, Democritus 
and Protagoras o f Abdera. 
But there were also writers who were born outside this linguistic 
region: as is the case, as is well known, o f Herodotus, who was born 
in the Dorian city o f Halicarnassus (he later moved to the Ionian 
island o f Samos, then to Athens and other parts), and in the case 
of Hippocrates and the physicians of the Dorian island o f Cos, some 
o f w h o m were travelling physicians. But there is also the case of, 
for example, Acusilaus o f Argos (author of a genealogy), Hellanicus 
o f Mytilene (author o f a history of Attica) and Pherecydes of Athens 
(author, too, o f a genealogy), among the logographers. O n the other 
hand, many writers w h o were Ionian or wrote in Ionic lived in 
Athens: Democritus, Hellanicus, Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, Protagoras 
and other philosophers and Sophists. 
H o w did all this occur? The movement in favour of Greek prose 
evidently originated in Ionia, where philosophers and historians 
decided to dispense with those poetic dialects which were also 
Ionicising. The shift from a mythical to a rational mentality is reflected 
in the shift from hexametric poetry (iambic poetry was also inade­
quate) to prose. But there was an essential precedent: apart from 
the official Ionic o f the inscriptions, there was also a popular Ionic 
o f the iambos. Another leap, and the move to prose was made. 
These thinkers travelled throughout Greece and had an influence 
everywhere, particularly in Athens. But at a certain point, in the last 
third o f the fifth century, it was certainly in Athens where 
they 
realised that if they were to widen their influence in a city which 
had become, intellectually-speaking, 
the main city of Greece, they 
would have to write in Attic. 
Evidentiy, the Sophists and philosophers in Athens spoke in Attic. 
It was a diglossia, for they spoke in Attic and wrote in Ionic. But 

I O N I C A N D 
A T T I C 
131 
at least one o f them, Gorgias, who had arrived from Leontini, Sicily, 
in 427, broke with this habit and started to write in Attic. He did 
this precisely at a moment in which Attic was invading Ionic. H e 
had the courage to break away, thereby opening the way for the 
Athenians and later for others. Indeed, the triumph of Attic in a 
world where it coexisted with Ionic marked the start o f the creation 
of koine: Attic with certain Ionic or general variants o f Greek. 
193. T h e shift from hexametric poetry to prose (still avoided by 
philosophers such as Xenophanes, Empedocles and Parmenides) was 
not easy psychologically speaking: literature was strictly poetic. It was 
helpful, just as for the formation of the different poetic languages, 
that precisely these languages were full of Ionicisms: they were a 
mixture of Ionicisms and epicisms o f various origins, sometimes also 
of Lesbianisms. Ionic prose continued this process to a certain extent, 
insofar as it continued to add epic elements to the Ionic elements, 
albeit in a more restricted way. 
The relation between spoken Ionic and Ionic prose presents a real 
problem. T o begin with, the former is hardly known to us. W e know 
only the language of the inscriptions, which does not support the 
assertion by Herodotus I 42 that there were four dialects in Ionia: 
very small differences are found, particularly certain innovations in 
Chios and Erythrae, and other coincidences in Chios and Miletus. 
By contrast, in Herodotus, who is the most studied author, impor­
tant sections o f vocabulary are found which are lacking in the inscrip­
tions. Indeed, in all these authors we find Homerisms, to a greater 
or lesser degree, as well as the development o f a new paratactic 
syntax and stylistic features destined for success: alliterations and 
repetitions, a new w o r d order, the historic present rejected by 
Homer, etc. 
194. On the Ionic dialect of the inscriptions, see Ch. Favre 1914, A. Lopez 
Eire 1984b, p. 340 ff. and K. Stiiber 1996. On the language of Ionic prose 
in general, cf. above all E. Norden 1898, K. Deichgraber 1962, H. Haberle 
1938 and S. Lilja 1968. On Herodotus, G. Steinger 1957, M. Untersteiner 
1949, H. B. Rosen 1962, E. Lamberts 1967, I. Beck 1971 and D. G. Miiller 
1980. On the whole subject in general, R. Hiersche 1970, p. 198 ff., 
O. Hoffmann 1973, p. 168 ff, L. R. Palmer 1980, p. 142 ff. 
The remarks of the ancient critics are not very coherent. The statement 
by Strabo I, 2, 6 that the most ancient prose only differs from poetry in 
its lack of metre is contradicted by Cicero, De oral II 12, 53, and Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus, De Thuc. 23, who refer to its lack of ornament; Hermogenes, 

132 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
De id. II 399 contrasts Hecataeus (who is 'pure and clear', and 'uses pure 
Ionic') and Herodotus, whom he calls 'mixed
5 and 'poetic'. 
For the language and style of the older works of the Corpus Hippocraticum, 
cf among others, P. Fabrini-A. Lanni 1979, A. Lopez Eire 1984b and 
1992, O. Wenskuns 1982 and A. Lopez Ferez 1987. As regards the cre­
ation of a scientific vocabulary and the actual structure of the treatise, I 
provide references in the chapter on the creation of the scientific language. 
195. W e find ourselves before a series of writers, the first o f w h o m 
were active in the second half o f the sixth century (Anaximander, 
Pherecydes o f Syros, Acusilaus of Argos); at the turn of the sixth 
and fifth centuries (Hecataeus, Alcmaeon, Heraclitus); in the first half 
or middle of the fifth century (Charon of Lampsacus, Anaximenes, 
Herodotus); and 
finally, 
in the second half o f the 
fifth 
century 
(Pherecydes of Athens, Democritus, Hellanicus, and the older writ­
ers o f the Corpus Hippocraticum). 
It should be observed that the Ionic writers who were active in 
Athens in the fifth century not only had H o m e r and lyric at their 
disposal, but also Attic tragedy and comedy; and those who were 
active at the end o f the century, Attic prose. At any rate, from the 
period o f the Persian wars, Attic was known to all of them. I have 
discussed this with respect to the Sophists. 
Indeed, towards the mid-fifth century we find Atticisms in Ionic 
inscriptions, as well as Ionicisms in the Attic ones, c f A. Lopez Eire 
1984b, p. 340 ff. This is the core o f the matter, a century after Ionic 
prose had tried to impose itself in the sixth century, dispensing as 
far as possible with epic influence. Indeed, it was in the second half 
o f the fifth century that it received a great universalist 
impulse, 
being already invaded by Attic elements. In the mid-fifth 
century, 
Athens dominated Greek politics and also, through theatre, Greek 
poetry. 
Yet it is difficult, as I have stated, to make detailed judgements 
about the language o f writers of w h o m we know so litde. But let us 
begin with the older authors, who predate the moment in which 
Athens peaked. 
196. N o literal fragments have survived o f the works o f Thales, 
Pythagoras, Anaximander and Anaximenes, among others, and there 
are only minimal fragments o f Alcmaeon. W e are better served by 
Pherecydes of Syros, thanks to a papyrus of some fifteen lines, and 
Heraclitus, whose literal quotes are numerous (but almost invariably 
in the form o f maxims); the same applies to Democritus, who is from 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
133 
the Athenian age, but for w h o m there are serious problems o f 
authenticity. 
Let us deal with a previous problem regarding the Atticisms that 
appear in Ionic writers in the fifth century, such as Pherecydes o f 
Athens and Hellanicus, jput especially, as we shall see, Herodotus 
and Hippocrates. It is sometimes postulated that these Atticisms come 
from the later textual tradition, other times that they were already 
present in the original texts o f these authors. The real answer is 
probably a mixture o f the two: the later tradition multiplied the orig­
inal Atticisms. W h e n citations come from a variety o f sources, as is 
frequently the case, we can clearly see the hesitation between Ionicism 
and Atticism. 
It could be said that, at least until the Persian wars, these writ­
ers would have had a command o f an Ionic without Atticisms, which 
would have gradually entered as the two dialects began to contam­
inate each other; and would have increased in the manuscript tra­
dition, particularly in some o f its later branches. 
197. This problem aside, and before dealing with the central sub­
ject o f epic forms, we should draw attention to two important char­
acteristics o f this prose: 
(a) Philosophic prose, above all, has an abundance o f abstracts 
(particularly in -ir| and substantivised neuters with or with­
out an article). Many are semantic innovations or pure and 
simple creations based on c o m m o n or, at times, epic lan­
guage. This is a subject that must be considered separately, 
when we discuss the creation o f the Greek scientific lan­
guage (also in philosophical poetry). For the first time, a lin­
guistic instrument had been created that was able to serve 
abstract thought. This included the creation o f new com­
positional structures, most certainly that o f the scientific 
treatise. 
(b) There is a proliferation o f a series o f figures o f speech, which 
were later continued in the first Attic prose, in order to 
compensate for the lack o f dactylic rhythm and to elevate 
the level o f the prose ('the style should be clear and solemn', 
aeuvoc,, according to Diogenes o f Apolonia B l ) . E, Norden 
in 1898 already recognized this and subsequentiy it has been 
confirmed by all scholars. 

134 
C H A P T E R 
E I G H T 
These figures of speech are alliteration, repetition, word play, 
parallelism, chiasmus and paratactic constructions (the so-called 
Xe^iq eipouevrt, although we have few examples outside o f 
Herodotus). With all this, a narrative prose was created which 
was both clear and capable o f establishing relations, and, also, 
expressive and capable of enhancing these elements. 
T o cite a few examples: 
Alliterations and repetitions: Pherecyd. Syr. 1, eyevexoyfj . . . yf]v yepac,; 
Heraclit. B 53, noXeyLoq Tidvxcov ^iev raxxrip eaxi, ftdvxow 8e paaiAeuc,; 
Anaxag. B 12, yvwurrv ye Ttepi navxoq nacav i'a%ei; Pherecyd Ath. 
105, 
e'Gue xa> rioaeiScovi 6 UeXiaq, 
K a i Jipoeute naox 7iapeivai, 
Hellanic. 54, dvco xr\q dcKavBou xou dvGeoc,. . . ate! avGeo-ocu. 
Word play: Heraclit. B 25, M,6poi ydp [xetpvec, \xeC,ovaq [loipaq Xay%a-
vouai. 
Parallelism: Heraclit. B 1, K a i xouc, \XEV Qeovq eSei^e, xovq 8e 
eXeuGepouc,; Anaxag. B 12, K a i dixoKpvvexai ano ye xov dpaiou xo 
7UUKV6V K a i ano xou \j/u%pou xo Gepjxov. 
Chiasmus: Anaxag. B 12, em ok KXEOV rcepixcopei Kai 7repixcopf|aei 
EKi 
KXEOV. 
Paratactic style: it combines the previous resources with clauses 
united by 8e, Kat, ydp, etc.; cf. for example, Hecat. 15, Heraclit 
1, Democrit 191. 
These figures o f speech are rarest in Hecataeus and the logogra­
phers, and in Democritus. These authors went the furthest in their 
search for a style without adornment. 
198. W e still have to deal with the subject o f epic's influence, which 
is derived from its penetration in all the literary languages and from 
the fact that both history and philosophy originate in Homer, Hesiod, 
and the rest o f Hexametric poetry. 
T o 
begin with, we certainly come across hexametric 
remnants, 
although some are clearer than others and some may be acciden­
tal. For instance, those that appear in Hecataeus or Pherecydes of 
Athens. W e also find, for example, in Heraclit. 1, Kai ercecov Kai epyoov, 
eupog TtoSoc, dv0po)7ie{ou; 35, eu \iaXa izoXX&v; Hellanic. 26, eu \iaXa 
ei86|j,evoi; Pherecyd. Syr. 1, Zaq \XEV Kai Xpovoc, fjaav; etc. 
But the lexicon and phraseology is of greater significance: frequently, 
the two go hand in hand, as in the start of the work by Hecataeus: 
'HKaxaioc, Mi^rjaioq obSe jiroGeixai (and in Demetr. De eloc. 2). 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
135 
Yet, 
phraseology aside, the harvest o f epic words (or c o m m o n 
words with epic forms) or of epic expressions is indeed great. Some­
times, we are dealing with poetic words in general. Some examples: 
Acusilaus: f]ev, TioXefjeeaKev. 
Heraclit.: dei^oooc,, dGupjuoc, dpnicpaxoc,, KXEOC, devaov, ij/euScov, 
T£KTOV£C,. 
Democr.: d-rnpoc,, 8ari|ia>v, ouoq, 6A,ooiTpo%oc;, 7ioXir|Tnc,. 
Hecat.: dpriyeiv, ouvojia, oupea. 
Pherecyd. Ath.: dxeoq, dmaq, epuKei, ouSoc,. 
Thus, there is no doubt about the influence of epic and poetry, unequal 
as it may be, and about the 'new style' (with earlier precedents) of 
parallelism, antithesis, repetition, etc. which would reach its peak in 
Attic prose with Gorgias. 
Herodotus 
199. Let us now turn to Herodotus, who, with the physicians, suc­
ceeded in diffusing Ionic as the language o f culture 
throughout 
Greece, starting from a few small cities and a small island in Asia 
(Halicarnassus, Gnidus and Cos). 
The writers mentioned above provided a precedent. They were 
Ionians whose work was diffused throughout Greece, especially in 
Athens, where many of them lived, and non-Ionians, such as Acusilaus 
of Argos, Hellanicus of Mytilene and Alcmaeon o f Croton, who also 
wrote in Ionic. 
With such precedents, before the writers o f Ionic made the move 
to Attic, another generation o f writers from a small corner of Asia -
Herodotus, Ctesias, Hippocrates and other physicians - had made 
the move from Doric to Ionic, converting it into the only prose-style 
of Greek culture. All of them were cosmopolitan individuals, born 
after the Persian wars. Exiled from Halicarnassus, Herodotus lived 
in Samos, an Ionic island, and later travelled in Athens, the Persian 
empire, Italy, and Sicily. He lived until the first years of the Pelopon-
nesian War. Ctesias was a physician in the Persian court and, like 
Hippocrates, lived until at least the end o f the fifth century. It is 
believed that Hippocrates had contact with the main intellectuals of 
his time. In any case, the physicians travelled and received students 
from all parts. 

136 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
It is not strange that men such as these should have looked for 
a dialect that was accessible to all the Greeks, as their predecessors 
had done so before them. Herodotus represents a shift from a myth­
ical to a critical and historical mentality, from localism to univer-
salism: on the basis o f small logoi on a particular city or village, from 
periegeseis or peripluses and from novelistic narratives, Herodotus artic­
ulated (without violating any o f these) a universal history directed at 
all the Greeks. In turn, the physicians also addressed all men. Their 
doctrine was based on the study o f human nature and broke with 
traditional magical beliefs regarding the origin o f disease. 
It should be emphasised that a universal language was as neces­
sary as it had been in the case of the language of epic or elegy, 
only n o w it had to be a prose language. The choice was clear: the 
oldest prose had emerged in Ionia, and it was in Ionia or its prox­
imities where these authors lived and where their audience could be 
found. Ionic was understood in Attica and the whole of Greece, and 
it linked up with the artificial, Ionicising languages of poetry. And 
it entered into ever greater symbiosis with Attic, which would end 
up displacing it as the literary language. 
In this way, the development of the literary languages went hand 
in hand with the p h e n o m e n o n o f Greek internationalism, 
the 
Panhellenic character o f this culture. The only step that remained 
to be taken was the replacement o f Ionic by Attic. 
200. But to return to Ionic and, firsdy, Herodotus. The logographers 
who preceded him wrote on the themes to which I have referred 
and wrote in Ionic, which contained certain epic echoes. Herodotus 
followed their example. However, he was still closer to epic than 
they had been: the composition o f his history imitates that o f the 
Iliad, and his purpose in writing it (I, 1), to ensure that 'great and 
admirable events
5 were not forgotten, provides a further parallel with 
the epic poems which narrated the 'glory o f the heroes
5. There is 
much of epic in Herodotus, and also o f tragedy, as I have discussed 
in other works (Adrados 1966, p. 317 ff., 1994d, p. 83 ff). 
Therefore, it is not surprising that Herodotus's language should 
have given the ancient critics the impression o f being mixed, poetic 
and Homerising, something which was discussed earlier (§§ 134 and 
193): Hermogenes, De id. II 399 regards Herodotus's language as 
'mixed
5 and 'poetic', as opposed to that o f Hecataeus; Longinus 13, 3 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
137 
describes it as Very Homeric'. There was no doubt a difference in 
degree with some o f his predecessors. 
A good part of this is attested in Herodotus's text: we find archaic 
and recent Ionicisms, Atticisms, words of various origins and, in 
effect, epicisms. The problem is that the text displays incoherences 
of which we are unsure to what extent they come from Herodotus 
himself or from the manuscript tradition (including the 
papyrus 
tradition). 
201. In our manuscripts of Herodotus, there is a coexistence of archaic 
and recent as well as Ionic and Attic variants, whether epic or not. It is 
believed that the archetypes of the two principal families date from the first 
or second century A D , so that their coincidencies should date from at least 
the Hellenistic period; sometimes the papyri coincide, whereas other times 
they contain a purer text, but not exempt from the same doublets. For more 
details, see the books by M. Untersteiner 1947 and H. B. Rosen 1962. 
It is clear that the Greek of Ionic inscriptions is partly different, yet it 
is difficult to establish linguistic use in contemporary Ionia in any decisive 
way. Cf Gh. Favre 1914 and K. Stuber 1996. According to H. B. Rose 
1962, p. 253, the dialect of Cos and Halicarnassus is closest to Herodotus: 
but this is not certain. A. Lopez Eire 1984b, previously cited, insists on the 
penetration of Attic elements from the middle of the century, p. 336 ff. 
(and of Ionic elements in Attic inscriptions, p. 341 ff). 
202. It is believed that a good part of Herodotus's 'anomalies', par­
ticularly those o f the archaic or epic type, are due to Herodotus 
himself; and, no doubt, also some Atticisms, although it is likely that 
the later tradition reinforced this. But to assume that Herodotus 
always used a uniform language - for example, with always con­
tracted or uncontracted vowels, with the A c . sg. o f the masc, o f the 
1st declination always in -nv, the D . pi. o f the 2nd always in 
-oxen, the A c . pi. o f nouns in -ic, always in -iq is to ignore the fact 
that in all Greek literary languages there have always existed pho­
netic variants and polymorphism, as well as an alternation of the 
archaic and the contemporary. 
There are cases in which the orthography of the period, that is, 
the ancient Ionic alphabet, indicates that the ouvoucc o f the manu­
scripts or the hesitation oupoc/opoc, are recent: this alphabet wrote 
O , and did not distinguish ou from o and, o f course, did not have 
a sign at its disposal to mark the spiritus asper. Contradictory ten­
dencies - epicising, Ionicising, Atticising - were operative while not 
evident in every step. O f course, without coherence. But they no 

138 
C H A P T E R 
E I G H T 
doubt maintained certain features o f Herodotus's language, for we 
certainly encounter epicisms and Atticisms, not to mention Ionicisms, 
which predominate. 
It is useful to study the language o f Ionic inscriptions, but this 
does not solve all o f our problems: as I have already pointed out, 
it offers coincidences with Ionic. For example, in the inscriptions we 
generally find -oiai in D . pi. o f the 2nd, but we also find -oic, in 
Halicarnassus in the fifth century: this therefore confirms Herodotus; 
and also other Ionicisms such as the G . sg. in -ou o f proper nouns 
in -nc.. O n the other hand, this language writes Ejii, rcoiEv, which 
attests to the existence o f a contraction that sometimes appears in 
Herodotus, sometimes does not: he has -ee, -eeaGai, -eev. There are 
hesitations too in other vocalic groups. N o doubt, Herodotus archaicised 
on the model o f H o m e r or o f the survival in Ionic o f certain vow­
els in hiatus, such as -eo- (but in Herodotus there are also contracted 
forms, Ion. -eu-, At. -ou-). H e also certainly archaicised in using vnoc, 
'temple' and in various forms with -n- o f the noun for 'ship'; there 
is fluctuation in Homer himself, whereas in Herodotus it is the manu­
scripts that fluctuate. 
Fluctuations may be Ionic, such as that o f the A c . sg. of the masc. 
of the 1st, already cited, between -nv and -ea: these are not attested, 
but the G . sg. -eccAe-Dc, is. In Ac, pi. we find 
TCOAIC, beside noXxaq in 
the literary texts, not just in Herodotus; this could be old, but there 
are doubts concerning At, noXexq, perhaps a recent introduction. 
These are not the only cases in which there is a fluctuation between 
Ionic and Attic forms, cf. for example, R . Hiersche 1970, p. 189 ff, 
A. Lopez Eire 1984b, p . 337. 
Thus, I believe that the conception o f Herodotus's language as 
mixed and poetic, with Attic elements, is correct. But it means that 
in the course o f transmission, the presence o f these elements became 
accentuated, although w e cannot fix any exact limits. 
203. Thus, we can speak in terms o f various sectors o f Herodotus's 
language, including the lexicon. 
(a) Ionic sector. This is the most frequent, and it includes the almost 
omnipresent n for a (there are some explicable cases o f a, cf. 
R. Hiersche 1970, p. 203), the predominance o f the D , pi, -oicn, 
inflection in - i c / - I O C , , the perf. and plusq. 3rd pi. 
-CCTCCI, 
- O C T O , psilosis 
(only in remnants), the lexicon and so many other things. I have dis­
cussed the possible variants and archaisms which rely upon epic. 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
139 
(b) Epic and Homericising sector. Obviating to what extent this sec­
tor may have been extended by tradition, it exists, of course, and is 
justified by the reasons mentioned above. But the Homerisms are 
much more limited than they are in poetry; for example, there is 
no G. in -010 except in transcribed oracular hexameters, no 'Aeolicisms' 
of the Kev type, or outdated archaisms. It is a question o f a light 
Homeric hint or taste. 
In morphology, we can attribute the very rare D . pi. in 
- E G G I to 
this influence, as well as the apocopated preposition and pre verb dv-, 
iteratives such as 8%eaK£, formations such as 7ioXiT)Tnc, (but also itoXiv(\<$, 
and, above all, numerous words and expressions: see note, djieiPeTo, 
djKpiTcoXoc,, dTpeicecoc,, KocTceAii;©, euxe, Qv^iaXyia ejrea, etc. 
There is also Homeric influence in phraseology, as for example 
when Syagrus replies to the pretensions of Gelon of Syracuse (VII 
159, 
cf. //. VII 125) or when the Lydian king Pittheus replies to 
Xerxes (VII 28). 
(c) The Attic sector (justified by the fact that Herodotus, who admired 
the city, resided there, cf. VII 139, and by the growing confluence 
of both dialects). I have already discussed the contraction -ou, and 
I would have to add aspiration instead o f psilosis in oupec,, etc., voaeco 
beside vouaoq, some particular rare duals, a contaminated form such 
as Gcouua (from Ion, Gcoucc and At. Gocuucc), the lexicon, for example, 
drcoXoyeouou, vauKpapoi, ooopoooKeco, ETC' auxocpcopq), KapaooKeco; and 
the inclusion o f tragic words, such as Seiuccioo), Spdjanua. This antic­
ipates not only the arrival of Attic as a literary dialect, but also the 
creation o f koine. 
(d) The foreign sector. Being a traveller with an impenitent curios­
ity, Herodotus introduced words o f various origins: Egyptian (Tupco^ic, 
'gentleman', 
KDAATIGTIC, 'bread', 
KataxGipic, 'dress'), Persian (dyyapoc, 
'post', aKivdicnc,, 'scimitar'), Median (GTcdica 'dog'), Scythian 
(aG%u, 
'a fruit'), Lybian (^eyepieq, 'hill'), Phrygian (Pexoc, 'bread'). He was 
also familiar with various technical terms from the Greek dialects. 
204, 
W e must conclude that Herodotus's dialect restricted epicism 
much more than the previous literary language, that o f elegy. It fol­
lowed the path initiated in this respect by iambos and yet it does 
not represent the totality o f the Ionic language. Within it, there are 
less Homerising sectors, as represented by some of the logographers 
a n d also medical writers, see §§ 205 ff. As regards Atticism, Herodotus 

140 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
is associated with the group that introduced it in a moderate way, 
within the cultural and political climate known to us, although the 
later tradition no doubt reinforced this feature. Hippocrates, as we 
shall see, inclined more towards Attic. 
Herodotus represented real progress with regard to the construc­
tion of the phrase within the so-called paratactic style or Xefyq eipouivn, 
which, for the earlier Ionic literature, only rare examples remain. 
Yet, for Herodotus we can provide ample examples because his 
work has been preserved. In fact, there are entire volumes dedicated 
to this theme, such as those o f G. Stinger 1957 (epic elements), 
E. Lamberts 1967 (parataxis), I. Beck 1971 (ring composition) and 
D . G. Miiller 1980 (sentence construction in general). Advancing on 
a base o f parataxis, participles of various construction, ring compo­
sition and constant reference to terms of the preceding phrase, as 
well as a certain degree of subordination, Herodotus's prose departed 
from the artificial methods o f some o f his Ionic predecessors: the 
parallelisms, alliterations, etc. But we should add that Herodotus was 
capable o f constructing a hypotactic period where necessary: we only 
need to look at the first paragraph o f his work, in which a main 
clause is followed by a final clause organised into antithetic members. 
However, Herodotus never managed to break with the traditional 
epic construction based on digressions and constant changes in set­
ting. Only with Thucydides would we arrive at a composition obey­
ing a strict chronology and organisation. 
But his organisation o f the paragraph constituted a break in which 
he was certainly following authors such as Hecataeus and which 
anticipated the break that would be made by Attic prose at some 
point, surpassing Gorgian prose. These were the origins o f narrative 
and scientific prose, in which the physicians, in addition to the 
philosophers and Sophists, played an important role. W e will briefly 
refer to the physicians below, but the subject will be dealt with in 
a separate chapter. 
The ancient Hippocratics 
205. The case of Ionic in the oldest writings of the Corpus Hippocraticum, 
from the last part o f the fifth century B C , differs to a certain extent, 
but not in essence: fundamentally, we are dealing with the writings 
On Airs, Waters, Places, On Ancient Medicine, On the Sacred Disease, Epidemics 

I O N I C A N D A T T I C 
141 
I—III and Prognostic. There is a consensus of scholarly opinion against 
the attempts of editors such as Kulhewein to completely Ionicise the 
language of these treatises, and it is widely acknowledged that the 
mixture of Ionic and Attic forms in the manuscripts is certainly due 
to some extent to the authors themselves, although in this case too 
there is an increase in Atticisms in the manuscripts. 
For a general overview see, for example, R . Hiersche 1970, p. 
188 ff. and A. Lopez Eire 1984b, p. 338 ff. and 1992. Herodotus's 
epicisms are absent: forms without augment, iteratives in 
- E O K O V , 
f]V£iKa. W e find, though more rarely, doublets based on the preser­
vation of forms from earlier literature: there is meeiv beside Seircveiv 
(but more rarely). There are also similar alternations between Ionic 
and Attic forms (-oicn, -aiai/oiq, -aic,; avv/^vv; 
jne^ov/uei^ov; ovXoq 
but oXoq; vovaoq but vooxco) and there are Attic forms such as eocuxov, 
Se^ia, etc. 
Now, the degree o f Atticisation in the texts of the ancient physi­
cians is greater than in Herodotus. There is more contraction in 
-ei-, ouv, yovv (not obv, ySv), eOeoav (not forms with - K - ) , des. of the 
3rd pi. in -aai (before the type ieicu), G. pi. o f the 1st -iSv, noXvq 
and not noXXoq, dcTioSei^ic, (not -Se^ic,), jneyeGoq (not jneyaBoq), aparrv 
(not eponv), iepoc, is frequent, etc. Some new formations are based 
on Attic, such as vocnuaa. 
Thus, we are dealing with the same mixed dialect that linked the 
triumph o f Ionic with the growing influx o f Attic, as seen in the 
inscriptions and in Herodotus. A. Lopez Eire 1992 has studied cer­
tain passages in which Ionic and Attic are closely related. 
As would be expected, a few Doric elements entered: Ttoxi, ocuxoc,, 
auxov, etc. It is certain that a standardised Ionic prose was not 
formed, but there was a clear shift from a pure Ionic towards an 
Atticised Ionic. T h e last step was that taken by Gorgias: the for­
mation of an Attic language. 
But, aside from the essential feature o f Hippocrates's language 
-
a scientific lexicon and a scientific compositional structure, which 
shall be discussed later - we find here for the very first time (given 
that our knowledge o f the earlier Ionic prose is incomplete) what 
R. Palmer 1980, p. 142 refers to as 'the first fully developed prose 
style'. Its features do not differ so much from those o f Herodotus: 
ring composition, anaphoric recapitulations, repetitions, dominance 
of parataxis, cf. O . Wenskuns 1982. 

142 
C H A P T E R 
E I G H T 
In other words, in Herodotus and in the first Hippocratics, prim­
itive prose based on alliterations, parallelisms and diverse figures of 
speech was replaced by a broader, essentially paratactic prose based 
on ring composition and continuous references to the future and to 
the past. This phenomenon later occurred in Attic, when Gorgianic 
prose, related to primitive Ionic prose, gave way to the extended 
period, whether paratactic or hypotactic. 
3. 
T H E 
T R A N S F O R M A T I O N O F T H E A T T I C D I A L E C T INTO 
A L I T E R A R Y L A N G U A G E 
Attic as an oral dialect 
206. As we have seen, a dialect to which we refer as Ionic-Attic 
existed within southern Greek. Around the year 1000 BC, this dialect 
received some isoglosses from Doric. Its innovations, among which 
the most notable is the shift from a to n, are from a later date. The 
shift from -rjcov to -ecov and the metathesis o f quantity vnoc, > vecoc, 
are dated even later. 
But a certain amount o f isolation and differentiation 
occurred 
between the Ionic o f Ionia, the Ionic o f the islands, Attic, and the 
dialect o f Euboea. For example, this dialect did not convert u > u; 
where Attic contracted the vowels, Ionic did not do so. It did not 
lengthen vowels preceding groups of sonant and digamma (^evoq, 
not i;eivoc,), it converted - p a > -pp-, converted the a back to n after 
p, t, e, accepted Boeotian - T T - for - G O - , etc. It maintained 
(although 
not without exceptions) peculiar forms such as ^6v beside 
G U V , eiq 
beside eq. Furthermore, it distanced itself increasingly in the course 
of its internal history: it ended up preferring (after initial hesitations) 
exq to eq, -oic, to - O I G I , etc. Indeed, in an older work of mine (Adrados 
1953a~57) I thought I could indicate a series o f Attic differentiations 
in the lexical area. 
Attic was a species o f provincial Ionic, with some very special 
characteristics which even the Atticist writers, much later, would 
avoid. Athens was a small city which only began to gain recogni­
tion abroad with Solon and Pisistratus, a recognition which increased 
when it founded a democracy and liberated itself from Spartan 
influence; and especially when it acquired an essential role in the 
Persian wars and, later, led the Maritime League, from 477 onwards. 

I O N I C A N D 
A T T I C 
143 
From this moment on, Athens became very closely related to the 
Ionic world, so that there was a reciprocal influence between the 
two dialects: we have seen h o w from the mid-fifth century on there 
were Atticisms in Ionic inscriptions and Ionicisms in Attic ones: I 
will elaborate on this in § 243. Koine was definitively formed: an Attic 
held together by some of* its more peculiar characteristics and with 
certain Ionic, pan-Greek and even Doric features. After its split, 
Ionic-Attic underwent a new unification. 
Yet, however politically important Athens may have been, partic­
ularly from the Persian wars onwards, and however attractive it was 
to the Greek intellectual world, Attic was not yet the language of 
prose. Athenians such as Pherecydes wrote in Ionic: Attic was not 
yet 'salonfahig' as J. Niehoff-Panagiotidis 1994, p. 199 puts it (the­
atre is another matter, see § 209). Indeed, foreigners living in Athens 
and all those who wrote prose did so in Ionic. As mentioned above, 
they certainly would have spoken in Attic in the streets, just like 
Socrates and the orators at the Assembly and the tribunals, but they 
wrote in Ionic: for instance, Pherecydes, Democritus, Protagoras and 
presumably the rest of the Sophists. T w o foreigners, Gorgias of 
Leontini - already mentioned ~ and Thrasymachus of Chalcedon, 
put an end to this anomaly when they created Attic prose in the 
twenties o f the fifth century. However, this did not mean that Ionic 
disappeared entirely, for it was cultivated in the fourth century by 
the physicians Metrodorus de Chios and Ctesias, among others, 
although they were in the minority. 
207. On the Attic dialect, see §§ 117f. and A. Lopez Eire 1984a, 1985 and 
1987b; also, my early work of 1953a~57 already cited. We now have good 
descriptions on the Attic of the inscriptions: on phonology, the first vol­
ume of L. Threatte 1980, A. Lupas 1972 and S. Theodorsson 1974; on 
morphology, see the second volume of Threatte, 1996. A. Lopez Eire 1994 
provides a description of the evolution of Attic through the inscriptions. In 
addition, see A Thumb-A. Scherer II 1959 (with many references). On 
vulgar Attic, see P. Kretschmer 1894 and W. Rabehl 1906 (the tabellae 
defixionis). On the strata of Attic, A. Thumb 1974, p. 202 ff. and 
J. Niehoff-Panagiotidis 1994, p. 195. On literary Attic, R. Hiersche 1970, 
p. 207 ff, 152 ff, V. Bers 1983, besides the monographic studies. E. des 
Places 1934 is interesting. On double forms in Attic, see in particular 
A. Lopez Eire 1986, 1991 (Aristophanes) and 1984 (Thucydides). These 
double forms sometimes anticipate koine, see § 226 for their presence in 
Xenophon, the late Plato and in Aristotie. 

144 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
Sources 
208. From what base did Gorgias and Thrasymachus make their 
transcendental leap? O f course, from the normal dialect of the period, 
filled with poetic and intellectual influences, some of which would 
have been very much at hand and unavoidable in Athens. But, apart 
from that, there existed a written Attic that was spread over three 
different sectors: 
(a) Inscriptions. These were usually official or, at any rate, written 
in a formulaic and standard language, although we also encounter 
graffitti and different manifestations of vulgar Attic, as in the vase 
inscriptions studied by P. Kretschmer 1894. Here, we find forms 
used by the lower sectors of the population, as well as by foreign 
craftsmen. 
But it is important to note that, the more elevated official or pri­
vate inscriptions, despite their formalism, do not display a unified 
language: they contain multiple variants, see for example the data 
on doublets such as ec/eic,, ^uv/auv, -oior(v)/-oic,, -rjor/-ouc;, yeyova/ 
yeyevrjucci, -vufxi/-vuco, eoouev/eScbicocuev, etc., and they only corre­
spond to chronology in part. All o f this is in accordance with the 
variants found in various writers: for example, Aristophanes and 
Thucydides (see the works o f A. Lopez Eire referred to in the pre­
vious note). But the inscriptions were not very numerous: many 
dialects were used for epigraphic, not literary, purposes. 
(b) Tragedy. This is indeed a precedent: it is Attic iambos (with cer­
tain Homerisms and Ionicisms) coming from Solon, and even from 
Attic skolia. Here there definitely existed a literary Attic, a contin­
uation o f the literary Ionic o f the iambos: a language definitely 
intended to be recited. 
M y theory (see, in particular, Adrados 1983a), which is o f course 
impossible to argue in any great length here, is that certain mimetic 
and dramatic choruses, specialised in the mythic themes which were 
later referred to as tragic, had become an itinerant spectacle which 
presented various themes: the members o f the chorus were occa­
sionally transformed into actors and entered into dialogue with each 
other. These would be the Doricising choruses that Thespis brought 
to the Panathenaea festivals, at the request o f Pisistratus in the year 
534; with just one actor (a specialised chorus singer) in the beginning, 
we are told. 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
145 
There was no fusion of the Doric chorus and the Ionic iambos, 
no artificial fusion o f two independent genres, as has sometimes been 
suggested. In Athens, if one chorus singer or actor abandoned the 
song (in 'Doric
5) to recite iamboi (very few in the beginning, but more 
when two and then three actors were introduced) he would have 
had a obvious model in Solon. It was a great innovation. It is clear 
that an archaic Attic of the sixth century, with poetic influences, was 
used. I will provide details later. 
(c) Comedy (perhaps earlier, in satyrical drama). T h e iambos of com­
edy and Ionic iambos have the same spirit, both having 
flourished 
in similar festivals. It is not surprising that in the festive pendant of 
the tragedy that is comedy, created fifty years later in 485, iamboi 
were recited in the colloquial and, at times, vulgar style of those fes­
tivals. It was a literary language which could adapt itself to various 
dialects: also to Syracusan, and in this case, to Attic. Indeed, why 
look further afield for something that could be found within? Yet 
this was not a prose language but rather a poetic language of a col­
loquial kind. 
Characteristics 
209. It should be stressed that this did not yet constitute prose as 
such, but it provided a base for those who would go on to create 
it. This base consisted of two different levels or registers: the solemn 
and remote register of tragedy and the colloquial and familiar (even 
vulgar) register o f comedy. W h e n prose was created there was some 
hesitation about which register to follow: the hesistations which, 
after Gorgias, gave rise to the different literary levels o f Attic, as we 
shall see. 
W e have seen h o w the choruses of tragedy only preserved a few 
remnants of the traditional language o f choral lyric, and that they 
already displayed an Attic influence. G. Bjorck 1950 and particu­
larly R . Hiersche 1980, p. 147 ff., have stressed this. Yet, the iamboi 
(and trochaic trimeters) o f tragedy are closer to the c o m m o n Attic 
language, although they are very distant from colloquial, not to men­
tion vulgar language, displaying as they do a distance appropriate 
to a religious language. I have discussed this in Adrados 1975c. 
So, the theories regarding the Ionic origin of tragedy's dialogue 
have not always provided us with valuable perspectives. I refer the 

146 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
reader to R . Hiersche, as cited previously, with regard to the issue 
o f the 'elevated
5 language of tragedy, its polymorphism, the influence 
of epic language and the scarcity of Ionic elements. 
The fact is that we are dealing fundamentally with Attic. I have 
proposed (Adrados 1953a~57) that certain 'glosses
5 and anomalous 
forms which are qualified as Homeric or Ionic are simply archaic 
Attic, dating from the birth o f tragedy. W h y should a form such as 
- O I O T be necessarily Homeric or Ionic, when it is also present in Attic 
inscriptions? Why, too, should Beaunc, be necessarily so, when used 
by Solon, or 
OCTEOIVOC, when used by Draco? I have emphasised this 
point in the article cited previously, cf. Adrados 1957, p. 116. N o 
doubt, these terms were later eliminated from Attic prose, but some 
survived in popular language and passed into koine, as proposed by 
A. T h u m b 
1974. I believe in the 'subterranean
5 existence, so to 
speak, o f a series o f words, often Ionic at the same time, which 
would emerge in the late Plato and in X e n o p h o n and would spread 
into koine; or would otherwise enter it directiy. 
This 'subterranean
5 lexicon is only a part o f conversational Attic, 
which was able to 
flourish 
in the tragedy, the comedy, and in 
Thucydides, but was not admitted into Attic prose (or even the lit­
erary transcription of the language of Socrates). It undoubtedly formed 
part o f the great Attic dialect, which will be discussed further on, 
and then entered the koine. 
It is notable that part o f that lexicon was at the same time archaic, 
dating from a period in which the subsequent regularisation had not 
yet occurred. For this reason, it had the prestigious allure of high 
poetry, which was even more reason for it to be rejected by prose. 
It also provided tragedy with a polymorphism which was not only 
useful but also similar to that of all Greek poetry. 
However, it is clear that certain Attticisms that were felt to be 
provincialisms did not have prestige, as for example 
- T T - and -pp-, 
which tended to be avoided in poetry. The language of tragedy, 
being Attic, functioned in the way that all Greek poetic languages 
functioned. 
The same applies with respect to the different syntactic features 
of tragedy, also shared by other poetry, which are also at the same 
time Attic archaisms: the use o f number (the 'poetic plural
5), moods 
without av, etc. C f , V . Bers 1983 (and A 
C. Moorhouse 1982, 
Adrados 1992d, p. 285). 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
147 
T h e problem lies in the fact that the oldest tragedy dates from 
472, sixty years after the birth of the genre. But the conclusion seems 
clear. 
Naturally, the language o f tragedy evolved from Aeschylus to 
Euripides, and was able,. at times, to adopt colloquial tones and 
nuances which were more or less comparable to those o f some prose 
writers. This has been studied in Euripides by P. T. Stevens 1976, 
but it was already referred to by Aristode, Rhetorica 1404 b 24. Indeed, 
it is evident that the theatre, starting with tragedy, was a model for 
the oldest Attic prose and for Socratic dialogue. 
210, The study o f the language of comedy encounters an even greater 
obstacle than that of the tragedy: the oldest preserved comedy, the 
Acharnians by Aristophanes, dates from the year 425 and is contem­
porary with the oldest prose. Nevertheless, Aristophanes is essential 
for the study of the colloquial and vulgar registers of Attic and its 
phonetic, morphological, lexical and syntactic variants; also, for the 
study of the comic resources o f the language. I have cited two works 
by A. Lopez Eire, to which I add another o f 1996a on colloquial 
language in Aristophanes; and a book by Anagnostopulos (1923) as 
well as a thesis, published in a summary, by E. Rodriguez Monescillo 
(1975). 
Aristophanes (who for us, in practice, is almost the sole repre­
sentative of the comedy) was an artist in his use o f language, who 
used a parody of different poetic languages and dialects, different 
registers, and of the polymorphism that was permitted by Attic. H e 
gave the use of the latter such flexibility that he no doubt smoothed 
the way for prose writers when, rejecting the poeticizing rigidity of 
a writer like Gorgias, they tried to approach the c o m m o n language 
and all its resources. This was something new, without precedent in 
Greece, but it should again be stressed that Aristophanes reflected 
a popular language that was not yet regularised in prose. 
211. This is the scene that the creators of the Attic language encoun­
tered. O f course, one should not forget the knowledge of the Attic 
that was spoken in the Assembly and in the tribunals, as well as in 
the sophistic debates: although here, it seems, with the new resources 
of the antilogical style and the new intellectual lexicon which passed 
into prose. This is the Attic which is more or less accessible to us 
through the routes I have outlined; but also, although it may appear 

148 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
strange, through another route, namely through Socrates: a com­
parison o f the different Socratic sources makes his language acces­
sible to a certain extent, c f Adrados 1992a. Although now I believe 
that not all his language is made accessible: a certain degree of defor­
mation by Plato and Xenophon, in order to adapt it to contempo­
rary prose, is highly plausible, although I believe very rare. 
T h e sources through which we know Socrates (mainly Plato, 
X e n o p h o n and Aristophanes) filter his ideas in different directions, 
yet this does not apply so much to his language, judging by the sim­
ilarities between them. For instance, they share the feature of the 
dialogue, instead o f the monologue; although not literary dialogue, 
such as that o f the Socratics, but rather a dialogue of free conver­
sation which jumps from one topic to the other in cUfferent contexts. 
It is a colloquial language, avoiding both the vulgar and the 'ele­
vated' style o f the Sophists, which Socrates parodied (particularly 
the Gorgianic). It is also a language displaying a uniformity o f 
register. 
Socrates, as he himself tells us in the Platonic Apology (17), spoke 
in the same language that he used in the agora and the counters of 
the moneychangers. A distinguishing feature of his language is the 
question and answer model rather than uninterrupted discourse; also, 
paraenesis (the use of the voluntative and imperative), exclamations, 
the constant vocatives with which he directs himself to his interlocutor; 
and there is not a lack o f emotional moments. 
C o m m o n words are always used, comparisons and similes, ironic 
and parodic moments, anecdotes, fables and myths, paradoxes. In 
addition, there is the use of polite attenuation: its constant 'perhaps', 
its potential instead of indicative, parenthesis with verbs of opinion, 
the replacement o f assertion with interrogation, excuses, impersonal 
forms. 
Almost invariably, we are dealing with short phrases, with minor 
hypotaxis; only rarely does a conditional lead the phrase, or does a 
final clause conclude it; clauses that are temporal or of another type 
are introduced asymmetrically, as well as some genitive absolutes. 
There are interruptions and anacolutha. 
Thus, the language o f Socrates is very representative of the lan­
guage o f the street, and is not far removed from many passages by 
Aristophanes. It not only avoids vulgarism, but also preciosity, poet-
icism, antilogy and long hypotactic periods. It was the starting point 
of educated conversation in Athens: colloquial spoken language, not 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
149 
prose. But often his very method o f discovery led him to develop 
special uses o f c o m m o n words such as (ppovnaic; (the new Socratic 
virtue), £7ria£^o|iiai 'to take care of, or occupy oneself with
5, BepocTieia 
'the care' (especially of the soul), Ekey%(d 'refute, convince', e^era^o) 
'examine', etc. 
Beside this, there was vulgar Attic, which we know from the lan­
guage o f the vases studied by P. Kretschmer and referred to by 
A. T h u m b - which was filled with haplologies, dissimilations, and 
other phonetic accidents (some anticipating koine, such as oXioq) and 
admitted many foreign words. Pseudo-Xenophon, in the Constitution 
of Atenas II 8, acknowledges this mixture. It passed into koine to a 
certain extent. 
Thus, spoken Attic had set aside the literary Attic o f the iambos; 
and it was not unitary, for it contained different strata, of which we 
have little knowledge. Attic prose largely maintained a series of con­
current forms. Indeed, it sometimes rejected Atticisms such as 
- T T -
and accepted 'international
5, Ionic and especially poetic phonetics, 
morphology or lexicon. 
The oldest Attic prose 
212. Socrates explored, he did not theorise: he was not tempted to 
write treatises. In fact, he lived in a context o f oral literature pecu­
liar to Athens, where poetry was heard in the theatre, in banquets, 
schools; where the discourses in the Assembly and the tribunals were 
neither written nor read; where a visiting foreign philosopher such 
as Zeno (as recounted by Plato in Parmenides 126 b - c ) would gather 
some friends together to read them one of his writings, and where 
we are told (by Eusebius in his Chronicle I 78) Herodotus made his 
History known through a reading. 
It is true that in this period one could buy a tragedy or a book 
by Anaxagoras, but it was strange to have a library, according to 
Euthydemus (cf. Xenophon, Mem. IV 2, 1), and the fact that Euripides 
had one (cf Athenaeus 3 A) was considered somewhat eccentric. 
The orality o f Athenian literature and its taste for debate is related 
to its culture of democracy, as I have shown in a recent book (Adrados 
1997a). It left its mark on the later written literature: on orations, 
discourses within history books, the Socratic dialogues, etc.; and, of 
course, on theatre. It also forms the base o f the first Attic prose, 
that of the Sophists and rhetoricians. 

150 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
It should be noted that these Sophists and rhetoricians represented 
a new culture, the culture o f the book. They debated and dialogued, 
but they also tended to write discourses that would serve as mod­
els, rhetoric 'arts
5 and treatises on theoretical themes. They followed, 
as we know, the line o f the ancient philosophers who authored their 
own writings, and the physicians, all o f w h o m wrote in Ionic; they 
also followed the Sicilian rhetoricians Corax and Tisias (although we 
do not know in which dialect they wrote). 
Indeed, they were important for the continuation of Athenian lit­
erature: for oratory, no doubt, but also for historiography, in which 
Thucydides was very influenced by them; and for the T8%voci and 
various essays, from ' O n the Chorus
5 by Sophocles to the different 
essays or discourses on the theme of love in the Platonic Symposium. 
Socratic dialogue was the only purely Athenian genre, with its own 
singular 
characteristics. 
213. As we saw, Ionic was also used in Athens in the beginning. 
W e have anticipated that in the twenties o f the fifth century Gorgias 
of Leontini, an Ionian city of Sicily, and Thrasymachus o f Chalcedon, 
a Megarian colony in the Bosporus, were inspired both by that lit­
erature and by what the Attic of Athens had to offer for the writ­
ing o f fictitious discourses, rhetorical 'arts
5 and treatises, all in the 
Athenian dialect, Attic. T w o Apologiae by Gorgias have been pre­
served, that of Palamedes and that of Helen; fragments of an Epitaphius; 
and the treatise On Not Being. He also wrote some works which have 
been lost, namely, speeches such as the Olympian, Pythian, Eulogy of 
the Eleans and a rhetorical Art. Another Art, also lost, was written by 
Thrasymachus, to w h o m a treatise is also attributed, On the Constitution. 
In this context, the language o f these writings is of interest: both 
with respect to the phonetic and morphological characteristics of 
their Attic and to the figures of speech and phrase construction, as 
well as to the lexicon. Also, fundamentally, the language o f the epi-
deictic works, the 'economic
5. 
Gorgias and Thrasymachus created a model o f Attic prose which 
different authors soon struggled to surpass, creating what I will refer 
to as the second Attic prose. However, the first Attic prose, influenced 
certainly by figures o f speech and other resources o f Ionic prose 
mentioned above (§§ 197 f ) , includes Gorgias and 
Thrasymachus, 
but strongly influenced, to schematise somewhat, the historian 
Thucydides, w h o on his return to Athens from exile in the year 404 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
151 
wrote in a style strongly influenced by Gorgias in his youth. This 
prose also influenced the orator Antiphon, whose Tetralogies (fictitious 
discourses in which an accusser and defender take turns) clearly fol­
low the line of Protagoras and Gorgias. These were possibly writ­
ten around the year 415 ^ c . But Thucydides and Antiphon, as well 
as the orator Andocides, fought strongly to free themselves from 
Gorgianism: they constitute a kind of transition to mature Attic prose, 
which in Lysias is decidedly anti-Gorgianic. For only in epideictic 
oratory do Gorgianic characteristics appear here and there. See, on 
the genre, V . Buchheit 1960. 
T h e small treatise, with oligarchic overtones, 'Constitution o f 
Athens', dated before the Peloponnesian war, is not included in the 
first Attic prose: it constitutes a first, rather clumsy attempt, before 
Gorgianic prose. Atticisms such as -TT- are present, and the sub­
stantivisation of the neuters in intellectual prose is still absent. 
Also, we have not included the two writings by the Sophist Antiphon, 
Concord and Truth (some papyrus fragments still survive o f the latter). 
His identification with Antiphon the orator, defended among others 
by W . Aly 1987, is dubious, just as the chronology proposed, around 
the year 439. Concord belongs to the epideictic genre and displays an 
Ionic-poetic language, with the 
- G G - and ^uv of the first Atticism; 
Truth is more Atticistic (-XT-, o i v , Attic vocabulary), but it follows 
the model of the Presocratic treatises, with badly organised and short 
members. 
Nevertheless, these were the first buddings o f Attic prose. The 
great transformation, its actual creation, was really in the hands of 
Gorgias and Thrasymachus: some believe that, in the long run, it 
was more in the hands of the latter who, according to the Suda, 
introduced 'the current style o f oratory' (cf J. D . Denniston 1970, 
p. 14). 
214. Let us now look at some o f the characteristics 
of what we 
regard as being the oldest Attic prose and the transitional prose. 
However, it should be noted beforehand that it contains 
many 
irregularities and numerous doublets in its phonetics and morphol­
ogy; also, with regard to 
figures, 
construction, and vocabulary, 
there are differences between the authors. Thucydides is a special 
case, in which elements o f the Gorgianic tradition are combined with 
various others; similarly with Antiphon. Thus, it is better to treat 
them 
separately. 

152 
C H A P T E R 
E I G H T 
215. See in particular R. Hiersche 1970, p. 208 ff. and the books of A. 
Thumb 1974 and J. Niehoff-Panagiotidis 1994 as cited; for the lexicon, see 
my articles Adrados 1953a and 1957. On Thucydides, see B. Rosenkranz 
1930, C. Roura 1971, F. R. Adrados 2003, p. 50 ff, O. Hoffmann 1973, 
p. 176 ff, J. Gaveney 1978, L. R. Palmer 1980, p. 152 ff A joint study 
is lacking, after that by E. Norden 1898; for Gorgias I can cite the (unpub­
lished) bachelor thesis of A. Duran 1966. The connections between the 
Gorgianic figures and those of Heraclitus can be seen in G. Rudberg 1942; 
for links with certain magical texts, see M. Garcia Teijeiro 1988; for other 
influences, including that of Protagoras, cf G. Zuntz 1939. On the figures 
themselves, cf. J. Martin 1974, p. 270 ff On their place in the history of 
Attic rhetoric and literary language, see the books cited by V. Buchheit, 
W. Aly and J. D. Denniston. 
There are problems regarding the hesitations of manuscripts and editors, 
along with problems of interpretation: it has been customary to regard as 
Ionic certain forms which today are clearly seen to be archaic Attic, espe­
cially in Thucydides. 
216. T h e great leap toward writing in Attic prose was not made 
without concessions: actually, similar concessions were made by the 
tragedians. T h e forms -xx- and -pp- only rarely appear in these 
authors, Ionic and poetic forms (or simply the general forms in the 
literary dialects) - G O - and - p a - dominating. The point was not to iso­
late the new literature too much (which would not have been a prob­
lem for comedy or, indeed, for more recent Attic prose). Perhaps 
the desire to maintain the dignity of the prose can be seen in the 
presence o f archaic forms such as edv, £6v, ec,, ouveica, 
eveicev, 
rcaAxxioxepoc,, although these sometimes alternate with modern forms. 
The same occurs with at least part of the so-called poetic vocab­
ulary found in tragedy, proceeding from poetry as well as the archaic 
Attic base. This was discussed above. 
In contrast, the proliferation o f abstracts in 
-JLIOC and -ore,, which 
comes from Ionic prose, is the sign o f a new age. Also, in particu­
lar, the 'figures
5 which I have discussed in this connection, which 
attempt to compensate for the lack of verse. 
217. Gorgias went further than the Ionians: his small periods (kom-
mata) were integrated by tiny units 
( K S X C X ) organised in antithetic 
pairs, linked by an equal number of syllables (rcccpiGcocnc,) and end 
rhyme 
(TCCCPOLXOIOOOTC,, OLioioxeXeuxov). Thus, a very artificial style came 
into being which was later rejected with the creation of longer peri­
ods organised on the basis o f hypotaxis. Aristotle (Rhetorica 1404 a 

I O N I C A N D 
A T T I C 
153 
26 ff.) criticises Gorgias by saying that prose is not the same as 
poetry. H e describes this style as 'poetic
5; no doubt, the lexicon con­
tributed to this impression, as well as the continued use of metonymy 
and metaphors, alliteration and verbal echoes. Apart from this, 
there is the artificial imposition o f a 'corset
5 which is antithetic to 
its content. 
Thrasymachus went a step further with his use o f metric clauses 
at the beginnings and endings o f periods: paeonic rhythms 
( — a t 
the beginnings and 
— at the endings), and also trochaics and cretics. 
In fact, all o f later Attic prose grew out of the modification o f the 
Gorgianic style and that of Thrasymachus by Thucydides and Antiphon 
and its critique by later writers: Plato in the Gorgias 467 b, 479 c, 
Menexenus 235 a, Symposium 198 a ff.; Isocrates V 27, I X 10, etc. Not 
to mention the criticism o f Euripides o f 'too beautiful
5 words and 
by Aristophanes against the young enthusiasts of sophistry and Rhetoric 
in Clouds 961 ff, among others. 
This criticism was justified by the success that Gorgianic rhetoric 
enjoyed for some time. Isocrates and Aristode show this clearly. Plato, 
for his part, reflects this success in small examples that he includes 
in his works: various in the Symposium, especially the discourse by 
Agathon; the erotic discourse o f Lysias recited by Phaedrus in the 
dialogue o f the same name; etc. Also, above all, it is clearly reflected 
in Plato's own criticism. 
218. T h e Gorgianic and Thrasymachean 
construction o f periods 
remained important for Antiphon and also left traces in Thucydides. 
In particular, its abundance o f antithetic expressions, whether used 
in parallel or oppositionally. Sometimes, it is accompanied by word 
play, with an exploitation of synonymy. 
However, Thucydides is an entirely different case. Elsewhere, I 
have studied his main characteristics (Adrados 2003, p. xxx ff). He 
does not display any complete phonetic or morphological regulari-
sation, he can choose archaisms or Ionicisms (which are sometimes 
the same thing). There is a lack o f short and rhythmic periods and 
he has not yet acquired the long and well-structured periods o f the 
later prose, whose development came later, due to his exile between 
424 and 404. His prose is full o f parentheses and anacolutha, o f 
syntactic imprecision. It preserves archaic syntactic uses and, in par­
ticular, exploits nominal expression: this comes from the intellectual 

154 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
base of his work, as does the proliferation of abstracts. Certainly, 
with some awkwardness, his prose manages to construct extended 
periods, charged with thought. 
So, in Thucydides we find the unification o f particular Attic 
archaisms, a flight from more local Atticism, the influence of the 
periodic and antithetical style of Gorgias and Thrasymachus, and an 
attempt to create new modes of expression adapted to the new thought 
and to the needs o f prose development. The antitheses, with some 
exceptions, are added to the thought, not the reverse, as in Gorgias. 
These needs were also felt by a series o f writers who extended 
the intellectual lexicon o f Attic and created extended and complex 
periods based on hypotaxis used in a regular way which became 
characteristic o f a new style, although there were differences between 
the various schools. Antiphon himself introduced a new style in the 
composition o f the periods. 
Mature Attic prose 
219. As pointed out earlier, Thucydides and Antiphon should be 
regarded as authors of a transitional prose that led direcdy to the 
great Attic prose style, which only really began to flourish in the 
fourth century. O n the one hand, this prose is decidedly Attic, with­
out any o f the concessions to Ionic phonetics, morphology and lex­
icon of which we have spoken. O n the other hand, it gradually 
renounces Gorgianic trappings and even rhetorical pomposity, as well 
as vulgarism. It does not always avoid colloquialism, but it has a 
'written
5 style which is essentially different from the oral style. This 
Attic prose was open to evolution, which begin in the fifth century 
and lead to the formation of koine. 
It is important to note that the development o f Attic prose is 
closely related to the development o f Athenian literature and 
the 
spirit that inspired it. Thucydides, to be sure, was not after bril­
liance, but after a rigorous exposition o f the facts and a rigorous 
theory: when he proposes that his work is 'a posession for all time 
and not a competitive piece to be heard for the moment
5 (I 22), he 
is, in effect, criticising the rhetoricians, Sophists and historians who 
aim to please with their mythical and poetical fantasies, whereas he 
is only after the truth. 
These criticisms are shared by Plato when, in the Gorgias, he 
opposes philosophy and rhetoric, and in the Symposium, philosophy 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
155 
and poetry: his Socrates searches for the truth by means of a dis­
course rid o f all artifice. This explains his criticism o f Gorgianism. 
Isocrates is no clifferent when he describes his stylistic evolution 
(XII 2) and offers his own criticisms (cf. § 217). He is after sapheneia, 
clarity o f exposition, in which everything fits. 
But to return to Thucydides, who was on the same path. There 
is a dominance of narration and argumentation in the impressive 
part of the proems and epilogues in the same discourses, cf. F. Romero 
1988. With regard to Antiphon, G. Zuntz 1939 has noted the dom­
inance of the narrative and argumentative part over Gorgianic 'adorn­
ments
5, and how for the former he developed his own version of the 
lexis eiromene or a coordinative version before the katestrammene or 
hypotactic version; but always without a forced regularisation, and 
avoiding Gorgianic schematism. 
Both in Thucydides and Antiphon we occasionally encounter a 
lexicon which is rather Ionic and poeticising, and which sometimes 
turns out to be archaic Attic This would later be rectified in a gen­
eral way. 
220. The Athenian spirit is responsible for three great literary inven­
tions (besides theatre, which I have discussed): 
(1) The development o f written oratory, mainly forensic and 
political in nature but also epideictic, with the purpose of 
persuasion (Gorgias's moto), although through a 'middle
5 lan­
guage, as it were, which was neither vulgar nor poeticising. 
(2) The creation of the Socratic dialogue, which is known to us 
above all through Plato and Xenophon. Although it includes 
mythical and rhetorical passages, it essentially raises spoken 
dialogue to the literary level. O f course, there are differences: 
there is true dialectic dialogue in the first period, dialectic 
and dramatic dialogue in the second (Protagoras, Gorgias, 
Symposium, Phaedrus, Phaedo, etc.) and in the late Plato there 
is a species o f fictitious dialogue, in which the 'yes
5 replies 
of the interlocutor do not hide the fact that we are really 
dealing with an expository treatise. 
(3) The creation of a new history, which continued the line of 
the Ionic histories but aimed for exact narration of political 
and military facts, without mythical or ethnographic excursi 
or digressions. Also, occasionally, discussing their interpretation. 

156 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
Thus, the mature Attic prose was created, and it was developed 
mainly in the fourth century, during a period in which Athens was 
a secondary power and would soon become a small city within the 
Hellenistic world. Despite this, a mature prose style developed, dis­
playing an ingenious regularisation, which distances it from the col­
loquial language o f Aristophanes and what remains of it in Thucydides. 
Underlying the more formalised prose, a freer Attic was stirring 
which would evolve and give rise to koine, expanding throughout the 
Greek world. 
221. A few characteristics o f this prose: 
(1) T h e elimination o f the excessively vulgar and o f certain 
archaic forms, without renouncing the forms c o m m o n to 
Attic, which are not replaced by the Ionic forms. EHmination, 
too, o f certain poeticisms. 
(2) A degree o f choice in the morphology and syntax (in, for 
example, Aristophanes and Thucydides), which renounces 
forms which often emerged later in koine (and even earlier, 
as mentioned previously). 
(3) Choice in the lexicon, too, which I studied in my earlier 
articles: this 'purged
5 lexicon survived in the popular lan­
guage and was reintroduced in koine. It was a 'subterranean
5 
lexicon, emerging at the end o f the Attic period and in koine. 
Attic prose definitely distanced itself from conversational language: 
by resorting to Ionicisms, poeticisms, rhetorical figures, etc.; and, 
subsequendy, to various types of choices. Cf. Adrados 1981b, p. 314 ff. 
There is no difference between the language o f the accused and the 
accusers in Lysias, and there is no attempt to categorise them by 
their language (the same applies in the case o f Aristophanes or 
Socrates with respect to conversational language). In short, Attic 
prose maintained the distinction between literary and conversational 
language which had existed from the beginnings o f Greece itself, 
and in the Hellenistic and R o m a n periods the same antinomy con­
tinued. Similarly, in the modern period, a distinction would be made 
between a katharevusa or 'pure
5 language and a dimotiki or 'popular
5 
language. 
222. On the role of prose within Athenian culture, I refer the reader to 
the works mentioned above (cf § 215) and especially my book of 1997. 
For rhetoric, see in particular V. Buccheit 1960 and J. Martin 1974, as 

IONIC AND ATTIC 
157 
cited previously, as well as O. A. Baumhauer 1986. On the intellectual 
aspects of Socratic and Platonic philosophy, see various works of mine col­
lected in Adrados 1992d; also, the book cited, Democracia y literature, en la 
Atenas cldsica, of 1997. For the style of Attic prose in general, the book by 
J. D. Denniston 1970 is very important. For the composition of the Platonic 
dialogues, c f among others, V. Goldsmith 1963, H. Thesleff 1967, 
P. Badenas 1984 (and my Prologue, Adrados 1984d). On the rhythm of 
Demosthenes, see D. McCabe 1981. On the occasional impact of the col­
loquial language, see E. des Places 1934, in general; D. Tarrant 1946 and 
1958, on Plato; compare also P. T. Stevens 1976, on Euripides. On the 
composition of Thucydides, see A. Momigliano 1930 (and my Introduction 
to my translation, Madrid 1984b). The bibliography on the language, style 
and composition of Attic prose is more scarce than might be expected. 
Histories of the Greek language, such as those of O. Hoffmann, R. Hiersche 
and L. R. Palmer, abundantly cited here, go up to Gorgias, Thucydides 
and Antiphon, and later surprisingly jump to Xenophon. 
It should be noted that relatively little remains of Athenian prose of the 
fourth century. It is true that a large part of oratory has been preserved, 
but as far as history is concerned, we have only Xenophon and some frag­
ments of Theopompus and Ephorus; so many others are missing. With 
regard to the Socratics, we are only left with Plato and Xenophon, and 
precious little of the other thinkers of the fourth century. Also, very little 
has survived of comedy. Note that the latter as well as the historians and 
philosophers were not often Athenians at all, only the orators were. But 
Attic was the language of prose: first in Athens, written by Athenians and 
non-Athenians, and later in all other parts. 
Variants within Attic prose 
223. There are enormous internal differences in Attic prose, within 
the c o m m o n characteristics which have been discussed. 
For instance, with regard to oratory, there is firsdy the style of 
Lysias, in which the logographer has to adapt to the simplicity of 
his clients, who are uncomfortable in the tribune; secondly, there is 
the style of certain passionate, political discourses, by Demosthenes; 
thirdly, the style of the complex of the grand epideictic discourses 
by Isocrates — the Panegyricus, Panathenaicus, Areopagiticus and the rest 
- with their long hypotactic periods, whose clauses contain others 
like Chinese boxes; their avoidance of the hiatus; and their clauses 
with paeonic rhythm. 
In certain passages - the 'climactic
5 moment o f the discourse On 
the Crown by Demosthenes, or the passage o f the procession o f 
souls and the discourse by Diotima in the Platonic Phaedrus 
-
the poetic style can resurface in the lexicon, phraseology and the kola. 

158 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
In any case, new and subtle rules o f composition - which the ora­
tor can break, as flagrandy demonstrated by Demosthenes in On the 
Crown with his second narration 
the possibility of turning to the 
colloquial or, in contrast, of introducing rhetorical emphasis, as well 
as the possibility o f constructing rather elaborate periods, joins in 
the service o f exposition, argumentation 
and persuation. Rhetoric 
was at the centre o f Athenian life, and all literature (including the­
atre and history) was influenced by it. Yet only echoes survive of 
ancient Gorgianic rhetoric. 
The same can be said o f the Socratic dialogues, which transformed 
dialogue (with varying themes) into literature. I have pointed out 
that the Socratic dialogues could consist o f various elements and 
could be divided into different subgenres, which is clearly demon­
strated in Plato. But there is always a pre-established 
organisation 
underlying their apparent freedom, leading to a conclusion. 
T h e dialogues o f the middle period o f Plato's life - starting with 
the Protagoras and the Gorgias, towards the year 390 - gave rise to 
the dramatic dialogue, which can take the form of a comedy or 
tragedy. Without going into too much detail about its construction 
(I already cited the bibliography), I would say that we are faced with 
a new genre in which the dramatic makes use o f prose expressions 
and in which the style is flexible according to need. H. Thesleff 1967 
discusses Plato's styles. 
O f course, the colloquialism of Socratic discourse, which I dis­
cussed, is overcome, but this does not exclude the occasional pres­
ence o f colloquialisms as appropriate, cf. D . Tarrant 1946 and 1958. 
Indeed, where necessary (I referred to the Phaedrus above), the style 
can be elevated without resorting to Gorgianic artifice. 
Similar observations could be made with respect to history, had 
more works been preserved for us. I have discussed Thucydides, 
although something should be added with regard to his composition, 
cf for example, A. Momigliano 1930. As regards his successors, we 
are acquainted with the simplicity of diction and compositional organ­
isation o f X e n o p h o n and the Hellenica Oxyrhynchia, and perhaps also 
o f Theopompus, whereas a more rhetorical and moralising aspect is 
attributed to Ephorus. It would seem that, in this way, the two essen­
tial lines o f Hellenistic historiography were presaged. 
224. J. D . Denniston 1970 has provided us with a magesterial work 
on the multiple possibilities o f Attic prose and its supreme flexibility. 

IONIC A N D 
A T T I C 
159 
For instance, he looks at the different ways of introducing abstract 
expressions; the use of word order, for emphasis and rhythm; the 
structure of periods, whether strict or lax, or organised on the basis 
of antithesis or hendiadys, containing repetitions, anaphoras, anaco-
lutha and asyndeton; augmenting or reducing the subordinates, which 
call for others, using genitive absolutes and predicative participles, 
etc. Short members dominate within the periods. The aim is always 
towards clarity of exposition and emphasis when the author deems 
necessary. 
The concept of Attic, in connection to prose, is multiple, ranging 
from the elevated to the colloquial, the formally complex to the 
apparendy casual, from the interminable periods of Isocrates to shorter 
ones. Because o f this, the Latin orators could chose between Lysias 
and Demosthenes and the subsequent Atticists could follow different 
models. In any case, the loosely organised periods as well as the 
artificially constructed periods based on antithesis and assonance were 
discarded. Consequently, the well-organised but flexible period dom­
inated by hypotaxis came into being, which was decisive for all sub­
sequent literary languages, starting with Latin. Attic prose was directiy 
or indirectly the model for all later prose. 
225. Emphasis should be placed on the variants of Attic prose, within cer­
tain limits, and the existence of doublets, as in any language, which the 
constant presence of Ionians and other foreigners reinforced. This subject 
has been studied by A. Lopez Eire in three works (1986b, 1991 and 1996a) 
on Aristophanes and one work on Thucydides (1984c). This is very appro­
priate, for Aristophanes was colloquial and Thucydides was a pioneer of 
prose; both precede the regularisation of written prose. Xenophon and the 
late Plato were both influenced by koine. 
A. Lopez Eire provides many examples of certain Aristophanic forms 
which would later belong to koine. For example, the plural next to the dual, 
the voc. Ixpe\jria8e(; as though one were dealing with a stem in -s, diminu­
tives tending to replace the base word (ueip&Kiov, which required the cre­
ation of the diminutive ueipaicoXAaov), superlatives transformed into mere 
positives, the replacement of vavqy &pf|v and 6pvi<; by rctauov, &uvo<; and 
opveov, 
ti as atenuant, etc. He also points out some coincidences in 
the syntax. 
Similarly with Thucydides, as mentioned earlier: A. Lopez Eire points 
out, among other things, the intense use of diminutives, the loss of the 
difference between o<; and oatic;, the use of prepositional phrases instead of 
cases, the confusion of ei<; and ev, the use of the active voice instead of 
the middle voice, the loss of the resultative value of the perfect, temporal 
periphrasis with eivoti, the construction of oxi with the infinitive, etc. I think 
that these doublets remained in use in Attic, although, later, one of the 

160 
C H A P T E R 
E I G H T 
forms would prevail in prose, while the other would surface in koine. On 
the 'freedom' of Thucydides, see also R. Hiersche 1970, p. 215. 
226. In effect, I believe that we are dealing with a somewhat artificial 
regularisation o f Attic prose, beneath which strong forces were stir­
ring which would end up creating koine. I will come back to this. 
Here, I would like to emphasise two important points: that at a cer­
tain point this regularity tended to be broken and that this began 
to be admitted: 
(1) 
It is a well-known fact, after the work by L. Gautier 1911, that 
X e n o p h o n is littered with non-Attic forms: not so many with respect 
to phonetics and morphology, but many in his vocabulary. They 
tend to be attributed to the agitated life of the writer, warring out­
side Athens and subsequently exiled, and consist o f Doricisms and 
Ionicisms, as well as o f various hesitations and, above all, a lexicon 
foreign to the standards o f Attic prose. 
His prose is often interpreted as containing Doricisms, Ionicisms 
and poeticisms, and some words have also been pointed out as being 
simply from koine (cf. for example, O . Hoffmann 1973). In fact, some 
of these words could also belong to the popular Attic base to which 
I have referred. This merits some research. In any case, it is clear 
that X e n o p h o n anticipated koine, especially in his lexicon, whatever 
its origin. 
(2) 
W h e n writing m y Estudios sobre el lexico de las fdbulas 
esopicas 
(Adrados 1948) I was able to confirm time and again the existence 
o f numerous lexical forms o f koine in the last dialogues of Plato, in 
Laws and Timaeus in particular. This was used by A. Diaz Tejera 
1961 for his study o f Plato's chronology. 
A writer who was active for almost fifty years could not help but 
reflect the linguistic changes o f his period. So, we have first-rate doc­
umentation o f the evolution o f Attic vocabulary in the direction of 
koine, although we cannot discard the hypothesis that, very often, 
words from this infra-literary origin to which I have referred were 
gradually generalised and in the middle of the fourth century were 
eventually accepted into the literature. 

I O N I C A N D 
A T T I C 
161 
4. 
T H E 
C R E A T I O N O F T H E SCIENTIFIC L A N G U A G E 
The Presocratics 
227\ The Presocratics - who wrote in hexameters and in elegiac dis­
tics from the sixth century BC onwards (and in Ionic prose, from the 
same date) - were primarily responsible for laying the foundations 
for the creation o f a scientific Greek language. The philosophical 
and technical writings of the Attic and Hellenistic periods would fol­
low. Indeed, whereas other languages, from Latin to the modern 
European languages, created a scientific language that was essen­
tially a continuation, adaptation and expansion o f the Greek scientific 
language, Greek created a scientific language based on the c o m m o n 
Greek language with all its bits and pieces. This distinguishes it from 
all the world's languages. 
Yet this is true, not only with respect to the vocabulary, although 
this is perhaps the most fundamental aspect, but also with respect 
to the creation of a prose capable of linking ideas in a rational man­
ner, and the creation of scientific texts organised in a systematic way. 
This was briefly discussed in §§ 197 ff. 
This does not mean to say that the beginnings of a scientific lan­
guage had not existed before or had not emerged in other places: 
for example, in Babylonia for astronomy, or in India for grammar. 
But in Greece, things proceeded in a more systematic way and, most 
importandy, a scientific language was created that would influence 
all of later languages. These langages, as I have stated in various 
works, are a species o f semi-Greek or crypto-Greek, due to a series 
o f Greek terms used with the form and sense o f the originals or 
with others; or, indeed, used in translation through semantic caiques. 
W h e n we say conciencia in Spanish (Lat. conscientia) or Gewissen in 
German, we are in effect translating the Greek auvemncuc,. The cre­
ation of this scientific language is inextricably linked to the creation 
of different philosophical and scientific systems. 
In this chapter we will look at the origins of this language in the 
Ionic and Attic periods; it continued to develop in the Hellenistic 
period, in the R o m a n period and, subsequently, in the modern lan­
guages until the present day. Indeed, the Greeks constituted a mono­
lingual world: thus, in creating their science, they had to express it 
in their own language, specialising and expanding it where neces­
sary. Naturally, this did not occur all at once. The Presocratics and 

162 
C H A P T E R 
E I G H T 
Ionic-prose writers contributed only in the first phase, which was 
incomplete and hesitant, and which later grew enormously in Athens. 
228. There is no global monographic study of the Greek scientific language 
or of its influence in the later scientific language: only partial studies of 
words, suffixes, etc. I refer the reader to Adrados 1997b, where I provide 
a general overview of this topic, along with the most important bibliogra­
phy (my own works and those of others) on the characteristics of this lan­
guage; and to Adrados 1996b, a summary of the role of Greek in this 
respect. Data is provided in Adrados-D. Lara (1998e) and Adrados-
J. Rodriguez Somolinos 1995-96, on the treatment of this vocabulary in 
the Diccionario 
Griego-EspanoL 
For the Presocratic origins of this vocabulary, cf. in particular Adrados 
1995b, which is followed here, as well as R. Hiersche 1970, pp. 182, 184 ff, 
190. On medical vocabulary, see § 232. For Heraclitus, cf. Adrados 1973a. 
Note that the new lexicon is not only derived from the new thought but 
is also better understood as a result of the new thought. 
For the study of the development of the diferent suffixes, cf, in partic­
ular, P. Chantraine 1933 and 1956; there is a specialised bibliography for 
the various suffixes, based on E. Frankel 1910—12. 
A very complete bibliography of the lexicon of scientific Greek can be 
found in P. Boned Colera-J. Rodriguez Somolinos 1998. 
229. It is evident that Greek literature and thought represent an 
authentic 'departure' in the direction o f rationality and science; par­
ticularly, 
as mentioned previously, in the hands o f the Presocratics, 
in verse or prose, and in Ionic prose. It was accompanied by the 
linguistic revolution discussed earlier. Yet, both thought and language 
were based on what had gone before: the poetic, particularly Homeric 
language, or conversational language. Terms, whether poetic or com­
mon, acquired a new meaning; others were also created by deriva­
tion or composition. 
Characteristics o f this language include, above all, new taxonomies 
and terminologies, new abstracts, and new lexical networks in which 
nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs correspond to each other. There 
are also other aspects o f the language, mentioned previously: the 
creation o f a scientific style and syntax and o f a word composition 
which is also characteristic o f scientific writing. 
T o return to the vocabulary, the procedures used, whether in iso­
lation or in conjunction, are: 
(a) T h e specialisation o f the poetic and Ionic vocabulary. 
(b) T h e creation o f new terms for derivation or verbal c o m p o ­
sition; this includes the creation o f abstracts from neutral 

IONIC A N D A T T I C 
163 
adjectives or adjectives with or without article: Anaximenes, 
TO SIKOCIOV; Anaxagoras, xo Bepjuov; Democritus, xoc KCCAXX, TO 
Seov. 
(c) The creation of systems of opposition, whether formalised 
(containing one of the two paired terms with d~, 8uc-, CCDTO-, 
etc.), or not (the type eiui/YiYvoum, Y£veorc/(p9opd, |3ioc/0dva-
xoq); this involves the existence of synonyms or semi-syn­
onyms in each term, as I have studied in Heraclitus (nvp 
-ev, d^uveToi -oc7C8ipov8(; -euSovxec,, taSyoc,-, uexpov-SiTcn). 
(d) The creation of networks of noun/adjective/verb/adverb, as 
stated earlier. 
O f course, the Presocratics advanced relatively little; there is a dom­
inance o f abstracts in -in over the later ones in -uov, adjectives in 
-IKOC, (characteristic of the Sophists) are rare, their opposites and their 
lexical networks were later sometimes continued and expanded (or 
not, as the case may be). In addition, there are deficiencies and dis­
crepancies among certain authors. 
230. As has been pointed out, there is a tendency to use poetic lan­
guage as a starting point, from which changes in meaning are made 
or parallel forms are created. So, for instance, avcavuuoc,, Od. VIII 
552, and dvonxoc,, H. Merc. 80, were given a philosophical meaning 
in Parm. 8, 17 and 16; dvcbtaBpoc, (Anaximand. 3) was created on 
this base. OiXoxnc, and Neucoc,, 'love' and
 
chate
5 in Homer, were trans­
formed into cosmic principles in Empedocles; and K6CT|LIO<; 'frame' in 
Od. VIII 492 became 'world'. 
This continued in Hippocrates, where, for example ixcbp, the 
Homeric 'blood o f the gods', was changed into 'serum'. 
Concretely, the cosmogonies and theogonies were a source of inspi­
ration for the creation o f the new vocabulary: this is not surprising, 
since the investigation of the dpxn or 'beginning' of the world was 
but a rational continuation o f the cosmogonies and theogenies. 
In effect, the 'beginnings' of the Presocratics were in H o m e r the 
names of the corresponding elements used in the comogonies ('water', 
etc.). Presocratic uses such as the drceipovoc yf|c, pd0ri of Emp. 39, 
sprang from Homeric and Hesiodic uses, in cosmogonic passages 
(77. X I V 200 and 301 rceipaxa ycanc,, among others) and from Trepaq, 
ocTteipOQ, drceipcov which indicate a lack of limits; the substantivisa­
tion of obteipov 'the indefinite' in Pythagoras and Anaximander was 
an advance. 

164 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
In the Homeric passage cited we also find yeveaiq: II. X I V 201 
' Q K E O C V O V xe, Gecov yeveorv is no doubt the source of the use of this term 
in Parmenides, Aristophanes and Plato to indicate the 'origin' of the 
gods; and from H o m e r we obtain the later uses of (pucuc; 'nature
5: in 
H o m e r the word only referred to the magical quality o f a plant, c f 
O d . X 303 and P. Chantraine 1933, p. 238. There is a precedent 
in Pherecydes o f Syros, 3, with regard to xoc evavxia 'the contraries'. 
231. M o r e clarity is needed with regard to the Presocratics, who 
inspired the creation o f lexical systems and meanings which were 
often maintained. 
W e should consider those that we rather anachronistically 
call 
abstractions, such as the series of semi-divine principles: earth (Irj), 
love ("Epcoc,), etc. Also, principles such as cmeipov or A,6yoc, which 
function on their own, are automatically included. These terms were 
in the vanguard of the rich world o f abstraction o f later philosophies. 
Another important point for the first thinkers was the unity o f 
Nature, M a n and G o d . Certainly, Greek philosophy and science 
attempted to break this unity, but traces of it remained in ancient 
time, and are reflected in the vocabulary. Terms related to the sphere 
o f human life passed into the sphere of nature: for instance, 
S I K U , 
uexpov, voj^oq, used now to refer to cosmic law or regularity. 
Inversely, a natural or physical term such as 
K O G U O C , entered 
the 
human sphere. 
It should be pointed out that the scientific vocabulary of the 
Presocratics was achronical. Its principles, or dp%a{, refer to atem-
poral realities: xd evavxia 'the contraries', xd ovxa 'being', xo 0ep^6v 
'heat', etc. In Heraclitus, A-oyoq refers to both a structural, organi­
sational law o f the universe and a law o f evolution. 
Another point worth considering is that in the Presocratics cer­
tain words were still mid-way (depending on the passages) between 
a mythico-religious and a philosophical conception. The word avdyicn 
refers to necessity, experienced as a religious force, but also to nat­
ural law (Hdt. II 22) and physical or logical necessity (Parm, B 8, 
30; 10, 6; Emp. B 15, 1). The word vouoc, means divine law (Heraclit. 
B 114), but also (in the same text) the law o f the city. 
O n the other hand, the lexical networks discussed (oppositions, 
correspondences between different classes o f words) could be incom­
plete in the Presocratics: only Plato, Aristode and the Hellenistic 
philosophers completed them. 

IONIC A N D A T T I C 
165 
Yet there is a serious problem: sometimes, uses which are absent 
in the B fragments (the literal ones) appear in the A fragments, which 
are mainly citations in the source language but could also often be 
faithful transmitters o f the original text. For example, the philosophical 
use o f 8iapeco, Siaipeorc, ('lp distinguish', 'distinction') appears in Plato 
and Aristotle, but had also appeared earlier in the A fragments o f 
Leucippus, Parmenides, Empedocles, Archytas, etc. Therefore, cer­
tain doubts exist regarding the history o f the scientific vocabulary. 
232. Thus, the new vocabulary offers various possibilities: 
(a) Sometimes it only represents a semantic specialization o f the 
old meaning: ccicov 'eternity', aiaBdvouai 'to perceive with 
the senses', yiyvouai 'to evolve', xd ovxa 'being', cpuorc, 'nature', 
etc. I have already mentioned Oxk6xr\q 
and NeiKoc,, 5iicn, 
vouq, vouoc,, etc. 
(b) N e w terms are created, as expected: frequently, they are 
derived forms (with prefixes or suffixes) or substantivisations. 
For instance, drceipov 'the infinite', the principle o f Anaxi­
mander; cf. more details in Adrados 1995b, p. 15. Or, new 
words such as aioGnorc; (Anaxag. B 2, Democr. B 9), in addi­
tion to those already cited, oify\aiq 
(Parm. B 1, 32; 4, 2), 
vonua (Xenoph. B 23, 2; Parm. B 16, 4; Emp. B 105, 3; 
etc). Sometimes, as mentioned previously, doubts exist regard­
ing the date o f new formations such as Siaipeaic, 
Occasionally, both the adjective and noun make their 
appearance in the Presocratics for the first time: for exam­
ple, dxojxoq 'indivisible', dxojuov 'the indivisible'. 
(c) Irregularities survive, as expected; some related to different 
uses by the different authors, others related to different sys­
tems. For example, Anaxagoras opposes vouc, to i)A,T|, X e n o -
phanes opposes di\iaq to vonjia (and likens vouc, to (pprjv), 
the new and multiple oppositions o f Heraclitus are well doc­
umented, as well as Parmenides' comparison o f (ppoveiv and 
eivou. 
The Presocratics ushered in the start o f the Greek philosophical lex­
icon, which, on the one hand, would become simplified, and on the 
other hand, would become specialised and would proliferate. Its roots 
can be found in the poetic and in the Ionic language. T h e number 
o f substantivisations o f the neuter adjective (with or without article) 

166 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
would increase, as would the abstracts created by means of a famil­
iar series o f suffixes. A m o n g them, -in, -jnoc, -cue;, Homeric and Ionic 
suffixes, establish their presence in the new terminology, and -uoc, is 
preferred by the physicians. The diffusion of adjectives derived from 
nouns is still relatively small. 
The Hippocratics 
233. In Herodotus and Hippocrates we come across the same tendencies 
which advance the cultural lexicon of Greek, particularly the scientific lex­
icon. But it is the work of the latter author in particular that we should 
study; that is, the Hippocratic treatises considered to be older. The dis­
cussion by R. Hiersche 1970, p. 190 is useful, along with works specially 
focused on Hippocrates, such as those by G. Maloney 1980, P. Fabrini and 
A. Lanni 1979, J. Irigoin 1980 and 1983, D. Lanza 1983, J. Zaragoza-
A. Gonzalez Senmarti 1989, C. Despotopoulos 1986, G. Santana 1991, A. 
Lopez Eire 1992. Other works regarding medical lexicon in general are 
also importantant, such as those of N. van Brock 1961 and F. Skoda 1988. 
For the composition of the treatises, the best work is by D. Lara 1984. 
The book by van Groningen 1958, p. 247 ff. and the article by A. Bernabe 
are also useful. 
234. T h e Hippocratics, starting with the first ones, created a spe­
cialised medical lexicon. The lexicon developed with the specialisa­
tion o f Homeric words, and o f c o m m o n Ionic or Attic ones: we have 
seen that these authors used these dialects simultaneously. Thus, in 
the first Hippocratic treatises, 7cd9r|, 7rd6r||na, or rcdGoc, refer to 'con­
ditions': the first two words are Ionic and appear in Herodotus, but 
with the double meaning of 'condition' and 'suffering' (in Aristoteles, 
rccc0r|uceTa is later 'passions'); the third word is Attic. So, there are 
various sources and a specialised treatment; as when, for instance, 
epic and Ionic vouaoc, coexist with the new forms vocrnpoc, and voorjua, 
created on the Attic base voaoq. 
There is an interesting study by Nadia van Brock 1961 about the 
specialisation o f medical terms from the Homeric lexicon, preferring 
irjTpoq rather than irjifip, for example, giving Gepomeuco specialised 
uses, e t c 
The medical language is the first specialised scientific language, 
although it naturally followed existing paths and operated within ten­
dencies which were in turn followed by the rest o f the scientific lan­
guages later created: there was no interruption in medicine or in 
any o f the other fields. It is worth noting the study by F. Skoda 

IONIC A N D A T T I C 
167 
1988 on how metaphor was used in a conscious way to create a 
new medical and anatomical lexicon. 
235. In parallel, medicine was the first science to create its own lit­
erary instrument: the scientific treatise. Its precedents can be 
found 
in the composition o f didactic poetry, which I have studied in Hesiod 
(cf. Adrados 1986c): a prologue which looks forward to the content 
is followed by parts that more or less respond to it, but with notable 
incoherences and digressions, although unified by the 
continuity 
provided by the 'echo' of key words. The presence of maxims is 
important. 
This prologue somewhat followed the model provided by Parmenides 
and, as far as we know, Heraclitus, whose prologue is known to us 
but was no doubt disfigured through the manner in which he is 
cited: we are nearly always provided merely with isolated maxims. 
In the literary composition o f these authors, A. Bernabe 1979 sees 
a great influence of epic and poetic models and, above all, of gnomic 
literature; although I believe that this latter aspect has been exag­
gerated by our transmitters. 
So, the first Hippocratic treatises, followed later by the others, 
offer schemes which, although still imperfect, are much closer to the 
later scientific treatises. They contain a prologue, a nucleus, and an 
epilogue, which are all somewhat differenciated. There are proce­
dures in place to distinguish them. 
The prologue anticipates and, occasionally, indicates the organi­
sation of the nucleus into various parts; the epilogue summarises and 
provides advice. The nucleus or its parts begin with clear exposi­
tions, which at times become unthreaded and are centered on details 
or examples. There were clear procedures for articulating all o f this 
through formulas for opening and closing, and ring composition (cf. 
the reference in § 203 to the b o o k by O . Wenskuns 
1982); and 
sometimes it is simply the content that establishes the divisions. 
All of this influenced the %£%vax or diverse 'arts
5 of the fifth cen­
tury, in sofar as they are attested today; in turn, these could also 
exert some influence. The treatises o f the Hellenistic and R o m a n 
periods were also influenced, as I mentioned earlier. 
It is not surprising that we should encounter problems here regard­
ing composition. After all, literary units are linguistic units, which 
are the most subjective and adaptable. The new models made their 
first appearance in Ionic and later in Attic, and they would have a 

168 
C H A P T E R E I G H T 
great success in the later literatures. A scientific lexicon, a coherent 
syntax with long periods and literary composition go hand in hand 
in the creation o f the new educated language — particularly in phi­
losophy and science, which would serve as the model for all the 
later ones. 
Attic literature 
236. The same tendencies were carried over into Attic literature -
philosophy, primarily, but certainly not exclusively. As mentioned 
previously, even Socrates, who by definition used the colloquial lan­
guage, created specialised words such as <pp6vno"ic, (the Socratic virtue 
par excellence), erciui^oum 'to take care o f , e^exd^oo 'to examine', 
ekeyxay 'to test', (ppovxi^co 'to think', etc., in order to express new 
concepts. The development o f a specialised lexicon in Plato is well 
documented. I have looked at the subject in various articles, such 
as Adrados 1971 and 1992a. There are two distinct phases. 
In the first phase, the c o m m o n lexicon acquires a new meaning. 
W h e n Socrates (or Plato) attempt to define the meaning o f certain 
words in the Socratic dialogues, they provide them with a new mean­
ing, eliminating, at the very least, some conventional aspects of these 
words. For instance, the following terms were moralised and prac­
tically made synonymous: dyccGoc,, K O C X O C , and Sucocioc,; a generic mean­
ing o f desire or search was created for epooc,; new meanings were 
created for ei8oc,, (Sea or Kvvnaic, or, in Aristode, for Kaxnyopia or 
opyavov. Words and meanings that have been transmitted to all o f 
the languages o f the world. 
The second phase constitutes the creation o f new terms, such as, 
in Aristotle, £0IK6<;, zvxeXexeia or Kivrijiia, which have had substan­
tial success. W h e n in Spanish we speak of organo, entelequia, categoria, 
especie (and its derivatives) we are still speaking in Aristotelian terms. 
At times, these authors have completed lexical networks, although, 
as we have seen, there is sometimes doubt as to whether Plato is 
the creator or whether the A fragments o f the Presocratics reflect a 
new kind o f use. In any case, oppositions such as \j/u%f)/ao)jLia, Ccorj/ 
Gdvaxoc,, uXn/vouc,, yiyvwaKco/aioGdvojiai, £7iiaxf|jir|/xe%vr|, euTieipia, 
which still dominate thought and the common lexicon (sp. alma/cuerpo, 
vida/muerte, materia/ espiritu, conocer/percibir, ciencia/ arte, empiria) were only 
consolidated from this date onwards, although there were earlier 
precedents. 

IONIC A N D A T T I C 
169 
This study of the development o f the Attic lexicon is not com­
plete. But we can obtain much information from the progress of the 
different suffixes: on the one hand, from those that create abstract 
words (alongside the other system, which consists in the abstract use 
of neuter adjectives, with or without an article); on the other hand, 
from those suffixes that derive adjectives from nouns, adverbs from 
adjectives (frequently, we are dealing with ancient plural neuters or 
forms in -CGC,), verbs from nouns and nouns from verbs, creating the 
lexical networks to which I have referred which enable a free con­
struction of the phrase. Sometimes, different suffixes introduce the 
possibility o f different groups o f meaning in the noun and in 
the verb. 
It should be noted that it was not just the philosophers (who 
expanded the lexicon of the Ionic philosophers), but also Attic prose 
in general which diffused these models, although they would finally 
end up being used by the Sophists and, later, the philosophers. The 
Hellenistic language would follow the same path. 
237. It is curious to study (in P. Chantraine 1933, for example) the 
development — in Ionic and later in Attic, especially among the 
philosophers - o f the different suffixes o f abstract nouns or nouns 
of action in -(a, -org, -oc,, -uxx, -auvn, 
-TUT-, etc. Sometimes these 
suffixes have values which are practically synonymous (7id9r|u<x and 
TCOCGOC,, aTro^oynucc and a7roA,oyioc); sometimes they offer clear opposi­
tions (SCSayuxx and SiSa^xc,, noir\\ia and Tiovnaic,; result and action). 
The poets preferred - o w n , the philosophers -TUT-, and the physicians 
-one, to designate diseases or their symptoms. 
T h e most developed suffix - adjectival, naturally, although it could 
of course be substantivised/nominalised 
— was -IKOC,, followed by 
-tooKoc,, -TIKOC,, -IGTIKOC; a suffix that was hardly used by H o m e r but 
was very popular among the young disciples o f the Sophists; see the 
well-known passage by Aristophanes, Knights 1371-81, where he intro­
duces a classification, a 'belonging to' list, as it were; it formed the 
basis for the systems, still surviving today, of -OC/-IK6C,, -IGUTJC,/
r-ioTr|c/ 
-IOTIKOC, 
The use of the suffix grew enormously in Herodotus and Thucydides 
(ayobv yujuviKoq, jnouaiKoq/papPapiKoq/TA-A.riviKoc;); in Plato it appears 
no less than 390 times. It is worth noting the use o f substantivisa­
tion in -Hen to name sciences and techniques, as well as the use o f 
adjectives derived from adjectives (eA.euOepoq/eXeuOspioq/eX.euOepiKoq). 

170 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
The suffix was destined for great success: in the Reverse Index of 
G. D . Buck and W . Petersen there are 4,627 examples (and 156 
examples o f - I O C K O C , ) . I will discuss its diffusion in Latin further on. 
Today, it dominates in all languages. 
Example of a lexical system 
238. Perhaps the clearest way o f illustrating the development of the 
intellectual vocabulary of Greek - from Homer to the 
Presocratics 
and Ionic, from the latter to Attic and, subsequently, Plato 
and 
Aristotle, to arrive at late Hellenistic Greek - is by resorting to the 
example o f a root's derivatives. Here, I shall provide a brief descrip­
tion o f the development o f the derivatives o f the root of vooc,, voeco. 
Only five forms appear in Homer: the verbs voeco and Tipovoeco, 
the nouns vooc; and vor||na, and the adjective avooq. W e should also 
add dvorjToc, in H. Merc, and dvoia in lyric. From here, there is a 
superb development in two paths that complement each other: 
(a) With the help o f various prefixes, the main ones being d-, 
duxpi-, dva-, dm)-, 5ia-, Sua-, 
eK-, ev-, erci-, 
raxa-, 
7capa-, 
Ttepl-, TipO-, TtpOG-, U 7 C £ p - , 
U 7 T - 0 . 
(b) With the help of derivative elements which tend to form a 
network in which various nouns correspond to various verbs 
and adjectives, and to these, various adverbs. 
Aside from these forms (in -ox; or adverbial neuters, or in -ei), we 
have the case in which the verb voeco corresponds to the nouns vooc;, 
vorjLra and vofjcuc, (these are simple, the derivatives of the former are 
adjectives); vonTriq, simple or compound; only compounds -vonora, 
-voice. With regard to the adjectives, there are vooc; compound forms 
(avoocj, etc.), from vonLta we obtain vorjucov; and the following are 
also related (with the verb too): vorjToq (and dvonToq, etc.) and voepoq; 
from the first we obtain 
V O T ] T I K 6 C J , and from vonuec, V O U L U X C I K O C , . With 
regard to the verbs, in addition to voeco (and its compounds), there 
is dvontaivo) and dvonxeo). 
This network is irregular and not absolutely symmetrical with all 
the preverbs; it gradually reached its completion after the Homeric 
and lyric periods. Some forms were in turn abandoned, such as 
dvorijuoov (only in Democritus). There were various types of devel­
opment. The scheme is as follows: 

I O N I C 
A N D 
A T T I C 
171 
(1) Horn., the lyric poets and all prose: cases previously cited 
from Homer, H. Merc, and lyr. (dvonxoc, and dvoioc). 
(2) Presocr., PI and Arist.; for example voepoc, and vonxoc,. 
(3) Ionic prose, Attic, PI and Arist.: Sidvoux, SiavorjjLia, Siavonorc,, 
rcapdvoia, Kpovoia; evvoeco, ejuvoea); raxocvoeco, \movoeco. 
(4) Attic, sometimes in Gorg. and Antiph., in addition to P. and 
Arist.: evvoioc, emvoicc, ouavoioc, uicovoia; 8uavooc, (not in 
Arist.). 
(5) Diog. ApoL, PI, Arist.: voncuc;; Siotvoeco. 
(6) PI, Arist.: evvoricuc,, KaxavorjLxa (Epin.), 
K O C X C C V O U G I C ; , 7iepivoia 
(Ax.); SiavouTiKoq; 7iapavoeco, dvonxaiva). 
(7) Arist.: eicvoioc, evvoonua, V O T J X I K O C , , Sxavonxoc,. 
The great volume o f Hellenistic and late vocabulary, or only late, 
should be added: for example, adjectives in -vouc, are Hellenistic or 
late: eKvouq, duxpivouc,, nepivovq; as well as many adjectives in 
-vofjLrcov, -vonxiKOC, and -vonuccTiKoc,; nouns in -vonai<;, -vonxfj^; the 
verbs dvonxeuco, dvonxeco; etc. 
Thus, this complex lexicon was gradually created, 
introducing 
classifications in the noun (abstract, action, and agent nouns) and 
other corresponding classifications in the adjective, subordinating all 
of this to the other classification introduced for the preverbs. T h e 
successive periods o f the Presocratics, o f Ionic and Attic prose, and 
the different philosophies are clearly displayed. 
Conclusion 
239. 
So, Ionic-Attic clearly created a prose capable o f expressing 
everything related to thought, its process and organisation, with the 
help o f a specialised vocabulary and a syntax in which hypotaxis 
dominates. T h e most important thing to remember is that we are 
dealing with an open, flexible language, capable o f increasing or 
modifying its lexicon and syntax to the needs of the whole intellec­
tual and scientific universe. Indeed, it achieves this without rigidity, 
which makes it possible for the c o m m o n man to follow all o f sorts 
of specialisations and lines of thought, with extremely broad nuances 
and possibilities. 


PART T W O 
FROM KOINE TO THE PRESENT 


CHAPTER ONE 
K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
1. 
O R I G I N , 
DEFINITION A N D LEVELS 
240. Attic prose at some point joined the ranks of the literary lan­
guages that belonged to a literary genre, which is exactly what was 
occurring in the other literary languages of Greece descended from 
the Homeric language. This literary language was not identical to 
spoken Attic. Attic was used in inscriptions to the same extent as 
the other spoken dialects, also, like Syracusan, for the dialogue of 
comedy and, of course, for the dialogue of Socrates and his inter­
locutors in the streets and plazas of Athens. 
But here we come across something that is new and original: it 
was not just literary Attic that was diffused across the entire Greek 
world as almost the unique language o f prose (Ionic and Doric prose, 
exceptionally, continued to exist for a time), but also spoken Attic, 
which was diffused throughout Alexander's empire, to begin with, 
and later beyond it. In some cases, the Attic was, of course, rather 
modified and was somewhat split up into variants. 
This Attic is customarily called koine, C o m m o n Greek. The term 
is ambiguous: here it is used to refer to C o m m o n Greek as a whole, 
with its popular or conversational (sometimes vulgar) and literary 
variants. From the beginning, reciprocal influences and relations were 
established between these variants: the first filtered or avoided certain 
features o f the second, which rejected features of the popular variant 
but was subjected to its influence. Both underwent fragmentation or 
evolution: we shall consider them 
separately. 
O f course, both variants have many elements in common, although 
neither is unitary. Conversational or popular koine was always a some­
what Ionicised Attic, rather exempt from the regularisations of prose; 
and rather submitted to a process of morphological simplification 
and phonetic and syntactic, as well as lexical, evolution. Literary 
koine approaches it but it is more influenced by Attic prose, and this 
literary influence grew with time. Here we definitely find the roots, 
as established long ago by N . Hatzidakis and K. Krumbacher, of 

176 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
the two modern Greek languages, the dimotiki or 'popular
5 language 
and the katharevusa or 'pure
5 language, to which I have already referred. 
241. This oaffusion o f a written but also spoken language, which 
unified vast areas formerly occupied by various dialects, is something 
new, although the groundwork was prepared, as mentioned previ­
ously, by the earlier literary languages, especially Ionic (whose diffusion 
had been, in turn, prepared by the c o m m o n or literary languages 
of poetry). 
This process of universal diffusion can be explained by historical 
circumstances, starting with the creation of the Athenian 
Maritime 
League in 477 BC (and the second League in 377 BC). The kingdom 
of Macedonia, the empire of Alexander, the kingdoms of the Diadochi, 
the Aetolian and Achaean Leagues, together with other alliances or 
hegemonies, required c o m m o n languages. The main language, nat­
urally, was the Ionic-Attic koine that we have been discussing, but it 
was not the only language. There were various Doric koinai, more 
or less established: that o f the east of the Aegean (with a centre in 
Rhodes), that o f the Greek o f the N.W., that o f the Doric o f the 
Achaean League, the Syracusan which for a period dominated in 
Sicily (from the start o f the fourth century B C until it was gradually 
displaced by the Ionic-Attic koine and subsequendy by Latin, cf. 
C. Cosani 1993, p. 118 ff.). 
But all the koinai and all o f the Greek dialects ended up being 
displaced by the Ionic-Attic koine after a period o f diglossia. Koine 
also had to struggle with different non-Greek languages (Egyptian, 
Aramaic, Lycian, Latin, etc.), admitting elements of theirs, provid­
ing them with borrowings, or making them disappear. 
242. As we can see, the history of koine is rather complicated. O n e 
has to distinguish the origin o f koine from its later diffusion. Let us 
start with the former topic 
It has been said that both literary Attic (from around the end o f 
the fifth century into the fourth century and then converted into lit­
erary koine) and popular or spoken koine are descendants o f the 
Maritime League or, if preferred, the Athenian empire. 
I have already looked at the creation of liteary Attic: the Athenians 
and foreigners who lived in Athens, precisely through the initiative 
of some o f the latter, stopped writing in Ionic at some point and 
began writing in Attic (although there are exceptions). The political 
and intellectual power o f Athens led to the conversion of its lan-

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
177 
guage into a literary language. T h e same occurred in the case of 
Castilian, Florentine, and the French of the He de France. 
The creation o f popular, spoken koine is more complex, besides 
which there are discrepancies in the interpretation of the facts. But 
we can be certain of one thing: Attic and Ionic had already begun 
approximating each other in the fifth century. This is not surpris­
ing, given the power, political and otherwise, which Athens had over 
the Ionians of the Maritime League, both those of the islands and 
the continent, and the constant Ionic presence in Athens. 
War, politics, commerce, the tribunals, everything worked to approx­
imate them. It was a process that culminated in the adoption by 
Athens of an Ionic alphabet in the year 403 (and it was not long 
before its use became generalised in all parts). 
It should be noted that since Antiquity, diverse circumstances of 
human and commercial mobility had acclimatised all kinds of Greek 
speech in Athens. This is stated by both Solon (24, 31 f.) and Pseudo 
X e n o p h o n (II 8). 
243. I have already looked at the influence o f Ionic in 
fifth-century 
Attic literature. Ionic forms are also found in Attic inscriptions from 
450 onwards: the lengthened D . pf, aw, etc. Although sometimes 
we are really dealing with Attic archaisms, or with the 'subterranean' 
Attic which I discussed. 
The penetration of Attic in Ionia after the same period is more 
decisive, creating the so-called Great Attic (Gran Atico, Grossattisch), 
the predecessor of koine. 
W e have seen it in Herodotus and Hippocrates. It is present in 
inscriptions from the fifth century onwards, c f A. Lopez Eire 1996b: 
O I K I C C V , ovxac,, EKyovoic,, etc. Indeed, certain Hellenistic forms such as 
vaoc, 'temple' appeared in the 'Great Attic' of the islands much earlier 
than in Athens (in the fourth century in Delos, circa 250 in Athens). 
This 'Great Attic' is, as stated, an anticipation of koine, which is 
fundamentally Attic, with -pa, -ta, -oic,, -cue,, etc., but with certain 
Ionic forms and other general or Doric forms (-co-, -pp-, etc.). It 
also contains Attic variants such as can be found in Aristophanes 
and Xenophon, and some of the vulgar Attic as studied by P. Kret-
schmer 1894, Wahrmann 
1907, and E. Nachmanson 1910; and, 
above all, it contains a large dose of lexicon that is poetic, Ionic, 
and, very often, no doubt 'subterranean' Attic. Apart from the authors 
previously cited (Xenophon, the late Plato), Aristotie and the Hellenistic 
authors were also invaded by it. 

178 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
So, koine is fundamentally 
Attic, although it contains Ionic ele­
ments and vocabulary (for example, the declension in -ac/-aSocj and 
has eliminated Atticisms such as 
- T T - , -pp- and certain 
inflectional 
types. It displays Kopn, ^evoc,, oXoc,, etc. 
244. However, authors such as V . Bubenik 1989 and A. Lopez Eire 
1993a insist that the participation o f vulgar Attic in koine was rare 
(not accepting forms such as nax>$ and that the diffusion of the 
middle-class, administrative and bureaucratic Attic o f the inscriptions 
was significant. They stress the similarity between the language o f 
Attic and Macedonian public inscriptions, in the period after Phillip II, 
the father o f Alexander. This Attic, in effect, would have been 
accepted by the Macedonian court and, subsequently, by the courts 
of the Diadochi. The influence o f the Attic o f the Macedonians in 
the expansion o f Greek in Asia, particularly through the foundation 
o f cities, has recently been gready emphasised. 
T o be sure, the Attic o f the Macedonian inscriptions and of the 
official inscriptions o f the Hellenistic period is the 'Great Attic' which 
has been discussed, in its official or literary version (later reinforced 
by the role of the Athenian school and the Attic literature which 
was read inside and outside Athens). But this is just one aspect o f 
the problem. The other means of diffusion was through the popu­
lar 'Great Attic', which was diffused in Ionia during fifth and fourth 
centuries, and through that of the soldiers and colonists, Macedonians 
or otherwise, who arrived in Asia. This view is held by C. Brixhe 
1993b. Indeed, the continuity of morphological and lexical Attic 
Variants' in koine as a whole, as discussed previously, and even of 
vulgar forms, points in the same direction. 
So, in the same way that there is a popular Attic (colloquial or 
vulgar) and a literary Attic, so there is also a popular, conversational 
koine and a literary koine. Neither is unitary, and I will elaborate on 
this further on; they share many c o m m o n elements and exchange 
many elements. This situation did not change until modern Greece. 
245. W e have greater knowledge o f literary koine: not just through 
the inscriptions, but, above all, through prose literature (at this time, 
poetry was written in the ancient dialects that had been resuscitated 
for this purpose), although we shall see that in the literary koine, there 
would be a shift from Atticism to poetism and that, for the oldest 
ones, our documentation is very scarce. Apart from the inscriptions, 
for the vulgar register we mainly have the Cynics and separate fea-

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
179 
lures adopted by various authors; for the middle register, after Aristode, 
Menander, Epicurus, we have fragments o f various philosophers, 
Philo o f Byzantium, Aristeas, Polybius, certain parts o f the L X X , 
some papyri, some apocryphal texts such as the Definitions, attibuted 
to Plato, or the De decentia, attributed to Hippocrates (cf. U. Fleischer 
1939), and a few more. 
With regard to popular, spoken koine, we have to make do with 
the 'mistakes' of written texts, all of those mentioned above and 
others such as private papyri, the L X X (literature o f translation; but 
some books correspond to a higher level) and the New Testament 
(these two texts have special features); the Life of Aesop and cynic 
texts such as the fragments of Bion o f Borysthenes may also be 
included. Note that a written text, however 'popular', always aspires 
to propriety, to the literary. Also, literary texts, as we have seen, 
contain 'mistakes' o f spoken koine. In any case, there is a great cor­
respondence between both koinai, however much literature may par­
tially correct the morphology, syntax, and lexicon; and it almost 
entirely covers phonetic evolution. 
A valid description can be provided for both koinai. But it is only 
partial: for example, the disappearance of the D . and the construc­
tion ev + D . can rarely be followed in the literary texts, which intro­
duce the dual, optative, and so many other forms which had been 
lost. For more details, see §§ 261 ff, 275 ff. 
I must stress the existence of two koinai, interrelated and divided 
into different levels; I will discuss their local and temporal differences 
in §§ 254 ff, 259 ff. 
246. For koine in general see, among others: K. Dieterich 1898, A. Thumb 
1974, A. Meillet 1975, p. 253 ff, L. R. Palmer 1980, p. 174 ff, V. Bubenik 
1989, p. 180 ff, R. Browning 1993, p. 19 ff, CI. Brixhe 1993b, A. Lopez 
Eire 1993, p. 41 ff, J. Niejoff-Panagiotidids 1994, p. 195 ff, G. Horrocks 1997, 
p. 32 ff. On the role of Macedonia in the origins of koine, see Gl. Brixhe -
A. Panayotis 1988, A Panayotis 1992 and G. Horrocks 1997, p. 42 ff. For 
the levels of koine in written texts, see F. R. Adrados 1948 and 1981b. For 
vulgar Greek, see K. Dieterich 1898, P. Wahrmann 1909, E. Nachmanson 
1910 and H. Ljungvik 1932. For the Doric koinai, V. Bubenik 1989, p. 227 ff, 
G. Vottero 1996, C. Consani 1996, M. Bile 1996, etc. 
It should be pointed out that the theory followed here is that which is 
commonly accepted, although, as I mentioned earlier, there are discrepan­
cies with regard to the role of the popular Attic language. It goes against 
the idea of koine as a mixture of dialects, as held by P. Kretschmer 1901, 
cf. A. Thumb and others; for koine as a 'pidgin' or 'creole
5, cf. J, Frosen 
1974 (and the critique in V. Bubenik 1989, p. 180 ff). 

180 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
2. 
T H E DIFFUSION O F K O I N E 
The diffusion 
247. The triumph o f Attic is quite remarkable. It became the general 
language o f all the Greeks after the two great defeats o f Athens: that 
of 404 against Sparta and 338 (and 322) against Macedonia. Indeed, 
Castilian and French, for example, became general languages of more 
extensive nations, not only due to their literary significance, but also 
due to the political power o f Castilla and the He de France: both 
factors went hand in hand. But not here: one would have to com­
pare the diffusion o f the Florentine dialect in Italy and the language 
of Luther in Germany, and even then it does not bear comparison. 
T o be more exact, in the fifth century Attic began to convert, in 
a slighdy modified way, into a lingua franca o f the Athenian empire: 
political power and trade account for this because, literarily speak­
ing, Athens continued to be a province o f Ionia. Later, Attic imposed 
itself as a literary language. 
W h e n the political power o f Athens was eclipsed, the foundations 
laid in the fifth century - that is, Attic as a lingua franca outside of 
Athens and the literary Attic which even non-Athenians were begin­
ning to write - were maintained. Linguistically speaking, the victory 
of the Spartans and their allies was meaningless. Throughout the 
fourth century their dialects were implacably invaded by Attic, and 
this also applied to the Doric koinai which attempted to resist. Indeed, 
nearly all the intellectual life o f Greece, which expressed itself in 
Attic and later koine, converged on Athens, the free city. 
A second factor was decisive: the adaptation of Attic (Great Attic) 
by the court o f Macedonia in the fifth century. Great Attic was 
accepted by enemies as well as friends. Consequently, the military 
defeat against Macedonia constituted a linguistic victory for Athens: 
it accelerated a process which had already begun. Athens, having 
attempted to establish its hegemony in Greece in the fifth century, 
failed in this attempt despite its intitial success. But failure in the 
political field translated into success in the linguistic field. Here, 
Athens was the great victor. This is the paradox, which I think has 
no parallels in linguistic history. 
The triumph o f Attic was merely one aspect of the intellectual tri­
umph o f Athens, which conditioned all of literature and later thought 
(although pre-Attic literature, written in the diverse literary languages 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
181 
which converged in Ionic, also strongly influenced later literature). 
For the educated Hellenistic public, all of this meant a reinforce­
ment of unity: the Greek tradition, which they were attempting to 
continue. 
248. Let us study the difftision of koine more closely. Various points 
can be noted: 
(1) The gradual conversion o f Attic and Great Attic into koine: 
in Attica, in the Ionian cities of the islands, Asia Minor, 
and Macedonia. 
(2) The conversion of the Ionic of exportation into koine: for 
example, in Caria and Lycia, where it was cultivated, at 
least as a written language, from the fifth century
7 onwards; 
and in the colonies of Italy, Sicily, and the West. See Part 
I of this volume on the colonies of Gaul and Hispania; the 
Greek alphabet was used to write the Celtic and 
Iberian 
languages. 
(3) The direct implantation o f Great Attic and koine in non-
Greek territories by means o f the Macedonian conquest and 
the politics of the Diadochi. Macedonians and Greeks of 
various origins were established in recently founded cities, in 
which they essentially survived isolated from the easterners; 
where as children they attended schools in which they studied 
Greek letters and literature; although this did not, however, 
prevent the reciprocal influence of the languages, see §§ 254 
ff, 286 ff. In spite o f the Lesbian which continued to be 
spoken and written in Lesbos, koine was spoken in Perga-
m u m from the beginning, and in all of the Macedonian 
setdements. 
(4) The penetration of different dialects (Aeolic, Boeotian, Doric, 
etc.) by koine, which supposes a gradual period of bilingual-
ism, a 'koinisatiori* of the dialects and a gradual loss of their 
active dominion, although they would be partly preserved 
and would continue to be written in certain circumstances. 
This is discussed in more detail below. In a remote corner 
of the Greek world, in Pamphylia, local characteristics of 
koine penetrated into the local dialect, whereas in other parts, 
under more conservative influence, it took much longer for 
these local characteristics to impose themselves. 

182 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
(5) The expansion o f koine outside the strict dominions of the 
Greek world. For instance, in R o m e , partiy due to the effect 
of a Greek-speaking immigrant population (including Syrians, 
Jews, etc.), and partly to the fact that it was the second lan­
guage of educated Romans. In this way, the Greek language 
began to influence the Latin language, and, similarly, Greek 
literature began to influence Latin literature. This compen­
sated for the fact that Greek had been displaced in the West 
by Latin. 
249. The cultural and universal value of the Greek language resulted 
in documents being written in this language by kings and dignitaries 
who spoke other languages: King Ashoka (third century BC) trans­
lated into Greek the edicts that he placed in what is today Afghanistan; 
edicts or important documents were written in Greek by the kings 
o f the kingdom o f A x u m in Ethiopia during and after the Hellenistic 
period (cf. E. Bernand and others 1991), by the Sasanid King Sapor 
(third century 
BC), as well as, much later, the khans of Bulgaria 
(eighth and ninth centuries 
A D ) . 
The same is true o f literature: Romans such as Fabius Pictor wrote 
in Greek, as well as jews such as Flavius Josephus, Ghaldians such 
as Berosos, Egyptians such as Manetho (not to mention those of a 
later date). Greek became the language o f the Christian Church in 
the East and the official language of Byzantium from the Danube 
to the Euphrates and the Nile, and also o f its conquests in the West. 
O n the other hand, there is the exportation of the Greek alpha­
bet and its essential role in the creation of different alphabets (con­
tinuing an already ancient process). Also, the clifmsion of linguistic 
characteristics and literary and cultural models to all the surround­
ing world. In this way, a small conglomerate of dialects which occu­
pied a reduced geographical area, that of Greece, was converted into 
a universal language, a model for all the others. Indeed, Greek con­
tinued to be spoken in Greece (although in a geographical area 
equally reduced), as well as in an important diaspora, until today. 
Thus, Greek originated in Greece and eventually found refuge again 
in Greece, but it made a permanent impact on all languages. 
But this is another topic, which we will come back to later. The 
fact is that Greek, in its koine phase, whether colloquial or literary, 
gradually extended throughout the Mediterranean world and beyond. 
From Cordoba to Kandahar, from Meroe to Bulgaria. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
183 
The 'koinisation* of the dialects 
250. Let us now turn to the subject of the 'koinisation' of the Greek 
dialects. It is widely known that the modern Greek dialects do not 
come from the ancient dialects, with the exception of Tsakonian in 
Messenia and Pontic in particular; there are doubts about the Greek 
of Calabria, which is rather more Byzantine, cf. D . Minniti-Gonia 
1992. In general, Modern Greek derives from koine, which absorbed 
all o f the Greek dialects. 
This subject has been studied in much detail by a number of 
scholars: after A. T h u m b 1901, p. 282, by A Lopez Eire, V . Bubenik, 
G. Horrocks, and the French school o f C. Brixhe, M . Bile and 
R. Hodot, among others, always on the basis of inscriptions which 
allow us to make out the influence of spoken koine in the local dialects. 
There is variation from dialect to dialect. Dialectal inscriptions 
often stop around the beginning o f our era, but dialectal inscriptions 
or dialectal features in koine inscriptions sometimes survive up to the 
third century A D . In the long run, the resistance o f the Doric koinai 
mentioned above proved useless, as did some conservative dialects 
such as those o f Boeotia, Messenia and Cyrenaica, in addition to 
artificial resurrections, for political reasons, in Lesbos, Laconia, Elis 
and Cyprus. 
The public and private inscriptions of the local dialects, which are 
more conservative, are a different case altogether. In the former, cer­
tain cases have been studied in which political reasons motivated 
the preservation o f the local dialect, for example, in Larissa (cf. 
L. R. Palmer 1980, p. 189 ff.), Boeotia (cf. G. Vottero 1996, p. 56 ff, 
G. Horrocks 1997, p. 37 ff.), Lesbos and Cyprus (cf. R . H o d o t 
1990c). Koine was preferred in foreign relations or for various polit­
ical uses, whereas the dialect was used within the territory for var­
ious purposes and particularly to highlight nationalist attitudes. Yet 
the dialect eventually would be penetrated by koine and would even 
contain hypercorrections which reflect just h o w unfamiliar it was to 
its speakers. 
251. After A. Thumb, a very informative general perspective, from dialect 
to dialect, can be found in V. Bubenic 1989, p. 73 ff, cf. also P. Wahrman 
1907, J. Niehoff-Panagiotidids 1994, p. 273 ff. and G. Horrocks 1997. 
A very good up-to-date study is provided by A. Lopez Eire 1996b. For 
the penetration of the koine in certain dialects, there are monographs by 
E. Nachmanson 1903 (Magnesia), E. Kieckers 1910 and M.J. Barrios 1996 

184 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
(Crete), R. Nehrbass 1935 (Epidaurus), J. J. Moralejo 1973 (Delphi), R. Hodot 
1990a (Asian Aeolic), A. Panayotis 1990 (Chalcidice), C. Brixhe 1993c (Caria 
and Licia; Laconia), G. Vottero 1996 (Boeotia), C. Consani 1996 (southern 
Italy). For the late preservation of some dialects, cf L. Zgusta 1980, p. 123 
ff For the Greek-speaking Eastern population in Rome, see J. Kaimio 1979, 
p. 21 ff and I. Kajanto 1980, p. 89 ff For Greek in the East, see the 
book by J. Kaimio and H. B. Rosen 1980, as well as the references already 
cited. 
3. 
C O L L O Q U I A L K O I N E A N D ITS V A R I A N T S 
Colloquial 'koine' 
252. It could be said that literary koine has a general norm: that o f 
Attic reduced by certain innovations o f the koine and later progres­
sively added to by means o f the phenomenon o f Atticism. T h e 
differences are of a temporal and scholarly nature, as well as being 
differences between individual authors. In contrast, colloquial or spo­
ken koine, also referred to as popular, cannot be regarded as unitary 
except to the extent that the literary koine served as a support, elim­
inating the more obvious deviations. 
But deviations did exist. O n the one hand, they were a product 
of the influence of other languages: above all, Egyptian in Egypt and 
Aramaic or Hebrew, although there is some doubt about the latter. 
O n the other hand, they were a product of an evolution that we 
can only partly follow and date, since it is covered up by the fact 
that all our documents are written and therefore, in a certain sense, 
literary. 
Frequentiy, popular koine can only be deduced from the mistakes 
o f the literary texts. W e are still left with the problem o f differences 
in level within the spoken language, that is, between colloquial and 
vulgar language. There are also chronological differences, which I 
will discuss later, c f §§ 264 ff 
So, the attempts to define the dialects o f koine (of Egypt, Asia, etc) 
are not often very productive and tend to be abandoned, cf A. Thumb 
1974, p. 167 ff. Although, at times, they have been undertaken again 
with the aid of new methods, as in the 'essay
5 by C . Brixhe 1984 
on Anatolian Greek from the beginnings of the period under discussion. 
253. It is almost impossible to describe literary and spoken koine sep­
arately, and the latter's social, local or temporal dialects. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
185 
Focusing for a moment on spoken, popular or conversational koine, 
we can only make a pan-chronic and pan-dialectal description deal­
ing with certain characterisctics found here and there, with greater 
or lesser frequency and regularity, which one tries to date and localise. 
These characteristics must be obtained from all kinds o f texts, includ­
ing those of literary koine where they penetrate to a greater or lesser 
extent, whether in a normal way or as mistakes. Some have sur­
vived, in a more generalised form, in Modern Greek. 
Before making such a description I will point out the variants 
within spoken koine, insofar as this is possible. They can be studied 
from various perspectives, since we are not looking at them from 
the perspective of the existence o f strict dialects. Then I will deal 
with these, insofar as they result from the influence of languages 
with which Greek came into contact; I will examine the 'social' vari­
ants of a vulgar type; and when we attempt a description of the 
koine in the next chapter, I will provide examples o f most of the vari­
ants, resulting from its evolution, although it is often fortuitous to 
fix their chronology and diffusion. 
The influence of other languages 
254. 
Starting with the variants resulting from the influence on Greek 
of the languages with which it came into contact, I will indicate the 
principal variants of these languages. 
T h e clearest conclusions refer to Egypt, doubtless because it is 
here where our documentation, thanks to the papyri, is more abun­
dant. Sometimes, we have exaggerated: for instance, cases such as 
the confusion of o and co, ei and i, the pronounciation of -u in ecu 
and eu as a semi-vowel, the later loss of difference in quantity, the 
loss of inter-consonantal y and o f final -v or the A c . Gtiyaxepav, are 
general in koine and not specifically Egyptian. In contrast, the inter­
change o f voiceless and voiced occlusives (they are not distinguished 
in Coptic) and, in certain positions, the voiceless and aspirated (these 
no 
doubt lost their aspiration) are features of the Greek of Egypt. 
A good description of the Greeek koine of Egypt can be found in 
C. Consani 1993, p. 27 ff. 
O f course, Greek received linguistic borrowings from Egyptian, cf. 
P. Wahrmann 
1907 and J. L. Fournet 1989. 
Little of this is found in Syria and Palestine. The Aramaic sub­
stratum has been held responsible for the occasional spelling o instead 
of a (TIOVSO%{O), the loss o f nasals in groups or in intervocalic position 

186 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
(NucpiKoc,), some prothesis (eioicoxXa 
= Lat. scutella) and little else. 
Other characteristics, such as the elimination of the diphthongs ecu 
and eu, the fricativisation o f aspirated consonants, the A c . pi. Koixeq, 
e t c are general. Regarding Anatolian koine, cf. W . Dressier 1963, 
C. Consani 1993, p. 30 ff. (and, earlier, A 
T h u m b 1974 [1901], 
p. 139 ff). The trilingual inscription of Xanthus reflects an influence 
o f Lycian in the Greek: sometimes the article is missing, there is 
much Kai, KoeGiepoco with G. O n the other hand, the Greek o f Dura-
Europos is very altered, no doubt through Aramaic influence (the 
prothetic vowel, G. instead o f D , N. pi. instead of A c p i , indec­
linable eva, the thematisation o f athematic nouns, nouns in -iv). Yet, 
there was influence from the local dialects (Lycian, Pisidian) in 
Pamphylian: the tonic accent, frequent apheresis and metathesis, the 
glide after i and u in hiatus, the neutralisation o f final o/u, the frica­
tivisation o f intervocalic g and d. At any rate, these are very mar­
ginal cases. 
255, Nothing very definite is found in other regions. But we should 
at least recall the vexata quaestio of the Semitisms in the Greek ver­
sion o f the Old Testament (that of L X X ) and the New Testament. 
In general, after the works o f A. Deisman 1923 (cf. F. R. Adrados 
1948, p. 132) and J. H, Moulton-G. Milligan 1914-29, it has become 
clear that these texts are practically koine and are very close to pop­
ular or conversational koine, despite the notable differences between 
them. Luke writes in a more literary Greek than the other evange­
lists. The 'Greek o f the Jews
5 is not sufficientiy known, if it existed 
at all, and some of the characteristics found in the two Testaments 
come from the Hebrew literary tradition; only some can be attrib­
uted to the Aramaic that was spoken there. 
Many alleged Semitisms have been rejected; as, for instance, by 
A. T h u m b 1974, p. 121 ff. Indeed, this has been the line followed 
by, among others, the well-known manual by F. Blass—A. Debrunner 
1949, p. 3 ff: many alleged Semitisms are simply koine, the clearest 
Semitisms being those o f pure translation from the Hebrew in the 
L X X (and citations o f these in the N T ) , and those of Jewish con­
cepts translated into Greek. D . Hill 1967 has written a book about 
these 'Greek words with a Hebrew meaning
5. But these authors are 
in a minority: for J. A. L. Lee 1983, after a detailed lexical study 
of the Greek Pentateuch, 'the Greek o f the L X X should be consid­
ered as being essentially o f its time
5 p. 146. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
187 
This is the most c o m m o n view, although there is no lack of pro­
posals regarding Hebrewisms and Aramaicisms. But true Aramaicisms 
from the contemporary language are rarely cited and they are sur­
rounded by doubt. 
256. For the influence of jndigenous languages on koine, see in general 
A. Thumb 1974, p. 102 ff, V. Bubenik 1989, p. 198 ff, J. Niehoff-
Panagiotidis 1994 and G. Horrocks 1997, p. 60 ff With regard to the 
Greek of the L X X and New Testament (for descriptions see, for the NT, 
H. Pernot 1927, F. Blass-A. Debrunner cit. and B. Gonsani 1994), and, 
in addition to the references already cited, see works that stress the syn­
tactic and stylistic features derived from the Hebrew bible: for instance, 
D. Tabachovitz 1956, K. Beyer 1962, C. F. D. Moule 1968 and H. B. 
Rosen 1979. On the New Testament as koine, see also L. Zgusta 1980, 
p. 126 ff. On the more educated Greek used by Luke, see among others, 
L. R. Palmer 1980, p. 174; on the more popular character of Mark, see 
J. Gh. Doudna 1961 (who places much emphasis on Semitisms). On the 
wide use of Greek in Palestine and the minimal presence of Aramaicisms 
in the inscriptions, cf. H. B. Rosen 1963, 1979 and 1980; for its scarcity 
in the NT, see V. Bubenik 1989, p. 67 (but they are more frequent in 
later Jewish literarure, as, for instance, in Flavius Josephus or the Shepherd 
of Hermes, cf. A. Hilhorst 1976). For the L X X in general, cf N. Fernandez 
Marcos, 1973. 
L. Rydbeck 1967 represents a different sort of critique: one cannot strictly 
speak of a 'popular language', for the N T has many similarities with the 
technical Greek language of the first century 
A D . 
257. The influence of Latin on Greek also failed to crystallise into 
the creation of local or regional dialects. Only in Egypt do some 
technical terms of the R o m a n army or administration appear to be 
translated by a particular word, but this could just be accidental. 
C o m m o n translations were often made: consul is waxoq, senator is avy-
KXTITIKOC,, frumentarius is OTTVKOC,, potestas is e^ouoia, etc. 
The inscriptions, papyri and literary texts offer us an abundant 
mass o f Latin vocabulary of the type mentioned. For example, for 
the New Testament see the great number o f terms relating to mil­
itary, judicial and administrative 
life as summarised by F. Blass-
A. Debrunner. There are studies in which all of these elements can 
be found, although the more cultivated writers, such as Plutarch, 
tended to avoid this. In fact, the direction o f borrowings generally 
went in the opposite direction, from Greek to Latin. 
For the lexicon, S. Davis 1991 collects some eight hundred Latinisms 
from all periods in the papyri, but for the Hellenistic period he points 
out that we are dealing with a superficial phenomenon limited to 

188 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
the world o f the military and administration; and only in cases where 
satisfactory Greek translations did not exist (these have been col­
lected by H . J . Mason 1974). Subsequently, in the age of Diocletian, 
there was another wave o f Latinisms relating to administration and 
functionaries, but equally superficial. See § 258. 
258. For other aspects o f the language, the most productive or use­
ful texts are the senatus consulta, treatises, laws, etc, which, for the 
eastern half o f the empire, were often written in Greek (or Greek 
translations were provided) from translated Latin texts. These have 
been studied particularly by E. Garcia Domingo 1973 and others. 
In these translations (and in inscriptions in general), as well as in 
the borrowings collected by Davis, we come across certain charac­
teristics affecting phonetics and other aspects o f Latin; but also char­
acteristics helping to distinguish the Greek from koine when, for 
example, i is pronounced instead of ei, and a fricative (Lat. f) instead 
of an aspirated (Gr. <j>). Sometimes, it is a question of the adapta­
tion o f the Latin inflection o f nouns (and adjectives, pronouns) to 
the Greek. 
T h e syntactic characteristics include: forced translations o f the 
gerundive (Seauiouc;. . . dvajn<p0f|voci ecppovxiaev for uinctos. . . remittendos 
curauit); the A c o f extension (%a>pocv 7tpoax{0r||jii. . . %68aq %iX{ouc, for 
agrum addo . . . mille pedes)] the indication o f the father AeuKiou uioq; 
the D . o f place (evedcrjaa rcapaxa^ei for uici. . . acie); the manner of 
making a v o w (ouvueiv etc, xov OuixeAAiov); the jussive subjunctive 
(8ouvai KeXeuan for dare iubeat); certain subjunctives in subordinates 
(oic, . . . e^nyfjacovxai for quibus . . . exponant). Then there are clear 
semantic caiques, which translate eligo for eicXeyca, colligo for auMteycQ, 
dilectio for Kaxa?loyr|. 
However, it is dangerous to attribute the presence o f these or 
other koine characteristics in the Greek to a Latin influence. The sub­
junctive o f wish is already present in the L X X (with earlier prece­
dents); the subjunctive of subordination without orccoc, also has 
precedents. And the confusion of the perfect and aorist, which has 
sometimes been seen as a Latinism, has its own history. 
259. T h e influence of Latin on Greek is negligible with regard to 
the formation of words and morphology. It has been proposed that 
nouns and adjectives in -iq, -w in Greek, where -toe,, - I O V is old, is 
a Latin influence; but it seems to be more a question of a phonetic 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
189 
phenomenon. However, the suffix -ocpioc, or -ocpic, is indeed a Latinism. 
In spite of everything, the lexicon had a significant influence: it 
reached Byzantium and Modern Greek and all its dialects. There 
are certain formal changes, such as ?ULHTOV from limes, Snvdpiov from 
denarius, Kopiri from cohors. But sometimes the transfer of a word from 
Latin into Greek produced a semantic change: for instance, cala-
marium is 'writing reeds', but KocXauxxpiov is 'inkpot'; and Constantine's 
Xdpocpov comes from a more general laureum. T h e phenomenon was 
repeated in Byzantium. 
However, the influence of Greek on Latin in the lexicon and for­
mation o f words was more significant, giving rise, in Latin, to a spe­
cial nucleus that we call Graeco-Latin, which had an enormous 
influence on later languages. See more about this in §§ 294 ff. 
So, all in all, the influence on koine of the different languages in 
contact with Greek was quite negligible. Or, rather, it is badly 
reflected in the inscriptions, given that it mainly corresponded to 
pronounciations which rarely figure in the inscriptions, and to mis­
takes that the written texts eliminate in most cases. If subdialects of 
the koine were created at all, no doubt in a small measure, these are 
barely known to us and were not important for the later tradition. 
260. In general, see A. Thumb 1974, p. 152 ff, and, for the New Testament, 
F. Blass-A. Debrunner 1949, p. 4. For the subject of Latin borrowings in 
general, cf. F. Viscidi 1944 and G. Horrocks 1997, p. 75 ff; for the Greek 
of official use among the Romans, see P. Viereck 1888, H.J. Mason 1974 
(administrative, political and military terminology). Also, L. Zgusta 1980, 
p. 131 ff For the Latin lexicon in the papyri, cf B. Meinersmann 1927, 
R. Cavenaile 1951 and especially Cerveka-Ehrenstrasser, I. M. Diehart, J. 
1996. For the inscriptions, see A. Cameron 1931. The circumstances sur­
rounding Latin and Greek in the Roman empire will be studied more 
closely in a later chapter. 
Variants of colloquial 'koine* 
261. Attempts have been made to reach conclusions on the local 
variants of the koine from what has survived o f it in Modern Greek. 
For instance, after A. Hatzidakis 1977 (1892), attempts were made 
by A T h u m b 1974 (1901), p. 190 ff., and J. Niehoff-Panagiotidis 
1994, p. 311 ff. 
It is evident that characteristics of koine, whether in the Hellen­
istic or R o m a n period, survive in Modern Greek: the p r o n u n c i a ­
tion of certain vowels and diphthongs (examples o f iotacism and the 

190 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
elimination of eu, ceo, in particular), the fricativisation of aspirated 
voiceless occlusives ( L a t . / f o r Gr. cp); forms such as the N. sg. depac,, 
A c sg. yuvouKav, A c . pi. yuvaucec,, N. pi. ypcupfic;, verbs in -wto, evi 
(mod. Gr. eivca), thematics instead o f athematics (icrrdvo), axdvco, 
OTTJKCQ, dcpiaxouuev), aor. eXapot; the loss o f the dative (confusion o f 
D . and A c ) , the dual, the perfect and the optative, the extension o f 
the use o f the subjunctive in the main clause (sometimes equivalent 
to the future), iva + subj. instead o f inf., the defective inflection o f 
the participle, etc. M o r e details are provided below, cf. §§ 330 ff, 
425 ff. T h e difficulty is in fixing the dialects locally and temporally. 
The attempts that have been made have taken into account the 
varieties within koine (in Italy, Crete, Cappadocia, Cyprus, Rhodes), 
varieties which descend at least in part from the old dialects (Tsakonian 
and Pontic). Certain differences in the pronounciation of 
the 
maintenance (or lack thereof) of the old geminates, the palatalisa­
tion (or lack thereof) o f the gutturals, the preservation of the 3rd 
pi. -ouor (for -ouv) and the extension of -occu to the 3rd pi. of the 
aorist - are all attributed to old developments, from Attic to the 
R o m a n age. 
It cannot be denied that this could be true, but it is far too con­
jectural. So, as I anticipated, there is no other solution when defining 
the general lines or the popular of conversational koine (including its 
impact on literary koine) than to provide a synchronic and spatially 
unitary type o f description. The data can be extracted from all kinds 
o f texts, including the literary texts. 
262. Let us first look at a variant that we have already discussed, 
which is easier for us to understand, although we are dealing with 
a social, not a geographical or temporal, dialect: vulgar koine. 
W e have already looked at the vulgar register in Ionia (in Hipponax 
and others) and general references have been provided on Attica, It 
is now interesting to see h o w some vulgarisms, apart from those that 
seem to be mistakes, seem to have been consciously introduced by 
some authors in order to distance themselves from literary and ele­
vated prose. I will refer to the Cynics. 
I refer the reader to a previous work o f mine (Adrados 1981), 
which is in turn based on another work by J. F. Kinstrand 1975 on 
Bion the Borysthenite, and an unpublished thesis by P. Peran on 
the Life of Aesop, whose cynical characteristics I have emphasised in 
various works. In both cases, vulgarism is definitely and consciously 

K O I N E A N D 
ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
191 
sought for. Furthermore, since this is c o m m o n in literary texts, how­
ever low their level may be, Hellenistic phonetics is much less obvi­
ous than in the 'mistakes', which authors such as E. Nachmanson 
1910 and K. Dieterich 1898 have researched. 
263. Bion displays some characteristics of Hellenistic phonetics (yivouca, 
yivobaKco, ouGeiq, neiva) and morphology (rcocuGdcGcoaav, lack o f the 
dual, abundance o f the diminutive and vocative); as well as syntac­
tic and lexical characteristics. 
The Life of Aesop contains traces of Hellenistic phonetics (iotacism, 
monophthongisation o f diphthongs, the confusion of long and short 
o, -toq > -iq, confusion in aspiration, etc.), and contains an abun­
dance o f expressive terms for physical defects and o f Hellenistic 
vocabulary in general. For morphology, we can note the following: 
Ac. %eipocv, euy£vf|v, N. n. fJccGw, numerals o f the type 5eica.T£vxe, 
lack of augment (e7uxexd%ei, eupov), inf. onAmv, dvapeiv, the change 
from one contracted form to another, from athematic to thematic 
(exiGovxo, SiSouvxoq, oxpcovvueaGai), aor. evjta, -aq, ei)paxe, perf oi8a, 
-aq, in the verb 'to be' rjq, fern. part. eiScbq, etc. In syntax, the A c . 
is used instead o f another case, the G. instead o f D . (GOV euvoei, 
also substituted by rcpoq + A c ) ; the Hellenistic use o f §idxi, orccoq, 
iva: of the moods and tenses (ind. instead o f subj, perf. instead of 
pret, periphrasis). 
Short and interrupted dialogue is characteristic; mixture of tenses, 
with neutralised uses (historic present and praesens pro futuro); the 
KCU 
style; expressions such as 
8COGOO yvco^mv x( eaxou, oval 
xcp Aiaco7U(p. 
Many of these characteristics are also found in colloquial koine in 
general, but the agglomeration and special uses in vulgar koine dis­
tinguish 
it from the colloquial. 
It serves to be reminded that the difference between the popular 
and the vulgar is not always easy to define: both share many fea­
tures, although literature does avoid certain words, expressions and 
turns o f phrase, not to mention phonetics. T h e vulgar language 
should be seen as a subterranean substratum which only emerges 
by mistake or as a conscious literary resource. It also emerges in 
the tabellae defixionis and other vulgar inscriptions, and, at the begin­
ning of the Byzantine period, in a remarkable text from the sixth 
or seventh century: the prose o f the anonymous collection of the 
Aesopic Fables, referred to as the Vindobonensis, which consciously 
vulgarises a more educated earlier prose. C f F. R . Adrados 1948, 

192 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
p. 67 ff. A similar case is that of Joannes Malalas, a contemporary 
of our collection, o f w h o m more will be said later. 
4. 
C O L L O Q U I A L KOINE: G E N E R A L DESCRIPTION 
264. The koine that was commonly spoken is referred to as collo­
quial or popular koine. Its phonetics is known particularly 
through 
the 'mistakes
5 o f texts without any literary pretensions; the 
other 
areas o f the language are known through these same texts and other 
more literary texts, particularly o f the Hellenistic period. Literary 
texts, especially the oldest ones, coincide in many aspects of syntax 
and lexicon, in particular with conversational koine. 
Since we are looking for c o m m o n characteristics, let us eliminate 
those that we have registered as coming from contact with other 
languages. I would like to stress that, as we shall see, it is not a 
question o f a temporally unitary language, for different 
character­
istics emerge in different dates, while others (or the same but in an 
earlier period) are only registered as a tendency (which sometimes 
culminates in Modern Greek). Indeed, some may begin as vulgarisms 
or as 'mistakes
5, and end up as regular characteristics. 
265. Descriptions of koine can be found in general works, such as those by 
A. Meillet 1975, p. 253 ff, E. Schwyzer-A, Debrunner 1975 (passim) and 
R. Browning 1993, p. 19 ff Specific works on certain aspects of koine (apart 
from the works cited previously on its origins and internal differences, and on 
the L X X and NT) include, on Greek papyri, E. Mayser 1926 ff. (Ptolemaic 
period), H. Ljungvik 1932, L. R. Palmer 1945, T. Gignac 1976 and 1981 
(Roman and Byzantine periods), S. G. Kapsomenos 1958 (id.), B. G. 
Mandilaras 1973 (the verb); on phonetics. H. Pernot (1921); on the dative, 
J. Humbert 1930 and W. Dressier 1965; on the perfect, P. Chantraine 
1927, p. 214 ff; on syntax, F. R. Adrados 1988c and 1992e (passim). Cf, 
in general, L. R. Palmer 1980, p. 174 ff. and G. Horrocks 1997, p. 65 ff. 
An elementary description is provided by W. R. Funk 1977. For certain evo­
lutionary features, cf H. Ljungvik 1932 and St. Wahlgren 1995. R. Browning 
provides an interesting comparison of the lexical use of NT and Atticists 
such as Phrynichus and Moeris. 
For the lexicon, see in general, F. R. Adrados 1948, p. 31 ff and 199 ff. 
(only words in koine). For Ionicisms' cf. for example, E. Mayser 1926, I, 
p. 20 ff (a list following from papryri), F. R. Adrados 1948, p. 160 ff. (id. 
from the Aesopic fables and from numerous texts used in the comparison). 
For Attic words which are absent in koine, cf for example, F. Blass-
A. Debrunner 1954, p. 70 (particles) and, for individual authors, the ref­
erences given in § 277. Lucian, Rhet mag. 16 and Lexiph. 1 reproaches the 
pedantic use of a series of Atticisms. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
193 
266. A description of popular koine must start from what we already 
know. It is fundamentally Attic, with some rare Ionic or general 
forms, and an abundant non-Attic lexicon, also Ionic and general. 
However, it is not always the standard Attic of prose but very often 
the popular types of Attic. Yet, it should be pointed out that from 
the start, or gradually, new features emerged: sporadic 
features, 
reflecting new tendencies, or features generalised earlier or later. 
267. Phonetics. During the R o m a n period the opposition of long and 
short vowels was lost, something which was presaged by the confu­
sion of n and e, co and o in Egypt from the third century B C , but 
with even earlier traces. Around the year A D 100, the poet Babrius 
disregarded the quantity of the penultimate in his choliambs, as he 
was more interested in the presence of the new tonic accent. 
The vocalic system was totally transformed, following tendences 
which are rarely found in 
fifth-century 
Attic (examples of iotacism 
in inscriptions from the Academy: 'A0wa, "Apic,) and which greatly 
penetrated fourth-century Beotian (closure of n into ei, monophthongi-
sation o f ai, etc.). In the Hellenistic period, the phenomenon of 
iotacism was clearly advanced (i for n, ei) as well as the p r o n u n ­
ciation of 01 as u; the elimination o f the diphthongs eu (> efy ev) and 
ecu (> af, av) is difficult to date; the monophthongisation of cu dates 
from the Imperial period; and the evolution u > i is Byzantine. 
These phenomena gradually came to create Modern Greek, but left 
little mark on the literary texts. 
In short, the disappearance of the differences in quantity, iotacism, 
and the elimination o f diphthongs are key, although these phenom­
ena did not quite reach completion. 
The consonantal system also underwent a drastic evolution. Aspirated 
voiceless occlusives became fricatives in the Hellenistic period; the 
voiced ones also became fricatives, except after a nasal; £ became a 
voiced sibilant; g was lost in cases such as oXioq. These phenomena 
became regulated from the fourth century B C , the fricativisation of 
the aspirated stops came later, after Christ. See H . Pernot 1921 and 
E. Schwyzer-A. Debrunner 1975. 
268. Morphology. Let us look at some notable characteristics. 
There 
is the sporadic appearance o f A c rcocxepav, from which in Modern 
Greek the N, Ttaxepocc, was created (depocc, in the third century 
AD). 
Above all, there is the disappearance o f the D , following a sort of 
flourishing during the Hellenistic period (cf. Adrados 1992e, p. 219), 
and in the Imperial period (cf. J. Humbert 1930 and W . Dressier 

194 
C H A P T E R O N E 
1965); it has culminated in Modern Greek. But from an earlier date 
onwards we encounter the exchange o f ev + D . and eiq + A c . There 
is also an A c . pi. yuvottKec,, N. pi. ypacpric,, G. in -ou in the 3rd decl, 
all in the Imperial period. Also, the dual was lost. 
Verbal inflection also contained some novelties. Since the Hellenistic 
era, the use o f athematic verbs in -ui was more and more reduced 
in popular texts, as they tended to become thematic on -co (Seucvueic,, 
e^covvuec,, ouvueiv, 8(8(0, iaravG)); sometimes athematic verbs were 
replaced by other thematic verbs (%opTa£a> replaced by Kopevvuui). 
There is an aoristic influence on the present (KpuPco), a new inflection 
o f the aorist o f the type e(3a^a, -ec, (etSa, rjpGa), the replacement o f 
thematic aorist by the sigmatic (icaT£A,i\|/a, second century AD); the 
confusion o f augment and reduplication; regularisations o f the type 
£0fiKa(ii8V, oiSaiiev, i\[ir\v; a reduction o f the optative, almost limited 
to stereotyped expressions o f wish, c f statistics in A. Meillet 1975, 
p, 289 ff.; the value o f the subjunctive future; the contamination, at 
times, o f aorist and perfect (of the type ejniaGcoKajnev) which presaged 
the loss o f the perfect in Modern Greek (except for some which were 
left as aorists, such as Ppfjica); the extension o f the passive aor. 
(dcTreKpCGnv) instead o f the middle; the beginning o f the part, with 
defective inflection, as in M o d . Gr.; the increase in periphrastic ver­
bal inflections. 
In conclusion, there was a tendency to reorganise the declensions, 
with a predominance o f the vocalic stem and a reduction o f the 
dative; and, in the verb, the elimination o f the inflection in -ui, the 
disappearance o f the optative and the perfect (or a fusion with 
the aor.), the confusion and even elimination o f augment and redu­
plication, regularisations o f the desinential system, etc. 
269. Syntax. T h e system o f cases evolved. As I explained in Adrados 
1988c 1989b and 1992e, the A c tended to become a general rule, 
eliminating some special uses, and the G. tended to focus on the 
function o f determining the noun. As mentioned earlier, the D . dis­
appeared, but much later on, and the use o f prepositions increased. 
W e have seen h o w the frequency o f use o f the optative was almost 
totally reduced to stereotyped expressions o f wish. T h e potential and 
the imperative tended to be substituted by futures. T h e subjunctive 
tended to be reduced to subordinate clauses, although its jussive use 
in main clauses was important in the Hellenistic period. As far as 
tenses were concerned, the perfect almost always became resultative, 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
195 
its intransitive use with a present value being rare; it became almost 
the equivalent o f the aorist, which presaged its eventual loss, as we 
have seen. However, the historic present is absent. The system of 
voices focused on the opposition of active and passive, the medium 
was reserved almost exclusively for reflexive and reciprocal use as a 
variant of the active. W e have discussed the participle. Sometimes, 
we come across an infinitive with a subject, even if the subject is 
the same as that o f the main clause. T h e frequency of subordina­
tion decreased, but there was an increase in the use of iva + sub­
junctive, instead of the infinitives dependent on verbs of will and 
others. 
270. Lexicon. First, there is the characteristic elimination of a large 
number of Attic terms and their replacement by other terms, whether 
new or from various origins. Sometimes, they are the Ionic terms 
which we have proposed as being at the same time Attic, belong­
ing to the 'subterranean' or popular language. These and other terms 
also appear in the late Plato (cf A . Diaz Tejera 
1961) and in 
X e n o p h o n (cf L. Gautier 1911), among other authors: some were 
perhaps traditional terms from the same subterranean language which 
was now beginning to surface; others were new creations. 
There is also a large number of words that are only found in 
koine'. Ionicisms and new creations, above all. O f course, the fre­
quency of abstracts and adjectives related to them is lower in pop­
ular as opposed to literary koine, but it increased considerably due 
to transfers between the two. Furthermore, there are words that can 
only be found in a particular region of the Hellenistic world (for 
example, in Egypt xhxokoyoq 'administrator o f private property' or 
Ga^aixnyoc, 'a vessel'); but this may be accidental and in any case, it 
is a minor difference. 
I would like to recall some conclusions which I presented in a 
very early work (Adrados 1948), but have not been picked up or 
considered by other scholars, or replaced with other studies. Indeed, 
this field has been largely ignored. 
The point is, within the koine that dates before ca. A D 100 there 
is very little difference between the lexicon of the spoken and o f the 
literary language (with the exception o f vulgarisms and technicisms). 
Both the elimination of certain Attic terms and the admission of 
Ionic or other terms probably o f a popular origin (and of certain 
abstracts and adjectives) are phenomena that affect the whole of the 

196 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
language known to us. The most 'popular' texts, mentioned earlier 
(§ 245), and authors such as Polybius or Philo coincide fundamen­
tally as far as the lexicon is concerned. All o f the written language 
displays the same extraordinary 
development o f the suffixes -ia, 
-uoc,, -r|, -eia, etc. and their corresponding adjectives; and of verbs 
with preverb; etc. 
Then there is the case of special lexicon within popular koine (the 
phenomenon is without doubt more important in literary koine), as 
well as the 'hiding' o f words (conventional synonyms) and words 
without meaning, and magical words in magical texts. Cf. M . Garcia 
Tejeiro 1996. 
5. 
L I T E R A R Y K O I N E A N D ITS STAGES 
The first stage 
271. However much every written text o f koine reveals a literary 
intention and hides, as far as possible, popular phonetics and lan­
guage, it is clear that texts such as the L X X or the N T , not to men­
tion the defixiones or private documents in papyrus, were directed at 
a non-educated public and were looking for a means o f communi­
cating with it; the writers tried not to distance their language too 
much from their audience. As regards the vulgar Greek o f the Life 
of Aesop and other texts, we are dealing with a conscious and liter­
ary vulgarism. 
Yet the majority o f the prose texts written from the beginning o f 
the second half of the fourth century B C onwards—-I am not refer­
ring to poetic texts, which artificially resuscitated the old dialects— 
were aimed at an educated, international public, an elite within the 
different Hellenistic kingdoms and leagues of cities. The cultural back­
ground for prose was rooted in Attic, whose literary genres (philos­
ophy, history, comedy, erudition, sometimes oratory) still survived. 
New genres such as the novel or the diatribe were added. 
T h e idea was not to widen the cultural gap with Athens, which 
existed all the same. Therefore, people wrote in a language which 
was an intermediate so to speak, between Attic prose and conver­
sational koine, with all sorts of gradations. It contained elements o f 
both, which is why we have been able to use it to describe the con­
versational koine, particularly as regards the lexicon, however different 
it may have been in some respects, its similarities with Attic being 
more significant. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
197 
This is the prose we refer to as literary koine or literary Hellenistic 
koine, the first stage of its evolution in the Imperial period. Let us 
look at this in more detail. 
272. The problem is that very few texts o f the first literary koine 
have been preserved and even studied to the degree that they deserve. 
It was precisely the increase in the more Atticist prose from the start 
of this era, along with the increase in works of erudition and sci­
ence in the period of the R o m a n empire, which led to the loss of 
the majority of Hellenistic literary prose. W e have had to make do 
with a few scattered remains. 
As mentioned earlier, the beginning o f the first stage was marked 
by the late works o f Plato, Xenophon, and Aristotle. Aristode's works 
are, firstly, written in various registers; the esoteric being more lit­
erary, the exoteric being more popular and at the same time scientific. 
Secondly, Aristotle has barely been studied from a linguistic point 
of view, and the same applies to his disciple Theophrastus and others, 
whose writings have been preserved in fragments. 
The texts which are useful for the study o f literary koine of the 
Hellenistic period have been mentioned above (§ 245). W e can add 
Diodorus of Sicily and Strabo, of a more recent date, in the Augustan 
period. Additionally, there are studies on specific points, but none 
of a general character. 
273. For Menander, cf D. B. Durham 1969 (1913, very partial, only deals 
with the lexicon); for Philo, M. Arnim 1912; for Aristeas G. H. Meecham 
1935; for Epicurus, H. Widmann 1935 and P. Linde 1906; for Polybius, 
J. A. Foucault 1972; for the late Hippocratic writings, U. Fleischer 1939 
and J. Mendoza 1976; for Diodorus, J. Palm 1955. The book by S. Wahlgren 
1995 is also useful, cf. § 277 and G. Horrocks 1997, p. 48 ff. 
274. Unfortunately, no study has been made on the whole o f this 
type of koine: i.e. literary Hellenistic koine in its first stage. The works 
cited place particular emphasis on the lexical aspects: the lack o f 
Attic terms, the appearance o f I o n i c ' or recent terms, as mentioned 
previously. Although a general overview is lacking, some observa­
tions can be made on various aspects o f the language. 
T o begin with, it should be pointed out that the writers of this 
period were very conscious o f the existence o f the two levels corre­
sponding to literary and popular koine. So, in the Gospels, Luke uses 
traditional Attic words as opposed to the popular words used by the 
other evangelists: Kpocvtov for ToXyoGav, (popoc, for icfyvaov, anb xou 
vuv for an apxi, acoixa for rcxcouet, eaOico for xpcbyco, 8epco for KoXacpi^co. 

198 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
But the whole o f the Gospels makes frequent use o f a lexicon which 
was rejected by Atticists such as Phrynichus and Moeris, who drew 
attention to the Attic' and 'Hellenistic
5 words. C f R. Browning 1983, 
p. 47 ff. 
W e know, from the book by H. Widmann, that Epicurus displayed 
a series o f non-Attic characteristics: frequent substantivisation of the 
participle, reduction o f the difference between active and middle, 
periphrastic verbal forms, confusion of the aorist and perfect, use o f 
the subjunctive in subordinate clauses, a reduction in the use of the 
optative, an increase in the use of prepositions, etc. 
Some observations on the characteristics o f Polybius and other 
authors (Strabo and Diodorus) can be added. A. Meillet 1975, p. 290 f. 
provides statistics on the rare use of the optative. J. Palm 1955 makes 
the following observations for Diodorus (apart from the large number 
of fluctuations due to the influence o f his sources): strengthening of 
the cases with the help o f prepositions; scant use, as mentioned, o f 
the optative; rarity o f the historic present; neuter pi. with sg. verb.; 
infinitives with the same subject as that of the main clause; periphrastic 
conjugation; etc. 
Indeed, the first literary koine is characterised by rather negative 
as opposed to positive aspects: the lack or rarity of Attic and Atticist 
lexicon and grammar; the entry o f new koine characteristics (in the 
lexicon and grammar), some o f which were later eliminated. 
But we should stress that Hellenistic literary Greek was not uni­
tary. It contained the poeticising rhetoric of Hegesias of Magnesia, 
studied by E. Norden 1958 (1898), filled with a poetic lexicon and 
Gorgianic figures, as well as with Attic grammar: dismissed by Cicero, 
it nevertheless had a great impact on posterity. Also, we should point 
out the presence of technical and scientific prose, which was signifi­
cant for the lexical development of Greek and which shall be fur­
ther discussed. 
Atticism 
275. Towards the start of the imperial age, in the period o f Augustus 
and Tiberius, there was a change in literary taste which steered the 
literary prose o f koine in an archaistic direction. This movement, 
known as Atticism, was marked by the revaluation o f Attic culture, 
and also had an impact on sculpture (and contributed to the loss o f 
the former prose). 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
199 
This movement found its origins among theorists o f style such as 
Caecilius o f Galeaete, Longinus and Dionysius o f Halicarnassus, 
although, earlier, Aristophanes of Byzantium had written about words 
which should be repudiated. Some believe it was rooted in the 
Asianism of Hegesias and other rhetoricians, while others (Philostratus 
in his Life of the Sophists)' believe it originated with the rhetors or 
'Sophists' (the 'Second Sophistic') w h o were making declamations or 
meletai in public around this period, particularly on historic or imag­
inary themes: for example, a certain Nicetas, of which nothing has 
been preserved, and his successors such as Polemon (in the times of 
Trajan) and those that came later, starting with Herodes Atticus. At 
any rate, the new style dominated in educated prose and found its 
practical exponents in authors of dictionaries who, like Phrynichus 
and Moeris, drew attention to the proscribed words. 
There is no doubt that the imitation o f the ancients sought to ele­
vate the Greeks to a superior cultural level than the Romans, and 
to provide them with a sense of identity. It is interesting to note 
that, as regards Christian Greek, this began at a popular level, but 
when Christianity reconciled with the R o m a n empire in the fourth 
century, its main representatives — Synesius, Basil, the two Gregories 
and John Chrysostom, among others - adopted Atticism (to the same 
extent as the last great pagans, Libanius and Proclus). With the clo­
sure of the A c a d e m y o f Athens by Justinian (529), the balance 
definitely shifted towards the Christians, who were given the formidable 
task of continuing the Attic level of Greek prose and rescuing ancient 
Greek literature from obscurity. 
276. It could be said that Atticism was adopted by the Greek higher 
classes, who needed a strong sense o f identity to face R o m e and 
needed to distinguish themselves from the populations who spoke a 
popular Greek. Although they often cooperated with R o m e , they 
retained a feeling o f cultural superiority, also regarding their value 
as a nation. 
In general, there was a gradual reintroduction o f an Attic lexicon 
and grammar. But the authors did not form a homogenous whole. 
Some preferred the Attic of prose, and there were those who filled 
it with poetic words, even taken from Sappho (Himerius). There 
were 'Sophistic' professionals, such as Dio Chrysostomus, the two 
Philostratuses, Aristeides and Favorinus, cf. the book by W . Schmid 
1964 (1887-96), the fundamental work on the subject, and writers 

200 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
influenced by them or 'part-time' Sophists, such as Dionysius of Hali­
carnassus, Dio Cassius, Arrian (editor of the work by Epictetus), Lucian, 
Aelian, etc. There is no complete study: the book by W . Schmid 
deals with Dionysius o f Halicarnassus, Aristeides, Lucian, and Aelian, 
and is important but incomplete in certain respects, c f Adrados 1948, 
p. 36. 
This is not all. With the task o f creating archaism, some authors 
imitated Herodotus, as for instance Dionysius of Halicarnassus 
and 
Josephus, or simply wrote in Ionic (as Arrian in his Indike). Besides, 
there was the technical or scientific literature, which was somewhat 
Atticising, and Christian literature, which adapted itself to the move­
ment from the fourth century onwards. 
277. On the Atheists, cf the book by W. Schmid previously cited, and my 
contribution in F. R. Adrados 1948, p. 31 ff. For precedents, cf L. Zgusta 
1980, p. 127. For Herodotisms, cf S. Ek 1942 and 1946. For Christian 
literature, cf for example, P. Gallay 1933. 
The important book by S. Wahlgren 1995 draws a systematic compar­
ison - for a series of characteristics such as the dual, anomalous conju­
gated forms, prepositions, particles, final and consecutive constructions -
between the situation of classical and pre-classical Greek, the koine (LXX, 
Letter of Aristeas, Polybius and Diodorus) and of the early Imperial prose 
(Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Nicolaus of Damascus, Strabo and Philo of 
Alexandria). The latter clearly displays the progress of Atticism, which rein­
troduced Attic forms or increased their frequency, always with differences 
according to the author and to the different linguistic features. 
278. T h e fundamental 
thing is that the Atticisms (and poetisms) 
entered progressively. In my book o f 1948, I established that from 
around the year 100, in the times of Trajan, then of Hadrian and 
Herodes Atticus, a new phase in literary koine began. Purism was all 
the rage, as reflected in the lexicon o f Phrynichus and Moeris, men­
tioned previously, w h o distinguished what was Attic and Hellenistic. 
It was also reflected in certain satires, such as that of the character 
who in Athenaeus is called Kevxouiceixoc, because of his repeated ques­
tion Keixou TI OU Keixca; i.e.,
 cIs it documented or not?'. W e have seen 
how Lucian, himself an Atticist, also satirizes the excesses of the Atticists. 
Let us take the example, from the book by W . Schmid (I, p. 226 ff), 
of Atticisms in Lucian, who is not the most exaggerated of the Atticists: 
(a) Morphology. A m o n g other things: pi, 8eaud, vecbq, axepoc,, of 
as indirect reflexive, f]8uvdur|v, impv. -ovxcov, jiocvxeun besides 
Hellenistic forms. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
201 
(b) Syntax. Substantivisation of neutral, dual, plural adjectives of 
the abstacts, certain G. partitives, G. of agent, D . of relation, 
historic present, perf. with present value, imperative of middle 
perfect, final or consecutive infinitive, optative in subordinate 
clauses; etc., besides Hellenistic uses. 
i 
In my book cited above, I established (p. 195 ff.), while studying the 
lexicon of the Augustan collection of Aesopic fables, certain groups 
of Atticisms which did not enter the new literature until a certain 
date - for example, until the second or the fourth 
century—and 
which, because of this, can be used to date anonymous texts such 
as these (which cannot be assumed to have been written before the 
fourth century). O f course, one has to distinguish between Atticisms 
as such, prosaic Atticisms, and the poetisms o f particular rhetori­
cians, which also increased with time. O n e also has to consider that 
technical literature is more moderate as regards Atticism. Furthermore, 
it would be useful to study other types o f literature, as, for exam­
ple, the novel or the different types o f Christian literature. 
In any case, Atticism is made up of many stages, as is the devel­
opment of abstract vocabulary, which can be seen, for example, 
when comparing Polybius and Plutarch. Here, terms from the pre­
vious koine were admitted, but many more were added, usually of a 
literary type. It is particularly difficult to separate popular from lit­
erary koine in this period, the latter remaining almost hidden from 
us. There is also a difference between Atticising and poeticising lit­
erary koine, which is seen, for example, when comparing the Augustan 
Collection of fables and Aphthonius, both from the fifth century A D . 
279. However, in the fables as in other literature, it was only at the 
start of the fourth century A D that Atticism began to retreat, faced 
with the fashion for popular and even vulgar language. This battle 
continued with varying results throughout the Byzantine and modern 
periods. 
I would like to stress that we find ourselves in unexplored terri­
tory here, for we lack any systematic studies on the evolution of 
Hellenistic and R o m a n Greek (I have noted some exceptions) and 
especially on the variants of the different schools of Atticism and the 
Atticism of the different genres. In certain cases, we could be look­
ing at a mixture of prosaic Atticisms and poeticisms, as in the col­
lection of fables already referred to. Indeed, the same author could 

202 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
change his style according to the genre he was using, something 
which is illustrated in Lucian and Plutarch. 
The fact is that prose language progressively began to distance 
itself from conversational language, which becomes more and more 
difficult to define. This occurred whenever mannerisms were intro­
duced for literary purposes, as with the Spanish imitators of Gongora 
or the French Symbolists: a series o f steps had to be created to ren-
novate resources whose effect had been overused. 
Consequendy, Greek literature became increasingly elitist and aimed 
at a closed circle of readers, until the arrival o f the Medieval period. 
280. Before this, Greek had developed a remarkable literature through 
this artificial language (and the even more artificial language o f 
poetry), in which Christian literature must be included. It laid the 
foundations for its survival as a language o f culture. But more impor­
tant was the growth of the literary lexicon and its influence on Latin. 
This Graeco-Latin lexicon made its way, through numerous obsta­
cles, to arrive at the modern languages in which it survives as an 
essential element. W e shall look at this in more detail further on, 
c f §§ 294 ff. 
T o move on from the subject o f the lexicon, it is worth looking 
at the modern study on the syntax of fifth- and sixth-century liter­
ature; I am referring to the work by K. Hult 1990. By comparing 
various authors, both pagan and Christian, from the centuries in 
question, this scholar managed to distinguish a group of four more 
'literary
5 authors (Eunapius, Theodoret, Marinus and Procopius) from 
two more 'popular
5 authors (Palladius and Callinicus). There is a 
series of points in which they differ. For example: 
Literary variants: hno and npoq as agents, in final sentences with 
<bc,, (be, av, OTCGOC; av, a future participle indicating intention, an absolute 
infinitive, an indicative in consecutives, xuyxavco with participle in 
nominative case, D . of agent, etc. 
Colloquial variants: purpose expressed by an infinitive with a prepo­
sition, direct instead o f indirect style, oxi after verbs of thought and 
vision, impersonal passive, consecutive iva and after verbs of willing, 
impersonal £xu%e with A c . and infinitive, etc. 
As we can see, there is a series of subde variations, but from the 
year A D 100, it becomes difficult to gain access to popular koine: we 
only have access to different variants o f literary koine, influenced by 
various tendences o f Atticism, and to less influenced texts. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
203 
6. 
T H E 
E V O L U T I O N O F T H E I N T E L L E C T U A L A N D SCIENTIFIC L E X I C O N 
Sources 
281. T o continue from where we left off (§ 237), let us look at the 
development of the Greek ^intellectual and scientific language in the 
Hellenistic and R o m a n periods. W e are partly dealing with special 
terms (semantically modified or newly created) relating to different 
philosophies and sciences, and partly with a vocabulary with a gen­
eral diffusion, at all levels, and in all the periods: the words them­
selves or the types o f formation, derivation and composition passing 
into the whole literary sector o f the later languages. 
At the outset, it is important to make two observations. First, that 
there are no broad or up-to-date studies on the development of this 
lexicon, so that we have to make do with approximations. Second, 
that the collection and study o f the Greek lexicon in dictionaries and 
special works is incomplete, or has been until now, because of a lack 
of lexicons, concordances and indexes of authors, and through the 
absence, even in the general dictionaries, of data that appear in the 
more specialised publications. 
However, there are specialised dictionaries (of botany, geometry, 
rhetoric, etc.) which may be o f use (see D . Lara 1997 and F. R . 
Adrados-D. Lara, 1998e). But dictonaries o f philosophical terms, 
such as those of F. E. Peters 1967 and J, O . Urmson 1990, focus 
on content and neglect the lexicographic aspects. The same thing 
happens in specialist studies like that o f D . Tsekourakis 
1974 on 
ancient Stoic terminology (Koc0r|KOVTa, KaTopOobjuaxa, 
T O xekoq, 
TOC 
aipexd, etc.). Fortunately, the recent publication of the Repertorio 
bibliogrdfico de la lexicografia Griega by P. Boned-J. Rodriguez Somolinos 
(1998) provides us with a very complete list o f all that has been pub­
lished in this field, which is a great aid to research. 
N o w , because of the data provided in the Thesarus Linguae Graecae 
(Irvine, California), and the Diccionario Griego-Espanol (I—VI, Madrid 
1980-2002), the situation is starting to change. As regards the latter, 
I refer the reader to two works: 
(a) F. R. Adrados-D. Lara (1998e), which provides an overview 
of the lexicon of different specialities and sciences and the 
corresponding bibliography, as well as its collection in the 
DGE. It also points out some problems: the difficulty of dis­
tinguishing 
between c o m m o n and specialised use, the lack 

204 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
o f precision (at times) as regards the taxonomies, the lack 
o f data, the transitions between normal or specific uses, etc. 
In addition, examples are provided of advances made in this 
area. 
(b) F. R . Adrados-J. Rodriguez Somolinos 1998d and 
2 0 0 2 " 
2003, which provides data on the enormous advance of the 
D G E V and V I compared to the dictionary by Liddel-Scott-
Jones, as regards new words or new technical and scientific 
meanings o f known words, which are exemplified with arti­
cles such as 8eKac;, Sfjjuoc, or 8ucn. It also points out, with 
respect to these volumes, hapax legomena that cease to be so 
and new words that were not collected until now. 
Description 
282. The scope of the intellectual and scientific Greek lexicon, whether 
we are dealing with specific words or meanings o f others, with tran­
sitions ranging from the most specialised to c o m m o n and conversa­
tional language, is immense. The ability to form new words is also 
without parallel; where we would form new phrases, the Greeks could 
form new words. It serves to recall the observation by Vendryes: 
'there was never such a beautiful tool to express human 
thought'. 
Cf. F. R . Adrados 1968. 
Throughout the Hellenistic and R o m a n periods, the lexical net­
works which we discussed above (§ 227) - created by the Presocratics 
and continued by the Socratics with repercussions on the c o m m o n 
language—were perfected. They contained different kinds of nouns 
(abstract, action, agent, etc.), adjectives related to these as well as 
verbs and adverbs; in addition, variants functioning as preverbs, 
prefixes, and first elements of compounds. Thus, an infinitely flexible 
intellectual tool was created. 
P. Chantraine provides a detailed study of the extension of the 
different formations across the centuries; for koine and later Greek, 
cf. for example, p. 190 fT. (-jua), 289 ff. (-cue,), 320 ff. (-rnq). Specialised 
studies exist on some o f these, many o f which are cited in my work 
Adrados 1997b. In fact, they originate from the Ionic and Attic 
period, as I have explained in the appropriate context: but during 
the Hellenistic and R o m a n periods they reached an unrivaled level. 
In some o f the examples of suffixes and different derivatives which 
I offered earlier, I placed much emphasis on this. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R 
L A N G U A G E S 
205 
Above all, it is a question o f abstract and action nouns in -d, 
-r| -(a, -act, -|J,6c,, -aic,, -awn, agent nouns in -xr|c,, etc.; adjectives in 
-toe,, -(X)IKOC;; and a series o f corresponding verbs. Also, compounds 
and derivatives with prepositions. There was a tendency to create 
systems in which nouns, adjectives, adverbs and verbs correspond, 
systems which had parallels with others with initial prepositions or 
with compound forms. This was subsequently imitated in all the 
world's languages. 
Many o f the words from which these lexical networks are formed 
did not emerge until the fifth or fourth century B C and were later 
diffused, sometimes becoming specialised and changing in semantics, 
in the Hellenistic period or later. For example, anaBia and 8idvoia 
descend from Herodotus, avrdpiceia and Siacpopd from Democritus, 
al'c0rioT<; from Anaxagoras, arcdBeia from Aristotle; they were then 
widely diffused, with various meanings, along with their derivatives. 
For instance, if, in the eighth century (Homer) we find cdpeco, only 
in the fifth century do we find the abstract otipeorc, (Hdt), which 
later survived in various literary genres and with various semantic 
specialisations; in the fifth/fourth century odpeoruoc, (X.), in the fourth 
century aipexoc, (pi., Isoc), in the fourth/third century aip£xiaxr|c, 
(Philem.), aipr(GiX£i%r|c, (Diph.), in the third century aipeoia (Delos 
inscription), -etioc, (Chrysipp.), -dxnc, ( L X X ) , -exi^a) (Hp., Ep., L X X ) , 
-etiKoc, (pi., Def), 
-STUTOOC, ( L X X ) , in the first century Bc/first cen­
tury A D aipeaio^dxoq (Ph.), in the second century A D aip£cndp%r|c, 
(S.E., Gal.), in the third century A D aipeaiobxrjc, (Porph.), in the fourth 
century A D ocipeoiccpxeco (Gr. Naz,), aipeaitaxxpicc (Did.). T h e lexical 
network grew across the centuries, across literary genres, and across 
both pagans and Christians. 
T h e same applies in the case o f prepositional compounds, for 
example, those with Sux-: Sioupeaic, appears in Hdt., in the fifth cen­
tury, as does the verb Sicap&o; then there is 8iatp£x6<; and Siaipexucoc, 
in pf, Siapexrjc, in an inscription from the third century B C , Siapexrjp 
in Philod. (first century BC) and 8iaipex£oq, 8iaipr|jLia in Them, and 
Dam. respectively (fourth and fifth century AD). For the documentation, 
as in the previous case, see the DGE. The conclusion is analogous. 
283. 
T o be sure, the Greek language created lexical systems which 
soon began to proliferate, such as ^oyi£o)/-ia|ia/-ioxf|<; (from which 
we 
obtain 
-IOXIKOC,, -iox£ia)/-iK6c/-i|ioc,; pot>A,£uco/-xfi(;/-jj,a/-xr|pxov; 
(pi?io(;/-£Go/-r|iia/-ia/-iK6<;; 8pdco/8paai<;/8pajia (from which we obtain 

206 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
- T I K O C , ) / 8pcWr|c;; etc. However, the derivatives from prefixes are no 
less prolific (dva-, 
OCTCO-, £K-, £ T U - , mice-, Tiapoc-, etc.) and composi­
tional elements (d-/dv-, ccuxo-, ei>, <piA,o-, dp%i-, etc.). In the 
DGE, 
there are around 800 words with am and auto, around 1,750 with 
d7io-, 50 with dyocGo-, 250 with dp%i- (dp%e-, dp%-). Note that most 
of this type o f vocabulary is present in all the written language. 
284. 
Another line o f enquiry in the study o f Greek lexicon, com­
plementing the previous one, deals with formative elements: terms 
which enter into compounds and derived words, like suffixes. W e 
have briefly looked at the treatment o f the lexicon in the archaic 
and classical period, but there were enormous advances in the 
period that we are studying. I refer the reader to my work Adrados 
1997b and its bibliography. For the extension of certain suffixes, cf. 
R. Browning 1983, p. 38 ff.; for the new meanings o f some words, 
p. 42. 
Below, I provide some statistics (which also include even the most 
ancient Greek, as there are no studies based on dates or genres) 
regarding noun and adjective suffixes. They come from the reverse 
index of Greek by C. D . Buck-W. Petersen 1944. Some frequencies: 
-105, -iov: 12,000 
-ia, -in, -la: 7,500 
-jioc,, -jwSv, -GJHOC,, -\o\ibq: 
4,000 
-fxa, 
-ccajna, -ia|xa: 3,300 
-TT|<; (-Tac,)/-Tr|Toc,, -TOCTOC,: 500 
-TUG, (-Tac,)/(-Tou), etc., -iGTfjc; 5,400 
-oic,, -^ic,, -xj/ic,, -TIC; 5,400 
-KOC,, -KOV, 
-IOCKOC,, -TIKOC,: 7,200 
It would be interesting to distribute the frequencies chronologically, 
as there was a continuous increase. 
285. 
I think that this can give us some idea o f the volume, the char­
acteristics and the evolution o f the intellectual vocabulary of Greek. 
Using Indo-European resources for word formation, it represented a 
remarkable advance comparable to that o f science, philosophy, and 
thought in general. 
It laid the foundations for the development o f this type o f lexi­
con 
in the coming periods, although this occurred largely through 
an intermediate stage, still to be studied, which we refer to as the 
Graeco-Latin lexicon. It is simply the last of the Greek grafts which 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
207 
Latin received from Plautus onwards, which enabled it to become a 
language of culture, a base for those which followed and continued 
to receive Greek grafts. 
7. 
G R E E K A N D L A T I N IN T H E R E P U B L I C A N D T H E E M P I R E 
The contact of Greek with other languages 
286. Greece and the Hellenistic kingdoms were conquered by R o m e 
in the third century B C The process extended through the conquest 
of southern Italy and Sicily (Tarentum fell in 272, Agrigentum in 
262, Syracuse in 212) to the defeat o f the Macedonian king Perseus 
by Aemilius Paulus in 167 B C (Greek resistence came to an end with 
the fall of Corinth in 146) and the collapse o f the Hellenistic king­
doms (Pergamum was legated to the R o m a n empire in 133 B C , 
Pompey conquered Syria in 64 BC, and Caesar conquered Alexandria 
and Egypt in 30 BC). At this time, and later, R o m e seized almost 
all of the countries on the Mediterranean, culminating its advance 
in the period o f Trajan 
(AD 98-117): its dominion extended from 
England to the Euphrates, from the Danube (and beyond, in Dacia) 
to the Sahara. 
Latin imposed itself wherever it came into contact with languages 
of more primitive cultures (in Italy, Gaul, England, Hispania, Germania, 
Pannonia, Illyria, Africa), and in Greek cities in some o f these places, 
the old colonies o f the Mediterranean coast. 
However, Rome's encounter with the Greeks from the third cen­
tury BC onwards (following another encounter of lesser intensity from 
the seventh century onwards) had a rather unexpected outcome: the 
Hellenisation of R o m e . It was a Hellenisation of the culture, literature 
and language of R o m e . A conquered Greece in turn conquered its 
fierce victor, or as Horace puts it: Graecia capta ferum cepit uictorem 
(Epist II 1, 156-157). 
287. However, the outcome was different in the East. Here, Greek 
was maintained, not just in Greece but also in the Hellenistic king­
doms o f Asia, where it had only been a superstratum on the indige­
nous languages. 
Greek was maintained for a long period in Sicily and in Marseille, 
but it succumbed in the end. In Africa it enjoyed a period of splen­
dour after the fall o f Carthage, then after Justinian's invasion, but 
it did not succeed in imposing itself. In Greece and the East, Latin 

208 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
was the official language, but Aemilius Paulus spoke in Greek with 
Perseus; Licinius Crassus delivered his pronouncements in Greek; 
Agrippa, king o f the Jews, was allowed to speak before the R o m a n 
senate in Greek; and the Romans themselves communicated with 
the Phoenicians, Jews, and Syrians in Greek. In Egypt, Romans 
allowed Greek to be used from the very start, as opposed to the 
indigenous language. In fact, not even the generalisation o f the 
R o m a n citenzenry under Garacalla was able to impose Latin in any 
generalised way. In short, Greek was the language of the educated 
and urban populations and the international language o f the East. 
Indeed, Latin only managed to impose itself in the newly conquered 
territories, in Pannonia, Thrace and Dacia, with the help of the new 
colonists. 
The military, judicial, and part of the administrative vocabulary, 
as mentioned previously, became generalised. In Byzantium, it was 
the official language until Justinian, and it was used above all in 
inscriptions and titles o f honour. However, from a much earlier date, 
discourses were pronounced in Latin, followed by translations; edicts 
and other inscriptions were published in both languages (such as the 
Res gestae by Augustus) or simply in Greek (as many edicts by Hadrian). 
H. Zilliacus and J. Kaimio have made a very detailed study of the 
use o f Greek in public inscriptions, political life, legal language, and 
its role in private life and as a language of culture. 
In fact, there was never any kind o f anti-Greek policy, and although 
this language had great prestige on the one hand, and yet was 
considered inferior on the other hand, a state of bilingualism was 
reached in the East and the West, and was resolved in two different 
directions. 
T h e result was two-fold. O n the one hand, Latin became filled 
with Greek expressions, words and constructions, derived from the 
Hellenising culture which it encountered and from the fact that 
R o m a n society, at the higher level, became bilingual. O n the other 
hand, geographically speaking, Latin had to share its territory with 
Greek, which was maintained, as we mentioned, in the East (and 
sometimes moved to the West through cultural means or carried by 
the Eastern diaspora). 
Furthermore, 
within the Eastern empire there were period and 
local differences. Latin was the preferred official language of Gonstan-
tine and later o f Theodosius and Justinian, who maintained it, as I 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
209 
stated, as the official language. At the most, translated versions of 
documents were published in Greek; Latin was also the language of 
law and jurisprudence, so that whenever translations were made they 
were full of Latinisms, cf. L. Burgmann 1991. However, the emperor 
Julian, for instance, preferred Greek, Arcadius allowed the use o f 
both languages before the tribunals, and soon legal texts were para­
phrased and translated into Greek. In Egypt, the use of Greek dom­
inated, with a few exceptions. 
288. So much for the official use: it is clear that in the East, Greek 
was the language of the higher and middle classes, as well as of 
most writers, which explains why it ended up imposing itself in all 
fields. 
The R o m a n empire therefore became bilingual in two ways. In 
the West, Greek was at the same time the language of lower class 
immigrants and the language of educated society; in the East, Greek 
was the language commonly spoken by the educated classes and 
Latin held sway over the administrative and official sectors (this was 
lost, however, in the Byzantine period). This rather complex situa­
tion was accompanied by a love-hate relationship, in which the 
Romans admired the Greeks for their culture but despised their 
weakness and decadence, while the Greeks despised the Romans for 
their lack of culture and arrogance but admired their discipline and 
power. Yet there were also Greek Romanophiles and R o m a n Greek-
ophiles, and all sorts o f intermediate positions, 
Greek in Rome 
289. Let us go back to the origins. Greek influence on Latin resulted 
in a total renovation. First in literature: the Saturnian was replaced 
by the hexameter; the fescennini and the Atellana by a Greek type 
o f comedy; annales and the elogia by the Hellenising epic, history and 
lyric; even tragedy was adopted and, later on, philosophy and ora­
tory. During the Augustan period, the first influence of contempo­
rary Hellenism was substituted by that of earlier literature, which 
was classic and still archaic: classic oratory and history, archaic lyric 
and epic. The first Latin literature was a translation from the Greek 
(Livius Andronicus translated the Odyssey) or was written in Greek 
(Fabius Pictor, Cincus Alimentus); and much later, R o m a n authors 
such Suetonius and Marcus Aurelius continued to write in Greek. 

210 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
W h e n this new Latin literature emerged, it contained original fea­
tures, of course, but in some ways it was also a continuation of the 
Greek. 
Certain factors must be taken into account in order to fully under­
stand this. Firstly, something we have already touched upon, namely, 
the influence o f Greek on all the languages of the 
Mediterranean, 
from the archaic period to, above all, the Hellenistic period, due to 
wars and conquests as well as trade. Subsequently, an enormous 
Greek-speaking population (Greeks, Jews, Syrians, etc) became estab­
lished in R o m e , as extensively attested in the inscriptions. Juvenal 
scornfully refers to the Graecam urbem (III 61). Secondly, the factor 
of the modernity and the strength of influence exerted by Greek lit­
erature, which ended up erasing ancient Latin literature and replac­
ing it with a new, very Hellenicised literature to which I have just 
referred. Thirdly, the bilingualism o f the R o m a n educated classes, 
who learned Greek and finished their training or education in Greece 
(although many of the Greek also learned Latin). Indeed, R o m a n 
conquerors from the second century BG, such as Aemilius Paulus 
(who annexed Macedonia after his victory in Pydna in 168) or the 
Scipios were fervent Hellenisers. Even the hostage Polybius managed 
to introduce Hellenism to the R o m a n aristocracy. 
290. In the letters o f Cicero and in many anecdotes relating to 
Caesar and the conspirors who murdered him, to Augustus, Tiberius 
and so many other personalities, the Latin text is interspersed with pas­
sages or replies in Greek. It was in Greek that Caesar delivered his 
famous pronouncement to cross the Rubicon ('the dice are thrown'); 
that Caesar spoke to Brutus when he was assassinated ('you too, my 
son?'); that Augustus reproached Asinius Pollio for admitting Timagenes 
into his house (
£you are feeding a wild beast'); and that Tiberius 
spoke when he drew someone into his confidence. 
Greek was also used as the language of love, as attested in Lucretius 
I V 1160 ff. and criticised by Juvenal V I 196 ff. Although circum­
stances later changed in the West, for in the fourth century only the 
higher classes and technical writers had a command o f Greek. 
Above all, Greek was an intellectual language and the language 
o f literature and science: these were either written in Greek or in 
Latin filled with a Greek vocabulary which was more or less assim­
ilated, and even with Greek words written in Greek 
characters. 
Cicero's letters and Ausonius's poems are littered with Greek phrases. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
211 
Those of Augustus, Claudius and Tiberius are filled with Greek 
words, although this does not include oratory or political works, nor 
the Acts (but Claudius did speak Greek in the Senate, according to 
Suet., Claud. 42). 
Thus, a part o f Latin ^absorbed so many Greek elements that it 
turned into what I have referred to as Graeco-Latin, which would 
play a decisive role in the diffusion of ancient cultures and languages 
in the Middle Ages and indeed in all the succeeding periods until 
the present day. 
291. The origin of this phenomenon is in the early influence o f the 
Greek language on the Latin language, which was essential for fac­
ing new cultural circumstances. W e are particularly familiar with this 
phenomenon from the Hellenistic period onwards. 
The influence took place in various stages: in the archaic, repub­
lican and imperial periods; and by various means: oral, literary, 
scientific and ecclesiastical I believe I have provided sufficient data 
on this. 
It should be observed that at the end o f Antiquity, familiarity with 
Greek diminished: in R o m e it was still very much alive in philo­
sophical and theological circles and among the aristocracy, but it 
was hardly known outside the city. Yet, cultivators o f Greek con­
tinued to exist. The emperor Gratian officially established its teach­
ing in Gaul (376), where Ausonius's circle was active in Bordeaux; 
the British Pelagius assisted the synod o f Diospolis in 415 and 
impressed everyone with his mastery of Greek. T h e councils, always 
celebrated in the East, enlightened the western bishops on the impor­
tance of Greek. 
Let us stop here for a moment. The Neoplatonists, particularly 
Plotinus and Porphyry, had the greatest influence on western thought 
during the fourth and fifth centuries. There were those who had a 
g o o d mastery o f Greek, such as Macrobius, Calcidius (translator of 
the Timaeus) or Hilary o f Poitiers; and those who had mastered it to 
a lesser extent, such as Saint Augustine, w h o came to Platonism 
through the Hortensius o f Cicero. Then there were the Hellenising 
poets, such as Ausonius, Claudian and Dracontius. 
Translations played an important role. In the third to the fourth 
centuries we have the Hermeneumata of Ps. Dositheus, which include 
translations o f Greek fables into Latin (the whole fabulistic genre 
consists of adaptations o f Greek). A m o n g the Christian 
translations, 

212 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
we must mention the oldest translations of the Bible (Vetus Latino)^ 
which were very non-literary, literal translations; the Vulgata by Jerome, 
which, for the Old Testament, also translates from Hebrew and is 
relatively literary; and the translations o f the Acts of the councils. 
Rufinus and Jerome translated Eusebius and Origen, the Gappadocian 
Fathers, etc. The style gradually improved in the direction of Atticism: 
as shown in the translation by Evagrius o f the Life of Saint Anthony 
by Athanasius, when compared with a previous translation. 
292. All in all, Greek was cultivated to a lesser extent in this period. 
It flourished, however, in Italian court circles under the Ostrogoths 
of Theodoric (493-526), who were familiar with it due to its culti­
vation in the East, where Ulfila translated the Bible into Gothic. 
The Hellenised philosophy o f Symmachus and Boethius date from 
this period; the work o f the latter being very prodigious, although 
he was unable to complete his translation o f the entire works o f 
Plato and Aristotle into Latin. Also from this period is Priscian, who, 
while living in Constantinople, wrote his Grammatica on the Greek 
model. Somewhat later, in the sixth century, Cassiodorus lived in 
gothic Italy and wrote on historical and theological subjects. 
Many translations from the Greek into Latin date from this period, 
some by Dionysius Exiguus and Saint Martin of Braga (monastic 
writings). Somewhat later, in the seventh century, we have Isidore, 
who in Visigothic Spain, in his Etymologiae and other works, left a 
kind o f testament o f the whole of Antiquity. 
This cultivation o f Greek is reflected in Latin Hellenisms, which 
will be emphasised here (not just lexical Hellenisms, but Hellenisms 
in general). 
293. On Latin expansion and its relation with Greek in general, see R.J. 
Bonner 1930, H. Zilliacus 1935, J. Marouzeau 1949, p. 125 ff., J. Kaimio 
1979 and L. Zgusta 1980, F. Bivillee 1990, p. 21 ff., S. A. Tovar 1990, 
p. 41. More specifically, see, on the situation in Rome, H. Kajanto 1980; 
in Palestine, H. B. Rosen 1980; on the border of Greek and Latin in the 
Balkans, see B. Gerov 1980. On the bilingualism of the educated classes 
in Rome, see J. M. Pabon 1939, L. Zgusta cit, p. 138 ff. On the emergence 
of Latin literature, see Adrados 1994b. On the relations between Greeks 
and Romans in general, and their estimation of each other, see S. Swain 
1986 (and my review in Emerita 65, 1997, pp. 374-75). On late Hellenism, 
see W. Berschin 1969-70. On the concept of 'Sprachbund' or the Graeco-
Latin linguistic league, J. Kramer 1983. This author proposes the existence 
of a series of characteristics in the evolution of Greek and Latin during the 
Republican and Imperial periods, resulting from the intense contact between 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
213 
these two languages. Thus, in phonetics, we have the lenition of intervo­
calic occlusives, the palatalisation of velar occlusives before a preceding e 
or i, the fricativisation of intervocalic 4, the loss of aspiration and of the 
differences in quantity and the monophthongisation of diphthongs; in mor­
phology, the introduction in Latin of new types of declension, the transfer 
of Greek suffixes into Latin, and Latin suffixes into Greek and the reduc­
tion of the case system (with the advance of the A c ) ; in syntax, the decline 
of constructions with infinitive, the dative absolute of Greek, the different 
periphrastic verbal forms, the tendency in vulgar Latin towards a central 
positioning of the verb, as in Greek, etc. Gf. G. Horrocks 1997, p. 73 ff. 
On Greek and Romance, Gf. W. Dietrich 1995. 
8. 
H E L L E N I S E D L A T I N A N D G R E E K - L A T I N 
294. The Hellenisation of Latin can be followed from the second 
century BG onwards, together with the Hellenisation of literature. 
The social circumstances described provide an adequate explanation 
of this process: the influence of spoken Greek where the two popu­
lations were in contact or interrelated, the cultural influence o f lit­
erary and scientific Greek. It was a process that was continued, with 
increasing intensity, throughout Antiquity. 
Phonetic and morphological adaptation varied depending on the 
route o f entry o f the Greek elements and on their date. 
With regard to phonetics, a classic transcription exists in which, 
for instance, the voiceless aspirated are transcribed in Latin as such: 
ph, th, ch. But, particularly in the archaic period, diverse transcrip­
tions were produced (for example, ampulla, purpura. Poems, etc.), which 
shed light on the phonetics of Greek and Latin at the time o f the 
loan. For instance, there are Greek words that were taken before 
the alteration of the Latin vocalic system and others after it. Similarly, 
there are transcriptions o f (p as p and as ph, and later others as f or 
b (Orpheus, baselus); there is P transcribed as b and u, etc. 
Linguistic borrowings also provide information on various details, 
such as the origin of certain borrowings in the Greek dialects of 
Italy and Sicily (machina with Doric a, Achiui, Argiui, oliua with digamma, 
Ulixes, sc(h)ara, etc.) or on the languages o f mediation (especially 
Etruscan, it is thought, in cases such as Proserpina or persona, from 
KpOGCGTCOV). 
295. Systems o f morphological adaptation were also created. For 
instance, the first Greek declension, in -a, -n and -aq, -nq was reduced 
in Latin to -a: nauta, poeta. But alterations o f the type Tarentum for 

214 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
Tdpaq, 
Agrigentum for 
'AKpocyctt;, bracchium for |3pa%iG)v, trigonus for 
tp-oycov, aulona for oaoXcbv are frequent, as is the mixture o f inflections 
(Piraea). However, sometimes the strict Greek form was respected 
(Achates, Pelides, agon, andron), depending on the level and style of the 
language. 
Nearly all verbs passed into the first conjugation: not just machi-
nari from |ia%ccv&a0ott but also exanclare from e^avi^etv, hilar are from 
i^apoco, tornare from topveueiv. But it is important to note that, excep­
tions aside, sometimes we are dealing with Latin derivatives: coaxare 
(from KodQ, paedicare (from xa rccciSnca), stomachari (from o%6\ia%o<;), 
pausare (from the aor. o f Tcoueiv). 
But I will not go into further detail on aspects relating more to 
Latin than Greek. The significant thing is the absorption of the Greek 
vocabulary, whether on the cultural level or on other levels. The 
Latin language was enriched by a panoply of roots and formative 
elements; it even altered its phonological system, permitting, for exam­
ple, finals in -n, and its morphological and syntactic systems, admit­
ting constructions identical to the Greek. 
296. The fundamental work continues to be that of O. Weise 1882. One 
should add the various works by F. Biville cited in the bibliography and, 
among many others, the works of J. Marouzeau 1949, J. Andre 1971, 
A. Ernhout 1954, M. Leumann 1948 and 1968, G. Devoto 1968, pp. 86 ff, 
117 ff., 147 ff., 184 ff., H. Liidtke 1974, p. 37 ff., 59 ff., G. Lagunz 1995 
and my work of 1997b. For fourth century pagan authors, see R. Moes 
1980. 
Suffixes with a Greek origin can be found in L. Delatte and others 
1981. For the Greek influence on vulgar Latin, see E. Goseriu 1977. 
I also use two papers by L. Perez Castro 1997 (on Quintilian) and 
F, Hernandez Gonzalez 1997 (on Faventinus). All the same, the subject 
deserves a new systematic study to define the different tendencies, accord­
ing to date and author, in the acceptance or rejection (by means of caiques, 
etc) of Greek lexicon and syntax. No systematic study has ever been made. 
297. 
In continuation, I will sketch the fundamental lines of Greek 
influence on Latin in the different areas of language, starting with 
the lexicon. 
T o take a few examples, we find Greek lexicon in the Carmen Auvale 
(triumpus), Livius Andronicus (cothurnus, purpureus), Naevius (barbarus, mebs, 
nauta), Plautus (absinthium, basilica, comoedia, emporium, peplum), Terence 
(musicus, scaenicus), Catullus (ambrosia, astrum, satyrus), Lucretius (cycnus), 
Virgil (calthus, magicus, narcissus), Cicero (astrologia, bibliotheca, epigramma, 
geometria, schola), Tertullian (apostolus), Ammianus (geographus), etc. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
215 
The 
oldest borrowings were oral and came from conversational 
language: they referred to the sea and maritime trade; they included 
the vocabulary of luxury, games and pleasure; domestic conversation; 
and the arts and sciences. Later, the poets played a decisive role, 
particularly since the Alexandrine school. 
I have only cited a few examples, in which there is a dominance 
of things which were unfamiliar to the Romans and came from the 
intellectual vocabulary. 
The 
introduction o f Hellenisms had begun in the fifth century
7 BG, 
with terms that were influenced by Etruscan, as we have seen 
itri-
umpe, amurca, sporta, persona) or otherwise (camera, gubernare, oleum, 
Pollux)] 
it increased after the Samnite wars, starting from 330 (mina, dracuma, 
techna, talentum, balineum, catapultd) and was stepped up through 
the 
literary and scientific route mentioned. 
O f couse, there were reactions against this, such as the expulsion 
of rhetoricians and philosophers in the years 173, 161 and 154; the 
rejection of Greek words in official oratory; and the efforts by Cicero, 
QuintiHan, etc., to create Latin equivalents of Greek words, see § 300. 
This Hellenistic lexicon became increasingly larger in bulk in the 
later literature, which included Christian literature. Enormous incre­
ments are recorded in Plautus, the Republican and Augustan poets, 
the Rhetorica ad Herennium, Cicero, Tertulian, the Historia Augusta 
and 
Jerome. These and other data, along with the distribution of the 
lexicon in semantic areas, can be found in the book by R. Moes 
1980, 
which records the Hellenisms in Jerome, the Letters, the book 
De rebus bellicis, Ammianus, Claudian, and the Historia Augusta. Devoto's 
statistics, p. 193, for literary authors from Catullus to Persius (via 
Ovid, Tibullus, Propertius, Horace, Ep. and Sat, Juvenal), reveal that 
the proportion of Hellenisms oscillates between 10 and 20 percent. 
298. 
Christian Hellenisms are very important. W e are dealing with 
words which, with a change in meaning, have remained fixed in the 
Latin language (words like angelus, baptisma, euangelium, christus, 
ecclesia, 
episcopus, liturgia, monacus, presbyter, monasterium, etc.) and with words, 
such as eremita, which were created from Greek. This is because, at 
a certain point, Latin was converted in the West into the language 
of the Church, which nevertheless inherited much from its Greek 
phase, which continued in the East. It should be noted that we are 
not just dealing with direct borrowings (sometimes with morphological 
adaptation), but also with caiques, such as spiritus for %vzv\ia (but 

216 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
sometimes a caique was attempted and failed, as when tingere gave 
way to pccTm^eiv). 
O . Weise records a total seven thousand Latin Hellenisms in his 
book of 1882, the pioneer work on this subject. Clearly, this number 
should be increased. 
Latin Hellenisms are useful for the understanding of Greek; not 
just the phonetics, but also the lexicon: in Latin there are Greek 
words and acceptance o f Greek words which are documented there 
before they are in Greek (cf. for example, df|p 'atmosphere', 'air' in 
the DGE, fifth century II 1). 
299. 
O n the other hand, it is not just a matter o f borrowings, but 
also semantic caiques, resulting in the creation o f new words. Both 
tended to remedy what Lucretius (I 832) referred to as patrii sermo-
nis egestas, the poverty o f the mother tongue. Plautus translated 
(piA,oyuvaioc, for mulierosus, Cicero transformed crov£{8r|0ic,, 7coa6xr|c, 
and TtoioTnc, into conscientia, quantitas and qualitas. He used conuenientia 
instead o f 6|K)^oyia, aequilibrietas instead of iaovouioc; sometimes he 
hesitated (notitia rerum, cognitio or intellegentia for evvoioc). Frequently, it 
took some time to find an equivalent: 7id0oc, is not passio until Saint 
Augustine. The process continued: accentus for rcpoocpSia, etc 
The bilingualism of the educated classes o f R o m e and, at 
times, 
of the population that coexisted with Greeks and Eastern peoples 
established in R o m e , and of the traders and artisans explains Graeco-
Latin 'monsters' such as sescentoplagus, Pompeiopolis, cistophorus, etc This 
system o f word formation continues to this day (sp. automovil, etc). 
300. 
It is necessary to study in greater detail (and it must be stressed 
that no such study has yet been realised) the behaviour of the different 
authors with regard to the acceptance or rejection o f the Greek lex­
icon, depending on factors relating to date, literary genre and per­
sonality. See L. Perez Castro 1997. 
T o take an example, in the Institutiones Oratoriae by Quintilian there 
is mention and sometimes criticism of Greek adaptations to Latin 
by authors such as Plautus or Cicero (who in the Acad. post. I 7, 25 
states 'I will make an effort to speak in Latin'), as well as his own 
numerous proposals. He accepts, for example, essentia for ouaia because 
'there is no Latin name' (III 6, 23) and conclusio for emXoyoc, (in the 
Rhet ad Her. 1, 4); he translates KaGoAaicd for uniuersalia 'ut dicamus quo 
modo possumus" (II 13, 14); he prefers uis for Suvajiic, to other pro­
posals, potestas, facultas (II 15, 3); etc. 

KOINE AND ITS RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 
217 
But Hellenisms were not incorporated to the same extent by all 
authors, and not all Hellenisms were the same. Cicero often reacted 
against them (see Orator 49, 164, De qfficiis I 111 and the afore­
mentioned passages) and used them more restrictively than the Rhetorica 
ad Herennium. Some ancient Latin voices remained definitively fixed 
by him as the equivalent of the Greek: sapienta for Goqnoc (cf. Afranius 
299), 
ars for T£%vr|, casus for TTCCOGK;, ratio for AxSyoq, causa for aixia. 
Some terms calqued from Greek compositional methods (altitonans, 
horrisonus, compounds in -ficus, -gena, -gradus, etc.) were reserved for 
poetry. Similarly, some exact transcriptions 
of the N. o f the first 
declension in -e, the A c . and the second declension in -n> etc. 
Faventinus, who produced an abbreviated edition o f Vitruvius, 
struggled with his Greek terminology (sometimes leaving the Greek, 
other times suggesting Latin caiques), adapting it to a 'humble lan­
guage' for private use. 
301. In the long run, a large proportion of the Greek lexicon remained 
firmly established in Latin and, more importantly, formative Greek 
elements such as -Tn<;, - U X X , -xpxa (> -ta, -ma, -tria) and so many 
more whose diffusion has been studied by J. Andre 1971; there 
are also verbal elements, such as 
- I £ G D 
( > -izare), 
- I G O C O 
( > -issare), cf. 
M . Leumann 1948. In addition, suffixes related to Greek, such as 
-icus, -men, -mentum, etc. were diffused. In fact, all these suffixes came 
to form a single system, in which other Latin suffixes were also 
admitted, such as -osus, sometimes with shades o f differences among 
them. Similarly, there was a tendency towards a unique system of 
prefixes and preverbs, which were at the same time Greek and Latin: 
a-/in-, hiper-/super-, peri-/circum-, in addition to those which were only 
Greek or Latin. 
Yet Greek suffixes have a lesser scope for use in Latin than they 
do in Greek: for the 920 cases o f -\o\ioq in Buck-Petersen, there are 
65 examples of -ismus in Latin. But it marked the start o f the enor­
mous diffusion o f -ismo, -isme, etc. in the modern languages. O n the 
other hand, Greek prefixes and suffixes were often linked to words 
of Greek origin (for example, a-, eu-, epi-, cata-) and only gradually 
became freed (mainly the suffixes). Nevertheless, Latin contained a 
lesser proportion o f Greek elements than the European 
languages 
today: it only provided the model, the starting point, as it were, for 
these languages to develop. 
This is the Graeco-Latin I have been referring to, which displayed 
syntactic features similar or identical to those o f Greek and, above 

218 
CHAPTER ONE 
all, a lexicon that was already to a large extent c o m m o n to the two 
languages. This mixed Latin, which began to spread at the end of 
Antiquity and to which Christianity also contributed, served as the 
vehicle o f transmission o f the intellectual vocabulary of Greek during 
the Middle Ages in the West, despite the fact that this language was 
practically ignored at the time. Later on, in the fifteenth 
century, 
both languages once again converged in the West, so that Graeco-
Latin grew and continued to develop within the languages of Europe. 
W e should remember that Graeco-Latin was not just an educated 
and ecclesiastical phenomenon. In the same way that in the archaic 
period a series of borrowings came from the spoken language, so it 
was in the later period. In studies on vulgar Latin, such as that by 
Grandgent 1928, it is said to contain Hellenisms such as amygdalum, 
cata 'each
5, colaphus, dactylus; the verbal suffix -izare, already cited; 
adjectival suffixes such as -o<; -rj, -ov (> -us -a, -urn) and, in partic­
ular, nouns adapted to Latin: -aq (lampa), -rj<;, -%r\q (tructa, boletus), 
-i (piper, sinapsis/sinape, gumma/gummis/gummi), 
-xq (pausa), -\xa (cima), 
-po<; (Alexander), -o>v (leo). Sometimes, the starting point is a case other 
than the N . (elephantus, magida) or phonetic alterations are introduced 
(ceresus, cithern, scopulus, spatula). 
302. But we need to pay closer attention to the influence o f Greek 
syntax on Latin to which we have already referred on several occa­
sions. This influence was to be expected given the contact between 
both nations and the fact that the development o f Latin literature 
on the Greek models called for the development in the former o f 
the syntax as well as the lexicon. 
The fact is that the oldest surveys of Greek syntactic influence on 
Latin were followed by more restrictive ones - too restrictive, in my 
view. Strange prejudices emerged; for instance, if a construction was 
present in Cicero, then this proved that it was Latin. 
Not many Hellenisms are referred to in the treatises on Latin syn­
tax: some in classical prose and in particular in classical poetry. For 
example, quod mihi uolenti est (Sallustius, Livius, Tacitus), cf, Gr. 
TOVXO 
eaxiv ejiol (3(n)A,ou£v(p; partitives G. and others related, such as dea 
dearum (Ennius), opportuna moenium (Livius), cuncta cur arum (Tacitus); A c . 
of relation as in traiectus lora, sacra comas (Virgil); A c . o f the whole 
and a part (Deiphobum tibiam ferit, Dictys Cretensis); part, equivalent 
to a subordinate (sensit medios delapsus in hostes, Virgil); G. dependent 
of a verb as in regnauit populorum (Horace), also with gratulator, gaudeo, 

KOINE AND ITS RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 
219 
miror, etc.; G. absolute, as in eius praeteriti temporis (Bellum Hispaniense) 
and of time, as in huius temporis (Jerome); ille as art., as in ille mor-
tuus (Itala); inf. of preterite with aoristic value, as in insidiam non timuisse 
debet (Tibullus); inf. dependent on the adjective, as in concedere digna 
(Catullus); inf. clauses with ellipsis o f subject and predicated in N., 
as in uxor inuicti louis esse nescis (Horace). The abundance of periphrastic 
forms of the verb in late Latin has been attributed to Greek influence. 
In short, sometimes we are dealing with 'literary
5 and poetic con­
structions and sometimes with vulgar and late constructions. 
303. The influence on phrase construction in general is more impor­
tant. For example, the construction of verbs o f understanding and 
language with quod, which is frequent in Plautus (scio iam, filius 
quod amet meus istanc meretricem in Asin. 52—53), only appears later in 
'incorrect
5 passages of the Bellum Hispaniense (36: renuntiaueront quod. . .) 
or Justin (I 7, 9 cognito quod. . .), but much later it was normal in 
vulgar Latin and has passed into the Romance languages. The con­
clusion that can be drawn is that a 'submerged
5 construction became 
non-literary. This, no doubt, was a result o f Greek influence, which 
imposed the generalisation of the subordinate with infinitive, also 
possible in Latin from the very beginning. 
Yet, this is but a minor detail. Although the same cannot be said 
for the creation of the complex period based on subordinates 
and 
determinations o f these, as imitated by Cicero from the Greek ora­
tors (Isocrates, Demosthenes) and subsequently practiced by the ora­
tors and throughout prose. As stated by W . Kroll 1935, p. 33: 
I am not speaking of Greek influence in the construction of discourse 
and of the Latin period, which, through this, obtained a clear and 
lucid form for the first time. We can appreciate the form that the lan­
guage of the old laws and the Umbrian tablets used to have, Varro 
always preserved something of this burden. The great service provided 
by Cicero consists in that he completely rid himself of this. 
Kroll also compares the transformation 
o f German prose (or any 
European prose, for that matter) through Latin influence from the 
fourteenth century onwards. 
Classical Greek syntax remained very much alive in Latin and, 
today, in our languages. 

220 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
9. 
G R E E K A N D O T H E R L A N G U A G E S O F A N T I Q U I T Y 
The languages revolving around Greek 
304. Latin was, o f course, the language which was most influenced 
by Greek and which was largely responsible for introducing 
the 
language and culture o f the Greeks to the Middle Ages and, indeed, 
modernity. But Greek influence was not limited to Latin: we have 
discussed its contact with the languages o f Gaul and Hispania, with 
Etruscan, Demotic and Coptic of Egypt, with the languages o f the 
Balkans, Asia Minor, Syria, and Palestine. Most o f these languages 
disappeared precisely because of the impact o f Greek (or Latin, for 
others). 
Indeed, within the limits o f the R o m a n empire, only Hebrew, 
Aramaic and Arabic survived; also Coptic in Egypt, which at some 
point was reduced to a sacred language. Subsequently, at the end 
o f the R o m a n empire, Armenian and Syriac created a literature, as 
did, much later, Gothic and Slavic — always under the influence o f 
Greek. 
Greek did not manage to impose itself in Egypt, for Egyptian 
(Demotic at this point, but later called Coptic) continued to be the 
language o f the masses. It also managed to influence Greek, as 
already discussed. There existed a bilingualism, as attested by the 
famous Rosetta Stone. 
However, Demotic was in turn enormously influenced by Greek. 
W . Clarysse 1987 links 96 Greek words to Demotic texts: particu­
larly honorific titles, proper names, official titles, administrative terms 
(especially from the sphere o f finance) and objects o f everyday life. 
This influence increased from the moment in which, beginning in 
the second century A D , Demotic began to be written in Greek char­
acters, first in local magical texts. This language is referred to as 
Coptic. From the year 300 onwards, translations into Coptic were 
produced o f Biblical, Gnostic and Manichean texts - always from 
Greek, which increased its influence. It has been calculated that up 
to 20 percent o f the Coptic lexicon is o f Greek origin, adapted to 
this language. T h e morphology was also adapted: for example, there 
were changes in gender, according to Greek synonyms o f the nouns. 
Also, compounds and derivates were created which did not corre­
spond with the normal use in Coptic, and new meanings to some 
words were introduced though Greek borrowings. There were also 
syntactic influences. 

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R 
L A N G U A G E S 
221 
305. I have already discussed how various languages o f the Balkans 
(Thracian), Syria and Asia Minor (Phrygian, Phoenician, Lydian, 
Lycian, etc) were subjected to Greek influence and began to disap­
pear in different periods, at the very latest during the R o m a n empire. 
This entire region was for^a time bilingual: numerous bilingual inscrip­
tions have survived. 
However, according to Strabo, the majority o f the languages o f 
N. W . Asia Minor had died out in his lifetime; the same can be 
said o f other languages, such as Phoenician, which survived until the 
first century A D , in Cyprus until the second century. There are bilin­
gual inscriptions and others, such as that from Piraeus dating around 
96 B C , which are a caique o f the Greek. 
Aramaic as well as Greek was spoken in Syria and Palestine: this 
is seen in Babatha's archive, dated A D 132. Palmyra was multilin­
gual: the higher class spoke Greek and Aramaic, others also Arabic. 
Here we find decrees in Aramaic and Greek, with Aramaicisms (N. 
for A c , etc.). There are also decrees in Greek, Latin and Palmyric 
(Aramaic). Greek was also written, in a very altered form, in Dura 
Europos, in the Euphrates. 
Given such circumstances, it is not strange to find Greek influence 
in the rare examples we have o f these languages, which soon died 
out; for example, in Phrygia, 
K O C K O D V in sepulchral inscriptions. 
However, this influence is best demonstrated in rabbinic Hebrew, 
studied by X . Sznol 1989 based upon the works o f S. Krauss, H . B. 
Rosen, D . Sperber and others, cited in the bibliography, in addition 
to his own study o f the rabbinical text Genesis Rabba (Galilee, third 
to fifth century AD). T h e sources o f these texts can be found in other 
writings in Hebrew and Aramaic, from the destruction o f the sec­
ond temple to the Byzantine period. 
There are many lexical borrowings from Greek: terms relating to 
everyday life, trade, public administration and the military, religious 
and philosophical currents. These words are c o m m o n in koine and 
are also found in Egypt, Syria and Asia Minor. T o mention a few: 
dva^oyrj 'bill, receipt
5, Xoxnaq 'added tax
5, (piaXn, 7coxr|piov. There 
are also new words: dvxiKaiaap, 58iy|a,aTfipiov, 8i<p£pviov, and new 
formations: KepauaSoc, Tcpcbxaxa, ap^ovxaq (of the A c . pi.). 
306. Apart from the languages which gradually died out in Antiquity 
and those which survived, albeit rather precariously, such as Aramaic 
and Coptic, we should not forget the languages which began to 
be written towards the end o f the Imperial period: from the third 

222 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
century A D (Ethiopic) or the fourth century (Syriac, Armenian). This 
is significant, for up until then, these were languages without writing 
(although Syriac is actually a derivative o f Aramaic) even though 
they were spoken early remote Antiquity. Galatan, spoken in Asia 
Minor in the third century BG, has left neither inscriptions nor writings. 
All these languages began to be written as a result o f diverse kinds 
o f contact with the Greeks and Greek culture. For Ethiopic we have 
inscriptions in the kingdom o f Aksum from the third century 
A D , 
inscriptions in Ethiopic and Arabic, but also in Greek. W e are told 
that the emperor Zoskales, at the start o f the century, was an expert 
in Greek. Another emperor, from the fourth century, Ezana, con­
verted his people to Christianity and introduced vowels, according 
to the Greek model, into the former alphabet, introduced from Saba 
in Yemen. Towards the year 500 the Bible was translated from 
Greek and there was a volume of literature which borrowed many 
words from Greek, o f the type notawfy) < vouTnc;, mangel < e^ayyeA-iov, 
zomo < £co|n6<;, etc. 
W e have examples o f Syriac from the second century A D , and it 
produced an entire literature from the fourth century A D , coincid­
ing with its Christianisation. This was initiated by the bishop Ephraim, 
the great writer who wrote commentaries to the Bible and other 
apologetic works. A very important Syriac literature developed, largely 
translated from Greek; Syriac was also the intermediate 
language 
between original Pahlavi texts and the Greek language (as in the 
case of Syntipas) and also Arabic. This literature also included pro­
fane Greek works, starting with Aristotle. O n c e again, the forces o f 
Hellenism together with those o f Christianity initiated the conver­
sion o f a new language into writing. 
Syriac is full of Greek words: ^eskema < a%fju.cc, hjule < iS&n, 'aksenjo 
< £ev(a, ^qftord < (pQopd, etc. 
T h e case o f Armenian is somewhat similar, only here we are deal­
ing with an Indo-European language whose alphabet was exactly 
adapted from the Greek. At the start o f the fourth century, the 
Armenian king Tiridates III converted to Christianity and declared 
it the state religion before R o m e did. A century later, the monk 
Mesrop invented an alphabet based on the Greek alphabet, with 
thirty-eight letters and very adapted to Armenian phonology: the 
purpose being to enable the Armenian people to follow the Christian 
liturgy. This invention was followed by translations of Christian writ­
ings by the same monk and many o f his successors in the fifth cen-

K O I N E A N D ITS R E L A T I O N T O O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
223 
tury. It is a fundamentally religious and historical literature, which 
was continued, in rather closely related dialects, until the middle of 
the nineteenth century; afterwards, it continued in modern dialects. 
Numerous Greek borrowings were also introduced here, of the 
type oyer < df|p, argiuron < dpyupiov, zom < ^euyjaoc, rawdos < pdpSoq; 
and some through Pahlavi. There were also borrowings from Greek 
syntax. 
These were the peoples who emerged and established new cul­
tures in the old territory of the R o m a n empire and its border zones. 
The influence of Greek on the Iranian language of the Parthians 
and Sasanians should also be added, as well as that of the Celts, 
after the first contacts with the Greeks in Marseille and the colonies 
of Hispania. In effect, we have some seventy Gallic inscriptions in 
the Greek alphabet from the third century BG onwards (along with 
many ostracd). Cf. P.-Y. Lambert 1994, p. 81 ff. 
See § 109 for the Iberian inscriptions in the Greek alphabet and 
the creation of alphabets and semi-alphabets, based on the Greek 
model, to record Iberian, Tartessian, and Celtiberian. Here we go 
back in time again, for most o f these inscriptions date from the 
fourth century BG onwards. 
307. On Demotic and Coptic, cf A. Bohling 1960, W. Clarysse 1987 and 
V. Bubenik 1989, pp. 257-64. On other languages, cf. E. Liiddekens in 
Neumann-Untersteiner 1980, pp. 241-65, V. Bubenik 1989, pp. 264-83. 
For Palestine, see H. B. Rosen 1963 and 1980, D. Sperber 1984, S. Krauss 
1898 and X . Sznol 1989. Also, for other languages, see the different sec­
tions in E. Schwyzer 1939, p. 161 ff. and F. Villar 1996. For Ethiopic, 
see F. Altheim-R. Stiehl, I, 1971, pp. 393-473. For Armenian, A. Thumb 
1916 and A. Meillet 1936, p. 8 ff 
Germanic, Slavic and Arabic 
308. At the close o f Antiquity, the peoples who invaded the ancient 
R o m a n and Byzantine empire became the protagonists o f the new 
era: Germans, Slavs and Arabs. They were all influenced in some 
way or another by the Greek language. 
I will not attempt to examine the consequences o f the pressure 
exerted by the Germanic tribes on the Mediterranean 
world (the 
invasions of the Cimbrians and Teutonics), from the second century 
BC onwards, but I think it is useful to look briefly at the Goths. 
These Germanic tribes, which had established themselves next to the 
Dnieper, clashed with the Romans in the third century A D (with the 

224 
C H A P T E R 
O N E 
incursions into Maesia and Thessalonika, the defeat against Aurelian). 
Subsequently divided into Visigoths and Ostrogoths, the former 
invaded various R o m a n provinces, especially in the West, but also 
made treaties with the Romans (under Constantine), and became 
their allies in the East. 
T h e turning point was the Christianisation o f the Goths, who con­
verted to Arianism, and the translation o f the Bible (which has not 
come down to us in a complete form) by the bishop Ulfilas, who 
came from a Christian family in Cappadocia and whose grandparents 
had been taken as prisoners by the Goths. Once again, the reason 
for translating the Bible was to enable people to become acquainted 
with the sacred writings in their own language. 
For this purpose, Ulfilas created an alphabet of twenty-seven letters 
(nineteen Greek, six Latin and two runic letters). O f course, he also had 
to introduce some Greek words (hairaisis < ccipeoic;, aikkksjo < 8 K K A , T | G { O C , 
praisbytairein < rcpeapWipiov, 
etc.), as well as Greek syntax. 
Nevertheless, the majority o f the Germanic tribes pressed on into 
the West and were civilised and Christianised by the Western R o m a n 
empire, and by Latin. Therefore, Greek influence there was indirect. 
Chronologically, the next invasion was by the Slavs. This Indo-
European people, sometimes allied with alien tribes, came to the 
Danube from the N. and E. towards the year A D 500. At one point, 
they were allied with Byzantium against the Goths, but in the sixth 
century they began their incursions; in the seventh century they pen­
etrated Greece, Thrace, and Macedonia. Yet, an important zone o f 
the Byzantine empire did not definitively come under the Slavs: in 
turn, it received a very strong Greek influence (see more on this in 
§§ 379 ff.). 
309. But the great catastrophe for the Byzantine empire (and later 
for the West) was the Arab invasion in 632: in a very short period 
of time it managed to occupy Palestine, Syria and Egypt, as well as 
Persia, part o f India, R o m a n Africa and Spain. Under the attack o f 
the Umayyad dynasty the Byzantine empire collapsed, except for 
Asia Minor and the European continent, which was under Turkish 
attack from the eleventh century onwards, culminating in the con­
quest of Constantinople in 1453. 
Nevertheless, the Arabs were from the outset strongly influenced 
by Byzantine civilisation and received many borrowings from the 
Greek language. W e will look at this subject in §§ 383 ff. 

KOINE AND ITS RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 
225 
In addition, there was Greek influence on Nubian: Greek words 
in the inscriptions of the Cathedral of Faras (in the tenth century). 
C f M . Krause 1971 (citing K. Michaelowski 1938). 
310. Thus, the Slavs were definitely the first - followed by the 
Armenians and, later, oth&r peoples o f Asia and, above all, the Arabs 
from the seventh century onwards - to reduce the extent o f the the 
Byzantine empire and, consequently, o f the Greek language. Later, 
in the eleventh century, the Turks would conquer almost all of 
Anatolia, and a large part of the Balkans in the fourtheenth century. 
But all this was to a certain extent compensated for by the par­
tial Hellenisation of the languages of these peoples, which extended 
to regions very distant from Byzantium: in the case o f the Slavs to 
the whole of Eastern Europe, and in the case of the Arabs and 
Turks to vast dominions. In 1453, as mentioned above, Constantinople 
fell to the Turks, although some Byzantine cities and places remained 
which were gradually lost, such as Trebizond and later Crete. 
However, Greek led a rather subterranean existence during the 
Turkish domination, a circumstance which favoured its diffusion as 
the language of the newly liberated Greece at the start o f the nine­
teenth century. W e must examine this. 
Byzantium defended Europe in the East for some time, then it 
retreated; and it defended the Greek language, which was preserved, 
although in a reduced area, more or less that o f ancient Greece. 
But Greek managed to have an enormous influence in Europe, espe­
cially through Hellenised Latin: this will be examined in the fol­
lowing pages. 

CHAPTER TWO 
B Y Z A N T I N E G R E E K A N D ITS I N F L U E N C E O N 
O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
1. 
H I S T O R I C A L C O N T E X T O F G R E E K 
IN B Y Z A N T I U M 
Historical data 
311. W e have referred to the Hnguistic situation in the Eastern Roman 
empire before and after the great historical events from the fourth 
century onwards: the adoption of Christianity by Constantine 
and 
the proclamation o f the freedom o f cults (324), the transfer o f the 
capital o f the empire to Byzantium (330); the prohibition of pagan 
cults by Theodosius (394); the division o f the empire (395); the sack 
o f R o m e by Alaric (510); and the closure o f the Academy of Athens 
by Justinian (529). 
Greek was now de facto the official language of the Eastern Roman 
empire, which in a few years became the last remaining R o m a n 
empire: the Byzantines referred to themselves as 'Roman'. W e have 
seen how Latin maintained a symbolic role for a time, and then 
practically died out, being barely left as the language of jurists. 
The Greek Church also became independent in practice, the schism 
o f the ninth century having been foreseen for quite a long time. It 
had adopted Atticist Greek as its language, while popular koine con­
tinued 
to be spoken in the streets in an increasingly altered form. 
In this way, a situation o f diglossia was inherited, which has con­
tinued, 
indeed, until the present day. 
312. Greek was now the c o m m o n language of the Byzantine empire, 
strongly centralised around Constantinople. It was also the language 
o f the Church. This was a consequence of an imperceptible transi­
tion, which had started a long time before. 
Yet there was an internal problem, that o f diglossia. In theory, 
the situation was similar to that in the West (Latin confronted with 
national languages), but in pratice, the strong centralisation of Byzan­
tium and the prestige o f the empire and the Church reduced the 
popular language to the subliterary level for a long time, and truly 

B Y Z A N T I N E G R E E K A N D ITS INFLUENCE O N O T H E R L A N G U A G E S 
227 
new literary works were not created in this language until the twelfth 
century; even then, only in marginal genres and always mixed with 
the literary language. The western risk o f dialectal fragmentation 
was absent. True Modern Greek did not emerge until the nineteenth 
century as a unitary language. 
O n the other hand, there were terrible swings - retreats, recon-
quests, new retreats - which have already been discussed and which 
culminated in the sack o f Constantinople by the Turks in 1453, 
which forced Greek into a subterranean existence until independence 
and international recognition in 1830. Greek, as we have seen, dis­
appeared first from the West and then from the territories conquered 
by the Slavs and Arabs, and later by the Turks. Let us examine this 
in more detail. 
313. The period o f the western barbaric invasions had its counter­
part in the East with the Gothic invasions, from the fourth to the 
sixth centuries A D : from the defeat o f Adrianople to the Gothic king­
d o m o f Theodoric and the final destruction o f the Ostrogoths in 
536. But at least there was a favourable result: the Christianisation 
of the Goths and the creation o f their writing based on Greek, as 
discussed earlier. 
The last date falls within the rule of Justinian (527-65), who recon­
quered vast territories in Italy, North Africa, and Spain for the 
empire. H e consolidated Byzantine culture, something which Theo-
dosius II (408-50) had gone a long way towards achieving by reor­
ganising the Academy o f Athens, with chairs o f Greek and Latin 
(Choeroboscus, who wrote on Greek grammar, was a titular there 
in the time of Justinian). Roman law was codified (the Corpus Theosianum 
and Corpus Iuris) and the whole culture became founded on Christianity 
and the study o f the Greek classics. 
The R o m a n empire experienced a rebirth, with the Greek and 
Christian cultures as its foundations. O f course, Atticist Greek dom­
inated. Justinian was decisive: he brought the pride back to the 
empire and reorganised its culture. The Cathedral o f Hagia Sophia 
was a symbol o f this and served as an inspiration and example in 
the bad times to come. 
314. Indeed, a new series o f misfortunes were to come. The Slavs, 
united with the Avars, a Turkish people (and later assimilated by 
them), crossed the Danube around 500 and clashed with Justinian 
in 558. Later on, they went on to plunder the Balkans, founded 

228 
CHAPTER TWO 
their own kingdom in Bulgaria (with the khan Kubrat, in 581), occu­
pied territories around Thessalonika and the Peloponnese and besieged 
Constantinople (626). This at least had the virtue of expanding Greek 
culture to the Slavic world, which we shall discuss. 
Another focus o f tension was in the East, where the Persian 
Sasanians were making terrible incursions into the empire: Khosrow 
I conquered Antioch (540), which was then reconquered by Belisarius; 
Khosrow II conquered Syria, Palestine, and Egypt and threatened 
Constantinople (615); in the end, he was defeated by the emperor 
Heraclius (627). Here, we are fortunate that asylum was given to 
the Greek thinkers who had fled when Justinian closed the Academy 
o f Athens, and that Greek literature arrived in Persia by way o f the 
Syriac translators o f Edessa. 
From the time o f Justinian, the empire had been in a constant 
state o f alert and had been weakening, which was fatal on the eve 
o f the Arab invasion. It could not count on any help from the West. 
Byzantium was even more weakened by the religious conflicts within 
Christendom inherited from the past: the Monophysites were pow­
erful in Egypt and Syria, the Nestorians here, and all were opposed 
to the orthodoxy of the Nicene creed, which had been adopted by 
Constantinople after much hesitation. 
All of this will be outlined so that we can gain a better under­
standing o f the cultural decline during these centuries. The great 
codes in parchment ceased to be written, those that remained being 
left to gather dust in the libraries until the ninth century, when they 
began to be copied in the new minuscule. Also, literature was barely 
produced (we shall return to this). 
315. All o f the previous problems and fears materialised with the 
Arab invasions: in 634, Bosra, the capital o f Arabia, fell; the great 
defeat at the river Yarmuk, in Palestine, occurred in 636; Damascus 
fell in that same year; Jerusalem and Antioch fell in 638; Mesopotamia 
in 639; and Alexandria in 646. Meanwhile, the Arabs conquered 
Cyrenaica and Tripolitania, Rhodes, Cos, and Chios and launched 
annual incursions into Asia Minor, where they conquered numerous 
cities, such as Cyzicus and Smyrna. They managed an attack on 
Constantinople in 674. In addition, Spain and Italy were lost. 
Byzantium was reduced to little more than the limits o f ancient 
Greece. But it never renounced its past: in the ninth century it ini­
tiated a reconquest and cultural renaissance at the same time. 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 229 
However, in the meantime, cultural circumstances remained 
unfavourable. From the beginning o f the eighth century, various 
emperors had joined the ranks o f those calling for the prohibition 
of the cult o f images. Adorers o f images were persecuted and images 
were destroyed in the churches, until 843, when the cult o f images 
was finally restored. This marked the start o f the Byzantine cultural 
renaissance, around the Patriarch Photius. But, until that time, these 
unfortunate events did not favour literary production, which remained 
just as stagnant as before. 
Popular and higher literature until 1453 
316. Let us quickly review literary and subliterary production in 
these centuries. 
For the first period, until the tenth century, few texts are avail­
able, some o f which reflect the popular language to some extent, 
though always mixed with the literary language. This was accom­
panied by the more formal and literary language of, for example, 
Procopius, Paul the Silentiary, Ioannes Lydus, Agathias and Cosmas 
Indicopleustes in the sixth century, Theophylactus Simocattes and 
Georgios Pisides in the seventh century, John Damascene and T h e o -
phanes the Confessor in the eighth century. 
Some examples o f popular language have been preserved, such as 
the acclamations to the emperors in the Constantinople hippodrome, 
some o f which contain satyrical traits such as that to the emperor 
Maurice in 602; as well as other short poems which are just as satyri­
cal, for example, the p o e m to the empress Theophano in 970; and 
some which are simply erotic (the theme o f the abandoned girl). In 
the seventh century there were also Proto-Bulgarian inscriptions, writ­
ten in vulgar Greek and commissioned by the Bulgarian Khans. 
This is all subliterary. A n example o f sixth-century literature con­
taining vulgarisms is the chronicle of John Malalas ('the rhetorician'), 
a Hellenised Syrian whose attempt to write a history in the vulgar 
language was soon abandoned. But we must also mention the Paschal 
Chronicle in the sixth century, the Pratum Spirituale by John Moschus 
in the seventh century, the Breviarium by the Patriarch Nicephorus 
in the eighth century, the Chronology by Theophanes and the Chronicle 
by George the M o n k in the ninth century, as well as the lives o f 
the saints (Saint John the Charitable, ca. 630, and Saint Philaretos, 
in the ninth century). 

230 
CHAPTER TWO 
I would like to add a text that is not mentioned in the histories 
of Byzantine literature: the collection of Aesopic fables called the 
Vindobonensis (after a manuscript from Vienna) and the versifications 
o f the Bodleian Paraphrasis o f the included in the same manuscripts. 
There is also a certain popular air in Leo the Wise (886-912) and 
Gonstantine VII Porphyrogenitus (emperor from 944). Yet, we should 
stress that these are not texts written in popular Greek, for such 
texts did not emerge until the eleventh or twelfth century, and even 
then mixed with literary Greek. 
317. The main problem with this literature is dating the stages of 
the language. For, indeed, most of the popular characteristics it dis­
plays are found already in papyri, inscriptions, and texts from the 
Hellenistic and R o m a n periods. It is difficult to know when they 
were actually diffused, and whether the literary characteristics which 
are mixed with the popular in our texts were also mixed in the lan­
guage o f the street, or whether we are dealing with contaminations 
by semi-educated writers. For, evidently, the representatives o f the 
truly popular language did not write. 
318. For the Byzantine history, see, in particular, A. A. Vasiliev 1946, 
G. Ostrogorsky 1984, J. M. Hussey (ed.) 1996. For the literature, K. Krum-
bacher, 2nd ed., 1897, H.-G. Beck 1971, S. Impellizeri 1975, H. Hunger 
1978b, I. Sevcenko 1982, U. Albini-E. V. Maltese 1984 (introductions), 
L. Politis 1994 and J. A. Moreno Jurado 1997 (introductions); also, S. A. 
Tovar 1990, p. 41 ff. For the older literature, of a vulgar type, cf. J. M. 
Egea 1987a (with more detail than is here provided, cf. p. 268 ff.) and 
1990 (Anthology), P. Badenas 1985b (edition of the Acclamations), V. Ursing 
1930 (on the Vindobonensis fables) and K. Weierholt 1963 (on Malalas). 
In general, see G. Horrocks 1997, p. 179 ff. 
319. Great events occurred in Byzantium in the ninth century. Under 
Michael III (842-67), Cyril and Methodius preached in Moravia and 
in 8 6 5 , king Boris o f Bulgaria was baptised, ushering in the 
Hellenisation o f the Slavs, which we have already discussed. A n d 
after the victory over the emir o f Melitene (863), a Byzantine offensive 
was launched in Asia, which continued under the Macedonian dynasty 
(867-1056); it was initiated by Basil I (867-886). 
There were successes and reconquests in Italy (Benevento, Bari), 
in the islands (Crete), and in Asia (Aleppo, Cilicia, Syria). Under 
Basil II (976-1025), Bulgaria was transformed into a Byzantine 
province, and there was an advance on Asia, followed by the con­
quest o f Armenia. 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 231 
O n the other hand, under the Patriarch Photius, Byzantine sep­
arated from R o m e (867) and Photius himself, together with other 
scholars (the bishop Aretas o f Caesarea in particular, in the ninth-
tenth centuries) initiated the great Byzantine renaissance, which led 
to the proliferation of writings in the literary language (katharevusa). 
The ancient manuscripts were copied in the new minuscule, and a 
literature emerged which was derived from the ancient Greek (Photius, 
Constantinos VII Porphyrogenitus, Ioannis Kameniatis, the Accursiana 
collection of Aesopic fables) - always in the literary language, as 
stated. 
From the time of Photius, a reorganisation of learning had been 
under way which culminated in the schools o f Law and Philosophy 
founded by Gonstantine I X (the first, in 1046). W e also know of a 
patriarchal school in the twelfth century. The prelates and large con­
vents favoured the production of copies and the study of the ancient 
writings, as well as intellectual work. This movement involved per­
sons in the court itself or protected by it. 
However, under the next dynasty, that o f the Ducas (1059-78), 
decadence set in with the great defeat of Manzikert, which opened 
Asia Minor to the Seldjuq Turks: once again, Byzantium was left to 
defend itself. Nevertheless, the Comneni (1081-1185) undertook a 
hard struggle to defend the empire in Asia, with setbacks such as 
the rights they had to cede to the Venetians, the start of the Crusades 
(in 1096), and the defeat of the emperor Manuel in Myriocephalon 
against the Seldjuqs (1176). This laid the groundwork for the great­
est defeat of all: the conquest of Constantinople by the fourth Crusade, 
in 1204. 
320. Such dangerous times were splendid for the Byzantine culture. 
The Atticist language had the advantage: united with Byzantine patri­
otism and the Church, it was diffused from the court of Constantinople 
as though it were a symbol of its majesty. This was a reaction against 
so many Barbarian attacks, the dispersion of the empire, and provin­
cialism. It was also an honorific tide that linked Byzantium not only 
with R o m e but also with ancient Greece. 
With the start, already summarised, o f the literary renaissance in 
the ninth and tenth centuries, it was history in particular that flourished 
(in the eleventh and twelfth centuries): Scylitzes, Psellus, Kekaumenos, 
Bryennius, Anna Comnena, Eustathius, Nicetas Choniates; but also 
philosophy (Psellus), erudition (Eustathius) and the genres that were 

232 
CHAPTER TWO 
translated or derived from the East: the translation of the Panchatantra 
in the eleventh century (by Simeon Seth), of the Syntipas in the twelfth 
century (by Andreopoulus), etc. 
T h e remarkable thing is that under the Comneni a truly popular 
literature emerged for the very first time, even though it was mixed 
with characteristics o f the literary language and had some special 
characteristics of its own. This popular literature was reduced to 
marginal genres that cultivated satire, didactics and fantasy. Its pop­
ular characteristics were not so different from those of the earlier 
period, as we shall see in more detail. But the problem remains of 
indicating to what extent this mixture o f which we speak was a 
response to aspects of the spoken language and to what extent it 
was a result of artificial contamination. Furthermore, the differences 
between the different authors must be attributed to literary, not 
chronological, reasons. Indeed, the copyists tended to introduce forms 
of literary Greek. 
321. The popular literature we are referring to in the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries consisted fundamentally of: 
(a) Border poetry - the fight between the Byzantines and Arabs 
on the Euphrates border - documented in the ninth cen­
tury by Aretas and represented, among others, by the eleventh 
and twelfth century poems of The Death of Digenis, The Sons 
of Andronicus, The Song of Armuris, Porphyris and Digenis Akritas 
(El Escorial manuscript), 
(b) Various p o e m s - the T r o d r o m i c p o e m s ' by T h e o d o r e 
Prodromus or Ptochoprodromus, on the themes of beggary 
and satire, using the contrast between the two types of lan­
guage; the p o e m by Michael Glycas, who defends himself, 
attacks and pleads from prison; the so-called Spaneas, con­
taining advice to the prince; the Judgement of the Fruit; and 
poems of animal epics inspired by the West. 
322. For more details, see the works cited by H.-G. Beck, p. 48 ff., 
R. Browning 1983, p. 72 ff., J. M. Egea 1987a, p. 269 ff. (and the Anthology 
of 1990, p. 44 ff). See also J. M. Egea 1987b (explanation of the weight 
of classical tradition on the language of Constantinople) and 1990-91 (expla­
nation of the literary character of the historiography of the Comnenian 
period); and P. Badenas 1985a, p. 7 ff. For the Digenis see the edition of 
M. Castillo Didier 1984. Note that the authors of this 'popular' literature 
were erudite and sometimes also wrote literature in the Atticist language 
(Prodromus and Glycas). 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 233 
323. Pressure from the crusades began to be felt towards the end 
of the eleventh century, and in 1176 the defeat suffered by Manuel 
I in Myriocephalon placed the Byzantines in a very bad positon in 
Asia Minor. This culminated in the conquest of Constantinople, in 
1203 and later in 1204 under the Angelus dynasty, by the Franks 
of the Fourth Crusade aicled by the Venetians. Earlier, the latter 
along with the Genovese and various western communities had set­
tled in the coastal cities where they had a commanding influence 
over trade. 
All this was decisive for the history o f Byzantium and, indeed, for 
the history of the Greek language. The Latin kingdom of Thessalonika 
was founded, and the Venetians seized the islands o f the Aegean, 
Ionia and Crete, among other areas; Richard the Lion-Heart in turn 
seized power in Cyprus, and the Hospitallers took in Rhodes. The 
Franks controlled the Peloponnese. Meanwhile, the Greeks created 
successor states in Epirus (with the Angelus dynasty), in Nicaea (N. E. 
Asia Minor, with the Lascaris dynasty) and in Trezibond (along the 
Black Sea, with the Comnenos dynasty). 
In Asia Minor, the situation of Byzantium was precarious, for the 
different Greek dominions had been left isolated. In spite o f every­
thing, a deep-rooted belief in the value of Hellenism had remained 
very much alive, so that the repeated attempts to unite the Greek 
Church with the Latin Church were destined to fail. 
324. However, things were never the same again, despite the recon-
quest of Constantinople in 1261 and the political and cultural restora­
tion that came with the Palaeologus dynasty. Once Constantinople 
and later Thessalonika had been liberated, the Franks of the Ville-
hardouin family continued to control the Peloponnese (now called 
Morea) and the Lusignans, Cyprus; and towards the end o f the thir­
teenth century, the Catalan Almogavares founded the duchies o f 
Athens and Neopatra. 
Around this time, the Turks disembarked in Europe: in 1354 they 
conquered Gallipoli and after the battle o f Kosovo (1389), Serbia 
and later Bulgaria fell under their control. 
325. In fact, at one point, only the regions o f Constantinople and 
Thessalonika (until their fall in 1430) continued under the depen­
dency o f the emperor; whatever remained o f the Greek language in 
Asia Minor and Italy was left isolated, which favoured dialectal frag­
mentation (the dialects which have been preserved come from these 
regions). 

234 
CHAPTER TWO 
The influence o f the western languages on the Greek language 
(especially in the lexicon) was significant; western literature also exerted 
an influence, providing models for the new Greek literature (the 
chronicle, novel, and erotic poetry). But the principal model was 
provided by the 'vulgar
5 western languages with a literary use, which, 
through imitation, stimulated a similar phenomenon in Greece. 
A n d yet, with the Palaeologi, in the two centuries from the recov­
ery o f Constantinople to its definitive fall in the hands o f the Turks 
(1453), literary cultivation was significant in the region that was still 
free. 
Indeed, for the (official) Atticist language we can cite, in Nicaea, 
Nicephorus Blemmides, George Pachymeres and George Acropolites; 
in Constantinople, the scholars o f Nicaea when the capital was lib­
erated, and others such as John Cantacuzenus, Alexius Macrembolites, 
Ducas, etc. But, above all, the copying o f ancient manuscripts was 
resumed: at a certain point, in minuscule and paper, which made 
them cheaper and thus easier to diffuse. O n the other hand, monas­
tic schools emerged, such as those in which Planudes, Nicephorus 
Gregoras and Michael Apostolius, among others, taught. There was 
also a series o f learned men, some o f w h o m moved to Italy after 
the city was taken, where they brought their manuscripts, and con­
tinued to teach. 
326. This was important for the preservation and transmission o f 
ancient Greek. But for the understanding o f popular Modern Greek 
from the twelfth century onwards, the new literature that used it is 
essential, however mixed it may have been with Atticist Greek. I 
have described the reasons for the appearance o f this literature: the 
isolation o f certain regions which were under western power, and 
the western model o f popular literature and some o f its genres. 
Perhaps the first written text in a generally popular language is 
the Chronicle o f the Morea, dating from around 1300, which is a 
narrative o f the conquest by the Franks from a favourable point o f 
view; it was probably the work o f a Frank or a descendent o f one. 
Although it was written in Byzantine political verses and reproduces 
Byzantine formulas, it is actually a western epic p o e m written in a 
cross between the popular and Atticist language. For more details, 
see J. M . Egea 1988, p. 11 ff. 
Prose documents such as the Assizes (feudal laws o f Cyprus) also 
have a western base, along with other chronicles, such as that o f 
Cyprus by Machaeras, those o f Ducas, Monemvasia, and Tochos. 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 235 
The Cyprus chronicles (the one already cited and some later ones) 
were written in a dialect of that island. 
But we must refer in particular to the knightly poems of an erotic 
type, true novels containing echoes of the Greek novel but with addi­
tions of a western type. They date from the fourteenth century and 
among them we can cite Lybistros and Rhodamne, 
Callimachus and 
Chrysorrhoe, Belthandros and Chrysantza, etc. These are the most well-
known works. There are also historical songs and threnodies, a trans­
lation of the Iliad into Byzantine Greek, fabulistic poems (The Book 
of Birds, of the Quadrupeds, etc.), love songs, religious and moral poetry, 
satires, etc. 
It is remarkable how the western occupation, by isolating certain 
Greek territories from the great cultural centre o f Constantinople 
and providing them with other models, contributed - but only to a 
certain extent - to the liberation o f the popular Greek language from 
the dominion o f Atticism (although always in marginal genres, as in 
the previous period). 
There is some doubt about whether one ought to speak of Byzan­
tine Greek or Modern Greek: I have chosen to reserve the latter 
term for the national language after the liberation. 
Literature from 
1453 
327. The occupation of Constantinople in 1453 (and subsequently 
that of Trebizond in 1461, and Lesbos in 1462) represented a bru­
tal shock at a time when the principal characteristics of Modern 
Greek were already present, but there hardly existed any literature 
in this language outside the marginal zones and genres, and always 
with a linguistic mix. T o be sure, once the empire was left without 
its head and without an imperial court, this situation in principle 
favoured the emergence o f a new literature; but other circumstances 
were not favourable to this. 
In the zone occupied by the Turks, culture was in the hands of 
the clerics who lived according to the old tradition; if they wrote, it 
was in the Atticist language. Moreover, the Patriarchy of Constantinople 
and the idea of a lost empire that had to be recovered was pre­
served. Nevertheless, oral poetry did exist although we know very 
litde about it; for instance, the klephtic ballads which narrate the 
adventures of the bandits who fought against the Turks in the moun­
tains. Little else remains. The popular language gives the impression 
of having been well established, although it did take certain lexical 

236 
CHAPTER TWO 
borrowings from the Turkish language, which also borrowed from 
Greek. 
328. N o w , as previously mentioned, there were indeed some terri­
tories that were, at least for a time, free from the power of the 
Turks. Here, western power, generally Venetian, was much more 
tolerable. A new literature took root. It serves to be reminded that 
Rhodes was in the hands of the Hospitallers until 1522; Nauplia and 
Monemvasia were in the hands o f the Venetians until 1540, Crete 
until 1569, Cyprus from 1489 to 1566. Also, the islands of Ionia 
and the Greek regions of Italy never fell into the hands o f the Turks. 
It is in these territories that the new literature took root. In Cyprus, 
besides the chronicles already mentioned, such as that by Machaeras, 
there were also love poems in the style of Petrarch in an almost 
pure Cyprian dialect (sixteenth century), and also in Rhodes (The 
Alphabet of Love, Love Trial). 
But it was above all in Crete where new literature emerged: the 
p o e m by Manuel Sclavos on the earthquake o f 1504, a series of 
tragedies (Erophile, The Sacrifice of Abraham, etc.) and comedies (Katzurbos, 
Stakis, Fortunato), the narrative poem Erotokritos, the bucolic The Beautiful 
Shepherdess, etc. Some o f these works are by well-known authors: 
Cuortatzis, who died in 1610, wrote Katzurbos and Erophile; Foscolos 
wrote Fortunato (1660); Kornaros wrote The Sacrifice of Abraham 
and 
Erotokritos (1635 or later). Sometimes their books were printed in 
Venice and circulated in the continent. The dialect used was Cretan, 
with purist forms. 
In these works we encounter, for the first time, and with few inter­
ferences from the literary language, a post-Byzantine Greek which 
is almost Modern Greek. 
The Ionic islands also produced popular literature. Sometimes, 
these works were translations; although there was also a tradition 
that remained alive and was continued by the poet Solomos. Corfu 
produced the first Greek grammar, by Nikolaos Sophianos. It was 
written in Venice towards the year 1540, but remained 
unpublished 
until 1870. 
These are the foundations upon which M o d e r n Greek would 
emerge as the national language, see §§ 417 ff. 
329. See the works by R. Browning 1983, p. 69 ff., 88 ff., J. M. Egea 
1987a, p. 270 ff. and 1990 (introduction), P. Badenas 1985a, p. 5 ff. For 
the Chronicle of the Morea, cf. J. M. Egea 1988; for the novel Callimachus 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 
237 
and Chrysorrhoe, P. Apostolopoulos 1984. For the literature, see the references 
in § 318. For the literature of Crete, Rhodes and Cyprus, see P. Stavriano-
poulou (ed.) 1996, with an edition and translation of the texts. 
It should be noted that Byzantine literature developed almost without 
the influence of Latin literature. In highly sophisticated authors we find 
quotations from Latin authors and references to a few translations, almost 
always by later and medieval authors, and mostly of a juridicial or theo­
logical type. It was only in the fourteenth century, largely through the work 
of Maximus Planudes, that many Latin classics were translated. Nevertheless, 
from the thirteenth century onwards, but particularly in the fourteenth cen­
tury, many Latin and French novelistic texts were translated: for example, 
the Latin novel about Apollonius King of Tyros, the French Gyron le Courtois 
(from the Arthur cycle), Boccaccio, the fables of Reynard the Fox, the novel 
Flora and Blancaflora (Tuscan version), etc. Cf. A. Lumpe 1970 and Adrados 
1979-87, II, p. 704 ff. of the english edition. All of this (along with the 
direct knowledge of French and Italian literature) had a great influence on 
Byzantine literature and facilitated the entry of a lexicon from western lan­
guages, as we shall see further in §§ 362 ff. But this together with the 
Turkish lexicon entered mainly by means of human contact, from the period 
of the Crusades onwards. 
2. DESCRIPTION OF BYZANTINE POPULAR GREEK 
Phonetics and morphology (until the eleventh century) 
330. W e can identify a first phase, from the sixth to the eleventh 
century. But let us not forget that many o f its characteristics were 
already present in the Greek o f the Hellenistic or R o m a n periods; 
that they cannot be dated within this period, with few exceptions, 
although it cannot be excluded that some which are documented in 
the later period already existed in this period; and that the true 
differences between the few popular texts available to us consist in 
the proportion o f the always present mixture o f popular terms and 
literary or Atticist terms. For this reason, the description that fol­
lows is an abstraction, based upon the 'popular' forms which appear 
alongside the literary forms and hypercorrections. 
331. T h e vocalic system o f koine - with its lack o f distinction o f 
quantity, iotacism, elimination o f diphthongs and its six vowels 
-
remained intact until, in the tenth century, t> (that is, u) was pro­
nounced i, with which the shift was made to a system o f five vowels 
which is still current. But initial atonal vowels, with the exception 
of &-, were dropped (as in onixi 
'house', jnepa 'day', pcoxS 'I ask', 

238 
CHAPTER TWO 
jLLotxt 'eye
5, \|/dpi 'fish
5, etc.). Yet, through an influence o f the Atticist 
language, EXzvBepia and XevxEpia, for example, were restored. This 
led to the loss, on occasion, o f atonal augment. 
As regards the consonants, the fricativisation o f voiced occlusive 
and aspirated voiceless was generalised, as well as the simplification 
o f geminates (with hypercorrections such as noXXvq in Malalas) and 
the loss o f -v (except before a vowel). The latter phenomena did not 
reach all o f the dialects. 
332. As regards the noun, we must point out the definitive loss of 
the D . (except in formulas such as 56tqa xfi 0e£> and in Atticisms): 
in its place, we have A c , G . , or eiq + A c (no^aio xov Geov, eircev 
amovt). Three systems dominate (in the sg.) for the N., G . , and A c 
cases, all with stems ending in a vowel. In the first system, the old 
m a s c in -ac; entered, as well as part of the old third declension; in 
the second, the old feminines in -a and another part of the third 
declension; in the third, the old 2nd declension: 
1. N. noXix^q, naxepaq, fiaGiXzaq 
A c rcoAixriv, rcaxepav, paaiAiav 
G . TDOMTTJ, TCaxepa, PaaiAia 
2. N . rcopxa, K6X% 'EXXaSa 
A c Kopxav, 7t6A,r|v, 'EXXabav 
G . 7t6pra<;, n6Xr\q, 'EXXaSaq 
3. N . Xoyoq 
A c Xoyov 
G . Xoyov 
With the loss o f the -v, types 1 and 2 were left with two forms. O n 
the other hand, some residues of the old consonantal system remained: 
yivoq/yivovq, 
aSjua/awjxocToq, etc. There was also a tendency to 
modify stems using -o<; in m a s c , -n in fern. (6 i|/fj(po<;, r\ 7cap0evr|). In 
the adjective, those with two desinences in -o<;, -ov now had three 
(-oq, -n, -ov). 
All o f this (as well as changes in gender or stem) is connected 
with analogous processes and with the simplification of the declension, 
which had the tendency to reduce the stems to two and to gener­
alise the A c . as a dependent o f the verb and the G . of the noun, a 
process which was already under way in the Hellenistic period. 
In the plural, we also find the types mentioned, on three stems. 
Notable examples are the N. in -zq in the systems 1 and 2 (naiepeq, 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 239 
%cope<; but also still %capai), and those in -dSec;, -{Sec; (icacpeSec;, nannovSeq, 
on (pDydSeq, SaKxuAiSeq). 
333. 
The article and pronoun present a very different case, result­
ing in part from the preceding period. For instance: 
Article: fern. pi. N. 01; A c . xec;. 
Personals: along with the old forms, in the sg. we find hyper-
characterisations 
and in the pi., equivalences with the sg.: 1st 
Ac. que, euiv, ejnevot, quevccv; 2nd N . eav; A c . eoe, eoev, eoevoc, 
eaevav; G. icov; 
pi. 1st N. ejieiq; A c . euxx<;, juaq; G. euxov, LJXDV; 
2nd 
N. eaeic;, cEiq; 
A c . eaac;, aac;; 
G. eacov, acov. Also, there 
are atonal forms jiaq, aac;. For the 3rd, an atonal form was cre­
ated xov, xnv, xo, etc., derived from 
avioq. 
Demonstratives: o8e disappears, avioq is replaced by iSioq, I5IK6<;, 
the stem xcvux- is generalised in ovxoc;. 
Relatives: oc, tends to be replaced by oaxiq, and by the inter­
rogative XIQ, x(; also, by OTOI), bnoloq. 
334. 
The most important thing with regard to the verb is the fol­
lowing. In the present, verbs in -jii disappear and the following stems 
are widely diffused: -x^co, -d^co, -eoco, -vo, -vco, -dpco: for example, 
there is cpepvoo, Kepvco, dcpivco. By analogy, there is Kpvpco, 
K X E P C O . 
With these presents there is a tendency to create a system o f two 
stems, insofar as the aorist and perfect are confused or mixed: eTtoiKccq, 
djidb^eKac;, etc. The normal system thus becomes that of dcpivoo/dcprjccc, 
\|/rjvco/e\j/r|aa, etc. 
The system of the middle voice is also dropped, while that of the 
passive voice develops. In the latter, forms of the type (pepGrjica impose 
themselves. 
For the future tense, e'xco 4- inf. is normally used; other periphrases 
are also diffused. O n the other hand, augment is in decline, as men­
tioned earlier, as well as reduplication. 
The system of desinences innovates, but with a confused mixture 
with the previous system. W e can point out the middle inflection of 
eijLii (eijuai, eiaai. . .), with a 3rd sg. evi, the old adverb later being 
written as eivcu. The mixtures of old and modern desinences referred 
to are frequent (3rd pi. pres. -ox>v/-ovoi, 
aor. -otv/-ov, etc). 
Yet, 
with the loss of the optative and, in part, the 
subjunctive 
(with a short vowel it became identical to the indicative), the infinitive 
and participle are in decline. T h e former survives, but tends to 

240 
CHAPTER TWO 
become reduced to certain constructions: the Vindobonensis collec­
tion o f fables mostly eliminates the infinitives of the completive clauses 
o f the Augustana, its m o d e l The participle is used in a confused 
way, with errors of gender and construction: dAxorceKa . . . 8eXedaaaa, 
"RXxoq . . . Tipo^evcyovxa (which anticipates the later indeclinable par­
ticiple in -vra [<;]). 
Examples of popular texts 
335. It is useful to make some observations on prepositions and con­
junctions (u£ for jnexd, cbadv, i;e-, c^ava-, OTOV etc.); and the great 
advances in certain suffixes such as -IT^IV, -aioq, as well as the new 
lexicon. This will be discussed in more detail in §§ 352 ff. 
With regard to syntax, we must stress the frequent substitution o f 
the subordinates by coordinates with KOU. 
For clarification, it may be useful to provide examples of the Greek 
of some of these texts (I will not deal with phonetics and orthography). 
336. Acclamations of the stadium and other small poems. Anomalous forms 
are in the minority: 
Lexicon: djuovi 'anvil', yepdia 'falcon', uo'uAxx 'mule', oeXXa 'chair', 
oXoq for naq, 
O%V\KOVOX. 
Nominal inflection: N . dXeKTopw, yepdiav, Mccupdac;; A c . yofivav. 
Anomalous form: 8epuecv, hypercorrected. 
Lack of augment: (pepe, vorjaec;. 
Pronoun: enclitic TOD, TO, Trjv, relative 
OKQX>. Prepositions: 0T6V, 
eioe (contamination o f the old form with the new form ae). 
337. Proto-Bulgarian inscriptions. The same observation applies here. 
Lexicon: yopevco 'to search', Xaoq 'army', okoq, KaXa adv. 
Prepositions: a%6 + A c , dvd^eoa, em = eox;, eco<; + A c , eacoOev, 
{<; + A c . = 'in', ai. 
Nominal inflection: A c . fiaoiXiav. Verbal: pres. eiv(oa), subj. = ind. 
iva . . . i)7iojivr|aKeTe, f)va Siajiivo-oai (with fut. value), aor. e(pxdaxi-
aav (with -00- > 
-ax-). 
Parataxis to avoid the inf.: eSoicev (perf. for aor., but there is 
also 86aoc<;), ice eprjuoaev (without augment). 
338. Malalas. Colloquial and paratactic style, but Byzantinisms are 
rare: inflection is almost always classical, but see, for example: 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 
241 
Lexicon: XOVKOV 
'onwards
5, 7tidoou 'to catch
5, pfjya (Ac.) 'king
5, 
lAAouaxpioq, etc. 
Prepositions: eiq xov depa 'in
5 and the hypercorrection ev 'Iepo-
GoMuxnc; 'towards
5. 
Relative: abundant usp o f OGXK; for oq. 
Verbal inflection: dta)xdp%rjaocv without augment, aor. eipeKox;, 
periphrastic perf. r|v 7ipoxp8\]/d|LL8voc;, piuAj/ac; rjv pas. v. enavQr{. 
Various constructions: dxpeiXcov + inf. with fut. value, e5o^ev . . . 6 
^aaiXzvq, final construction npbq xo 
87ux£A,eiG0ai, f|Gi>%aG£v . . . 
xot> Tioieiv xapa%dc;, ano (agent). 
339. Fables from the Vindobonensis collection and the Bodleian paraphrasis. 
Most vulgarisms can be found in these fables, from the sixth and 
seventh centuries. I follow the study by Ursing on the M o s c o w codex: 
Nominal inflection: A c . sg. o f the 3rd cpAxSyccv, 7i68av, N. pi. of the 
1st Qipeq, dypoxeq; forms of the 2nd decl. in words which were 
originally of the 3rd: 6pv(0oic;, SeAxptvoi); changes in gender. In 
the adjective, the use of the comparative with the same value 
as the positive. 
Pronouns. The article as a relative, equivalent amov and ocmou, 
possessive 
\8ioq. 
Verbal inflection: lack of augment in 6p%oi)vxo, Tcerccoiceiv; id. of 
reduplication in dvocTtexaauivai; perfect for aorist, and pluper­
fect for perfect (ei<; xotx; pp6%0D<; £7C£7n;a)K£i). 
Prepositions and conjunctions: a%6 + A c , du.cc 4- G . , interchange of 
ev/eiq; woe xi, edv + ind., yi&xpiq, £00c; + dv and ind. 
Syntax: anomalous A c . (8EXXOV ae £(pepa, dTcrivxnaev ccoxov, 
T I K O U G E 
rcai5a KXavdiivpi^wv); anomalous G : (pi)5id^ojiiai 
G O D , ojnoiov 
dv5po<;; hypercorrect D.: xoiq aXXoiq ^r\Xo\)vxzq, £7tr|pcbxrjG£v at>xa>; 
verbs of 'promise
5, etc. with present infinitive; final infinitive 
with article; avoidance of the inf. in completives with various 
constructions (rcapfiveae . . . 
OTCCOC; . . . , Xiyow oxi. . . d7toSa>G£iv, £(*)<; 
dv . . . GDvGXdaai); anomalous uses o f the participle, cf. § 334. 
340. For more data see the references already cited, cf. §§ 318, 322, 
329; and in G . Horrocks 1997, p. 205 ff. For the Vindobonensis, I 
insist on U. Ursing 1930: it is a shame that this area has escaped 
the attention of scholars studying the Byzantine language. But this 
is not all, for we still need to study, for example, the Byzantine cor­
rections o f the classics in the manuscripts o f this period through the 
eleventh century. 

242 
CHAPTER TWO 
Sometimes we are faced with difficulties. In the Life of Aesop, which 
I have studied (cf. Adrados 1993), we need to determine, 
firstly, 
whether we should correct in the Atticist sense as the editors do; 
and secondly, whether or not the non-Atticist terms o f a manuscript 
such as the G (a Gryptoferrantensis of the tenth century) are Hellenistic 
or Byzantine. 
Phonetics and morphology from the twelfth to the fifteenth century) 
341. Let us n o w turn to the next period, which dates from the 
twelfth to the fifteenth century. Vocalism is kept as it was at the 
end o f the previous period, once t> has become i: it is a system o f 
five vowels. In the consonants, the evolution KX, %0 > %x, %%, cp0 > 
cpx, G0, G% > OK becomes dominant; but traditional orthography 
results in the preservation, alongside this, of old forms o f the type 
aa%r\\ioq. Final -v is dropped, a phenomenon begun earlier, which 
results in homophonous cases of the 1st and 2nd declension, with 
the presence o f non-etymological extensions (we have seen some 
examples); -ea, -(a become -id (rapSid). The geminates are simplified 
(but not in some dialects). 
However, dialectal variations are known in this period, such as 
those preserving final -v (in Cyprus, Dodecanese and Italy), those 
giving other treatments to the consonant groups (in southern Italy), 
those palatalising the K before preceding vowels (in Cyprus), or closing 
the vowels e, o. W e shall discuss these dialects further on (§§ 434 ff.) 
in connection with Modern Greek. 
342. In nouns, the main difference, as noted earlier, is that with the 
loss o f -v, the N. and A c . of the fern, o f the 1st declension became 
identical (N. A c . %a>poc/G. %cbpa<;) and the same applies to the A c . 
and G. o f the masc. (N. K^eqnriq/Ac. G. K?i£(pxr|). The rest stays the 
same, including the remnants o f declensions in -oq/-ovq, 
-\ia/-|naxo<;, 
-tc;/-eax;, plurals in -dSsc;, -iSeq, adjectives with three desinences (those 
in -r\q/-eq and others had to adapt in various ways); there are also 
other regularisations such as uitaxvo<;, jneydAxx;. 
343. The subjunctive, which as we know is constructed on two stems, 
ends up being assimilated to the indicative, and the participle becomes 
indeclinable in -ovxoc(<;). 
The future is marked by the periphrasis with which we are already 
familiar, with £%G) + infinitive or £%co vd + subjunctive; £i%a in the 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 243 
same constructions is potential Nevertheless, with the advance o f the 
period, there is preference for periphrasis with 6e?uo + infinitive, 0eX© 
vd 
+ sunjunctive, the previous ones passing into the perfect 
(ex©) 
and pluperfect (el%a); in the Chronicle of the Morea, we come across 
both uses, as well as the periphrasis with 0e?t© (from which the mod­
ern future with 9d is obtained). In twelfth-century Cyprus we find 0e. 
There is a large variety o f personal desinences. In the 3rd p i we 
find the present -oi)v(e)/-oi)Gi, pret. -av(e)/-aai, -GCCV. Contracted con­
jugations have developed, which in the active voice sometimes confuse 
the old forms in -d© and -e©, while in the middle voice we find both 
(pofkro^cu, (po|3daai, (po(3axai and forms with -{eum, -leaoci, -iexai. In 
the middle voice (or the deponents), we find new forms alongside 
the traditional: -ODJLIO'OV, -OUGODV, -oxocv, -o^eaxa, -eaxe, -owxav. 
In verbs with accent on the last syllable an imperfect is created, 
-croGa, etc. and -ayoc, etc. T h e desinence o f passive aorist -Gnv is 
replaced definitively by -GrjKa. In the imperative, the desinence -e o f 
the present extends to the aorist. 
344. 
Pronouns systematise the new forms, for example, N. pi. eiieiq. 
Similarly with prepositions. Here, with the generalisation o f the use 
with A c , the old distinctions in meaning between prep. + A c / p r e p . 
+ D . disappear: u.e(xd) + A c is 'with' ('after' is ikrcep' drco); ev 
+ D . is replaced by \xeoa ei<;. Other prepositions either disappear or 
are retained as sophisticated words (dvd, em, raxd, rcepi, 7cpo, rcpoq, 
Gt>v, weep, 0)7c6). 
The vocabulary also evolves, as a result of borrowings from Turkish 
and the western languages, as well as internal developments (deriva­
tion, composition, semantic change). This subject will be dealt with 
in another chapter. 
345. 
Looking back at ancient Greek and Indo-European, we find 
that we now encounter a very different language which nevertheless 
retains traces o f its inheritance. In phonetics, the vocalic system is 
formed by the five vowels a, e> % o> u, without diphthongs; the con­
sonantal system is formed by a system o f voiceless and voiced occlu­
sives with three points o f articulation and a system o f voiceless and 
voiced fricatives with the same three points o f articulation; with the 
liquids and nasals p, X, ji, v; and a voiceless and voiced sibilant (writ­
ten Q. I will not deal with compound consonants. 
Nominal inflection has been simplified: the D . is lost and the A c . 
and G. tend to have well-defined general functions; they can, for 

244 
CHAPTER TWO 
instance, be used as determinants of the verb or noun. The gender 
of old Greek (diffused in the adjective in a regular morphological 
manner) has been maintained, as well as the sg. and pi. numbers 
(the old dual was lost much earlier). Formally, there is a predomi­
nance of vowel stems, which frequently adopt the same form for the 
N. and A c . or the A c . and G., as mentioned. The adjective has 
taken forms that are analogous to those of the noun. In the desinences, 
there are also analogous generalisations. But exceptions remain in 
form and content. 
The article and pronoun are essentially the same, with differences 
which are almost invariably of a formal nature. For instance, we 
find the extension o f the sg. to the pi. stem o f the personals; new 
demonstratives, invariably based on the old three stages, and new 
possessives o f the 3rd pers,; a tendency for various kinds o f elimi­
nation o f the old relative. There are also changes in inflection. The 
creation o f atonal personals o f the 3rd pers. is newer, enabling the 
creation in Modern Greek o f an objective conjugation which is sim­
ilar to the Spanish (of the type
 
cse lo dire todo a tu madre'). 
346. In the verb, there is a reduction of the present stems and a 
fusion of aorist and perfect, which form a second stem. The future 
and perfect are n o w expressed with periphrastic forms. In the moods 
o f the verb, with the early loss o f the optative, the subjunctive, 
identified with the indicative, is now lost, and also the participle, 
transformed into an indeclinable adverbial form; at the end o f this 
period the infinitive is at the point of being lost. 
So, the marking o f tense is reduced to the opposition o f pre­
sent/preterite and to the indicative; the other tenses and the sub­
junctive are expressed by atemporal periphrases of a subjective kind. 
But the aspect o f present and aorist is kept very much alive, even 
being carried outside the indicative. 
W e are dealing with a simplified Greek, which partly follows ten­
dencies that are similar to those in the IE that we call IIIB (poly-
thematic IE of the European languages and Tocharian), which reduces 
verbal inflection to two stems and regularises it significantly, almost 
eliminating athematic inflection; and which also reduces the moods, 
the participle and infinitive a little, and makes abundant use o f 
periphrasis for the future and perfect. 
Sometimes the new Greek resembles a certain branch of IE: for 
instance, with respect to details of verbal inflection (such as the ere-

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 245 
ation o f a new imperfect and others referred to earlier) and nomi­
nal inflection (such as the loss of the D . and the creation of inflections 
with only two stems). There is a parallel for the loss o f the infinitive 
in Balkan languages such as Rumanian and Bulgarian. 
347. 
Consequendy, the tendencies of koine are carried on into Byzantine 
Greek, in that the latter simplifies verbal morphology, which is only 
used to mark three persons, two numbers, two tenses (in ind.) and 
two 
aspects. T h e older Greek system was evidently far too refined 
and complex, and so it was reduced and complemented with peri­
phrastic forms. This also applies to the noun and adjective. Yet it 
survived, and the rich system of nominal and verbal derivation and 
composition continued to develop. 
It is useful to provide, as we did for the Greek o f the previous 
period, examples of the language of some of the representative authors 
of this period. W e will look at texts in which there is a contamina­
tion of the two levels o f Greek. Pure, or almost pure, popular Greek 
is found in the popular poems dated between the fifteenth and sev­
enteenth centuries, mentioned above in § 328. 
Examples of popular texts 
348. 
Prodromus. See the beginning o f the verses to the emperor 
Manuel. Some, expressly addressed to the emperor (141-44), are 
in a purely literary language; in the rest, there is sporadic literary 
language. For example, we find D . yepovxncoic;, 7iocxpiKoi<;, Coyote; A c . 
yeixovcc, impf. rcepteTidxei, aor. e^ocGov, pas. aor. eKX£v{a0r|, impv. 
7t£{a0rjTi, u£xd and £K + G., anb (xiKp60£v, ovdev, 
EK^aXke, 
some 
infinitives in -£iv, e t c 
But there is also an abundance o f modern elements: for example, 
in the lexicon (PAircG) 'see', y£|xara 'full', yopeoco 'search', xaayydpr|<; 
'shoemaker; xcopa 'now', cbadv 'how', the suffixes -ixaioq, -axoq). In 
the noun, there is a frequent use o f N . - A c . in -iv (TCOU8IV), A C . 
yovcciKocv (and erroneously -v in dva0£}iav). There is also a frequent 
use of enclitics: xo-o (6 KoXnoq XOD, 7cox£ TOD) and xov (P^£7t£i<; xov), 
the relative bnov, and the pers. eoeva. The accusative o f anomalous 
syntax is very frequent (vnipnvpa 
y£U£i, arc' £K£iva). In the verb, 
there are new forms of the present (d7tXcbvco, xopxaivo), the aorist-
perfect (ETTOIKCCV, ni)piaKa), the subjunctive, which is identical to the 
indicative (napaQeaovGi, 
viyexoci), the indicative o f ei\ii (evx). Above 
all, there is abundant periphrasis with vd + subjunctive with values 

246 
CHAPTER TWO 
of prospective, future (vd TOV euro), vd ovojudaouv, vd ixaQr\q), or pre­
sent (npbq TO vd |iid0co ypdjiiuxrca). 
349. 
Digenis Akritas. It is sufficient to look at the first verses o f the 
p o e m in the manuscript o f El Escorial edited by Castillo Didier. T h e 
first impression is o f an entirely classical text: for example, we have 
a N . pi. amxXax, A c . sg. KCCTdpav, pi. nXv^aq, old verbal forms such 
as iir\ (poprjGfiq, prep. + G. Ttccpd unTpoq, etc. But there is modern 
lexicon (eicapaAiiceDGev, with old inflection, doTepaxov with the famil­
iar suffix, dpyupoTadTtcDToc, a hybrid form). In the noun, the diminutives 
%epia, 6vD%ia (from which we obtain the forms o f Modern Greek), 
jLieTcbjiiv. In the pronoun, we find iiaq and the enclitics TOD, TTJV. In 
the verb, the new subjunctive KocTccTUTofiaoDv (with a classical con­
struction, jifi ae, in the first verse); it also appears with aq and dv 
with a prospective or future value (iced TOT8 aq TTIV 87tdp0DV, 6 0e6<; 
vd \xb\q PoT|8fiar|). 
W e could continue. A few verses further on we come across ofircpoc; 
etv(ai), fjBeAxxaiv, ejHTifJKav, ooadv, relative xaq, ox yv%£q, etc. 
350. 
Chronicle of the Morea. Here, we can refer to the study by J. M . 
Egea 1988. W e need only look at the beginning o f the p o e m to 
appreciate the same mixture. In the first two lines, we find old ele­
ments indisolubly linked with the new elements: 6eA,oo, %Xzxq + sub­
junctive, OTOCV + imperfect ryzovz, anb KTiaeco<; KoajKn) (a perfectiy 
classical, ecclesiastical influence) but jne SDvaunq (the modern form 
of the preposition and inflection). There is a modern use o f prepo­
sitions in zxq TOD XpiaxoD xov Tacpo (with the loss o f -v), GTOV
 cin'; 
and a modern use o f the relative (ooxxq, 
OKOV). 
T h e system o f per­
sonal pronouns is almost that o f Modern Greek. N e w verbal forms 
include, among others, imperfects such as dcpevTEDocv (Byzantine lex­
icon), D\J/COV8V, spputTotv, TijjxopoDccv, the aorists 8K?ia\j/ev, epapeGrixev 
(but eX-D7ifiGr|v), the participle I56VTCC<;; and, above all, very diverse 
and hesistant periphrastic uses. 
In contrast, the stems o f the future and perfect and the optative, 
among other things, have disappeared. 
Indeed, it would seem that popular Greek dominates: Atticist forms 
are often the result o f corrections in various manuscripts, and often 
the popular language is written with Atticist spelling, which makes 
it possible for us to discover Atticist forms in the phonetics as well 
as morphology. 
From verse 754 onwards, there is a notable presence o f false lit-

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 
247 
erary words and hypercorrections: the participles dKxroaoov, Siapovxa, 
A c . O-oydxrip; other forms are correct, such as eTrdpcojiev, anb xr\q 
PcbjLiriq xfjj; EKKkr\oiaq, 
anb xov vt>v, fiaoxXzvq, xiveq. Yet, alongside 
this we find modern forms such as paaiXea<;, xov eSa)Kev oe ypdcpco, 
xrjpfiaexe, the pronoun e|xioc(;/jia(;/|Lia(;, dv (pdyouai, etc. 
351. Callimachus and Chrysorrhoe. This novel brings us to the fourteenth 
century. The study of Ph. Apostolopoulos 1984 is very complete: 
here, we provide only a few data. 
In the noun, we find ai f||jipai/cu fjuipec;; 
rcaiSt/rcaiSdia, 
%epi, 
Ac. sg. yepovxav, N. pi. 01 xe%vixai/oi dcpBevxec; (also A c , alternat­
ing with -aq). W e should note that the D . still appears with some 
frequency. 
In the pronouns, we find all the forms we have already discussed, 
including the enclitic forms: iiov, iiaq, xov, xovq (beside eucm, f]|iSv, 
etc), the type 6 ISIKOQ HOD 'mine', demonstrative avxoq, etc; archaic 
indefinites (xxq, o\)8ei<;, 7tocvxo8oc7i6c;, naq) beside the modern (Kaveic;, 
xinoxe). Similarly, we find classic relatives and bnov, in addition to 
the article (xovq yvXaKaq xovq eiSe). The inflection of the two per­
sonals is quite classical, with i\iiE\<;, etc and forms in D . , but along­
side EIIEV and enclitic forms. 
There is a significant advance in the frequent lack of augment. 
The imperfect eftXena and aorist 2nd pers. sg. eypct\|/e<; are gener­
alised, along with the aorist imperative of the type yvcopioe, the aorists 
with -K- such as ercoiKa, d(pfJKa (but also dcprjaa); also, the forms of 
the middle voice o f eijxi. T h e system of desinences is quite conser­
vative (but, Aiyo-ov). The particles aq, dv, and periphrasis with e%co 
and eBeA-CG function normally but, curiously, very often with the old 
subjunctive (aq Spdjj.coju.ev). Furthermore, 
the infinitive (|ULr| Oe^rit; 
ue Keipd^ai) and the participle are retained, although with low 
frequency. 
This novel displays a very mixed, rather archaising 
language— 
proof, once more, that chronology is not always the deciding factor. 
3. T H E DEVELOPMENT OF THE BYZANTINE LEXICON 
352. It is useful to dedicate a separate chapter to the growth of the 
lexicon in Byzantine Greek; to be complemented by a further chap­
ter in which, by describing the influence of Byzantine lexicon in the 
East and West, we may be able to shed some light on other data. 

248 
CHAPTER TWO 
The fact is, since I have already paid special attention to the growth 
o f the Greek lexicon - particularly of the educated language, in the 
Classical, Hellenistic and R o m a n periods - and since I intend to 
deal with its diffusion and growth in the West, it is impossible to 
leave this important intermediate stage untouched. 
The facility o f Greek to create new derived and compound words 
(see Adrados 1968) is a fundamental characteristic o f this language, 
which continued to operate during the Byzantine period, while 
different parts o f the grammar were innovating in a profound way. 
This did not mean that the old lexicon was preserved (though this 
did occur, particularly in Atticist or 'pure' prose) or that new words 
were introduced through borrowing or semantic variation, but the 
methods o f derivation and composition, which were essentially the 
same, continued to expand the Byzantine lexicon. 
The fact is that the Byzantine lexicon has never been systemati­
cally studied in its entirety, and we do not even possess complete 
dictionaries. Apart from the old lexicons, which are incomplete, by 
Stephanus, Sophocles, Dimitrakos, and Lampe (a partial work ded­
icated only to the patristic lexicon), we have to make do with con­
temporary works which are also incomplete: our Greek-Spanish Dictionary 
(Diccionario Griego-Espanot), which only goes upto the year 600), the 
Dictionary by Kriaras and that by Trapp-Horandner-Diethart 
(apart 
from partial studies). 
Indeed, the study o f the Byzantine lexicon should deal with two 
very important issues: the borrowings it received from different lan­
guages, and its diffusion into different languages (sometimes diffusing 
words of non-Byzantine origin). All o f this will be dealt with before 
we look at the diffusion o f Graeco-Latin into western languages. For, 
although we cannot draw clear divisions, we can distinguish between 
Byzantine influence through a popular route, preferrably from an 
earlier date, and the influence of classical Greek (usually through 
Latin) through a literary route, particularly from the twelfth century 
onwards and even more so during the period o f Humanism. 
353. For a general overview of the matter in question, see E. Trapp 1988. 
For compounds and borrowings from Greek, see R. Browning 1983, pp. 
67 ff.. and 84 ff., and 1997; and A. Steiner-Weber 1991. For the relation 
between the Atticist and popular lexicon, see Adrados 1948, p. 67 ff. For 
borrowings adopted by Byzantine Greek, see H. and R. Kahane 1970 ff. 
And 1979; also, L. Burgmann 1990 (Latin borrowings). Furthermore, see 
M. A. Triantaphylides 1909. 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 249 
For 
French and Italian borrowings, cf. H. and R. Kahane 1970 ff., 
p. 501 ff.; for Turkish borrowings, see R. Browning 1983, p. 97 ff. 
354. 
Nearly all o f the suffixes of ancient Greek continued to be 
productive in Byzantium, but we should draw attention to suffixes 
which were either new or more frequent: -&<;, -GIUO, -uoc, -IGGCC, the 
diminutives -tov, -dpiov, -dSiov, «{8iov, -CXKIOV, -(KIOV, the new suffix 
-x£i(v), -(x£i(v), the Latin suffix -axoc;, those of Italian origin -omai(ov), 
-ox>TGiKoq; we have already pointed out which o f the verbal suffixes 
are most frequent. Consequently, derivation was very smooth; an 
adjective could be obtained from practically every noun, as, for exam­
ple MavoriX-cxToq from Mavt>r|A,. 
Composition was extremely rich. Although many old nominal com­
pounds of the elevated language, disappear, as well as many verbs with 
prepositions, many new forms of all the traditional types were created. 
Copulative compounds are present, such as dpioxoSetTivov Tood 
and meal', dvSpoyovoQ 'man and woman'; adjectival compounds such 
as ppcxxDjiocKpoc; 'short and long' (and Ppax\)jnaKp6ppa%D(; 'short, long 
and short'); determinative compounds of various kinds: yopyoyA-coxxiot 
'great oratory skill', TiayK^erjq 'very glorious', 7covxopducov 'which 
moves in Pontus
5, etc; QeoftXaoxoq 'born o f God'; and possessives: 
dypioTipoacoixoq 'with a fierce expression'. There are also verbal com­
pounds, with noun (unpoKA-d^co 'to break a leg', Gi8rjpo8eco 'to chain 
up') 
and with preverbs (KocxocTiayexeco 'to freeze', imo^avxi^co 'to die 
a light blond'); also, with double or triple preverb (eytcocOomoypdcpco 
'to sign in', TCocpeKemxeivco 'to extend even more'). Verbal compounds 
with the preverb ^ccva- 'again' are frequent. 
As I have stated throughout, Greek has preserved that marvellous 
trait which enables anyone to create a new word. M a n y of these 
new words are individual discoveries made by writers o f the elevated 
language. The total numbers are very high and have not yet been 
properly calculated, cf. A. Steiner-Weber 1991, p. 245. 
355. 
The new Byzantine lexicon represents to a large extent a ren­
ovation, in that the popular language, in particular, loses a sub­
stantial part of the old vocabulary. There is cdaxpoq and daicrijioq, 
against duopqxx;; otKoq against GTUXI; KaXoq no longer refers to phys­
ical beauty, etc. There are innumerable examples. But classical words 
could continue to be used in the literary language. Consequently, 
we find doublets o f the type PaaiA-euq/paaiXtdq, used for stylistic 
purposes. 

250 
CHAPTER TWO 
This subtle game is particularly well illustrated when a text is car­
ried from one o f the two main registers to the other. I have studied 
this in connection with the popular Byzantine collection of fables, 
the Vindobonensis, which rewrites its old model, the Augustana col­
lection, which is a cross between an Atticistic and a poeticising lan­
guage. I have studied the mechanism in Adrados 1948, p. 67 ff., 
and have shown h o w Attic and poetic terms are almost systematically 
substituted by terms which are c o m m o n to koine, or rather, to popular 
and sometimes vulgar koine. The number of compound verbs with 
preverbs is reduced. 
The stylistic study o f the Byzantine texts is threfore rather c o m ­
plicated. Cf, for example, the study o f the Alexias by Anna Comnena 
in E. Diaz Rolando 1989. 
4. BORROWINGS IN BYZANTINE GREEK 
Latin borrowings 
356. The Byzantine lexicon also grew, as we have seen, by means of 
linguistic borrowings from peoples and cultures with which Byzantium 
had contact. Let us look at one people or culture at a time. 
W e have already discussed the Latin borrowings in East Greek in 
the first periods. It was pointed out how Latin only gradually ceased 
to be the official language and how knowledge of Latin literature in 
Byzantium was negligible. W e also noted the huge importance o f 
the trace it left in law. 
H. Mihaescu 1993, p. 350 ff. has established that some 3,000 
Latin terms entered Byzantine Greek, o f which some 200 were 
retained in Modern Greek, Avoided by the educated, they were not 
of minor importance for the public; not just with regard to legal 
and administrative terminology but also military terminology. 
In the legal and administrative fields it was inevitable that a great 
number o f Latin terms would enter into translations and commen­
taries. There is a good study on this subject by L. Burgmann 1990. 
Sometimes, Latin terms in Latin letters were included, sometimes 
they were transcribed into Greek (of the type juayKircioDin), Burgmann 
indicates that in the paraphrase of the Institutiones, some 1,000 Latin 
words appear, each one about ten times. They also appear in pri­
vate and official documents. 
It is clear that there were certain currents that sought to Hellenise 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 251 
the legal texts. At times, authors limited themselves to altering the 
Latin terms, adapting them to Greek inflection (dScmxdkiv) or else 
glossing them; while other times, they translated or calqued them. 
However, many words from the legal language were carried into the 
popular language; for instance, Tioaasoicov, dKK£7txiA,ocxicov 'receipt', 
xeaxa(uevxov, e^epeSaxeutoJ EurxyKiTtaxeuco ^mydxcop, Tioiva, uoSepdxcop 
KT|V0£\)CO, etc. 
Now, 
the creation o f Greek terms from Latin was important in 
the popular language from the start o f the Byzantine period: it was 
the continuation 
o f the process which we have studied for the 
Republican and Imperial R o m a n periods. Given the rather limited 
influence of Latin literature in Byzantium, it was the popular lan­
guage that exerted the most influence and not the elevated language 
(with the exception, as we know, o f the legal and administrative 
vocabulary). This popular language created words which in many 
cases were reexported to the West: occasionally, they display specific 
phonetic or morphological alterations; indeed, there are even mixed 
'monsters' 
(anXonaXXxov). 
357. 
Let us quickly review the principal elements of this vocabulary: 
Imperial court, titles, functionaries, professions: Kccioocp, [idyiaxpoq, 
TtaxpiKioc;, oqwadAaoq, K-ueaxcop, npaxnoaixoq; 
xa(3oi)X,dpioq, A,nyd-
xoq, peaxi07cpdxr|(; 'silk trader', juaiceXXdpux;, etc. 
Military: see in particular H. Mihaescu 1993, who examines the 
Greek terms of Latin origin relating to uniform and equipment 
(KaTuroc, KaXiyco, xevxcc), transport (Ka$aXXxKzx>(o, oiXfax), weaponry 
(dpudxoc;, dpKdxoq, ocxyixxoc, onaQa), 
organisation 
(opStvocxicov, 
cruexpavoq, KCDVCOV, E^TCESTXOI), vigilance (e^TiXopdxcop), ranks 
(rcpiuoc;, KopviKoi)Xdpio<;), insignia (fi^xXXov, 
<p?ia^o\)A,tov), strat­
egy (KipKeiieiv, Kcmpadxcop), rewards and punishment (d8copea, 
Snaepxcop), signals (POUKIVOV, rcpaiKcov), settiements and fortifications 
(Kdaxpa, dyeaxa), means of communication (oxpaxoc), etc. 
Daily life: Kojn|jipKiov, vot>|jno<;, ouyida, KaXdvSai, t o w toe;; U^JI-
Ppavdpioq, PpaKapioq, Pavidxcop, xaPeAAicov, ooxidpioq; OGTUXIOV, 
oeXXa, (poopva^, aKpCviov, paK^ov, juaKeX^dpiov; Kajiuoiov, aayiov, 
ppaKiov. 
The world of the circus: the hippodrome played a fundamental role 
in Byzantine life and had its own vocabulary, nearly always 
taken from the Latin. Cf., for example, the seats o f places 
reserved for the emperor and magistrates (oev^ov < sessus, oeXXiov, 

252 
CHAPTER TWO 
xevxa); carts, flags, crowds (pfJYtx, TIOCVIV 'team insignia
5, pn^dpiv 
'flag to signal the start
5, (potKxicov, opva 'urn for drawing lots
5, 
ocopvydpiv 'tunic o f the auriga\ XovnepKaX 'end o f the year race
5, 
(pcxKTiovdpioc; 'president of a circus team
5, jua^iXXdpioq 'he who 
puts the cushions on the seats
5). 
358. W e could easily go on. Clearly, part of this vocabulary was 
lost, along with the institutions it served; but another part survived 
into Modern Greek. O n the other hand, form and meaning in this 
vocabulary are at times Latin, while other times there is derivation 
(particularly with -axoc;) or semantic change. In addition to the pre­
vious examples, we can point to others such as xpovXXa 
'cupula' 
(from Lat. trulla 'serving spoon'), aK&Xa 
'port' (Lat. 'stair'), 
ii&Xoq 
(from Lat. moles), KccXccudpiov 'inkpot' (from Lat. calamarium 'writing 
reeds case'), etc. 
It should also be noted that derivation can be from the A c (dovKaq 
from A c Sowcx, in turn, from Lat, ducem); in the first two declen­
sions we cannot see whether they originate in the N. or the A c 
Also, modifications in form can be more profound than the mere 
addition o f a suffix: sometimes the new word becomes semi-Greek, 
like KEViapxoq (for centenarius), diaeKxoq 
(for bisextus). The original Latin 
can also turn out to be hypothetical; for instance, KocA,a<pdxr|<; must 
come from a *calefa(c)tor, but this remains a hypothesis. Sometimes, 
the original Latin comes from the spoken Latin o f the Balkans, 
as for instance mxt,i\ievxov 
(impedimentum), with fricativisation. 
Cf. 
H. Mihaescu 1993, p. 354. 
Borrowings from Gothic and eastern languages 
359. Let us n o w look at the much rarer borrowings from other 
languages. 
For instance, borrowings from Pahlavi, the Persian language o f 
the Sasanian period, given that the contact between the two peo­
ples was, as we know, intense (mostly of a bellicose nature but also 
cultural). T h e Byzantines succeeded the Romans as defendors o f the 
Euphrates frontier, suffering terrible invasions in Syria and Palestine, 
and achieving great victories under the emperor Heraclius, on the 
eve o f the Arab expansion. This conflict weakened both peoples and 
left them defenseless before the new conquerors. But there was also 
an important cultural exchange, as reflected in the Greek influence 
on Sasanian art and the spread of Manicheanism to both sides of 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 253 
the border. Greek literature merged with the Pahlavi literatures o f 
the Persians, which had been previously influenced by the Greeks: the 
Sasanian court had welcomed Greek philosophers who had emi­
grated when Justinian closed the Academy of Athens (529), such as 
Simplicius, as we noted previously; and Greek elements entered into 
Pahlavi versions o f the ^anchatantra, 
such as that which, through 
Arabic, served as the base for the Castilian Calila and Dimna. I have 
dealt with this elsewhere (cf. for example, Adrados 1983b). 
Consequently, we find Greek borrowings in Pahlavi and Pahlavi 
borrowings in Greek, A m o n g these, we can cite *tv8aviKov (mid. 
Lat. andanicum 'a type o f steel'), from kindawdni 'Indian'; %iPidpiov 
'caviar', from kapi 'fish' and ya 'egg' (?). 
360. As regards the Goths, we have discussed their conflicts with 
the Byzantine empire as well as the Ostrogothic empire of Theodoric. 
The eastern Goths had received Christianity (in its Arrian sect) from the 
Greeks and were very Hellenised. It was in the Greek East that the 
Gothic bishop Ulfilas or Wulfilas created Gothic writing based on 
Greek and translated the Bible into Gothic, as mentioned previously. 
The Gr, rcoDyytov (attested in the sixth century and even in the 
dialects of today), from the Goth, puggs 'bag', was also carried into 
Rumanian. Yet the main influence was in the opposite direction. 
T h e same occurs in the case o f Slavic, which had a very close 
belie, but also cultural, relationship with Byzantium, as we have 
seen. I will explore this subject when I discuss Greek borrowings in 
Slavic. 
361. In the case of Arabic, in contrast, lexical borrowings occurred 
in two directions, and, frequendy, those which Greek received from 
Arabic were later re-exported in various directions. In general, it 
could be said that Arabic borrowings in Greek result from relations 
at the popular level from the time o f the Arab conquests that we 
have referred to; whereas the borrowings which the Arabs took from 
the Greek result from relations at the literary as well as popular 
level. But this subject will not be dealt with now. I will limit myself 
here to a few observations on Arabic borrowings in Greek, which 
sometimes later re-exported them, as mentioned. 
There are very concrete examples of terms from military and polit­
ical life, or relating to plants and animals. For instance, we have 
amir, which became Gr. djuipcxc; with various derivatives, rizq 'that 
which Providence provides', from which Gr. pi^iKov (and from this 

254 
CHAPTER TWO 
Sp. riesgo, etc.) was obtained; targaman, from which Spayojiicxvoq with 
many derivatives was obtained; badingan, from which Gr. u^ivx^dva 
(and from this Sp. berenjena, etc.) was obtained; babga, from which 
Gr. nanayaq 
(Sp. papagayo, etc.) was obtained. 
Borrowings from western languages 
362. Let us now turn to the borrowings from western languages, 
which was the product o f a history that is already familiar to us. 
There were relations with Italy early on, but the oldest relations with 
the Byzantine Italy o f Justinian did not result in Italian borrowings, 
only Latin ones. Then, from the eleventh century, Venice, Genoa, 
Amalfi, and other cities established close relations with Byzantium, 
where there were colonies o f their citizens; there was also a Venetian 
dominion in Crete and other parts, and Turkish conquests in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, to which I have already referred. 
Furthermore, the Franks passed through Byzantium from the end 
of the eleventh century onwards as crusaders, conquered the city, 
and when they later lost it, remained there as lords' of the Peloponnese 
and Cyprus. In the fourteenth century it was the turn of the Catalans 
and Aragons. I have referred to the Turkish conquests in the Balkans 
in the fourteenth century, the sack o f Constantinople and later the 
Byzantine cities. 
The Italians and French left their mark on Byzantine literature, 
as we mentioned earlier. Indeed, they even left a mark on the lan­
guage. Greek contained borrowings from the Italian languages, from 
Provengal, French, Catalan, etc. but no longer from Latin. 
363. Titles and feudal terminology, in particular, were taken from 
French: KaPaTtdpoq 'knight', jxiaip 'lord', poi 'king', yinapovq 'baron', 
aipyevxr|<; 'sergeant'; q>ie = Fr. fief mpA,au{x<; 'parliament', Kcropxeaia 
'courtesy'; Ko-oyKeaxi^co 'to conquer', etc. Also, military terms (Kouyiceaxa 
'conquest', xpe(3a 'truce'); and eccleciastical terms (naaoaxlp 
'passage 
to the Holy Land', cppe 'friar', Tiapxofiv 'pardon'). 
In the Greek dialect of Cyprus, many French and Provengal words 
have been preserved: PocAXevxi^oc 'bravery', Koupowoc 'crown', izka^ipxv 
'pleasure', yccpevxid^co 'to guarantee', x^ijuufoc 'chimney', aoi^a 
'legal 
provision' (asize)y etc. 
364. Commercial and naval terms, in particular, were taken from 
Italian. In the oldest period, the naval lexicon had been carried over 
from the Greeks into Italy; but from the eleventh century onwards 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 
255 
(and later, the sixteenth century) the reverse was true; also, suffixes 
such as -EXXO, 
-exxo, -eooa, -ivoq 
were carried over. The majority 
are Venetian, but we shall not go into this now. 
A m o n g the old Italianisms, from the eleventh century onwards, 
we can cite: in the navy and in war, noboxaq < pedotta, xpaixo-ovxdva 
< tramontana, naxoq < pako; in fashion and daily life: KOCTWCOVT^IV 
< 
cappuccio, ypxtpq 
< gris, Kovxriq < conte, jnepKocxdvxoc; < mercatante, 
T^aujiouvoc < zampogna. 
There are numerous borrowings in the more recent Italian. For 
example: titles (So-UKeaooc, noozoxaq); public life (oaXfto 'safe-conduct', 
vxodvoe 'customs'); common terms (ypdx^tcc 'grace', Pe(v)5exxa 'revenge', 
dpevxofipa 'adventure'); from religion (nxoq, (pe, cpeaxoc); cultural life, 
music, poetry (voPeAxx, fhotax, xpo-oujJexac;, KpovocKa); fashion, profes­
sions (pd^ov 'satin', pepexxa < berretta, p65a 
wheel', 
\mpovv^xvoq 
'bronze'); war, weaponry (yo^PepvaSopoq, TiepiKO'uA.ov, cpopxex^a, 
Tiavxiepa); etc. 
Naval terms were particularly important: 
<povxo<; 'depth', pevoc 
'sand', dpjad8oc, (poika, dvxeva, KooPepxa, Karcexdvoc;, etc. 
Many of these words were carried into Modern Greek. 
365. Finally, we must mention the Turkish borrowings, many of 
which have survived to the present day. For instance, 7ia7io
,uxaia 
'shoes', rcitaxqn 'rice', yiaoupxi 'yoghurt', Kaq>e<; 'coffee', xoi)q>8Ki 'rifle
5. 
W e find -oytan) in the patronymics. Turkish influenced word order 
in the dialects o f Asia Minor. 
5. GREEK BORROWINGS IN OTHER LANGUAGES 
General ideas 
366. W e are now dealing with a decisive moment in the history o f 
the Greek language. O n the one hand, it continued to survive, as 
such, in Byzantium and from there into modern Greece, while on 
the other hand, it influenced and implanted itself into all the sur­
rounding languages. This process has already been examined for the 
Hellenistic and R o m a n periods. In R o m e , specifically, a type of Latin 
which we call Graeco-Latin was created. Enormous advances fol­
lowed, so that Greek remains among us until today. 
It should be noted that Greek penetrated our languages through 
multiple routes. Let us review a few o f the observations we have 
already made: 

256 
CHAPTER TWO 
(a) Through Byzantium, whether through contact between indi­
viduals and peoples or through a cultural and ecclesiastical 
route. 
(b) Through the Latin that was kept alive in the Middle Ages 
as the language o f culture, and which absorbed Greek terms 
from classical and especially late Latin. 
367. Later on, classical Latin, which was progressively discovered 
and studied in the age of Humanism, became the source for extract­
ing Hellenisms; in the fifteenth century too, they began to be directly 
extracted from the ancient Greek that was brought to Italy by schol­
ars fleeing from the Turks. 
It is not always easy to stick to this classification: Byzantine terms 
passed into Latin and the languages that were just starting to be 
written, but sometimes the entry o f these predates Latin documen­
tation. Very often, it is difficult to fix a date or route of entry for 
these Hellenisms. Yet, at a certain point, Greek roots and formative 
elements began to be freely used within the modern languages, once 
they had been fully incorporated into them. 
At any rate, there are two fundamental routes. First, the route of 
medieval Greek and Latin (which shall be looked at in this chapter), 
consisting o f Byzantine Greek and medieval, late Latin models. 
Second, the route consisting of classical Greek and Latin models (which 
shall be looked at in the next chapter). Indeed, with the arrival of 
the Renaissance and Humanism in the West there was a shift o f 
perspective in the western perception of Greek culture: the old, clas­
sical phases of Greek and Latin now served as the model to follow. 
It is paradoxical that the learned Byzantines, by taking refuge in 
Italy, would bring there classical Greece, which was much more 
appreciated by the West than contemporary Greece. A long time 
would pass before Byzantium and even the European Middle Ages 
would be studied and appreciated. 
368. Yet, if we return to the end o f Antiquity and the Middle Ages, 
Byzantium was the centre of the world, the true continuation o f the 
R o m a n empire. Its literature, with the exceptions we shall give, was 
barely known in the West. But its State, Church, military organisa­
tion, art, and industries were imitated by all. 
Indeed, it was a centre o f the world which, with Justinian, occu­
pied all the area extending from the Danube to the Euphrates and 
the Nile, in addition to North Africa and a good part o f Italy and 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 257 
Spain. Its influence did not diminish after the loss o f the Byzantine 
possessions in Italy (the exarchate of Ravenna in the eighth century, 
Sicily in the ninth century, southern Italy in the eleventh century), 
Africa, and Spain (in the seventh century). N o r did it diminish after 
the successive conflicts with the Slavs and Arabs: only from the thir­
teenth century onwards <iid the current begin to change and west­
ern influence started to increase in Byzantium. 
As the centre of the world and the greatest cultural and political 
authority, Byzantium - and with it the Greek language - exerted 
the greatest influence on the surrounding peoples, whether through 
force or diplomacy. 
W h o were these peoples? T o the north, the Goths, and later the 
Slavs; to the east and south, together with those already mentioned, 
first the Sasanians, then the Arabs, and later the Turks. Byzantium 
had a influence on all of them. Similarly, in the West, among the 
Latin, Germanic, and Celtic peoples. 
I will examine the Greek borrowings received by the various lan­
guages of these peoples in the first half of the Middle Ages, until 
the thirteenth century: with this, I continue the parallel study which 
I began for the period of Antiquity. Then, I will examine the other 
area referred to, the influence o f literary Greek in Europe, through 
the classics, from this same period in the thirteenth century. 
However, before exploring the linguistic issue and Greek influence 
on these different languages, it will be useful to give an overview of 
the historical-cultural context. In this way, we will explore, succes­
sively, Greek borrowings through Latin; those that entered directly 
into the Romance languages; those that entered the Germanic lan­
guages (through Gothic); borrowings through Slavic and through 
Arabic (at times, the transmitter o f borrowings into other languages). 
For each case I will give the historical context. 
Borrowings in western languages 
369. I will begin with the West. The Germanic emperors were pri­
marily interested in being recognised by the emperors of Byzantium 
as emperors o f the Romans, from Charlemagne to Otto III. They 
sought equality - as two emperors crowned by the Pope and the 
Patriarch - which the Byzantines had denied them, even though they 
did call the emperor of the West
 
cpatricius
y or 'king' o f the Romans. 
The dream o f unity remained alive: Charlemagne attempted to 

258 
CHAPTER TWO 
w e d the w i d o w emperess Irene, Otto II married the princess 
Theophano, who gave birth to the emperor Otto III. But this was 
an impossible dream to realise, for when the power of the papacy 
became too strong, Byzantium's response was the Photian schism. 
This led not only to a political but also to a religious division. 
The union was impossible, and the West knew very little about 
Byzantine culture, as the Byzantines in turn knew little about Latin 
culture. T h e Greek language was even less known in the West. 
But Greek still had prestige, as attested by certain residues in the 
liturgy (the Kyrie eleison, the trisagiori) and by the tradition of bilingual 
Bibles that were still being copied. Greek was better preserved by the 
Irish and English monks who were active in the court of Charlemagne, 
and later in France and the monasteries o f St. Gall, Reichenau, and 
others. Also, by the Greek monks themselves, who were present in 
the court o f Otto I, and were numerous in R o m e in the eighth and 
ninth centuries, and even more so in southern Italy: first, as refugees 
from the Arab invasions, and later from the iconoclasts, they founded 
monasteries and cultivated Greek, 
370. Translations, however, were not very numerous. The transla­
tions, particularly in Italy, of the lifes of the saints are from an early 
period. Later, Dionysius the Areopagite entered in favour, with trans­
lations of Hilduin (abbot o f St. Denis) and Scotus Erigena in the 
eighth and ninth centuries. In the latter century, Anastasius trans­
lated hagiographic and ecclesiastical literature in R o m e . 
S o m e texts were translated in St. Gall (Hippocrates, Galen, 
Dositheus). Aristotle and others would have to wait until the twelfth 
century, with the translations by Aristippus, in Sicily, and Grosseteste, 
in England. In the thirteenth century, we have the translations o f 
Guglielmus of Moerbecke and the Toledo school of translators, who 
worked from Arabic, as we know. Also, there was the Greek Grammatica 
by Roger Bacon, translations o f Nicholas o f Otranto, e t c 
So, although Roger Bacon himself referred to the scant knowl­
edge o f Greek in Europe, and philosophers such as Albertus Magnus 
and Thomas Aquinas studied the Greeks through Latin translations, 
there is no doubt that the Greek language had prestige. This pres­
tige was linked to the prestige o f Antiquity and of Byzantium itself, 
with which there was much contact in the councils and numerous 
embassies from the time o f Charlemagne. 
W e should also note that the influence o f Byzantine art was enor-

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 259 
mous in Europe: in architecture, painting, textile, ivories. From at 
least the ninth century onwards, it served as a vehicle, not only for 
Greek literature, but also for Eastern art which was introduced into 
Europe through this route. 
I have studied this subject in detail in connection with the fable, 
in Adrados 1984a. There' is a Greek fable tradition, for instance, in 
one manuscript of St. Gall from the ninth century: the same monastery 
in which, around that period, Greek authors were being translated. 
371. In fact, as we shall see, there are many Greek lexical borrow­
ings dating from the medieval period. They may sometimes turn out 
to be Latinisations o f Greek words that penetrated the new Romance 
and Germanic languages, but mostly the opposite seems true. There 
were various routes of entry: through cultural or personal contact in 
the West, or other routes through Byzantine Italy and the Arabs. 
At any rate, Latin was the language o f culture and religion in the 
West: from here, the lexicon o f Greek origin, together with the resid­
ual Latin lexicon, penetrated into the new languages of Europe. 
372. For the historical relations between Byzantium and the West, in addi­
tion to the historical works already cited, see W. Berschin 1970 and S. A. 
Tovar 1990. For Byzantium as the transmitter of the fable tradition to the 
West, see Adrados 1984e. For borrowings in western languages, H. and R. 
Kahane 1970 ff., p. 349 ff., F. Brunot 1966, I, p. 121 ff., M. Gortelazzo 
1970, A. Ewert s. a., p. 288 f., W. Stammler (ed.), 1957, p. 733 ff., K. M. 
Pope 1973, p. 30 ff., H. Liidtke 1974, p. 160 ff., A. de la Cruz and 
A. Caflete 1992, p. 109 ff.; and, for Spain, M. Fernandez-Galiano 1966 
and J. Berguz 2002. 
373. W e shall now look at the influence of Byzantine Greek on the 
western languages. However, it is very difficult to dissociate this 
influence from that o f the older borrowings: for example, if auvoSoq 
'meeting of the bishops' is attested from the fourth century, it is 
difficult to decide whether Lat. synodus and its derivatives in the 
different western languages is from the same date or from 
the 
Byzantine period (the same applies for Kocujtf|, xapxapotixoc;, £7U(pav[e]ia, 
Powupov, etc.). Just as it is difficult, as we mentioned previously, to 
establish whether there was an intermediate Latin in Greek bor­
rowings, or a direct link from Byzantine Greek to the modern lan­
guages, through one of these. 
There is also the question of whether the borrowing is indeed 
popular or literary, and not strictly Byzantine: sometimes it is the 

260 
CHAPTER TWO 
two, 
from monasterium we obtain popular as well as elevated deriva­
tives (Sp. monasterio) in the western languages, and similarly with eccle-
sia, etc. Sometimes, from a single word we obtain a derivative through 
the Byzantine route and another through the normal Latin route: 
from djroGriicri we obtain Sp. botica (with Byzantine iotacism) and 
bodega (without it). 
It would seem more appropriate here to provide actual Byzantine 
terms which infiltrated the West through Latin transcriptions (keep­
ing in mind the doubt expressed in § 371). 
Thus, I will provide a summary of actual Byzantine words (by 
date of appearance or by semantics) which infiltrated the western 
languages. They will be classified by date of appearance in Byzantium: 
the date o f the Latin form may be contemporary to or posterior to 
this date (even anterior to our documentation o f the Greek). Chrono­
logical groups will be established, and I will indicate whether the 
Latin term and, very briefly, the western forms are of interest. But 
we will only be dealing with a few examples. 
374. 
In the following, I will indicate the date of the word's or the 
meaning's first appearance in Byzantium: 
Fifth-sixth centuries: K a v o v i K o q , judvSpoc 'cloister', 'cell'; TCPCOTOKOX-
Xov 
'first leaf of a roll o f papyrus', Xuaveia 
'litany', *Tpiadyiov 'tris-
agion', 8KTIK6(; 'consumptive fever', Kapa|3o<; 'rapid boat', 
anodeifyq 
'receipt', ra£i8iov 'voyage'. The Latin transcriptions are attested in 
general, although in some cases they have to be reconstructed. As 
regards the derivatives in the Western languages, we need only refer 
to, for example, in Sp. tetania, trisagio, hetico, carabela; in other lan­
guages, for example, OFr. etique, Port, karavo, Ital. polizza (from which 
we obtain Sp. poliza), Ital. tasseggio. 
Seventh-eighth centuries: eiKoov 'image' (MLat. icona, eighth cen­
tury), dpxoq 'consecrated bread' (MLat. artona, seventh century), 
KataSynpoc; 'monk' (MLat. calogerus), JLIO-OGTCXKIOV, TraAAnKapiov 'young 
man'. See derivatives such as: Sp. canonigo, Cat, calonge, Ital. (dialects) 
ancona, icona, cona> Venet. mostacci, Sp. mostacho. 
Ninth-tenth centuries: vaoq 'temple', p©umo<; 'pilgrim', cujaxpoovia 
'musical instrument', rcepyajurjvri 'parchment', pdjipoci; 'cotton', Xzlvio^ 
'snail', duipaq (MLat. amiras) 'admiral', p-o^dvTi(ov) 'a Byzantine coin', 
jnocicdpi 'perhaps', EapaKr|v6<; 'muslim' (before, 'Arab'), yaXza 
'small 
battle-ship', Kovxotipoc 'ship with a short tail', %copa 'region' (MLat. 
hora), GKXafioq. There are derivatives, generally through Latin, such as 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 
261 
Sp. nave, Fr. nef, Sp. romero, zampona, parche, besante, maguer, sarraceno, 
galera, eslavo; MFr. amir ail, Oltal. saracino, Venet. gondola. 
Eleventh-twelfth centuries: 7iapd5eiao<; 'paradise', %apiGX£toc 'scarcity', 
pi. dpyaXeiov (Lat. argalia) 'catheter', *(3povxiov 'bronze', KoexdGXixov 
'cadastre', 
8(JLLIXOV 'a tissue', £^dutxov 'another type of tissue', *d|3poxd-
pi%ov (Lat. butaricum) 'salted fish', OKaXa 'port'. There are derivatives 
such as Ital. paradiso, Sp. paraiso, carestia, bronce, Ital. algalia, Fr. algalie, 
Venet. catastico (Sp. catastro), Ital. (dialects) buter, boder (Eng. butter), Sp. 
botarga, and escala. 
Thirteenth-fourteenth centuries: *7ip6%iov 'pitcher' (MLat. broccus), 
*7iXf|xpia 'funnel', |xaKapcbv£ia 'funeral song' from 'funeral 
food'. 
From here, forms through Latin such as Ital. (dialects) brocca, OProv. 
broc> Ital. (dialects) pledria, plera, plero, Ital. maccheroni, Sp. macarrones, 
Ital. arcipelago, Fr. archipel, Sp. archipielago. Some words passed directly 
into French during the Crusades, such as boutique, chaland, dromond. 
375. A few observations should be added to the above: 
1. Byzantine phonetics appears frequently: Sp. botica, pergamino, 
Himosina (pressupposed for Opisan. mozina, etc.), Ital. bisante, 
icona, Sp. sdndalo, etc. 
2. Sometimes, we find the A c . (Ital. duca, limaca) or a change 
in number (Ital. algalia, Sp. botarga) or declension (of the type 
despotus) or an adaptation with a particular suffix (Ital. fanale 
from (potvdpiov) or a verbal unification {*galamateus, Sp. gali­
matias, from Kocxd MaxGaiov) or a semantic change (such as 
that o f archipielago). 
3. There are contaminations: ^petroleum from 7t£xp£?iaiov on the 
Lat. oleum, trepalium from xpucdaGCc^ov 'instrument of torture', 
on the Lat. palus. 
4. There are semantic caiques: from anoKpeoyq we obtain MLat. 
carnelevare, from which we obtain Sp. carnaval. 
5. Latin Hellenisms, as Latinisms in general, passed not only 
to the Romance languages, but also the Germanic and other 
languages ( O H G . pergamin, M H G . tievel < diabolus, etc., and 
words o f diverse origins, cf. al. Kirsche < cerasus, Pfirsich < per-
sicus, Quitte < cydoneus, ^wetschge < damascenus). In other lan­
guages too, for example, Basque and Albanian, cf. H. Liidtke 
1974, pp. 181 ff., 186 ff. 
6. Occasionally, we can follow the route by which words derived 
from the Greek penetrated from one language to another. 

262 
CHAPTER TWO 
For example, in Spanish we have influences of French Hel­
lenisms, as in cisne, cofre, monje, golpe, tapiz, ants; from Italian, 
calma, chusma, gruta (but these are probably words that came 
from Byzantium through other Italian languages, without 
Latin as an intermediate language - we shall discuss these 
later). In English there is a series of Hellenisms which have 
entered through French: abbey, baptism, blasphemy, chair, charity, 
clergy, govern, homily, parish, parliament 
In German, in parallel, Hellenisms entered through French, as for 
instance, O H G . Prestar < OFr. prestre < Lat. presbyter < Gr. 7ipeo|3i)T£po<;; 
other times, there are semantic caiques ( O H G . salmsang 'psalter'). 
376. Let us n o w look at the Hellenisms which entered through a 
popular route, through the Byzantine dominions in Italy. Although, 
as I have said, it is not always easy to make a distinction. As before, 
I will provide a brief historical introduction. 
Byzantine influence was particularly important in Ravenna, Venice 
and Genoa, as well as in southern Italy, Amalfi, Naples, Sicily, and 
even R o m e . From these centres, a series o f Byzantine words were 
diffused throughout the western Mediterranean. 
Ravenna was, as we know, the capital o f the Byzantine exarchate 
of Italy, from the mid-sixth century to the mid-eighth century. It 
possessed Genoa until the mid-seventh century; and also Venice, 
which after the fall o f the exarchate became a dukedom with a loose 
dependence on Byzantium in the ninth century, becoming independent 
and even a rival in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Subsequendy, 
from the thirteenth century onwards, Venice had settlements in 
Constantinople, as well as Genoa, and even possessions in the islands 
mentioned above. Until about the year 1000, Dalmatia was also 
under Byzantine rule and there was an analogous exchange between 
the two. 
In short, a close relationship existed, as reflected in the introduction 
of Italianisms in Byzantium (as we have seen) and in the acceptance 
o f Greek vocabulary, which was later diffused into other languages, 
in Venice, Genoa and other regions. The Hellenisms o f Ravenna 
are almost invaribly related to daily life, industry, and clothing; those 
o f Venice, to trade and navigation, the Church, technology, banking 
and fashion. Similarly with those o f Dalmatia, which diffused these 
Byzantisms in the Slavic world. 
Southern Italy was conquered by Justinian and from the seventh 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 263 
century onwards received many immigrants who were fleeing from 
Islam; in the eighth century, immigrants fleeing from the Iconoclasts, 
and in the ninth century, many more from Sicily, which was lost to 
the Muslims, previously having been conquered by Justinian. 
Many Greek convents were founded in southern Italy and also in 
R o m e . Greek culture flourished in these convents (and later even in 
Sicily, under the Normans), as discussed in §§ 369 f. 
Thus, Italy was a centre of diffusion for the Greek lexicon, not 
just of the lexicon which entered through a cultural route, but also 
of that which entered by means of trade, and personal and political 
relations. Let us look at some examples. 
377. 
T o illustrate, I will provide examples of some Byzantisms which 
penetrated the Italian dialects and sometimes, from here, other West­
ern languages by means of trade and other means, in the Middle Ages. 
From the Ravenna exarchate, from the ninth century: in various 
dialects, delta 'rim of a triangular well
5 < SeA/rcc, ardica 'hall o f the 
church
5 < ocpQrjKoc, butinus 'hole' < P60DVO<;, buter 'butter' < Poi>xi)pov, 
angaria 'cucumber' < dyyoupxov, bronzo 'bronze' < *ppovxiov, deuma 
'model' < 8eiy|ia. 
From Genoa: cintraco, centrego 'inferior functionary' < Kevxocpxoq. 
From Venice: dromo 'fence' < 8p6uo<;, liago 'balcony' < fjAactKoc;, 
prostimo 'fine' < rcpooxijiov, messeta 'broker, currency exchange agent' 
< jieaixriq, agio 'charter' < dycoyiov, staria 'firm land' < axe pea, stradioto 
'soldier' < oxpaxubxnc;, gripo 'small ship' < ypiTioq, gondola < Kovxcmpoc. 
From Dalmatia: inchona < eiKova, condura < Kovxo-upa. 
From southern Italy and Sicily: ana < dvd 'in equal parts', para-
bisu < *7capdpeiao<; < 7capd8eiao<;, romeus 'pilgrim' < pcojjxxioc;, malan-
zana 'aubergine' < u^Xivx^dva. 
It is frequent for the same word to appear, with variants, in the 
different Italian dominions; and Latin forms of many of them are 
found, whether created from the dialectal forms or as intermediate 
forms: it is often difficult to tell, but the literary route is favoured 
in cases such as Sp. paraiso, Cat. paradis, whereas the Italianism is 
evident in other cases. 
O n the other hand, many of these words had a wide diffusion 
outside Italy, as stated earlier: they were imported through the Italian 
forms, when not directly through Latin. For instance, Sp. anchoa (Gr. 
d<p{>r|), brujula (nvfyq), calma (Kccfijxa), grata (xpvnxr\), poliza (drcoSei^K;). 
In old French, we can cite examples of Italianisms o f Greek origin 

264 
CHAPTER TWO 
(sometimes through Provengal), such as bourse, Fr. chiere (< mpce, cf. 
Sard., Prov., Cat., Sp., Port., card), falot 
(cpdpcx;), golfe, calme, casse 
(Koc\|/a), medaille (jieraAAov), moustache, magasin, page (< pagio < 7iai8{ov), 
risque, etc.; others infiltrated 
through an intermediate Arabic (for 
instance, carat, Gr. Kepcmov) or, usually, from Latin (with a classical 
pronounciation, as in chemeil 'camel' or Byzantine, as in tapis). 
T o cite a word o f general extension: the word for 'admiral', from 
the Gr. djuipaq (in turn, from the Arabic) which, contaminated with 
the Latin ad-, has extended to all the languages from Norman Sicily 
through Genoa. 
378. Let us n o w turn to the eastern Byzantine contacts. W e have 
discussed the relation betweeen Byzantium and the Goths, Slavs and 
Arabs. In all these cases, the Greek lexicon found an opening in the 
respective languages. 
W e have looked at Greek borrowings in Gothic. The Goths were 
a Germanic people who had direct contact with Byzantium, as we 
know; but this was mainly the branch o f the Ostrogoths, who dis­
appeared from history in the sixth century. Nevertheless, their 
Christianisation and alphabetisation, together with their translation 
of the Bible into their language, placed them above the other Germanic 
peoples to w h o m they transmitted some Hellenisms complementing 
those which entered through Latin. 
For example, we find icoptaKov 'house o f the lord', which was the 
name for church in various Germanic languages (Ger. Kirche, Eng. 
church with the Scottish variant kirk); nanaq, nanaq (Goth, papa, O H G . 
pfqffb, Ger. Pfqffe); 7tevTr|KOGTf| (Ger. Pfingsten); "Apeox; fjuipa (Aust. and 
Bav. Ertag); %i\m%r[ (Aust. and Bav. IJinztag); adppcxTOv (Goth. *sambat, 
Ger. Samstag). 
Other Hellenisms, through ecclesiastical Latin, penetrated in ancient 
times into the Germanic languages: for instance, ANord. tollr, O H G . 
tol, from Vulg. Lat. toloneum (Gr. xetaoveTov), O H G . Biscqf 'bishop', 
Miinster 'monastery'. 
Borrowings in Slavic 
379. W e still need to look at Greek borrowings in Old Bulgarian 
(and the other Slavic languages) and in Arabic. Through the first 
route, Hellenisms penetrated all the Slavic world, and through the 
second route, they increased their presence in the western world. As 
before, I will start by giving a brief historical introduction. 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 265 
380. For the relations between the Greeks and other Indo-European peoples 
in general, see the book by F. Villar 1996a. For Gothic, see W. Streitberg 
1919, M. H. JeUinek 1926, pp. 19 ff. and 186 ff., W. P. Lehmann 1986 
(see Greek borrowings on p. 537 ff.). For Slavic, see F. Dvornik 1956 and 
Adrados 1987. 
For the relations between the Arabs of the Caliphate of Baghdad 
and Byzantium, as well as for translations from Greek, see J. Vernet 1978 
and my book Adrados 2001, p. 21 ff. For the Greek lexicon which entered 
Spanish through Arabic, cf. R. Lapesa 1980 (8th ed.), p. 131 ff. and 
M. Fernandez-Galiano 1966, p 57 f. For its entry into French, see Ewert 
s. a., p. 296. 
381. W e are familiar with the main episodes o f the meeting between 
Byzantium and the Bulgarians and with the relations between them. 
Let us now focus on the language. 
The Slavic language was not written: instead, the Slavs used Greek 
in their inscriptions, starting with the great inscription o f the khan 
Krum in Madara. In Greek, the khan was called ap%oov or fiamXzxx;. 
After the foundation of the Bulgarian state by khan Kubrat in 
681, the conversion to Christianity, once again, initiated the process 
o f alphabetisation and increased Greek cultural influence. This was 
undertaken by King Boris (852~89), after a complex history in which 
the Germanic empire, R o m e and Byzantium disputed religious and 
political dominion over the Slavs, leaving the latter some room to 
manoeuvre: in the end, the pressure exerted by the empire and the 
papacy forced Boris to seek protection with Byzantium. 
T h e influence o f Byzantium was great, as reflected in the con­
struction of palaces (in Preslav and Pliska) and in close relations o f 
all kinds: King Simeon, for example, studied in Constantinople. This 
relationship was not interrupted with the destruction o f the Bulgarian 
kingdom by the Byzantines (1018), who occupied the country, or 
with the creation o f the second Bulgarian kingdom (1185™1396). 
From our perspective, the most interesting thing was the creation 
of Slavic writing, based on the Greek, by the monks or missionaries 
Cyril and Methodius - two Greek brothers from Salonika who were 
very familiar with Slavic at a time when the Slavic tribes were sur­
rounding the city. 
As I stated earlier, the history is rather complex. There was a 
power struggle between the Byzantine and Germanic empires 
-
which was reflected in these missionaries being sent to Bohemia 
and Moravia - with the popes o f R o m e playing an often adverse, 
often ambiguous role with regard to petitions for the creation o f an 

266 
CHAPTER TWO 
autocephalous Bulgarian Church with a Slavic liturgy. The Photian 
schism (concluded in 863) favored this idea, although in the end, 
Bohemia and Moravia (where Cyril and Methodius had first preached) 
were left under the sphere o f influence o f the Romano-Germanic 
empire. 
The fact is, the Slavic alphabet had been invented for this evan­
gelisation, and it was implanted, from the year 885, in Bulgaria, 
when Boris accepted Methodius's disciples, who had fled from Moravia. 
In 925, Simeon managed to establish a patriarchy in Bulgaria: this 
was the Golden Age of Bulgaria. Later, the Slavic liturgy spread to 
Pannonia, Croatia and Dalmatia. 
382. It is significant that an important school of Bulgarian literature 
was formed at this point, with Clement of Ochrid and others: from 
here, Slavic literature spread to the Ukraine and other Slavic coun­
tries. In the principality o f Kiev, King Vladimir (978-1015) took the 
initiative to convert. It should be pointed out that in Bulgaria, as in 
the Ukraine, the translation of sacred and profane Greek texts formed 
the core o f the new literature: liturgical writings, John Chrysostom, 
John Damascene, Malalas, Cosmas Indicopleustes, the Physiologies, etc. 
There was an undeniable continuation o f Byzantine literature, or lit­
erature adopted by the Byzantines. 
Indeed, there were two forms o f script, Glagolitic and Cyrillic, 
derived respectively from the Greek alphabet in minuscule and in 
uncial. The latter imposed itself and continues to serve the Slavic 
languages, except for those that fell under western influence. 
There were lexical borrowings from the start: in names of persons, 
in toponymies, and in words like pinix < (poTvt£, ankjura < dyicopa, 
dijavol < SidpoXoq, myro < jxtipov, e t c , all found in the translation of 
the Gospels; and, o f course, the creation o f a syntax and prose based 
on the Greek model. 
N o w , we are not just dealing with Old Bulgarian or eccleciasti-
cal Slavic. Throughout the first period o f the Middle Ages, Greek 
words from the Byzantine territories entered into the different Slavic 
languages (sometimes through Latin, see H. Mihaescu 1993, p. 430 ff). 
For example, from Gr. eiicova we obtain OSerb. icona; from pdaov 
'coarse woolen cloth
5, OSerb. rasa; from naxoq 'floor' we obtain Serb.-
Croat, patos; from 5idicovo<;, iakan; from Kepocaoc; 'cherry', OSlav. 
cersa, Bulg. cresa. These words were often also carried into Rumanian 
and Albanian. 

BYZANTINE GREEK AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OTHER LANGUAGES 267 
In short, if Greek influence in the West was exerted, fundamen­
tally, through Latin, in the East it was exerted through Slavic. 
Borrowings in Arabic 
383. It should be pointed out that the Arabs, emerging from the 
desert as conquerors o f Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Persia, 
western 
India, North Africa and Spain, were enormously influenced by Greco-
Byzantine culture, as well as Persian and R o m a n culture, in art and 
architecture (including of a military type), literature, philosophy and 
science. Indeed, from a certain perspective, the Arab conquest con­
stituted a re-Hellenisation: part o f the Greek legacy was introduced 
in the Middle Ages through the Arabs, the other part being intro­
duced through R o m e . 
They were not the only route, but the translations from Greek 
(and from Sanskrit, Pahlavi, Coptic, and Syriac) into Arabic during 
the Abbasid dynasty in Baghdad, were o f fundamental 
importance. 
A whole school o f Syriac translators worked in Edessa on the trans­
lation o f Greek (and Pahlavi) texts into Syriac and Arabic, and of 
Arabic texts (often o f Pahlavi and remote Sanskrit origin) into Greek; 
this activity was later continued in Baghdad with Hunayn Ibn Ishak, 
towards 850. 
The Arabs were more interested in philosophy and the sciences 
than in poetry. Most o f their literature and thought reflected this: 
from the philosophers influenced by Aristotle or the Platonists and 
Gnostics, to the physicians, botanists, astrologists, 
mathematicians, 
and others. Subsequentiy, part of this literature was translated into 
Latin in the thirteenth century in Toledo: the two routes o f trans­
mission of Greek culture came together. But there were older trans­
lations in Italy, such as those of Hippocrates and Galen by a monk, 
Constantine o f Monte Cassino. 
384. Personally, I feel that Arabic poetry owes much to erotic Greek 
poetry, especially in its popular versions from Alexandria and Syria, 
with which we are somewhat familiar, and to the ideas o f the Epi­
cureans, Cynics, and Sceptics, reflected in authors such as Omar 
Khayyam, Hafiz, Ben Cuzman and many Andalucian poets. 
O f course, not only the Arabs but also the Jews were influenced 
by the Greeks: for example, Moses of Leon, influenced by the Gnostics, 
and Sem T o b , by the sapiential tradition. W e have already discussed 
the introduction o f the Greek lexicon into Rabbinic literature. 

268 
CHAPTER TWO 
385. 
Returning to the Arabs, we know about their cultural under­
taking in great detail: h o w the Caliphs al-Mansur and al-Ma^mum 
obtained Greek manuscripts through their conquests or embassies to 
Byzantium, or as ransom: so that, at the end of al-Mansur's life, we 
find Arabic translations of Plato, Aristotie, Hippocrates, Galen, Euclid, 
and later o f Vettius Valens, Dioscorides, etc. Or, indeed, how a 
manuscript o f Dioscorides was sent by Romanus to Abderraman III, 
and nobody in Cordoba could understand it so the Byzantine emperor 
had to send a translator, etc. 
As always, the influence o f the Greek language reached the Arabs 
through a two-way route: through the spoken language (in the East, 
in Sicily, Africa, and Spain), which provided terms relating to the 
realities o f the Mediterranean world and Byzantine life and prac­
tices; and through the literature, which was translated and imitated 
and which introduced the Arabs to the intellectual world o f the 
Greeks. 
386. 
Here are some examples of Arabic terms derived from Greek, 
which later penetrated the western languages. I will cite examples 
which give a Spanish derivative: KouaapeTov > qaisariya (Sp. alcaiceria); 
%apxr\q > qaritas (Sp. carta); xeXeoiia > tilasm (Sp. talisman); oiyxXXaioc, 
(from Lat. sigillatus) > siqirldt > Sp. escarlata; iiaXXmi] 
> malluta > 
Sp. marlota; 7ieptp6A,ouov > Mozar. fir(i)wil > Sp. ferreruelo. 
Also, here follows a list o f Spanish words derived from Arab 
words o f Greek origin, taken from the Historia de la Lengua Espanola 
by D . Rafael Lapesa 1980: 
A m o n g the plants, fruits, fish, etc.: acelga (oiKeXoq), adelfa (8d<pvr|), 
albaricoque (PepiKOKKov), alberchigo (rcepaiKov), alcaparra (KdrcrcapK;), alfostigo 
(TciaxdcKri), almdciga (u.acru%r|), altramuz (Gupjucx;), arroz (opu^a), atitn 
(Qvvvoq), cazuz 'ivy
5 (KIGCO<;), jibia (anTcia), zumo (£a)ji6<;). Scientific and 
technical terms: alambique (du.pi4), albeitar (iKKiaipoq), adarme (8pa%ur|), 
alquimia (xDjueioc). From daily life and luxury: abalorio (prjpi)A,A,o<;), ebano 
(ePevoq), fondacy fonda, alhondiga (7cav8o%etov), guitarra (KiOdpa), quilate 
(Kepdtiov). 
T o show that this is not just a Spanish phenomenon (although it 
was certainly widespread here), I will give examples o f French words 
derived from Arab words taken from the Greek: alchimie, amalgame, 
alcooly alambicy ambre, coton, elixir, gazelle, harem, jupe, nadir. Some o f these 
words penetrated into other languages: Spanish (algalife, papegai, abrico, 
pasteque), Portuguese (epinard); Italian (arsenal, chiffre, girafe). 

CHAPTER THREE 
G R E E K IN T H E E U R O P E A N L A N G U A G E S 
t 
1. T H E PENETRATION OF GREEK-LATIN IN THE 
EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
Generalities 
387. Greek did not end with Greek or R o m a n Antiquity or with the 
Byzantine Middle Ages. Its agitated life — always the same, yet always 
different - continued until the present day with M o d e r n Greek. 
Yet, we have seen how in Antiquity as in the Middle Ages, Greek -
its lexicon above all, but also its morphology, syntax and even its 
literary genres - began to infiltrate different languages, including the 
European languages (Slavic, Romance, Germanic) which began to 
take shape during the ninth century. 
W e have already studied part o f this process. T h e Greek words 
sometimes come from Byzantium, sometimes from Medieval Latin, 
which continued the old Graeco-Latin we have discussed and which 
as we know was the language o f the Church and. o f culture in the 
Middle Ages. W e left our study around approximately the twelfth 
century, stressing that it is not always easy to establish a chronology 
for the borrowings, or their Byzantine or Latin source. N o w we shall 
place emphasis on Hellenisms taken from a literary source from the 
twelfth century onwards, with some older precedents. W e will find 
that there is a steady escalation in the numbers o f Hellenisms enter­
ing European languages, which continues all the way up until the 
present day. 
388. Let us make some preliminary observations. 
1. Our study is focussed on Spanish, with references to French, 
Italian, English and German, above all, but with the aware­
ness that many Hellenisms also made their way into many 
other languages, and indeed, today, all the languages o f the 
world. 

270 
CHAPTER THREE 
2. O n the other hand, our study intends to offer general ideas, 
as well as some examples. A broad, up-to-date study with a 
general focus has not really existed until now. 
3. U p to the sixteenth century, Hellenisms nearly always entered 
through Latin (except for those from Byzantium); from then 
on, they also entered directly from Greek texts. 
4. W e should recognise the importance of this: from ancient 
times, but later to an ever greater degree, Hellenisms were 
originally not just foreign words which were later assimilated 
into the different languages, but also a source o f formative 
elements (roots, suffixes, prefixes, methods o f compostition 
and derivation) which were very fertile within each language, 
creating new words. In this sense, we can say that Greek 
survives in our languages as a dynamic, integral part o f them. 
5. Finally, I should also stress that, although studied here to a 
lesser extent, Greek grammar (particularly syntax) and liter­
ature, direcdy or indirecdy became constituted as models: 
they have continued to develop and are still very much alive. 
In view o f this, I have stated on a number of occasions that 
our European languages (which are in turn models o f others 
in this respect) are in fact a semi-Greek or crypto-Greek. At 
times, the Greek element is remote and difficult to describe 
when it has provided semantic caiques and words which have 
been fully integrated with phonetic and semantic variations. 
389. For Spanish, see in particular M. Fernandez-Galiano 1966 (much used 
in the following discussion) J. Berguz 2002 and the bibliography given on 
p. 65, n. 11, in addition to R. Lapesa 1980; for French, F. Brunot 1966; 
for German, W. Stammler (ed.) 1952; for English, A. Ewert s. a., A. G. 
Baugh 1971 and F. Fernandez 1982; for Italian, B. Migliorini 1968. 
Hellenisms in the high Middle Ages 
390. W e begin our discussion with some elaborations on the intro­
duction o f Hellenisms through Latin in the Medieval period. The 
Carolingian renaissance o f the ninth century, with similar phenomena 
in countries such as Ireland and Spain, produced waves o f Latinisms; 
among them were Greek words (whether of ecclesiastical origin or 
not) which had been integrated into Latin. 
After so many medieval Hellenisms from Latin (which existed 
already in Latin in the period in which the Romance languages were 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
271 
derived from it, and very often even earlier), we also find Latin cul­
tural words, often o f Hellenic origin, in the first texts in Castilian. 
In the Poema de Mio Cid we find mirra, tus 'incense
5; in the Auto de 
los Reyes Magos, retoricos, gramatgos. 
In the thirteenth century, Latinism, and with it Hellenism, became 
accentuated: 
Berceo usei abysso 'abyss
5, epistolero, evengelistero (mixed 
formations); the Apollonius uses idolo; the Alexandre uses prologo, silogismo, 
elemento. Naturally, this increased in the prose of Alfonso X the Wise, 
which required a technical language which sometimes borrowed from 
Arabic, sometimes from Latin or Graeco-Latin. O n occasion, the 
Latin or Greek vocabulary was accompanied by its interpretation in 
Castilian: for instance, in the case o f teatro ('a large and round yard'). 
I will give some examples of these words. Scientific and technical 
terms such as alegoria, apoplejia, aritmetica, dtomo, autentico, clima, cronica 
(coronica), dialectica, filosojia, geometria, glosa, gramatica (gramatgo), historia 
(estoria), logica, musica, planeta, poeta, policia ('politics'), retorico (retoligo), 
silaba, sqfisma, teologia, teorica. Mythical beings, exotic plants and ani­
mals, ancient cultural elements: aloe, Amazona, amomo, bdlsamo, ballena, 
bufalo (bubalo), camello, centauro, ceptro (cetro), cocodrilo, draco (drago, dragon), 
elefante (elifant), gigante, grifo, pergamino, tesoro, trono. 
It should be noted that sometimes there is a R o m a n c e adaptation, 
and sometimes a pure Latinism. Also, there are mixed forms such 
as bigamo. Recall too h o w Latin words that already gave rise to deriv­
atives in the Romance languages, were reintroduced and produced 
semi-literary forms, as in the case o f monasterium and ecclesia. 
391. T o provide an example, let us briefly discuss the Hellenisms o f 
French, introduced through a cultural route, recalling how some of 
these, resulting from the Norman conquest, were carried into English. 
In writings from the period of Charlemagne we already come across 
words such as element, angele, chrestien; and the following are also of 
ancient date, from an ecclesiastical context: abisme, anateme, apostle, 
baptisier, baptistere, basilique, diacre, eglise, estatue, heretique, idee, idole, isope, 
pope, paradis, scisme, sinagoge, throne, timpan. In works of Medieval science: 
allegorie, aloes, amesthyste, aromatiser, astronomien, basilisc, element, embleme, 
nigromance, zone. 
It is easy to see how, as in Castilian, there is sometimes adapta­
tion to the R o m a n c e language, and even derivation. 
392. Similar observations can be made with regard to the German 
language. In addition to the Latin borrowings from the ancient period, 

272 
CHAPTER THREE 
which I have already discussed, a new wave of cultural words entered, 
pardy o f Greek origin, from the ninth century onwards, which the 
Anglo-Saxon missionaries helped to diffuse: O H G . scuola, prestar, 
pergamin, arzat (< archiater), postolik. There were also semantic caiques, 
such as O H G . forasako for profeta, gotspel and cuatchundida for evangelium, 
which was also present. Later, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, 
we find poete, zepter and, in scientific writings, the terms grammatica, 
dialectica, physica, etc. Then, in the thirteenth century, metaphysica, 
melancholisch, musica. 
In parallel with this, in English we find the words allegory, mechan­
ical, polite, zephyr, among others. But the principal influence on English 
in these centuries came from French, which often introduced Latinisms 
and Hellenisms. 
Hellenisms in the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries 
In Castilian 
393. In the period from the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries, words 
descending from Latin (and stylistic resources such as hyperbaton) 
were introduced into the western languages, first gradually, then in 
great numbers; these included a considerable number of Hellenisms. 
Other Hellenisms continued to enter from French or Italian through 
a cultural or, more frequently, colloquial route. Others finally began 
to enter directiy through Greek literature from the fifteenth 
century 
onwards, when it became known in the West. Works such as the 
translation o f Dioscorides by Andres Laguna (155) were a source o f 
Hellenisms (mosdy of a scientific type, alongside the literary Hellenisms). 
The Hellenisms were adapted in form to Latin transcription and 
sometimes modern language use, there were also hypercorrrections. 
Changes in meaning were also introduced when necessary. 
It should be noted that this period is characterised by two, often 
opposing, often converging tendencies. O n the one hand, Antiquity 
and its authors were adored and considered as models: Juan de Mena 
considered the Iliad a
 
csancta e serdphica ohra\ and the romance
 
crudo 
y desierto\ In the fourteenth century, we have translations o f Greek 
by Fernandez de Heredia and from Latin by the chancellor Ayala. 
Hellenisms such as olligarchia, politico, theremotu, ypocrita, astralobio, 
entered the works o f these authors. Authors such as the marquis o f 
Villena and the marquis o f Santillana, Juan de Mena and Fernando 
de Rojas followed the ancient models, as would Garcilaso, Fray Luis, 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
273 
Hurtado de Mendoza, and so many others. The same was true for 
the other European 
nations. 
394. O n the other hand, this was also the period in which the new 
languages would acquire their definitive form and gradually would 
become the only language^ o f literature (although Garcilaso and Fray 
Luis, among others, continued to write in Latin). With his Gramdtica 
and his Latin-Spanish and Spanish-Latin Diccionarios of 1492 (fol­
lowing the Universal Vocabulario o f 1490 by Alfonso Fernandez 
de 
Palencia), Nebrija laid the foundations for the use o f Castilian or 
Spanish as a language of culture just like Greek and Latin; almost 
half a century would pass before the appearance of a Latin-French 
dictionary by Robert Etienne. 
The Castilian language, now integrated into Spanish, was extolled 
by Luis Vives, as Italian was by Bembo, French by D u Bellay, or 
English by Mulcaster. The development o f the German 
language 
was slower, promoted by Luther: until 1680 the majority of books 
were edited in Latin. 
Yet, this advance of national languages was not an obstacle for 
the introduction o f literary words: on the contrary, they were needed 
now more than ever, and the Latin language, serving as a model, 
functioned as a huge deposit of words that could be introduced (and 
used, at times, for the expression of new concepts) - many of these 
words having, o f course, a Greek origin. 
It was not just a question o f words, but also of prefixes and suffixes 
which functioned freely, perfectly assimilated within Latin from the 
ancient period. In English, for example, among the learned prefixes' 
we find, amphi-, a(n)-/an(a)-, 
archfi)-, aut(o)-, cata-, di-, hyper-, hypo-, 
mono-, pant(o)-, prot(o)-, syn-, which are also found in other languages; 
and suffixes such as -ism, ist, -ite, ize, e t c (the same 
observation 
applies). There are others more. 
395, From the fifteenth century, Hellenisms from the field of botany, 
in a literary or Romanised form, were introduced into Spanish: for 
example, acacia, celidonia, cerfollo (< Lat. caerefolium < Gr. xccipeqyoAAov, 
then perifollo), dragontea, eleboro, jacinto; also, Hellenisms from exotic 
animals, such as dspid, delfxn, dromedario, hiena, lince, tigre; from medicine, 
such as agonia, arteria, cardiaco, colico, diarrea, frenesi, gangrena, mania, 
pronostico, tisico; from chemistry or pharmacy, such as amoniaco, arsenico; 
from mathematics, astronomy and other sciences, such as drtico, boreal, 
caos, catarata, estadio, cilindro, cono, cubo, giro, matemdticas, nauta, polo, 

274 
CHAPTER THREE 
tropico, zona; from grammar, music and literature, such as academia, 
alfabeto, apocope, armonia, biblioteca, comedia, diptongo, elegia, etimologia, metro, 
oda, ortografia, proemio, prologo, ritmo, sintaxis, tragedia; from thought, lit­
erature, and politics, such as cinico, didlogo, enigma, fantastico, heme, peda-
gogia, periodo, politico, sqfista, tirano; from mythology, such as ambrosia, 
laberinto, musa, sdtiro, sirena. 
W e should also recall the Hellenisms imported through French 
(page, ddtil), Italian (galea, golfo, porpdo), Arabic in the fifteenth century 
(we have already mentioned a few, we can add alambique, alcaparra, 
almoraduj (djudpctKcx;), bodoque ( < TCOVUKOV, a type of nut). Also through 
Catalan and Portuguese. But from the sixteenth century onwards, 
Byzantinisms rarely entered directly. 
In contrast, the number o f scientific Hellenisms increased. 
For 
instance, from botany, such as acanto, achicoria (< cichoria < Ki%6piov), 
amaranto, anemona, asfodelo, camomila (< chamaemelon < %auociur|A,ov), 
crisantemo, ebano, iris, menta, mirto, opio. From medicine: antidoto, asma, 
cataplasma, colirio, diafragma, dosis, laringe, narcotico, pancreas, tisana, etc. 
From zoology: fenix, hipopotamo. From chemistry: cdnstico, colqfonia. From 
construction: arquitecto, aula, maquina, mecdnico. From mathematics, geo­
graphy, sailing: dbaco, atlas, estadio, escdlamo, eter, horizonte, istmo. From 
grammar and literature: andstrofe, apologo, catdlogo, encyclopedia, erotico, 
frase, lira. From thought and politics: aristocracia, asilo, catdstrofe, despota, 
didlogo, idea, teoria. From mythology and the ancient world: atleta, nectar, 
ninfa, obelisco. 
396. Cultural words, as indicated previously, were adapted in various 
ways. By means o f vocalic changes: oregano, laudano, rumbo; by changes 
in suffix (poesia, hipocresia, amatista, didfano); by haplology (idolatria); by 
change in gender (diadema). Also, by other means: achicoria (< Ki%6piov), 
algalia 'catheter
5 (epyaXetov), cornisa (< Kopcoviq), panadizo (< 7iapcovu%iov), 
perlesia, pocima (< drco^eu-a), tericia, almorranas, pdrrafo, teulogia and ipro-
quesia in Saint Teresa. Naturally, educated forms very often appear 
together with vulgar forms. 
There are also changes in meaning. The following words acquired 
values related to religion or the Church: cimborio (Ki(icbpiov, the fruit 
of the waterlily and a cup of a similar form), clew, cripta, dogma, jer-
arquia, liturgia, ortodoxo, presbitero, pompa, tiara; and other values, for 
example, chisme (from a%ia(iia), quimera. 
There was a definite acceleration in the growth o f Graeco-Latin 
which was never quite forgotten and which now became Graeco-
Spanish (and Graeco-French, etc.). This literary and scientific Greek 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
275 
vocabulary was imposed in order to serve a c o m m o n culture. With 
it came an increase in prefixes and suffixes, which were increasingly 
transformed into the elements of the new languages, which would 
use them in their own formations. 
This was because these languages lacked an adequate vocabulary 
for the new culture and especially the new science, which were both 
intimately connected to Antiquity. 
The same phenomenon that had occcurred in Latin, when, under 
similar circumstances, its lexical poverty (patrii semonis egestas) was 
overcome with the help of Greek, was now reproduced here, with 
the help of the Graeco-Latin we have been discussing and, on occa­
sion, with the help of Greek directly. 
In French 
397. Similar conclusions can be extracted from the study of French. 
In the thirteenth century we find words which have been taken from 
Latin, often with a French derivation, such as austerite, authentique, 
bigame (mixed Graeco-Latin form), machination, margarite, physician, poli­
tique, practicien, rhetorique, along with many words that are more purely 
Latin. 
This increased in the fourteenth century when kings and princes 
encouraged translations o f Latin. T o take a few examples o f the bor­
rowings: agronome, allegorique, anarchie, anatomic, antipode, apoplectique, apos-
tasie, apostat, apostumeux, apostumer, architectonique, aristocratic, asthmatique, 
astronomique, barbarie, boreal, catalogue, cataplasme, catechisms, cautere, cephalique, 
cithare, climat, colerique, colon, comedie, coriandre, critique, cyclope, cynique, 
cynocephale, declinable, democratic, diabetique, diaphane, diaphoretique, diaphragme, 
diarrhee, economie, empirique, effimere, epigramme, etymologic, fantasie, farmacie, 
heretique, hierarchie, historien, hypotheque, maniache, mathematique, mecanique, 
medecin, monopole, oligarchic, pedagogie, periode, peritoneon, phlegmon, poeme, 
pompeux, poreux, pronostique, regmatique, spermatique, spherique, spasme, spongiosis, 
spongieux, tragedie, tetragone, thorax, triumphete, tyrannique, ydrophobique. 
This list, though incomplete, reveals a series o f facts: 
1. The variable degree o f assimilation into the French language. 
2. The predominance o f vocabulary from the fields we have 
discussed: sciences (particularly medicine), politics, literature, 
etc, 
3. The diffusion o f desinences and suffixes derived from Greek 
(from -a, -oq, -iKoq) and Latin (-osus, -anus, -bilis, -tas); also, 
prefixes such as cata- and dia-; the elimination of neuters in 

276 
CHAPTER THREE 
-iia, which passed into feminines in -me, the derivation of 
verbs (apostumer), etc. 
In the fifteenth century, with the Renaissance rage for classical Antiq­
uity, there was an invasion of such terms: agaric, angeliser, apologetique, 
bachique, boree, caducee, fantasien, eteroclite, satire, to name a few. 
O f course, this was intensified in the sixteenth century, when the 
kings favoured both the classical languages and French. The sciences, 
in particular, were filled with Greek and Latin formative elements 
and terms: whether in a crude Latin and even Greek form, or in 
an adopted form. But there was still some controversy. Abel Mathieu 
criticised literary words and preferred to replace elegie and hymne with 
complainte and chant a dieu ou aux choses saintes respectively; D u Perron 
used accord de naturel instead o f sympathie, and contrenaturel instead of 
dvTurdGeicx. In contrast, Ronsard complained that in French one 
could not, as in Greek, say ocymore, dispotme, oligochromien. 
There was an intermediate solution, but it could be said that 
Greek-Latin triumphed. 
Many words entered from both late and 
classical Latin, such as, to cite a few, Academic, acromion, anagramme, 
anodyn, apophtegme, charite, chiliandre, disque, embleme, enthousiasme, epilepsie, 
heptagone, hydraulique, hygiene, hysterique, lythargue, magnes, metaphrene, neo-
terique, ode, pericarde, philogue, phlebotomie, sympathie, trachee, trapeze and 
many more. 
O n c e again, derivations and mixed forms must be taken into 
account: academkien, archicoupeur, clisteriziste, diabliculer, gigantal, sumbolisation, 
theatrique, etc. This indiscriminate mixture o f words with a Greek or 
Latin root and suffixes derived from both languages, all as an exten­
sion o f the French vocabulary, is a reflection of the literary language, 
with the strong Greek and Latin stamp we have been discussing. 
Again, this is displayed mostiy in the field o f science and rather 
strange natural elements. 
In Italian 
398. Similarly, in Italy, from the thirteenth century onwards, the 
vulgar language was filled with Latinisms: not just ancient but also 
medieval Latinisms. In the sphere o f culture (often centered around 
the University o f Bologna) and religion, these Latinisms were often 
actually Hellenisms: postolo, arismetica, canonista, clima, codicillo, diavolo, 
epiciclo, grammatica, martire, melodia, profeta, rettorica, sfera, sinfonia, zodiaco. 
Dante (who writes in the vulgar language and justifies this with 'the 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
277 
natural love o f one's own language', although he considers it infe­
rior to Latin) adds Greek words taken from his sources: perizoma, 
latria, tetragono and the false entomata. O n the other hand, many of the 
Latinisms are Greek caiques: conszienza (awetSoq), conoscienza (ht\Gxi\iir[), 
dottrina (86y|ia), sostanza (tytoiceiiaevov), accidente (aujipePnicog), etc. 
The case was similar during the fourteenth century, in which poets 
such as Petrarch and writers such as Boccaccio flourished and in 
which the translation or edition of philosophical and theological works 
required a Graeco-Latin lexicon. Words such as the following were 
introduced: ambrosia, antropofago, autentico, austero, discolo, energumeno, 
eunuco, sofistico. Also, words which had been asssimilated for a long 
time regained their Latin form, such as vangeo or evangelfijo for guagnello, 
gigante for giogante. 
T h e fifteenth century displays the same features in Italy as in the 
other European countries, but with more emphasis on Humanistic 
culture, particularly towards the end o f the century with the intro­
duction o f printing and the arrival of learned Greeks. The Humanists 
were conscious of the fact that they were elevating the Italian lan­
guage, in prose and verse, with the help of Graeco-Latin borrowings. 
Furthermore, 
there was a symbiosis o f Latin and the vulgate: 
authors such as Sannazaro and Poliziano, as Dante and Boccaccio 
before them, wrote in both languages, Poliziano and Lorenzo de' 
Medici praising the Tuscan vulgate. T h e mixture of both languages 
is also frequent in the documentation o f the period, which includes 
letters. The massive entry of Latinisms (which are sometimes Hellenisms) 
was thus inevitable, as was the adoption of Latin orthography in 
words which had acquired Italian orthography. 
T o cite a few examples o f Hellenisms which seem to date from 
this period: amaranto, calamo, cataratta, onomatopea, paraninfo, plettro, trage-
lafo. There are also caiques such as insetto, for evrojiov. 
In the sixteenth century, in the period in which Spain, France, 
the Pope, and Venice were the main powers, the Tuscan vulgate 
made substantial progress: even philosophy and mathematics, various 
documents and history began to be written in this language. There 
can be said to have been a rebellion, led by academies and poets, 
against tradition and the exclusive use of Latin by the universities. 
But, at the same time, the advance of Latinism in the vulgar lan­
guage continued, albeit with various differences with respect to ortho­
graphic and morphological adaptation. 

278 
CHAPTER THREE 
Within this advance, the Hellenisms are nearly always, as custom­
ary, taken from the scientific and literary spheres: assioma, clinica, 
crisalide, ecatombe, entusiasmo, gimnico, omonimo, ottica, parafrasi, parossismo, 
rapsodia, scenogrqfia, tripode. As in other parts, there were reactions 
against this, such as the attempt to impose errante instead of planeta; 
and not all Latinisms and Hellenisms were maintained, some disap­
peared with the writers that introduced them, such as bibliopola or 
elego. 
In English 
399. W e shall look rather briefly at the case o f English, which is 
similar to the others; let us recall that some Hellenisms entered from 
French after the Norman conquest, and later from Italian. 
O n c e again, Latin was the source of Hellenisms. The problem of 
deciding to what extent this new vocabulary should be accepted 
arose, here too, in the sixteenth century, when Thomas Wilson 
attacked it in his Art of Rhetorique. Dryden and Mulcaster took inter­
mediate positions; as in the other cases, this was the solution adopted. 
In Elyot, we find anachronism, analogy, encyclopedia, autograph; in M o r o , 
monopoly, monosyllable, paradox; in Shakespeare, antipathy, apostrophe, cat­
astrophe, emphasis, misanthrope, pathetical. At times, the Latin form was 
retained (climax, epitome), at times, the English adaptation. 
Perhaps this has served to give some idea of the progress of the 
Graeco-Latin lexicon and the formative elements o f Graeco-Latin in 
this period. It would be useful to adduce other languages, such as 
German, which lagged behind a bit. But in the end, this lexicon, 
from wherever it may have originated, reached all languages. 
Hellenisms in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries 
In Castilian 
400. During the next centuries, Hellenism continued to grow in 
Spanish in the scientific and educated language in general. 
In the seventeenth century, the poets assimilated, within 
the 
Latinisms, a reduced number o f Hellenisms, largely relating to myth 
and various aspects o f Antiquity or which were used by the Latin 
poets (antro, aspid, himeneo, musa, ninfa, pdnico, palestra, pira, rima, etc.). 
Although a prose writer such as Quevedo was able to enrich Spanish 
with his use o f Greek prefixes; for example, archipobre or protomiseria: 
this would receive a large following in more recent times. 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
279 
But the other field, which was always growing, is more important. 
Here, as before, I will provide some examples o f the new words that 
were introduced, divided into separate fields: 
Zoology: anfibio, foca, pardsito, rinoceronte. Chemistry and minerology: 
fosforo, amianto. Medicine: alopecia, embrion, epidemia, reuma, sintoma, trdquea. 
Mathematics: astronomy, geography, nautics: cateto, cometa, didmetro, elipse, 
estrobo, geografia, hipotenusa, meteoro, ndutico, paralelo, pirata. Grammar, lit­
erature, music: apostrqfe, critico, dialecto, ditirambo, drama, encomio, episo-
dio, jilologia, idilio, lexico, lirico, metafora, museo, palinodia, paradoja, pleonasmo, 
sindnimo, tropo. Thought and politics: andlisis, anarquia, antagonista, democ-
racia, diploma, economia, entusiasmo, emporio, epoca, etnico, genesis, hipotesis, 
ironia, lirico, metamorfosis, metodo, monarca, patriota, problema, poligamia, 
sindico, simbolo, simpatia, tests. Religion: ateo, carismo, mistico, proselito, sar-
cofago. Ancient world: esfinge, falange, gimnasio, mausoleo. 
Sometimes, derivatives were created: cetdceo, diagonal, hipocondria. 
401. Let us n o w move on to the eighteenth century, where we 
encounter a new environment in the fields of illustration and science. 
Latin was still important as the intellectual language: Leibnitz and 
Newton wrote their main works in Latin, and Linneus used Latin 
to give scientific names to plants, and the Spanish Diccionario de 
Autoridades used it to define the meanings of words. 
Certainly, the Romance languages had an absolute dominion as 
literary languages, but Latin continued to supply new vocabulary 
which, in the field o f science, was very often Greek. O n the other 
hand, Greek was now accessible to scientists, w h o did not hesitate 
to use it in creating the new lexicon which became necessary. 
In short, the growth of science required the introduction of new 
waves of Latin terms, many o f them Hellenisms, and o f Hellenisms 
taken directly from Greek. This was in order to express concepts 
which were already present in Greek science, or to express new 
things or concepts with the help o f Greek terms which were able to 
express something more or less approximate, or whose elements could 
be used for new formations. Often, this new vocabulary arrived in 
Spain through other modern languages, particularly French. 
This period is characterised by the fact that, alongside the true 
Hellenisms that belonged mostiy to the traditional fields of science 
and thought, great numbers of neologisms were introduced. T h e 
form and often meaning of the Greek vocabulary had always, even 
from Latin, undergone alterations. But now, radically new words 

280 
CHAPTER THREE 
with Greek elements were increasingly created. This has some prece­
dents, as for example in the words composed o f both Greek and 
Latin which have been discussed, but now the phenomenon had 
added importance. 
M a n y Hellenisms as such were introduced: for example, aorta, 
autonomia, autopsia, base, bibliogrqfia, botdnica, ciclo, clepsidra, coriza, criterio, 
despotismo, diastole, dicotomia, diddctico, esceptico, exantema, fase, fenomeno, 
fildntropo, jiltro, hidrdulico, hipodromo, isosceles, mecanismo, miope, misdntropo, 
mitologia, neumdtico, parodia, periferia, periodico, perone, rombo, simetria, sinfonia, 
sistema, tirania, trapecio. Note that there are changes in suffix (heterogeneo 
< exepoyevfi^) or in meaning (diatribe 'violent discourse or writing', 
polemica 'discussion') and that French sometimes acts as an intermediary 
(automata, poliglota with -a due to a bad interpretation of Fr. -e). 
The most important thing, as mentioned previously, was the grow­
ing number of neologisms demanded by the new sciences and scientific 
concepts, machines, etc. There is the emergence of new sciences (or 
arts), such as hidrostdtica, mecdnica, ornitologia, paleogrqfia, pirotecnia, psi-
cologia, zoologia (and sociologia, etc.); machines and instruments such as 
barometro, microscopio (and others in -scopid), termometro, the machine 
pneumdtica, the globe aerostdtico; fluids and concepts such as electricidad, 
the logaritmos, etc., as well as related adjectives and nouns, such as 
electrico, escepticismo; verbs such as electrizar. N e w systems were created 
on the model o f the old systems: there is aristocracia/ aristocrdtico, but 
also estoicismo/estoico, electricidad/electrico, etc. In a recent article (Adrados 
1996c) I have indicated that the eighteenth century saw the intro­
duction o f Fr, acrobate, Eng. acrobat, Sp. acrobata, Germ. Akrobat, at a 
time in which Gr, aKpopdxrjq was not attested (today it is): but it 
was easy to deduce from ocKpoPaxeco, aicpoPaxiKoq. 
In other languages 
402. In other European languages we see almost the same things 
occurring. Only German, to a certain extent, differs somewhat due 
to the systematic cultivation o f the semantic caique: the negative 
prefix un-; abstract suffixes -heit, -keit, -nis; -kunde instead o f -logia, 
-grqfia; adjectives with -reich; indigenous terms for concepts such as 
equality (Gleichheit), Being (Sein), knowledge (Erkenntnis), conscience 
(Gewissen) and the grammatical terms, instead o f familiar Greek terms 
such as 
Despot/Despotismus. 
T o avoid devoting too much space to this, I will limit myself to 
a brief description o f the facts with regard to Italian. 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
281 
In the seventeenth century we come across Hellenisms in the most 
diverse disciplines. For example, acrostico, analjabeto, apogeo, conoide, hiper-
bole, molecula, panegirico, parergo, parodia, sinoride, sintassi, sintesi, patologia, 
pleura, prisma, scheletro, taumaturgo, tesi. Note that sometimes the old 
form is recovered instead^ o f another evolved form (chirurgo instead of 
cerusico, clistere instead of cristeo or cristero, emmorroidi instead o f moroide). 
W e also come across neologisms, often o f an international type 
(selinografia in Bacon and Galileo). 
O f course, in the eighteenth century the introduction o f scientific 
Hellenisms continued: monopetalo, polipetalo, rizotomo, stalagmite, clinico, 
diagnosis, prognosis, patema, elissoide, sometimes with a new derivation. 
Some Hellenisms that entered at a later date but were rarely used, 
were incorporated definitively into the language: miriade, erotico. 
It is also important to note that some Hellenisms entered through 
foreign languages, most notably French: analisi, aneddoto, biografo, cos-
mopolita, epoca. From German we obtain dicaster(i)o, estetica, etere (in the 
chemistry sense). 
W e also find that the phenomenon o f neologism is on the increase: 
aeronautica, aerostato, anglomania, bibliqfilo, bibliomane, eliocentrico, scqfandro 
and others, which did not prosper. There was then a great diffusion 
o f -ismOy -ista, -izzare, added both to Latin and Greek terms: botanista, 
cambista, capitalista, caratterizzare, dispotismo, elettrizzare, tranquilizzare. 
Hellenisms in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries 
403. In these centuries, Hellenisms which had not been previously 
taken as borrowings were constandy introduced: often with alter­
ations in the formation or meaning, as in the previous examples. 
They are mostiy c o m m o n to all the European languages, so that it 
is not always easy to establish through which language they have 
entered. 
Let us, once again, take a few Spanish examples from the various 
sciences and disciplines: abulia, afonia, anacoluto, anemia, aneurisma, aporia, 
apoteosis, arcaico, asceta, autarquia, autoctono, asindeton, asteroide, astenia, batra-
cio, biografia, clinico, colofon, cosmos, crater, diabetes, elitro, epidermis, ecumenico, 
encefalo, esquema, estetico, estigma, fonetica, hemiplegia, homeopatia, marasmo, 
necrologia, neumonia, palimpsesto, pederastia, peripecia, plutocracia, pornograjia, 
programa, prostata, quiste, sinopsis, taquigrafo, triptico. Some terms change 
in meaning, such as dnodo, bacteria, baritono, cloro, estoma, higiene, plds-
tico, tonico. The ability to form small systems by means o f familiar 
suffixes has increased. 

282 
CHAPTER THREE 
404. But most significant is the increasing number of neologisms to 
satisfy the demands o f the new sciences, techniques and currents o f 
thought—whether through derivation or through the combination of 
Greek and Latin elements (prefixes, roots and suffixes). They tended 
to be international, with slight differences in form, phonetics 
and 
orthography. In effect, they constituted the new European 
language 
which coexisted with each of the modern languages, a Greek-Latin 
which was alive within them. Therefore, it is not very useful to study 
this subject language by language, although we are often left with 
the problem o f where and when these words were invented, and by 
which means they were diffused. At times, certainly, there can be a 
lack o f formal correspondence: Sp. mdquina de escribir translates Eng. 
typewriter, Ger. Fall translates Lat. casus (and this translates Gr. nt&oiq), 
Ger. Fernsprecher translates forms of other languages with tele- and 
-phono. 
These neologisms, which pass from one language to another, occa­
sionally can be dated with some precision. Fr. voiture automobile dates 
from 1875, then we find automobile, and from there the Sp. automovil, 
auto. The word cinema is dated towards 1899 (from Fr. cinematographe, 
from which we also obtain Eng. cinema, Ger. Kino). The word tele-
fono dates from the last quarter o f the nineteenth century, maraton 
from 1896 onwards (the resumption of the Olympics), aeroplano from 
the start o f the twentieth century, and later television. Some words 
descend from others, sometimes with a change in meaning o f one 
o f their elements: in fotogrqfia, foto- is still 'light', but in fotocopia etc, 
it is 'image'. Auto- is no longer 'the same' in Ital. autostrada, Sp. 
autopista or autovia. 
Neologisms respond most frequentiy, as we pointed out, to the 
scientific language (sometimes existing with other meanings). Con-
sequendy, they supply the names of various sciences: arqueologia, binomio, 
biologia, geologia, histologia, morfologia, numismdtica, ontologia, ortopedia, psiquia-
tria, psicoandlisis, etc. They also refer to medicine: anestesia, asepsia, 
astigmatismo, blenorragia, colitis, Jlebitis, metabolismo, microbio, neuralgia, organ-
ismo, quirqfano, etc.; to the natural sciences: eucalipto, cromo, glucosa, 
hidrogeno, hormona, organismo, orquidea, oxigeno, proteina, etc.; to various 
techniques: aerodromo, aeroplano, astronauta (and compounds with -nauta), 
automovil (and compounds with auto-), batiscqfo, cine (cinema, cinemato-
grqfo), clonico, endocrinologia, filatelia (and derivatives with fil[o]-), her-
meroteca (and compounds with -teed), hipoglucemia (and derivatives with 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
283 
hipo-), megaterio (and compounds with mega-), metro (metropolitano), micro-
fono (and compounds with micro-), ortodoncia (and compounds with 
orto-), pancromdtico (and compounds with pan-), paranoico (and c o m ­
pounds with para-), pediatra (and compounds with ped- and deriva­
tives in -iatra), taxi (taximetro), telefono (and compounds with 
tele-), 
termostato (and compounds with termo-), etc. Others belong to less spe­
cialised fields: melancolia, nostalgia, panorama. 
405. This is but a short list of examples, which can be extended 
easily in books such as those by Eseverri 1945 or Gonzalez Castro 
1994 or Bergua 2002. Yet, we do not have a complete repertory, 
either for Spanish or the other languages which indicates the date 
of first appearance, diffusion and frequency. 
It is clear that a Greek lexicon appears in our languages in two 
ways: 
(a) Assimilated, from different dates and through different means. 
It has become an integral element o f the lexicon o f our lan­
guages, and is felt by speakers to be part o f them. 
(b) Forming part o f the stratum of the cultural and scientific 
lexicon: from a Greek-Latin that forms a special stratum 
within each language, accepting characteristics o f the lan­
guage, but remaining essentially the same in all o f them. It 
consists o f intact Greek words, others that are formally or 
sematically altered, or various neologisms; always alternat­
ing or combining with the Latin lexicon, with which it forms 
an integrated whole. There is an abundance of hybrid for­
mations of the type binomio, monocorde, etc. 
This is the Greek-Latin we have been discussing, which was created 
in gradual stages through the ages, but which culminated in our age 
and is advancing towards the future. It is the most living and active 
lexical element that exists: its original compositional elements com­
bine with those o f the new languages; and the new words pass from 
one language to another: for example, burocracia from French, and 
autocar from English. It is curious that a new wave of Greek and 
Latin terms should be arriving through the latter language (tecnologia, 
macro, base de datos, etc.), as well as transcriptions with ch and th. 
Next, I shall deal with the place of this Greek-Latin in our lan­
guages today. As I have stated, it is not a fossil element, such as 

284 
CHAPTER THREE 
the lexicon from Arabic or other languages, including some Greek 
elements. It is a linguistic stratum of enormous vitality, making it at 
the same time a unifying agent o f all the cultural languages 
and 
today, indeed, o f all the world's languages. 
2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PLACE AND FUNCTION OF GREEK-LATIN IN 
PRESENT DAY EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
Origins and characteristics of this lexicon 
406. W e have described the essential features o f the Greek-Latin o f 
Antiquity and have shown how after a long period of decline, the 
lexicon of the modern languages was slowly reconstructed with the 
aid o f Graeco-Latin terms incorporated into the new medieval lan­
guages through different means - particularly through Latin litera­
ture and later Greek literature, but also directly from the Greek 
lexicon. 
W e have also indicated, although much more detail is needed, to 
what extent Greek-Latin is today the most dynamic element in our 
languages. Also, h o w it essentially forms a unique language within 
the western languages (and indeed all the world's languages). Let us 
make some specific observations. 
407. In general, there are simple and regular correspondences between 
the different modern languages: for example, Sp. democracia/Fr. democ­
ratic/Eng. democracyy'GerDemokratie/Itai. 
democrazia/Rus. .neMOKparaa, 
have innumerable parallels with exact correspondences in phonetics, 
orthography and suffix; the same is true o f other series, such as those 
with Eng. -ty, Fr. -te, Sp. -dad, Ital. -td, and with series with the same 
prefixes. 
But there are variations which are sometimes a product of his­
torical accidents, such as the splitting of a word or element into two 
or more: Sp. cdtedra/cadera, musicalmurga> arce-/archi-/arqui-/arz< 
rou­
tinely, 
the popular forms are left out of the Graeco-Latin system. 
They may also be a result o f lexical variations (Ger. 
Autobahn/\\A. 
autostrada!'Sp. 
autopista, autovid) or of external influences, including 
errors o f transcription (Sp. -ie and not -ia in hematie, due to a bad 
interpretation o f Fr. Vhematie, les hematics). Also, one word may be 
borrowed directiy, through another language, resulting in two forms 
and two meanings [crater/ cratera, from Fr., with the same error). 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
285 
Variations may also result from formal hesitations in the transcrip­
tion of borrowings. There are irregularities in transcription even in 
modern times, see the books already cited by Eseverri and Gonzalez 
Castro, as well as Fernandez-Galiano 1969 and J. Berguz 2002. 
408. As we have seen, Gueek-Latin coincides to a large extent with 
the concept o f the scientific language, although there are also non-
Graeco-Latin words. This concept and even that of the cultural lan­
guage in general, goes beyond its limits. It has been used to create 
small lexical systems of very varied values, o f the type hijolfilial her-
mano/fraternal, ojo/ocular/dptico, 
dedo/dactilar/digital and so many others 
in which the adjective is of a cultural type. O n the other hand, the 
limits are difuse: a technical term may become common, and vice 
versa. 
409. Graeco-Latin elements are often used with new meanings, as 
we have seen with regard to foto-. 
This is inevitable when we are 
dealing with new professions, as in cases such as -nauta (cosmonauta, 
aeronauta, astronauta). What would the Greeks have said about these 
words or about hemeroteca, videoteca, cinemateca, taximetro, or dinamometro? 
A n d who would ever imagine that ion comes from the pres. Part, of 
the verb eijitt? The same is true in the case of suffixes and prefixes, 
as we have seen: for example, in chemistry -ico and -oso (sulflrico/' sul-
furoso) take specific values. Greek and Latin prefixes and suffixes 
sometimes become synonymous and try to occupy the same field (for 
instance, sidoso/siddtico), 
sometimes they b e c o m e specialised (Gr. 
-ma is favoured to Lat. -mm in linguistic and medical terminology, 
and a distinction is drawn between hipermercado and supermercado). 
410. Also, the types of formation are often different from the ancient 
ones and very unorthodox from the point of view of Greek and 
Latin: the Utopia by Tomas M o r o was rather unorthodox, and today, 
true monstrosities are sometimes created. Very often, as we have 
seen, not only are Graeco-Latin hybrids created, but also hybrids of 
the modern language and Greek or Latin suffixes (naturismo/naturista, 
turismo/turista, o f French origin). Yet the systems are optional, not 
compulsory (there is no *nazista, *bandolerista). 
O n the other hand, the small lexical systems of Modern Greek-
Latin are, in principle, the same as those we have seen within Greek 
and Latin, but they occasionaly exceed themselves in creating more 
than one noun/adjective/verb/adverb system from the same root: 

286 
CHAPTER THREE 
and with greater or lesser symmetry or asymmetry with respect to 
the parallel systems. A n d many forms are only used in composition. 
So, from (pcovf) we obtain the nouns -fonia (zampona < oDjjxpcovia is 
an old R o m a n c e word which was left out of the system), fonema, 
fonetica (substantivisation); the adjectives -fono (substantivised from tele-
fond) y fonico, fonetico, fonemdtico and neither verbs nor adverbs; all with 
various semantic specialisations within the different scientific fields. 
From 7id9o<; we obtain: the nouns -pata, -patia, patologo, patologia; 
the adjectives -pdtico, patetico, patologico. From nXaooay. the nouns plasma, 
-plastia, plasta, pldstica, pldstico; the adjective pldstico; the verb plasmar. 
In short, the situation o f irregularities and lacunae found in the sys­
tem in Greek continues here, within a growing volume of lexicon. 
But the expansion o f the various formations and their semantic 
diversification is steadily increasing. 
411. The truth is, a systematic study of the cultural lexicon with a Graeco-
Latin base has never been attempted: today it is possible thanks to the new 
information systems of databases and data processing. But, of course, we 
can still count on studies such as those cited in § 389: works by R. Lapesa, 
M. Fernandez-Galiano, F. Brunot, A. Ewert, A. C. Baugh, F. Fernandez, 
W. Stammler, B. Migliorini, H. Ludtke, J. Berguz. The direct study of 
dictionaries is particularly significant. We shall refer later to the DRAE, 
the Dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy (Real Academia Espafiola) 2001, and 
that of C. Eseverri and J. F. Gonzalez Castro, previously cited; also, to the 
inverse Spanish dictionary by I. Bosque-M. Perez Fernandez 1987. 
For the problems of scientific and technical language, cf. Adrados 1973b, 
1986b and 1997b (with bibliography) and M. A. Martin Zorraquino 1997. 
For the lexical systems in general, see Adrados 1969, I, p. 490 ff, E. Coseriu 
1977; for some concrete lexical systems in Spanish, see Adrados 1995. For 
the quantifying of this lexicon, K. Psomadakis 1995 (and the data that I 
extract directly from various sources). 
412. In fact, these nuances, which could be extended almost 
indefinitely, do not negate the central importance in our languages 
o f the stratum o f the cultural and scientific language which we have 
called Greek-Latin. This stratum is a practically international con­
tinuation 
of scientific Greek and Latin, without which today we could 
hardly speak in terms o f culture and science. 
It has totally renovated the languages which were formed in the 
Middle Ages from the old Indo-European languages and others, 
bringing them closer together. W e are dealing with a Graeco-Latin 
cultural universe, which is more alive today than it ever was. Thus, 
Greek and Latin continue to be living languages in the present day. 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
287 
As an example, let us try to quantify in some measure the impact 
of this type o f language in modern Spanish. I say 'as an example
5 
because the circumstances are strictly comparable in other European 
languages and because, as I mentioned before, exhaustive studies on 
this subject d o not exist. 
Eseverri's dictionary of Spanish Hellenisms, already outdated and 
incomplete, serves as a starting point (it contains some 17,000). If 
we compare the 2,500 Latin Hellenisms collected by Weise, we can 
see that the number has increased considerably. A n d it continues to 
do so: the proposal for new words presented to the plenary sessions 
of the Royal Spanish Academy (Real Academia Espanola) by the Technical 
Vocabulary Commission (Comision de Vocabulario Tecnico), contains hun­
dreds and hundreds of words which are, for the most part, Hellenisms 
or formations with elements from Greek lexicon. T o be sure, in the 
recently published (1998) collection of emmendations and additions 
to the DRAE (only for the letters a and c), words with a Greek base 
appear in a very great number. For example: there are 6 with 
aero-, 10 with aero-, 17 with anti-, 12 with bio-, 14 with cat(a)-, 13 
with cine-. 
These elements are Spanish proper, and they join for the most 
part with Spanish words: antiimperialismo, antiniebla, antinuclear, antipartkula, 
etc. (but also antihelmintico, antipatia, antipoda, e t c , with Greek elements, 
antihidtico, antimisil, etc with Latin elements). 
Importance for the Spanish lexicon 
413. The importance of these elements for the Spanish lexicon can 
be seen by studying the DRAE. In my article Adrados 1997b I indi­
cate, for example, that there are some 100 words with auto-, 80 with 
hiper-, 25 with filo-; there are also abundant Latinisms with circum, 
hiper, etc. 
I have studied a list, made by the Institute o f Lexicography o f the 
Royal Spanish Academy (Instituto de Lexicografia de la Real Academia 
Espanola), containing prefixes or initial formative elements that appear 
in the DRAE - some 200 - and the proportion o f Hellenisms and 
Latinisms is astonishing: about 95 percent. In the first page, which 
contains 48, there are 22 Hellenisms; a-, aden-, adeno-, aero-, alo-, 
an-, ana-, anarco-, ami-, aniso-, anti-, antropo-, arce-, archi-, arqui-, arz~, 
auto-, baro-, biblio-, bio-, bradi-, cata- (we can see that sometimes there 
are variants of the same element). Alongside this, we have 22 Latinisms 

288 
CHAPTER THREE 
and 4 elements o f other origins. In other pages, the proportion o f 
Hellenisms is even greater. 
This means that Greek-Latin covers all of the cultural language 
and is a fundamental element of Spanish. But not just the prefixes. 
In the Diccionario inverso de la lengua espanola by I. Bosque—M. Perez 
Fernandez 1987, we find, as I indicate in the article cited, around 
600 words with -tico, 50 with -sico-> 800 with -ismoy 11 with -asmo. 
These are just some samples. 
T h e study o f the DRAE list leads to analogous conclusions with 
respect to suffixes: whether from Greek (like those mentioned and 
others) or from other origins: Latin (-ario, -ano> etc.), originating from 
the former or latter (-ia, -ico, etc.), or from Spanish (-able, -ador, etc.). 
The Greek element is strong, although not as much as in the prefixes. 
It is also strong in the second terms of compounds (which some­
times also appear in the first): see series such as -fib, -fobo, -fugo, 
-genesis, -genia, -geno, -gono, -grafia, -grama, -hidrico, -iatria; or such as 
-plastia, -podo, -ptero, -rragia, -rrea, -rro, -scopia, -scopio, -statico, -teca, 
-tecnica, -termo, -tomia, -tomo, -trofia, -trofo. 
Note that in these relations we are only dealing with Greek ele­
ments (and Latin elements such as -cultura, -forme) o f more frequent 
use, which have been assimilated into Spanish and have practically 
become part o f it. From this, we can deduce that our qualification 
o f the modern languages o f Europe as semi-Greek or crypto-Greek 
is not an exaggerated one. 
414. Another resource for evaluating the importance o f the cultural 
language is the study o f the growth o f the lexicon through the cen­
turies. In a report presented recently to the Royal Spanish Academy, 
the proportion o f words that have entered in each historical period 
is established, based on a study of 1,000 pages o f the Diccionario 
Historico de la lengua Espanola. These periods are: 
T h e Middle Ages (until 1501), 1,060 (14 percent). 
The Golden Age (until 1701), 1,148 (15.4 percent). 
T h e eighteenth-twentieth centuries, 5,242 (70.3 percent). 
This impressive increase is mainly due to the cultural and scientific 
vocabulary and derivatives within Spanish, created according to ten­
dencies of this vocabulary. It is clear that in passing from Latin to 
Castilian, the lexicon had been extremely reduced, with very few 
abstracts and hardly any derivatives and lexical paradigms. Only the 

GREEK IN THE EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
289 
cultural lexicon of Greek-Latin, and that created in its likeness, was 
able again to produce a rich and flexible language with a broader 
lexicon than Latin. 
Similarly, an impoverished syntax gave way to a more flexible and 
rich syntax which was abl^ to express abstract thought. Again, through 
imitation of the ancient models: Latin syntax, which had developed 
under the influence o f Greek syntax. 
An international character 
415. W e have repeatedly indicated that we are dealing with a gen­
eral phenomenon, which is not restricted to Spanish. I would like 
to confirm this by referring to a study by K. Psomadakis 1995, 
already cited in § 411, in which he summarises Greek words and 
formative elements (or o f Greek origin) in seven European languages. 
The first is Modern Greek, which has often received these words 
from other European languages, without this affecting its original 
Greek character. 
The first part of this study draws a list o f 120 words of the cul­
tural and scientific language which are almost identical in the seven 
European languages in question: Greek (modern), Russian, English, 
French, German, Italian and Spanish. This is the case in the word 
democracy (cf. § 436). 
It is impossible to treat these 120 words and their seven versions 
here, so I will limit myself to the beginning of the list in Spanish 
(alphabetisation is according to Greek, naturally): estetica, etiologia, ale-
goria, amnistia, anemia, andlisis, anarquia, anecdota, aritmetica, harmonia, arqueo-
logia, astronauta, atmosfera, dtomo, automata, bardmetro, base, bibliogrqfia, 
biologia, galaxia, genetica, geogrqfta, decdlogo, democracia, demagogia, diagnosis, 
dicta, didlogo, didmetro, diqfragma. 
T h e second part o f the study draws a list of a series of compos­
itive elements which are considered to be c o m m o n to these lan­
guages (I will also give these in Spanish, the correspondences are 
obvious): 
Initial elements: (a) prepositions, anfi-, ana-, anti-, apo-, cata-, 
dia-, ec-, en-, hiper-, hipo-, meta-, para-, peri-, pro-, sin-; (b) numer­
als, mono-, proto-, di-, tri-, tetra-, penta-, pento-, hexa-, hepta-, octo-, 
deca-, dodeca-, hecto-, kilo-; (c) nouns, adjectives and 
adverbs, 
aero-, astro-, auto-, bio-, cromo-, crono-, dis-, ecto-, electro-, endo-, eu-, 
exo-, geo-, gramo-, hemo-, hemato-, hetero-, holo-, homo-, homeo-, 

290 
CHAPTER THREE 
hidro-, higro-, iso-, macro-, micro-, meso-, neuro-, nefro-, orto-, paleo-, 
pan-, pango-, filo-, fono-, foto-, 
poll-, pseudo-, psico-, tele-, termo-, 
uro-, xero-, zoo-. 
Final elements: (a) suffixes, -oide, -ista, -ico, -ismo, -osis; (b) nom­
inal elements, -cracia, -gnosis, -gnostico, -grqfia, -grdfico, -logico, -logia, 
-metro, -metrico, -metria, -morfo, -morfico, -morfismo, -nauta, -patia, 
-patetico, -fono, -fonico, -fonia, -plasma, -plasia, plastico, -rrea, -scopio, 
-scopia, -topo, -topico, -tropo, -trofico, -trofia. 
416. In most cases, we are just dealing with examples. But I believe 
that, given the aforementioned data, the act of including the life of 
Greek in other languages in the history o f Greek is justified. This 
stratum belongs to these languages, but it is at the same time inter­
national and also Graeco-Latin. It is an entirely living stratum which 
is constantly developing. 
Thus, Greek not only provided the model for scientific vocabu­
lary and prose, but also survived to the present day in very diverse 
languages, actively serving this vocabulary. It is not just a fossil ele­
ment or one among other elements: it is an element whose history 
still continues. 

CHAPTER FOUR 
M O D E R N G R E E K 
1. T H E HISTORY OF MODERN GREEK ( M G ) 
417. T h e Greek language has always provided surprises: in Ancient 
Greece, its differentiation and then unification through the conver­
gence o f literary and political factors; subsequently, in the R o m a n 
period, its uninterrupted existence in the East under R o m a n rule; 
and in Byzantium, its continuity as the language o f the Church and 
State. A n d then, o f course, its 'invasion' o f all languages, making 
them suitable for the development o f culture and science. 
Finally, after the fall o f Byzantium and the Turkish period, Greek 
was resurrected in the form o f two sociolinguistic strata and a myriad 
of dialects; it then unified them, around Athens, as in Antiquity, and 
in a somewhat parallel manner. 
Somehow, the language o f a small group o f people had managed, 
in extremely unfavourable circumstances, not only to survive and 
achieve unity twice, but also to become the model which all lan­
guages would follow. 
Here, we shall deal with its last adventure: the creation o f Modern 
Greek. 
418. W e have seen how, during the Turkish period, only certain 
marginal dialects o f the Ionic islands (which were never occupied 
permanendy by the Turks), and o f Cyprus and Crete (which main­
tained their independence for a time), were cultivated in a literary 
way. In the occupied zone, continental Greece, the dialects which 
emerged had, with few exceptions, a purely oral character. 
T h e Church, upon which the Greeks based their sense o f iden­
tity, made use o f the Atticist language. T h e previously mentioned 
attempts made in the Byzantine period, to use popular language in 
literature (only in very concrete genres and without a mixture o f old 
elements) were abandoned. 
This brings us back to the subject o f the two Greek linguistic 
strata. W e have seen that in the periods o f the Byzantine and R o m a n 

292 
CHAPTER FOUR 
empires, there had been two languages which had a reciprocal 
influence on each other: spoken or popular language and literary or 
Atticist language. Indeed, in modern Greece, from the 
liberation 
onwards, there has been a rivalry between these two languages, 
known respectively as KocGotpeuouaa 'pure' and 8r||ioTtKr| 'popular
5, 
the former being derived from Atticist Greek and the latter from 
popular or spoken Greek. A. Hatzidakis, in his book of 1892, estab­
lished the genealogy o f M G as descending from the old koine, and 
not, in general terms, from the old dialects. The Modern Greek 
dialects, whose origins have been discussed, also descend from koine 
(although these dialects may have inherited features of the old dialects, 
see § 440). 
The history o f M G resumes with an evolutionary tendency: the 
disappearance of the two linguistic strata and of the different dialects 
in favour o f a single, almost unified M G (which has also, o f course, 
received influences from different languages). 
M G has reduced its scope to a relatively reduced geographical 
area, close to that o f A G (Ancient Greek). It occupies nearly all of 
Greece, where 95 percent of the population speak it (more than 
10,000,000 people) and the Greek part o f Cyprus (some 600,000 
people). In Greece, the number o f Slavic, Armenian, Albanian and 
Rumanian speakers has diminished drastically and the majority are 
bilingual; Ladino or Judeo-Spanish practically disappeared after the 
persecutions o f the Second World War. There are about 150,000 
Turkish speakers left in Thrace. 
Besides this, the number o f Greek speakers in Egypt (Alexandria) 
and Asia Minor has diminished incredibly as a result o f anti-western 
backlash: the lost war in Anatolia and the exchange o f population 
groups (1923), nationalist regimes in Egypt (from 1956). Their num­
ber has decreased in Istambul. These Greeks, and those o f the 
Caucasus and Ukraine, have withdrawn to Greece. By contrast, there 
are flourishing Greek communities in western Europe, America and 
Australia. 
419. For the bibliography relating to M G in general (until 1972), cf D. V. 
Vayacacos 1972. The linguistic study of M G was initiated by A. Hatzidakis 
in his book of 1892, Einleitung in die neugriechische Grammatik, and was con­
tinued by other works outlined in our bibliography. Here, one can also 
find references to the grammars and linguistic studies of J. Psichari 1886-89, 
A. Thumb 1895, H. Pernot 1921 and A. Mirabel 1959a as weU as the 
works of M. Triandaphyllidis, whose Grammatiki of 1941 had a profound 

MODERN GREEK 
293 
influence. See also F. W. Householder and others 1964, O. Elefteriadis 
1985 and (today, the more complete Grammatiki) A. Tsopanakis 1994. For 
the various areas of grammar, see H.-J. Seiler 1952, A. Koutsoudas 1962, 
P. H. Matthews 1967 and D. Sotiropoulos 1972; for the lexicon, see 
P. Mackridge 1985, p. 307 ff. and § 432 ff. 
For the most essential points regarding the history of M G , the 'linguistic 
question' in Greece and the state of the current language see: in this work, 
p. 70 ff., and in R. Browning 1983, p. 100 ff, D. V. Vayacacos 1972, 
p. 81 ff. and P. Mackridge 1985, p. 1 ff. See also, on these subjects, 
A. E. Megas 1925-27, A. Mirambel 1937, 1957 and 1959, V. Rotolo 1965, 
C. D. Papadatos 1976, E. Petrounias 1978, G. Babiniotis 1979, R. Brown 
1982, S. C. Caratzas 1957-58, I. P. Walburton 1980 and G. Horrocks 
1997, p. 334 ff. 
420. Greek managed to maintain its prestige in the East in the 
Turkish period, despite the terrible blows it received. A small elite 
regarded it as the descendant of the glorious past; many more regarded 
it as the language o f the true religion, centered on the patriarchy 
o f Constantinople. Here and in other parts o f the Turkish empire, 
there were many Greek speakers who were generally tolerated although 
there were periods o f persecution. Indeed, a small Greek aristocracy 
held official posts in the empire, particularly the Phanariots o f 
Constantinople, who held important administrative and political posts 
and governed Walachia and Moldavia for the Sultan. 
In the West, however, the only reference for Greek was Classical 
Antiquity. In its name (or using it as a pretext), Frederick II of 
Prussia rejected Voltaire's proposals to help liberate the Greeks from 
the Turks. The Greeks were considered undeserving, debased, and 
their language corrupt. A n exception was Catherine o f Russia, no 
doubt because o f the deep bonds between her country and Byzantine 
culture. 
However, towards the end of the century, after the 
Enlighten­
ment and the French Revolution, efforts to help the Greeks slowly 
began to grow, as they became identified more or less with the 
ancients: for example, Lord Byron and the Philhellenes who fought 
in the Greek war o f liberation from 1821 onwards. This was com­
plemented by the fact that the Greeks, who were subjects of the 
Turkish empire, began to relate to Europe as partners in foreign 
trade or as members o f the Greek communities which were being 
formed in Russia and the West. Also, by the diffusion o f European 
ideas o f independence and freedom, whose ancient genealogy was 
admitted by all. 

294 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Under liberal and nationalistic influence, groups of Greek immi­
grants promoted the creation o f independence groups in Greece and 
abroad (in Odessa and in the West), which were supported by the 
Phanariots o f Constantinople and the Greek Church. 
O n the other hand, Greece was a g o o d support base for the 
Russians and westerners in their desire for expansion at the expense 
of the Turks. All of this resulted in aid to the Greeks when they 
tried to liberate themselves from the Turks. The events unfolded as 
follows: the revolt of 1821, a war with disputable results; the sup­
port o f Great Britain, Russia and France (the treaty of London and 
the battle o f Navarino, 1827); Greek independence (the treaty of 
Adrianopolis o f 1829 and the London Conference of 1830). 
421. Greece thus found itself liberated, but there was still the lin­
guistic issue. The minority that was able to write did so in KaOapewuoa 
(KG), the continuation of the old, Byzantine koine; the rest spoke 
Sn^oxiKti (DG), divided further into dialects, a language which was 
not written. The western model and a little rationality required a 
single language, a language that would also be capable o f satisfying 
the needs o f European civilisation. But how would this be achieved? 
The task was undertaken by Adamantios Korais (1748-1833), a 
Greek from Smyrna w h o had been sent to Amsterdam by his father 
as a commercial representative, and had later studied medicine at 
the University o f Montpellier. H e had lived through the French 
Revolution and saw in the expedition to Egypt the beginning o f the 
end o f the Ottoman empire. In his last years, he witnessed the lib­
eration of Greece. 
Korais was an excellent classical philologist. He began by trans­
lating Strabo, at Napoleon's request, and later translated and edited 
(with numerous notes) the classical authors: Aristotle, Plato, Thucydides, 
Isocrates, and many others. 
H e considered Greek as a continuum, believing that Polybius, 
Plutarch, and the rest had followed the pronounciation o f Modern 
Greek. Yet, if, for Korais, 8njioTi.cn, was the continuation o f Ancient 
Greek, he wanted to 'purify' it, by adding some elements of the old 
language in order to convert it into a language o f culture, adminis­
tration, and education. He was treading an intermediate 
territory 
between the pure 5r|jnoTiKf| and the 'pure' language advocated by 
the more traditional sector, led by Codrikas, a representative o f the 
Phanariots o f Constantinople. 

MODERN GREEK 
295 
For example, against the demotic yapx 'fish
5, he proposed its ety­
mological form o^dpiov, whereas Codrikas wanted to return to the 
A G ixfaq. 
The poets o f the Ionic islands were more radical. These islands 
were the only place where a dialect continued to be cultivated in 
written form, after the conquest of Cyprus and Crete by the Turks. 
W e 
have mentioned the poet Solomos, the most well-known of the 
group. But it was a local language and now, attempts were being 
made to create a national language suitable for administration 
and 
prose in general. 
422. 
In these circumstances, a provisional government was established 
in Nauplion in 1828, and later, in 1833, the capital was moved to what 
really was a small city but with an illustrious name, Athens. The clas­
sicist interpretation prevailed (although making Athens into a monar­
chy was hardly classical) and the city became filled with neoclassical 
buildings. This orientation also prevailed with regard to language. 
However, from the outset, the hard facts of reality began to impose 
themselves. Together with the Athenians, an influx of foreign peoples, 
mainly Peloponnesian, invaded the small city of Athens. A spoken 
dialect began to form, which was more or less c o m m o n , based on 
'southern Greek', more conservative than that o f the North but with 
certain archaisms proceeding from the dialect spoken in Attica, 
Megara and Aegina. It had (and still has) the forms avOpcorco*; (not 
avQpovnovq), \IVTT\ 'nose' (not um), jxeonuepi 'midday' (not jLuauip). 
It accepted some features from the Greek o f the Ionic islands (Ac. 
pi. fern, TIC; of the article) and Constantinople. 
However, once the Greek government had been installed, pres­
sure from classicism was very strong, so that the Ka8apenoi)aa under­
went a renovation and was taken a step further. There were certainly 
extremists (such as P. Soutsos, who attempted to renovate old Attic) 
and moderates (such as K. Asopios). O n the other hand, there was 
also hypercorrection and the creation of new words: instead o f Kocoaa 
'box', %pr||iaTOKiPa)Tiov was used; instead o f TCCXTOVCCC, yeoburiXov (a 
caique from Fr. pomme de terre). 
The Demotic language (DG) was referred to as 'long-haired' and 
riots broke out in Athens when, in 1901, A. Rallis published a 
translation of the New Testament into D G (he had previously trans­
lated the Iliad). 

296 
CHAPTER FOUR 
423. Nevertheless, the situation had begun to change in 1888 when 
J. Psicharis, a Greek writer w h o lived in Paris, published his novel 
To ra£,i8i ('My voyage') in D G . H e attempted to create a regularised 
Demotic (too regularised), which admitted, it is true, literary words 
from K G . Yet, in spite o f everything, the language of journalism, 
law, 
and science continued to be K G , and until 1909 it was the 
only language taught in the schools. 
Gradually, however, it began to lose the most extreme features of 
Atticism: the old Greek future, the optative, Attic declension, imper­
atives in -0i. But the 1911 Constitution still considered G K the official 
language o f Greece. 
Nevertheless, the renovation became stronger when, in 1910, 
M . Triandaphyllidis founded the association known as the 'Education 
Society' ( 'EKTICXISCDTIKCX; "OUIAAX;). This body influenced the legisla­
tion o f the Liberal Party of E. Venizelos, who in 1917 introduced 
D G into elementary education. The language advocated by Trian­
daphyllidis was described in his Grammar o f 1941, which was a kind 
of prescriptive linguistics. 
Certainly, his conception was more open than that of Psicharis: 
it preserved certain double forms and purist forms, such as -KT-
instead o f -cpx- in words of ancient origin (7iepi7iT£po). But, unfortu­
nately, the linguistic 'issue' became politicised, and the supporters of 
D G 
were at times accused o f pro-Russian and even pro-Bolshevik 
sympathies. 
From 1923 to 1964 D G continued to be the language of the first 
levels o f school education (except during the government o f Tsaldaris 
in 1935-36); in 1964, the Centre Party placed both languages on 
an equal footing, although D G was rarely studied by students older 
than 14. Later, during the government o f the Coronels, K G was 
once again declared the official language (1969), D G being restricted 
to the first four levels of primary education. There was a reaction 
against this with the change o f regime: in 1976, D G was declared 
the official language o f education and 
administration. 
Subsequently, the triumph o f the PAS O K 
party saw the intro­
duction of the so-called monotonic system in 1982: an orthographic 
reform which abolished the spiritus, allowed monosyllables to be writ­
ten without accents (with exceptions) and polysyllables with only an 
acute accent. 
424. 
However, the path towards the imposition of D G turned out 
to be longer than expected. For a long time, and despite everything, 

MODERN GREEK 
297 
K G , 
liberated from extremisms, continued to be the language of the 
tribunals, army and Church. It was the language of culture, while 
D G 
slowly began to be imposed (from genre to genre) and with 
errors, producing an often artificial and confused prose. This situa­
tion was only made worse by the decline in the standard o f teach­
ing o f the classics and by hew pedagogical trends which constantly 
lowered the level of the students. 
All 
the same, D G n o w triumphs in Greece. But rather than 
Demotic, we should simply call it, at least in its written form, C o m m o n 
Greek. Indeed, there are various types o f D G , among them the so-
called KaGojiiTtoDuivr), with abundant elements o f Ka9ocpe\>um)aa 
which were culturally indispensable. Consequendy, what we normally 
refer to as Modern Greek ( M G ) is not exactly unitary: it preserves 
elements o f the ancient language in its phonetics and morphology, 
and especially in its lexicon. There is 7t6A,r|/.T;6Aa<; (G. -nq or -ecoq), 
-6Ta/-6xr)<;, G. o f the first declension in -a (modern)/-nc; (ancient), 
8eo7ioiviSa/8eG7ioiv{<;, 'EAAd8a/'EA,A,d<;; the N . pi. o f the first in -at 
(xoDpiaxai) is sometimes preserved; from the adj. pcc0\><; there is G. 
sg. 
poc9icnVPa0eo<;, N. pi. (3a0ioi/pa0ei<;. A n d there are still many 
compositive elements of A G , as well as infinite variations which are 
more or less synonymous in the lexicon, o f the type KOKKOCAX)/OOTOUV 
'bone
5. The language we call M G therefore combines different vari­
eties o f D G . 
2. DESCRIPTION OF MODERN GREEK 
425. 
Thus, a new koine, which is Modern Greek, was created and 
diffused, amid the debates o f the proponents o f diverse 
official 
interventions and solutions. It is not entirely uniform (although nei­
ther was the ancient koine), but it is fundamentally based on a dialect, 
as the old koine had been: in Peloponnesian Greek, in this case. A 
new 
element has been added: the resolution o f the inherited diglos­
sia, which had become increasingly aggravated. Also, the absorption 
of lexical elements from the western languages, which shall be dis­
cussed later. 
The 
principal characteristics are known to us from the D G o f 
various Byzantine texts, particularly from the twelfth century onwards 
(and in later dialects o f Cyprus and Crete, among others). W e have 
discussed these. But it is useful to present an overview o f D G as a 
whole, adding data on K G . 

298 
CHAPTER FOUR 
426. Phonetics. T h e following characteristics are found: iotacism and 
the elimination of diphthongs, which provokes various graphias of 
the same phoneme; the elimination of the opposition of short and 
long vowels (but there are two graphias of o), of the accent o f inten­
sity, and of the two old tonal accents; a system o f voiceless and 
voiced occlusives and fricatives, in the three points of articulation, 
with graphic distinction; an opposition of the sibilants G / £ , also in 
certain contexts o f voiceless/voiced a; of the affricates XG, x£; the 
loss of -v (except before occlusives and affricates, but sometimes pre­
served in K G ) ; %x, (px (sometimes KX, TCX in K G ) ; the palatalisation 
of consonants before i (y); and a fixed accent in adjectives (vecoxeprj, 
but not in K G ) . 
427. Noun and adjective. The noun has a simplified morphology, with 
the three cases o f N., G. and A c . (rarely a separate V.) and the two 
numbers sg. and pi. There are isosyllabic words of two types: the 
first, with two forms in sg. and another two in pi. (masc. sg. N. 
rcaxepac/G.-Ac. 
Tcaxepa, pi. N.-Ac. Ttaxepeq/G. rcaxepcov; fern. N.-Ac. 
Kap5ia/G. Kapoiac;, pi. N.-Ac. Kocpoiiq/G. KapSicov, and close types); 
the second, with three forms in sg. and pi. (masc sg. N. 8d0KaXoc;/Ac. 
SdaKocAo/G. SccGKaAm), pi. N. SdGKocAoi, Ac. SccGKatanx;, G. 8CXGK&AG)V), 
but two in the neuters (sg. N.-Ac. 7rpoGC07io/G. upoGcoTun), pi. N.-Ac. 
rcpoGGma, G. rcpoGcoTCcov, cf. also jnepo(;/(xepoi)<;/|j,epr|/jLiepSv). 
In addition, there are anisosyllabic words, whose masc. and fern, 
have two forms in the sg. (N./Ac.-G., but there are three in the 
case o f Popidq), and another two in pi, (N.-Ac,/G.), pi. ones having 
one syllable more thanks to the desinence -8e<;, which we have dis­
cussed. Also, the neuters have two forms with the same distribution 
and one pi. in -ocxoc (ovo^a/ovojuaxcc), of ancient origin. 
The adjective has generalised the triple inflection 
masc./fern./n. 
(with few exceptions). It has maintained three degrees, but the com­
parative and superlative, together with the synthetic forms of ancient 
origin, have analytic forms with nio/b 
nw. 
As we can see, inflection has been greatly altered and simplified; 
we saw h o w in K G ancient desinences are sometimes preferred. 
428. Pronouns and articles. T h e pronouns of the 1st person (eycb) and 
2nd person (EGV, GX>) continue to exist, while the 3rd is new (the old 
is a\)xoc;, 'the same'). The unification of forms in the pi. is notable 
(N. ejieiq; 8G8i<;; G. eiiaq, jiaq; ioaq, oaq) and the preservation, with 
formal variants, o f the old opposition between full forms (1st G.-Ac. 

MODERN GREEK 
299 
euivcc, uivoc, 2nd eoevct, GEVCC, among others) and clitics (which are 
not necessarily atonal, the majority being both enclitic and proclitic): 
for 
instance, G. uxyo, GOU, XOV (masc), A c ui, oL Only the A c . TO, 
TT|, 
TO, o f the 3rd is enclictic and atonal. K G has TOOV as G. pi. o f 
the 
3rd, 
D G 
has 
TOD<;. 
Some systems are important: the demonstratives avxoq, 
xovxoq, 
EKeivoq; 
xexoxoq, xoaoq; possessives which are the G. eiiov, etc.; the 
reflexives 6 kavxoq urn), etc.; the indefinite Kccvevaq, pi. |xspiK0i; the 
interrogatives 
TIOI6<;, TI, noaoq; the relative 
rcoi), without inflection, 
but also 07i;oio<;, OTIOIOC;, O G o q , OGTIC; (in K G ) . 
In the article, together with the traditional definite article (with 
slight variations in inflection, fern. pi. N. oi, A c . xiq), there is an 
indefinite evocc;. 
429. 
Verbs. T h e most important characteristics have already been 
mentioned: the reduction to two stems, the second coming from the 
aorist and perfect, the loss o f the dual and optative, and the unification 
of the indicative and subjunctive in the present stem (not in that o f 
the aorist), the loss o f the future (replaced by 9a and the ind.), perfect 
(replaced by a periphrastic form), infinitive (usually, replaced by vd 
and subjunctive), the participle (made indeclinable in 
- O V T C C C ; , -(ovxaq; 
but the middle-passive is maintained); an abundance o f periphrastic 
forms. In addition, the old verbal system, although simplified, is 
essentially maintained: three persons, two voices (the middle voice 
also acting as a passive), three tenses, three moods (with the imper­
ative), two aspects (opposition extended to the future). 
The 
modifications are above all formal: the reduction o f suffixes 
in the present stem, various ways o f forming the aorist stem (we 
have discussed this), new multi-stem verbs; the middle-passive aorist 
-9r|Koc; the loss o f atonal augment (but it is maintained in K G ) ; the 
verb dui inflected as a middle (eijuou); considerably altered desinences. 
Such alteration is notable and sometimes gives rise to variants. 
For 
those that come from A G , there are notable forms such as the 
act. pres. ind. 2nd sg. Aiq, aicovc;, naq, 1st pi. SEVODU^ for 8evo|ie, 
3rd 8£V0i)v, dicowe; impf. 1st sg. d y o m o f t G a ; aor. 2nd sg. eSeGeq; mid. 
pres. ind. 1st dyaTtisfLiai. At times, before new desinences such as 
mid. 
1st pi. -OJJXXGTE, K G preserves the old -6|i£9a; in the imperfect, 
- o j u n v , - £ G o , -£T0 can be maintained instead o f -OJIODV, - O G O W , -OTOCV. 
In the imperfect o f contract verbs in the active voice, the old forms 
-cov, e t c can be used in K G instead o f -OUGCC, e t c , the aorist passive 

300 
CHAPTER FOUR 
-0r|v can be maintained instead o f -9r|Ka, the articular infinitive, etc. 
But the optative, the old aorist, and future, etc., and a large series 
o f forms have definitively been lost. 
430. Invariable words. Adverbs are to a large extent those of A G ; 
adverbs in -a predominate over those in -coc;, which are maintained 
particularly in K G . 
Prepositions are practically those of A G , sometimes with an altered 
form: yid, 
JLIE, ae 
( G T O V in D G , eiq 
T O V in K G ) , sometimes main­
tained; there are new prepositions, such as Sixcoc;, %o>pic; 'without', 
odv 'how', xaaiiz 'the same as'; they are constructed with the A c , 
some with the G. or N. But only some o f them function as preverbs 
(dvii, dTto, Kara, uexd, Tcapd, rcpoq), alongside the old prepositions 
which alone preserve this function even though they are used as 
prepositions in ready-made phrases and in K G (8td, 
E K / E J ; , ev, mi, 
Kept, 7ip6, bnip, bno). W e should add the preverbs, ^e- (from e£) and 
i;ocvoc- (also an adverb, from e^-ava-). 
As far as conjunctions are concerned, we must distinguish between 
coordinating and subordinating conjunctions. The former are not 
very different from those of A G : copulative KCC{; disjunctive r\. . . r\. . ., 
eixe . . . E I X E . . . , 
O U X E . . . ovxe 
. . . , 
U T J X E . . . U T | T £ . . . The importance 
of the latter has grown since the disappearance of the infinitive, as 
well as the genitive absolute. Apart from relative clauses with 
7 1 0 - 0 
and other relatives, already mentioned, there are clauses of c o m -
pletives foq, 9<o<; and oxt (particularly in K G ) , interrogatives with xi, 
causal and temporal with yiccxx, depot), £7iei8f|, E V S , Sioti, consecu-
tives with 
C O O T E , finals with woe, yid vd, those of fear with \xr\, ur|v, 
those o f m o o d with 
KCC9CO<;, adv, etc. 
431. Suffixes, lexicon. Suffixation closely resembles that o f A G , but 
there are far more suffixes, whether new (some of foreign origin, as 
we saw), or ancient: from abstracts such as 
- G I J X O 
( T P E ^ I J L L O 'race'), 
-Tjxo ((pocynxo 'meal'), -ot>poc (aicowupa 'confusion'), 
- E ( O C , -£id (8o-oA,£id 
'work'); from diminutives such as -dici, -{81, -ovXa and augmentatives 
such as -dpec, -dpoq; from ethnics such as -dvoq, -ivo<;, -E^oq; from 
the derivation o f adjectives taken from nouns such as -aKoq, -dpnc;, 
-dtoc; or other adjectives such as -ot)Ari<; (da7Cpot>Ar|<;) or verbs such 
as -£po<; (OAtfipoc;). In § 334 we saw the preferred suffixes for verbs 
from the Byzantine period onwards. 
The important thing is that the richness o f derivation and com­
position is preserved, functioning in a way similar to that of Ancient 
Greek, but with constant innovation. 

MODERN GREEK 
301 
T h e lexicon continues that o f A G to a large extent, but it has 
been renovated; we shall deal separately with this subject, for it is 
an area in which foreign influence has been considerable. It serves 
to draw attention to the existence o f a D G lexicon that is different 
from that o f K G , whose terms, nevertheless, occasionally can be 
introduced in D G . Examples o f pairs with the opposition D G / K G 
are the following (some were mentioned previously): zvaq/ziq 'one
5, 
u^ydAoc;/'uiyou; 'big', KOKKaAo/oaxouv 'bone', \|/api/i%8n<; 'fish', umrj/piq 
'nose', vep6/u5cop 'water', etc. 
3. BORROWINGS AND CULTURE WORDS IN THE 
MODERN GREEK LEXICON 
432. W e have seen how, in the history o f Greek, the partial difference 
between D G and K G presented the greatest obstacle for unification. 
Later, however, many words from K G , along with the lexical base 
of D G , would aid in the formation o f M G . Greek has absorbed 
many borrowings from other languages, among them western bor­
rowings (sometimes o f Greek origin) which have enabled it to become 
incorporated into the universal cultural and scientific movement. 
This was a late incorporation, given that Greece had not partic­
ipated in the movement o f Humanism and modern science because 
of Turkish domination. Yet, the facility o f its language for deriva­
tion and composition, inherited from the Ancient language, made 
this incorporation possible: it easily admitted lexical elements o f 
Ancient Greek origin or those derived from them. 
Note that the 'new' words are abundant in the popular language 
today, whereas we can write about abstract or scientific subjects with 
a vocabulary that is practically that o f Ancient Greek with forms 
derived from it. 
According to the statistics presented by P. Mackridge and extracted 
from van Dijk-Wittop Koning, 324 out o f 1,148 words studied by 
this author are words from A G which have remained unchanged in 
form and meaning; 148 are substantially the same, with some changes 
in morphology or phonetics (ACyoq for 6A,{yo<;, Oexco for x(0r|jii); 129 
are words from A G that have been 'resuscitated' in modern 
time; 
202 are words derived from A G from the fourth century BC onwards 
(awe%i^co, dKaxaTia-oaxoi;, etc.); 252 are words derived in modern time 
from others coming from A G ; only 50 words are true borrowings. 

302 
CHAPTER FOUR 
433. On the Modern Greek lexicon in general and its problems, see 
P. Mackridge 1985, p. 306 ff. On borrowings of various origins, A. Tsopanakis 
1994, p. 629 ff. For the borrowings from Slavic, Albanian and Rumanian, 
G. Meyer 1894; for borrowings from Turkish, K. Kazazis 1972; and from 
French, A. A. Papadopoulos 1926 and N. G. Kontospoulos 1978. For a 
fuller bibliography (until 1972), see D. V. Vayacacos, p. 215 ff. 
434. Greek continues to have many words of Latin origin, taken in 
loan in different periods: dcKouupcb < accumbo, darcpoc; < asper, ppa%i6Ai 
< bracchiolum, lcdaxpo < castrum, etc. The majority o f these words 
have adapted to the Greek system o f inflection and from them very 
productive suffixes are obtained, such as -dpoo, -dvoq, -ot>Ai. 
Greek maintains many words of Italian origin, mostly Venetian, 
such as poAxoc, yovoxo, 
KapauiAot, Koaxoi>jii, 
KOD^VVOC, UTCCCGXOUVI, 
aap8eAAa, xapexoa, xaijjivxo, etc. These are assimilated into the Greek 
lexicon and its inflection. They are a product o f medieval contacts 
with the peoples o f Italy, in some cases also in the modern period. 
A series o f borrowings are a product of the occupation by neigh­
bouring peoples and from other contacts. Rumanian borrowings are 
quite frequent: PeAivx^ce 'cloak', yKccPoq 'blind man', etc. Slavic bor­
rowings are numerous: Pccyevi 'barrel', AOUXGCC 'marsh', pou%o 'dress', 
etc. There are also Russian borrowings, some are old, but others 
date from the eighteenth century (jiTcaAaAaiKa, uxyo£(Ko<;, etc.), and 
some Albanian borrowings (icoKopexat, a kind of 'hen guts', Tudxanco 
'armed incursion', etc.) and Arabic borrowings (icapapdvi, jxaya^i, 
aowpdpx, etc.). 
But this is not as important as the Turkish vocabulary that was 
left in Greece, especially relating to material objects, food, dress, 
hierarchical ranks, etc.: dcpevxnq, yAivxi 'party', jxeAix^dvoc 'aubergine', 
p,7cocKdAr|<; 'shopkeeper', xadvxa 'bag', xoercrj 'pocket'. There are many 
frequendy occurring words, despite efforts to replace them with Greek 
words; we even encounter formative elements such as the -oyAoi) of 
the patronymics. 
435. Borrowings from the western languages were the most impor­
tant in shaping the Greek language: there are very few from Spanish 
(KOCWIPCCAXX;, Kaoxaviexeq, Tiaxdxa) and Portuguese (icojmpa 'snake'), 
but an abundant number from French; there are also borrowings 
from English and 
German. 
From French, apart from literary terms and borrowings from the 
end o f the Middle Ages, which we have already considered, we find, 
among others: dyica^e < engage, yraAepi < galerie, ypapdxa < cravate, 

MODERN GREEK 
303 
KOCGKO^ < cache-col, X-iKep < liquer, jnocKiyid^ < maquillage, [inXi < bleu, 
VXZKOXXZ 
< decollete, Goq>£p < chauffeur, etc. Very often, they are words 
from the world of fashion, food, and social life. All o f this reflects 
the enormous French cultural influence in Greece from nineteenth 
century onwards. These words are routinely left undeclined and are 
sometimes entirely assimilated (KouA/roupa, nXox>paXia\i6q). 
English (and American) terms, apart from derived and compound 
literary words, mostiy refer to the new civilisation and way of life: 
YKdvyKGiep, yicotap, KiXoftax, KTUXUTI, K?id^ov, Koujuoikep, judvaT^iLievT, 
ujcdp, 7u£dua, GTOK TG8K, xiouuop, etc. Their phonology adapts badly 
to Greek, or hardly at all if they are altered: they are transcribed 
with the original phonetics, with or without inflection. Sometimes, 
there is an effort to avoid them, by introducing, for example, 
bnoXoyi<5xr\q instead o f KojLuuouxep, eTcixayri instead of TGEK. 
German borrowings are o f less significance: \mipa, ovuoeX, 
etc. 
436. This vocabulary partly links the Greek people with their east­
ern neighbours, but insofar as it originates from the West and is of 
a recent date, it has gradually introduced the Greek people to the 
world o f modern culture. Nevertheless, the entry o f what we refer 
to as Greek-Latin is o f greater significance in this field — the lexicon, 
nearly always formed from derivatives and compounds, and nearly 
always o f a Graeco-Latin origin, which has become the international 
language of culture and science. W e have looked at examples based 
on the work of K. Psomadakis 1995, 
Indeed, these are often words which already existed in A G , and 
which have returned to M G through French or English: according 
to Tsopanakis, they can be seen as words which had 
'emigrated
5 
and later returned to their native land, sometimes with a change in 
meaning. Or, as I have pointed out, words formed with elements of 
A G . Greek has reconstructed its form, eliminating the phonetic or 
inflectional accidents of the modern languages. From Fr. anecdote it 
has created dveicSoTov, from necrologie, veKpoJioyia; from Eng. telephone 
it has created TT|X£(pcovo, from Ger. Leukamie, A,£u%cupia. 
Another of the paradoxes o f the Greek language has to be that, 
after providing the western languages with so many elements, and 
losing them itself, it later recovered them from these same languages. 
Thus, it has become incorporated into the field of European languages, 
previously enriched by Greek, and the culture expressed by them. 
O f course, sometimes the recovered ancient words have taken on 

304 
CHAPTER FOUR 
a new meaning: dAArjAoypacpia is 'correspondence
5, and no longer 
'writing of amoebaei verses', vuaXk^koc, 
is 'employee
5. This is partic­
ularly the case when Greek words are created to translate modern 
vocabulary that is not always entirely Greek: Fr. automobile is awoidvriTo, 
bicycle is TCOOTIAOTO, journalist is SrjjLiooioYpdcpoq, universite is Ttavemcrcfijiio, 
Ger. Eisenbahn is aiSrjpoSpouoc;, Weltanschauung is KoajxoGecopioc. 
However, we are still left with some errors or imprecisions. Gr. 
SnjuoKpotTicc does not distinguish between 'democracy' and 'republic', 
dxojLLiKoq is both 'individual' and 'atomic', KnPepvnxiKoq is both 'gov­
ernmental' and 'cybernetic'. The new concepts are expressed in Greek 
with words that used to express other concepts and that cannot be 
renounced. But problems such as these occur in all languages. 
The Greek lexicon thus portrays a bizarre image, filled as it is 
with all kinds of borrowings and words which may look Greek, but 
either never existed or, if they did, then with a different meaning. 
It has not always managed to resist the influence o f foreign lexicon 
which is to a large extent o f Greek origin; it has only assimilated it as 
far as possible. However, Greek has definitively incorporated the same 
layer or stratum of cultural vocabulary - of definite Greek origin 
and international through its diffusion - which we have been discussing. 
4. T H E MODERN GREEK DIALECTS 
General considerations 
437. W e saw in our treatment of medieval Greek how the devel­
opment o f the popular language and, specifically, of the dialects, was 
produced mainly in places that were distant from the unifying power 
of Constantinople. Yet, very little is known about the dialects of that 
period, except for what we have noted about Cyprus, Rhodes, Crete, 
and the Ionic islands. 
M u c h more is known about the current dialects, which almost 
invariably arose in similar conditions of isolation, but whose history 
is for the most part a matter o f pure conjecture. It is generally 
thought that they descend from Byzantine Greek, not from Ancient 
Greek: this was established by Hatzidakis. But we also find residues 
o f the ancient dialects, see § 440. 
438. A general treatment of these dialects can be found, especially, in 
R. Browning 1983, p. 119 ff, in N. G. Kontosopoulos 1995 and G. Horrocks 

MODERN GREEK 
305 
1997, p. 299 ff.; also, R. M. Dawkins 1940 and A. Tsopanakis 1994, 
p. 62 ff. For Tsakonian, see H. Pernot 1934 and S. Caratzas 1976; for 
Gappadocian, R. Dawkins 1916; for Pontic, D. E. Oeconomidis 1908, A. A. 
Papadopoulos 1955, D. E. Tobaidis 1988 (and A. Semenov 1935 for the 
southern Russia); for the dialects of Northern Greece, A. A. Papadopoulos 
1927; for the dialect of Cyprus, B. Newton 1972; for that of Crete, A. A. 
Papadopoulos 1948, N. G. I^ontosopoulos 1970, 1980 and 1988 and M. I. 
Kaukala 1992; for the dialect of Mani, D. V. Vayacacos 1972b; for that 
of Chios, H. Pernot 1946; for the dialects of southern Italy, G. Rohlfs 1950 
and 1962; for that of Cargese, in Corsica, G. H. Blanken 1951. See more 
references in D. V. Vayacacos 1972, p. 160 ff. and N. G. Kontosopoulos 
1994, p. 199 ff. Our current knowledge of the dialects is incomplete; a 
good part of the bibliography deals with local aspects, vocabularies, etc. 
439. The neo-Greek dialects are in decline. O n the one hand, this 
is a result of the increasing diffusion o f the modern koine, which we 
call Modern Greek; on the other hand, it is due to the 
constant 
retreat o f Hellenism, due to the Slavic and Arab invasions at the 
start of the Middle Ages, the invasions of the Seldjuqs from the 
eleventh century onwards and the Ottomans in the fourteenth 
and 
fifteenth 
centuries, to the population movements in our century to 
which we have referred: the exchange o f populations with Turkey 
in 1923 (and earlier with Bulgaria) and the almost complete disap­
pearance of the Greeks in Alexandria, Constantinople, and southern 
Russia. These communities found refuge in the Greek continent, par­
ticularly in Athens. 
Indeed, since Antiquity itself, Greek has become almost eliminated 
from the ancient colonies in Italy, Sicily, and the West; if any Greek 
speakers were left, as proposed by Rohlfs and Caratzas as regards 
southern Italy, it was in abandoned and isolated areas. In Greece 
itself, the occupation of part of the territory by the Slavs and Albanians 
during long periods o f time and, of course, Turkish rule, gave rise 
to parallel isolations, to which we attribute the preservation of Laconian 
features in the Tsakonian dialect, in the S. E. Peloponnese, on the 
eastern side o f Parnon. 
Occasionally, the connection between a certain island or place 
with a certain dialect is attributed to migrations in the Byzantine 
period: for example, the Greek dialect of Cargese, in Corsica, of 
Peloponnesian origin (Maniotic, to be more exact), or the fact that 
the dialect of Samos is o f a northern and not sourthern type (due 
to a migration from Lesbos); or the existence of a Tsakonian colony 
in Propontis. In Asia Minor, the isolation o f Greek communities 

306 
CHAPTER FOUR 
during the Turkish period was responsible for the special character 
of the Pontic dialect, among others (in Cappadocia, Pharasa and 
Silla); they also received Turkish influence. Analogous circumstances 
of isolation are responsible for the dialects o f southern Russia. 
As mentioned above (§ 418), the most widely accepted view, taken 
from Hatzidakis, is that the koine of the Roman and Byzandne periods 
provides the base for these neo-Hellenic dialects. However, Rohlfs 
and Caratzas have proposed that in the Greek of southern Italy -
some small nuclei centered on Lecce and Bova - residues o f the 
ancient dialects remain: otherwise, it would be impossible to explain 
their archaisms. Yet, the subsequent invasion by Justinian must have 
had an influence on the language. Similarly, Tsakonian received ele­
ments from koine, in addition to Laconian elements. 
440. At any rate, this is a much debated subject. After A. T h u m b 
1885, A. Tsopanakis 1994 has proposed that the northern Greek 
dialects, characterised by the loss or closure o f atonal vowels, were 
influenced by Thessalian and other Aeolic dialects: this is rather 
doubtful, for we have no exact date for the differenciation, which 
in any case appears to be medieval. There is more clarity surrounding 
the persistence o f dialectal archaisms preserved in certain places, 
especially in dialects of the periphery: this proves that the implantation 
o f koine was never as absolute as the literary and epigraphic texts 
would have us believe. O n the other hand, koine features which were 
lost in the later Greek were sometimes preserved in particular places. 
Here, I give some examples of different kinds of archaisms: 
Tsakonian: preserves the digamma ((3avve < *&pvo<;), also the distinc­
tion between long and short vowels (ov for co, o maintained) and the 
Doric a 
(TOCV auipa); as in Laconian, it makes 0 > a (oepoq) and loses 
the a between vowels (opoua < opSaoc). It preserves the active eui. 
Euboea, Megara, ancient Athens: v becomes t, not xov. 
Cyprus, Dodecanese, Pontic, etc.: they retain -v (Cyp. rcaiSiv). 
Cyprus, Dodecanese, S. Italy: they retain geminate consonants (akXoq). 
Cyprus, Crete, Rhodes, S. Italy: 3rd pi, in - o w i . 
Pontic and other dialects of Asia Minor, preserve the e timbre o f the 
n (as e), the negation 
' K I , the possessives e\xoq, ejneTepoq. 
Pontic, S. Italy: impv. 
C X K O I ) G O ( V ) . 
These are just a few examples. They attest to the resistance of the 
ancient dialects and ancient koine in marginal areas to the unifying 
tendencies, not just with regard to K G , but also D G . 

MODERN GREEK 
307 
Characteristics of the principal dialects 
441. A detailed study of the neo-Hellenic dialects is not pertinent 
here. The important thing is to establish that these dialects can be 
divided into two groups, northern and southern; within the latter, 
we find the archaising and at the same time innovatory dialects we 
have referred to, and from this group we derive the Demotic dialect 
which forms the base of Modern Greek. 
The two large Greek dialect groups are separated by a line that 
runs through the entire gulf of Corinth and the Isthmus, climbing 
north and leaving Attica to the South, continuing through the S. of 
Euboea, the South of Samos (a recent extension, as we saw, Chios 
being a southern dialect) and arriving in Asia Minor. Thus, the Greek-
speaking regions o f Italy, the Ionic islands, Attica, the Peloponnese, 
and most of the Cyclades (the case o f the Greek of Asia is more 
complicated) comprise the southern dialect; the northern dialect 
embraces the whole o f northern Greece, including Macedonia. This 
dialect has more innovations. They are mainly phonetic and relate 
to atonal vowels, as mentioned previously: e and o become i and u 
respectively, while i and u are lost: avGpowiouq, urn 'nose', Xein 
'leaves', etc. There is also palatalisation o f consonants before atonal 
i, fricative pronounciation o f s, velar /, etc. In short, these dialects 
deviate considerably from the norm and, specifically, from Ancient 
Greek. As regards the relation of M G with this dialect, which con­
tinues to be preserved, it is fortunate that southern Greek has imposed 
itself, effacing the peculiarities o f the marginal dialects. Note that 
southern Greek has a system o f five vowels (as well as that of Crete); 
northern Greek has one of five vowels in tonic position and one of 
three in atonal position; and various marginal dialects (Tsakonian, 
Pontic, Capadocian) have systems of six or seven vowels. They are 
hardly comprehensible to the speakers o f M G . 
442. I cannot engage here in a detailed description o f the different 
dialects. Indeed, their classification and mutual relations are often 
very unclear. But let us note the principle dialects. 
In Asia Minor, until the interchange of populations, we find Pontic 
(in the Black Sea coast, from Inepolis to Athens o f the Colchis); in 
the interior, we find isolated nuclei o f Cappadocian and the lan­
guages o f Pharasa and Silla; Greek dialects were also spoken in Livisa 
and Makri, on the S. W . coast. O n the other hand, we find Pontic 
dialects in the Ukraine, the most notable being that of Mariupol 
(whose population came from the Crimea). 

308 
CHAPTER FOUR 
W e 
also find Greek dialects in the Cyclades, the Dodecanese, 
Cyprus, Crete: the last two being particularly dynamic. In Chios, we 
find three dialectal varieties. 
O n 
the continent, mention should be made o f the 
normal 
Peloponnesian dialect, which differs from the dialects of Mani and 
Tsakonia; to the N. of the Isthmus, the archicising and already extinct 
dialects o f Athens, Megara, and Aegina; and then there are the living 
northern dialects o f Thessaly, Macedonia, and Thrace, among others. 
The 
dialects o f Apulia and Calabria remain to be mentioned, two 
small nuclei, and the dialect o f Cargese in Corsica. 
As regards their phonetic, morphological and lexical characteris­
tics, I will not present an overview here, as I have already stated. 
But perhaps it is useful to provide some loose data, to give the reader 
a general idea. 
In Tsakonian, apart from the archaisms mentioned, there are frica­
tives instead o f occlusives, a a like the sh in English (the fricative s), 
the K becomes xo after a vowel; nouns in -oq are changed to -e; 
there are remnants of participles. 
In Cappadocia, Pharasa and Silla, together with archaisms such 
as the retention o f the e timbre of the n, there is strong Turkish 
influence, which imposes vowel harmony and the opposition o f ani­
mated and unanimated nouns. There are coincidences with Greek 
of the N., for instance atonal e > i, along with more serious alter­
ations o f the consonantal system and, for example, the use of oov 
and not GXOV. In Pontic, besides archaisms such as the preservation 
of -v, we find the fricatives / and z, a very open e and vocalic features 
that coincide with the Greek o f the N.; the x and K are seriously 
altered (LXOVCUX > LX&KIOC, OKvXXoq > xoovXXoq). The article is routinely 
ommitted, the N. in -o<; becomes -ov, there is 0oc<pKow8av instead 
of Gdjupovxcu. 
The 
southern type o f Cyprian is notable, it preserves -v (and 
extends it: TcpoypaLniav) and the geminates; it maintains the 3rd pi. 
in -ODOI, -aat. But it innovates consonantism: K becomes the affricate 
c before e, i; there is also / (from % before e, i, or a before y) and 
Z (from Q. In the Cretan dialect, it is notable that the x is pro­
nounced as 0 before y, the vx as 8 (jidOioc, dp%o8id); and that -v0-
is reduced to -0- (dOpomoq, the loss o f the nasal in groups occurs in 
various dialects). There are variations in the article (xoi = xovq, xiq), 
Q£X(o in the fut. (vd (pajie 0eX,ei), and vd is lost before the verb in 
the negation context (8ev e%0) nov Ttdco). 

MODERN GREEK 
309 
Many differences exist from island to island and there are three 
varieties in Chios, as I stated earlier. For example, in the Masticochora, 
the % before e, % is pronounced as a fricative (s), GK before e becomes 
s, the £ becomes vxC,; in Phita the G before y becomes % (eicicA,i%id). 
In the Cyclades, where the southern dialects dominate, there is one 
northern dialect in part of* Andros and in Tenos; Mikonos is shared 
between the two. 
W e know of the situation in the Peloponnese, but we should note 
that, apart from the anomalous dialect o f Tsakonia, there is also that 
of Mani, which pronounces the K as xo (affricate) before e, i It was 
diffused into Corsica, as mentioned. 
As regards the Greek of southern Italy, apart from the archaisms 
already mentioned, some innovations should be noted. In Apulia, 0 
and 5 are unknown, x is generally pronounced, as well as G (TEO, 
djiEGOcvE) and occlusive d; in Calabria, ax is pronounced for KT, %0, nx. 
These are just a few notes, mainly phonetic, which would have 
to be supplemented by multiple data. Palatalisations and fricativisa-
tions are, as we can see, routine, as in the Romance languages. 
In morphology, one would have to add numerous data relating 
to declension and, in the verb, to the limitations or exclusions that 
occur here and there in stems of the present or aorist. Pontic lim­
its aspect to the indicative, Cappadocian only obtains a subjunctive 
and future from the the aorist, etc. 
Dialects and MG 
443. Dialects are being lost in Greece by the diffusion of M G through 
education, means of communication, administration, etc. O f course, 
the forced migrations from Asia, Constantinople, and Egypt have 
had an enormous influence: having arrrived in continental Greece 
with the immigrants, the ancient dialects soon began to decay. The 
same occurred in the small localities and islands where there was 
large-scale immigration. In the N. of Greece and the large islands 
(Crete, Rhodes, Chios), dialects are somewhat better preserved. In 
the large cities they are lost. 
Thus, the centrifugal tendencies which led to the growth o f the 
dialects (of which only a few were given prestige by literature and 
regarded as fixed dialects), and which had considerable strength at 
the end of the Byzantine empire and later in places where Turkish 
power was felt the least or not at all, were extinguished with the 
creation of the new Greek state. 

310 
CHAPTER FOUR 
A new centre had emerged, Athens, which in a first phase attempted 
to impose K G and in a second phase, gradually accepted a D G 
tainted with K G : what we refer to as M G or Modern Greek. Greece 
has always had a strong nationalist and centralist sentiment, proba­
bly because o f the memory o f historical misfortunes and the con­
stant pressure from the Turks and Slavs. This has been reflected, 
too, in the creation and diffusion, from the dialects just mentioned, 
o f a c o m m o n language: a language which, based above all on the 
Peloponnesian dialects, has remained relatively close to A G , without 
undergoing the vowel and consonantal alterations o f other dialects, 
nor their great morphological innovations. This has allowed for a 
fluid relation between D G and K G , and the arrival at M G , in which 
demotic has received, through K G , elements from A G which were 
indispensible for its transformation into a language o f culture. 
444. Note that in Modern Greek the vocalic system has remained 
intact, although the same cannot be said o f prosody, accentuation, 
or the use o f diphthongs (the dialects have produced more profound 
alterations). The consonantal system has not varied too much, although 
aspirated voiceless consonants have become fricatives and in addi­
tion there are other fricativisations (though much less than in the 
dialects). 
The morphological scheme is fundamentally the same as that o f 
A G , although with simplifications not dissimilar from some in the 
northern Indo-European languages (IIIB) and, within this, from 
Germanic and R o m a n c e languages: the elimination o f the dual, the 
reduction o f the causal system (without dative) and the modal (with­
out optative and with a subjunctive with limited use); the elimina­
tion o f the synthetic perfect and future, the creation o f a verbal 
system based on two stems. Some developments are also compara­
ble to those in other languages: the creation o f futures, perfects and 
other analytic forms, and the opposition o f a definite and an indefinite 
article. M G has created analytic comparatives and superlatives, along 
with the synthetic. 
These were no doubt, as with certain phonetic evolutions, general 
tendencies o f Indo-European, which took some time to reach the 
different languages; they are also reflected in the history o f Indie. 
By contrast, the disappearance o f the infinitive finds a parallel in the 
Balkan languages (the extension o f its use was reduced in Germanic 
and Romance). 

MODERN GREEK 
311 
All the same, M G has maintained its inflection, fundamental 
gram­
matical categories, derivation, and composition; and it has developed 
a great capacity to create abstracts, to easily transform certain classes 
of words into others, and to assimilate foreign lexica (very often of 
Greek origin). These conditions are all necessary for it to continue 
being an intellectual language, the inheritor o f the ancient language. 
Athens has acted as the new Byzantium and its role has not been 
so different from the role it had in Antiquity. Although, then, we 
were dealing with a cultural triumph which accompanied and fol­
lowed a political defeat, whereas here, it is the political role of Athens 
in Greece which has favoured the unifying tendencies as regards lan­
guage strata and dialects. 

C O N C L U S I O N 
445. T h e remarkable history o f the Greek language is an adven­
turous one, whose writings can be followed across 3,500 years (only 
Chinese, as we stated, is comparable) and which, through direct 
or indirect influence, has transformed all European languages, and 
indeed, all the world's languages, into languages o f culture. 
Greek began its life as one o f the various languages o f the last 
phase o f Indo-European. Within this, it belonged to the more archaic 
southern group which preserved, in the noun and verb, inflections 
on various stems and had not undergone the inflectional reductions 
of the northern group. However, this was an innovatory group in 
various aspects. In short, Greek is a derivative o f the group o f peo­
ples that, with Persian, Armenian and the Indo-Iranian languages, 
descended into Greece, Asia Minor, Iran and India: the so-called 
Indo-European IIIA. 
Its first nucleus, C o m m o n Greek, was implanted in some area of 
the Balkans. It was only relatively unitary. Its eastern group descended 
into Greece towards the year 2000. The western group, much later, 
towards 1200. From it, two groups derived. The speakers o f the 
eastern group setded on the neolithic and bronze cultures, from 
which they took many elements; those o f the western group (the 
Dorians) settled pardy on top o f the speakers o f the eastern group. 
In Greece, both groups tended to become more differentiated and 
to split internally. 
This was the process that we believe East Greek was undergoing 
during the second millennium. It is probable that a fragmentation 
was already initiated within it, which tended to distinguish an Aeolic 
and an Ionic group, and, among them, a group known as Arcado-
Cyprian. 
In any case, it is clear that two special languages were created in 
the second millennium: Mycenaean, the language o f the bureaucracy 
o f the Mycenaean kingdoms; and Achaean Epic, the language o f 
epic poetry, which was, o f course, oral. They had a lot in c o m m o n 
with the dialects referred to above, from which the later dialects 
would emerge; and differentiating features too. 
In the first millenium, with the disappearance of Mycenaean, the 

CONCLUSION 
313 
fragmentation process of East Greek continued; also o f West Greek, 
now within Greece. Various dialects were created within the groups. 
Each valley, each small region tended to created its own dialect; 
even its own alphabet, when, from the ninth century onwards, a 
new script emerged, derived from Phoenician. 
Thus, this is a story of* diversification, o f an ever greater rupture 
of unity. It deals with what we call the epigraphic dialects (because 
it is principally through inscriptions that we know them), although 
some became literary and in most o f them one could write verse 
inscriptions, influenced by Homeric poetry. 
Yet the creation, around the year 1000, o f isoglosses that partly 
unified the eastern and western dialects, or at least most of them, 
was an event of great significance. After this, diversification contin­
ued. The unity o f Greek seemed to be definitively lost, although the 
Greeks considered themselves as the descendants o f c o m m o n ances­
tors, with a c o m m o n culture. 
446. However, the calling of Greek, after so many adventures, was 
unity. What is so unique about this is that it should have been 
achieved through the literary languages. 
First, the Homeric language. As the inheritor o f old Achaean epic, 
it absorbed Aeolic and in particular Ionic elements by means of old 
features which were interpreted as Aeolic or Ionic (from their dialec­
tal assignment in a later date). Indeed, this literary, artificial lan­
guage was sung and understood in all parts. It thus contributed 
towards the unity o f the Greeks. 
Moreover, it strongly influenced the subsequent literary languages 
which were also international and which received a strong epic and 
above all Ionic influence. It was received by the language of elegy, 
iambos, and even by languages with an Aeolic base (the language 
of the Lesbian poets) and Doric base (the language o f choral lyric). 
Any poet who wrote in any of these genres, whatever his native 
land, wrote in the language appropriate to the particular genre: these 
were international languages. All of them contained, first, a strong 
epic influence; secondly, a strong Ionic influence - especially those 
we refer to as the 'general' literary languages o f elegy, iambos, and 
even choral lyric. 
Thus, Homeric epos was joined with the later literary languages, 
which were sung and understood everywhere. Ionic was the domi­
nant language, so that when prose arrived in the sixth century 
-
Ionic prose - everyone could write and understand it. 

314 
CONCLUSION 
T o be sure, Ionic prose was but a forerunner of Attic prose. Athens 
had become a centre o f power and above all the cultural centre o f 
Greece and a place o f freedom. The Greek intellectuals, who wrote 
in Ionic, flocked to Athens. O n e of them, Gorgias, began to write 
in Attic, which was not so different. And Attic, because of its cul­
tural force, triumphed everywhere. It was adopted by the Macedonians, 
who would later conquer Greece. So, Athens may have lost the war, 
but its conquerors generalised the use of Attic. 
This new Attic was koine. Thus, there can be no doubt that the 
literary languages, by means of the last of them, Attic, unified the 
Greek language. The epigraphic dialects soon disappeared entirely, 
or almost entirely. 
This was the first unification of Greek. It coincided with the promis­
ing creation — first in Ionic, later in Attic, and finally in koine — of 
a cultural and scientific language, which was the first of its kind. 
Greek spread throughout the East, and to a great extent also in 
the West, where the sophisticated men of R o m e were bilingual. It 
became the language o f the R o m a n empire in the East. 
447, But, after unification came diversification. This occurred with 
the creation o f two strata, corresponding to the popular language 
and the literary language. This distinction prevailed in the Hellenistic, 
Roman, Byzantine, and Modern periods, almost until the present 
day. In the case o f the literary language, the growing relevance of 
Greek, which Latin borrowed, was extremely important for the expan­
sion of the cultural and scientific language. This was the Greek-Latin 
I have referred to, which had such a great influence on so many 
languages. 
From the fourth century AD, Greek was the language of the Roman 
empire o f the East; in the Middle Ages it was the language of the 
Byzantine empire and the eastern Church. Literary or 'pure
5 Greek 
dominated. Not much is known about the popular or demotic Greek 
and its dialects: it was written rarely and in limited genres, partic­
ularly from the twelfth century onwards. But subsequentiy the Greeks 
would be dominated by the Slavs, Franks, Venetians, and Turks 
-
a sad state o f affairs. 
Yet, in the meantime, literary Greek managed to influence the 
European languages through Ancient and Medieval Latin, and through 
Byzantine Greek. 

CONCLUSION 
315 
448. But when Greece finally lifted itself out of this sad situation 
by gaining its independence in 1830, Greek was once again frag­
mented into two sociolinguistic strata and into geographical dialects. 
It was again the language of Athens that would end up imposing 
itself, a dialect based on the Peloponnesian dialects without the weak­
nesses and losses o f vowels' of the northern dialects, or the palatali­
sations and other features of the various dialects. 
This dialect, the new Attic, would assimilate lexical features par­
ticularly from the 'pure language'. Thus, the new Greek was created: 
the so-called Modern Greek, which is essentially Demotic, but with 
literary elements. Greek-Latin had a decisive influence on it. 
For a second time in the history of Greek, unification had 
fol­
lowed a differenciation. A n d once again, it had occurred in Athens. 
With one difference: the first time around, a cultural triumph had 
accompanied a political defeat; the second time around we were 
dealing with a political triumph which, however, was founded on 
the memory o f ancient Athens. 
In each case, by whatever means, Greek managed to become 
unified. So, it is significant that although in its worst moments, Greek 
may have been in decline, the educated Greek-Latin language, still 
managed to invade all the world's languages. Defeated at home, 
albeit provisionally, Greek went on to conquer the world. 


A B B R E V I A T I O N S * 
O H G . 
= Old High German 
Ac. = accusative 
act. — active voice 
adj. = adjective 
OSlav. = Old Slavic 
OFr. = Old French 
O H G . 
= Old High German 
OIn. = Old Indie 
Oltal. = Old Italian 
OSerb = Old Serbian 
Ger. = German 
O N o r . = Old Norse 
aor. = aorist 
OProv. = Old Provencal 
Arc. = Arcadian 
Arc.-Cyp, = Arcado-Cypriot 
Arm. 
= Armenian 
art. = article 
OSerb. = Old Serbian 
At. = Attic 
atem , = athematic 
Austr. = Austrian 
av. = avestico 
Bait. = Baltic 
Balto-Slav. = Balto-Slavic 
Bav. 
= Bavarian 
Boeot. = Boeotian 
Bulg. = Bulgarian 
c. = circa 
Cat. = Catalan 
Celt. = Celtic 
Cyp. = Cypriot 
Cret. = Cretan 
D . = dative 
D.-L.-I. = dative-locative-
instrumental 
decl. = declension 
des. = desinence 
Dor. 
= Doric 
eg. = example 
AeoL = Aeolic 
Sp. = Spanish 
fern. = feminine 
Fr. = French 
Phryg. - 
Phrygian 
fut. = future 
E. = East 
G. = genitive 
A G = Ancient Greek 
C G 
= C o m m o n Greek 
D G 
= Demotic Greek 
G K 
= Greek katharevusa 
M G 
= Modern Greek 
W G 
= West Greek 
E G = East Greek 
Goth. = Gothic 
Gr. = Greek 
Horn. = Homeric 
I.-L - Indo-Iranian 
IE = Indo-European 
impers. = impersonal 
impf. = imperfect 
* Abbreviations for the names of authors and works are those of the Diccionario 
Griego-Espanol 

318 
ABBREVIATIONS 
impv. = imperative 
ind. = indicative 
inf. = infinitive 
Eng. - 
English 
Ital. — Italian 
Ion. = Ionic 
Ion.-At. = Ionic-Attic 
L. — locative 
Lat. = Latin 
Lesb. = Lesbian 
lyr. — lyric 
Lith. = Lithuanian 
M H G , = Middle High German 
m a s c = masculine 
mid. = middle voice 
MFr. = Middle French 
M y c = Mycenaean 
MLat. = Middle Latin 
mod. = modern 
N. = nominative (also North) 
N. W . = North West 
W . = West 
West. = Western 
opt. = optative 
Pam. = Pamphylian 
part. = participle 
pas. = passive voice 
perf. = perfect 
pers. = person 
pi. = plural 
plu. = pluperfect 
Port. - 
Portuguese 
prep. = preposition 
pres. = present 
pret. = preterite 
pron. = pronoun 
Prov. ~ Provengal 
S. = South 
S. E. = South East 
S. W . = South West 
sec. = secondary 
Serb.-Croat. = Serbo-Croatian 
sg. = singular 
subj. = subjunctive 
them. = thematic 
Thes. = Thessalian 
T o e = Tocharian 
V o c — vocative 
vulg. = vulgar 

B I B L I O G R A P H Y 
i 
J. Pouilloux et al., 1963: Archiloque, Vandoeuvres-Geneva. 
A. E. Raubitschek et al., 1968: Uepigramme grecque, Vandoeuvres-Geneva. 
Istituto lombardo-accademia di scienza e lettere, 1977: Pakontologia linguistica, Brescia, 
Adrados, et al., 1984 (2nd ed.): Introduction a Homero, Barcelona, 2 vols. 
AA.W., 1995: Les grecs et ['Occident, Rome. 
AA.W., 1996: Filhelenismo e tradizionalismo nei primi due secoli deWimpero, Rome. Actes 
de la premiere recontre intemationale de dialectologie grecque, 1987: in Verbum 10, no. 1-3, 
Nancy. 
A.A.V.V., 1999: Les completives en grec ancien, Saint Etienne. 
Adiego, I. J., 1993: Stadia Carica, Barcelona. 
Adrados, F. R., 1948: Estudios sobre el lexico de las Jdbulas esopicas, Salamanca. 
, 1952: La dialectologia griega como juente para el estudio de las migraciones indoeuropeas 
en Grecia. Salamanca 1952 (2nd ed., Madrid 1997). 
, 1953a and 1957: 'Sobre los origenes del vocabulario atico', Emerita 21, pp. 
123-162; 23, pp. 81-121. 
——-, 1953b: 'Como ha Uegado a nosotros la literatura griega', Revista de la Universidad 
de Madrid 1, pp. 527-552. 
, 1955: 'Achaisch, Ionisch und Mykenisch', IF 62, pp. 240-248. 
, 1958: 'La vocalizacion de las sonantes indoeuropeas', Emerita 26, pp. 249—309 
(in Estudios sobre las sonantes y larengales indoeuropeas, 2nd ed., 1973, pp. 3-79, 
enlarged). 
, 1962: 'Hettitisch und Indogermanisch', in //. Fachtagung ftir Indogermanische und 
allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft, pp. 145-151, Innsbruck. 
, 1966: Ilustracion y politica en la Grecia cldsica, Madrid. 
, 1968: 'Ideas para una tipologia del griego', EC 54, pp. 25-258 (in Estudios 
de Lingiiistica General, 2nd ed., Madrid, 1969, pp. 111-135). 
, 1969a: Lingiiistica Estructural, Madrid. 
, 1969b: 'El Banquete platonico y la teoria del teatro', Emerita 37, pp. 1-28 (in 
Adrados 1992d, pp. 353-389). 
, 1971: 'Lengua, ontologia y logica en los sofistas y Platon', Revista de Occidente 
96, pp. 340-355 and 99, pp. 285-309 (in Estudios de Semdntica y Sintaxis, Madrid 
1975, pp. 209-246). 
, 1973a: 'El sistema de Heraclito: estudio a partir del lexico', Emerita 41, pp. 
1-43 (in Estudios de Semdntica y Sintaxis, Madrid, 1975, pp. 237-313). 
——, 1973b: 'La lengua en la Ciencia contemporanea y en la Filosofia actual', 
RSEL 3, pp. 297-321 (in Estudios de Semdntica y Sintaxis, Barcelona 1975, pp. 
43-67). 
, 1974 (2nd ed.): Evolution y estructura del verbo indoeuropeo, Madrid. 
, 1975a: 'Sanskrit and Indoeuropean', in Proceedings of the first international Sanskrit 
Conference 111, New Delhi, pp. 436-444 (Sp. vers, in Adrados 1988a, pp. 421-428). 
, 1975b: Lingiiistica Indoeuropea, Madrid. 
, 1975c: 'La lengua del teatro griego', in Estudios sobre los generos literarios, 
Salamanca, pp. 29-48. 
, 1976a: 'Micenico, dialectos paramicenicos y aqueo epico', Emerita 44, pp. 
65-113 (in Adrados 1988a, pp. 429-472). 
•, 1976b: 'La creacion de los dialectos griegos del primer milenio', Emerita 
44, pp. 245-278 (in Adrados 1988a, pp. 473-503). 

320 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
, 1978: 'Propuestas para una nueva edition e interpretation de Estesicoro', 
Emerita 46, pp. 251-299. 
, 1979-87: Historia de la fdbula greco-latina, Madrid, 3 vols. (English transl., Leiden, 
Brill, 1999-2003). 
, 1979a: 'Arqueologia y diferenciacion del Indoeuropeo', Emerita 47, pp. 
245-278^(in Adrados 1988a, pp. 19-38; German vers., Innsbruck, 1992). 
, 1979b: review of J. L. Garcia Ramon, 'Les origenes postmyceniennes du 
groupe dialectal eolien', Emerita 47, pp. 471-472. 
, 1980a: 'La teoria del signo linguistico en un pasaje del Banquets platonico', 
RSEL 10, pp. 331 337 (in Adrados 1988b, pp. 61-69). 
, 1980b: 'Les langues slaves dans le contexte des langues indoeuropeennes', in 
Supostabitelno ezykosnanie, pp. 3-14 (Sp. vers, in Adrados 1988a, pp. 541-557. 
, 1980c: Lirica griega arcaica, Madrid. 
, (dir.), 1980 2002: Diccionario Griego-Espanol, Madrid (6 vols.). 
, 1981a: 'Towards a new Stratigraphy of the Homeric Dialect', Glotta 59, pp. 
13-27 (Sp. vers, in Adrados 1988a, pp. 505-518). 
, 1981b: 'Sociolmgiiistica y griego antiguo', EC 11, pp. 311-329 (in Adrados 
1988b, pp. 34-45). 
, 1982a: 'Neue jambische Fragmente aus archaischer und klassischer Zeit. 
Stesichorus, Semonides (?), Auctor incertus', Philologus 126, pp. 157-179. 
, 1982b: 'The archaic structure of Hittite: the crux of the problem', JIES I 1, 
p. 135 (Sp. vers, in Adrados 1988a, pp. 391-420). 
, 1983a (2nd ed.): Fiesta, Comedia y tragedia, Barcelona. 
, 1983b: 'Siria, cruce de caminos de la narrative bizantina y la oriental', Aula 
Orientalis 1, pp. 17—29. 
, 1983c: 'Las categorias gramaticales del griego antiguo', in Estudios metodologicos 
sobre la lengua griega, pp. 85-97, Caceres (in Adrados 1988b, pp. 139-149). 
, 1984a: 'La dialectologia griega', in A. Martinez (ed.), Actualizacion Cientifica en 
Dialectologia griega, pp. 219-237 (in Adrados 1988a, pp. 519-539). 
—— y 1984b: Origenes de la lirica griega, Madrid. 
, 1984c: 'Prologo' to P. Badenas, La estructura del didlogo platonico, Madrid, pp. 
IX-XI (in Adrados 1992d, pp. 349-351). 
——•, 1984d: 'The earliest influences of Greek Fable on Medieval Latin Writing', 
Classica et Mediaevalia 35, pp. 243-263. 
, 1986a (2nd ed.): Origenes de la lirica griega, Madrid. 
, 1986b: 'Scientific Language: Instrument and Obstacle. Examples from the 
Field of linguistics', in Wissenschaftssprache und Gesellschqft, Th. Bungarten (ed.), 
Hamburg, pp. 13-21 (Sp. vers, in Adrados 1988b, pp. 46-52). 
——, 1986c: 'Las fuentes de Hesiodo y la composition de sus poemas', Emerita 54, 
pp. 1-36. 
—-—, 1986d: 'La epica romance a la luz de la epica indoeuropea', in Adas del 
Congreso de la Juglaresca, Madrid, pp. 7—22 (in Adrados 1988b, pp. 309-322). 
, 1987: 'Cultural Contacts between Byzance and the Roman Germanic Empire 
in the time of Methodius', in Kirillo-Methodievski Stydii 4, Sofia, pp. 52~56. 
, 1988a: Mievos estudios de Lingiiistica Indoeuropea, Madrid. 
——, 1988b: Nuevos Estudios de Lingiiistica General y Teoria Literaria, Barcelona. 
, 1988c: 'Sistema y sistemas de los casos en Griego antiguo', in Homenaje a 
Maria C Giner, Salamanca, pp. 143-147 (in Adrados 1988b, pp. 170-174). 
-——, 1989a: 'De la paideia tragica a la socratico-platonica', in Paideia y Humanitas, 
Santiago de Chile, pp. 119-135 (in Adrados 1992d, pp. 159-182). 
, 1989b: 'Anticipos de una nueva teoria del sistema casual del griego antiguo
5, 
in Adas del VII Congreso Espanol de Estudios Cldsicos \, pp. 23-278, Madrid (in 
Adrados 1988b, pp. 158-162). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
321 
, 1989c: 'Etruscan as an IE Anatolian (but not Hittite) Language', JIES 17, 
pp. 363-383. 
, 1990a (3rd ed.): Liricos griegos. Elegiacos y yambografos arcaicos, Madrid. 
, 1990b: 'Sincretismo de casos en micenico?', Menos 24, pp. 169-185. 
, 1990c: 'El genitivo tematico en -o en micenico y chipriota', in Stadia Indogermanica 
et Palaeohispanica en honorem A. Tovar et L. Michelena, Salamanca, pp. 175-181. 
, 1992a: 'La lengua de Socrates y su filosofla', Methexis 5, pp. 29-52 (in Adrados 
1992d, pp. 251-278). 
, 1992b: 'Mito e historia en la Epopeya', in 3er Coloquio de Estudiantes de Filologia 
Cldsica, Valdepenas, pp. 217-227. 
, 1992c: 'The new Image of Indoeuropean. The History of a Revolution', IF 
97, pp. 1-28. 
, 1992d: Palabras e Ideas, Madrid. 
, 1993: review of M. Papathomopoulos, Aesopus revisitatus and '0 pio<; xox> AiocbflOD 
Gnomon 65, pp. 660-664. 
, 1994a: 'De la literature helenistica a la literature latina', in Adas del VIII 
Congreso Espanol de Estudios Cldsicos, I, pp. 855-862. 1994c: ('More on Etruscan as 
an IE-Anatolian Language', Historical Linguistics 107, pp. 54-76. 
, 1994b (2nd ed.): Rakes griegos de la cultura moderna, Madrid. 
-——, 1994c: Nueva Sintaxis del Griego antiguo, Madrid. 
, 1995a: Sociedad, amor y poesia en la Grecia antigua, Madrid. 
, 1995b: 'Human vocabulary and naturalistic vocabulary in the Presocratics' 
Glotta 72, pp. 182^195 
, 1995c: 'Problemas lexicos y lexicograficos del espanol actual', Donaire 4, pp. 
52-58. 
, 1996a: Manual de Lingiiistica Indoeuropea, II. Morfologia nomenal y verbal, Madrid. 
, 1996b: "la eXfoivnca, r\ nXeov TcayKoauia yXcbaaa', in E^Xrjvucfi Ai£8vf|<; 
TAxoaaa 7, pp. 275-277. 
, 1996c: 'Esp. acrobata o de como quince diccionarios pueden equivocarse
5, 
in Adas del IV Congreso de Hispanistas de Asia, Seoul, pp. 1-5. 
, 1997a: Democracia y literatura en la Atenas clisica, Madrid. 
, 1997b: 'Los origenes del lenguaje cientifico', RSEL 27, pp. 299-315. 
, 1997c: "More on the Diccionario Griego-Espanol", en A Festschrift for Ladislav 
Zgusta, Berlin-Nueva York, Mouton-de Gruyter, pp. 221-231. 
——, 1998a: 'La reconstruction del Indoeuropeo y su diferenciacion dialectal', in 
Manual de Lingiiistica Indoeuropea, III, pp. 144-205. Madrid. 
, 1998b: La 'Dialectologia Griega', hoy (1952-1995). 
Madrid. 
——, 1998c: 'Navegaciones del siglo VIII, navegaciones micenicas y navegaciones 
en la Odisea
9 (in Greek) OMHPIKA, Ithaca,, pp. 13-29. 
, 1998d: and Rodriguez Somolinos, J., 1995-96 [1997]: 'Diccionario Griego-Espanol 
Vol. V , Museum Criticum 30-31, pp. 301-317. 
, 1998e: and D. Lara: 'El Vocabulario tecnico en el Diccionario Griego-Espanol', 
in Atti del II Seminario . . . sui Lessici, Messina, pp. 13-25. 
, 1998f: "Escisiones y unificaciones en la historia del Griego", en Classica Boli­
viano, 61-68. 
, 1999a: Manual de Lingiiistica Indoeuropea III (en colaboracion), 'La reconstruc­
tion del Indoeuropeo y de su diferenciacion dialectal', pp. 249-284. 
, 1999b: 'El etui de Conchita' Miscelenea lexica en memoria de Conchita Serrano, 
Madrid, CSIG, pp. 3-9. 
, 1999c: 'Ambiente y lexico egipcico en Esquilo, Las Suplicantes: (3api<; (839, 
etc.); oivSovia (121); %&UTiaa (878);
 ?Iai (848)', in Eikasmos 10, pp. 46-55. 
, 1999d: "Hacia una tipologia de las combinaciones de rasgos linguisticos", en 
Language Change and Typological Variation, II, Washington 1999, pp. 387-396. 

322 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
——, 2000a: 'Homero y las lenguas poeticas de Grecia como via hacia la unidad 
del griego', in Poesia e religione in Grecia. Studi in onore de G. Aurelio Pnviterra, Perugia, 
pp. 3-12. 
, 2000b: '^Como describir el Indoeuropeo y sus variantes?', in Europa et Asia 
Polyglotta, Dettelbach, pp. 1-6. 
, 2000c: 'La Semantica en el Diccionario Griego-Espanol', in Cien anos de inves­
tigation semdntica: de Michel Breal a la adualidad, La Laguna, pp. 99-110. 
, 2000d: 'Towards a Syntax of Proto-Indo-European', IF 105, pp. 60-67. 
, 2000e: 'Griego y Latin, vivos en la lengua culta international', Revista de 
Lengua y Literatura Espanolas 1, pp. 9-22. 
, 2000f: "Toponimos griegos en Iberia y Tartessos", Emerita 68, 2000, 1—18. 
, 2001: Modelos gtiegos de la prosa castellana y Europea. Madrid, Real Academia 
Espanola. 
, 2001a: 'Lexicographical Studies and Publications in Madrid', in Praktikd, Tomos 
A, Athens, pp. 1-14. 
, 2001b: 'Introduction a "El verbo Esslavo'", in Paleobulgaristika i Starobulgaristica, 
Veliko Turnovo, pp. 147-157. 
, 2001c: 'The reconstruction of the most ancient Indo-European at the School 
of Madrid', in Cinquant' ami di ricerche linguistiche, Milan 2001, pp. 89-95. 
, 2001 d: "Mas sobre Iberia y los toponimos griegos", Archivo Espanol de Arqueobgia, 
25-33. 
, 200 le: "La composition de los poemas hesiodicos", Emerita 69, 197-224. 
, 2002a: "Sobre Botorrita IV", Emerita 70, 2002, pp. 1-8. 
, 2002b: "Los eslavos: de los origenes a la helenizacion y la integration en 
Europa", en Espana y el Mundo Eslavo, Madrid 2002, pp. 27-40. 
, 2002c: "Hacia una teoria de la Ciencia Toponimica", RSEL 32, 2002, pp. 
33-51. 
——, 2002c: "La Lingiiistica griega en Espana (1983-2000)", en Adas del II Congreso 
de la RSEL, Madrid 2002, I, pp. 215-231. 
, 2002d: 'Tipologia de las lenguas indoeuropeas modernas', Stadia Indoeuropaean, 
pp. 9-29. 
, 2002e: "El lexico espanol y el diccionario de la Academia", in 2002. Central 
Nuclear Trillo 1. Encuentros Culturales, pp. 103-122. 
——2002f (en colaboracion): Diccionario Griego-Espanol VI. Madrid, C.S.I.C. 
, 2003 (new ed.): Tucidides. Historia de la guerra del Peloponeso, Madrid. 
——-, 2003a: "Grecia en los origenes de la prosa castellana", en Grecia y Espana. 
Los confines de Europa. Madrid 2002 (2003), pp. 13-23. 
and Rodriguez Somolinos, J., 2003b: Diccionario Griego-Espanol, vol. VI, in Illinois 
Classical Studies 27-28, pp. 115-130. 
, 2004a: "Griego y Latin, ^lenguas muertas?", Estudios Cldsicos, 125, 2004, pp. 
7-16. 
Agud, A., 1980: Historia y teoria de los casos. Madrid, Gredos. 
Agud, A. and others (eds.), Las lenguas de corpusy sus problemas linguisticos, Madrid, 1996. 
Akurgal, E., 1985: Ancient civilizations and ruins of Turkey, Istambul. 
Albini, U. y Maltese, E. V., 1984: Bizanzio nella sua Letteratura, Milan. 
Allen, W. S., 1987: 'The Development of the Attic Vowel System. Conspiracy or 
catastrophe?', Minos 20-22, pp. 21-32. 
Alonso Troncoso, V., 1994: El comercio griego arcaico, La Corufla. 
Altheim, F. and Stiehl, R. (eds.), 1971: Christentum am Roten Meer, Berlin and New 
York. 
Aly, W., 1987 (1st ed. 1929): Formprobleme der alteren griechischen Prosa, New York. 
Amadasi Guzzo, M. G., 1991: 'The shadow Line. Reflexions sur l'introduction de 
Palphabet en Grece', in Baurain, CI., and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 293-309. 
Ambrosini, R., 1970: 'Problemi e ipotesi sulla lengua dei graffiti di Segesta', in 
Rendiconti, Classe di Scienze morali, storiche e filologiche, 25, pp. 461-464. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
323 
, 1979: 'Le iscrizioni sicane, sicue, elime', in Le iscrizioni pre-latine en Italia, Rome, 
pp. 57-104. 
, 1983: 'Lengue nella Italia pregreca', in Tre Millenni di Storia Linguistica, Pisa, 
pp. 13-35. 
Anagnostopulos, C , 1923: 'The language of Aristophanes', Athena 36, pp. 1-60. 
Andre, J., 1971: Emprunts et suffixes nominaux en latin, Geneve-Paris. 
Apostolopoulos, Ph., 1984: La fatigue du roman byzantin
 (Callimaque et Ch?ysorrhoe
}, Athens. 
Arnim, M., 1912: De Philonis Byzantii genere dicendi, Gryphia. 
Aura Jorro, F., 1986-1996: Diccionario Micenico, 1-11, Madrid. 
Babiniotis, G. A., 1972: To pfjjua rfjg 'EXXrfviKrjg, Athens. 
, 1978: NeoeXXrjvucrf Koivrj. Ylipa rf\g KaOapevjiovarjg xal rfjg SrjfioTiicfjg, Athens. 
, 1985: ZvvomiKr) 
iotopia 
rfjg EXXrfviicfjg yXwaarfg, Athens. 
, 1999: H rXwaaa cog celiac. Athens, Gutenberg, 1999. 
Bach, A., 1949: Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, Heidelberg. 
Badenas, P., 1984: La estructura del didlogo platonico, Madrid. 
, 1985a: 'La lengua griega en la baja Edad Media', Erytheia 6, pp. 5-41. 
, 1985b: 'Primeros textos altomedievales en griego vulgar', Eiytheia 6, pp. 
163-183. 
Barrio, M. L. del, 1987: El dialecto de Eubea, Madrid. 
, 1988: 'La position dialectal del euboico', Emerita 56, pp. 255-270. 
——, 1994: 'Relation dialectal entre colonia y metropoli: ^herencia o proximidad 
geografica? Eretria y Oropo', RSEL 24, pp. 315-328. 
Barrios, M. J., 1996: El dialecto cretense. Unpublished doctoral thesis, Seville. 
Bartonek, A., 1972: Classification of the West Greek Dialects, Brno. 
, 1979: 'Greek Dialects in the second millenium b.g.', Eirene 9, pp. 49-66. 
, 1987: 'The Greek Dialects between 1000 and 300 b.g.', SMEA 26, pp. 7-20. 
, 1991: 'L'evoluzione dei dialetti greci nella dimensions geografica delle eta 
oscure', in Musti, D. and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 241-250. 
——, 1996: 'The Mycenaean Language and Dialect', in De Miro, E. and others 
(eds.) 1996, pp. 7-23. 
, 2003: Handbuch der Mykenischen, Heidelberg, Winter. 
Baugh, A. C. 1971 (2nd ed.): A History of the English Language, London. 
Baumhauer, O. A., 1986: Die sophistische RhetoriL Eine Theorie sprachlicher Kommunikation, 
Stuttgart. 
Baurain, C , 1991: 'L'ecriture syllabique a Chipre', in Baurain, C. and others (eds.), 
Phoenikeia Grammata. Lire et ecrire en Mediterranee. Actes du Colloque de Liege, 15-18 
novembre 1989, Namur, pp. 389-424. 
Bechtel, F., 1921-1924 (2nd ed. 1963): Die griechischen Dialekte, I—III, Berlin. 
Beck, H.-G., 1971: Geschichte der byzontinischen Volksliteratur, Munich. 
Beck, I., 1971: Die Rings/composition bei Herodot und ihre Bedeutung fiir die Beweistechnik, 
Hildesheim. 
Bergua Cavero, Jorge, 2002: Introduction al estudio de los hellenismus del espanol, Zaragoza. 
Bernabe, A., 1977: 'La vocalization de las sonantes indoeuropeas en griego', Emerita 
45, pp. 269-298. 
, 1979: 'Los filosofos presocraticos como autores literarios', Emerita 47, pp. 357-394. 
——, 1996 (2nd ed.): Poetae Epici Graeci. Testimonia et Fragmenta, pars I, Stuttgart and 
Leipzig. 
, 2004: Poetae Epici Graecii Testimonia et Fragmenta, pars II, fasc. 1, Miinchen & 
Leipzig. 
, 
Bernand, E. and others, 1991: Recueil des Inscriptions de I'Ethiopie pre-axoumite et axoumite, 
Paris. 
Bers, V., Greek Poetic Syntax in the Classical Age, New Haven. 
Berschen, W., 1969-70: 'Literatur und Sprache. III. Literatur. Griechisches im 
lateinischen Mittelalter', in Reallexikon der Byzantinistik 3-4, cols. 227-304. 
Beyer, K., 1961: Semitische Syntax im neuen Testament, Gottingen. 

324 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Bile, M., 1988: Le diakcte cretois ancien, Paris. 
— , 
1990a: 'Dialectologie et chronologies*, Lalies 9, pp. 7-16. 
, 1990b: 'L'apport de la linguistique a la dialectologie', Lalies 9, pp. 17-39. 
, 1996: 'Une koina est-egeenne?', in Brixhe, C. (ed.) 1996a, pp. 133-146. 
Brixhe, C. and Hodot, R., 1984: 'Les dialectes grecs, ces inconnus', BSL 79, pp. 
155-203. 
Birwe, 1956: Griechisch-Arische Sprachbeziehungen im Verbalsystem, Waldorf. 
Biville F. 1987: Graphie et pronontiation des mots grecs et latin, Louvain. 
, 1990-1995: Les emprunts du Latin au Grec. Approche Phonetique, 1-11, Louvain-
Paris. 
, 1993: 'Grec des romains ou latin des grecs? Ambiguite de quelques proces­
sus neologiques dans la koine', in Brixhe, G. (ed.) 1993a, pp. 129-140. 
Bjork, G., 1950: Das alpha impurum und die tragische Kunstsprache, Uppsala. 
Blanken, C. H., 1951: Les grecs de Cargese, Leiden. 
Blass F, and Debrunner A., 1949 (8th ed.): Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Griechisch, 
Gottingen. 
Blumel, W., 1982: Die aiolischen Dialekte, Gottingen. 
, 1993: 'Dialekte und Dialektmischung im siidwestlichen Kleinasien', in Grespo, 
E. and others (eds.) 1993, pp. 29-35. 
Boardman, J., 1973: Los griegos en Ultramar: comercio y expansion colonial antes de la era 
cldsica, Madrid. 
Bohling, A., 1960: 'Griechische Elemente im Koptischen als Zeugniss fur die 
Geschichte der griechischen Sprache', in Akten des XI. intemaiionalen Byzantmistenkongresses, 
Munich. 
Bondesson, B., 1936: De sonis et formis titulorum Milesiorum Didymaeorumque, Lund. 
Boned Golera, P. and Rodriguez Somolinos, J., 1998: Repertorio bibliogrqfico de la 
Lexicografia griega, Madrid. 
Bonfante, G., 1984: / / miceneo, il greco storico e Omero, Rome. 
— 
and L., 1985: Lengua e cultura degli etruschi, Rome. 
Bonner, R. J., 1929-30: 'The conflict of Languages in the Roman World', CJ 25, 
pp. 579-92. 
Bosch-Gimpera, P., 1960: El problema indoeuropeo, Mexico. 
Bosque, I. and Perez Fernandez, M., 1987: Diccionario inverso de la lengua espanola, 
Madrid. 
Bourguet, E., 1927: Le dialecte laconien, Paris, 
Bowie, A. M., 1981: The poetic Dialect of Sappho and Alcaeus, New York. 
Bowra, C. M., 1952: Heroic Poetry, London. 
Braun, T. F. R. G., 1882: 'The Greeks and the Near East' and 'The Greeks in 
Egypt', in the reedition of the Cambridge Ancient History, III 3, pp. 1-31 y 32-56. 
Bravo Garcia, A., Signes Codoner, J., Rubio Gomez, E., 1997: El Imperio Bizantino, 
Madrid. 
Breitenbach, W., 1934: Untersuchungen uber die Sprache der Euripideischen Lyrik, Stuttgart. 
Bremer, J. M. and others, 1987: Homer: Beyond oral Poetry, Amsterdam. 
Brescia, C , 1955: Ricerche sulla lingua e lo stilo di Epicuro, Naples. 
Brillante, C , 1986: 'Sul dialetto miceneo e la lengua epica', QUCC 22, pp. 145-151. 
, 1987.: 'Sulla lingua della lirica corale', QUCC 23, pp. 145-153. 
, Cantilena, M., Pavese, C. O. (eds.), 1981: I poemi epici rapsodici non omerici e 
la tradizione orale, Padua. 
Briquel, D., 1991: 'L'ecriture etrusque. D'apres les inscriptions du VIP s. av. 
J.-Ch.', in Baurain, G. and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 615-63 1. 
Brixhe, C , 1983: 'Epigraphie et grammaire du phrygien: etat present et perspec­
tives', in Vineis, E. (ed.), Le lingue indoeuropee di frammentaria attestazione, Pisa, pp. 
109-133. 
, 1984: Essai sur le grec anatolien au debut de notre ere, Nancy. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
325 
, 1990a: 'L'apparentement des dialectes grecs', Lalies 9, pp. 27-39. 
——-j 1990b: 'Dialectologie et ideologic', Lalies 9, pp. 41-53. 
, 1991a: Sur la Crete antique. Histoire, Ecriture, Langues, Nancy. 
, 1991b: 'De la phonologie a Pecriture. Quelques aspects de l'adaptation de 
l'alphabet caneen au grec', in Baurain, C. and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 313-356. 
, 1991c: 'Du mycenien aux dialectes du ler millenaire. Quelques aspects de la 
problematique', in Musti, D. and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 251-272. 
, 1992: 'Du "datif" mycenien aux protagonistes de la situation linguistique', in 
Olivier, J. P. (ed.) 1992, pp. 129-157. 
(ed.), 1993a and 1996a: La koine grecque antique, 1—11. Nancy. 
, 1993b: 'A chacun sa koine?', in Brixhe, G. (ed.) 1993a, pp. 7-21. 
, 1993c: 'Le Grec en Carie et Lycie au IV
e siecle', in Brixhe, G. (ed.) 1993a, 
pp. 59-82. 
, 1996b: 'Le IP et le I
e r siecles de Phistoire linguistique de la Laconie et la 
notion de koina', in Brixhe, C. (ed.) 1996a, pp. 93-111. 
, 1996c: Phonetique et Phonologie du Grec ancien, 1, Louvain-la-Nueve. 
and Panayotis, A., 1988: 'L'hellenisation de la Macedonie, Pune des sources 
de la koine', Verbum 11, pp. 245-260. 
Browning, R., 1982: 'Greek diglossia yesterday and today', Int. Journal of Sociology of 
Language 35, pp. 49-68. 
, 1983 (2nd ed.): Greek transl. Athens 1996. Medieval and Modem Greek, Cambridge. 
——1997: 'Von der Koine bis zu den Anfangen des modernen Griechisch', in 
H.-G. Nesserath (ed.), Einleitung in die griechische Philologie, Stuttgart and Leipzig, 
pp. 156-168. 
Brunot, F., 1966: Histoire de la langue frangaise, I—II vols., Paris. 
Buchheit, V., 1960: Untersuchungen zur theorie des Genos Epideiktikon von Gorgias bis 
Aristoteles, Munich. 
Buck, C. D. and Petersen, W., 1944: A Reverse Index of Greek Nouns and Adjectives, 
Chicago. 
Bubenik, V., 1989: Hellenistic and Roman Greece as a Sociolinguistic Area, Amsterdam. 
Burgmannn, L., 1991: 'Ae^eic; pCGjxaiicai. Lateinische Worter in Byzantinischen juris-
tischen Texten', in W. Horandner and E. Trapp (eds.) 1991, pp. 61-79. 
Cadell, H., 1981: "Papyrologie et information lexicologique", en Scritti Motevecchi, 
Bolonia, pp. 73-83. 
Cameron, A., 1931: 'Latin Words in the Greek Inscriptions of Asia Minor', AJPh 
52, pp. 232-262. 
Campanile, E., 1990a: La riconstruzzione delta cultura indoeuropea, Pisa. 
, 1990b: 'Antigiiedades indoeuropeas', in A. Giacalone - P. Ramat (eds.), Las 
lenguas indoeuropeas, Madrid, pp. 27-56. 
Cantilena, M., 1982: Ricerche sulla dizione epica. I. Per uno studio della formularieta degli 
Inni Omerici, Rome. 
Caratzas, S., 1957-58: 'Die Entstchung der neugriechischen Literatursprache', Glotta 
36, pp. 194-208. 
, 1958: Uorigtne des dialectes neo-grecs de Vltalie meridionale, Paris. 
, 1976: Les Tzacones, Berlin. 
Carpenter, Rh., 1968: 'Das Alter des griechischen Alphabets', in G. Pfohl (ed.) 
1968a, pp. 1-39. 
Casevitz, M., 1985: Le vocabulaire de la colonisation en Grec ancien, Paris. 
Cassio, A. C , 1996: 'La prose ionienne postclassique et la culture de I'Asie Mineure 
a Pepoque hellenistique', in Brixhe, C. (ed.) 1996a, pp. 147-170. 
Castillo Didier, M., 1994: Epopeya de Diyenis Akritas, Santiago de Chile. 
Cavenaile, R., 1951: 'Influence latine sur la vocabulaire grec de PEgypte', Chronique 
d'Egypte 51, pp. 391-404. 
Caveney, J., 1978: Verbal Variation and Antithesis in the Narrative of Thucydides, Ann Arbor. 

326 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Cervenka-Ehrenstrasser, I. M. and Diethart, J., 1996: Lexikon der lateinischen Lehwdrter 
in den griechischen Texten Aegyptens, 1, Vienna. 
Chadwick, H. M., 1967 (1st ed. 1912): Vie Heroic Age, Cambridge. 
and Chadwick, N. K., 1968 (1st ed. 1936): The Growth of literature, Cambridge. 
Chadwick, J., 1956: 'The Greek Dialects and Greek History', Greece and Rome 3, pp. 
38-50. 
, 1958: El enigma micenico, Madrid. 
, 1964: 'Mycenaean elements in the Homeric Dialect', in G. S. Kirk (ed.), The 
Language and Background of Homer, Cambridge, pp. 38-50. 
, 1973: 'Who were the Dorians?', PP 103, pp. 103-117. 
, 1976: The Mycenaean World, Cambridge. 
, 1985: 'I dori e la creazione dei dialetti greci', in D. Musti (ed.) 1985a, pp. 
3-12. 
, 1988: 'Differences and similarities between Cypriot and the other Greek 
Dialects', in The History (Karageorghis, J. and Masson, O., eds.), 1988, pp. 55-66. 
, 1990: 'The Descent of the Greek Epic', JHS 110, pp. 174-177. 
Chantraine, P., 1927: Histoire du Parfait Grec, Paris. 
, 1933: La formation des noms en grec ancien, Paris. 
, 1942: Grammaire Homerique (Phonetique et Morphologic), Paris. 
, 1956: Etudes sur le vocabulaire grec, Paris. 
Christidis, A. Ph. (ed.), 2001: laxopta xr\<; *EXkr\viKr\<; rtaoaaaq, I., Thessaloniki. 
Clarysse, W., 1987: Greek loan Words in demotic, Louvain. 
Conejero, V., 1973: El lenguaje coloquial griego, Barcelona. 
Consani, C , 1989: 'Storia e preistoria dei dialetti antichi: a proposito di una recente 
pubblicazione', QJJCC 62, pp. 157-167. 
, 1993: 'La koine et les dialectes grecs dans la documentation linguistique et 
la reflexion metalinguistique des premiers siecles de notre ere', in Brixhe, C. (ed.) 
1993a, pp. 23-39. 
-, 1996: 'Koina et koine dans la documentation epigraphique de l'ltalie meri-
dionale' in Brixhe, C. (ed.) 1996a, pp. 113-132. 
Cook, J. M., 1982: 'The Eastern Greeks', in reedition of the Cambridge Ancient History, 
III 3, p. 196 ff. 
Corsani, B., 1994: Guida alio studio del Nuovo Testamento, Rome. 
Cortelazzo, M., 1970: Uinflusso linguistico greco a Venezia, Bologna. 
Cortes Gabaudan, F., 1986: Formulas retoricas de la oratoria judicial dtica, Salamanca. 
Coseriu, E., 1966: 'Structure lexicale et enseignement du vocabulaire', in Actes du 
Premier Colloque International de Linguistique Appliquee, Nancy, pp. 175-272. 
, 1977: 'Influencia griega sobre el latin vulgar', in Estudios de Lingiiistica romdnica, 
pp. 264-280. 
Costas, P. S., 1979: An Outline of the History of the Greek Language with particular Emphasis 
on the Koine and the subsequent Periods, Chicago. 
Crespo, E. and others, 1992: Homerica. Estudios lingilisticos, Madrid. 
, (eds.), 1993: Dialectologica Graeca. Adas del II Coloquio International de Dialectologia 
Griega (Miraflores de la Sierra [Madrid], 19-21 de junio de 1991), Madrid. 
Crespo, E., Conti, L., Maquieira, H., 2003: Sintaxis del Griego Cldsico. Madrid, Gredos. 
Crossland, R. A., 1985: 'La tradizione greca suila migrazione dorica', in Musti, D. 
(ed.) 1985a, pp. 235-240. 
Cruz, A. de la y Canete, A., 1992: Historia del ingles. Malaga. 
Cruz, J. de la and Trainor, P., 1989: Gramdtica inglesa, Madrid. 
Cunchillos, J. L. and Zamora, J. A., 1995: Gramdtica Ugaritica, Madrid. 
Curtis, A., 1985: Ugarit (Ras Shamra), Cambridge. 
Dagron, G., 1969: 'Aux origines de la civilisation Byzantine: langue de culture et 
langue d'Etat', Revue Historique 241, pp. 23-56. 
Daris, S., 1991 (2nd ed.): 77 lessico latino nel greco d'Egitto, Barcelona. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
327 
Daskalakis, B., I960: 'O 'EXXrfvicjfiog vfjg dpxcciag MaKs5oviag, Athens. 
Davaras, C , 1976: Guide to Cretan Antiquities, Park Ridge, New Jersey. 
Dawkins, R., 1916: Modern Greek in Asia Minor: a Study of Dialect of Silly, Cappadocia 
and Pharasa, Cambridge. 
, 1940: The Dialects of Modern Greek', TPHs pp. 1-38. 
Debrunner, A., 1933: Nahklassisches Griechisch, Berlin. 
, and Scherer, A., 1969^(11, 2nd ed. by A. Scherer): Geschichte der griechischen 
Sprache, Berlin. 
Deger-Jalkotzy. S. (ed.) 1983: Qiechenland, die Aegais und die Levante wdhrend der Dark 
Ages vom 12. bis zum 9. Jh. v. Chr., Vienna. 
Deichgraber, K., 1962: 'Rhythmische Elemente im Logos des Heraklit', AWLM, 
Abh. des Geistes und Sprachwiss. Klasse, pp. 477-552. 
Deissmann, A., 1923 (4th ed.): Licht von Osten, Tubingen. 
Delatte, L. and others, 1981: Dictionnaire frequentiel et inverse de la langue latine, Liege. 
Denniston, J., 1970 (1st ed. 1952): Greek Prosa Style, Oxford. 
Descoeudres, P. G. (ed.), 1990: Greek Colonists and Native Populations, Canberra and 
Oxford. 
De Miro, E. and others (eds.), 1996: Atti e Memorie del secondo Congresso Internationale 
di Micenologia, Rome. 
Des Places, E., 1934: 'Style parle et style oral chez les ecrivains grecs', Mel. Bidez, 
I, 267-286. 
Despotopoulos, C , 1985-86: 'Hippocrate et la philosophic', Philosophia 15-16, pp. 
145-155. 
Devoto, G., 1962, Origini indo-europee, Florence, 1962, 
, 1968 (trans.): Geschichte der Sprache Roms, Heidelberg. 
Di Vido, St., 1997: GH elimi. Storie di contatti e di rappresentazione, Pisa. 
Diaz Rolando, E., 1989: La Alexiada, Seville. 
Diaz Tejera, A., 1961: 'Ensayo de un metodo linguistico para la cronologia de 
Raton', Emerita 29, pp. 241-286. 
Dickinson, O., 1977: The Origins of mycenaean Civilization, Goteborg. 
, 1995: The Aegean Bronze Age, Cambridge. 
Diehl, E., 1950: Anthologia Lyiica I 1-2, Leipzig. 
Dieterich, K., 1898: Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der griechischen Sprache von der hellenis-
tischen £eit bis zum 10. Jahrhundert nach Christ, Leipzig. 
Dietrich, M. and Lorentz, O., 1991: 'Die Keilalphabete aus Ugarit', in Baurain, 
C. and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 49-67. 
Dietrich, W., 1995: Griechisch und Romanisch. Divergenzen und Parallelen, Munster. 
Dimitrakos, D. B., 1933-51: Meya AE^IKOV T% 'EXXr}viKr\<; yXoiccrqg, Athens, 9 vols. 
Doudna, J. Ch., 1961: The Greek of the Gospel of Mark, Philadelphia. 
Dressier, W., 1963: Einfluss epichorischen Sprachen auf die griechischen Inschriften Kleinasiens, 
Vienna. 
, 1965: 'Der Untergang des Dativs in der Anatolischen Grazitat', WS 78, pp. 
83-107. 
Drews R., 1989: The coming of the Greeks, Princeton. 
Dubois, L., 1983: Recherches sur le dialecte arcadien, Paris. 
Duhoux, Y., 1977: Le disque de Phaestos. Archeologie, Epigraphie, Edition Critique, Lou vain. 
, 1982: Ueteocretois. Les textes. La langue, Amsterdam. 
, 1983: Introduction aux dialectes grecs anciensK Louvain-la-Neuve. 
——, 1987: 'Lineaire B cretois et continental: Elements de comparaison', in Ilievski, 
P. H. and Crepajac, I. (eds.) 1987. 
, 1988: 'Les elements grecs non doriens du cretois et la situation dialectale 
grecque au IF millenaire', Cretan Studies, 1, pp. 57—72. 
, 2000: Le verbe grec ancien. Louvain la Neuve. 
Duran, A., 1966: La lengua de Gorgias. Unpublished bachelor thesis, Madrid. 

328 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Durante, M., 1966: Sulla preistoria della tradizione poetica greca, Rome. 
, 1968: 'Vicende linguistiche della Grecia fra l'eta micenea e il medioevo 
ellenico', in Atti del T Congresso Internazionale di Micenologia. Roma 27 settembre-
3 ottobre 1967, Rome, vol. II, pp. 744-755. 
Durham, D. B., 1969 (1st ed. 1913): The Vocabulary of Menander, Amsterdam. 
Dvornik, F., 1956: The Slavs. Their Early History and Civilization, Boston. 
Earp, F. R , 1972 (1st ed. 1944): The Style of Sophocles, Cambridge. 
, 1970 (1st ed. 1948): The Style of Aeschylus, New York. 
Edwards, G. P., 1971: The Language of Hesiod in its traditional Context, Oxford. 
Egea, J. M., 1987a: 'El griego de los textos medievales', Veleia 4, pp. 255-284. 
, 1987b: 'La lengua de la ciudad en el s. xii', Eiytheia 8, pp. 241-262. 
, 1988: Gramdtica de la Cronica de Morea, Vitoria. 
, 1990: Documenta selecta ad historiam knguae Graecae inlushandam II (medioaevi), Vitoria. 
, 1990-91: 'La lengua de la historiografia bizantina tras el cambio linguistico', 
Erytheia, 11-12, pp. 21-32. 
Eissfeldt, O., 1968: 'Zur Frage nach dem Ursprung unseres Alphabets', in G. Pfohl 
(ed.) 1968a, pp. 214-220. 
Ek, S., 1942: Herodotismen in der Archaologie des Dionysius von Halicarnassus, Lund. 
, 1946: Herodotismen in der judischen Archaologie des Josephus, Lund. 
Eklund, B.-L., 1976: Modern Greek. Verbal Aspect and Compound Nouns. Two Studies, 
Gothenburg. 
Elefteriadis, O., 1985: Modern Greek. A contemporary Grammar, Palo Alto, California. 
Ernout, A., 1954: Aspects du vocabulaire latin, Paris. 
Eseverri, C , 1945: Diccionario Etimologico de Helenismos Espanoles, Burgos. 
Ewert, A., s. a.: The French Language, London. 
Fabrini, P. and Lanni, A., 1979: 'II problema della lengua nello scritto ippocratico 
De arte', RSF 34, pp. 123-133. 
Falkner, M., 1968: 'Zur Fruhgeschichte des griechischen Alphabets', in G. Pfohl 
(ed.) 1968a, pp. 143-171. 
Favre, Ch., 1914, Thesaurus verborum quae in titulis ionicis leguntur cum Herodoteo sermone 
comparatus, Lund. 
Fernandez, Francisco, 1982: Historia de la lengua inglesa, Madrid. 
Fernandez Alvarez, P., 1981: El argolico occidental, Salamanca. 
Fernandez de Palencia, Alfonso, 1490: Universal Vocabulario, Seville. 
Fernandez Delgado, J. A., 1983: 'Los estudios de poesia oral cincuenta afios despues 
de su "descubrimiento"', Anuario de Estudios Filologicos 6, pp. 63-90. 
, 1985: Los ordculos y Hesiodo. Poesia oral mdntica y gnomica griegos, Caceres. 
Fernandez Marcos, N., 1973: La Septuaginta en la investigation contempordnea, Madrid. 
, 1979: Introduction a las versiones griegos de la Biblia, Madrid. 
Fernandez Nieto, F. G., 1983: 'La colonization griega' and 'Los griegos en Espana', 
in Historia de Espana Antigua, Madrid, pp. 527-558 and 559-591. 
- — 1 9 9 2 : 'Griegos y colonization griega en la peninsula iberica', in Chaves 
Tristan, F. (ed.), Griegos en Occidente, Seville, pp. 129-145. 
Fernandez-Galiano, M., 1966: 'Helenismos', in Enticlopedia Lingiiistica Hispdnica II, 
pp. 51-77. Madrid. 
, 1969: La transcription castellana de los nombres propios griegos, Madrid. 
——, 1984: 'El marco historico de la epopeya', in R. Adrados-Fernandez-Galiano, 
Gil and Lasso de la Vega, Introduction a Homero, pp. 197-234, 2nd ed., Barcelona. 
Ferrari, F., 1997: Romanzo di Esopo. Introduzione e testo critico, Milano. 
Finnegan, R., 1977: Oral Poetry, Cambridge. 
Fleischer, U., 1939: Untersuchungen zu den pseudohippokratischen Schriften, Berlin. 
Forssmann, B., 1968: Untersuchungen zur Sprache Pindars, Wiesbaden. 
; 1991: 'Schichten der Homerischen Sprache', in Latacz, J. (ed.), ^weihundert 
Jahre Homerforschung, Stuttgart-Leipzig, pp. 259-288. 
Foucault, J. A., 1972: Recherches sur la langue et le style de Poly be, Paris. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
329 
Foumet, J. L., 1989: 'Les emprunts du grec a Tegyptien', BSL 84, pp. 55-80. 
Frankel, E., 1910-12: Geschichte der griechischen Nomina Agentis aitf -Tt)p3 -reap, -%r\g 
(-T-), Strasbourg. 
Frosen, J., 1974: Prolegomena to a Study of the Greek Language in the first Centuries A.D., 
Helsinki. 
Funk, R. W., 1977 (2nd ed.): A beginning-intermediate Grammar of the Hellenistic Greek, 
Missoula, Montana. 
Gallay, P., 1933: Langue et styih de Saint Gregoire de Nacianze dans sa cortespondance, Paris. 
Gamkrelidze, Th. - V. Ivanov, V. V., 1995: Indo-European and the Indo-Europeans, 
Berlin-New York. 
Gangutia, E., 1994: Cantos de mujeres en Grecia, Madrid. 
Garbrach, K. A., 1978: A Grammar to the Ionic Inscriptions from E?ythraea, Meisenheim. 
Garcia Blanco, J., 1988: Gramdtica de las inscripciones eleas. Unpublished doctoral 
thesis. Madrid. 
Garcia Domingo, E., 1979: Latinismos en la koine (en los documentos epigraficos desde el 
212 a. J. C hasta el 14 d J. C), Salamanca. 
Garcia del Pozo, R., 1983: Las inscripciones del locrio occidental, Madrid. 
Garcia Teijeiro, M., 1984: 'Reflexiones sobre la clasifkacion dialectal del panfilio', 
in Athlon. Satura grammatica in honorem Francisci R. Adrados, I, Madrid, pp. 191-197. 
, 1988: 'Retorica, oratoria y magia', in G. Morocho (ed.), Estudios de drama y 
retorica en Grecia y Roma, Leon, pp. 143-153. 
, 1996: 'Sobre la lengua de los documentos magicos griegos
5, in A. Agud and 
others (eds.), Las lenguas de corpus y sus problemas lingiiisticos, Salamanca. 
Garcia-Ramon, J. L., 1975: Les origines postmycennienes du groupe dialectal eolien, 1975. 
, 1987: 'Geografia intradialectal tesalia: la fonetica, Verbum 10, pp. 101-153. 
, 1999: 'Griechische Dialekte', in Gancik (ed.), Der Neue Pauly. 
Gautier, L., 1911: La langue de Xenophon, Geneva. 
GentiH, B., 1969: 'Epigramma ed elegia', in A A . W . 1969, pp. 37-81. 
and Prato, C , 1979-85: Poetae Elegiaci, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 2 vols. 
Georgakas, D. and Kevxpov 'EAAnviicfjc; Ytabacrn<;, 1998: AE^IKO tfjg Neag EXXrfviicfjg 
yXmaaag. Vol. 1, Salonika. 
Georgiev, V., 1941: Vorgriechische Sprachwissenschqft, Sofia. 
-——, 1964: 'Mycenaean among the other Greek Dialects', Wingspread Colloquium, 
pp. 125-129. 
, 1981: Introduction to the History of the Indo-European Languages, Sofia. 
Gerov, B., 1980: 'Die lateinisch-griechische Sprachgrenze auf der BalkanhalbinseP, 
in Neumann, G. and Untermann, J. (eds.) 1980, Bonn. 
Giacalone, A. - Ramat, P. (eds.), 1993: Las linguas indoeuropeas, Madrid, Catedra. 
Giannotta, M. E. and others (eds.), 1994: La detifrazione del cario, Rome. 
Gignac, F. T., 1976: A Grammar of the Greek Papyri of the Roman and Byzantine Periods. 
Vol 1. Phonology, Milan. 
, 1981: A Grammar of the Greek Papyri of the Roman and Byzantine Periods. Vol. II 
Morphology, Milan. 
Gimbutas, M., 1974: The Gods and Goddeses of Old Europe, London. 
, 1989: The Language of the Goddess, San Francisco. 
Giundin, L. A., 1987: 'A propos du statut de la langue des macedoniens de 
l'Antiquite', EBalk 23, pp. 19-27. 
Goldsmith, V., 1963 (2nd ed.), Les dialogues de Platon. Structure et methode dialectique, 
Paris. 
Gonzalez Castro, J. F., 1994: Palabras castellanas de origen griego, Madrid. 
Gostoli, A., 1990: Terpandro. Introduzione, testimonianze, testo critico, traduzione e commento, 
Rome. 
Graham, A. J., 1982: 'The colonial expansion of Greece' and 'The Western Greeks', 
in the reedition of the Cambridge Ancient History, III 3, pp. 83 ff. and 183 ff. 
Grandgent, D. A., 1928: Introduction al latin vulgar, Madrid. 

330 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Guarducci, M., 1967-78: Epigrqfia Greca, I-TV, Rome. 
- 
, 1968: 'Die Geburt des griechischen Alphabets', in G. Pfohl (ed.) 1968a, pp. 
197-213. 
, 1987: UEpigrqfia greca dalle origini al tardo impero, Rome. 
Haberle, J., 1938, Untersuchungen ilber den ionischen Prosastil, Munich. 
Haarmann, H., 1996: 'Aspects of early Indo-European contacts with the neighbor­
ing cultures', IF 101, pp. 1-14. 
Hainsworth, J. B., 1967: 'Greek Views of Greek Dialectology', TPHS 1967, pp. 
62-76. 
, 1968: The Flexibility of the Homeric Formula, Oxford. 
Hajnal, L, 1987 and 1988: 'Zur Sprache der altesten kretischen Inschriften', IF 92, 
pp. 58-84 and 93, pp. 62~87. 
, 1995: Studien zum Mykenischen Kasussystem, Berlin and New York. 
Hamm, E.-M., 1957: Grammatik zu Sappho und Alkaios, Berlin. 
Hammond, N. G. L., 1986 (3rd ed.): A History of Greece, Oxford. 
Hansen, P. A., 1983: Carmina Epigraphka saeculorum VIII- Va. Chr. n., Berlin-New York. 
Hatzidakis, G. N. 1905-7: MeaaimviKa xai Nea 'EXXr)viKa, Athens, 2 vols. 
, 1947 (1st ed. 1915): ZvvTOjioq iaiopia 
%r}<; 'EXXrjviicrjg yXaaarfg, Athens. 
, 1977 (1st ed. 1892): Einleitung in die neugrkchische Grammatik, Hildesheim (Greek 
transl, Athens 1976). 
Hausler, A., 1985: 'De Anfange von Rad und Wagen in der Kulturgeschichte 
Europas', in Produktivkrqfte und Produktionsverhaltnisse, Berlin, pp. 121-133. 
, 1992a: 'Zum Verhaltnis von Ockergrabkultur und Schnurkeramik', in 
Schnurkeramik Symposium, Prague, pp. 541-548. 
, 1992b: 'Zur kulturgeschichtiichen Einordnung griechischer Stelen. Ein Beitrag 
zur Frage nach dem Ursprung der Griechen
5, in Heinrich Schliemann. Grundlagn und 
Ergebnisse. . . . Berlin, pp. 253-266. 
, 1994: 'Archaologische Zeugnisse fiir Pferd und Wagen in Ost- und Mittel-
Europa', in Die Indogermanen und das Pferd, Budapest, pp. 217-257. 
——, 1995: 'Ueber Archaologie und Ursprung der Indogermanen
5, in Whither 
ArchaeologkP, Prague, pp. 211-229. 
Havelock, E. A., 1986: La Musa impara a scrivere, Bari. 
, 1996: Alle origini della filosqfia greca. Una revisione storica, Bari. 
Heisenberg, A., 1934: Neugrkchische diakkttexte, Heidelberg. 
Hernandez Gonzalez, F., 1997: 'Apuntes lexicales sobre Faventino', Ckn anol de inves­
tigation semdntica, II, pp. 1611-1625. 
Hettrich, H., 1985: 'Zum Kasussynkretismus im Mykenischen', MSS 46, pp. 111-122. 
Heubeck, A., 1961: Praegraeca, Erlangen. 
, 1972: 'Syllabic r in Mycenaean Greek?', Acta Mycenaea II, pp, 55-79, Salamanca. 
, 1981: 'Zum Problem der homerischen Kunstsprache', MH 38, pp. 65-80. 
Hiersche, R., 1970: Grundzuge der griechischen Sprachgeschkhte, Wiesbaden. 
, 1972: Dk Sprache Homers im Lichte neuerer Forschungen, Innsbruck. 
Hilhorst, A., 1976: Semitismes et latinismes dans k Pasteur dHermas, Nijmegen. 
Hill, D., 1967: Greek Words and Hebrew Meanings, Cambridge. 
Hodot, R., 1990a: Le diakcte eolien dAsie, Paris. 
, 1990b: 'Dialecte et koine', Lalies 9, pp. 55-62. 
, 1990c: 'Inscriptions et litterature dialectales', Lalies 9, pp. 63-70. 
Hoekstra, A., 1957: 'Hesiode et la tradition orale', Mnemosyne 10, p. 193 ff. 
, 1969a: Homeric Modifications of formulaic prototypes, Amsterdam. 
, 1969b: The sub-epic stage of the formulaic tradition, Amsterdam. 
Hoffmann, O. and others, 1973: Historia de la lengua griega, Madrid. 
Hofinger, M., 1981: Etudes sur k vocabulaire grec archaique, Leiden. 
Hooker, J. T., 1976: Mycenaean Greece, London. 
, 1977: The Language and Text of the Lesbian Poets, Innsbruck. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
331 
——, 1983: 'The Homeric Dialect', in Concilium Eirene XVI, III, pp. 75-79. 
, 1991: 'Mycenology in the 1980Y, Kratylos 36, pp. 32-72. 
Horandner, W. and Trapp, E. (eds.), 199 1: Lexicographica Byzantina. Beitrage zum Sym-
posion zur byzantinischen Lexikographie (Wien, 1-4.3.1989), 
Vienna. 
Horrocks, G., 1987: 'The Ionic-Epic tradition: Was there an Aeolic Phase in its 
Development?', Minos 20-22, pp. 269-294. 
, 1997: Greek. A History of the Language and its Speakers, London and New York. 
Householder, F. W., 1972: Greek. A Survey of Recent Work, The Hague-Paris. 
— 
and others, 1964: Reference Grammar of Literary Dimotiki, Bloomington. 
Hoz, J. de, 1964: 'Poesia oral independiente de Homero en Hesiodo y los himnos 
homericos', Emerita 32, pp. 283-298. 
, 1969: 'Acerca de la historia de la escritura prelatina en Hispania', AEA 
119-120, pp. 104-117. 
— , 
1970: 'Un grafito griego de Toscanos y la exportation de aceite ateniense 
en el siglo VIP, Madrider Mitteilungen 11, pp. 102-109. 
——, 1979: 'On some Problems of Iberian Script and Phonetics', in Adas del II 
Cobquio sobre lenguasy culturas prerromanas de la Peninsula Iberica, Salamanca, pp. 257-271. 
, 1987: 'La escritura greco-iberica', Stadia Palaeohispanica, pp. 285-298, Vitoria. 
— , 
1991: 'The Phoenician Origin of the early Hispanic Scripts', in Baurain, C. 
and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 669-682. 
, 1992: 'Arqueologia del lenguaje sin lagrimas . . . y sin lenguaje', Arqritica 3, 
pp. 11-14. 
, 1996: 'El origen de las escrituras paleohispanicas quince aflos despues', in 
Actas del VI Coloquio sobre lenguas y culturas prerromanas de la Peninsula Iberica, Salamanca, 
pp. 171-206. 
Hualde Pascual, M. P., 1997: 'Eolismos en Jonia: revision de un problema de 
geografia intradialectaP, Emerita 65, pp. 221-256. 
Hult, J., 1990: Syntactic Variation in Greek of the 5th Century A.D., Goteborg. 
Humbert, J., 1930: La disparition du datif grec, Paris. 
, 1972 (1st ed. 1945): Syntaxe grecque, Paris. 
Hummel, P., 1993: La Syntaxe de Pindare, Louvain. 
Hunger, H., 1978a: 'Stilstufen in der Byzantinischen Geschichtschreibung des 12. 
Jh. Anna Kommene und Michael Glykas', Byz. Studies 5, pp. 139-170. 
, 1978b: Die hochsprachliche profane Literatur der Byzantiner, Munich. 
Hussey,J. M. (ed.), 1966: The Cambridge Medieval History IV. Byzantium and Its Neighbours, 
Cambridge. 
Huxley, C , 1961: Crete and the Luwians, Oxford. 
Ilievski, P. H. y Crepajac, I., 1987: Tradata Mycenaea, Skopje. 
Impellizzeri, S., 1975: La letteratura bizantina da Costantino a Fozio, Florence-Milan. 
Irigoin, J., 1980: 'La formation du vocabulaire de l'anatomie en grec: du mycenien 
aux principaux traites de la Collection Hippocratique', Hippocratica. Ades du Colloque 
hippocratique de Paris (4-9 Sept 1978), Paris, pp. 247-257. 
, 1983: 'Paralleles linguistiques a Interpretation de termes techniques attestes 
dans la Collection Hippocratique', in Lasserre, F. y Mudry, P. (eds.), Formes de 
penste dans la Collection hippocratique. Ades du IV
e Colloque International hippocratique 
(Lausanne, 23~26 septembre 1981), Geneva, pp. 173-180. 
Iselin, I. B. S., 1991: 'The transfer of the Alphabet to the Greeks: the state of doc­
umentation', in Baurain, C. and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 283-291. 
Isenring, H. C , Die lateinischen Adjediva auf -icus und -ticus, Zurich 1955. 
Janko, R., 1982: Homer, Hesiod and the Hymns, Cambridge. 
Jeffery, L. H., 1990 (2nd ed.), The local scripts of archaic Greece, Oxford. 
Jellinek, M. H., 1926: Geschichte der gotischen Sprache, Berlin. 
Kahane, H. y R., 1979: 'Les elements byzantins dans les langues romanes', in Graeca 
et Romanica, Scripta Selecta, Amsterdam, pp. 67-73. 

332 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
— 
1970 ff.: 'Abendland und Byzanz. III. Literatur und Sprache. B. Sprache', 
in Reallexicon der Byzantinistik, cols. 345-640. 
Kaimio, J., 1979: The Roman and the Greek Language, Helsinki, 1979. 
Kajanto, I., 1980: 'Minderheiten und ihre Sprachen in der Hauptstadt Rom', in 
G. Neumann and J. Untermann (eds.), 1980, pp. 83-101. 
Kalleris, J. N., 1954: Les anciens macedoniens. Etude historique et linguistique, Athens. 
Kapsomenakis, S. G., 1938: Voruntersuchungen zu einer Grammatik der Papyri aus der 
nachchristlichen ^eit, Munich. 
Kapsomenos, S. G., 1958:
 cDie griechische Sprache zwischen Koine und Neugriechisch', 
in Berichte zum XL Internationalen Byzantinistenkongress, II 1, Munich. 
Karageorghis, J. y Masson, O. (eds.), 1988: The History of the Greek Language in Cyprus. 
Proceedings of an International Symposium sponsored by the Pierides Foundation. Larnaca, 
Cyprus, 8~13 September- 1986, Nicosia. 
Karageorghis, V., 1991: Les anciens Chipriotes. Entre Orient et Occident, Paris. 
Karoussos, Gh., 1973: Rhodos, Athens. 
Katicic, R., 1976: Ancient Languages of the Balkans, The Hague, 2 vols. 
Kaukala, M. I., 1992: Mvr}fi6ovvo 
Kprftucfjg 
diaXsKTOv, Athens. 
Kazazis, K., 1974: 'The status of the Turkisms in the present-day Balkan languages', 
in Birnbaum, H. and Vryonis, S. (eds.), Aspects of the Balkans, The Hague, pp. 
87-116. 
Kieckers, E., 1910: 'Das Eindringen der Koine in Kreta', IF 21, pp. 72-118. 
Kinstrand, J. F., 1975: Bion of Borysthenes, Uppsala. 
Kirk, G. S. (ed.), 1964: The Language and Background of Homer, Cambridge. 
, 1976: Homer and the Oral Tradition, Cambridge. 
Kock, B., 1910: De epigrammatum Graecorum dialectis, Gottingen. 
Kontosopoulos, N. G., 1970: "H armepivT] yA,G)acn,icri Kaxdaiaaxc; 
ev KpT|TT| KOU f| 
Y^coaaa TCDV ev 'ABrrvau; Kpr|Teov', KprjriKr) XpoviKa 
22, pp. 144-278. 
, 1978: Uinfluence du frangais sur le grec, Athens. 
1980: "H yhhaaa avyxpovoi) netpv KpiyctKoi) Keuxevot)', in Mvrjfia 
Koupjuook, 
Athens, p. 19 ff. 
, 1988: r^coaaiKoq "AxXac, tfjc; KpT|Tr|c,, Iraklio. 
——, 1994 (2nd ed.): AKXXEKTOI Km iSicofiam xr\g viae, EXXr\viKr)g, Athens. 
Koutsoudas, A., 1962: Verb Morphology of Modem Greek: A Descriptive Study, Bloomington, 
Indiana. 
Krafft, F., 1963: Vergleichende Untersuchungen zu Homer und Hesiod, Gottingen. 
Kramer, J., 1983: 'Der kaiserzeitliche griechisch-lateinische Sprachbund', in Zjele 
und Wege der Balkanlinguistik, Berlin, pp. 115-131. 
Krause, M., 'Inschriften aus Faras', in F. Altheim and R. Stiehl, Christentum am Roten 
Meer, Berlin-New York, 1971. 
Krauss, S., 1898: Griechische und lateinische Lehnworter im Talmud, Midrasch und Targum, 
Berlin. 
Kretschmer, P., 1894: Die griechischen Vaseninschrifien Hirer Sprache nach untersucht, Gutersloh. 
, 1901: Die Entstehung der koine, Vienna. 
, 1909: 'Zur Geschichte der griechischen Dialekte. I', Glotta 1, pp. 9-59. 
•, 1946: Introduction a la Lingiiistica griega y latina, Madrid. 
Kriaras, E., 1968 ff.: AE^IKO 
rfjg MsaaicoviKfjg 
eXXriviicfjg 8rffid>6ovg 
ypa^areiag 
(1110-1669), 
Thessalomiki, vols. I-XIII. 
Kroll, W., 1935: La sintaxis cientifica en la ensenanza del latin, Madrid. 
Krumbacher, K., 1897 (2nd ed.): Geschichte der byzantinischen Literatur, Munich. 
Kullmann, W. and Reichel, M. (eds.), 1990: Der Uebergang von der Miindlichkeit zur 
Literatur bei den Griechen, Tubingen. 
Laguna, G., 1995: 'Influencia lingiiistica del griego sobre el latin', Tempus 9, pp. 
5-32. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
333 
Lambert, P.-Y., 1994: La langue gauloise, Paris. 
Lamberts, E., 1967: Untersuchungen zur Parataxe bei Herodot, Vienna. 
Lampe, G. W. H., 1961: A Patristic Greek Lexicon, Oxford. 
Lanza, D., 1983: 'Quelques remarques sur le travail linguistique du medicin', in 
Lasserre, F. and Mudry, P. (eds.), Formes de pensee dans la Collection hippocratique. 
Actes du IVe Colloque International hippocratique, Geneva, pp. 181-185. 
Lapesa, R., 1980 (8th ed.): Historia de la lengua espanola, Madrid. 
Lara, D., 1984: Estudio sobre la composition de los tratados hipocrdticos, Madrid. 
, 1997: Initiation a la lexicografia griega, Madrid, 1997. 
Latacz, J. (ed.), 1991: ^weihundert Jahre Homer-Forschung, Stuttgart. 
Lazzeroni, R., 1969: 'Correnti linguistiche nel greco letterario', in Studi e saggi lin­
guistics suppl. a Ultalia diakttale 33, pp. 111-138. 
Lee, J. A. L., 1983: LAX. A lexical Study of the Septuagenta Version of the Pentateuch, 
Chico, California. 
Lehmann, W. P., 1986: A Gothic Etymological Dictionary, Leiden. 
, 1992: Die gegenwdrtige Richtung der indogermanischen Forschung, Budapest. 
Lehrmann, A., 1996: 'Indo-Hittite revisited', IF 101, pp. 73-88. 
Lejeune, M., 1968: 'Rapport sur le grec mycenien', Atti del 1° Congresso Intemazionale 
di Micenologia. Roma 27 settembre - 3 ottobre 1967, Rome, vol. II, pp. 726-731. 
, 1976: 'Pre-mycenien et proto-mycenien', BSL 71, p. 193 ff. 
, 1993: 'D'Alcoy a Espanca: Reflexions sur les ecritures paleo-hispaniques', in 
Michel Lejeune. Notice biographique et bibliographique, Louvain, pp. 53-86. 
Leumann, M., 1948: 'Griechische Verba in 4£eiv im Latein', in Melanges Marouzeau, 
Paris, pp. 371-389. 
-——, 1950: Homerische Worter, Basilea. 
——, 1968: 'Die Entgliederung entlehnter griechischer Verben ins Latein', Studii 
Clasice 10, pp. 7-12. 
Liddell, H. G., Scott, R., Jones, H. S., 1940 (9th ed., there are two Supplements of 
1968 and 1997): Greek-English Dictionary, Oxford. 
Lilja, S., 1968: On the Style of the Earliest Greek Prose, Helsingfors. 
Lillo, A., 1979: El dialecto arcadio, Salamanca. 
Linde, P., 1906: De Epicuri vocabulis ab optima Atthide alienis, Bratislava. 
Ljungvik, H., 1926: Studien zur Sprache der Apokryphen Apostelgeschichten, Uppsala. 
, 1932: Beitrage zur Syntax der spdtgriechieschen Volkssprache, Uppsala. 
Lloyd-Jones, H. y Parsons, P., 1983: Supplementum Hellenisticum, Berlin and New York. 
Long, A., 1968: Language and thought in Sophocles, London. 
Lopez Eire, A., 1966: 'Dislocacion sintactica y atico coloquial en la comedia 
aristofanica', in Agud, A. and others (eds.), pp. 167-197. 
, 1972-1973: 'Los jonios y el jonico-atico', Zepty™ 
23-24, pp. 197-207. 
, 1977: 'Nuevas perspectives metodologicas en dialectologia griega', Helmantica 
28, pp. 315-329 (in Lopez Eire 1986a, p. 289 ff.) 
. 1978a: 'El retorno de los Heraclidas', J&pkyrus 28-29, pp. 287-297. 
-, 1978b: 'Problematica actual de la Dialectologia griega', in Adas del V Congreso 
Espanol de Estudios Cldsicos, Madrid, pp. 457-479. 
, 1984a: 'Genealogia del Atico', EC 26, pp. 43-46. 
, 1984b: 'En tomo a la lengua del Corpus Hippocraticum', Emerita 52, pp. 325-354. 
, 1984c: Tucidides y la koine', in Athlon. Saturn grammatica in honorem Francisci 
R. Adrados, 1, Madrid, II, pp. 245-261. 
, 1985: Jonico y Atico', in Melena, J. L. (ed.), Symbolae Ludovico Mitxelena sep-
tuagenario oblatae, I, Vitoria, pp. 81-93. 
, 1986a: Estudios de Lingiiistica, Dialectologia e Historia de la lengua griega, Salamanca. 
, 1986b: 'La lengua de la comedia aristofanica', Emerita 54, pp. 237-274. 
, 1987a: 'Sobre los origenes de la oratoria', Minerva 1, pp. 13-31. 

334 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
-——, 1987b: 'Geographie intradialectale de Pionien-attique', Verbum 10, 155-178. 
, 1989a:
 
cLas invasiones griegas y la dialectologia', Homenaje a Marcelo Vigil, 
Salamanca, pp. 147-169. 
, 1989b: 'Sobre las innovaciones del jonico-atico', in Borrego Nieto, J. and 
others (eds.), Philologica I. Homenaje a D. Antonio Llorente, Salamanca, pp. 191-1998. 
, 1991: Atico, koine y aticismo. Estudios sabre Aristqfanes, Murcia. 
, 1992: 'Algunos aspectos de la lengua de los tratados hipocraticos mas antiguos', 
in Adas del VIE Congres Hippocratique, Madrid, pp. 351-364. 
, 1993a: 'De PAttique a la koine', in Brixhe, C. (ed.), 1993a, pp. 41-57. 
, 1993b: 'Estructuras linguisticas recurrentes en las inscripciones dialectales grie­
gas', in Crespo, E. and others (eds.) 1993, pp. 221-227. 
, 1994: 'Historia del atico a traves de sus inscripciones', ^ephyrus 47, pp. 157-188. 
, 1996a: La lengua coloquial de la comedia aristofdnica, Murcia. 
, 1996b: 'L'influence de Pionien-attique sur les autres dialectes epigraphiques 
et Porigine de la koine', in Brixhe, C. (ed.) 1996a, pp. 7-42. 
and LiUo, A., 1982: 'Pannlia y el dialecto pannlio', Zephyrus 34-35, pp. 243-248. 
and Lillo, A., 1983: 'En torno a la clasifkacion dialectal del pannlio', Emerita 
51, pp. 5-27. 
and Mendez Dosuna, J., 1971: 'En busca de la situation dialectal del jonico-
atico', in Simposio de Colonizaciones, pp. 247-278, Barcelona. 
and Mendez Dosuna, J., 1980: 'El problema de los dialectos dorios y nor-
doccidentales', Emerita 48, pp. 15-30 (in Lopez Eire 1986a, p. 273 ff.) 
Lopez Ferez, J. A., 1987: 'Problemas linguisticos en los escritos hipocraticos: el 
tratado Sobre los Humores', Emerita 55, pp. 253-263. 
Lord, A. B., 1960: The Singer of Tales, Cambridge (Mass.). 
Louw, J. P., 1982: Semantics of the Mew Testament, Chico (California). 
LiAddekens, E., 1980: 'Aegypten', in Neumann, G. and Untennann, J. (eds.) 1980, 
pp. 241-265. 
Liidtke, H., 1974: Historia del lexico romdnico, Madrid. 
Lumpe, A., 1970: 'Abendladisches in Byzanz', in Reallexicon der Byzantinistik, 4. 
Amsterdam, pp. 305-306. 
Lupas, L., 1972: Phonologie du grec attique, The Hague. 
McCabe, D., 1981: The Prose-rhythm of Demosthenes, New York. 
Mackridge, P., 1985: The Modern Greek Language, Oxford. 
Maloney, G., 1980: 'L'emploi des particules dans les oeuvres d'Hippocrate', RELO 
1, pp. 1-20. 
Maluquer de Motes, J., 1968: Epigrqfia prelatina de la Peninsula iberica, Barcelona. 
Mandilaras, B. G., 1973: The Verb in the Greek non-literary Papyri, Athens. 
Marazzi, M., 1985: 'TrafBti Minoici e Micenei d'Oltremare: una rassegna su recenti 
incontrP, QUCC 50, pp. 107-116. 
and others (eds.), 1986: Trqffici micenei net Mediterraneo. Problemi storici e documen-
tazione archeological, Tarento. 
Marouzeau, J., 1949: Quelques aspects de la formation du Latin litteraire, Paris. 
Marschall, M. H. B., 1987: Verbs, Nouns and Postpositives in Attic Prosa, Edinburgh. 
Martin, J., 1974: Antike Rhetorik. Technik und Methode, Munich. 
Martin Zorraquino, M. A., 1997: 'Formation de palabras y lenguaje tecnico', RSEL 
27, pp. 317-339. 
Martinez Hernandez, M., 2000: Semnantica del Griego antiguo. Madrid, Ediciones 
Clasicas, 2000. 
Martinez Vazquez, R. - Ruiz Yanmuza, E., 1999 et alii: Gramdtica funcional-cognitiva 
del griego antiguo. Sevilla. 
Mason, H. J., 1974: Greek Terms for Roman Institutions, Toronto. 
Masson, O., 1967: Recherches sur les plus anciens emprunts semitiques en Grec, Paris. 
, 1988: 'Le dialecte de Paphos', in Karageorghis, J. and Masson, O. (eds.) 
1988, pp. 19-30. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
335 
Mastrelli, C. A., 1954: La lengua di Alceo, Florence. 
Mateo, J., 1977: El aspecto verbal en el Nuevo Testamento, Madrid. 
Matthews, P. H., 1967: 'The main features of Modern Greek Verb inflection', FL 
3, pp. 262-284. 
Mayser, E., 1926 ff. (2nd ed., 1970): Grammatik der griechischen Papyri aus der Ptolemderzeit, 
Leipzig. 
Meecham, H. G., 1935: The Letter of Aristeas, Manchester. 
Megas, A. E., 1925-27: 'Iarojyw 
TOV yXmooiKov fy]%r)iiaxog, Athens, 2 vols. 
Meid, W., 1975: 'Probleme der raumlichen and zeitlichen Gliederung des Indo-
germanischen', in Rix, H. (ed.), Flexion und Wortbildung. Akten der V. Fachtagung der 
Indogermanischen Gesellschaft. Regensburg, 9-14 September 1973, Wiesbaden, pp. 204-
219. 
Meier-Brugger, M., 1992: Griechische Sprachwissenschaft, Berlin-New York. 
Meillet, A., 1936: Esquisse d
yune Grammaire comparee de Farmenien classique, Vienna. 
, 1975 (7th ed.): Apergu d
yune histoire de la langue grecque, Paris. 
Meinersmann, B,, 1927: Die lateinischen Worter und Namen in den griechischen Papyri, 
Leipzig. 
Meister, K., 1921 (reed. 1965): Die Homerische Kunstsprache, Stuttgart. 
Mendez Dosuna, A., 1980: 'Clasifkacion dialectal y cronologia relativa: el dialecto 
eleo' SPHS 4, pp. 181-201. 
, 1985: Los dialectos dorios del Noroeste. Gramdtica y estudio dialectal, Salamanca. 
Mendoza, J., 1976: 'Aportaciones del estudio de la lengua a la determination de 
la cronologia de dos tratados del Corpus Hippocraticum", Emerita 44, pp. 171-195. 
Merlingen, W., 1955: Das vorgriechische und die sprachwissemchqftlichvorhistorischen Grundlagene, 
Vienna. 
Meyer, G., 1894: Die slavischen, albanischen und mmddnischen Lehworter im Neugriechischen, 
Vienna. 
Michalowski, K., 1938: Storia de la Nubia cristiana, Rome. 
Migliorini, B., 1968: Historia de la lengua italiana, Madrid. 
Mihaescu, H., 1993: La romanite dans le sud-est de VEurope, Bucarest. 
Millard, A. R., 1991: 'The uses of early Alphabets', in Baurain, C. and others (eds.) 
1991, pp. 101-114. 
Minniti-Gonia, D., 1992: 'Les theories sur l'origine du dialecte grec de Calabria', 
Parousia 8, pp. 117-124. 
Mirambel, A., 1937: Les etats de langue dans la Grece actuelle, Paris. 
, 1957: 'La doctrine linguistique de Jean Psichari', La nouvelle Clio 3, pp. 78-104. 
-, 1959: La langue greque moderne, Paris (Greek transl., Thessalonika 1978). 
Momigliano, A., 1930: La composizione della Storia di Tucidide, Turin. 
Moes, R., 1980: Les Hellenismes de Fepoque Theodosienne, Strasbourg. 
Moorhouse, A. C , 1982: The Syntax of Sophocles, Leiden. 
Moralejo, J. J., 1973a: Gramdtica de las inscripciones delfcas, Santiago. 
, 1973b: 'Sonantes y griego micenico', Emerita 41, pp. 409-426. 
, 1977a: 'Dialectos y niveles de lengua en griego antiguo', RSEL 7, pp. 57-85. 
, 1977b: 'Los dorios: su migration y su dialecto', Emerita 45, pp. 243-267. 
, 1979: Recent contributions to the History of the Greek Dialects, Santiago. 
, 1984: 'Nota al dativo eolico', EC 26, pp. 61-66. 
, 1990: 'Griego antiguo: migraciones y dialectos', RSEL 20, pp. 271-308. 
, 1996: 'Position del dialecto lesbio', in Agud, A. and others (eds.), 1996, pp. 
111-127. 
Moreno Jurado, S. A., 1997, Antologia de la Poesia Griega (siglos XI 4 sigs.), Madrid. 
Morpurgo Davies, A., 1964: '"Doric" Developments in the Language of Hesiod', 
Glotta 62, pp. 138-165. 
, 1968: 'The treatment of *r and */ in Mycenaean and Arcado-Cyprian', in 
Atti del 1° Congresso Intemazionale di Micenologia. Roma 27 settembre - 3 ottobre 1967, 
Rome, vol. II, pp. 791-812. 

336 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
, 1984b: 'Mycenaean and Greek Language
5, in Morpurgo Davies, A. and 
Duhoux, Y. (eds.), 1984, pp. 75-125. 
, 1992: 'Mycenaean, Arcadian, Cyprian and some questions of Method in 
Dialectology
5, in Olivier, J. P. (ed.) 1992, pp. 415-431. 
, and Duhoux, Y. (eds.), 1984a: 'Linear B: A 1984 Survey
5, Louvain-la-Neuve, 
pp. 75-125. 
Moser, H., 1957: 'Deutsche Sprachgeschichte der allteren Zeit
5, in W. Stammler 
(ed.), Berlin. 
Moule, C. D. F., 1968: An Idiom-Book of the New Testament, Cambridge. 
Moulton, J. H. y Milligan, G., 1914-29: The Vocabulary of the New Testament illus­
trated from the Papyri and other non-literary Sources, London. 
Mugler, Ch., 1938: Uevolution des subordonnees relatives complexes en grec, Paris. 
Mulller, D. G., 1980: Satzbau, Satzgliederung und Satzverbindung in der Prosa Herodots, 
Meisenheim. 
——, 1982: Homer and the Ionian Epic Tradition, Innsbruck. 
Musti, D. (ed.), 1985a: Le origini dei Greci. Dori e mondo egeo, Rome. 
, 1985b: 'Continuita e discontinuity tra Achei e Dori nelle tradizione storiche
5, 
in Musti, D. (ed.) 1985a, pp. 37-71. 
and others (eds.), 1991: La Transizione dal Miceneo aWalto arcaismo. Dal palazzo 
alia citta. Atti del Convegno Intemazionale, 1988, Rome. 
Nachmanson, E., 1903: Laute und Formen der Magnetischen Inschriften, Uppsala. 
, 1910: Beitrage zur Kentniss de?- altgriechishen Volkssprache, Uppsala-Leipzig. 
Nagel, P., 1971: 'Die Einwirkung des Griechischen auf die Intstehung der kopti-
schen Literatursprache
5, in F. Altheim and R. Stiehl (eds.), Christentum am Roten 
Meer, Berlin. 
Nagy, G., 1970: Greek Dialects and the transformation of Indoeuropean Process, Cambridge. 
Narr, G. (ed.), 1971: Griechisch und Romanisch, Tubingen. 
Naveh, J., 1982: Early History of the Alphabet, Jerusalem/Leiden. 
Nebrija, A. de, 1592: Lexicon hoc est Dictionarium ex sermone latino in hispaniensem, 
Salamanca. 
——-, 1592: Dictionarium ex hispaniensi en latinum sermonem, Salamanca. 
Negri, A., 1981a: 'La straficazione delfattico
5, K£95, 
pp. 61-65. 
, 1981b: Miceneo e lengua omerica, Florence, 1981. 
——, 1982a: 'L'unita intermedia ionico-attica
5, Acme 35, pp. 7-17. 
, 1982b (1984): 'II problema delle unita intermedie e 1'unita intermedia ionico-
attica
5, ASGM, 23. 
Nehrbass, R., 1935: Sprache und Stil der Iamata von Epidaurus, Leipzig. 
Nenci, G. and Vallet, G. (eds.), 1977 ff.: Bibliogrqfia topogrqfica de la colonizzazione greca 
in Italia e nelle isole tirreniche, Pisa-Rome, 
Neumann, G., 1980: 'Kleinasien
5, in Neumann, G. and Untertnann, J. (eds.) 1980, 
pp. 167-185. 
—— and Untermann, J. (eds.), 1980: Die Sprachen im rbmischen Reich der Kaiser zeit, 
Cologne. 
Newton, B., 1972: Cypriot Greek. Its Phonologie and Inflexion, The Hague-Paris. 
Niehoff-Panagiotidis, J., 1994: Koine und diglossie, Wiesbaden. 
Norden, E., 1958 (5th ed.; 1st ed. 1898): Die antike Kunstprose, Stuttgart. 
Nothiger, M., 1971: Die Sprache des Stesichorus und des Ibycus, Zurich. 
Oeconomidis, D. E., 1908: Lautlehre des Pontischen, Leipzig. 
Olivier, J. P. (ed.), 1992: Mykenaikd. Actes du IX
e Colloque international sur les textes 
myceniens et egeens organise par le Centre de VAntiquite Grecque et Romaine de la Fondation 
Hellenique des Recherches Scientifiques et Fecole Frangaise d
3Athenes (Athenes, 2-6 octobre 
1990), Athens-Paris. 
, 1996: 'Les ecritures cretoises: sept points a considered, in Baurain, C. and 
others (eds.) 1991, pp. 11-123. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
337 
Olivieri, A., 1930; Frammenti della comedia greca e del mimo nella Sicilia e nella Magna 
Grecia, Naples. 
Ostrogorsky, G. 1983 (original ed. 1963): Historia del estado bizantino, Madrid. 
Pabon, J. M , 1939: 'El griego, lengua de la intimidad entre los romanos', Emerita 
7, pp. 126-131. 
Page, D. L., 1963: 'Archilochus and the oral tradition', in A A . W . 1963, pp. 
117-163. 
, 1967 (2nd ed.): Poetae Alelici Graeci, Oxford. 
, 1974: Supplementum Lyricis Graecis, Oxford. 
Palaima, Th. G., 1991: 'The advent of the Greek Alphabet in Cyprus: a competi­
tion of scripts', in Baurain, C. and others (eds.) 1991, pp. 449-471. 
Palm, J., 1955: Ueber Sprache und Stil des Diodoros von Sizilien, Lund. 
Palmer, L. R., 1945: A Grammar of the post-Ptolemaic Papyry. Vol. I, London. 
, 1958: 'Luwian and Linear A', TPhS, pp. 75-110. 
, 1980: The Greek Language, Oxford. 
Parry, A., 1971: The Making of Homeric Verse, Oxford. 
Parry, M., 1928: Uepithete traditionelle dans Homere, Paris. 
Panagl, O., 1992: 'Mykenisch und die Sprache Homers: Arte Probleme, neue 
Resultate', in J. P. Olivier (ed.) 1992, pp. 499-513. 
Panayotis, A., 1990: 'Des dialectes A la koine: l'exemple de la Chalcidique', Poikila 
10, pp. 191-228. 
, 1992: "tf yXmoaa roov emypaq&v 
%r\g Maxedoviag', 
Athens. 
Papadatos, C. G., 1976: 'H &votTO|Lua xfj<; 'EXkT|vticfj<; yXoxjoaq, Athens. 
Papadopoulos, A. A., 1927: FpawiaiiKY] %<bv popeicov iSicop-drcov rfjv Neag 'EXXrjviicfjg 
yXcbaaag, Athens. 
, 1930: 'Oi yaMuajioi zr^q 'EAA,r|viKn.<; yX<ho<yr\<;\ 'A&rfva 42, pp. 3-33. 
, 1948:
 lH Kprjvrf VKO xovg ZapK7]vovg\ Athens. 
, 1955: 'IoTopiKt) Fpap,fiai;iKr) 
rfjg IIovTiKfjg SiaXeiccov', Athens. 
Patzer, H., 1972: Dichter und poetisches Handwerk im Homerischen Epos, Heidelberg. 
Pavese, C. O., 1972: Tradizioni e generi poetici delta Grecia arcaica, Rome. 
, 1974: Studi sulla tradizione epica rapsodica, Rome. 
Peabody, B., 1975: The winged Word, New York. 
Peek, W., 1955: Griechische Versinschrfkn, I, Berlin. 
Peran, P., 1985: La lengua de la
 cVida de Esopo\ Unpublished bachelor thesis, Madrid. 
Perez Castro, L., 1997: 'Vocabularios cientifico-tecnicos y lexico comun en latin 
ciasico', RSEL 27, pp. 107-114. 
Perez Molina, M. E., 1986: 'El Ilamado dialecto saronico. Revision critica', Myrtia 
1, pp. 107-115. 
Pernot, H., 1921: D'Homere, a nos jours, Paris. 
1927: Etudes sur la langue des Evangiles, Paris. 
, 1934: Introduction a Vetude du dialecte tsaconien, Paris. 
, 1946: Morphologie des parlers de Chios, Paris. 
Peters, F. E., 1967: Greek Philosophical Terms, New York-London. 
Peters, M., 1986: 'Zur Frage einer achadischen Phase des griechischen Epos', in Etter, 
A. (ed.), O-o-pe-ro-si. Festschrift fur Ernst Risch zum 75. Geburstag, Berlin, pp. 303-319. 
Petrounias, E., 1978: 'The modem Greek language and diglossia', in S. Vryonis Jr. 
(ed.), The Past in Medieval and Modern Greek Culture, Malibu, pp. 193-220. 
Pfohl, G. (ed.), 1968a: Das Alphabet, Darmstadt. 
, 1968b: Elemente der griechischen Epigraphik, Darmstadt. 
Pictet, A, 1859-1863: Les origines indoeuropeennnes ou les Aryas primitifs. Essai de paleon-
tologic linguistique, Paris. 
Pisani, V., 1938: 'Paleontologia Linguistica', in Annali della Fac. di Lettere e Filosofa 
delta R. Universitd di Cagliari. 
, 1954: Breve historia de la lengua griega, Montevideo. 

338 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Pittau, M., 1984: Lessico Etrusco-Latino, Sassari. 
Pohl, W. (ed.), 1997: Kingdoms of the Empire. The integration of the barbarian in late 
antiquity, New York. 
Politis, L., 1994: Historia de la Literatura griega moderna, Madrid. 
Poltera, O., 1997: Le langage de Simonide, Berne. 
Pope, K. M., 1973 (1st ed. 1934): From Latin to Modern French, Manchester. 
Porzig, W., 1954: 'Sprachgeographische Untersuchungen zu den altgriechischen 
Dialekten', IF 6\, pp. 147-169. 
Powell, B. B., 1991a: Homer and the origin of the Greek alphabet, Cambridge. 
, 1991b: 'The Origins of the alphabetic Literacy among the Greeks', in Baurain, 
C. (ed.), 1991, pp. 357-70. 
Powell, J. U., 1925 (reimpr. 1970): Collectanea Alexandrina, Oxford. 
Probonas, J. K., 1992:
 
rH EXXr^viKoxi^xa 
xr\g Mamdoviag 
\xeoa arovg 
amvag, 
Athens. 
Psichari, J., 1886-89: Essais de grammaire historique du neo-grec, Paris. 
PsomadaMs, K., 1995: 'YlapaoxaxiKr\ npoopoXr) rfjg EXXrjviicfjg cog BisBvovg TXcoaaag', 
in EXXr]viKr] 
SieOvrjg FXmaaa 2. 
Pugliese Carratelli, G., 1985: Magna Grecia. II Mediterraneo, le metropoleis e la fondazione 
delle colonic, Milan. 
Rabehl, W., De sermone defixionum atticarum, thesis, Berlin, 1906. 
Raderenacher, L., 1947: Koine, Vienna. 
Raubitschek, A. E., 1969: 'Das Denkmal-Epigramm', in A A . W . 1967, pp. 1-26. 
Real Academia Espanola, 2001 (22nd ed.): Diccionario de la lengua espanola, Madrid. 
•, 1998: Enmiendas y adiciones al Diccionario de la Real Academia Espanola aprobadas 
por la Corporation. Letters A-C, Madrid. 
Regard, P., 1924: 'La version grecque du Monument d'Ancyra', REA 26, pp. 
147-161. 
Renfrew, G, 1987: Archaeology and Language. The Puzzle of Indoeuropean Origins, Cambridge 
(Sp. transl., Barcelona, 1990). 
Risen, E., 1955: 'Die Gliederung der griechischen Dialekten in neuer Sicht', MH 
12, pp. 61-76. 
, 1966: 'Les differences dialectales dans le mycenien', in Cambridge Colloquium, 
Cambridge, pp. 150-157. 
, 1974: Wortbildung der homerischen Sprache, Berlin. 
, 1979: 'Die griechische Dialekte im 2. vorchristlichen Jahrtausend', SMEA 20, 
pp. 91-101. 
, 1985: 'La posizione del dialetto dorico', in Musti, D. (ed.) 1985a, pp. 13-35. 
, 1988: 'Le developpement du chipriote dans le cadre des dialectes grecs anciens', 
in Karageorghis, J. and Masson, O. (eds.) 1988, pp. 67-80, Nicosia. 
, 1991: 'La contribution de la langue mycenienne au probleme de la transi­
tion du palais a la cite', in Musti, D. (ed.) 1991, pp. 231-240. 
Rix, H., 1992: Historische Grammatik des Griechischen, Darmstadt. 
Rizzi, E., 1981: 'II dorico di Creta: aspetti e problemi della struttura fonematica', 
Studi italiani di linguistics teorica ed applicata, pp. 251-282. 
Rocca, G., 1984: Continuitd micenee nel dorico, Milan. 
Rodriguez Monescillo, E., 1975: Estudios sobre la lengua de Aristqfanes, Madrid. 
Rodriguez Somolinos, H., 1998a: El lexico de los poetas lesbios, Madrid. 
(1998b): 'Inscriptiones Graecae Antiquissimae Iberiae', in Gangutia Elicegui, 
E., Testimonia Hispaniae Antiqua, Madrid, II. pp. 335-363. 
Rohlfs, G., 1950: Historische Grammatik der unteritalischen Grdzitat, Munich. 
——, 1962: Neue Beitrage zur Kenntnis der unteritalischen Grdzitat, Munich. 
Romero Cruz, F., 1988: 'En tono a los proemios y epilogos de Tucidides', in 
G. Morocho (ed.), Estudios de Dramay Retorica en Grecia y Roma, Leon pp. 155-167. 
Rosen, H. B., 1962: Eine Laut- und Formenlehre der Herodoteischen Sprachform, Heidelberg. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
339 
, 1963: 'Palestinian KOIVTJ in Rabbinic Illustration', JSS 8, pp. 56-72. 
, 1979: Uhebreu et ses rapports avec le monde classique, Paris 1979. 
, 1980: 'Die Sprachsituation im romischen Palastina', in Neumann, G. and 
Untermann, J. (eds.) 1980, pp. 215-239. 
Rosenkranz, B., 1930: 'Der lokale Grundton und die personliche Eigenart in der 
Sprache des Thukydides', iF 35, pp. 127-178. 
Rotolo, V., 1965: A, Korais e la questione della lengua en Grecia, Palermo. 
Roura, C , 1971: 'La indeterminacion sintactica en Tucidides y los problemas de 
la traduction', Emerita 39, pp. 121-127. 
Rudberg, G., 1942: 'Herakleitos und Gorgias', Serta Eitremiana, Oslo, pp. 128 140. 
Ruijgh, C. J., 1957: Uelhnent acheen dans la langue epique, Assen. 
, 1967: Etudes sur la Grammaire et le vocabulaire du grec Mycenien, Amsterdam. 
, 1984: 'Le mycenien et Homere', in Morpurgo, A. and Duhoux, Y. 1984, pp. 
75-125. 
, 1995: 'D'Homere aux origines de la tradition epique', in Crielaard, J. P. (ed.), 
Homeric Questions, Amsterdam, pp. 1—96. 
- 
, 1995-96: 'La genese de l'eolien d'Asie', Verbum 18, pp. 289-297. 
, 1996: 'Sur la position dialectale du mycenien', in De Miro, E. and others 
(eds.) 1996, pp. 115-124. 
Rydbeck, L. 1967: Fachprosa, vermeintliche Volkssprache und JSfeues Testament, Uppsala. 
Sacconi, A., 1991: 'I sistemi grafici del monde egeo tra la fine del II e l'inizio del 
I millennio a. C.', in Musti, D. (ed.) 1991, pp. 43-52. 
Sakellariou, M., 1980: Les proto-grecs, Athens. 
Santana Henriquez, G., 1991: 'En torno a la composition en la prosa medica griega 
antigua', Emerita 59, pp. 123-132. 
Santiago, R. A., 1997: 'La dialectologia griega, hoy', in Bosch, M. G. and Fornes, 
M. A. (eds.), Homenatge a Miquel Dole. Actes del XII Simposi de la Seccio Catalana i de 
la Seccio Balear de la S.E.E.C., pp. 13-30. 
Scarpat, G., 1952: / dialetti Greci in Omero secondo un grammatico antico, Milan. 
Schachermeyer, F., 1980: Griechenland im ^eitalter der Wanderungen, Vienna. 
Schrader, O., y Nehring, A., 1917-29: Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde, 
I-II, Berlin-Leipzig, 1917-1929. 
Scherer, A., 1963: 'Die Sprache des Archilochos', in A A . W . 1963, pp. 89-116. 
Schmid, W., 1964 (1st ed. 1896-97): Der Atticismus in seinen Hauptvertretern, Hildesheim, 
5 vols. 
Schmift, R., 1967: Dichtung und dichtersprache im idg. £eit, Wiesbaden, 1967. 
, 1977: Einfuhrung in die griechischen Dialekte, Darmstadt. 
Schwyzer, E., and Debrunner, A,, 4 vols., 1975 (4th ed., 1st ed. 1939 ff.): Griechische 
Grammatik, Munich. 
See, K. von (ed.), 1978: Europdische Heldendichtung, Darmstadt. 
Semenov, A., 1935: 'Der nordpontischen Dialekt des Neugriechischen', Glotta 23, 
pp. 96-107. 
Seiler, H.-J., 1952: Vaspect et le temps dans le verbe neo-grec, Paris. 
, 1958: 'Das Problem der sogenanten Geminaten in den neugriecmschen 
Dialekten . . .', Glotta 36, p. 209 ff. 
Sevcenko, I., 1982: 'Levels of Style in Byzantine Prose', JOB 31, pp. 281-312 and 
32, pp. 220-233. 
Shipp, G. S., 1964: 'Mycenaean Evidence for the Homeric Dialect', in G. S. Kirk 
(ed.), The Language and Background of Homer, Cambridge, pp. 1-14. 
Shipp, G. P., 1972 (2nd ed.): Studies in the Language of Homer, Cambridge. 
Sicca, U., 1924: Grammatica delle Iscrizioni Doriche delta Sicilia, Arpino. 
Skoda, F., 1988: Medicene ancienne et metaphore. Le vocabulaire de Vanatomie et de la patholo-
gie en grec ancien, Paris. 
Snell, B., 1969: Tyrtaios und die Sprache des Epos, Gottingen. 

340 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Soesbergen, P. G. van, 1981:
 cThe coming of the dorians', Kadmos 20, pp. 38-51. 
Sommer, F., (3rd ed.), 1948: Handbuch der Lateinischen Laut und Formenlehre, Heidelberg. 
Sophocles, E. A., 1914 (3rd ed., reprint, 1975): Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine 
Periods (B.C. 146 to A.D. 1100), Cambridge. 
Sotiropoulos, D., 1972: Noun Morphology of Modern Demotic Greek, The Hague. 
Sperber, D., 1984: A Dictionary of Greek and Latin Legal Terms in Rabbinic Literature, Bar 
Ilan. 
Stammler, W., (ed.), 1952: Deutsche Philologie im Aifriss, I, Berlin. 
Starr, Ch. G., 1964; Gli origini della civiltd greca, Rome. 
Stavrianopulu, P. (ed.), 1996: TIio Kovrd c%r\v EXXdSa 11, Madrid. 
, 1997: riw Kovxd oxr\v EXXdba 12 13, Madrid. 
, 1998: TIw Kovxd orr]v EXXdSa 14, Madrid. 
, 1999: Ilid Kovrd arrfv EXXdSa 15, Madrid. 
Steiner-Weber, A., 1991: 'Merkmale der byzantinischen Wortbildung anhand der 
Komposition', in Horandner, W. and Trapp, E. (eds.) 1991, pp. 235-248. 
Steinger, G., 1957: Epische Elemente im Redestil des Herodot, Kiel. 
Stephanus, H., 1831-65 (reprint, 1954): Thesaurus Linguae Graecae, Paris. 
Stevens, P. T., 1976: Colloquial expressions in Euripides, Wiesbaden. 
Stichel, R., 1991: 'Die Bedeutung der mittelalterlichen slavischen Uebersetzungliteratur 
fur die byzantinische Lexicographies in Horandner, W. and Trapp, E. (eds.) 1991, 
pp. 249-282. 
Streitberg, W., 1919 (2nd ed.): Die gothische Bibel, Heidelberg. 
Striano, A., 1987: 'Sobre los supuestos lesbismos del dialecto cirenaico
5, Emerita 55, 
pp, 335-344. 
Strunck, K., 1957: Die sogenannte Aeolismen der homerischen Sprache, Koln. 
, 1997: 'Vom Mykenischen bis zum klassischen Griechisch', in H.-G. Nesselrath 
(ed.), Einleitung in die griechische Philologie, Stuttgart-Leipzig. 
Stubbings, F. H., 1963: The Rise of Mycenaean Civilization, Cambridge. 
, 1975: The recession of Mycenaean Civilization, Cambridge. 
Stiiber, K., 1996: J?ur dialektalen Einheit des Ostionischen, Innsbruck. 
Sturtevant, E. H., 1933 (2nd ed. New-Haven-London 1942): A Comparative Grammar 
of the Hittite Language, Philadelphia. 
-, 1962: The Indo-Hittite Hypothese', Language 38, pp. 101-110. 
Swain, S., 1996: Hellenism and Empire. Language, Classicism and Power in the Greek World, 
Oxford. 
Sznol, X., 1989: 'Ejemplos del griego rabinico a traves del tesoro lexicografico del 
DGE\ Emerita 57, pp. 329-343. 
Tarrant, D., 1946: 'Colloquialisms, Semi-proverbs and Wordplay in Plato
5, CQ40, 
pp. 109-117. 
, 1958: 'More Colloquialisms, Semi-proverbs and Wordplay in Plato', CQ 
N. S. 8, pp. 158-160. 
Taylour, W., 1983 (1st ed. 1964): The Mycenaeans, Cambridge. 
Theodorsson, S., The phonemic System of the Attic Dialect 400-340 B.C., Lund, 1974. 
, 1977: The Phonology of the Ptolemaic Koine, Lund. 
TheslefT, H., 1967: Studies in the Styles of Plato, Helsinki. 
Thevenot-Warelle, A., 1988: Le dialecte grec d'Elide. Phonetique et Morphologie, Nancy. 
Thompson, D. W., 1928: 'On Egyptian Fishnames used by Greek Writers', The 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 14, 1928 I—II. 
Threatte, L., 1980-1996: The Grammar of Attic inscriptions, Berlin, vols. 1-11. 
Thumb, A., 1885: Handbuch der neugriechischen Volkssprache, Strassbourg. 
, 1916: 'Die griechischen Lehnworter im Armenischen', B% 9, p. 388 ff. 
, 1974 (1st ed. 1901): Die griechische Sprache im ^eitalter des Hellenismus, Strassbourg. 
and Kieckers, E., 1939: Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte, I, Heidelberg. 
and Scherer, A., 1959: Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte, II, Heidelberg. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
341 
Tobaidis, D. E., 1988:
 (H %ov%xaKr\ SidXeKxog, Athens. 
Tovar, A., 1944: 'Ensayo sobre la estratigrafia de los dialectos griegos. I. Primitiva 
extension geografica del Jonio', Emerita 12, pp. 245-335. 
Tovar, S. A., 1990: Biografia de la lengua griega, Santiago de Chile. 
Traglia, A., 1952: Studi sulla lengua di Alceo, Bari. 
, 1952: Studi sulla lengua di Empedocle, Bari. 
Trapp, E. and others, Studien {zur Byzantinischen Lexicographic, Vienna 1988. 
, 1988: 'Stand und Perspektiven der mittelgriechischen Lexicographic \ in 
E. Trapp (ed.), Studien zur Byzantinischen Lexicographic, Vienna, pp. 11-46. 
, Horandner, W. and Diethart, J., 1994 ff.: Lexikon zur byzantinischen Grdzitat 
(besonders des 9.-12. Jahrhunderts), Vienna. 
Triandaphyllidis, M., 1909: Die Lehnworter der mittelgriechiscfien Vulgarliteratur, Strassbourg. 
, Kcxi £7iixpo7rf|(^, 1941: N£oeXXi)viKf\ rpafifiaxiKT) 
(rfjg ArjporiKrjg), Athens. 
, 1981 (1st ed., Athens, 1946): NeoeXXrjviKX] rpafifiamcr) ('loxopiKX] Eiaay<&yr\\, 
Thessalonica. 
Troxler, H., 1964: Sprache und Wortschatz Hesiods, Zurich. 
Trumpy, C , 1986: Vergleich des Mykenischen mit der Sprache der Ghorlyrik. Frankfurt am 
Main and New York. 
Tsekourakis, D., 1974: Studies in the Terminology of early Stoic Ethics, Wiesbaden. 
Tseskhladze, G. and de Angelis, F. (eds.), 1994: The Archaeology of Greek Colonization. 
Oxford. 
Tsopanakis, A., 1994: NeoeXXriviKr) Tpa\i\iaxiKr], 
Athens. 
Tsopanakis, A. C , 1979: 'Onomatologia omerica', QUCC, N. S, 1, 1979, pp. 83-90. 
, 1993: "Ava£fYnicn KatatanTtwv i% ap%aia<; MaK£5ovncfj<; 
'EM,T|VIKTJ<;
5 in 
EXXriviKfj AiaXexxoXoyia 3, pp. 61-82. 
Ullmann, B. L., 1968: 'Wie alt ist das griechische Alphabet
5, in G. Pfohl (ed.) 1968a, 
pp. 214-220;
 cEin Beleg fur die Buchstabenfolge unseres Alphabets aus dem 14. 
Jahrhundert vor Christus', ibid., pp. 221-32. 
Unterenann, J., 1987: Einfuhrung in die Sprache Homers, Heidelberg. 
Untersteiner, M., 1949: La lengua di Erodoto, Bari. 
Urmson, J. O., 1990: The Greek Philosophical Vocabulary, London. 
Ursing, U., 1930: Studien zur griechischen Fabel, Lund. 
Van Brock, N., 1961, Recherches sur k vocabulaire medical du grec ancien, Paris. 
Van der Velde, R., 1924: Thessalische Dialektgeographie, Nijmegen. 
Van Groningen, B., 1958: La composition litteraire archaique grecque, Amsterdam. 
Vasiliev, A. A., 1946 (original ed. 1928-29): Historia del imperio bizantino. De Constantino 
a las Cruzadas, Barcelona. 
Vayacacos, D. V., 1972a: Le grec moderne, les dialectes neohelleniques et le dutionnaire his-
torique de la langue grecque de lAcademie dAthenes, Athens. 
, 1972b: r^ooaoncT) avyyeveia Kprixn*; mi Mavni;, Ae^ixoypacpiKov SeXriov, pp. 
3-42. 
Verdier, Ch., 1972: Les eolismes non-epiques de la langue de Pindare, Innsbruck. 
Vemet, J., 1978: La cultura hispano-arabe en Oriente y Occidente, Barcelona. 
Viereck, P., 1888: Sermo graecus quo senatus populusque romanus magistratusque popuh romani 
usque ad Tiberii Caesaris aetatem utebantur, Gotemburgo. Vilborg, E., 1960: A tenta­
tive Grammar of mycenaean Greek, Gotenburg. 
Villar, F., 1996a (2nd ed.): Los indoeuropeos y los origines de Europa. Lenguaje e historia, 
Madrid. 
and d'Encarnagao, J. (eds.), 1996b: La Hispania prerromana, Salamanca. 
Vineis, E. (ed.), 1983: Le lingue indoeuropee di frammentaria attestazione, Pisa, pp. 135-151. 
Viscidi, F., 1944: I prestiti latini nel greco antico e bizantino, Padua. 
Vottero, G., 1996: 'Koines et koinas en Beotie a Pepoque dialectale
5, in Brixhe, C. 
(ed.) 1996a, pp. 43-92. 
Vries, J. de, 1963: Heroic Song and heroic Legend, London. 

342 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Wachter, R., 1989: 'Zur Vorgeschichte des griechischen Alphabets', Kadmos 28, pp. 
19-78. 
Wahlgren, St., 1995: Sprachwandel im Griechischen der friihen Kaiser zeit, Gotenburg. 
Wahrmann, P., 1907: Prolegomena zu einer Geschichte der griechischen Dialekten im ^eitalter 
des Hellenismus, Wien. 
Walburton, I. P., 1970: 'Greek Diglossia and the true aspects of the Phonology of 
Common Modern Greek', JL 16, pp. 45-54. 
Wathelet, P., 1970: Les traits eolien dans la langue de Vepopee grecque, Rome. 
, 1991: 'Les datifs analogiques en -eaoi', REG 104, pp. 1-14. 
Watkins, C , 1995: 'El protoindoeuropeo', in Giacalone, A. and Ramat, P. (eds.), 
Las lenguas indoeuropeas, Madrid, pp. 57-117. 
Webster, T. B. L., 1958: From Mycenae to Homer, London. 
Weierholt, K., 1963: Studien im Sprachgebrauch des Malalas, Oslo. 
Weise, O., 1882: Die griechische Wb'rter in Latein, Leipzig. 
Wenskuns, O., 1982: Ringskomposition, anaphorisch-rekapitulierende Verbindung und anknupfende 
Wiederholung im Hippokratischen Corpus, Frankfurt. 
Widmann, H., 1935: Beitrage zur Syntax Epikurs, Stuttgart-Berlin. 
Willets, F. R., 1988: 'Early Greek in Cyprus', in Karageorghis, J. and Masson, O. 
(eds.) 1988, pp. 39-54. 
Windekens, A. J. van, 1952: Le pelasgique, Louvain. 
Witte, K., 1913: 'Homer, Sprache', in RE VIII 13-47. 
Woodward, R. C , 1986: The Dentalization of the Labiovelars in Greek', 7F 91, 
pp. 129-154. 
Zaragoza, J. and Gonzalez Senmarti, A., 1989: 'Reflexions sur le lexique dans les 
Epidemies II, IV, V, VI, VIP, in Die hippokratischen Epidemien. Theorie, Praxis, Tradition. 
Verhandlungen der V
e Colloque International Hipporcratique (G. Baader et al. eds.), Stuttgart. 
Zgusta, L., 1980: 'Die Rolle des Griechischen im romischen Kaiserzeit', in G. Neumann 
and J. Untermann (eds.) 1980, pp. 121-145. 
Zilliacus, H., 1935: £um Kampf der Weltsprachen im ostromischen Reich, Helsinfors. 
Zumbach, O., 1955: Neuerungen in der Sprache der Homerischen Hymnen, Winterthur. 
Zuntz, G., 1939: 'Earliest Attic Prosa Style (On Antiphon's second Tetralogy)', 
Classica et Medievalia 2, pp. 121-144. 

I N D E X 
The numbers in this index refer to paragraph numbers, not to page numbers. 
acclamations of the stadium: language, 
336 
Achaean epic: 81 ff.; origin, 89 
Aeolic: 121 ff.; in Homer, 144 ff. 
Alcaeus and Sappho: language, 176 ff. 
alphabet: Greek, 100 ff; Etruscan, 110; 
derived from Greek, 110 f; Iberian, 
306; Gothic, 308 
Antiphon: language, 213, 217 
Arab: 309, 314; invasion, 315; 
borrowings from Greek, 386 ff. 
Aramaic: influence in koine, 254; 
influence from Greek, 305 
Arcado-Cyprian: 119 f; precedents, 90 
Aristophanes: language, 225 
Armenian: influence of Greek, 306 
Attic lexicon: scientific vocabulary, 
236 ff. 
Attic scholia: language, 189 
Attic: in Ionic inscriptions, 195; oldest 
Attic prose, 212 ff.; mature prose, 
219 ff; variants in prose, 223 ff; 
scientific lexicon, 234 ff; diffusion, 
247 
atticism: 275 ff. 
Bacchylides: language, 171 
biblical Greek: 255 f. 
Boeotian: 180 
Bulgarian: 381 
Byzantine Greek: popular language, 
330 ff, 341 ff; Latin borrowings, 
356 ff; borrowings from Gothic 
and the easten languages, 359 ff; 
borrowings from western languages, 
363 ff; borrowings in other 
languages, 366 ff; borrowings 
in western languages, 369 ff; 
borrowings in Slavic, 379 ff; 
borrowings in Arab, 383 ff. 
Byzantine lexicon: 352 ff. 
Byzantium: historical context of Greek, 
311 ff; literature, 316 ff, 327 ff. 
Callimachus and Chrysorrhoe: 
language, 351 
Callinus: language, 158 
Cicero: 297 
colonization: 95 ff. 
colloquial koine: 252 f.; local variants, 
261 f; vulgar koine: 262 f; general 
description, 264 ff. 
comedy: language, 208, 210 
Common Greek: his existence, 28 f; 
essential characteristics, 30 ff; 
variants, 36 ff 
Coptic: 304 
Corinna: language, 180 ff 
Chios: modenr dialect, 442 
choral lyric: language, 162 ff 
Chronicle of the Morea: language, 350 
Demotic: influence of Greek, 304 
Digenis Akritas: language, 349 
Dorian: 125 f. 
Dorians: arrival, 53 ff. 
East Greek: 68 ff; precedents in CG, 
38 f; variants, 90, 112 ff. 
Egyptian: influence in koine, 254 
elegy: language, 155 ff 
epic: v. Achaean epic, Homer 
epigram: language, 160 f. 
Eteo-Cretan: 59 
Ethiopian: influence of Greek, 306 
Etruscan: alphabet, 110 
Fables from the Vindobonensis 
collection: language, 339 
Germanic: 308; hellenisms, 378 
Gorgias: language, 213, 217 
Gothic: alphabet, 308 
Greek inscriptions: 108 ff. 
Greek: in the 2nd millenium, 46; 
Pre-Greek elements, 62 ff; 
expansion in the first millenium, 
92 ff; inscriptions, 104 ff; unifying 
isoglosses, 127 ff; differences in 
the first millenium, 130 ff; general 
literary languages, 133 ff; specific 
literary languages, 175 ff; Ionic 

344 
INDEX 
and Attic literary languages, 185 ff.; 
influence of Latin, 257 ff; contacts 
with other languages, 286 ff; 
coexistence with Latin within the 
empire, 287 f; in Rome, 289 ff; 
influence of othe languages, 304 ff. 
Greek-Latin: 387 ff., 406 ff.; in 
Spanish lexicon, 413 ff; international 
character, 415 f. 
Greeks: expansion and arrival to 
Greece, 40 ff 
hellenisms: in western languages in 
the high middle ages, 390 ff; in 
Castilian (centuries xiv-xvi), 393 ff; 
in French (centuries xiv-xvi), 397; 
in Italian (centuries xiv-xvi), 398; in 
English (centuries xiv-xvi), 399; in 
Castilian (centuries xvi-xviii), 400 f; 
in German (centuries xvii-xviii), 
402; in Italian (centuries xvii-xviii), 
402; in Castilian (centuries xix-xx), 
403 ff. 
Herodot: language, 199 ff 
Hesiod: language, 151 f 
hippocratics: language, 205, 231 ff 
Homer: language, 85 ss, 136 ff; 
formulaic diction, 140 ff; 
dialectal forms, 143 ff; artificial 
forms, 146; problems of 
transmission, 148 
Homeric Hymns: language, 153 
Iambographers: language, 187 ff. 
Iberian: alphabet, 306 
Indo-European: monothematic (IE II), 
19; polithematic (IE 111), 19; IIIA, 
23 f, 26; IIIA and Greek, 21 
Indo-Europeans: origins, 1 ff; 
invasions, 5 ff; point of departure, 
6 ff; theories about home and 
expansion, 7 ff; culture, 13 ff; 
cultural vocabulary, 16 f. 
Ionians: origin, 118 
Ionic-Attic: 116 ff; precedents, 90 
Ionic: in Homer, 144 ff; prose, 191 ff; 
Iambographers, 187 ff; 
inscriptions, 194; in Attic prose, 242 
koine: origin, definition, levels, 240 ff; 
diffusion, 247 ff; influence in 
dialects, 250 ff; influence in other 
languages, 254 ff. 
Latin: influence in koine, 257 ff; 
Hellenization, 110, 294 ff; in the 
East and Byzantium, 287 f. christian 
hellenisms, 298 
Lesbian: 118, 122, 177 f, 183 
literary koine: the first stage, 271 ff 
literary Syracusan: 183 ff 
Macedonian: 60 f. 
Malalas: language, 338 
Minoans and Mycenaean expansion: 
42 ff 
Modern Cyprian: 442 
Modern Greek: general panorama, 
417 ff, 443; description, 425 ff; 
borrowings and culture words, 
432 ff; dialects, 437 ff, 443 ff. 
Mycenaean: 73 If; texts, 76; linguistic 
features, 77 ff 
Neolithic in Greece: 59 
Nubian: 309 
oral Attic: fuentes, 208; general 
features, 206 ff; characteristics, 
209 ff 
Para-Mycenaean: 90 
Pelasgian: 57, 64 f 
Phrygian: 110; influjo del griego, 305 
Plato: language, 221, 270 
post-Homeric epic: language, 149 ff. 
Pre-Greek languages: 57 ff 
Prodromos: language, 348 
Proto-Bulgarian inscriptions: language, 
337 
rabbinic Hebrew: influence of Greek, 
305 
ritual lyric: language, 173 
Sappho: v. Alcaeus 
scientific Greek lexicon: presocratics, 
197, 227 ff; hippocratics, 233 ff; 
Attic literature, 236 ff; example of 
a system, 238; sources, 281; general 
description, 282 ff. 
Sea Peoples: 47 
semitisms in Greece: 255 
Semonides: language, 159 
Simonides: language, 171 
Slavic: 379 ff; borrowings from 
Greek, 382 

INDEX 
04:0 
Socrates: language, 211 
Solon: language, 189 
syllabaries: 49 ff. 
Syriac: influence of Greek, 306 
Theocrit: language, 185 
Thrasymachus: language, 213, 217 
Thucydides: language, 218, 225 
tragedy: language, 172, 208 
Tsaconian: 440, 442 
Tyrtaeus: language, 159 
West Greek: 53 ff., 125 ff. 
Xenophon: language, 226 

