THINKING
ARABIC
TRANSLATION
_______________________________
A Course in Translation Method:
Arabic to English
Supplement
James Dickins

Contents: Supplement
Introduction
1
1 Preliminaries to translation as a process
3
1.3.1 
Annotation: gist, exegesis and rephrasing
3
Practical 1.3 Gist translation: ﳑﺎ ﻫﻮ ﺟﺪﻳﺮ ﺑﺎﻟﺬﻛﺮ8
2 Preliminaries to translation as a product
9
2.1.1
Interlinear translation
9
2.1.5
From interlinear to free translation
10
2.2.2.1
Translation by omission
11
2.2.2.2
Translation by addition
11
Practical 2.3 Literal vs. free translation: ﻣﻌﻠﻘﺔ ﻟﺒﻴﺪ11
3 Cultural transposition
14
3.1
Basic principles
14
3.3
Calque
14
Practical 3.2 (extension) Cultural transposition: وﻟﻴﺲ ﻫﻨﺎك إﺧﺼﺎﺋﻲ15
Practical 3.3 Cultural transposition: وﻗﺎدﺗﻪ ﺧﻄﻮاﺗﻪ15
4 Compensation
17
4.1
Basic principles
17
4.2
Categories of compensation
17
Practical 4.1 Compensation: ﻗﺪ ﳝﺮ وﻗﺖ ﻃﻮﻳﻞ18

ii
Contents: Supplement
5 Denotative meaning and translation issues
19
5.1
Denotative meaning
19
5.1.2
Hyperonymy-hyponymy
20
5.1.3
Particularizing translation and generalizing translation
20
5.1.4
Partially overlapping translation
22
5.2
Semantic repetition in Arabic
23
5.2.2
List restructuring
23
Practical 5.3 Semantic repetition, parallelism and list restructuring:
إن اﻟﺮﺳﻮل اﻟﻜﺮﱘ26
6 Connotative meaning and translation issues
28
6.7
Reflected meaning
28
7 Phonic/graphic and prosodic issues in translation
29
7.1.1
Alliteration, assonance, and rhyme
29
7.2
The prosodic level
29
7.2.2
Translating Arabic verse
30
Practical  7.3 The prosodic level: ﻣﻌﻠﻘﺔ ﻟﺒﻴﺪ31
Practical  7.4 The phonic/graphic and prosodic levels:
آه .. ﻛﻢ ﻛﻨﺎ ﻗﺒﻴﺤﲔ31
8 Grammatical issues in translation
33
8.2
The grammatical level
33
8.2.0 
The definition of syntactic sentence in English and Arabic
34
8.2.0.1 
Grammatical definition of syntactic sentence
34
8.2.0.1.1
English
35
8.2.0.1.2 
Arabic
36
8.2.0.2 
Occurrence-based definition of syntactic sentence
38
8.2.2
Grammatical arrangement
40
8.2.3.1
Pattern repetition
41
Practical  8.2 Lexical item repetition: إن اﻟﺘﻤﻴﻴﺰ اﻟﻄﺒﻘﻲ42
9 Sentential issues in translation
43
9.1
The sentential level
43
9.2.2
Theme and rheme
44

Contents: Supplement
iii
9.2.2.3
Basic theme-rheme translation issues
44
9.2.4
Interaction of theme-rheme and main-subordinate elements
47
9.3
Denotative aspects of subordination
50
Practical 9.3 Coordination in Arabic narratives:  وأﺣﻨﻰ رأﺳﻪ52
10
Discourse and intertextual issues in translation
54
10.3.1
Genre membership
54
10.3.2
Quotation and allusion
56
Practical 10.3
Textual restructuring:  ﻛﺘﺎب ﻳﺪﻋﻮ ﻟﻠﻌﻮدة57
11
Metaphor
59
11.2.2
The purposes of metaphor
59
11.2.3
Metaphorical force
60
 
12
Language variety and translation: register,
sociolect and dialect
61
12.6 Representations of speech in written Arabic
61
Practical 12.3
Representation of speech in written Arabic,
and tonal register: أﻫﻼ ﻋﻤﺮ، ﺗﻐﻴﺮت66
Practical 12.4
Representation of speech in written Arabic,
and tonal register: اﺳﺘﻠﻘﻴﺖ ﻋﻠﻰ ﻇﻬﺮي67
13
Textual genre as a factor in translation
69
Practical 13.3
Genre: Comparison of Kuwait articles
69
14
Translating technical texts
72
14.1.1 
Cultural commonality vs. cultural non-commonality
72
14.3
Conceptual problems in technical translation
73
Practical 14.3 Semi-technical translation: اﳌﺎدة اﳌﻈﻠﻤﺔ76
15
Translating constitutional texts
79
Practical 15.3
Constitutional translation:
ﻣﺸﺮوع دﺳﺘﻮر ﺟﺪﻳﺪ ﻟﻠﺠﻤﻬﻮرﻳﺔ اﻟﻠﺒﻨﺎﻧﻴﺔ79

iv
Contents: Supplement
16
Translating consumer-oriented texts
81
16.4
Genre-mixing in consumer-oriented texts
81
Practical 16.3
Translation of consumer-oriented texts: ﻣﺒﻄﻦ ﺑﺮوﻛﻮﻟﻮ82
References
84

Introduction to
Thinking Arabic
Translation: Supplement
_______________________________
Thinking Arabic Translation: Supplement is designed to be used alongside
Thinking Arabic Translation (Dickins, Hervey and Higgins 2002). The
Supplement contains two sorts of material. The first is textual material further
developing the translation issues discussed in the main text of Thinking Arabic
Translation. The second is additional practicals, supplementing the practicals
at the end of the chapters of Thinking Arabic Translation. The Supplement is
particularly suitable for tutors teaching more intensive Arabic>English
translation courses of three or more class hours per week.
Textual material in the Supplement is organised under section numbers in
two ways. Where the material develops ideas specifically related to a particular
section of Thinking Arabic Translation, it bears the same section number as
the relevant material in that book. Where the material in the Supplement does
not develop ideas specifically related to a particular section of Thinking
Arabic Translation, but introduces new ideas, it is given a new section
number not  found in Thinking Arabic Translation.
Thus, Chapter 2 of the Supplement consists of four sections: 2.1.1, 2.1.5,
2.2.2.1 and 2.2.2.2. These correspond to identically numbered sections in
Thinking Arabic Translation and specifically develop the ideas put forward
in these sections in Thinking Arabic Translation.
In Chapter 1 of the Supplement, by contrast, the only section,1.3.1, has no
correspondent bearing the same number in Thinking Arabic Translation.
Chapter 1 of Thinking Arabic Translation does, however, have a Section 1.3
(as well as a subsequent Section 4). Section 1.3.1 in the Supplement is,
accordingly, intended not to develop the ideas in Section 1.3 in Thinking
Arabic Translation, but to introduce new ideas dependent on those of Section
1.3.
Further materials for tutors relating to both Thinking Arabic Translation
and this Supplement can be obtained directly from James Dickins at the

2
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
following address: Department of Arabic, School of Modern Languages and
Cultures, Al-Qasimi Building, University of Durham, Elvet Hill Road, Durham
DH1 3TU, United Kingdom (e-mail: James.Dickins@durham.ac.uk or
James.Dickins@urz.uni-heidelberg.de). These materials include full
discussions of the practicals given in this Supplement, covering, where
appropriate, strategic decisions, possible translations, and decisions of detail.
The further materials also include further handouts relating to Thinking Arabic
Translation which considerations of space precluded us from including in the
Tutor‚s Handbook to that book. Any comments on both Thinking Arabic
Translation and this Supplement  are welcome, particularly those relating to
possible improvements. These can be sent direct to James Dickins at the
above address.
The symbols used in the Supplement are the same as those for Thinking
Arabic Translation, as follows:
{ }
Indicates key elements in ST and/or TT where these might not otherwise
be clear.
ø 
Indicates zero elements in translation (translation by omission).
Ch.
Section reference to section in another chapter (e.g. Ch. 9.2.2 means
ºSection 9.2.2‚).
§
Section reference to section in the same chapter.
Cross-references in this Supplement normally refer to material in Thinking
Arabic Translation. Where they refer to material in the Supplement itself,
this is marked with a preceding use of ºSupplement‚ (thus, ºSupplement §
5.2.2‚ means Section 5.2.2. of the same chapter of the Supplement).
There is supplementary material for all chapters of Thinking Arabic
Translation except chapters 17 and 18.

1
Preliminaries to
translation as a process:
Supplement
_______________________________
1.3.1 Annotation: gist, exegesis and rephrasing
Good examples of exegetic translation, and also on occasion gist translation
and even rephrasing, can be found in annotated texts. The following is part
of the text of  ,ﻣــــﻌﻠﻘــــﺔ ﻟـﺒـــﻴــــﺪone of the seven pre-Islamic odes known as the
 ,ﻣــﻌﻠـﻘــﺎتwith an accompanying commentary (in Arabic  )ﺷَـــﺮْحby اﻟﺰوزﻧـﻲ
(n.d.: 125-127). Such ancient Arabic poetry makes wide use of vocabulary,
word order, and to some extent also grammatical structures which were
probably already archaic and confined to the poetic register when the poetry
was first composed. Considered an essential element of the Arab literary
heritage, the  ﻣــﻌﻠﻘــﺎتare studied as part of the school curriculum throughout
the Arab world. Given their difficulty in terms of vocabulary, etc. they are
universally studied together with a commentary on them.
In order to make the discussion of the material easier, the text of the
relevant portion of  ﻣـــــﻌـﻠﻘــــــﺔ ﻟﺒــــــﻴـــــﺪis presented here with an interlinear-type
English translation – i.e. an English translation which closely mirrors the
structure and wording of the Arabic, and is inserted between each line of the
original Arabic text. (Interlinear translation will be discussed further in Chapter
2.)
Note also that every line in a classical Arabic poem ( )ﻗـــﺼــــﻴـــﺪةis divided
up into two halves or hemistiches (ºhemistich‚ in Arabic being  ﻣِــــــﺼـــــــﺮاعor
  .)ﺷﻄﺮThe first half of the line is called the  ﺻــﺪرºchest‚ (also اﻟﺸﻄﺮ اﻻول
ºthe first half‚), and the second the  ﻋـــــﺠـــــﺰºrump‚ (also  اﻟـﺸﻄـﺮ اﻟﺜــــــﺎﻧـﻲºthe
second half‚). These are separated by a gap in the text which is somewhat
longer than that which standardly occurs between words. Thus in the first
line of this poem the  ﺻﺪرis  ,ﻋَـﻔَﺖِ اﻟﺪﱢﻳﺎرُ ﻣـﺤﻠﱡﻬـﺎ ﻓَـﻤُـﻘـﺎﻣُـﻬـﺎwhile the  ﻋﺠـﺰis

4
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
 .ﺑِﻤـﻨَﻰ ﺗَـﺄَﺑﱠﺪَ ﻏَـــــﻮْﻟُـﻬـــــﺎ ﻓَـــــﺮِﺟـــــﺎﻣُـــــﻬـــــﺎWe have used the symbol // in the English
translation to mark the break which occurs between the two hemistiches.
Parts of the original footnotes for lines 1 and 4 appear after the end of the
extract. Translations of the footnote are added beneath the footnote itself.
Note that other footnotes in the original commentary have not been included
here. Elements omitted from the original footnotes of lines 1 and 4  are
marked by [...] in the original Arabic, and by [...] in the English translation.
ﻋَﻔَﺖِ اﻟﺪﱢﻳﺎرُ ﻣﺤﻠﱡﻬﺎ ﻓَﻤُﻘﺎﻣُﻬﺎ   ﺑِﻤﻨَﻰ ﺗَﺄَﺑﱠﺪَ ﻏَﻮْﻟُﻬﺎ ﻓَﺮِﺟﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
Have-disappeared the-camping-grounds – their-alighting-places and their-
stopping-places // in Mina; have-become-deserted its[i.e.
Mina‚s]-[Mount]-Ghaul and-its[i.e. Mina‚s]-[Mount]-Rijam.
ﻓَﻤَﺪاﻓﻊُ اﻟﺮﱠﻳﱠﺎنِ ﻋُﺮﱢيَ رَﺳْﻤُﻬﺎ   ﺧَﻠَﻘًﺎ ﻛﻤﺎ ﺿَﻤِﻦَ اﻟﻮُﺣِﻲﱠ ﺳِﻼﻣُﻬﺎ
The torrent-beds of [Mount] Al-Rayyan have-become-denuded their-trace
//  made-threadbare; just as have-encompassed the-writings (obj.) its-stones
(subj.) [i.e. just as its stones have come to obliterate its writings].
دِﻣَﻦٌ ﺗَﺠَﺮﱠمَ ﺑَﻌْﺪَ ﻋَﻬْﺪِ أَﻧﻴﺴِﻬﺎ   ﺣِﺠَﺎجٌ ﺧَﻠَﻮْنَ ﺣَﻼﻟُﻬﺎ وﺣَﺮاﻣُﻬﺎ
ruins/dung-heaps have-passed since the-time of their-sociability // years,
have-gone-by their-unhallowed and their-sacrosanct.
رُزِﻗَﺖْ ﻣَﺮاﺑﻴﻊَ اﻟﻨﱡﺠُﻮمِ  وَﺻﺎﺑَﻬﺎ   وَدْقُ اﻟﺮﱠواﻋِﺪِ ﺟَﻮْدُﻫﺎ ﻓﺮِﻫﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
[they] have-been-fed with-the-spring-rains of the-stars [adverbial
accusative use of َ ,]ﻣــــــــــــــــــﺮاﺑــﻴــﻊand have struck-them // the-rain of the-
thunder-clouds their-[i.e. the thunder clouds‚]-downpour and-their-shower.
ﻣِﻦ ﻛﻞﱢ ﺳَﺎرِﺑَﺔٍ وَﻏَﺎدٍ ﻣُﺪْﺟِﻦ   وَﻋَﺸِﻴﱠﺔٍ ﻣُﺘَﺠﺎوِبٍ إِرْزَاﻣُﻬﺎ
from every night-cloud and darkening morning-cloud, // and late-evening
answering-itself its-roar [i.e. every late evening cloud whose roar echoes
back].
Footnote to line 1 (beginning )ﻋﻔﺖ اﻟﺪﻳﺎر
ﻋـﻔﺎ ﻻزم ﻣـﺘـﻌﺪ، ﻳﻘـﺎل. ﻋﻔـﺖ اﻟﺮﻳﺢ اﳌﻨﺰل وﻋﻔـﺎ اﳌﻨﺰل ﻧﻔـﺴﻪ ﻋـﻔـﻮا وﻋﻔـﺎء،
وﻫﻮ ﻓﻲ اﻟـﺒــﻴﺖ ﻻزم. اﶈﻞ ﻣـﻦ اﻟﺪﻳﺎر.ﻣــﺎ ﺣﻞ ﻓـــﻴــﻪ ﻷﻳﺎم ﻣــﻌـــﺪودة، واﳌﻘــﺎم
ﻣﻨﻬـــﺎ ﻣــﺎ ﻃﺎﻟﺖ اﻹﻗــﺎﻣــﺔ ﺑـﻪ. ﻣﻨﻰ ﻣــﻮﺿﻊ ﺑـﺤــﻤﻰ ﺿــﺮﻳﺔ ﻏــﻴــﺮ ﻣـﻨﻰ اﳊــﺮم،
وﻣﻨـﻰ ﻳﻨـﺼــــﺮف وﻻ ﻳﻨﺼــــﺮف وﻳُـﺬﻛﱠــــﺮ وﻳﺆﻧّـﺚ. ﺗﺄﺑﺪ. ﺗـﻮﺣﺶ، وﻛــــﺬﻟـﻚ أﺑﺪ
ﻳﺄﺑـﺪ أﺑﻮدا . اﻟﻐـــﻮل واﻟﺮﺟـــﺎم. ﺟـــﺒــﻼن ﻣـــﻌـــﺮوﻓـــﺎن ]...[  ﻳﻘـــﻮل . ﻋــﻔـﺖ دﻳﺎر
اﻷﺣﺒـﺎب اﳕﺤﺖ ﻣﻨﺎزﻟﻬﻢ ﻣـﺎ ﻛﺎن ﻣﻨﻬـﺎ ﻟﻠﺤﻠﻮل دون اﻻﻗﺎﻣـﺔ وﻣﺎ ﻛﺎن ﻣـﻨﻬﺎ
ﻟﻺﻗـﺎﻣﺔ، وﻫﺬه اﻟـﺪﻳﺎر ﻛﺎﻧﺖ ﺑﺎﳌﻮﺿﻊ اﳌـﺴﻤﻰ ﻣﻨﻰ ، وﻗـﺪ ﺗﻮﺷـﺤﺖ اﻟﺪﻳﺎر
اﻟﻐـــﻮﻟﻴـــﺔ واﻟﺪﻳﺎر اﻟﺮﺟـــﺎﻣـــﻴــﺔ ﻣﻨـﻬــﺎ ﻻرﲢـــﺎل ﻗﻄﺎﻧﻬـــﺎ واﺣـــﺘــﻤـــﺎل ﺳﻜﺎﻧﻬـــﺎ ،
اﻟﻜﻨﺎﻳﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻏـﻮﻟﻬـﺎ ورﺟـﺎﻣﻬـﺎ راﺟـﻌﺔ اﻟﻰ اﻟﺪﻳـﺎر، ﻗﻮﻟﻪ ﺗﺄﺑﺪ ﻏـﻮﻟﻬـﺎ أي دﻳﺎر
ﻏﻮﻟﻬﺎ ودﻳﺎر رﺟﺎﻣﻬﺎ، ﻓﺤﺬف اﳌﻀﺎف.

Preliminaries to translation as a process: Supplement
5
Translation of footnote to line 1 (beginning )ﻋﻔﺖ اﻟﺪﻳﺎر
º[The verb]  ﻋـــــــﻔــــــــﺎis both transitive and intransitive; one may say ﻋــــــــﻔـﺖ
 اﻟﺮﻳﺢ اﳌـﻨﺰلºThe wind obliterated [[ ]ﻋـــﻔﺖthe traces of] the camp-site‚,
and ºThe campsite itself was obliterated [[ .]ﻋــﻔــﺎThe verbal noun is] ﻋــﻔـــﻮ
and  .ﻋــــﻔـــــﺎءIn this verse  ﻋـــــﻔـــــﺎis used intransitively. [ ﻣـــــﺤـﻞMahall] with
respect to camping grounds is where one alights for a limited number of
days. [ ﻣـﻘــﺎمMuqam] is where one stays for a long time. [ ﻣﻨـﻰMuna] is a
place in the sanctuary of Dirriya, not the Holy Sanctuary [of Mecca]. The
word Muna can be [treated as] grammatically declinable or indeclinable,
and it can be masculine or feminine. Al-Ghaul and Al-Rijam are both
well-known mountains. [...] He [The poet] says: ºThe tracings of the
camping places of the beloved ones have been obliterated - those
encampments where they set down without meaning to stay long, and
those where they tarried. These camping sites were in a place called
Mina. The camping places at Ghaul and Rijam have become deserted
because of the passing on of their inhabitants and the moving away of
those who dwelt in them.‚ There is a metonymy in [ ﻏــﻮﻟﻬــﺎits Ghaul] and
[ رﺟـــﺎﻣــﻬـــﺎits Rijam] relating back to [ اﻟﺪﻳﺎرthe camping grounds]; when
he [the poet] says [ ﺗﺄﺑﺪ ﻏـﻮﻟﻬـﺎºits Ghaul has become deserted‚] he means
[ دﻳﺎر ﻏﻮﻟﻬﺎ ﻓﺮﺟﺎﻣﻬﺎºthe camping grounds of its Ghaul and its Rijam‚].
Footnote to line 4 (beginning )رزﻗﺖ ﻣﺮاﺑﻴﻊ اﻟﻨﺠﻮم
 
]...[ ﻳﻘـــــﻮل. رزﻗﺖ اﻟـﺪﻳﺎر واﻟﺪﻣـﻦ اﻣﻄـﺎر اﻻﻧﻮاء اﻟـﺮﺑﻴــــﻌـــــﻴــــﺔ ﻓــــﺄﻣـــــﺮﻋﺖ
وأﻋــﺸــﺒﺖ وأﺻــﺎﺑﻬــﺎ ﻣﻄﺮ ذوات اﻟـﺮﻋــﻮد ﻣﻦ اﻟﺴــﺤــﺎﺋﺐ ﻣــﺎ ﻛــﺎن ﻣﻨﻪ ﻋــﺎﻣــﺎً
ﺑﺎﻟﻐﺎً ﻣﺮﺿﻴﺎً أﻫﻠﻪ وﻣـﺎ ﻛﺎن ﻣﻨﻪ ﻟﻴﻨﺎً ﺳﻬﻼً، وﲢﺮﻳﺮ اﳌﻌﻨﻰ ان ﺗﻠﻚ اﻟﺪﻳﺎر
ﳑﺮﻋﺔ ﻣﻌﺸﺒﺔ ﻟﺘﺮادف اﻷﻣﻄﺎر اﺨﻤﻟﺘﻠﻔﺔ ﻋﻠﻴﻬﺎ وﻧﺰاﻫﺘﻬﺎ
.
Translation of footnote to line 4 (beginning رزﻗﺖ ﻣﺮاﺑﻴﻊ اﻟﻨﺠﻮم
He [the poet] says: ºThe camping grounds and the dung-heaps have been
watered by the rains of the storms of spring. They have become fertile
and green; thundery rain has struck them from the clouds – some of
which [rain] was abundant and sufficient for the [its] people, and some of
which was gentle and slight‚. The gist of the meaning is: ºThose camping
grounds are fertile and green because of the repeated rain of different
types which has fallen on them, and because of the purity of this rain‚.
The three basic types of intralingual translation which we have been
discussing – gist translation, exegetic translation, and rephrasing – are all
illustrated in the selected portions of this commentary.
Gist translation is illustrated in the footnote to line 4 ان ﺗﻠﻚ اﻟﺪﻳﺎر ﳑﺮﻋﺔ
 .ﻣﻌـﺸﺒﺔ ﻟﺘـﺮادف اﻷﻣﻄﺎر اﺨﻤﻟﺘﻠﻔـﺔ ﻋﻠﻴﻬﺎ وﻧﺰاﻫﺘـﻬﺎHere the fact that this is a
gist translation is explicitly signalled by the introductory phrase وﲢــــــــــــــﺮﻳـﺮ
.اﳌﻌﻨﻰ
Exegetic translation is most clearly illustrated in the additional information

6
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
in the footnotes about words or phrases. For example in the footnote to line
1, the exegesis provides glosses for the common nouns ّ ﻣـــﺤﻞand  ,ﻣـــﻘـــﺎمand
for the proper names  اﻟـﻐـــــﻮل ,ﻣﻨـﻰand  .اﻟـﺮﺟـــــــﺎمUnder exegetic translation,
one might also include the grammatical information which is frequently found
in the footnotes, and which is provided because of the difficulty of the text
(even for native Arabic speakers). Sometimes this is specifically related to
the text itself; for instance, in the footnote to line 1, the commentary on the
phrase  ﻏـﻮﻟﻬﺎ ﻓـﺮﺟـﺎﻣﻬـﺎreads as follows: اﻟﻜﻨﺎﻳﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻏـﻮﻟﻬـﺎ ورﺟﺎﻣـﻬـﺎ راﺟﻌـﺔ
اﻟﻰ اﻟﺪﻳﺎر، ﻗﻮﻟﻪ ﺗﺄﺑـﺪ ﻏﻮﻟﻬﺎ أي دﻳﺎر ﻏـﻮﻟﻬﺎ ودﻳﺎر رﺟﺎﻣـﻬﺎ، ﻓﺤـﺬف اﳌﻀﺎف.
ºThere is a metonymy in [ ﻏــﻮﻟﻬــﺎits Ghaul] and [ رﺟـــﺎﻣـــﻬـــﺎits Rijam] relating
back to [ اﻟﺪﻳﺎرthe camping grounds].  When he [the poet] says ﺗﺄﺑـﺪ ﻏـــﻮﻟـﻬـــﺎ
[æits Ghaul has become desertedÆ] he means [ دﻳﺎر  ﻏـــــﻮﻟﻬـــــﺎ ﻓــــﺮﺟــــﺎﻣـــــﻬــــﺎºthe
camping grounds of its Ghaul and its Rijam‚].‚ Elsewhere, however, the
footnote contains a certain amount of more general grammatical information;
for example in the footnote to line 1: ﻋـــﻔـــﺎ ﻻزم وﻣــــﺘـــﻌـــﺪ، ﻳـﻘـــﺎل. ﻋـــﻔﺖ اﻟـﺮﻳﺢ
 ,اﳌﻨﺰل وﻋﻔﺎ اﳌﻨﺰل ﻧﻔﺴﻪ ﻋـﻔﻮا وﻋﻔﺎء، وﻫﻮ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺒﻴﺖ ﻻزم.i.e. º[The verb]
 ﻋــﻔــﺎis both transitive and intransitive; one may say  ﻋـــﻔـﺖ اﻟﺮﻳﺢ اﳌـﻨﺰلºThe
wind obliterated [ ]ﻋﻔﺖthe camp-site‚, and ºThe campsite itself was obliterated
[[ .]ﻋـــــﻔـــــﺎThe verbal noun is]   ﻋـــــﻔـــــﻮand   .ﻋـــــﻔــــــﺎءIn  this verse   ﻋـــــﻔــــــﺎis used
intransitively.‚ Here the information that  ﻋــــــــــــﻔــــــــــــﺎcan be both transitive and
intransitive, and that it has verbal nouns  ﻋــﻔـــﻮand  ﻋــــﻔــــﺎءgoes beyond simple
commentary on the text itself. The same generalising form of grammatical
exegesis can be seen in the statement (also in the footnote to line 1): وﻣﻨـﻰ
 ﻳﻨـﺼـــــﺮف وﻻ ﻳﻨﺼـــــﺮف وﻳُﺬﻛﱠـــــﺮ وﻳـﺆﻧّﺚºThe word Muna can be [treated as]
grammatically declinable or indeclinable, and it can be masculine or feminine‚.
Rephrasing, finally, is illustrated by the simple statements of the meaning
of the text which are found in both the footnote to line 1 and that to line 4.
For line 1 we find: ﻳﻘـﻮل . ﻋـﻔﺖ دﻳﺎر اﻷﺣﺒـﺎب اﳕﺤﺖ ﻣﻨﺎزﻟـﻬﻢ ﻣﺎ ﻛـﺎن ﻣﻨﻬـﺎ
ﻟﻠـﺤﻠﻮل دون اﻻﻗـــﺎﻣـــﺔ وﻣـــﺎ ﻛـــﺎن ﻣﻨﻬـــﺎ ﻟﻺﻗـــﺎﻣـــﺔ، وﻫﺬه اﻟـﺪﻳﺎر ﻛـــﺎﻧﺖ ﺑﺎﳌـﻮﺿﻊ
اﳌﺴـــــﻤﻰ ﻣـﻨﻰ ، وﻗــــﺪ ﺗـﻮﺷــــﺤﺖ اﻟـﺪﻳﺎر اﻟـﻐــــﻮﻟﻴـــــﺔ واﻟﺪﻳـﺎر اﻟﺮﺟــــﺎﻣـــــﻴــــﺔ ﻣﻨـﻬــــﺎ
 ﻻرﲢــﺎل ﻗﻄـﺎﻧﻬــﺎ واﺣــﺘـــﻤــﺎل ﺳﻜﺎﻧـﻬــﺎºHe [the poet] says: ºThe tracings of the
camping places of the beloved ones have been obliterated – those encampments
where they set down without meaning to stay long, and those where they
tarried. These camping sites were in a place called Mina. The camping places
at Ghaul and Rijam have become deserted because of the passing on of their
inhabitants and the moving away of those who dwelt in them‚.‚ For line 4 we
find ... ﻳﻘـــــﻮل. رزﻗﺖ اﻟـﺪﻳﺎر واﻟـﺪﻣﻦ اﻣـﻄﺎر اﻻﻧـﻮاء اﻟﺮﺑـﻴــــﻌـــــﻴــــﺔ ﻓـــــﺄﻣـــــﺮﻋﺖ
وأﻋﺸـﺒﺖ وأﺻﺎﺑﻬـﺎ ﻣﻄﺮ ذوات اﻟﺮﻋﻮد ﻣﻦ اﻟﺴـﺤﺎﺋﺐ ﻣﺎ ﻛـﺎن ﻣﻨﻪ ﻋﺎﻣـﺎً ﺑﺎﻟﻐﺎً
 ﻣــــﺮﺿـــﻴــــﺎً أﻫﻠﻪ وﻣــــﺎ ﻛـــﺎن ﻣـﻨﻪ ﻟﻴـﻨﺎً ﺳـــﻬــــﻼًºHe [the poet] says: æThe camping
grounds and the dung-heaps have been watered by the rains of the storms of
spring. They have become fertile and green; thundery rain has struck them
from the clouds – some of which [rain] was abundant and sufficient for the
[its] people, and some of which was gentle and slightÆ.‚
In all the examples we have been discussing the dividing-lines between

Preliminaries to translation as a process: Supplement
7
gist, exegesis, translation and comment are somewhat blurred. For instance,
the phrase ( ﺗَـﺄَﺑﱠﺪَ  ﻏَــــــﻮْﻟُـﻬــــــﺎ  ﻓَــــــﺮِﺟـــــــﺎﻣُــــــﻬــــــﺎline1 of the poem) is glossed in the
commentary as وﻗــــﺪ ﺗـﻮﺷــــﺤـﺖ اﻟﺪﻳـﺎر اﻟﻐــــﻮﻟـﻴــــﺔ واﻟـﺪﻳﺎر اﻟـﺮﺟــــﺎﻣــــﻴـــــﺔ ﻣﻨـﻬــــﺎ
 .ﻻرﲢـــــﺎل ﻗـﻄﺎﻧـﻬـــــﺎ واﺣـــــﺘــــــﻤـــــﺎل س ﻛـــــﺎﻧـﻬـــــﺎThis has been described above as
rephrasing. However, not only does this paraphrase contain additional
information  ,ﻻرﲢــﺎل ﻗﻄﺎﻧـﻬــﺎ واﺣـﺘــﻤــﺎل ﺳـﻜﺎﻧﻬــﺎwhich can be inferred from
the poem, but which is not strictly speaking mentioned in the poem; the
gloss, in addition, itself contains a rhetorically motivated doublet ارﲢــــــــــــﺎل
  ﻗﻄﺎﻧﻬﺎand  .اﺣﺘﻤﺎل ﺳﻜﺎﻧﻬﺎThis doublet involves both repetition of meaning
(termed semantic repetition: cf. Ch. 5.2), and complex repetition of
morphological patterns ( ارﲢـﺎلand  ,اﺣــﺘــﻤــﺎلon the one hand, and ﻗﻄـﺎﻧﺎﻫـﺎ
and  ﺳﻜـﺎﻧﻬــــﺎon the other) (termed pattern repetition: cf. Ch. 8.2.3.1). That is
to say, although one might regard the gloss as essentially a paraphrase of the
original poem, it nonetheless introduces certain additional elements, and
therefore has some of the features of an exegesis.
In fact, things could not be otherwise. As this chapter has shown, it is
difficult to control (and even to discern) how far an intralingual TT omits
from, adds to, or faithfully reproduces the ST message content. As we shall
see in the next chapter and throughout the course, what applies to intralingual
translation applies a fortiori to translation proper: the ST message content
can never be precisely reproduced in the TT, because of the fact that the two
forms of expression are different.

8
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
PRACTICAL 1
Practical 1.3  Gist translation
Assignment
Produce an approximately 50-word gist translation of the following extract
by the Arabic nationalist writer ( ﺳــــــﺎﻃﻊ اﳊُــــــﺼَــــــﺮيcited in Johnstone 1991:
78–9). Say whether it is easier to produce the gist translation in Practical 1.2
or this one, and why.
ST
وﳑﺎ ﻫﻮ ﺟــﺪﻳﺮ ﺑﺎﻟﺬﻛــﺮ واﳌﻼﺣﻈﺔ أن ﺟــﻤـﻴـﻊ اﻵراء اﻟﺘﻲ أُﺑﺪِﻳﺖ واﻷﺑﺤــﺎث
اﻟﺘﻲ ﻧُﺸــﺮت ﻓﻲ »ﻓﻜﺮة اﻟﻘــﻮﻣـﻴـﺔ« وﻓﻲ »ﻣــﺒـﺪأ ﺣـﻘــﻮق اﻟﻘـﻮﻣـﻴــﺎت« ﺧـﻼل
اﻟﻘــﺮن اﻟﺘـــﺎﺳﻊ ﻋــﺸــﺮ ﻛــﺎﻧﺖ ﺗﻨـﺤــﺼــﺮ ﺑﺎﻟﺸــﻌــﻮب اﻻورﺑـﻴــﺔ وﻓــﺮوﻋــﻬــﺎ وﻟﻢ
ﺗﺸـــﻤﻞ اﻟﺸــﻌـــﻮب اﻵﺳــﻴــﻮﻳـﺔ واﻹﻓــﺮﻳﻘــﻴـــﺔ. ﻷن ﺟــﻤــﻴـﻊ اﳌﻔﻜﺮﻳـﻦ اﻻورﺑﻴﲔ
ﻛـــﺎﻧـﻮا ﻳﺰﻋــــﻤـــﻮن أن ﺗـﻠﻚ اﻟﺸــــﻌـــﻮب ﻟـﻴـــﺴﺖ »ﻣــــﺘـــﺄﺧــــﺮة« ﻓـــﺤــــﺴﺐ ﺑـﻞ ﻫﻲ
»ﻣــﺤـﺮوﻣــﺔ ﻣﻦ ﻗــﺎﺑﻠﻴــﺔ اﻟﺘـﻘــﺪم واﻟﺘــﻤـﺪن« أﻳـﻀـﺎ. وﻟﺬﻟـﻚ ﻓـﻬﻲ ﻻ ﺗـﺴـﺘــﺤﻖ
اﳊــﻘــﻮق اﻟﺘﻲ ﺗﺴــﺘــﺤــﻘــﻬـﺎ اﻟـﺸـﻌــﻮب اﻻورﺑـﻴـﺔ. ﺣــﺘﻰ اﻟـﻜﺘــﺎب اﻟﺬﻳﻦ ﻛــﺎﻧﻮا
اﻟﺘـــﺰﻣـــﻮا ﻣــﺒـــﺪأ »ﺣـــﻘــﻮق اﻟـﻘــﻮﻣـــﻴــﺎت« أﺷـــﺪ اﻻﻟﺘـــﺰام، وﲢـــﻤــﺴـــﻮا ﻟﻪ اﺷـــﺪ
اﻟـﺘـــــﺤـــــﻤـﺲ، ﻟـﻢ ﻳﺨــــــﺮﺟـــــﻮا ﺑـﺂراﺋﻬـﻢ ﻓﻲ ذﻟـﻚ ﺧـــــﺎرج ﻧـﻄﺎق اﻻورﺑـﻴﲔ، وﻟـﻢ
ﻳﺴﻠّﻤﻮا ﲟﺜﻞ ﺗﻠﻚ اﳊﻘﻮق ﻟﻠﺸﻌﻮب اﻵﺳﻴﻮﻳﺔ واﻹﻓﺮﻳﻘﻴﺔ.

2
Preliminaries to
translation as a product:
Supplement
_______________________________
2.1.1  Interlinear translation
The translation of the extract from  ,ﻣـﻌﻠﻘـﺔ ﻟﺒﻴـﺪgiven in Supplement Chapter
1 was virtually interlinear, although some concessions to English grammar
were made in order to render it fairly easily comprehensible to an English
reader. A more radically interlinear translation of the same piece would be
something like the following (here ~ indicates that the two English words so
linked correspond jointly to one Arabic word in the ST, and - indicates that
the two English words so linked correspond to two linked Arabic forms or
words in the ST):
ﻋَﻔَﺖِ اﻟﺪﱢﻳﺎرُ ﻣﺤﻠﱡﻬﺎ ﻓَﻤُﻘﺎﻣُﻬﺎ   ﺑِﻤﻨَﻰ ﺗَﺄَﺑﱠﺪَ ﻏَﻮْﻟُﻬﺎ ﻓَﺮِﺟﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
Disappeared the-camping~grounds alighting~places-their and-stopping
~places-their // in-Mina become~deserted Ghaul-its and-Rijam-its
ﻓَﻤَﺪاﻓﻊُ اﻟﺮﱠﻳﱠﺎنِ ﻋُﺮﱢيَ رَﺳْﻤُﻬﺎ ﺧَﻠَﻘًﺎ   ﻛﻤﺎ ﺿَﻤِﻦَ اﻟﻮُﺣِﻲﱠ ﺳِﻼﻣُﻬﺎ
And-torrent~beds The-Rayyan became~denuded trace-their threadbare //
just~as encompassed the-writings stones-its
دِﻣَﻦٌ ﺗَﺠَﺮﱠمَ ﺑَﻌْﺪَ ﻋَﻬْﺪِ أَﻧﻴﺴِﻬﺎ   ﺣِﺠَﺎجٌ ﺧَﻠَﻮْنَ ﺣَﻼﻟُﻬﺎ وﺣَﺮاﻣُﻬﺎ
dung~heaps passed since time sociability-their // years went~by
unhallowed-their and-sacrosanct-their
رُزِﻗَﺖْ ﻣَﺮاﺑﻴﻊَ اﻟﻨﱡﺠُﻮمِ  وَﺻﺎﺑَﻬﺎ   وَدْقُ اﻟﺮﱠواﻋِﺪِ ﺟَﻮْدُﻫﺎ ﻓﺮِﻫﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
were~fed spring~rains the-stars and-struck-them // rain the-thunderclouds
downpour-their and-shower-their

10
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
ﻣِﻦ ﻛﻞﱢ ﺳَﺎرِﺑَﺔٍ وَﻏَﺎدٍ ﻣُﺪْﺟِﻦ   وَﻋَﺸِﻴﱠﺔٍ ﻣُﺘَﺠﺎوِبٍ إِرْزَاﻣُﻬﺎ
from every night~cloud and-morning~cloud darkening // and-late~evening
answering~itself roar-its
As is apparent from the incomprehensibility of the English TT here, interlinear
translation is normally only employed where the purpose of the translation is
to shed light on the structure of the ST. It is mainly used in descriptive
linguistics, where the writer is discussing examples from a language or
languages which he or she does not expect the reader to know; the interlinear
translation provides a gloss which preserves the structure of the original.
Sometimes, interlinear translation may be used in language teaching and
related areas; one could imagine this interlinear translation of ﻣــــﻌـﻠﻘــــﺔ ﻟـﺒــــﻴــــﺪ
being used to make it easier for students studying the text to grasp both its
grammatical structure and the meaning.
2.1.5  From interlinear to free translation
The word ºidiom‚ in English has two senses which or of relevance here: 1. an
expression whose meaning cannot be inferred from the denotative meanings
(Chapter 5) of the words that constitute it, and the meanings of the grammatical
relations (cf. Chapter 8) between these words (e.g. ºthat‚s a different kettle of
fish‚, ºhe knows his onions‚); 2. linguistic usage that is grammatical and
natural-sounding to native speakers of a language in the context in which it is
used (definitions adapted from Collins English Dictionary). In fact, many
expressions which are idioms in the second sense (i.e. they sound natural in
the context in which they are used) are not idioms in the first sense, since
their meaning can be predicted from their constituent words and the meanings
of the grammatical relations between these words. However, almost all
expressions which are idioms in the first sense are also idioms in the second
sense; i.e. they sound natural if used in appropriate contexts.
The notion of idiomizing translation properly speaking relates to the second
sense of ºidiom‚ given above; i.e. it is a translation which sounds natural if
used in an appropriate context. Accordingly, an idiomizing translation will
very likely (but not necessarily) use typical TL phonic or rhythmic patterns
(cf. Chapter 6). It is also, however, likely to make use of TL idioms in the
first sense of ºidiom‚ given above, since, as already noted, idioms in the first
sense tend also to be idiomatic in the second sense, at least when used in
appropriate contexts. Idiomizing translations are designed to give an easy
read, even if this means sacrificing nuances of meaning or tone. They are
also by definition idiomatic – but no more so than most literal, faithful,
balanced or free translation.

Preliminaries to translation as a product: Supplement
11
2.2.2.1 Translation by omission
Wherever omission reduces the specificity of the information regarding a
particular person, thing, process, etc. which is being referred to, it is also a
case of generalizing translation; cf. Ch. 5.1.3.
2.2.2..2  Translation by addition
Wherever addition provides additional specification regarding a particular
person, thing, process, etc. which is being referred to, it is also a case of
particularizing translation; cf. Ch. 5.1.3.
PRACTICAL 2
Practical 2.3  Literal vs. free translation
Assignment
Consider the degree to which the following two English translations exhibit
free or literal approaches to translation. What types of audience do you think
each of the translations would be most appropriate for?
The following considerations (perhaps amongst others) should be useful
for your discussion:
1.
The degree to which the word-order of the ST is maintained.
2. 
The degree to which the word structure of the ST is maintained (i.e. the
extent to which one word in the ST corresponds to one word in the
TT).
3.
The degree to which the grammatical structure of the ST is maintained.
4.
The degree to which the contents (i.e. meaning is maintained.
5.
The degree to which the verse form of the ST is maintained. Arabic
verse forms are discussed in more detail in Ch. 7.2.1.2; here it is
sufficient to consider the degree to which the hemistich structure (cf.
Supplement Ch. 1.3.1) of the ST is maintained in the TT.
Contextual information
The following are two translations of the first five lines of  .ﻣــﻌﻠـﻘــﺔ ﻟﺒــﻴــﺪThe
first translation is from Arberry, The seven odes (1957: 142). The second
translation, which follows, is from Desert tracings by Sells (1989). The
Arabic original is included with both translations for ease of cross-reference.
The interlinear-type translation given in Chapter 1 may also be of use, as
may the more radically interlinear translation given earlier in this chapter
(especially for the meaning of individual words).

12
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
Arabic text plus Arberry‚s translation
ﻋَﻔَﺖِ اﻟﺪﱢﻳﺎرُ ﻣﺤﻠﱡﻬﺎ ﻓَﻤُﻘﺎﻣُﻬﺎ   ﺑِﻤﻨَﻰ ﺗَﺄَﺑﱠﺪَ ﻏَﻮْﻟُﻬﺎ ﻓَﺮِﺟﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
The abodes are desolate, halting-place and encampment too,
at Miná; deserted lies Ghaul, deserted alike Rijám,
ﻓَﻤَﺪاﻓﻊُ اﻟﺮﱠﻳﱠﺎنِ ﻋُﺮﱢيَ رَﺳْﻤُﻬﺎ  ﺧَﻠَﻘًﺎ ﻛﻤﺎ ﺿَﻤِﻦَ اﻟﻮُﺣِﻲﱠ ﺳِﻼﻣُﻬﺎ
and the torrent-beds of Er-Raiyán – naked shows their trace,
rubbed smooth, like letterings long scored on a stony slab;
دِﻣَﻦٌ ﺗَﺠَﺮﱠمَ ﺑَﻌْﺪَ ﻋَﻬْﺪِ أَﻧﻴﺴِﻬﺎ   ﺣِﺠَﺎجٌ ﺧَﻠَﻮْنَ ﺣَﻼﻟُﻬﺎ وﺣَﺮاﻣُﻬﺎ
blackened orts that, since the time their inhabitants tarried there,
many years have passed over, months unhallowed and sacrosanct.
رُزِﻗَﺖْ ﻣَﺮاﺑﻴﻊَ اﻟﻨﱡﺠُﻮمِ وَﺻﺎﺑَﻬﺎ   وَدْقُ اﻟﺮﱠواﻋِﺪِ ﺟَﻮْدُﻫﺎ ﻓﺮِﻫﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
The star-born showers of Spring have fed them, the outpouring
of thundercloud, great deluge and gentle following rain,
ﻣِﻦ ﻛﻞﱢ ﺳَﺎرِﺑَﺔٍ وَﻏَﺎدٍ ﻣُﺪْﺟِﻦٍ   وَﻋَﺸِﻴﱠﺔٍ ﻣُﺘَﺠﺎوِبٍ إِرْزَاﻣُﻬﺎ
the cloud that travels by night, the sombre pall of morn,
the outspread mantle of eve with muttering antiphon

Preliminaries to translation as a product: Supplement
13
Arabic text plus Sells‚ translation
ﻋَﻔَﺖِ اﻟﺪﱢﻳﺎرُ ﻣﺤﻠﱡﻬﺎ ﻓَﻤُﻘﺎﻣُﻬﺎ   ﺑِﻤﻨَﻰ ﺗَﺄَﺑﱠﺪَ ﻏَﻮْﻟُﻬﺎ ﻓَﺮِﺟﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
The tent marks at Mínan are worn away,
where she encamped
and where she alighted,
Ghawl and Rijám left to the wild,
ﻓَﻤَﺪاﻓﻊُ اﻟﺮﱠﻳﱠﺎنِ ﻋُﺮﱢيَ رَﺳْﻤُﻬﺎ   ﺧَﻠَﻘًﺎ ﻛﻤﺎ ﺿَﻤِﻦَ اﻟﻮُﺣِﻲﱠ ﺳِﻼﻣُﻬﺎ
And the torrent beds of Rayyán
naked tracings,
worn thin, like inscriptions
carved in flattened stones,
دِﻣَﻦٌ ﺗَﺠَﺮﱠمَ ﺑَﻌْﺪَ ﻋَﻬْﺪِ أَﻧﻴﺴِﻬﺎ   ﺣِﺠَﺎجٌ ﺧَﻠَﻮْنَ ﺣَﻼﻟُﻬﺎ وﺣَﺮاﻣُﻬﺎ
Dung-stained ground
that tells the years passed
since human presence, months of peace
gone by, and months of war,
رُزِﻗَﺖْ ﻣَﺮاﺑﻴﻊَ اﻟﻨﱡﺠُﻮمِ وَﺻﺎﺑَﻬﺎ   وَدْقُ اﻟﺮﱠواﻋِﺪِ ﺟَﻮْدُﻫﺎ ﻓﺮِﻫﺎﻣُﻬﺎ
Replenished by the rain stars
of spring, and struck
by thunderclap downpour, or steady,
fine-dropped silken rains,
ﻣِﻦ ﻛﻞﱢ ﺳَﺎرِﺑَﺔٍ وَﻏَﺎدٍ ﻣُﺪْﺟِﻦ   وَﻋَﺸِﻴﱠﺔٍ ﻣُﺘَﺠﺎوِبٍ إِرْزَاﻣُﻬﺎ
From every kind of cloud
passing at night,
darkening the morning,
or rumbling in peals across the evening sky.

3
Cultural transposition:
Supplement
_______________________________
3.1  BASIC PRINCIPLES
A fairly extreme example of the difficulty posed by cultural difference is
provided by the term  .ﻛــــــــﺮﱘAccording to Sells,  ﻛـــــــــﺮﱘas used originally in
pre-Islamic Arabia is ºan untranslatable term usually rendered as ægenerousÆ
or ænobleÆ: the centrepiece of tribal ethos, symbolized through the naqa
[ ]ﻧـﺎﻗــــــــﺔsacrifice and the feeding of the tribe, the unflinching defence of the
clan in battle, the lavish wine bouts and banquets, and, in a more abstract
sense, the refusal to hoard one‚s life. The Qur‚an gave the karim a more
ethical and religious dimension, but maintained its centrality as a human
ideal‚ (Sells 1989: 77-8).
3.3. CALQUE
Sometimes calques generate further quasi-calques in the TL. So, in addition
to  أﻟﻘـﻰ ﺿـــﻮءًا ﻋـﻠﻰfor ºto shed/throw light on‚, forms are encountered such
as  .ﺳـﻠّــﻂ اﻷﺿــــــــــــﻮاء ﻋــﻠـﻰIt is, however, impossible to say in English ºshed
lights on‚. In using calque, it is clearly important to get the form right. A
failed calque may sound endearing (as does a lot of ºforeignerese‚), or it may
jar with speakers of the TL. In either case, it is likely to distract from the
intended message.

Cultural transposition
15
PRACTICAL 3
Practical 3.2  (extension) Cultural transposition
(iv) Underline any words and phrases which raised cultural issues in your
translation. Now, produce a translation of this first paragraph aimed not at
the general museum-going public, but for an academic journal whose readership
was expected to have specialist existing knowledge of Sudanese culture.
Practical 3.3  Cultural transposition
Assignment
Consider the following translation (St. John 1999: 7–8). What different
techniques of cultural transposition are used by the translator? What motivations
might there be for adopting these different approaches at different points in
the translation?
Contextual information
This text is taken  from the short story   ﺣــــﻘـﻞ اﻟﺒـﻨﻔـــــﺴﺞby the Syrian writer
 .زﻛــــﺮﻳﺎ ﺗﺎﻣــــﺮIn this part of the story, the hero  ﻣـــﺤــــﻤـــﺪis infatuated with an
unknown young woman, whom he briefly glimpsed in a field of violets, and
dreams of winning her heart. He is currently walking around in a confused
day-dream.

16
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
ST
وﻗـﺎدﺗﻪ ﺧﻄـﻮاﺗﻪ اﻟﻰ ﻣـﺴـﺠـﺪ ﻛــﺒـﻴـﺮ، وﻛـﺎن ﻳﺠـﻠﺲ ﻓﻲ داﺧﻠﻪ ﺷـﻴﺦ ﻟـﻪ ﳊـﻴـﺔ
ﺑـﻴــــــﻀــــــﺎء، ﲢـﻠﻖ ﺣـــــــﻮﻟﻪ ﻋــــــﺪد ﻣـﻦ اﻟـﺮﺟــــــﺎل. وﻛــــــﺎن اﻟـﺸــــــﻴـﺦ ﻳﺘـﻜـﻠﻢ ﻋـﻦ اﻟﻠـﻪ
واﻟﺸﻴﻄﺎن:
» اﻟﻠﻪ ﻫﻮ ﺧﺎﻟﻖ ﻛﻞ اﻻﺷﻴﺎء، وﺟﻤﻴﻊ اﺨﻤﻟﻠﻮﻗﺎت ﻻ ﺗﻔﻌﻞ ﺷﻴﺌﺎ اﻻ ﺑﺄﻣﺮه«.
ﻓﻘﺎل ﻣﺤﻤﺪ ﻟﻨﻔﺴﻪ:
 
اذن ﻳﺴﺘﻄﻴﻊ اﻟﻠﻪ ﻣﺴﺎﻋﺪﺗﻲ ﻋﻠﻰ ﲢﻘﻴﻖ أﻣﻨﻴﺘﻲ.
وﻗﺎل اﻟﺸﻴﺦ :  إﺑﻠﻴﺲ ﻋﺪو اﻟﺒﺸﺮ .. اﻧﻪ اﻟﺸﺮ«.
وﻏـﺎدر ﻣﺤـﻤـﺪ اﳌﺴﺠـﺪ ﺑﻴﻨﻤـﺎ ﻛﺎﻧـﺖ دﻣﺎء ﺷـﺮاﻳﻴﻨﻪ أﺻـﻮاﺗﺎ ﺗﺘﻮﺳـﻞ ﺑﻠﻬﻔـﺔ،
وﺗﻬﺘﻒ ﺿﺎرﻋﺔ :
 
ﻳﺎ اﻟﻠﻪ.
TT
His feet led him to a large mosque, and inside it sat a religious teacher
with a white beard. Several men were gathered round him and he was
talking about God and the Devil.
ºAllah is the Creator of all things, and no creature can do anything
unless He wills it.‚
ºSo Allah can help me realize my dream,‚ said Mohammed to himself.
The teacher continued.
ºSatan is the enemy of Man – he is evil.‚
Mohammed left the mosque, and as he did so, the blood in his veins
became a mass of imploring voices, calling out woefully: ºOh God.‚

4
Compensation:
Supplement
_______________________________
4.1  BASIC PRINCIPLES
A good example of the difference between compensation and communicative
translation is provided by the fact that the standard English equivalent of
 ﺷـﺮﻃﺔ ﻣـﻜﺎﻓـﺤـﺔ اﻟـﺸـﻐﺐis ºriot police‚ (rather than ºanti-riot police‚, or ºriot
combat police‚, etc.). The translation ºriot police‚ for ,ﺷﺮﻃﺔ ﻣﻜﺎﻓﺤﺔ اﻟﺸﻐﺐ
or   ﺷـــــــﺮﻃـﺔ ﻣـﻜﺎﻓـــــــﺤـــــــﺔ اﻟـﺸـــــــﻐـﺐfor ºriot police‚, does not therefore involve
compensation, despite the obvious differences between the Arabic and English
forms.
4.2  CATEGORIES OF COMPENSATION
Another example of compensation in place, from اﻟﺴــﻴـﺪة وﻣــﺮاﺗﻪ ﻓﻲ ﻣـﺼــﺮ
 by  ,ﺑﻴﺮم اﻟﺘﻮﻧﻴﺲoccurs where the wife is complaining about the treatment
she receives from a female Egyptian customs official. The wife says: ﻳﺎﻣﺎ اﻧﺎ
 .ﻣﻨﻜﺎدة ﻣﻦ اﳌﺮة اﳋﻨﺰﻳﺮة اﻟﻠﻲ ﻓﻲ اﳉﻤﺮك ديThis is translated as: ºReally,
it‚s just that woman at the customs got my goat by being piggish to me‚
(Foreman 1996: 35). Here the translator has chosen not to translate the phrase
 اﳌﺮة اﳋﻨـﺰﻳﺮةas ºpiggish woman‚, or even ºpig of a woman‚, but has opted
for compensation in place ºby being piggish to me‚ (as well as introducing a
pun of his own – i.e. a further element of compensation in kind – through
the use of ºhas got my goat‚).

18
Thinking Arabic translation
PRACTICAL  4
Practical 4.3  Compensation
Assignment
(i)
Discuss the strategic decisions that you have to take before starting
detailed translation of the following text, and outline and justify the
strategy you adopt. Pay particular attention to issues of compensation.
You are to translate this text for the general reader with no specialist
knowledge about Lebanon, for a book entitled The Lebanese civil war:
Arab perspectives.
(ii)
Translate the text into English.
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail which you made in producing your TT.
For each decision of detail, identify (a) whether there is compensation
or not; and where there is compensation: (b) what is lost in the TT; (c)
what compensates for this loss in the TT; and (d) how it does so.
Contextual information
This text is taken from the start of a book entitled ﺳـــــﻘــــــﻮط اﻹﻣـــــﺒــــــﺮاﻃﻮرﻳـﺔ
 ,اﻟﻠﺒﻨﺎﻧﻴﺔby ( ﻓﺆاد ﻣﻄﺮ1984, vol. 1: 7). The book deals with the breakdown
of the political consensus in Lebanon in the mid-1970s, and the ensuing civil
war.
ST
ﻗــــﺪ ﳝﺮ وﻗـﺖ ﻃﻮﻳـﻞ ﻗــــﺒﻞ أن ﻳﺼــــﺒـﺢ ﻓﻲ وﺳــــﻌـﻨﺎ ﻓــــﻬـﻢ ﺣــــﻘــــﺎﺋﻖ اﳊــــﺮب
اﻟﻠﺒﻨﺎﻧﻴـﺔ اﻟﺘﻲ ﻋﺼـﻔﺖ ﺑﻬـﺬا اﻟﻮﻃﻦ اﻟﺼﻐـﻴـﺮ ﻓﺪﻣّـﺮﺗﻪ ﻛﻤـﺎ ﻟﻢ ﺗﺪﻣّﺮ ﺣـﺮب
ﻣﻦ ﻗﺒﻞ ، وﻣﻦ ﻫﺬا اﻟﻨﻮع ، وﻃﻨﺎ ﻣﻦ اﻷوﻃﺎن ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌﺎﻟﻢ .
وﻫﺬه اﳊـــــﺮب اﻟﺘـﻲ ﺑﺪأت ﻓـﻲ ٣١ ﻧﻴــــﺴـــــﺎن )أﺑﺮﻳـﻞ( ٥٧٩١ واﺳــــﺘـــــﻤــــﺮّت
ﻗــــﺮاﺑﺔ ﺳـﻨﺘـﲔ ، ﻟﻬــــﺎ ﺧﻠـﻔــــﻴّــــﺎت ﳝﻜﻦ اﻟـﻘــــﻮل إﻧﻬــــﺎ ﺗـﻜﻮّﻧﺖ ﻣـﻊ وﻻدة ﻟﺒـﻨﺎن
اﳌﺴــﺘـﻘﻞ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌــﺎم ٣٤٩١ واﺳـﺘــﻤـﺮت ﺗﻨﻤــﻮ ﻋﻠﻰ اﳋﻄﺄ ، ﺛﻢ ﻧﺸــﺄت ﻇﺮوف
ﻣـﻮﺿـﻮﻋـﻴـﺔ ، ﺳـﺎﻋـﺪت ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﻜﺮﻳﺲ اﳋﻄـﺄ ، إﻟﻰ أن ﻛـﺎﻧﺖ ﳊﻈﺔ اﻻﻧﻔـﺠـﺎر ،
ﻓــﺈذا ﺑﻬـــﺎ ﳊﻈﺔ ﻗــﺎﺳــﻴــﺔ ﺟـــﺪا ﺣــﻮّﻟﺖ اﻟﻮﻃﻦ اﻟـﺼــﻐــﻴــﺮ إﻟﻰ ﺳــﺎﺣـــﺔ ﺣــﺮب ﻟﻢ
ﻳﺴﺠّﻞ اﻟﺘﺎرﻳﺦ اﳊﺪﻳﺚ ، ﻋﻠﻰ اﻷﻗﻞ ، ﻣﺜﻴﻼً ﻟﻬﺎ .
إن اﳊـــﺮب اﻟﻠﺒﻨـﺎﻧﻴــﺔ ﻣـﻦ اﻟﻨﻮع اﻟﺬي ﻳـﺼــﻌﺐ ﲢـــﺪﻳﺪ ﻫﻮﻳـﺘــﻪ ، ﻓـــﻼ ﻫﻲ
 ﻓـﻠﺴﻄـﻴﻨﻴـــﺔ ﻓـــﻘـﻂ ، وﻻ ﻫﻲ إﺻـــﻼﺣـــﻴـــﺔ- ﻃﺎﺋـﻔـــﻴـــﺔ ﻓـــﻘﻂ ، وﻻ ﻫﻲ ﻟـﺒﻨﺎﻧﻴـــﺔ
ﻓﻘﻂ. إﻧﻬﺎ ﻛﻞ ﻫﺬه اﻷﻣﻮر وﻏﻴﺮﻫﺎ ﻣﺠﺘﻤﻌﺔ .

5
Denotative meaning and
translation issues:
Supplement
_______________________________
5.1  DENOTATIVE MEANING
Denotative meaning is also known as ºcognitive‚, or ºpropositional‚ meaning
(cf. Baker 1992:13-14). It is also sometimes referred to as ºliteral‚ meaning.
In this book, we have avoided the use of ºliteral‚ in technical discussion
(although it used informally in many places in the book in roughly the sense
of ºdenotative‚), since ºliteral‚ also has a number of other uses. Most important
of these, from the point of view of this book, are the use of ºliteral‚ in the
phrase ºliteral translation‚ (Ch. 2.1.2), and ºliteral‚ meaning non-metaphorical
(cf. Chapter 11).
In the case of words, it is denotative meanings that are given in dictionary
definitions. In fact, words may, and typically do, have more than one denotative
meaning. The situation in which a word has more than one different and
distinct denotative meaning – or more technically more than one sense – is
known as polysemy. Polysemy can be illustrated by the word plain, which
means (i) ºclear‚ (as in ºa plain sky‚), (ii) ºunadorned‚ (as in ºa plain paper
bag‚), and (iii) ºobvious‚ (as in ºit‚s a plain case of forgery‚). There are
sometimes problems in deciding between cases where two uses of a word
represent more than one sense – i.e. cases of polysemy – and where the two
uses in question are merely ºvariants‚ of a single overall sense. These need
not, however, concern us here, since they are not typically of great importance
for translation.
(There are also problems in deciding between what constitutes two senses
of a single word, and cases where two words happen to sound the same. This
latter situation is known as homonymy. An example of homonymy which is
fairly frequently quoted is bank = ºside of a river‚ vs. bank = ºinstitution for

20
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
the investment and borrowing of money‚. Again, these are not of great
importance for translation, and need not concern us here.)
A large proportion of a language‚s vocabulary is traditionally regarded as
polysemous (or polysemic). Typically dictionaries list polysemous words
under single heads, separating what they regard as the distinct senses of a
word by a semi-colon, and what are regarded as merely variants of a single
sense by a comma (the Hans Wehr Dictionary of modern written Arabic, for
example, does this).
Unfortunately, even dictionary definitions of words are not without their
problems. This is because they impose, by abstraction and crystallization of
one core sense (in the case of non-polysemous, or monosemous, words) or a
series of core senses (in the case of polysemous words), a rigidity of meaning
that words do not often show in reality. In addition, once words are put into a
context, their denotative meanings become even more flexible. These two
facts make it difficult to pin down the precise denotative meanings in any
text of any complexity. The more literary the text, the more this is so; but it
is true even of the most soberly informative texts. In this chapter, we shall
discuss three degrees of semantic equivalence – that is, how close given
expressions are to having identical denotative meanings.
5.1.2  Hyperonymy-hyponymy
An example where translators deviate from the pattern of translating an
Arabic pronoun by a simple English pronoun hyperonym is al-Hilali and
Khan‚s translation of the initial word ْ  ﻗُﻞin   ,ﺳــــــﻮرة  اﻹﺧـــــــﻼصwhere they
have ºSay, O Muhammad‚ (cited in Ch. 1.5). Here, ºO Muhammad‚ goes
beyond relaying the fact that this is the equivalent of the Arabic masculine
singular, to identifying precisely who it is that ْ ﻗُﻞrefers to.
5.1.3  Particularizing translation and generalizing translation
Other situations in which particularization is acceptable include the
following:
(i) where the context implies something which is typically referred to in
more specific terms in the TL than in the SL; thus an  إﻧــﺬارissued by a
military commander is likely to be an ºultimatum‚ rather than simply a
ºwarning‚; a  ﺑـﻴــــــــﺎنin a similar context is likely to be a ºproclamation‚ or a
ºcommunique‚ rather than a ºstatement‚;  ﻏـــــــــــــﺎراتin the context of NATO
raids on Kosovo are likely to be ºstrikes‚ or ºair-strikes‚ rather than ºattacks‚;
(ii) where the TL typically makes use of a specific collocation (cf. Ch. 6.6)
which happens to involve a hyponym of the TL form; for example ﻛﻨﺰ ﺛﻤﲔ
is likely to be translated as ºpriceless treasure‚, rather than ºvaluable treasure‚,

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
21
since ºpriceless treasure‚ is the more common collocation in English.
Particularizing translation may also be used for other reasons. For example,
 ﻛﻨـﻴــﺴـــﺔ ﻗـــﺪﳝﺔmight be translated as ºancient church‚ in a particular context
where this was appropriate to avoid the ambiguity of ºold church‚, since this
latter could be interpreted to mean ºformer church‚ instead of the intended
ºold [= not new] church‚. That is to say, ºold‚ in English is polysemous
between the two senses of ºold‚ and ºformer‚, and in this context, it would
not necessarily be clear to the reader which of the two senses was intended.
Other situations in which generalization is acceptable include:
(i) where the context implies something which is typically referred to in
more specific terms in the SL than in the TL. For instance, it is common to
refer to a room as  ﺿـــﻴﻖin Arabic, to mean not just that it is small but that it
is rather too small. In many contexts in English, however, a suitable translation
of  ﺣــــﺠـــﺮة ﺿــــﻴـــﻘــــﺔwould be the generalizing ºsmall room‚, a particularizing
translation such as ºcramped room‚ being reserved for contexts in which it
was important to stress that the room was too small. Similarly,  ﻋــــﺼـــــﻔــــﻮرin
Arabic is regularly used to refer to any small bird. In translating the phrase
 ,ﻋـــــﺼـــــﻔـــــﻮر ﺻــــــﻐـــــﻴـــــﺮit is likely to be sufficient to say ºsmall bird‚, although
properly speaking what is being meant is a specific small member of the
class of small birds (i.e. a bird that is small even among small birds);
(ii) where the TL typically makes use of a specific collocation (cf. Ch. 6.6)
which involves a hyperonym of the SL form. For instance, ﻟـﻠـﻮﻫــﻠـﺔ اﻷوﻟـﻰ
denotatively means ºfor the first moment‚. However, in English the normal
phrase is ºfor the first time‚. Similarly  رثmeans ºold and worn out‚ of
clothes. However, in many contexts   ﻣﻼﺑﺲ رﺛﺔwould be happily translatable
by the standard collocation ºold clothes‚.
Generalizing translation can also be used for many other reasons. Consider
the following:
وﻣـﻬـﻤــﺎ ﺗﻜﻮن اﳌﺸـﺎﻛﻞ اﻟﻘــﺎﻧﻮﻧﻴـﺔ اﳌﺘـﺮﺗﺒــﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﺪﺧﻞ ﺣﻠﻒ اﻟـﻨﺎﺗﻮ واﻟﺘﻲ
ﻛﻨﺖ ﻧﻔﺴﻲ ﻗﺪ أﺷﺮت إﻟﻴﻬﺎ ﻣﻨﺬ أﻳﺎم ﻗﻠﻴﻠﺔ ]...[
This has been translated (Ives 999:11) as:
Whatever the legal problems linked to NATO intervention, to which I
myself have recently referred [...]
Here the generalizing form ºrecently‚ is preferred to the denotative equivalent
ºa few days ago‚ mainly because it results in a less wordy overall phrase.
(ºRecently‚ also allows the translator to use the present perfect ºhave ...
referred‚ which adds a sense of immediacy and relevance to the statement; ºa
few days ago‚ would require the use of the simple past ºreferred‚.)
Generalizing translation is not acceptable if the TL does offer suitable
alternatives, or if the omitted details are important in the ST but not implied

22
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
or compensated for in the TT context. An example of this would seem to be
al-Hilali and Khan‚s translation of ْ ﻗُﻞin  ﺳــﻮرة اﻹﺧــﻼصdiscussed above (§
5.1.2). It seems likely that the inclusion of the compensatory phrase ºO
Muhammad‚ is motivated here by the perception of the translators that is not
acceptable in this context to present the possibility that the reader (or some
other person than the Prophet Muhammad) is being addressed.
For another example of particularizing translation, consider the word
 ,ﺻﻬﺮwhich means ºhusband of one‚s daughter, son-in-law; husband of one‚s
sister, brother-in-law‚ (Wehr); these different possibilities can be taken as
ºvariants‚ of a single sense (i.e. this is not a case of polysemy; cf. Supplement
§ 5.1). Translating  ﺻـــــــــﻬـــــــــﺮas ºson-in-law‚ in a particular case would be an
example of particularizing translation, since it would explicitly rule out a part
of what can be meant by ( ﺻﻬﺮi.e. ºbrother-in-law‚).
Generalization is acceptable if the TL offers no suitable alternative and
the omitted detail is either unimportant in the ST or is implied in the TT
context. For instance,   ﻗِــﺪِرand  ﻗِـــﺪرةin Sudanese Arabic are both words for
cooking pot, the difference being that  ﻗـــــــــﺪرrefers to something bigger than
 .ﻗـــــــــﺪرةFor most translation purposes into English, however, the distinction
could probably be ignored, and ºcooking pot‚ would be a sufficient translation.
 5.1.4  Partially overlapping translation
The typical uses of partially overlapping translation parallel those of
particularizing translation and generalizing translation. Thus partially
overlapping translation may be used where the context implies something
which is typically referred to by a term in the TL whose denotative meaning
overlaps with the denotative meaning of the SL term. For example a poem by
the Syrian poet  ﻧﺰار ﻗﺒـﺎﻧﻲcontains the line ﻃﺎردوﻫﺎ ﻛﻌـﺼﻔـﻮر رﺑﻴﻌﻲ اﻟﻰ
 .ان ﻗـــﺘﻠـﻮﻫﺎThis has been translated (Rolph 1995: 23) as ºThey attacked her
like a young sparrow until they killed her‚.  رﺑﻴـــﻌﻲhere overlaps in meaning
with ºyoung‚. Some but not all ºspring sparrows‚ are young, and some but
not all young sparrows are ºspring sparrows‚ (one could have a sparrow
which was, abnormally, born in summer).  ºSpring sparrow‚, however, is a
problematic phrase in English‚; it does not have a clear meaning, and there is
nothing in this overall context to make the intended meaning clearer in the
English (ºspring sparrow‚ also yields an unfortunate collocative clash with
ºspring chicken‚; cf. Ch. 6.6). Accordingly, the translator has chosen a more
contextually acceptable overlapping expression.
Partially overlapping translation may also be used where the TL typically
makes use of a specific collocation (Ch. 6.6) which happens to overlap in
meaning with the meaning of the SL term. An example of this is وﺧﻴﺮ ﺷﺎﻫﺪ
 ,ﻋـــﻠــﻰ ذﻟـــﻚwhich is typically translated as ºthe clearest evidence of this‚
(ºclearest evidence‚ being a more standard collocation in English than the

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
23
literal ºbest evidence‚). ºClear/clearest‚ and  ﺧـﻴــﺮoverlap with one another in
meaning; some but not all good things are clear, and some but not all clear
things are good. Another example is ºcoup perpetrators‚ for ,رﺟﺎل اﻻﻧﻘﻼﺑﺎت
which might typically be translated as ºcoup perpetrators‚ or º[the] perpetrators
of coups‚ (ºcoup men‚ or ºmen of coups‚ being quite abnormal in English).
ºPerpetrators‚ and  رﺟﺎلoverlap with one another; some but not all perpetrators
are men (other perpetrators, even of coups, might be women), and some but
not all men are perpetrators (there are, or could no doubt be, men who have
never perpetrated anything in their lives).
5.2  SEMANTIC REPETITION IN ARABIC
It will be seen that both semantic repetition and other forms of parallelism
typically involve repetition of the same grammatical category or categories.
In the case of single words, this is fairly trivial; what is repeated is a noun or
a verb or whatever. In the case of repetition of whole phrases, however,  the
effect can be much more striking. Consider the following from an article by
the Egyptian journalist  ﻣــﺼﻄﻔﻰ أﻣﲔfrom  ,اﻟﺸــﺮق  اﻻوﺳـﻂ21 September
1982 :
،]..[ إذا داﻓﻊ ﻋﻦ ﻗـﻀــﻴـﺔ اﳊـﺮﻳﺔ وﺣـﻘــﻮق اﻹﻧﺴـﺎن، إذا اﺣـﺘـﻀـﻦ ﻛﻞ ﻣﻈﻠﻮم
إذا ﻗﺎوم اﻟﻔـﺴﺎد، إذا ﺿـﺮب اﻷﻣﺜﻠﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘﺪوة اﻟﺼـﺎﳊﺔ، إذا ﺣـﻮّل اﻟﻜﻠﻤﺎت
إﻟﻰ اﻓﻌﺎل واﻟﻮﻋﻮد إﻟﻰ ﺣﻘﺎﺋﻖ ]...[
This extract makes use of four verb-object combinations: ,اﺣﺘﻀﻦ ﻛﻞ ﻣﻈﻠﻮم
  ,ﺿـﺮب اﻷﻣﺜﻠﺔ ]ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘـﺪوة اﻟﺼﺎﳊـﺔ[  ,ﻗـﺎوم اﻟﻔﺴـﺎدand ﺣﻮّل اﻟﻜﻠـﻤﺎت ]إﻟﻰ
 ,اﻓـﻌـﺎل[ واﻟﻮﻋﻮد ]إﻟﻰ ﺣـﻘـﺎﺋﻖ[as well as the initial verb-prepositional object
combination  .داﻓﻊ ﻋـﻦ ﻗـــﻀــــﻴـــﺔ اﳊــــﺮﻳﺔ وﺣــــﻘـــﻮق اﻹﻧﺴــــﺎنThe parallelism is
reinforced by the fact that each of these phrases begins with .إذا
5.2.2 List restructuring
One particularly striking feature of parallelism in Arabic is a tendency to use
fairly long lists of terms belonging to the same semantic field. The following
examples are taken from a political article in the Egyptian magazine روز
( اﻟﻴﻮﺳﻒno. 3521, Dec. 4, 1995), which criticizes the use of political violence
in the Middle East. They compare the behaviour of the Prophet Adam with
that of extremist political groups and individuals in the modern Middle East
(from Hetherington 1996: 19, 20):
.. ﻟﻘــﺪ اﺧـﺘــﺎر آدم اﻟﻌــﻘﻞ ﻓﻜﺴـﺐ اﻟﺪﻳﻦ واﳊـﻴــﺎء .. ﻣﻨﺘــﻬﻰ اﳊﻜـﻤـﺔ واﻟﺬﻛــﺎء

24
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
.. ﻟﻜـﻦ أﺣـــﻔــــﺎده ﻓﻲ اﻟﺸــــﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂ ﻧـﺴـــﻮا ﺧــــﺒـــﺮﺗﻪ. وﲡــــﺎﻫﻠـﻮا اﺧـــﺘــــﻴـــﺎره
ﻓـﺄﻏﻠﻘـﻮا اﻟﻌـﻘﻞ وﻓـﺘـﺤـﻮا اﻟﻨﻴـﺮان .. وﻏـﺎﺻﻮا ﻓﻲ اﻟـﻜﺘﺐ اﳌﻘـﺪﺳـﺔ ﻟﻜﻨﻬﻢ ﻟﻢ
ﻳﻨﺘـﺒـﻬـﻮا ﻓـﻴـﻬـﺎ إﻻ ﻟـ}ـﻠﻌﻨﻒ واﻟﻐـﻀﺐ، واﻟﺘـﻌـﺼﺐ، واﻻﺳـﺘـﻌـﻼء، واﻟﺮﻓﺾ،
واﻟﺘﻤﺮد، واﻻﻟﻢ، واﻟﻔﺘﻨﺔ{ ]...[
إن ﻫـﺆﻻء }ﻳـﻘــــــــﺘـﻠـﻮن ﺑـﺎﺳﻢ اﻟـﻠـﻪ .. وﻳـﺴـﻠـﺤــــــــﻮن، ﻳـﻔــــــــﺠـــــــــﺮون، وﻳـﺬﺑـﺤــــــــﻮن،
وﻳﻐﺴﻠﻮن اﻟﻌﻘﻮل، ﻳﻜﺴﺮون اﻟﻌﻈﺎم، وﻳﺤﺮﻣﻮن اﻹﺑﺪاع{ أﻳﻀﺎ ﺑﺎﺳﻢ اﻟﻠﻪ!
In the case of the first extract a translation of the list in curly brackets along
the lines ºviolence, anger, fanaticism, false superiority, bigotry, insurrection,
pain and infighting‚ would clearly be possible, as would a translation along
the lines ºkill, take up arms, detonate bombs, massacre, brainwash, break
bones, and forbid originality‚ in the case of the second extract. In both cases,
however, such a translation seems a little strained in English, reflecting the
tendency of English to avoid such long lists.
 In some contexts an appropriate strategy in translating long lists into
English is simply to reduce the listed elements. Thus ºties of blood and
marriage‚ would in many contexts be a sufficient translation of ﻋـــــــــــﻼﻗــــــــــــﺎت
( اﻟﻘــــﺮﺑﻰ واﻟـﻨﺴـﺐ واﳌﺼــــﺎﻫﺮةcf. Humphrys 1999: 7); and similarly, ºbased
upon kinship, marriage, and ethnic and tribal origin‚ would be a sufficient
translation of ﻋـﻠـﻰ اﺳــــــــــــﺎس اﻟـﻘـــــــــــﺮاﺑــﺔ واﻟـﺰواج واﻻﺻـﻞ اﻹﺛـﻨـﻲ واﻟـﻌــــــــــــﺎﺋـﻠـﻲ
( واﻟﻘﺒﻠﻲcf. Humphrys 1999: 7).
One function of listing in Arabic seems to be to suggest an overall scene
or situation by extensive exemplification of aspects of that scene or situation.
In a number of contexts an appropriate strategy in translating into English is
to reduce the listed elements, and to substitute other information which provides
a summary account of the overall scene or situation. Consider the following,
which describes the behaviour of senior military figures in the Arab world:
:ﻓـــﻬﻢ، ﻛـــﺎﻟﺴـــﻴـــﺎﺳــﻴـﲔ، ﻳﺼـــﺮون ﻋﻠﻰ ﳑـﺎرﺳــﺔ اﻟـﻮﺟــﺎﻫـﺔ ﺑﺠـــﻤــﻴـﻊ ﻓــﺮوﻋـــﻬـــﺎ
}اﻟﺒــﻴـﻮت اﳌﻔــﺘـﻮﺣــﺔ، اﻟﻘـﺼــﻮر، اﳊـﺮس اﳋــﺎص، اﻟﺰﻟﻢ، اﻟﺒــﺬج، واﻗـﺘﻨـﺎء ﻣـﺎ
ﻋﺰ ﻣﻦ اﻷﻟﺒﺴﺔ واﳊﻠﻰ واﳊﻠﻞ.
This might be translated (cf. Humphrys 1999: 7-8) as:
Like politicians, they insist upon all the outward trappings of privilege:
mansions, palaces, bodyguards, and all the finery that money can buy.
This translation omits specific translation of the later listed elements in the
Arabic,  ,اﻟﺰﻟﻢ، اﻟـﺒــﺬج، واﻗـــﺘﻨﺎء ﻣــﺎ ﻋـــﺰ ﻣﻦ اﻷﻟﺒـــﺴــﺔ واﳊﻠـﻰ واﳊﻠﻞutilizing
instead the phrase ºall the finery which money can buy‚; i.e. the English

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
25
summarizes while the Arabic exemplifies.
The following is a fairly similar example from the same book:
»ﻛﻨـﺎ ﻧﺨــــﺎﻓـــﻪ، ﻳﺪﺧـﻞ اﻟﻰ ﻗــــﺎﻋـــﺔ اﻻﺟــــﺘـــﻤــــﺎﻋـــﺎت }ﻳـﺤـــﺎﺿــــﺮ وﻳﺘــــﻮﻋـــﺪ، ﻳﻬــــﺪد
وﻳﺤﺬر{«.
This has been translated (Humphrys 1999: 3) as:
æWe fear the officer forcing his way into civilian life, {imposing his will
and laying the law down}.Æ
Here again the English provides a summary account of the officer‚s behaviour,
using the two parallel composite phrases ºimposing his will‚ and ºlaying the
law down‚, while the Arabic exemplifies the kind of things he does through
the four verbs .ﻳﺤﺎﺿﺮ وﻳﺘﻮﻋﺪ، ﻳﻬﺪد وﻳﺤﺬر
Because English does not so readily use exemplification through listing to
suggest an overall scene or situation as does Arabic, it is sometimes appropriate
when translating into English to insert a summary phrase, even when it
seems reasonable to retain all or most of the elements of the original Arabic
list. Consider the following, which is taken from an account of the internal
leadership elections of the Phalange ( )اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺋﺐparty in Lebanon in 1999.
ﺷﺒﺢ ٢٩٩١ ﻛﺎن ﺣﺎﺿـﺮا ﺑﻘﻮة ﻣﻊ ﻛﻞ }اﻻﺟﺘﻤﺎﻋﺎت واﻟﺘـﺤﺎﻟﻔﺎت واﻟﻠﻘﺎءات
اﳉﺎﻧﺒﻴﺔ{ }ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺸﺮﻓﺎت وﻓﻲ اﳌﻜﺎﺗﺐ اﳉﺎﻧﺒﻴﺔ وﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺴﻠﻢ اﳋﺎرﺟﻲ{.
This has been translated (Jones 1999: 8) as follows:
The ghost of 1992 was present in force, with {countless meetings} taking
place in any available space: {on the balconies, in side offices, and even
on the outside stairs}.
The Arabic ST here has two lists: ]ﻛﻞ[ اﻻﺟـﺘـﻤـﺎﻋـﺎت واﻟﺘـﺤـﺎﻟﻔـﺎت واﻟﻠﻘـﺎءات
 ,اﳉـﺎﻧﺒــﻴـﺔand .ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺸــﺮﻓـﺎت وﻓـﻲ اﳌﻜﺎﺗﺐ اﳉـﺎﻧـﺒـﻴــﺔ وﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺴﻠﻢ اﳋــﺎرﺟﻲ
The first of these is summarized in English as ºcountless meetings‚, while the
second is retained in full (and in fact strengthened by the addition of ºeven‚
before ºon the balconies‚). However, before the second list in the English,
the translator has inserted the additional summarizing phrase ºin every available
space‚. (The translation also contains a somewhat unfortunate mixed metaphor
ºghost [...] present in force‚; cf. Ch. 11.4.)

26
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
PRACTICAL  5
Practical  5.3  Semantic repetition, parallelism and list restructuring
Assignment
(i)
Discuss the strategic problems confronting the translator of the following
text, and outline your strategy for dealing with them. You are to translate
the text as part of an ºFrom the Arab Press‚ section of the English
version of the Egyptian daily newspaper ( اﻷﻫﺮامthe English-language
version of this has a certain degree of independence from official political
pressure). The intended readership is mainly expatriate English-speakers
in Egypt, plus some other readers worldwide, who are likely to have
quite a good knowledge of Middle Eastern culture and affairs.
(ii)
Translate the text into English.
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail you made in producing your translation.
Contextual information
This passage is taken an article entitled  from the weekly Egyptian news
magazine ( روز اﻟـﻴــــــــــﻮﺳـﻒno. 3521, Dec. 4, 1995). The article  by ﻋــــــــــﺎدل
 ﺣﻤﻮدةis entitled    .ﻟﻌـﺒﺔ اﻟﻀﻔـﺎدع اﻟﻌﻘـﺎرب ﻓﻲ ﻋﻮاﺻﻢ اﻟﺸـﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂThe
general theme of the article is the negative political effects of religious
fundamentalism in the Middle East (text taken from Hetherington 1996:
34-35). This particular section deals with the behaviour of religious extremists.

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
27
ST
إن اﻟـﺮﺳــــــــﻮل اﻟـﻜﺮﱘ )ﺻـﻠـﻌـﻢ( ﺗﺘــــــــﺒــــــــﺄ ﻓـﻲ ﺣــــــــﺪﻳـﺚ ﺷــــــــﺮﻳـﻒ ﺑﺄن اﻟـﻴــــــــﻬــــــــﻮد
ﺳـــﻴــــﺘـــﻔـــﺮﻗــــﻮن ﻋﻠﻰ ١٧ أو ٢٧ ﻓـــﺮﻗــــﺔ. وﻛـــﺬﻟﻚ اﻟـﻨﺼـــﺎرى .. أﻣــــﺎ اﳌﺴﻠـﻤـــﻮن
ﻓـــﺴــﻴـــﺘــﻔـــﺮﻗـــﻮن ﻋﻠﻰ ٢٧ ﻓـــﺮﻗــﺔ. واﺠﻤﻟـــﻤــﻮع ٥١٣ أو ٧١٣ ﻓـــﺮﻗـــﺔ .. ﻛﻞ ﻓــﺮﻗـــﺔ
اﻧﻘـﺴـﻤﺖ إﻟـﻰ ﻣـﺠـﻤـﻮﻋـﺎت .. ﻛﻞ ﻣـﺠــﻮﻣـﻮﻋـﺔ ﺗﺮى أﻧﻬـﺎ اﻟﻮﺣـﻴــﺪة اﻟﺘﻲ ﻋﻠﻰ
ﺻﻮاب، وﺗﺮى ﻏﻴـﺮﻫﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺿﻼل .. وﻛﻞ ﻣﺠﻤـﻮﻋﺔ ﻳﺮى اﺗﺒﺎﻋﻬـﺎ اﻧﻬﻢ أوﻟﻴﺎ
اﻟﻠﻪ، وﺟـﻨﺪ اﻟﻠﻪ، واﺻـــﻔــﻴــﺎء اﻟـﻠﻪ، واﺻــﺪﻗــﺎء اﻟـﻠﻪ، واﻟﻨﺎﻃـﻘــﻮن اﻟﺮﺳــﻤـــﻴــﻮن
ﺑﺎﺳﻢ اﻟﻠﻪ .. وﻣﺎ ﻋﺪاﻫﻢ ﻳﻌﻴﺸﻮن ﻓﻲ اﳊـﺮام، واﻟﻔﺴﺎد، واﳉﺎﻫﻠﻴﺔ، واﻟﻜﻔﺮ،
واﻹﳊﺎد.
 ﻓﻲ زﻣﻦ- وﺑﻌـﻀﻬﻢ ﻟـﲔ .. ﳝﻴﻞ اﻟﻰ اﳊﺴﻨﺔ .. وﻟـﻜﻦ اﻟﺴﻴـﺎدة اﻟﺪﻳﻨﻴـﺔ
 ﺗﻜﻮن ﻟـﻸﻛــﺜــﺮ ﺗﺸــﺪداً .. ﻟـﻸﻛــﺜــﺮ- ﻳﺨــﺘـﻠﻂ ﻓــﻴــﻪ اﻟﺒـــﺎرود ﺑﺎﻟﻜﺘﺐ اﳌـﻘــﺪﺳــﺔ
ﺗﺸﻨﺠﺎً، وﺗﻬـﻮرا، وﺗﻄﺮﻓﺎ .. وﻟﻸﻛﺜﺮ ﺟﺮأة ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻘـﺘﻞ .. إن ﻫﺆﻻء ﻳﻘﺘﻠﻮن
ﺑـﺎﺳﻢ اﻟـﻠﻪ .. وﻳـﺴﻠـﺤـــــﻮن، وﻳﻔــــــﺠـــــﺮون، وﻳﺬﺑـﺤـــــﻮن، وﻳـﻐـــــﺴﻠـﻮن اﻟـﻌـــــﻘـــــﻮل،
وﻳﻜﺴﺮون اﻟﻌﻈﺎم، وﻳﺤﺮﻣﻮن اﻹﺑﺪاع اﻳﻀﺎ ﺑﺎﺳﻢ اﻟﻠﻪ!
ﻻ ﻫﻢ اﺳـﺘــﺨـﺪﻣـﻮا اﻟﺪﻳـﻦ ﻟﻠﻘـﻀـﺎء ﻋـﻠﻰ اﻟﻔـﻘـﺮ وﻣــﺘـﺎﻋﺐ اﻟﻔــﻘـﺮاء، وﻻ ﻫﻢ
اﺳـﺘـﺨـﺪﻣـﻮه ﻣﻦ أﺟﻞ اﻟـﺼـﻔـﻮ واﻟﺼـﻔـﺎء .. ﻻ ﻫﻢ اﻋـﺘـﺒـﺮوه وﺳـﻴﻠـﺔ ﻟﺘـﺤـﻘـﻴﻖ
اﻟﻌﺪاﻟﺔ اﻻﺟﺘﻤﺎﻋﻴﺔ وﻻ ﻫﻢ وﺟﺪوا ﻓﻴﻪ ﻋﻼﺟﺎ ﻟﻸﻣﺮاض اﻟﻨﻔﺴﻴﺔ.

6
Connotative meaning
and translation issues:
Supplement
_______________________________
6.7  REFLECTED MEANING
More complex cases of reflected meaning also occur, where parts of phrases
are involved in a form of polysemy. One frequently quoted example compares
the connotative difference between the two synonyms ºHoly Ghost‚ and
ºHoly Spirit‚ (Leech 1981: 19). Through polysemous association, the ºGhost‚
part of ºHoly Ghost‚ is reminiscent of the reflected meaning of ºghost‚ (ºspook‚
or ºspectre‚). Although such an association is not part of the denotative
meaning of ºHoly Ghost‚, it has a tendency to form part of the overall
meaning of the expression, and therefore often actually interferes with its
denotative meaning. By another, polysemous association the ºSpirit‚ part of
ºHoly Spirit‚ may call to mind the reflected meaning of ºspirits‚ (ºalcoholic
drinks‚); here again, the association tends to interfere with the denotative
meaning. Clearly, then, while ºHoly Spirit‚ and ºHoly Ghost‚ are referential
synonyms, their total semantic effects cannot be called identical, in so far as
they evoke different images through different reflected meanings.

7
Phonic/graphic and
prosodic issues in
translation:
Supplement
_______________________________
7.1.1  Alliteration, assonance and rhyme
In literary STs, especially poetry, marked phonic features very often have a
thematic and expressive function – that is, the message would be less complex
and have less impact without them. Whether these effects are triggered or not
is very much a matter of genre – of what the text is for and what the public is
expecting. It is even possible, for example, to imagine the mining sentence as
part of a poem. If it were, the purpose of the text would be different, and the
reader‚s/listener‚s expectations would be different. The phonic features would
have an expressive function, and ignoring them might incur unacceptable
translation loss. We shall consider further aspects of assonance under pattern
repetition (Ch. 8.2.3.1), root repetition (Ch. 8.2.3.2), and suffix repetition
(Ch. 8.2.3.3).
7.2  THE PROSODIC LEVEL
This section provides some further discussion of the following ST and TT,
considered in § 7.2:
ST
ًوﳑﺎ ﻻ ﺷﻚ ﻓــﻴـﻪ أن ﺣــﺼـﺎد وإﳒــﺎزات اﻟﻌــﻤﻞ اﻟﺒــﺘـﺮوﻟﻲ ﺧــﻼل اﻟـ٨١ ﻋـﺎﻣــﺎ
اﳌﺎﺿــــﻴـــﺔ ﻫـﻮ ﺑﺜــــﺎﺑﺔ وﺳـــﺎم ﻟـﻠﻌــــﺎﻣﻠﲔ ﺑـﺎﻟﺒــــﺘـــﺮول وﻣــــﺤـــﺼﻠـﺔ ﻟﻠﺴــــﻴـــﺎﺳــــﺎت

30
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
.واﺠﻤﻟﻬﻮدات اﻟﺘﻲ ﲤﺖ ﺧﻼل ﺗﻜﻞ اﻟﻔﺘﺮة
TT (adapted)
No doubt, the achievements of the petroleum sector during the past 18
years represent a triumph for the workers in this sector, and reflect the
policies and efforts which have been pursued during this period.
When ºNo doubt‚ is placed at the beginning of a sentence in English, it
acquires a sense of emphasis (technically, it becomes an emphatic theme: cf.
Ch. 9.2.2.2).
The English TT could be improved somewhat by changing ºNo doubt‚ to
ºThere is no doubt that‚ (since this removes the ºno doubt‚ element from the
emphatic initial position in the sentence), although even here the possibility
of a contrastive interpretation with a rising intonation pattern remains. Thus:
There is no doubt that the achievements of the petroleum sector during
the past 18 years represent a triumph for the workers in this sector, and
reflect the policies and efforts which have been pursued during this period.
(For a generally more acceptable translation, see § 7.2.) For further discussion
of the contrastive function of initial phrases expressing doubt in Arabic, see
Hatim (1997). For further discussion of intonation and stress, see Ch. 9.2.1,
9.2.2.1.
7.2 .2 Translating Arabic verse
As with rhyme, there may sometimes be very little reason for translating ST
verse into TT verse. This might be the case where the verse itself is particularly
trivial, and where it is being used mainly for humorous effect. Under such
circumstances, a prose TT form might be appropriate which relays the
denotative meaning (Chapter 5) of the ST and achieves an ºequivalent‚ (cf.
Ch. 2) degree of humour by some other means such as allusion (cf. Ch.
10.3.2). Similarly, a translator would probably be constrained to translate as
prose a verse form used in the ST in a context where verse is not appropriate
in the target culture. An example is the use of verse at a wedding, which is a
feature of some Arabic societies, but not normally of English-speaking ones.
It is essential for the translator to consider such issues, before he or she can
take a reasoned decision either to translate into prose or couch the TT in an
appropriate verse-form.

       Phonic/graphic and prosodic issues in translation: Supplement
31
PRACTICAL 7
Practical  7.3  The prosodic level
Assignment
Turn back to the translations of the portion of  ﻣــــﻌﻠﻘــــﺔ ﻟـﺒـــﻴــــﺪby Arberry and
Sells given in Supplement, Chapter 2. What strategies do these two translations
adopt with regard to the prosodic level? In your opinion which translation
works better on this level, and why?
Practical 7.4   The phonic/graphic and prosodic levels
Assignment
  (i)
Discuss the strategic decisions that you have to take before starting
detailed translation of the following text, and outline and justify the
strategy you adopt. You have been asked to translate these poems for
an anthology of poems entitled War‚s words: poetry of conflict from
around the globe .
 (ii)
Translate the poems into an appropriate poetic English form.
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail which you made in producing your TTs,
especially those involving compensation.
Contextual information
These poems (from  ﻓــﺒــﺎﻧﻲ1981: 344, 346–7) are the second and fourth in a
series of poems by  ﻧـﺰار ﻗـــــــــﺒـــــــــﺎﻧـﻲdealing with the Lebanese civil war and
collectively entitled  .إﻟﻰ ﺑﻴﺮوت اﻷﻧﺜـﻰ ﻣﻊ ﺣﺒﻲThey are simply numbered
º2‚ and º4‚ in the original collection (as they are here). Beirut is addressed in
the second person (feminine singular) throughout.
 ﻗــﺒــﺎﻧﻲis Syrian by origin, but lived in Lebanon for many years, attracted
there by the greater freedom of expression than in his own country.  ﻗـﺒــﺎﻧﻲis
a leading exponent of modern Arabic free verse. His writing typically combines
simplicity with elegance. Much of his poetry deals with romantic love, but he
is also known for his political and social themes.

32
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
ST
٢
آهِ .. ﻛﻢ ﻛُﻨﱠﺎ ﻗﺒﻴﺤﲔَ، وﻛُﻨﱠﺎ ﺟُﺒَﻨُﺎءْ
ﻋﻨﺪﻣﺎ ﺑﻌﻨﺎكِ، ﻳﺎ ﺑﻴﺮوتُ، ﻓﻲ ﺳُﻮقِ اﻹﻣﺎءْ
وﺣﺠﺰﻧﺎ اﻟﺸﻘَﻖَ اﻟﻔﺨﻤﺔَ ﻓﻲ ﺣﻲﱢ )اﻷﻟﻴﺰﻳﺔ( وﻓﻲ )ﻣﺎﻳْﻔﻴﺮ( ﻟﻨﺪنْ ..
وﻏﺴَﻠﻨﺎ اﳊﺰنَ ﺑﺎﳋﻤﺮةِ، واﳉﻨﺲِ، وﻗﺎﻋﺎتِ اﻟﻘﻤﺎرْ
 ﻋﻠﻰ ﻣﺎﺋﺪة اﻟﺮوﻟﻴﺖِ، أﺧﺒﺎرَ اﻟﺪﻳﺎرْ- وﺗﺬﻛﱠﺮﻧﺎ
واﻓﺘﻘﺪﻧﺎ زﻣﻦَ اﻟﺪِﻓْﻠﻰ ﺑﻠﺒﻨﺎنَ ..
وﻋﺼﺮَ اﳉُﻠﱠﻨﺎرْ ..
وﺑﻜﻴْﻨﺎ ﻣﺜﻠﻤﺎ ﺗﺒﻜﻲ اﻟﻨﺴﺎءْ ...
٤
ﻃﻤﺌﻨﻴﻨﻲ ﻋﻨﻚِ
ﻳﺎ ﺻﺎﺣﺒﺔَ اﻟﻮﺟﻪ اﳊﺰﻳﻦْ
ﻛﻴﻒ ﺣﺎلُ اﻟﺒﺤﺮِ؟
ﻫﻞ ﻫُﻢْ ﻗﺘﻠﻮهُ ﺑﺮﺻﺎص اﻟﻘﻨﺺ ﻣﺜﻞ اﻵﺧﺮﻳﻦْ؟
ﻛﻴﻒَ ﺣﺎلُ اﳊﺐّ؟
ﻫﺎ أﺻﺒﺢ أﻳﻀﺎً ﻻﺟﺌﺎً ...
ﺑﲔ أﻟﻮف اﻟﻼﺟﺌﲔْ ...
ﻛﻴﻒ ﺣﺎلُ اﻟﺸﱢﻌْﺮ؟
 ﻣﻦ ﺷِﻌْﺮٍ ﻳُﻐَﻨﱠﻰ؟- ُ ﻳﺎ ﺑﻴﺮوت- ِﻫﻞ ﺑَﻌْﺪَك
ذَﺑﺤَﺘْﻨَﺎ ﻫﺬه اﳊﺮبُ اﻟﺘﻲ ﻣﻦ ﻏﻴﺮ ﻣﻌﻨﻰ ..
أﻓﺮﻏَﺘْﻨﺎ ﻣﻦ ﻣﻌﺎﻧﻴﻨﺎ ﲤﺎﻣﺎً ..
ﺑَﻌْﺜَﺮﺗْﻨَﺎ ﻓﻲ أﻗﺎﺻﻲ اﻷرضِ
ﻣﻨﺒﻮذﻳﻦَ ..
ﻣﺴﺤﻮﻗﲔَ ..
ﻣَﺮْﺿَﻰ ...
ﻣُﺘْﻌَﺒِﲔْ
 ﺧﻼﻓﺎً ﻟﻠﻨُﺒُﻮءاتِ ..- ﺟَﻌَﻠَﺖْ ﻣِﻨﱠﺎ
ﻳﻬﻮداً ﺗﺎﺋﻬﲔْ ....

8
Grammatical issues in
translation:
Supplement
_______________________________
8.2 THE GRAMMATICAL LEVEL
The essentials of morphology are not difficult to understand. Words in both
English and Arabic are made up of ºbits‚, these ºbits‚ being known in linguistics
as morphemes. Thus, in English, the word ºunfortunately‚ can be regarded as
being made up of four morphemes ºun-‚, ºfortune‚, º-ate‚, and º-ly‚.
Traditionally, the morphemes which make up English words are classified as
stems and affixes. The stem is the central bit of the word; in the case of
ºunfortunately‚, the stem is ºfortune‚. Affixes are the non-central bits of the
word, which come either before or after the stem. Affixes which come before
the stem are known as prefixes; in the case of ºunfortunately‚, ºun-‚ is a
prefix. Affixes which come after the stem are known as suffixes; in the case
of ºunfortunately‚, º-ate‚ and º-ly‚ are suffixes.
Like English, Arabic has both prefixes and suffixes. Thus in the word
 ﻳﺬﻫﺒﻮنºthey go‚,   ﻳـis a prefix (indicating 3rd person), while  ـﻮنis a suffix
(indicating masculine plural). More strikingly for an English learner Arabic
does not really have stems along the lines of English. Rather, it operates with
a system of root morphemes and pattern morphemes. Consider the word
  ﺣَـﻈِﻴـﻆºfortunate‚. Here the basic notion of luck or fortune is conveyed by
the consonants  ,ح ظ ظthis element being traditionally known in English as
the root (Arabic  .)ﺟــــــﺬرThe fact that this is an adjective is conveyed by the
arrangement of vowels which are interpolated between these letters. This
arrangement of vowels is known in English as the pattern (Arabic وَزْن
ºweight‚, ºpoetic measure‚), and is traditionally represented using the dummy
verb  ,ﻓــــﻌﻞas a convenient ºpeg‚. Thus, the word  ﺣَـﻈِﻴـﻆis said to be on the

34
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
 ﻓَﻌِﻴﻞpattern. While English ºfortunate‚ consists of a stem morpheme ºfortune‚
and a suffix morpheme º-ate‚, the root morpheme  ح ظ ظand the pattern
morpheme   ﻓَــــــــــــﻌِــــــــــــﻴـﻞwhich make the Arabic word  ﺣَـﻈِــﻴـﻆare completely
interlinked with one another. This situation is sometimes referred to as
ºtransfixing‚ (cf. Bauer 2003: 30-31). We shall consider various issues in
relation to Arabic morphology in particular later in this chapter.
Morphology yields words of various classes; traditionally in English words
are said to belong to one of eight word classes, or what are traditionally
known as parts of speech: noun, pronoun, adjective, verb, preposition,
conjunction, adverb, and interjection. And although this division is not
traditionally used for Arabic, it does work fairly well for Arabic, particularly
when viewed from the perspective of English. The combination of words
into phrases does not pose particular theoretical problems, although we may
note in passing that the use of the word ºphrase‚ in linguistics tends to be
much more closely defined than is typically appropriate for translation purposes.
More problematic is the combination of words and phrases into sentences, or
rather what we termed above syntactic sentences, and it is this that we turn to
next.
8.2.0 The definition of syntactic sentence in English and Arabic
There are two basic ways of defining a syntactic sentence: in purely grammatical
terms, and in more occurrence-oriented terms. These two do not always yield
the same results, in that what is a syntactic sentence in one sense may not be
a syntactic sentence in the other. Both approaches, however, have their
theoretical virtues, as well as their practical implications for translation. We
shall therefore briefly consider the two approaches.
8.2.0.1 Grammatical definition of syntactic sentence
The following is a very brief account of the fundamentals of English and
Arabic sentence structure, and it necessarily simplifies and omits many issues.
It is intended only as a general guide to this aspect of the two languages for
the purposes of analyzing features of Arabic>English translation, and
particularly, as we shall see in Chapters 9 and 10, features related to theme
and rheme, mainness and subordination, and cohesion and coherence. Readers
who are interested in more detailed accounts of the grammatical structures of
the two languages should consult specialist works such as Leech and Svartvik
(1994) for English, and Beeston (1970) and Holes (1995) for Arabic.

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
35
8.2.0.1.1  English
Traditionally, the syntactic sentence in English is analyzed into a number of
syntactic elements. Every syntactic sentence is said to have a verb; Thus, the
imperative, ºStop!‚ is a syntactic sentence. Every non-imperative syntactic
sentence has as a subject as well as a verb; thus, ºThey stop‚ is a syntactic
sentence, in which ºThey‚ is the subject and ºstop‚ is a verb. Additionally,
some syntactic sentences may have objects; in the syntactic sentence, ºThey
stop the car‚, ºthe car‚ is an object. While most verbs take nominal objects
(ºnoun-based‚ objects, such as ºthe car‚ in ºThey stop the car‚, some verbs
take prepositional objects (ºpreposition-based‚ objects). An example is ºon
you‚ in ºI rely on you‚. The verb ºto be‚ is somewhat exceptional to this
general pattern in that it is described as taking a complement, rather than an
object. Thus, ºin the house‚ is the complement in the syntactic sentence
ºThey are in the house‚; ºhappy‚ is the complement in the syntactic sentence
ºWe were happy‚; and ºgeniuses‚ is a complement in the syntactic sentence
ºYou are geniuses‚.
The elements SUBJECT-VERB-OBJECT can be complex as well as simple;
ºThey‚  is a simple one-word subject in ºThey stop the car‚, while ºthe car‚ in
this example is a complex phrase (consisting of ºthe‚ and ºcar‚). ºThe fast
car‚ and ºthe very fast car‚ are more complex still. In all cases, however, the
phrase beginning with ºthe‚ and ending with ºcar‚ functions as the object of
the verb ºstop‚.
Verb phrases (i.e. phrases made up of verbs) may also be complex. Examples
are ºmay stop‚ in ºThey may stop the car‚, and ºshould have stopped‚ in
ºThey should have stopped the car‚. Irrespective of the simpleness or complexity
of the elements which make them up, however, syntactic sentences in English
may all be analyzed as having a main structure consisting of [SUBJECT]-
VERB-[OBJECT] (optional elements are here placed in square brackets).
Mainness in traditional English grammar contrasts with subordination.
Sometimes the terms ºsubordinate‚ and ºsubordination‚ are used to describe
elements which are directly dependent on a central element of the main
structure of the syntactic sentence. Thus, in the syntactic sentence ºThey
stopped the car which had been speeding along the motorway‚, the relative
clause ºwhich had been speeding along the motorway‚ is a subordinate clause
with respect to the noun ºthe car‚. In this case, it is easy to see that ºthe car‚
is the central element of the whole phrase ºthe car which had been speeding
along the motorway‚. This is demonstrated by the fact that it is possible to
omit the element ºwhich had been speeding along the motorway‚ and still
retain a grammatically acceptable syntactic sentence: ºThey stopped the car‚.
It is not, however, possible to omit the element ºthe car‚ and retain a
grammatically acceptable syntactic sentence; we cannot say in English ºThey
stopped which had been speeding along the motorway‚.
An aspect of subordination which is more important for our current purposes

36
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
is subordination of elements to the entire main part of the syntactic sentence.
The following are examples of such subordinate elements: ºat three-o-clock‚
in the sentence ºAt three-o-clock they stopped the car‚; ºout of frustration‚ in
ºThey stopped the car out of frustration‚; ºfor petrol‚ in ºThey stopped the car
for petrol‚; ºnear the cafe‚ in ºNear the cafe they stopped the car‚; and ºall of
a sudden‚ in ºAll of a sudden they stopped the car‚. Such subordinate elements
are said to function as adverbials, i.e. they work like adverbs. This can be
seen from the fact that in some cases at least it is possible to replace the
subordinate phrase by a one-word adverb (normally ending in -ly); thus, not
only can we say ºAll of a sudden they stopped the car‚. We can also say,
ºSuddenly they stopped the car‚.
All the subordinate elements just discussed are non-verbal (i.e. they do
not contain a verb); and with the exception of the single word ºsuddenly‚,
they are all non-verbal phrases. It is also possible, however, to have clausal
subordinate elements of the same type as these. By clausal we mean here
ºcontaining a verb‚. Such clausal subordinate elements are known as
subordinate clauses. Examples of subordinate clauses (together with a main
clause) are: ºWhen three-o-clock came, they stopped the car‚; ºfeeling totally
frustrated‚ in ºfeeling totally frustrated they stopped the car‚; ºin order to buy
petrol‚ in ºThey stopped the car in order to buy petrol‚; and ºAs soon as they
got near the cafe‚ in ºAs soon as they got near the cafe, they stopped the car‚.
Forms which introduce subordinate clauses, such as ºwhen‚, ºin order to‚ ,
ºto‚ (in the sense of ºin order to‚), and ºas soon as‚ can be termed subordinating
conjunctions (the -ing on the end of ºfeeling‚ in ºfeeling totally frustrated‚
can also be called a subordinator).
In traditional English grammar, subordination – typically involving
subordinating conjunctions – is contrasted with coordination. This latter
involves the use of coordinating conjunctions between two main clauses, the
most important of these coordinating conjunctions being ºand‚ and ºbut‚.
Thus, ºThey stopped the car, and they bought petrol‚ is an example of clausal
coordination. Here the two main clauses ºThey stopped the car‚ and ºthey
bought petrol‚ are linked by the coordinating conjunction ºand‚. This can be
compared with ºThey stopped the car in order to buy petrol‚. Here, the main
clause ºThey stopped the car‚ is linked to the subordinate clause ºbuy petrol‚
by the subordinating conjunction ºin order to‚.
8.2.0.1.2 Arabic
The following analysis of the Arabic sentence draws partly on traditional
Arabic analyses and partly on modern western-based analyses. It is designed
to allow for fairly simple comparison between the structures of Arabic and
English.
The syntactic sentence in Arabic has similarities to the syntactic sentence

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
37
in English, as well as some dissimilarities. The major dissimilarities lie at the
most basic level of sentence structure. In English, as we have seen, from the
point of view of overall sentence structure, the main part of the syntactic
sentence can be analyzed as [SUBJECT]-VERB-[OBJECT]. In Arabic, the
basic element in the sentence can be termed the predicate. In fact some
syntactic sentences in Arabic consist of a predicate only. An example is !ﻗﻒ
ºStop!‚; another example is  ﺗﻘﻒºIt [fem.] stops‚.  As these examples show,
in Arabic both imperatives and non-imperatives may be subjectless, whereas
the only English syntactic sentences which may not contain subjects are
imperatives (such as ºStop!‚). Where an Arabic syntactic sentence consists of
a predicate only, this predicate is always a verb.
More commonly Arabic syntactic sentences consist of a subject and a
predicate. (In fact, according to the traditional Arab linguists even a single-word
syntactic sentence such as  ﺗﻘﻒºIt stops‚ contains a subject and a predicate,
the subject in this case being a ºhidden pronoun‚, ,ﺿـﻤـﻴـﺮ ﻣﺴـﺘـﺘـﺮin the verb
itself. For present purposes we do not need to worry about the merits or
otherwise of this analysis.) An example of a subject-predicate syntactic sentence
is  ﺗﻘﻒ اﻟﺴﻴﺎرةºThe car stops‚. Here the subject is  اﻟﺴﻴﺎرةand the predicate
is the verb  .ﺗﻘﻒTraditionally in Arabic, the subject is known as the ﻣُــــﺴْـﻨَﺪ
 اﻟـﻴـــــﻪand the predicate is known as the  .ﻣُـــــــﺴْﻨَـﺪWhere the Arabic syntactic
sentence contains a subject as well as a predicate, the predicate may be
something other than a verb. It may, for instance, be a noun, as in اﻟﺴـــــﻴــــﺎرة
 آﻟﺔºThe car is a tool‚, or an adjective as in  اﻟـﺴــــــﻴـــــﺎرة ﺳــــــﺮﻳـﻌــــــﺔºThe car is
quick‚, or a prepositional phrase as in  اﻟـﺴـــــــــﻴـــــــــﺎرة وراء اﻟـﺒـــــــــﻴـﺖºThe car‚s
behind the house‚. The predicate may also be more complex, and itself
consist of a subject and a predicate. Thus in ﻫﺬه اﻟﺴــﻴــﺎرة ﺳــﻮاﻗــﻬــﺎ ﻣـﺸــﻬــﻮر
ºThis car, its driver is famous‚ (i.e. ºThe driver of this car is famous‚), ﻫﺬه
 اﻟﺴﻴﺎرةis a subject, and  ﺳﻮاﻗﻬﺎ ﻣﺸﻬﻮرis a predicate. Within the predicate
 ,ﺳــﻮاﻗـﻬــﺎ ﻣــﺸـﻬــﻮرhowever, there is a secondary, subsidiary subject ﺳـﻮاﻗــﻬـﺎ
and a secondary subsidiary predicate ( ﻣـﺸــﻬـﻮرfor further discussion of basic
sentence-types in Arabic, cf. Dickins and Watson 1999: 337-340).
As in English, verbs in Arabic may take objects (or in the case of the verb
ºto be‚ complements). Thus in  ﻳـﻮﻗّﻒ اﻟـﺮﺟﻞ اﻟـﺴــــــﻴــــــﺎرةºThe man stops the
car‚,  اﻟﺴـﻴـﺎرةis the object of the verb  .ﻳﻮﻗّﻒVerbs in Arabic may also take
prepositional objects as well as nominal objects. Thus we can regard  ﻋﻠﻴﻚas
the object of   اﻋـﺘــﻤـﺪin  اﻋــﺘـﻤــﺪ ﻋﻠﻴﻚºI rely on you‚. As in English elements
of the syntactic sentence may be simple as well as complex. Thus  اﻟﺴـﻴﺎرةis
already a complex of  ﺳـــــــــــــﻴــــــــــــــﺎرة+  ;الthis phrase can then be made more
complex; e.g.  اﻟﺴﻴﺎرة اﻟﺴﺮﻳﻌﺔor .اﻟﺴﻴﺎرة اﻟﺴﺮﻳﻌﺔ ﺟﺪا
As in English also, subordination in Arabic can be of various forms. Thus
a relative clause   اﻟﺘﻲ ﺗـﺘــﺴــﺮع ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟـﻄﺮﻳﻖºwhich was speeding along the
road‚ is subordinate to the noun  اﻟﺴـــــﻴـــــﺎرةin the syntactic sentence وﻗّـــــﻔــــــﻮا
 اﻟـﺴـــــــﻴـــــــﺎرة اﻟﺘـﻲ ﺗـﺘـــــــﺴـــــــﺮع  ﻋﻠـﻰ اﻟـﻄﺮﻳـﻖºThey stopped the car which was
speeding along the road‚.

38
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
In summary, Arabic has a basic syntactic sentence pattern [SUBJECT]-
PREDICATE. Where there is no subject, the predicate must be a verb, and
where there is a subject the predicate may be either a verb or another element,
such as a noun (or noun phrase), adjective (or adjective phrase), or prepositional
phrase.
Just as everything which falls outside the main [SUBJECT]-
VERB-[OBJECT] pattern in English is subordinate and adverbial with respect
to the main clause, so everything which falls outside the [SUBJECT]-
PREDICATE pattern in Arabic is subordinate and adverbial with respect to
the main clause. In Arabic these non-main parts of the syntactic sentence are
known as the  ,ﻓَﻀْﻠﺔthe ºresidue‚.
Again as in English, in Arabic it is possible to have non-clausal elements
which are subordinate to the main clause. Examples are: ً ﻓﺠﺄةin ﻓﺠﺄةً وﻗّـﻔﻮا
 اﻟﺴـﻴـﺎرةºSuddenly they stopped the car‚; and  ﻓﻲ اﻟﺴــﺎﻋـﺔ اﻟﺜـﺎﻟـﺜـﺔin وﻗـﻔـﻮا
 اﻟﺴﻴﺎرة ﻓﻲ اﻟﺴﺎﻋﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺜﺔºThey stopped the car at three-o-clock‚. Equally,
it is possible to have clausal elements which are subordinate to the main
clause. In this latter case, such clausal elements do not necessarily contain a
verb, as they must in English, but they must normally conform to the pattern
[SUBJECT]-PREDICATE, which is also found in main clauses. (There are
one or two exceptions to this rule, but they need not concern us here.) An
example of a subordinate clausal element of this nature – i.e. a subordinate
clause – is  ﻋﻨـﺪﻣـــﺎ دﻗﺖ اﻟـﺴـــﺎﻋــــﺔ اﻟﺜـــﺎﻟـﺜـــﺔin وﻗّـــﻔــــﻮا اﻟﺴـــﻴــــﺎرة ﻋﻨﺪﻣــــﺎ دﻗﺖ
 اﻟﺴـــــﺎﻋـــــﺔ اﻟﺜـــــﺎﻟﺜـــــﺔºThey stopped the car when the clock struck three‚. Here
 ﻋﻨﺪﻣﺎis a subordinating conjunction.
In Arabic as well as in English, subordination of clauses may be contrasted
with coordination of clauses. The three coordinating conjunctions in Arabic
are ( وwhen not used in a ﺣـــــــــــﺎل-construction),  ,فand ( ﺛــﻢcf. Dickins and
Watson 1999: 571-6). All other conjunctions (including  وwhen used in a
ﺣـــﺎل-construction) are subordinating. Thus in وﻗــــﻔــــﻮا اﻟـﺴــــﻴــــﺎرة ﻟﻴـــــﺸــــﺘــــﺮوا
 اﻟـﺒـﻨــﺰﻳـﻦºThey stopped the car in order to buy petrol‚, the particle  لis a
subordinating conjunction, and  ﻟﻴـﺸـﺘـﺮوا اﻟﺒﻨﺰﻳﻦis a subordinate clause. In
 ,وﻗــﻔــﻮا اﻟﺴـــﻴــﺎرة ﻓــﺎﺷــﺘــﺮوا اﻟﺒـﻨﺰﻳﻦon the other hand,  فis a coordinating
conjunction and  وﻗﻔﻮا اﻟﺴﻴﺎرةand  اﺷﺘﺮوا اﻟﺒﻨﺰﻳﻦare both main clauses.
8.2.0.2 Occurrence-based definition of syntactic sentence
The above grammatical definitions of syntactic sentence in English and Arabic
are important in practical terms not only because they provide a means of
analyzing sentences in the two languages, but because in formal writing in
particular, syntactic sentences are expected to conform to these patterns. This
means that in translating Arabic into formal English, one would expect, all
other things being equal, all syntactic sentences to conform to the patterns
outlined in Supplement § 8.2.0.1.1.

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
39
However, it is also possible to adopt another more occurrence-based
definition of syntactic sentence. Communicatively, we may define a syntactic
sentence as a string of words which is not necessarily a complete grammatical
syntactic sentence but can nonetheless be uttered in isolation, such that its
use is felt to be complete or sufficient in the context in which it is used.
Consider again the following, which we saw earlier in Ch. 7.2:
ST
:ﺳﺄﻟﺘﻪ
 أﺣﺠﺰت؟-
:وﻫﺰ رأﺳﻪ وﻗﺎل
 ﻋﻠﻰ وﺷﻚ.-
 أﻃﻠﺒﺖ ﻏﺮﻓﺔ ﺑﺤﻤﺎم؟-
. ﻧﻌﻢ-
. ﺣﺴﻨﺎ. أﺧﺒﺮﻧﻲ ﻋﻦ رﻗﻤﻬﺎ. ﻓﻐﺮﻓﺘﻲ ﺑﻼ ﺣﻤﺎم-
:وأﺿﺎﻓﺖ
 اﻟﻮﺳﺦ ﻳﻀﺎﻗﻨﻲ.-
TT (adapted from Tunnicliffe 1994: 12)
ºHave you checked in?‚, she asked.
He shook his head and said, ºAlmost‚.
ºDid you ask for a room with a bathroom?‚
ºYes.‚
ºGood. Give me the number; my room hasn‚t got one‚.
And then she added: ºI get fed up with the dirt‚.
A lot of informal language usages do not in fact conform to the grammatical
rules laid out in Supplement § 8.2.0.1.1 and 8.3.0.1.2. In the above Arabic
ST,  ,ﻧﻌﻢ ,ﻋﻠـﻰ وﺷﻚand ً ﺣــــﺴـﻨﺎdo not; and neither in the English TT do the
corresponding ºAlmost‚, ºYes‚,  and ºGood‚. Examples of this type are quite
typical of informal and particularly spoken language. In traditional linguistic
thought, attempts have been made to explain the discrepancies between what
formal grammatical analysis dictates syntactic sentences should consist of,
and what they do in fact consist of. These attempts apply the notion of
ellipsis; i.e. the omission of elements from a syntactic sentence which formal
grammar dictates ought to be there. And traditionally in both Arabic and
English grammar, complex rules have been devised to describe ways in
which particular elements of the syntactic sentence may or may not be ellipted.
The details of these need not concern us here, although we may note that in
many cases there are serious problems with the practical operation of ellipsis.
ºNo way‚ for example seems a perfectly reasonable informal statement of

40
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
disbelief or refusal. It is difficult to see, however, what it could be elliptical
for. (A form such as ºThere is no way that can be true‚, for example, not only
sounds a communicatively implausible non-elliptical version of ºNo way‚. It
is also quite arbitrary, in that there seems no principled way in which we
could determine whether ºNo way‚ was elliptical for ºThere is no way that
can be true‚, or ºThere‚s no way I‚m going to believe you‚, or any number of
other expressions giving roughly the same idea.)
Whatever the relationship between the grammatical and the occurrence-
based syntactic sentence, the important issue from a translation point of view
is to take into consideration when it is appropriate to use a grammatical
syntactic sentence, and when it is, or may be, better to use an occurrence-based
syntactic sentence.
8.2.2  Grammatical arrangement
Noun-adjective compounds, such as  ,اﻟﺸـﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂthrow up similar issues
to genitive compounds. In English it is possible to make adjectives from
compound nouns of this type; thus ºMiddle Eastern‚ from ºMiddle East‚. In
Arabic, it is not traditionally possible to do this. Accordingly, the name of an
academic institution ºThe Centre for Middle Eastern Studies‚ would have to
be translated into Arabic as the complex genitive ﻣــــــﺮﻛـــــﺰ دراﺳــــــﺎت اﻟﺸــــــﺮق
 .اﻻوﺳﻂAs in the case  of the phrase  ,ﺳـﺘـﺎﺋﺮ ﻏـﺮﻓـﺔ اﻟﻨﻮم اﳉـﺪﻳﺪةdiscussed
in § 8.2.2, this means that a phrase such as ﻣـــﺮﻛـــﺰ دراﺳـــﺎت اﻟﺸـــﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂ
 اﳉــــﺪﻳﺪis ambiguous between ºThe New Centre for Middle Eastern Studies‚
and ºThe Centre for the Studies of the New Middle East‚ (or more idiomatically
ºThe Centre for the Study of the New Middle East‚). Again, this is likely to
generate periphrastic structures in Arabic, utilizing ِ   ﻟـــand other forms,
providing opportunities for translators into English to find conciser, more
tightly structured translation equivalents.
More recently, Arabic has begun to develop adjectival compounds based
on noun-adjective compound nouns. So, from ‚ اﻟـﺸـــــــﺮق اﻻوﺳـﻂthe Middle
East‚ one now comes across  ﺷـــــــﺮق اوﺳﻄـﻲºMiddle Eastern‚. Accordingly,
ºAmerican Middle-East policy‚ might now be translated into Arabic as
( ﺳــــﻴـــــﺎﺳــــﺔ أﻣـــــﺮﻳﻜـﺎ اﻟﺸـــــﺮق اوﺳﻄـﻴــــﺔnote the use of only a single  اﻟـin the
definite phrase  .)اﻟـﺸـــــــــﺮق اوﺳﻄـﻴـــــــــﺔHowever, given that forms of the type
 ﺷـــــــﺮق اوﺳﻄـﻲare met with extreme disapproval by linguistic purists in the
Middle East, one is relatively unlikely to encounter them outside the realm of
politics and related matters. Thus, ºThe Centre for Middle Eastern and Islamic
Studies‚ at the University of Durham in England is translated into Arabic in
official documents as ,ﻣـﺮﻛﺰ دراﺳـﺎت اﻟﺸـﺮق اﻻﺳﻂ واﻟﺪراﺳـﺎت اﻻﺳـﻼﻣﻴـﺔ
rather than the more concise ,ﻣـﺮﻛﺰ اﻟﺪراﺳـﺎت اﻟﺸـﺮق اوﺳﻄﻴـﺔ واﻻﺳـﻼﻣﻴـﺔ
even though the former involves a repetition of  دراﺳــــــــــﺎتwhich is slightly
inelegant because it involves the use of the word in the first instance without

Grammatical issues in translation: Supplement
41
and in the second instance with the definite article  .اﻟــThe translator from
Arabic to English, faced with a form such as ﻣــﺮﻛـــﺰ دراﺳــﺎت اﻟﺸـــﺮق اﻻﺳﻂ
 واﻟـﺪراﺳــــــــﺎت اﻻﺳـــــــﻼﻣــــــــﻴــــــــﺔis likely to have to find the original name in an
English source in order to work out what the correct English form is.
8.2.3.1 Pattern repetition
Pattern repetition by definition involves assonance (Ch. 7.1.1); and the more
frequently the pattern is repeated, the greater the assonance will be, as well
as the greater the degree of emphasis conveyed. Consider the following:
     وﺑـﺸﻜـﻞ ﻋـــــــﺎم ﻓـــــــﺈن ﻫـﺬه اﻷﲡـــــــﺎﻫـﺎت اﳉـــــــﺪﻳـﺪة ﻋـﻠﻰ ﻛــــــــﺎﻓـــــــﺔ اﻷﺻـــــــﻌـــــــﺪة
اﻻﻗـــﺘـــﺼـــﺎدﻳـﺔ واﻻﺟـــﺘـــﻤـــﺎﻋـــﻴـــﺔ واﻟـﺴـــﻴـــﺎﺳـــﻴـــﺔ واﻟﻔـﻜﺮﻳﺔ أﺧـــﺬت }ﺗـﺘـــﺴـــﺎرع{
و}ﺗﺘﺼﺎرع{ و}ﺗﺘﻜﺎﻟﺐ{ ﺟﻤﻴﻌﻬـﺎ ﲟﺎ ﲢﺘﻮﻳﻪ ﻣﻦ إﻳﺠﺎﺑﻴﺎت وﺳﻠﺒﻴﺎت ﻋﻠﻰ
رأس اﺠﻤﻟــﺘـﻤﻊ اﳌـﺼـﺮي اﻟﺬي ﻛــﺎﻧﺖ أﻏﻠﺒــﻴــﺘـﻪ اﻟﺴــﺎﺣــﻘـﺔ ﲢــﻴــﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ ﻓﻄﺮﺗﻬــﺎ
اﻟﺒﺴﻴﻄﺔ ....
This has been translated (Calderbank 1990: 16) as:
    In short, these various currents began to exercise an unprecedented
influence – whether positive or negative – on all aspects of economic,
social, political and intellectual life. {They thus became locked in a desperate
struggle} for the intellectual leadership of an Egyptian society, the great
majority of whose members were still living a simple, traditional life ...
Here the translator has transposed the ST three-verb structure ({}ﺗـﺘــــــــﺴــــــــﺎرع
 )و}ﺗﺘــــﺼــــﺎرع{ و}ﺗﺘﻜـﺎﻟﺐ{grammatically, as a composite verb-prepositional-
object phrase ºbecame locked in a desperate struggle‚. He has also made use
of alliteration and assonance (ºd/t‚, ºs‚, ºl‚), giving the English an added
sense of emphasis.
Finally, pattern repetition may give rise to rhymes where the roots involved
have radicals with the same final one or two letters. Sometimes such rhyme -
like some examples of rhyme elsewhere – will be best ignored in the English
translation. An example of this is  ﻣــﺸـﺮوع اﻟﺘــﻮﺣـﻴــﺪ واﻟﺘـﺠــﺪﻳﺪtranslated as
ºthe project of unification and reform‚ (from a Lebanese newspaper article
dealing with changes in the Lebanese Phalange Party). Elsewhere something
more striking may be called for in the English TT, such as alliteration,
assonance or rhyme, or possibly an appropriate English cliché, as in the case
of the formulaic  ,ﻓﻲ اﻟﺴـﺮاء واﻟﻀـﺮاءwhich might be translated as ºin good
times or bad‚.

42
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
PRACTICAL  8
Practical  8.2  Lexical item repetition
Assignment
(i)
Paying particular attention to lexical item repetition in the ST, discuss
the strategic decisions that you have to take before starting detailed
translation of the following text, and outline and justify the strategy
you adopt. Your translation should be aimed at an educated, but non-
specialist readership, and will be published as a book.
(ii)
Translate the text into English.
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail you made in producing your translation.
Contextual information
The ST is a from a book entitled  اﻟـﻌـــــﺴﻜـﺮ واﳊـﻜﻢ ﻓـﻲ اﻟﺒـﻠﺪان اﻟـﻌـــــﺮﺑـﻴـــــﺔby
( ﻓـــــﺆاد اﺳــــﺤـــــﺎق اﳋـــــﻮريHumphrys 1999: 10). It deals with the relationship
between political power and the military in the Arab world and is aimed at
the interested non-specialist reader.
ST
إن اﻟﺘـــﻤــﻴـــﻴـــﺰ اﻟﻄﺒـــﻘﻲ ﺑﲔ اﻟـﻀــﺒـــﺎط واﻟﻌـــﺴﻜﺮ ﻳﺘـــﺄﺛﺮ إﻟـﻰ ﺣــﺪ ﻛـــﺒــﻴـــﺮ
ﲟﺴـــﺘـــﻮى اﻟـﺘﻜﻨـﻮﻟﻮﺟـــﻴـــﺎ ﻟﻠﺠـــﻴـﺶ. ﺧُـــﺬ ﻣـــﺜـــﻼً ﻋﻠﻰ ذﻟـﻚ ﻧﺴـــﺒـــﺔ اﳉﻨـﻮد إﻟﻰ
اﻟﻀــﺒــﺎط. إن ﻧﺴــﺒــﺔ اﳉﻨـﻮد ﻟﻠﻀــﺒــﺎط ﻓﻲ اﳉــﻴــﻮش اﳌﺘــﺨﻠﻔــﺔ ﺗـﻜﻨﻮﻟﻮﺟــﻴــﺎً
ﺗـﻔـــــﻮق ﺑﻜـﺜـــــﻴـــــﺮ )ﺣـــــﻮاﻟـﻲ ٥١ ﺟﻨـﺪﻳﺎً ﻟـﻜـﻞ ﺿـــــﺎﺑﻂ( اﻟـﻨﺴــــــﺒـــــﺔ اﳌﻮﺟـــــﻮدة ﻓـﻲ
اﳉــــــﻴــــــﻮش اﻷﺧـــــﺮى واﻟـﺘﻲ ﺗـﺘــــــﺮاوح ﺑﲔ ٤ أو ٥ ﺟـﻨـﻮد ﻟﻜـﻞ ﺿـــــﺎﺑـﻂ. ﻛـﻠﻤــــــﺎ
ارﺗﻔـــﻌﺖ ﻧﺴـــﺒـــﺔ اﳉﻨﻮد اﻟﻰ اﻟـﻀــﺒـــﺎط، اﻧﺨـــﻔﺾ ﻣــﺴـــﺘـــﻮى اﻟﺘﻜﻨـﻮﻟﻮﺟــﻴـــﺎ،
واﻟﻌﻜﺲ ﺻﺤﻴﺢ.

9
Sentential issues in
translation:
Supplement
_______________________________
9.2 THE SENTENTIAL LEVEL
As noted in § 9.2, a sentence can be defined as a complete, self-contained and
ready-made vehicle for communication: nothing needs to be added before it
can be uttered and understood in concrete situations.
From a more theoretical perspective, the difference between what we
termed a syntactic sentence in the Supplement (Ch. 8.2.0) and a sentence in
the full sense, as we are using it here, is as follows: a syntactic sentence is
just a collection of words arranged in a grammatical pattern, whereas a
sentence (in the full sense) is more than this. This is evident in spoken
language. Any spoken sentence has in addition to the words it contains a
particular intonation pattern; in fact it is virtually impossible to speak a
sentence without some features of rhythm and stress, and where these are
artificially removed, as can be done with synthetic speech, the results are
almost incomprehensible (indeed, even where such intonation features are
not fully developed – as is sometimes the case with artificial speech on
telephone answering services –  the results are extremely odd).
That a sentence is more than a collection of words arranged in a grammatical
pattern is also evident from the fact that in grammatical terms (as we have
described them in Ch. 8.2.0.1.1), ºThey stopped the car at three-o-clock‚ and
ºAt three-o-clock they stopped the car‚ are identical (i.e. they both consist of
a main clause ºThey stopped the car‚ plus a subordinate element ºat three-o-
clock‚). They are clearly not, however, identical in terms of word order. Nor,
as we shall see (§ 9.2.2, 9.2.2.2) are they identical in terms of the weighting
they give to the bits of information conveyed.
We should note here, that although this chapter deals with sentential

44
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
issues in translation, it is often impossible both in translation and in linguistic
analysis to consider one sentence in isolation from other surrounding sentences.
Discussion at various points in the chapter will therefore sometimes go beyond
the level of the single sentence, with the intention, however, of explicating
features at the level of the individual sentence.
9.2.2  Theme and rheme
In terms of overall ºinformation structure‚ theme and rheme can be looked at
in two ways. The first is as a cline, or continuous progression. Thus, in a
sentence ºAyatollah Khomeini was the son of a cleric‚, it is possible to think
of there being a continuous progression throughout the sentence from the
most predictable information ºAyatollah Khomeini‚ to the most unpredictable
information ºa cleric‚. Elements at various stages on this cline are sometimes
said to differ in terms of their ºcommunicative dynamism‚ (cf. Baker 1992:
161-4).
The second way of thinking about theme and rheme is in terms of discrete
chunks. Thus, in ºWhen she got there, the cupboard was bare‚, it makes
sense to regard ºthe cupboard was bare‚ as the overall rhematic (i.e. less
predictable) chunk, in contrast to ºWhen she got there‚, which is the overall
thematic (i.e. more predictable) chunk. Within each chunk one can make
further analysis of a theme-rheme nature. Thus, within ºthe cupboard was
bare‚, we can think of ºthe cupboard‚ as being theme (ºtheme-within-rheme‚),
and ºbare‚ (or ºwas bare‚, perhaps) as being rheme (ºrheme-within-rheme‚).
In some cases it might be possible to set up multiple ºChinese boxes‚ of this
nature. Alternatively, it is possible to combine chunk and cline analyses; so
having got our two chunks, ºWhen she was there‚ and ºthe cupboard was
bare‚, we might prefer to analyze each of these further in terms of a theme-
to-rheme cline, rather than through additional chunking.
The question of clines vs. chunks is interesting from a theoretical linguistic
point of view, and solutions to the apparent incompatibility of the two
approaches could be pursued there. From the point of view of translation
practice, it is reasonable to mix the two approaches, and adopt whichever one
seems more appropriate for the particular problem in hand.
9.2.2.3  Basic theme-rheme translation issues
One particularly interesting feature of Arabic from the point of view of
theme and rheme is the distinction between clauses and sentences which
have Verb-first word order (e.g. Verb-Subject-Object word order), and clauses
and sentences which have Subject-first word order (e.g. Subject-Verb-Object
word order). This is of greater relevance to English>Arabic translation than

Sentential issues in translation: Supplement
45
to Arabic>English translation, since there it normally makes no difference to
the standard English word order which places the subject before the verb
whether an Arabic text has the verb first or something else first.
We can term texts which deal with the real world in a fairly neutral way
ºempirical‚ texts (cf. §. 13.2). Within such empirical texts, we can also make
a fairly traditional distinction between narrative texts on the one hand, i.e.
those texts which describe events, and descriptive or conceptual texts on the
other, i.e. those elements which describe static scenes or abstract relationships.
In Arabic, narrative texts (and narrative sections of texts) tend to use Verb-first
word order, and descriptive and conceptual texts (and descriptive/conceptual
sections of texts) tend to use Subject-first word order. The initial sentence
element in these cases reflects the general orientation of the text in question.
Narrative texts are action-oriented (or event-oriented), actions (or events)
being expressed through the use of verbs. In narrative texts (or sections of
text) the event is accordingly more predictable than the other elements (if we
are tell a story, for example, we know that things will happen). Descriptive
and  conceptual texts (or sections of text), on the other hand, are scene-oriented,
static scenes being expressed through the use of nouns. In such texts (or
sections of text) the characters or features involved are more predictable than
the other elements (if we are describing a scene, we know that there will be
features of the scene to be described).
In a narrative action-oriented text, or section of text, therefore, the writer
tends to begin a clause by presenting an event (i.e. the verb, which is presented
as predictable information) and then saying something about those involved
in the event (i.e. the characters, or entities referred to by the subject, object,
etc., which is presented as unpredictable information). In a descriptive or
conceptual scene-oriented text, or section of text, the writer tends begin a
clause by presenting a character, feature or entity (i.e. a subject noun, which
is presented as given information) and then saying something about this
character, feature or entity (using a verb with a possible object, or a predicate
noun, etc., which is presented as new information).
Consider the following text from ( ﻣﺠﻠﺔ اﻟﺸﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂOctober 11,1994)
about the satirical Palestinian cartoonist  ,ﻧﺎﺟـﻲ اﻟﻌـﻠﻲwho was murdered by
an unidentified gunman in London in 1987. Relevant verbs and subjects are
put in curly brackets, and labelled verb or subject.
}وﻟﺪverb{ }ﻧﺎﺟـﻲ اﻟﻌـﻠﻲsubject
 { ﻓﻲ ﻗـــــﺮﻳﺔ »اﻟـﺸــــﺠـــــﺮة« ﻋــــﺎم1936، وﻫﻲ
ﻗـــﺮﻳﺔ ﺗـﻘﻊ ﺑﲔ اﻟـﻨﺎﺻـــﺮة وﻃﺒــــﺮﻳﺎ ﻓﻲ اﳉﻠـﻴﻞ اﻟﺸــــﻤـــﺎﻟﻲ ﺑﻔـﻠﺴﻄـﲔ، وﺑﻌـــﺪ
إﺑﻌــﺎده ﻋـﺎم 48 ﻣﻊ ﻋــﺎﺋـﻠﺘــﻪ ﻧﺤــﻮ اﳉـﻨﻮب اﻟﻠﺒﻨـﺎﻧﻲ ﻋــﺎش ﺣــﻴــﺎﺗـﻪ ﻓﻲ »ﻋﲔ
اﳊﻠﻮة« ﻓﻲ ﺧﻴﻤﺔ ﺻﻐﻴﺮة وزﻋﺘﻬﺎ وﻛﺎﻟﺔ اﻟﻐﻮث اﻟﺪوﻟﻴﺔ .
وﻗـﺪ }ﻛـﺎﻧﺖverb{ }ﺣـﻴـﺎﺗﻪ ﺗﻠﻚsubject{، ﺑﲔ اﳋـﻴـﺎم، ﻣـﺼـﺪر إﻟﻬـﺎﻣـﻪ ﻓﻲ
رﺳــﻮﻣـــﻪ ﻓﻲ ﻣــﺎ ﺑـﻌــﺪ، ﺷـــﺎرﺣــﺎً ﺣــﻴـــﺎة اﻟﺬل اﻟﺘﻲ ﻋـــﺎﺷــﻬـــﺎ وﻗــﺎﺳـــﺎﻫﺎ ﺷــﻌـــﺒــﻪ
ﻫـﻨـﺎك. وﺑـﻌـــــــــــﺪ ﺣــــــــــﺼـــــــــــﻮﻟـﻪ ﻋـﻠـﻰ ﺷـــــــــــﻬــــــــــﺎدة دﺑــﻠـﻮم اﳌـﻴـﻜـﺎﻧـﻴـﻜـﺎ، }دﺧـﻞverb
{

46
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
}ﻧﺎﺟﻲsubject
 { أﻛــــﺎدﳝﻴـــﺔ اﻟـﻔﻨـﻮن ﻓﻲ ﻟﺒـﻨﺎن، اﻟﺘـﻲ ﻗﻄﻌــــﻬـــﺎ ﻋــــﺎم63 ﺣـــﻴﺚ
ﺳــﺎﻓــﺮ اﻟـﻰ اﻟﻜﻮﻳﺖ، ﻟﻴـــﻌــﻤﻞ ﻓﻲ ﺻــﺤــﻴـــﻔــﺔ »اﻟﻄﻠﻴـــﻌــﺔ« اﻟﻜﻮﻳﺘـــﻴــﺔ رﺳــﺎﻣــﺎً
وﻣﺨﺮﺟﺎً ﻓﻨﻴﺎ.
]...[
و}ﺳﺮ ﳒﺎح ﻧﺎﺟﻲ اﻟﻌﻠﻲsubject{ }ﻳﻨﺤﺼﺮverb
،{ ﻓﻲ ﻋﻔﻮﻳﺘـﻪ اﻟﺼﺎدﻗﺔ
اﻟﺘﻲ ﻟﻢ ﻳﻌــﻬـﺪﻫﺎ اﻟﻔﻦ اﻟﺴــﺎﺧـﺮ اﻟﻌـﺮﺑﻲ. و}ﻋـﻔــﻮﻳﺘـﻪsubject{ }ﺗﻨﻄﻠﻖverb
{
ﻣﻦ ﺧـــﻼل رﺳــﻮم ﻣﻠـﺘــﺰﻣـــﺔ، ﺗﻠﻤﺲ اﳉـــﺮح اﻟﻔﻠـﺴﻄﻴﻨـﻲ واﻟﻌــﺮﺑـﻲ ﺑﺴــﻬـــﻮﻟﺔ
ﻗﺎﺳﻴﺔ.
In sentences which contain both a verb and a subject, the verb in this extract
comes first in the narrative sections (paragraphs 1 and 2), which relate aspects
of ‚ﻧــﺎﺟـﻲ اﻟــﻌـﻠــﻲs life. In descriptive/conceptual sections (paragraph 3), by
contrast, the verb comes before the subject. It will also be seen that the word
order subject-verb in the conceptual sections mirrors the word order subject-
predicate which occurs in sentences without a main verb (e.g. وﻫﻲ ﻗﺮﻳﺔ ﺗﻘﻊ
 ﺑﲔ اﻟﻨﺎﺻـﺮة وﻃﺒــﺮﻳﺎ ﻓﻲ اﳉﻠﻴﻞ اﻟﺸـﻤـﺎﻟﻲ ﺑـﻔﻠﺴﻄﲔin the first sentence of
this text; here  ﻫﻲis the subject and ...  ﻗﺮﻳﺔis the predicate). Since sentences
without a main verb are common in description and conceptual exposition,
and since the verb in subject-verb sentences is also a kind of predicate, it will
be seen that the general standard word order for description and conceptual
exposition tends to be subject-predicate. For further discussion of these issues,
see Holes (1995: 265–6); also Dickins and Watson (1999: 348–50).
It is also worth stressing that what is important here is the type of material,
not the tense of the verb. Thus, while description and conceptual exposition
tend to have imperfect ( )ﻣﻀﺎرعverbs in Arabic, and tend to have subject-verb
word order, not all types of text involving imperfect verbs will have this
word order. Where the imperfect verbs express repeated action or are used to
describe narrative (imperfect describing past events, for example), the word
order will tend to be verb first. This can be seen in the text from ﻋﺮس اﻟﺰﻳﻦ
(Practical 7.2). Here all the verbs except the first verb in the text are in the
imperfect. The word order throughout, however, is verb-subject.
It is worth noting that apparently not all distinctions between the use of
verb-first structures, and subject-first structures can be explained in terms of
theme-rheme features. Consider the following from a short story by the Iraqi
writer ( ﻣﺤﻤﻮد اﻟﻈﺎﻫﺮquoted in Somekh 1991: 32):
اﳋـﻴــﻮط اﻟﺮﻣــﺎدﻳﺔ ﺑﺪأت ﺗﺴـﻮدّ .. ﻗــﺼﺺ اﻟﻠﻴـﻞ ﻣـﺨـﻴــﻔـﺔ ﺟــﺪا .. اﻣـﻪ ﻗــﺎﻟﺖ
ﻟﻪ: اﻟﺸــﻴـﺎﻃﲔ ﺗﺨــﺮج ﻟﻴـﻼ ﻟﺘــﺤـﺎرب ﺑﻌـﻀــﻬـﺎ اﻟﺒـﻌـﺾ. ﺳـﺮت رﺟـﻔــﺔ ﺧـﻮف
ﻓﻲ ﺟـﺴﻤـﻪ اﻟﺼـﻐـﻴﺮ. وﻏـﺎﺻﺖ ﻗـﺪﻣﺎه ﻓـﻲ اﻟﺮﻣﺎل. واﻟﺪه أﻛـﺪ ﻷﺑﻨﺎء اﻟﻘـﺮﻳﺔ
ﺑﺄﻧﻪ ﺣــﺎرب اﳉﻦ ﻓﻲ ﻧـﻮﻣـﻪ وﻳـﻘﻈﺘــﻪ. ﻗـﺮوﻧـﻬﻢ ﻣــﻌـﻘــﻮﻓــﺔ وﺣــﺎدة. اﻟﺸــﻴﺦ ﻟﻢ
ﻳﻜﺬب ﻓﻲ ﻫﺬه اﳌﺮة. ﻫﺬا ﺻﺤﻴﺢ.

Sentential issues in translation: Supplement
47
This can be translated as follows:
The gray threads were beginning to darken. How frightening are the tales
of the night. His mother had said to him: ºThe devils come out at night to
fight each other‚. A shudder passed through his little body, and his feet
sank deep into the sand. His father used to tell the villagers that he fought
against the jinns both asleep and awake. Their horns were crooked and
sharp. In this case the old man wasn‚t lying; it was true.
This text mainly depicts the thoughts and feelings of a village boy, haunted
by the fear of jinns as night approaches. As Somekh (1991: 32) notes, wherever
the text can be taken as expressing the boy‚s thoughts (whether these provide
general descriptions of exterior events, such as the first clause اﳋـــــــــــــﻴـــــــــــــﻮط
 ,اﻟﺮﻣــﺎدﻳﺔ ﺑـﺪأت ﺗﺴــﻮدّor more psychologically oriented judgements such as
 )اﻟﺸﻴﺦ ﻟﻢ ﻳﻜﺬب ﻫﺬه اﳌﺮةthe word order is subject-first. However, wherever
the text describes exterior events from a neutral standpoint (or from the point
of view of the narrator, as in traditional narrative), the word order used is
verb-first (e.g.  ,)ﺳـﺮت رﺟﻔـﺔ ﺧﻮف ﻓﻲ ﺟـﺴـﻤﻪ اﻟﺼـﻐﻴـﺮas one would expect
in a standard narrative context.
Another context in which theme-rheme considerations seem irrelevant to
word order is newspaper headlines. Here the word order is always Subject-first
(where there is a verb in the headline), notwithstanding the fact that news
stories are unambiguous examples of Arabic narrative texts (cf. Dickins and
Watson 1999: 154). In fact, in general, there seems to be a greater tendency
for Modern Standard Arabic to  make use of structures in which the subject
precedes the verb than did Classical Arabic, a phenomenon which may reflect
the tendency towards subject-first structures in at least some Arabic dialects.
9.2.4  Interaction of theme-rheme and main-subordinate elements
While it may be that in most cases subordinate clauses in rheme position (i.e.
towards the end of the phrase or sentence) convey information which is both
backgrounded and relatively unpredictable, in some cases this expectation is
not fulfilled. Consider the following example from English:
Where a society regularly uses two or more languages to carry out its
affairs, we can speak of societal bilingualism. The restriction of each
language to certain areas is referred to as geographical bilingualism. In
parts of Belgium, for instance, French is spoken as a first language, {whereas
Flemish is natively spoken elsewhere}; and both languages have official
status. Some people, of course, will be bilingual; and in most bilingual
societies, one language-group is more bilingual, at the individual level,
than the other (Leith 1983: 12; cited in Sekine 1996: 83).
Here, the information conveyed by the phrase ºwhereas Flemish is natively

48
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
spoken elsewhere‚ is unpredictable, but it is not, as one would have expected
from the fact that it is subordinate and rhematic, backgrounded. In this context,
neither French nor Flemish has been previously discussed, and the text does
not go on to discuss either of them subsequently. In fact, it would seem
perfectly possible to reverse the occurrences of ºFrench‚ and ºFlemish‚ without
materially altering the information conveyed by the text. Thus: ºIn parts of
Belgium, Flemish is spoken as a first language, whereas French is natively
spoken elsewhere‚ seems little different from the version in the actual text. In
this case, the relationship between the information conveyed by the main
clause and that conveyed by the subordinate clause is roughly one of equality
in terms of degree of foregrounding/backgrounding. In this respect, the balance
of information is more like that typically conveyed by coordination than that
conveyed by subordination.
As noted in § 9.2.4, reversal of the subordination structure is a fairly common
strategy for dealing with cases in which rhematic subordinate clauses in
Arabic convey foreground information. An example is the following extract,
from the start of a newspaper article, which we have seen previously in Ch.
5.2.1 (from Al-Jubouri 1984):
ﻓﻲ اﺳــﺘﻄﺎﻋــﺔ أي ﺣــﺰب أن ﻳﻨﺠـﺢ إذا داﻓﻊ ﻋﻦ ﻗــﻀــﻴـﺔ اﳊــﺮﻳﺔ وﺣــﻘــﻮق
اﻹﻧﺴــﺎن، إذا اﺣـﺘـﻀـﻦ ﻛﻞ ﻣﻈﻠﻮم، إذا ﻗــﺎوم اﻟﻔـﺴــﺎد، إذا ﺿـﺮب اﻷﻣــﺜﻠﺔ ﻓﻲ
اﻟﻘــﺪوة اﻟﺼــﺎﳊــﺔ، إذا ﺣـﻮّل اﻟﻜـﻠﻤـﺎت إﻟـﻰ اﻓـﻌــﺎل واﻟﻮﻋــﻮد إﻟﻰ ﺣــﻘــﺎﺋﻖ. ﻛﻞ
ﺣـﺰب ﻳﻘﻒ إﻟﻰ ﺟـﺎﻧﺐ اﻟﺸـﻌﺐ ﻳﻘـﻒ اﻟﺸـﻌﺐ إﻟﻰ ﺟـﺎﻧﺒـﻪ ﻳﺤـﻴﻂ ﺑﻪ ﻋﻨﺪﻣـﺎ
ﺗُﻮﺟﱠﻪ إﻟﻰ ﻇﻬﺮه اﳋﻨﺎﺟﺮ وإﻟﻰ ﺻﺪره اﳌﺪاﻓﻊ واﻟﺴﻴﻮف.
For any political party to succeed it must be prepared to stand up for
freedom of expression and human rights, to protect the weak, to oppose
corruption, to set itself the highest standards, and to act according to these
standards. Any party which supports and defends the people will find that
it is supported and defended by the people.
Compare this translation with a more literal one:
It is possible for any political party to succeed if it is prepared to stand up
for freedom of expression and human rights, to protect the weak, to oppose
corruption, to set itself the highest standards, and to act according to these
standards. Any party which supports and defends the people will find that
it is supported and defended by the people.
This more literal translation sounds slightly odd because the information
presented in the rhematic subordinate clause beginning ºif it is prepared‚
seems too important to the overall development of the text to be backgrounded
in this way.
As also discussed in § 9.2.4, one strategy for dealing with unpredictable
foreground information which is conveyed by a rhematic subordinate clause

Sentential issues in translation: Supplement
49
in Arabic is to translate the Arabic rhematic subordinate clause as a separate
sentence in English. Sentences are ºinformationally independent‚.  This  strategy
can be further illustrated by the following extract from a magazine article
about music in Islamic Spain:
ﺛﻢ ﺟـﺎء ﻋـﺒــﺪ اﻟﺮﺣـﻤﻦ اﻟﺜـﺎﻧﻲ ﻓـﺮﻓﻊ ﻣـﻦ ﻗـﻴـﻤـﺔ اﻟﻄﺮب واﳌﻮﺳـﻴــﻘﻰ ﺑﻌـﺪ أن
اﺳـــﺘـــﻀــــﺎف أﺷـــﻬـــﺮ ﻣـــﻮﺳـــﻴـــﻘـﻲ ﻓﻲ ﺗﺎرﻳـﺦ اﳌﻮﺳـــﻴـــﻘـﻰ اﻟﻌـــﺮﺑـﻴـــﺔ »زرﻳﺎب«
}اﻟﺬي{ ﻛــــﺎن أول ﻣﻦ ﲡــــﺮأ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗـﻄﻮﻳﺮ اﳌـﻮﺳـــﻴــــﻘﻰ اﻟﻌــــﺮﺑﻴــــﺔ اﻟﺘﻲ ﻛــــﺎﻧﺖ
ﺗﻌﺘـﺒﺮ آﻟﺔ اﻟﻌﻮد ﻣﻦ أﻫﻢ اﻵﻻت، ﻓﻘـﺎم ﺑﺈﺿﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻮﺗﺮ اﳋـﺎﻣﺲ إﻟﻴﻪ ﻟﻴﻄﻮر
إﻣﻜﺎﻧﻴـﺎت أداﺋﻪ }ﺑـﻌـﺪ أن{ ﻛـﺎﻧﺖ ﻫﺬه اﻵﻟﺔ ﺗﻘـﺘـﺼـﺮ ﻓـﻘـﻂ ﻋﻠﻰ أرﺑﻌـﺔ أوﺗﺎر
ﻟﻌﺼﻮر ﻃﻮﻳﻠﺔ.
A possible English translation of this is as follows:
He [Abd al-Rahman the First] was followed by Abd al-Rahman the Second,
who further raised the status of music by bringing to his court the most
famous musician in Arab history, Ziryab. {Ziryab} pioneered the
development of Arabic music by adding a fifth string to its most important
instrument, the Oud, thereby greatly increasing its potential musical range.
For many generations {previously} the Oud had been limited to four
strings only.
Here the Arabic relative clause introduced by  اﻟﺬيis converted into a second
sentence, introduced and related back to the first sentence by the repetition of
the name Ziryab. The subsequent temporal clause in Arabic introduced by
  ﺑــﻌـــــــــــــــــﺪ أنis also converted into a separate sentence in English, the word
ºpreviously‚ being used to provide the appropriate temporal relationship.
This example and the previous one also illustrate the tendency in Arabic to
make use of multiple subordinate clauses introducing rhematic but
foregrounded information. The standard relative pronoun ( اﻟـﺬيand related
forms), and the clausal relative markers  اﻷﻣــــﺮ اﻟﺬيand ( ﳑﺎcf. Dickins and
Watson 1999: 235) are particularly commonly used in this way.

50
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
9.3  DENOTATIVE ASPECTS OF SUBORDINATION
From a denotative point of view the information contained in a subordinate
or element can be regarded as subordinate to the information contained in the
main clause in that the former normally qualifies the latter. Consider the
following:
1. Tom screamed until the police arrived.
2. Tom screamed once until the policy arrived.
3. Tom screamed, and eventually the police arrived.
4. Tom screamed once, and eventually the police arrived.
Example 1. here is readily interpretable as meaning that Tom screamed and
carried on screaming until the police arrived. Example 3. is, without further
context, ambiguous between Tom screaming once and then eventually the
police arriving, and Tom continuing to scream until the police arrived. Example
4. obviously only allows the interpretation that Tom screamed once. Example
2., however, is odd, since the information given in the subordinate clause,
and particularly that given by ºuntil‚ (i.e. continuity of action) cannot coherently
qualify the information given in the main clause, and particularly that given
by ºonce‚ (i.e. a single completed action). The result is a ºlogical‚ or denotative
contradiction. Example 2. can be contrasted particularly with example 4. in
which the coordinating conjunction ºand‚ is used (together with ºeventually‚).
Here the grammar of English does not require that the information contained
in the second clause – in this case a second main clause introduced by ºand‚
– qualify in this way the information contained in the first clause. The
second clause º[and] eventually the police arrived‚ does not, therefore, force
an interpretation that the screaming continued right up to the arrival of the
police; and there is therefore no contradiction between the use of ºonce‚ in
the first clause and the use of º[and] eventually‚ in the second clause.
The principle that the information contained in a subordinate clause or
element is subordinate to the information contained in the main clause in that
the former qualifies the latter seems to be largely upheld in both Arabic and
English. There are, nonetheless, occasions in both languages where this
principle does not hold true; these seem to be commoner in Arabic than in
English.
Consider the following which comes at the end of a newspaper article
about the life of ( ﻃﻪ ﺣــﺴﲔfrom  ,اﻟﺸــﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂOct. 24, 1992; in Dickins
and Watson 1999: 469-471). The subordinate clause of particular interest is
placed in curly brackets:
ﻋـــﺎش د. ﻃـﻪ ﺣـــﺴـﲔ ٤٨ ﻋـــﺎﻣــــﺎ ﻣﻨﺪ ﻣــــﻮﻟﺪه ﻓﻲ ٤١ ﻧـﻮﻓـــﻤــــﺒـــﺮ ٩٨٨١ وﺣــــﺘﻰ
رﺣــﻴـﻠﻪ ﻓﻲ ٨٢ أﻛـــﺘــﻮﺑﺮ )ﺗـﺸــﺮﻳﻦ اﻻول( ٣٧٩١. ﺻـــﺎدف ﺧــﻼﻟﻬـــﺎ اﻟﻌـــﺪﻳﺪ ﻣﻦ

Sentential issues in translation: Supplement
51
اﶈﻦ واﻟـﻌــﻘـــﺒـــﺎت ﻛـــﺎن أوﻟﻬـــﺎ ﻓــﻘـــﺪان اﻟﺒـــﺼـــﺮ وﻫﻮ ﻣـــﺎ زال ﻃﻔـــﻼ وﻟﻜﻨـﻪ ﻟﻢ
ﻳﻴﺄس أﺑﺪا }إﻟﻰ أن وﺻﻞ اﻟﻰ أﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺪرﺟﺎت اﻟﻌﻠﻤﻴﺔ{.
An initial translation of this might be along the following lines:
Born on November 14, 1889, Taha Hussein lived until he was eighty-four,
eventually dying on October 14, 1973. During this time, he had to deal
with numerous trials and tribulations, the first of which was losing his
sight when he was still a young boy. However, he never despaired {until
he reached the pinnacle of scholarly achievement}.
In fact, the final sentence of the English gives an entirely different sense to
that intended by the Arabic; it suggests that when Taha Hussein reached the
pinnacle of scholarly achievement he despaired. This is because the information
contained in the phrase ºuntil he reached the pinnacle of scholarly achievement‚
qualifies – i.e. limits the validity of – the information contained in the main
clause ºhe never despaired‚ and particularly that expressed by the word ºnever‚.
The same qualification – or limitation – does not obtain when the coordination
conjunction ºand‚ is used instead of the subordinating ºuntil‚. Thus, ºHowever,
he never despaired, and ultimately he reached the pinnacle of scholarly
achievement‚ retains the intended sense of the Arabic ST.
A similar, but less extreme, example is provided by the following (Brown
1996: 53):
وﻣﻊ ﺣـﻠﻮل اﳌـﺴـــﺎء، ﻛــــﺎن ﻗــــﺪ ﻧـﺎل ﻣﻨﻪ اﻟـﺘــــﻌﺐ ﻓــــﻌــــﺎد اﻟﻰ »اﻟـﻌﻠﻴــــﺔ« واﻟـﻘﻰ
ﺑﻨﻔـﺴﻪ ﻋﻠـﻰ اﻻرض }ﺣﺘﻰ ﺑﺰوغ اﻟﻔـﺠـﺮ{. ﺛﻢ ﻧﻬﺾ وﻗﺪ اﺣـﺲ ﺑﻈﻬﺮه ﻛـﺄﻧﻪ
ﻟﻮح ﻣﻦ اﳋﺸﺐ.
An initial translation of this might be:
With the advent of evening, tiredness had taken hold of him, so he returned
to the Upper Room and flung himself on the ground {until dawn}. Then
he rose to discover that his back was as rigid as a plank of wood.
In fact, the actual TT reads:
With the advent of evening, tiredness had taken hold of him, so he returned
to the Upper Room and flung himself on the ground. {He lay there until
dawn} then rose to discover that his back was as rigid as a plank of wood.
Here the translator has avoided the implication of the initial translation given
above that the character in question continued to fling himself on the ground
until dawn by placing the equivalent of  ﺣـــﺘـﻰ ﺑﺰوغ اﻟﻔــــﺠـــﺮin the following
sentence. It is thus no longer subordinate to the information expressed by
º[he] flung himself on the ground‚, and therefore does suggest an interpretation

52
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
of the character‚s continuous flinging of himself on the ground until dawn.
In fact, there are occasions, even in English, when the principle of ºdenotative
subordination‚ does not seem to hold true. Thus a passage describing the life
of Ayatollah Khomeini contains the sentence, ºHe then moved to Qom, the
religious capital of Iran, until heart problems forced him to return to Tehran
where he lived in the northern suburbs for the rest of his life‚ (cf. Dickins
and Watson 1999: 462). Here, we are not expected to interpret the sentence
as meaning that Ayatollah Khomeini moved continually to Qom until heart
problems forced him to return to Tehran, which would be the logical
interpretation if the principle of ºdenotative subordination‚ operated rigorously
in English.
PRACTICAL  9
Practical 9.3  Coordination in Arabic narratives
Assignment
Consider the following short Arabic ST and the two possible English TTs
which follow it. Identify and briefly discuss coordinating and subordinating
conjunctions in the (a) the original Arabic ST, (b) English TT 1, which is
intended to be fairly literal, and closely reproduces the coordination and
subordination patterns of the ST, and (c) English TT 2, which is intended to
be more idiomatic, and incorporates subordinating structures typical of English
narratives.
Contextual information
This passage is an extract from the novel  ﻣـــــــﺪﻳﻨـﺔ اﻟـﺒــــــﻐـﻲby the Palestinian
author ( ﻋـــــﻴـــــﺴﻰ ﺑـﺸـــــﺎرةtaken from Brown 1996: 32). The novel concerns a
young journalist  ,ﺻﺎﺑﺮand his sense of alienation in  ,ﻣـﺪﻳﻨﺔ اﻟﺒـﻐﻲthe ºCity
of Oppression‚, in which he lives. In this short extract  ﺻـــــــــــــــﺎﺑـﺮis with his
mother.

Sentential issues in translation: Supplement
53
ST
وأﺣﻨﻰ رأﺳــﻪ، وﻗـﺒﻞ ﺟـﺒﲔ اﻣــﻪ ﺛﻢ ﺷـﺪ اﻟﻐﻄﺎء ﻋـﻠﻰ ﺟـﺴـﺪﻫﺎ اﻟﻬَــﺮِم وﻃﻠﺐ
ﻣـﻨﻬـــــــﺎ أن ﺗﺨـﻠـﺪ اﻟﻰ اﻟـﻨـﻮم، وراح ﻳﺠـﻠـﺲ ﻓﻲ ﺣـــــــﺠــــــﺮﺗـﻪ ﻻﺟــــــﺘـــــــﺮار آﻻﻣــــــﻪ
وﻋﺬاﺑﺎﺗﻪ اﳌﺘﻮاﺻﻠﺔ.
TT 1
And he bent forward and kissed his mother‚s forehead, then he pulled the
covers over her frail body and told her she must sleep, and he went to sit
down in his bedroom, to brood over his endless grief and pain.
TT 2
He bent forward and kissed his mother‚s forehead, then, pulling the covers
over her frail body, told her that she must sleep. He went and sat in his
bedroom brooding over his endless grief and pain.

10
Discourse and
intertextual issues in
translation:
Supplement
_______________________________
10.3.1  Genre membership
As noted in § 10.3.1, the  ﻣـــــﻘـــــﺎﻣـــــﺔgenre itself has effectively disappeared in
modern Arabic, as has  ﺳـﺠﻊin its pure form). It is, however, possible to find
ﺳــــﺠﻊ-like material in modern literature, and even in some non-literary texts
(cf. Dickins and Watson 1999: 548-9). An example which we saw in Ch.
7.1.1 was the following from the novel  ﻣــــــــــﺪﻳـﻨـﺔ اﻟـﺒــــــــــﻐـﻲby the Palestinian
writer :ﻋﻴﺴﻰ ﺑﺸﺎرة
وﻟﻢ ﻳﻜﻦ ﺑﻮﺳـﻌـﻪ ان ﻳـﻄﻐﻲ ﻧﺎر اﻟﻌﲔ ﺑﺎﻹﻏـﻀـﺎء او ﻳﺨـﻔـﻲ ﺗﻜﺸـﻴـﺮة اﻟﻨﺎب
ﺑﺎﻹﺻﻐﺎء ]...[
This has been translated (Brown 1996: 13) as:
It was not in his power to smother the fire in his heart with indifference
or, by listening, to disguise his grimace.
As noted in Chapter 7, the translator chose here, with good reason, not to
translate the Arabic rhyme into an English rhyme. There are occasions,
however, where ﺳﺠﻊ-like material is acceptably translated into English rhyme.
Consider the following from the historical novel  اﺳــﺪ ﺑﺎﺑﻞby ,ﻧﻮاف ﺣــﺮدان
which deals with the fall of Babylon in the 6th century BC. The novel adopts
a somewhat archaic style in parts. This extract is from an initial introductory
section lamenting the fall of Babylon:

             Discourse and intertextual issues in translation: Supplement
55
ﻛﻴﻒ ﺳـﻘﻄﺖ اﳌﺪﻳﻨﺔ اﻟﻌﻈﻴﻤﺔ اﳊـﺼﻴﻨﺔ؟ ذات اﻻﺳﻮار اﳌﻨﻴـﻌﺔ اﻟﺸﺎﻣـﺨﺔ
.. واﻟﻬﻴـﺎﻛﻞ اﻟﺸﺎرﺧﺔ واﻟﻘﺼـﻮر اﻟﺒﺎذﺧﺔ .. واﳉﻴـﻮش اﳉﺮارة واﻟﺒﻄﻮﻻت
اﻟﻜﺮارة
This has been translated (Morrey 2000: 8-10) as follows:
How could she fall, the Great Invulnerable City? With walls impregnably
towering, temples divinely flowering, palaces proudly glowering, with
armies vast and ferociously grave, heroes cunning and valiantly brave.
Much of the rhyme, parallelism and repetition of the Arabic ST is preserved
in the English TT. However, this is only acceptable because of the archaic
nature of the material, and because the translator has chosen to translate this
material in an archaizing manner reminiscent of the kind of rhyming used
particularly in pre-modern plays. That is to say, although ST is from a
modern novel, the translator has managed to find a TL generic model from
outside the typical form of the modern novel which makes this translation
plausible.
Even where there is a more obviously close correspondence between
genres in Arabic and English, there may be significant genre-related problems
in translating between the two languages. Consider the following example of
English>Arabic translation from Hemingway‚s novella The old man and the
sea  (cited by Abdulla 1994: 69). The original reads:
He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf stream and he
had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish.
Abdulla compares two translations of this, which we can designate TT1 and
TT2:
TT1
ﻛـــﺎن اﻟﺮﺟـﻞ ﻗــﺪ ﺑـﻠﻎ ﻣﻦ اﻟـﻌـــﻤـــﺮ ﻋــﺘـــﻴـــﺎ، وﻟـﻜﻨﻪ ﻻ ﻳـﺰال راﺑﻀـــﺎ ﻓﻲ زورﻗـــﻪ
ﻳﻄﻠﺐ اﻟـﺼـﻴــﺪ ﻓﻲ اﳋﻠﻴـﺞ »ﻏـﻮﻟﻒ ﺳــﺘــﺮﱘ« وﻗـﺪ ﻋــﺒــﺮت ﺑﻪ ﺣـﺘـﻰ اﻟﺴـﺎﻋــﺔ
ارﺑﻌﺔ وﺛﻤﺎﻧﻮن ﻳﻮﻣﺎ ﻟﻢ ﻳﺠﺪ ﻋﻠﻴﻪ اﻟﺒﺤﺮ ﺧﻼﻟﻬﺎ ﺑﺸﻲء ﻣﻦ اﻟﺮزق.
TT2
ﻛـﺎن رﺟﻼ ﻋـﺠـﻮزا ﻳﺼـﻴﺪ اﻟﺴـﻤﻚ وﺣـﺪه ﻓﻲ ﻗـﺎرب ﻋـﺮﻳﺾ اﻟﻘﻌـﺮ ﻓﻲ ﺗﻴـﺎر
اﳋﻠﻴﺞ، وﻛﺎن ﻗﺪ ﺳﻠﺦ ارﺑﻌﲔ ﻳﻮﻣﺎ ﻣﻦ ﻏﻴﺮ ان ﻳﻔﻮز ﺑﺴﻤﻜﺔ واﺣﺪة
Abdulla comments:
Excerpt [TT1] is by Salih Jawdat, a contemporary Arab Romantic

56
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
poet who transports the text into a much more poetic style than
Hemingway would use. A noteworthy indicator is the use of the term
( ﻋﺘﻴﺎºdecrepit‚), an echo from the Qur‚an when Zacharia, addressing
God, asked how he could beget a son when he has grown decrepit
from old age [ :ﻗَـﺪ ﺑَﻠَﻐْﺖُ ﻣِﻦَ اﻟﻜِﺒَﺮِ ﻋِـﺘِﻴﱠـﺎfrom  ,ﺳﻮرة ﻣـﺮﱘv. 8]. The
translator‚s grandiloquence hardly befits Hemingway‚s simple, direct
and secular style. A whole sentence was added, which could be back-
translated as ºhe is still crouching alone in his boat‚, injecting an
element of sentimental suspense by likening the old man to an animal
waiting for prey. The last sentence, back-translated as ºThe sea has
not endowed him with any sustenance‚ is too general and abstract to
match Hemingway‚s preference for the concrete (e.g. ºfish‚ rather
than ºsustenance‚). In sum, the translator has presented Hemingway,
who had established his literary career as a master of an objective,
unadorned style, to his Arab readers as a more romantic writer prone
to religious allusions, high abstractions and verbal redundancy. [...]
[TT2] was made by Munir Ba‚albaki, the compiler of the well-known
English-Arabic dictionary Al-Mawrid [..], and offers a decidedly less
romantic version than [TT1]. In place of the Qur‚anic  ﻋــﺘــﻴــﺎwe have
the Standard Arabic term ( ﻋـﺠـﻮزاºold‚), which however in Classical
Arabic was reserved for women; later in the passage, the translator
shifted inconsistently to the Classical quasi-synonym  .ﺷــﻴﺦThe verb
 ﺳﻠﺦfor becoming weary through the passage of time (literally, ºtake
the skin off the body‚) sticks out as grand Classical style in otherwise
prosaic rendering that comes close to the original even in having the
same number of words (as compared to [TT1] with 37 words).
We thus have a choice between the frankly and consistently high
style of [TT1] versus the more neutral but inconsistent style of [TT2].
While the latter is closer to Hemingway, the former serves to mediate
cultural differences by linking up to the high tradition of Arabic
narrative, which is much more alive today than the corresponding
English high style that Hemingway so roundly repudiated. The
translator‚s stylistic decisions are therefore plainly crucial and should
be carefully weighed throughout the process of translating (Abdulla
1994: 69-70).
10.3.2 Quotation and allusion
A variation on genre membership is imitation, which may shade into parody.
The following provides a small-scale example. This extract is taken from a
section of a magazine article dealing with extremist politico-religious groups
in the Middle East:

             Discourse and intertextual issues in translation: Supplement
57
]...[ وﻛﻞ ﻣــﺠـــﻤــﻮﻋــﺔ ﻳﺮى اﺗـﺒــﺎﻋــﻬــﺎ اﻧﻬـﻢ أوﻟﻴــﺎ اﻟﻠﻪ، وﺟـﻨﺪ اﻟﻠﻪ، واﺻـــﻔــﻴــﺎء
اﻟﻠﻪ، واﺻﺪﻗﺎء اﻟﻠﻪ، واﻟﻨﺎﻃﻘﻮن اﻟﺮﺳﻤﻴﻮن ﺑﺎﺳﻢ اﻟﻠﻪ ]...[
This can be translated (cf. Hetherington 1996: 20) as:
The followers of each group see themselves as the companions of God,
His chosen soldiers and friends – and His official spokesmen.
Most of this Arabic extract uses language which clearly belongs to a religious
register ( ,وﻟﻲpl.   أوﻟـﻴــــــــــﺎءis a traditional word for an Islamic ºsaint‚; ﺟـﻨـﺪ
ºarmy‚ is a word with strong Classical and Islamic overtones: cf.  ,ﺟــــــــــــﻴـﺶ
which is the more normal term for ºarmy‚ in modern Standard Arabic). By
contrast the phrase ...  واﻟﻨﺎﻃـﻘـﻮن اﻟﺮﺳــﻤــﻴــﻮن ﺑﺎﺳﻢºthe official spokesmen
for ...‚ belongs specifically to the language of modern politics. The juxtaposition
is here used to mock the pretensions of the extremist groups which the author
is attacking.
Practical 10.3  Textual restructuring
Assignment
Consider the following ST and the proposed TT of the first paragraph below
it. Identify ways in which the TT is odd in the light both of material in this
chapter on textual restructuring (§ 10.2.1.2) and on the interaction of theme-
rheme and main-subordinate (Ch. 9.2.4). Produce your own revised version
of the TT, dealing with the oddities which you have identified. Translate the
first paragraph of the ST only. (The second paragraph is included here simply
to provide fuller context.)
Note that  ﺑـﻌــــــــــﺪ أنhere has both a temporal and a causal aspect; i.e. the
reason that there is a need to return to the roots of Islam is that western
ideologies have previously emptied Arabic culture of its true contents.
Contextual information
The ST is from the start of a publisher‚s blurb for a book by اﻟــﺼــــــــــــــــــﺎدق
  اﻟﻨﻴﻬﻮمentitled .ﺻﻮت اﻟﻨﺎس ... ﻣﺤﻨﺔ ﺛﻘﺎﻓﺔ ﻣﺰورة

58
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
ST
ﻛﺘﺎب ﻳﺪﻋـﻮ ﻟﻠﻌﻮدة اﻟﻰ ﺟﺬور اﻻﺳﻼم اﻻوﻟﻰ ﻛـﻤﺎ ﻓﻬﻤﻬـﺎ اﳌﺴﻠﻤﻮن ﻓﻲ
ﻋــﻬــﺪ اﻟﺮﺳــﻮل اﻟﻌــﺮﺑﻲ واﻋــﺘــﻤــﺪﻫﺎ اﳋﻠـﻔـﺎء اﻟـﺮاﺷــﺪون ﻣﻦ ﺑﻌــﺪه، }ﺑﻌــﺪ أن{
أﻓﺮﻏﺖ اﻻﻳﺪﻳﻮﻟﻮﺟـﻴﺎت اﻟﻐﺮﺑـﻴﺔ اﻟﺜﻘـﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﻴـﺔ ﻣﻦ ﻣﺤﺘـﻮاﻫﺎ اﻻﺳﺎﺳﻲ
وﻋﺮﱠت اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﻴﺔ ﻣﻦ ﻣﻀﻤﻮﻧﻬﺎ اﻻﺻﻠﻲ.
وﻳﺘــــﺴـــﺎﺋﻞ اﳌﺆﻟـﻒ ﻓﻲ ﻫﺬا اﻟـﻜﺘـــﺎب ﻛــــﻴﻒ ﺧـــﺴـــﺮﻧـﺎ اﶈـــﻴﻂ، وﻛــــﻴﻒ أن
اﻻﺳــﻼم ﻟﻢ ﻳﺤــﻘﻖ رﺳــﺎﻟﺘـﻪ اﻟـﻌـﺎﳌﻴــﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ ﻳـﺪ اﻟﻔـﻘــﻬــﺎء، ﺑﻞ ﺧــﺴـﺮ ﻣــﻌــﺮﻛـﺘــﻪ،
وﻇﻬـﺮت اﻟﺮأﺳﻤﺎﻟـﻴﺔ ﲟﺜـﺎﺑﺔ دﻳﻦ ﻋﺎﳌﻲ ﺑﺪﻳﻞ. وﻳﻨﺎﻗﺶ اﳌﺆﻟﻒ اﻟﻔـﺮق ﺑﲔ
اﻟﺸﻮرى واﻟﺪﳝﻘﺮاﻃﻴﺔ ، أي ﺑﲔ اﳌﺼﻄﻠﺢ اﻻوروﺑﻲ واﳌﺼﻄﻠﺢ اﻻﺳﻼﻣﻲ.
Proposed TT
This book calls for a return to the fundamental roots of Islam, as these
were understood by Muslims in the age of the Arabian apostle, and applied
by the Rightly Guided Caliphs who followed him, since western ideologies
have emptied Arabic culture of its true contents and have destroyed the
authenticity of the Arabic language.

11
Metaphor:
Supplement
_______________________________
11.2.2  The purposes of metaphor
Basing ourselves on Newmark, we can say that metaphor has two purposes, a
denotative-oriented purpose and a connotative-oriented purpose. (Newmark
in fact uses different terminology; he calls these ºreferential purpose‚, and
ºpragmatic purpose‚ respectively.) The denotative-oriented purpose is ºto
describe a mental process or state, a concept, a person, an object, a quality or
action more comprehensively and concisely than is possible in literal or
physical language‚ (Newmark 1988: 104). This analysis of the
denotative–oriented purpose of metaphors is particularly appropriate in the
case of lexicalized metaphors. Thus, if someone says, ºHe lashed out at his
opponent‚, this is a very concise way of saying that ºhe burst into or resorted
to verbal or physical attack‚ (cf. Collins English Dictionary). In the case of
non-lexicalized metaphors, and original metaphors in particular, another
denotative-oriented purpose is often foremost. This is the use of metaphor to
express an open-ended denotation or potential range of denotations. This
open-endedness of interpretation of original metaphors is a function of the
fact that the grounds of a metaphor are often not defined precisely enough by
the context to enable a reader to say exactly what the metaphor means.
The connotative-oriented purpose of metaphor ºis to appeal to the senses,
to interest, to clarify ægraphicallyÆ, to please, to delight, to surprise‚ (Newmark
1988: 104): in short, metaphors tend to carry with them a strong emotional
force. The reason metaphor is able to achieve these effects is a function of
the fact that all metaphors except dead ones have a strong reflected meaning
(Ch.  6.7), original metaphors typically having the strongest reflected meaning.
Metaphorical usages are quite frequently extremely witty. Consider the
following, from a football summary on British radio: ºTottenham were a
marshmallow of a team: sweet, expensive – and downright soft in the middle‚.
Here the summarizer has made use of multiple metaphors to produce a

60
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
memorable and entertaining turn of phrase.
11.2.3  Metaphorical force
On the basis of the above account of metaphor, it is possible to draw up a
scale of metaphorical force as follows:
 L   E   X   I   C  A  L   I    Z   E   D
NON-LEXICALIZED
  *–––––––––––*–––––––––––*–––––––––––*––––––––––*
Dead
     Stock
          Recent      Conventionalized   Original
   
 ––––––––––––––––––––––––––> typically greater metaphorical force
As this diagram shows, there is a typical correlation between non-lexicalized
metaphors and metaphorical strength. Non-lexicalized metaphors tend to be
more striking or forceful or vivid than lexicalized metaphors, at least partly
because of the unpredictability of the meaning of non-lexicalized metaphors.
However, the metaphorical force of conventionalized non-lexicalized
metaphors is typically less than that of original metaphors. Thus metaphors
such as ºvultures are the sharks of the air‚, or ºmy head is a balloon this
morning‚ seem rather weak because it is fairly typical normal to use sharks
as an example of rapacious animals, and there is a general convention in
English that emptiness signifies lack of intelligence or understanding. Similarly,
some non-lexicalized metaphors which were originally quite striking might
be considered hackneyed now because of their frequent repetition. An example
might be John Donne‚s ºNo man is an island‚.
 
Conversely, lexicalized metaphors tend towards the banal because of the
definable and predictable nature of their meaning; often lexicalized metaphors
lose almost all their force, and scarcely recall the more basic meaning of the
word or phrase with respect to which they are metaphorical; i.e. they become
dead metaphors. Even such dead metaphors, however, can be ºdebanalified‚
and rendered vivid. Normally, we would hardly think of ºsift‚ meaning ºexamine
minutely‚ as being a metaphor; ºHe sifted the evidence‚ seems to have little
metaphorical force, and could be classified as a dead metaphor. As soon as
we add ºthrough the fine sieve of his intellect‚ to give ºHe sifted the evidence
through the fine sieve of his intellect‚, however, the original metaphor ºfine
sieve‚ ºresuscitates‚ and renders vivid the non-original metaphor ºsifted‚.
For a fuller treatment of issues involved in the translation of metaphor see
Dickins (forthcoming).

12
Language variety and
translation: register,
sociolect and dialect:
Supplement
_______________________________
12.6  REPRESENTATIONS OF SPEECH IN WRITTEN ARABIC
The examples  ﻣﺶ ﳑـﻜﻦand  ﺑﺎﻟـﻌــــﻤـﻞ واﻟﺼـــــﺒــــﺮ ﻛـﻞ ﺷﻲء ﳑـﻜﻦwhich were
discussed in § 12.5 illustrate two approaches to the representation of
spontaneous speech in written Arabic. The first is to relay speech as it was
actually said, or in the case of fiction, as it might have been said. The second
is to ºconvert‚ the actual or imagined colloquial into Standard Arabic.
One type of writing in which spontaneous speech is regularly represented
is modern fiction. Some writers make regular use of colloquial Arabic in
representing direct speech. The following is from the short story ﻋﺮس اﻟﺰﻳﻦ
by the Sudanese writer ( اﻟﻄـﻴﺐ ﺻــــﺎﻟﺢn.d.: 5). Here the colloquial elements
are in a rural Sudanese dialect of an area on the Nile north of Khartoum.
Since most readers are unlikely to be familiar with this dialect, we have
provided English glosses for the dialect forms in footnotes at the end of the
ST:
 وﻗـــﺪ ﺟــﺎءت ﻛـــﻌـــﺎدﺗﻬـــﺎ ﻗـــﺒﻞ ﺷـــﺮوق- ﻗـــﺎﻟﺖ ﺣﻠـﻴــﻤـــﺔ ﺑـﺎﺋﻌـــﺔ اﻟﻠﱭ ﻵﻣﻨـﺔ
 وﻫﻲ ﺗﻜﻴﻞ ﻟﻬﺎ ﻟﺒﻨﺎً ﺑﻘﺮش:- اﻟﺸﻤﺲ
»ﺳﻤﻌﺖ اﳋﺒﺮ؟ اﻟﺰﻳﻦ ﻣﻮ داﻳﺮ ﻳﻌﺮّس«.1
وﻛـﺎد اﻟﻮﻋـﺎء ﻳﺴـﻘﻂ ﻣـﻦ ﻳﺪي آﻣﻨﺔ. واﺳـﺘـﻐﻠﺖ ﺣﻠﻴـﻤـﺔ اﻧﺸـﻐــﺎﻟﻬـﺎ ﺑﺎﻟﻨﺒـﺄ
ﻓﻐﺸﺘﻬﺎ اﻟﻠﱭ.
ﻛــﺎن ﻓﻨﺎء اﳌـﺪرﺳـﺔ »اﻟـﻮﺳﻄﻰ« ﺳــﺎﻛﻨﺎً ﺧــﺎوﻳـﺎً وﻗﺖ اﻟﻀــﺤﻰ، ﻓــﻘــﺪ اوى

62
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
اﻟﺘــﻼﻣــﻴـﺬ اﻟﻰ ﻓــﺼــﻮﻟﻬﻢ. وﺑﺪا ﻣﻦ ﺑـﻌـﻴــﺪ ﺻــﺒﻲ ﻳﻬــﺮول ﻻﻫﺚ اﻟﻨﻔﺲ، وﻗــﺪ
وﺿـﻊ ﻃﺮف رداﺋـﻪ ﲢﺖ اﺑـﻄﻪ ﺣــــــﺘـﻰ وﻗﻒ اﻣــــــﺎم ﺑـﺎب »اﻟﺴـﻨﺔ اﻟـﺜــــــﺎﻧﻴــــــﺔ«
وﻛﺎﻧﺖ ﺣﺼﺔ اﻟﻨﺎﻇﺮ.
»ﻳﺎ وﻟﺪ ﻳﺎ ﺣﻤﺎر. اﻳﻪ اﺧّﺮك؟«2
:وﳌﻊ اﳌﻜﺮ ﻓﻲ ﻋﻴﻨﻲ اﻟﻄﺮﻳﻔﻲ
»ﻳﺎ اﻓﻨﺪي ﺳﻤﻌﺖ اﳋﺒﺮ؟«3
«»ﺧﺒﺮ ﺑﺘﺎع اﻳﻪ ﻳﺎ وﻟﺪ ﻳﺎ ﺑﻬﻴﻢ؟4
وﻟﻢ ﻳـﺰﻋــــﺰع ﻏـــــﻀﺐ اﻟـﻨﺎﻇﺮ ﻣـﻦ رﺑﺎﻃـﺔ ﺟــــﺄش اﻟـﺼــــﺒﻲ، ﻓـــــﻘــــﺎل وﻫـﻮ ﻳﻜـﺘﻢ
ﺿﺤﻜﺘﻪ:
»اﻟﺰﻳﻦ ﻣﺎش ﻳﻌﻘﺪو ﻟﻪ ﺑﻌﺪ ﺑﺎﻛﺮ«.5
Footnotes
1.  اﻟـﺰﻳـﻦ ﻣــــــــﻮ داﻳـﺮ ﻳـﻌــــــــﺮّسºDoesn‚t Zein want to get married?‚: = ﻣــــــــﻮ
negative particle,   = داﻳﺮºwanting‚, º[he] wants‚.
2. « »ﻳـﺎ وﻟـﺪ ﻳـﺎ ﺣــــــــﻤـــــــــﺎر. اﻳﻪ اﺧّـــــــــﺮك؟ºBoy, donkey, what has made you
late?‚:  = اﻳﻪºwhat‚.
3. « »ﻳـﺎ اﻓﻨـﺪي ﺳـــــﻤـــــﻌـﺖ اﳋـــــﺒـــــﺮ؟ºSir, did you hear the news?‚: = اﻓﻨﺪي
ºSir‚.
4. « »ﺧـﺒــﺮ ﺑﺘـﺎع اﻳﻪ ﻳﺎ وﻟﺪ ﻳﺎ ﺑـﻬـﻴﻢ؟ºNews of what, boy, dumb animal?‚:
 = ﺑﺘﺎعºof‚,  = ﺑﻬﻴﻢºdumb animal‚.
5. .« »اﻟﺰﻳـﻦ ﻣــﺎش ﻳـﻌـــﻘــﺪو ﻟـﻪ ﺑﻌـــﺪ ﺑﺎﻛـــﺮºZein, they‚re going to make the
wedding contract for him the day after tomorrow‚:  = ﻣـــــــــــــﺎشº[they are]
going to‚,  = ﻳﻌﻘﺪوºthey make the wedding contract‚,   = ﺑﺎﻛـﺮºtomorrow‚,
 = ﺑﻌﺪ ﺑﺎﻛﺮºthe day after tomorrow‚.
The following, by contrast, illustrates the use of Standard Arabic for
representing spontaneous speech. This extract is taken from the novel ﻗـﻠـﺐ
 اﻟﻠﻴﻞby ( ﳒـــﻴﺐ ﻣــــﺤـــﻔـــﻮظn.d.: 3). We have placed elements which we will
further discuss below in curly brackets:
: ﻗﻠﺖ وأﻧﺎ اﺗﻔﺤﺼﻪ ﺑﺎﻫﺘﻤﺎم وﻣﻮدة
 }إﻧﻲ{ أﺗﺬﻛﺮك ﺟﻴﺪا .-
اﻧﺤﻨـﻰ ﻗﻠﻴــﻼ ﻓــﻮق ﻣﻜﺘــﺒـﻲ وأﺣــﺪّ ﺑﺼــﺮه اﻟﻐــﺎﺋﻢ . وﺿﺢ ﻟـﻲ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻘــﺮب
ﺿـﻌﻒ ﺑـﺼـﺮه ، ﻧﻈﺮﺗﻪ اﳌﺘــﺴـﻮﻟﺔ ، وﻣـﺤــﺎوﻟﺘـﻪ اﳌﺮﻫـﻘـﺔ ﻻﻟﺘـﻘــﺎط اﳌﻨﻈﻮر ،
وﻗــﺎل ﺑﺼـــﻮت ﺧــﺸﻦ ﻋــﺎﻟﻲ اﻟـﻨﺒــﺮة ﻳﺘـــﺠــﺎﻫﻞ ﻗــﺼــﺮ اﳌـﺴــﺎﻓــﺔ ﺑﲔ وﺟــﻬـــﻴﻨﺎ
وﺻﻐﺮ ﺣﺠﻢ اﳊﺠﺮة اﻟﻐﺎرﻗﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻬﺪوء:
 ﺣﻘﺎ !؟ .. ﻟﻢ }ﺗﻌﺪ{ ذاﻛﺮﺗﻲ }أﻫﻼ ﻟـ{ـﻠﺜﻘﺔ ، ﺛﻢ }أن{ ﺑﺼﺮي ﺿﻌﻴﻒ..-
..  وﻟﻜﻦ أﻳﺎم ﺧﺎن ﺟﻌﻔﺮ ﻻ ﳝﻜﻦ أن ﺗﻨﺴﻰ-
! ﻣﺮﺣﺒﺎ ، اذن ﻓﺄﻧﺖ ﻣﻦ }أﻫﻞ{ ذﻟﻚ اﳊﻲ-
: ﻗﺪﻣﺖ ﻧﻔﺴﻲ داﻋﻴﺎ إﻳﺎه اﻟﻰ اﳉﻠﻮس وأﻧﺎ أﻗﻮل

Language variety and translation: Supplement
63
.  ﻟﻢ ﻧﻜﻦ ﻣﻦ ﺟﻴﻞ واﺣﺪ وﻟﻜﻦ }ﺛﻤﺔ{ أﺷﻴﺎء ﻻ ﺗﻨﺴﻰ-
: ﻓﺠﻠﺲ وﻫﻮ ﻳﻘﻮل
 وﻟﻜـﻨﻲ أﻋـــﺘــــﻘـــﺪ أﻧـﻨﻲ ﺗﻐــــﻴـــﺮت }ﺗﻐــــﻴـــﺮا ﻛـﻠﻴـــﺎً{ وأن اﻟـﺰﻣﻦ وﺿﻊ ﻋـﻠﻰ-
! {وﺟﻬﻲ ﻗﻨﺎﻋﺎ ﻗﺒﻴﺤﺎ }ﻣﻦ ﺻﻨﻌﻪ ﻫﻮ ﻻ ﻣﻦ ﺻﻨﻊ واﻟﺪي
وﻗﺪم ﻧﻔﺴﻪ ﺑﻔﺨﺮ دون ﺣﺎﺟﺔ اﻟﻰ ذﻟﻚ ﻗﺎﺋﻼ :
 اﻟﺮاوي ، ﺟﻌﻔﺮ اﻟﺮاوي ، ﺟﻌﻔﺮ اﺑﺮاﻫﻴﻢ ﺳﻴﺪ اﻟﺮاوي ..-
In this extract not only is the dialogue relayed in Standard Arabic, but also in
a form of Standard Arabic which is quite formal and clearly distinct from
colloquial Arabic. The writer chooses to use   }إﻧﻲ{ أﺗﺬﻛــﺮك ﺟـﻴــﺪاinstead of
أﺗﺬﻛﺮك ﺟـﻴﺪاor even  ,أﻧﺎ أﺗﺬﻛﺮك ﺟـﻴﺪاboth of which would be closer to the
colloquial. Similarly  {ً ﺗـﻐــــــﻴـــــﺮتُ }ﺗـﻐــــــﻴــــــﺮا  ﻛﻠـﻴــــــﺎwith its use of the absolute
accusative (cf. root repetition; Ch. 8.2.3.2) and وﻟﻜﻦ }ﺛـﻤــﺔ{ أﺷـــﻴــﺎء ﻻ ﺗﻨـﺴﻰ
are markedly formal usages (cf. the less formal ,)وﻟﻜﻦ ﻫﻨﺎك أﺷـﻴﺎء ﻻ ﺗﻨﺴﻰ
as is the word order in the phrase { .}ﻣـﻦ ﺻﻨـﻌـــــﻪ ﻫـﻮ ﻻ ﻣﻦ ﺻـﻨﻊ واﻟـﺪيEven
usages such as {ﺛﻢ }أن{  ,}أﻫﻼ ﻟـ{ ,ﻟﻢ }ﺗﻌـــﺪand {( }أﻫﻞin the way in which it
is used here) seem chosen to distance the forms of this extract from those of
colloquial speech.
Some writers choose in their representation of speech to avoid both
colloquial Arabic and a markedly non-colloquial form of Standard Arabic.
There are two ways in which this can be done. The first is to make use of a
form of Arabic which obeys all the grammatical rules of the Standard language,
but which avoids words, phrases, and grammatical usages which are markedly
in contrast with those of colloquial Arabic. The result is a form of Arabic
which has a colloquial feel without being colloquial. This approach was
adopted by the playwright  ﺗﻮﻓﻴﻖ اﳊﻜﻴﻢamongst others.
The second technique is to adopt a form of writing which makes various
concessions to colloquial Arabic, either using a certain number of colloquial
words and phrases, or in the sporadic adoption of colloquial and non-Standard
grammatical forms. Consider the following which is from a book of jokes
entitled  ﻧـﻮادر ﺟـــــﺤــــــﺎrelating to the Middle-Eastern folk-character Juha and
written by ( ﻳـﻮﺳـﻒ ﺳــــــــــــﻌـــــــــــﺪn.d.: 10). Elements of relevance to the current
discussion have been placed in curly brackets:
*
: ﻗﺎﺑﻞ أﺣﺪ اﻟﻔﻼﺣﲔ ﺟﺤﺎ وﺳﺎر ﻣﻌﻪ إﻟﻰ أن وﺻﻞ ﻣﻨﺰﻟﻪ وﻗﺎل ﳉﺤﺎ
ﻫﻞ ﻟﻚ أن ﺗﺴﻠﻔﻨﻲ ﺣﻤﺎرك اﻟﻴﻮم ﻓﻘﻂ ﻷﻧﻘﻞ ﻋﻠﻴﻪ ﺑﻌﺾ اﻟﺴﺒﺎخ؟
ﺟﺤﺎ:
 
}ﻫﻮ{ أﻧﺖ ﻻ ﺗﻌﺮف؟
اﻟﻔﻼح: }أﻋﺮف ﻣﺎذا{؟
ﺟﺤﺎ: ﻓﻲ اﻟﻮاﻗﻊ أن ﺣﻤﺎري ﻣﺎت }ﻣﻦ{ ﺷﻬﺮﻳﻦ.
 }ﻳﻌـﻨﻲ{ اﳊــﻤــﺎر ﻻ زال ﺣــﻴــﺎً ﻳﺎ- اﻟﻔــﻼح: ﺑﻌــﺪ أن ﺳــﻤـﻊ ﻧﻬــﻴﻖ ﺣــﻤــﺎر ﺟــﺤــﺎ
ﺟﺤﺎ وﻟﻢ ﳝﺖ!
ﺟﺤﺎ: }ﻳﻌﻨﻲ{ ﺗﻜﺬﺑﻨﻲ وﺗﺼﺪق اﳊﻤﺎر!

64
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
Here the form  ﻫﻮin the phrase  ﻫﻮ أﻧﺖ ﻻ ﺗﻌﺮف؟ºDon‚t you know‚ is used,
not pronominally, as in Standard Arabic, but as an ºinterrogative particle
signalling surprise or mild disbelief‚ (Badawi and Hinds 1986: 918) as in
Egyptian Arabic. Similarly  أﻋـــــــﺮف ﻣــــــــﺎذاadopts the word order of Egyptian
Arabic   أﻋــــــــــــــــــﺮف أﻳــﻪºI know what‚ rather than the grammatically correct
Standard Arabic  .ﻣـــــﺎذا أﻋـــــﺮفFinally, the use of  ﻳﻌـﻨﻲin the sense of ºYou
mean to say that‚ (etc.) is typical of Egyptian colloquial Arabic.
As might be expected, texts which make use of specifically colloquial
elements also tend to make use of Standard Arabic forms which are compatible
with the colloquial. In this example, for instance, the writer has used the
phrase  ,ﻣـﻦ ﺷــــــــــﻬـــــــــــﺮﻳـﻦwhich is acceptable in both Standard and colloquial
Arabic, avoiding the form  ,ﻣﻨـﺬ ﺷــــﻬـــــﺮﻳﻦwhich is only used in the Standard
language.
It is also possible to find occasions where writers make use of forms
which are not strictly speaking Standard Arabic in narration or other contexts
where speech is not being represented. An example is the use of colloquial
Arabic forms by  ﻳﻮﺳـﻒ إدرﻳﺲin the first paragraph of the ST in Practical
3. .١This is reproduced here for convenience:
 وﺣﲔ ﻛﺎن ﻳﺴﺘﺮد أﻧﻔﺎﺳـﻪ ﻻﺣﺖ ﻟﻪ ﻓﻜﺮة اﻟﻠﻮﻛﺎﻧﺪة ، وﻟﻜﻨﻪ ﻧﺒﺬﻫﺎ ﻓﻲ
اﳊـــﺎل ﻓـــﻬﻢ اﺛـﻨﺎن ، وزﺑﻴـــﺪة ﺣـــﺮﻣـــﻪ ، وﺧـﻄﺮة ، واﳊـــﺴـــﺒـــﺔ ﻓـــﻴـــﻬـــﺎ ﺑـﺎﻟﺮاﺣـــﺔ
ﺧﻤﺴﻮن ﺳﺘﻮن ﻗﺮﺷﺎ ، واﳊﻜﺎﻳﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻠﻪ .
Here the colloquial Arabic elements اﳊﻜـﺎﻳﺔ ﻋـﻠﻰ ,ﺑﺎﻟـﺮاﺣـــﺔ ,ﺣــــﺴـــﺒــــﺔ ,ﺣـــﺮﻣـــﻪ
 ,اﻟــﻠــﻪ etc. (cf. Practical 3.1 for the meaning of these) are used within a
general context of Standard Arabic vocabulary and sentence structure. The
result is a combination of intimacy, as though the reader is being made privy
to the thoughts of  ,اﻟﺸﺒﺮاويand emotional distance, in that the authoritative
third-person ºStandard Arabic‚ voice of the author is still present.
From a translation point of view, the various approaches to the representation
of spoken colloquial in written Arabic present a number of problems. In most
cases, the translator is unlikely to want to render dialect by dialect for reasons
discussed in § 12.4.1, although it would seem sensible to render forms which
are dialectal or at least reminiscent of dialect in Arabic into fairly colloquial
forms in English. In the case of the extract from  ﻳـﻮﺳـﻒ إدرﻳـﺲwhich we
have just looked at, it would seem very difficult to find any technique for
relaying in a TT the effect produced by the incorporation of colloquial Arabic
forms in a Standard Arabic framework.
Interesting problems also arise in cases where the writer uses Standard
Arabic to represent spoken Arabic, and particularly where the form of Standard
Arabic chosen is fairly distant from the colloquial. Here the context may be
decisive. Consider the following, which has already been discussed in Ch.

Language variety and translation: Supplement
65
4.2  (Montgomery 1994: 21):
«»ﻳﻔﺘﺢ اﻟﻠﻪ
»ﻋﺸـﺮون ﺟﻨﻴﻬﺎ ﻳﺎ رﺟﻞ ، ﲢﻞ ﻣﻨﻬـﺎ ﻣﺎ ﻋﻠﻴﻚ ﻣﻦ دﻳﻦ ، وﺗﺼﻠﺢ ﺑﻬـﺎ ﺣﺎﻟﻚ
. وﻏــﺪا اﻟﻌــﻴــﺪ ، واﻧﺖ ﻟـﻢ ﺗﺸــﺘــﺮ ﺑﻌــﺪ ﻛــﺒﺶ اﻟﻀــﺤــﻴــﺔ ! واﻗــﺴﻢ ﻟـﻮ ﻻ اﻧﻨﻲ
ارﻳﺪ ﻣﺴﺎﻋﺪﺗﻚ ، ﻓﺎن ﻫﺬه اﻟﻨﺨﻠﺔ ﻻ ﺗﺴﺎوي ﻋﺸﺮة ﺟﻨﻴﻬﺎت « .
TT:
ºNo deal!‚
ºLook here my man, with twenty pounds you could settle your debts and
make your life a lot easier. The Eid festival is tomorrow and you haven‚t
even bought a sacrificial lamb yet. As I would not ordinarily pay more
than ten pounds for a date palm like this, I would like to think that I am
being of some assistance to you.‚
As noted in Chapter 4, the use of slightly stilted formal English here is
motivated by rather formal nature of the Arabic, and by the fact that the rest
of the Arabic dialogue in the story is in colloquial.
Elsewhere, the informality of the situation itself may in effect rule out
anything but a highly informal translation in English. This is the case with
regard to the extract from  اﻟﻨﺎر واﳌﺎءin Practical 2.2.
In other cases, however, the situation is not so clear. This is partly because
the choice of colloquial or Standard Arabic or something in between to
represent speech in written Arabic is to a degree at least a matter of personal
preference on the part of the writer. Some writers, such as ,ﳒـــﻴﺐ ﻣــــﺤـــﻔـــﻮظ
have consistently refused to make use of colloquial Arabic in their works
( ﳒـــﻴﺐ ﻣـــﺤـــﻔـــﻮظhas described the use of colloquial as a ºdisease‚; Somekh
1991: 27). By contrast   ﻳـﻮﺳـﻒ إدرﻳـﺲuses colloquial Arabic to represent
speech in some of his books but not others – and it is not always evident that
there is a reason behind the choice (cf. Holes 1995: 303-9).
Given this, the safest technique is probably to translate most Arabic
representations of spoken language into contextually normal – and in most
cases informal – TL forms in English. The obvious exception is where a
representation of spoken language in Arabic is so obviously formal and
distant from spoken colloquial Arabic that the writer is clearly using this
distance for stylistic effect. In such a case it might be reasonable to use a
similarly formal register in the English TT.

66
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
PRACTICAL  12
Practical 12.3  Representation of speech in written Arabic, and tonal
register
Assignment
  (i)
Discuss the strategic decisions that you have to take before starting
detailed translation of the following text, and outline and justify the
strategy you adopt, paying particular attention to issues of tonal register
in the ST. The translation of this TT is part of a new translation of
 اﻟـﺸـــــــﺤـــــــﺎذwhich you are doing to be published by Plover Books in its
Nobel Prizewinners series.
 (ii)
Translate the following text into English
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail you made in producing your translation.
Contextual information
This text is taken from the novel  اﻟﺸـﺤﺎذby ( ﳒﻴـﺐ ﻣﺤـﻔﻮظn.d.: 277–278).
The text concerns a visit to a famous doctor called  ﺣـﺎﻣـﺪ ﺻــﺒـﺮيby a former
schoolmate,  ,ﻋـــــﻤــــﺮ اﳊـــــﻤـــــﺰاويwho is himself a prominent lawyer. The two
have not met for many years.
ST
!_ أﻫﻼ ﻋﻤﺮ، ﺗﻐﻴﺮت ﺣﻘﺎ وﻟﻜﻦ اﻟﻰ اﺣﺴﻦ
_ ﺣﺴﺒﺘﻚ ﻟﻦ ﺗﺬﻛﺮﻧﻲ!
وﺗﺼﺎﻓﺤﺎ ﺑﺤﺮارة.
_ وﻟﻜـﻨﻚ ﻋـــــﻤــــﻼق ﺑﻜـﻞ ﻣــــﻌـﻨﻰ اﻟـﻜﻠﻤـــــﺔ، ﻛﻨـﺖ ﻃﻮﻳـﻼ ﺟــــﺪاً وﺑﺎﻻﻣـــــﺘــــﻼء
ﺻﺮت ﻋﻤﻼﻗﺎً ..
وﻛﺎن ﻳﺮﻓﻊ رأﺳﻪ اﻟﻴﻪ وﻫﻮ ﻳﺤﺎدﺛﻪ ﻓﺎﺑﺘﺴﻢ ﻋﻤﺮ ﻓﻲ ﺳﺮور وردد:
_ ﺣﺴﺒﺘﻚ ﻟﻦ ﺗﺬﻛﺮﻧﻲ.
_ أﻧﺎ ﻻ أﻧﺴﻰ أﺣﺪاً ﻓﻜﻴﻒ أﻧﺴﺎك أﻧﺖ!
ﲢـﻴـﺔ ﻛـﺮﳝﺔ ﻣﻦ ﻃﺒـﻴﺐ ﺧﻄﻴـﺮ. وﻛـﺜـﻴـﺮون ﻳﺴـﻤـﻌـﻮن ﻋﻦ اﻟـﻄﺒـﻴﺐ اﻟﻨﺎﺟﺢ
وﻟﻜـﻦ ﻫﻞ ﻳﻌـــﺮف اﶈــﺎﻣﻲ اﻟـﻔــﺬ اﻻ أﺻـــﺤــﺎب اﻟـﻘــﻀـــﺎﻳﺎ؟! وﺿــﺤـﻚ اﻟﻄﺒـــﻴﺐ
وﻫﻮ ﻳﺘﻔﺤﺼﻪ وﻗﺎل:
_ وﻟﻜـﻨﻚ ﺳـــــﻤـﻨﺖ ﺟـــــﺪاً، ﻛــــﺄﻧـﻚ ﻣـــــﺪﻳﺮ ﺷـــــﺮﻛــــﺔ ﻣـﻦ اﻟﻌـــــﻬـــــﺪ اﳋـــــﺎﻟﻲ وﻻ
ﻳﻨﻘﺼﻚ إﻻ اﻟﺴﻴﺠﺎر.
ﺿـــﺤـﻜﺖ أﺳــــﺎرﻳﺮ اﻟﻮﺟــــﻪ اﻻﺳـــﻤــــﺮ اﳌﺴـــﺘـﻄﻴﻞ اﳌـﻤـــﺘـﻠﺊ، وﻓﻲ ﺷـﻲء ﻣﻦ
اﻻرﺗﺒﺎك ﺛﺒﺖ ﻧﻈﺮاﺗﻪ ﻓﻮق ﻋﻴﻨﻴﻪ وﻫﻮ ﻳﺮﻓﻊ ﺣﺎﺟﺒﻴﻪ اﻟﻜﺜﻴﻔﺘﲔ.
_ إﻧﻲ ﺳﻌﻴﺪ ﺑﻠﻘﻴﺎك ﻳﺎ دﻛﺘﻮر.
_  وأﻧﺎ ﻛﺬﻟﻚ وان ﺗﻜﻦ ﻣﻨﺎﺳﺒﺔ رؤﻳﺘﻲ ﻟﻴﺴﺖ ﺑﺎﻟﺴﺎرة ﻋﺎدة.
وﺗﻘﻬـﻘﺮ اﻟﻰ ﻣﻜﺘـﺒﻪ اﺨﻤﻟﺘـﻔﻲ ﲢﺖ أﻃﻼل ﻣﻦ اﻟﻜﺘﺐ واﻷوراق وﻻأدوات

Language variety and translation: Supplement
67
:اﳌﻜﺘﺒﻴﺔ اﻟﻨﻔﺴﻴﺔ ﺛﻢ ﺟﻠﺲ وﻫﻮ ﻳﺸﻴﺮ اﻟﻴﻪ ﺑﺎﳉﻠﻮس
_ ﻓﻠﻨﺆﺟﻞ ﺣﺪﻳﺚ اﻟﺬﻛﺮاﻳﺎت ﺣﺘﻰ ﻧﻄﻤﺌﻦ ﻋﻠﻴﻚ.
وﻓﺘﺢ دﻓﺘﺮا وأﻣﺴﻚ ﺑﺎﻟﻘﻠﻢ:
_  اﻻﺳﻢ: ﻋﻤﺮ اﳊﻤﺰاوي، ﻣﺤﺎم، واﻟﺴﻦ؟
وﺿﺤﻚ اﻟﻄﺒﻴﺐ ﻋﺎﻟﻴﺎً وﻫﻮ ﻳﻘﻮل ﻣﺴﺘﺪرﻛﺎً:
ﻻ ﺗﺨﻒ، اﳊﺎل ﻣﻦ ﺑﻌﻀﻪ!
_ ٥٤ ﻋﺎﻣﺎً.
_ ﻋﻠﻰ أﻳﺎم اﳌﺪرﺳـﺔ ﻛـﺎن اﻟﺸـﻬـﺮ ﻳﻌـﺘﺒـﺮ ﻓـﺎرﻗـﺎً ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌـﻤـﺮ ﻟﻪ ﺧﻄﻮرﺗﻪ
أﻣﺎ اﻵن ﻓﻴﺎ ﻗﻠﺒﻲ ﻻ ﲢﺰن ]...[
Practical 12.4  Representation of speech in written Arabic, and tonal
register
Assignment
  (i)
Discuss the strategic decisions that you have to take before starting
detailed translation of the following text, and outline and justify the
strategy you adopt, paying particular attention to issues of tonal register
in the ST. The translation of this TT is part of a new translation of
 اﻟـﺸـــــــﺤـــــــﺎذwhich you are doing to be published by Plover Books in its
Nobel Prizewinners series.
 (ii)
Translate the following text into English
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail you made in producing your translation.
 (iv)
Consider the ways in which the tonal register of your translation of this
text differs from the tonal register of your translation in Practical 12.3.
Contextual information
This text is also taken from the novel  اﻟﺸﺤﺎذby ( ﳒﻴﺐ ﻣﺤﻔﻮظn.d.: 404).

68
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
ST
اﺳـــﺘـﻠﻘــــﻴﺖ ﻋﻠـﻰ ﻇﻬـــﺮي ﻓــــﻮق اﳊـــﺸــــﺎﺋﺶ راﻧﻴــــﺎ اﻟﻰ اﻷﺷـــﺠــــﺎر اﻟﺮاﻗــــﺼـــﺔ
ﲟـﻼﻃﻔــــــﺎت اﻟﻨـﺴـــــﻴـﻢ ﻓﻲ اﻟـﻈﻼم. أﻧـﺘﻈـﺮ وإن ﻃﺎل اﻻﻧـﺘﻈـﺎر ، واذا ﺑـﺄﻗـــــﺪام
ﺗﻘﺘﺮب وﺻﻮت ﻳﻬﻤﺲ:
_ ﻣﺴﺎء اﳋﻴﺮ ﻳﺎ ﻋﻤﺮ .
واﻧﺘــﺼﺐ ﺷـﺒـﺢ اﻟﻰ ﺟـﺎﻧﺒـﻲ . ﻣـﺎ اﻛــﺜـﺮ اﻷﺣــﻼم وﻟﻜﻨﻨﻲ ﻻ أرى ﺷــﻴـﺌــﺎ .
وﻗﺎل :
_ ﻛـــــــﺪت أﻳﺄس ﻣـﻦ اﻟـﻌــــــﺜـــــــﻮر ﻋـﻠﻴـﻚ ، ﻛــــــﻴـﻒ ﺗـﺮﻗــــــﺪ ﻫـﻜـﺬا ، اﻻ ﺗﺨـــــــﺎف
اﻟﺮﻃﻮﺑﺔ؟
وﺟﻠﺲ اﻟﻰ ﺟﺎﻧﺒﻲ ﻓﻮق اﳊﺸﺎﺋﺶ وﻣﺪ ﻳﺪه وﻟﻜﻨﻲ ﲡﺎﻫﻠﺘﻪ ﻓﻘﺎل :
_ أﻧﺴﻴﺖ ﺻﻮﺗﻲ ؟ أﻟﻢ ﺗﻌﺮﻓﻨﻲ ﺑﻌﺪ ؟
ﻗﻠﺖ ﻣﺘﺄوﻫﺎ :
_ ﻣﺘﻰ ﻳﻜﻒ اﻟﺸﻴﻄﺎن ﻋﻨﻲ ؟
_ ﻣﺎذا ﻗﻠﺖ ﻳﺎ ﻋﻤﺮ ؟، ﺑﺎﻟﻠﻪ ﺣﺪﺛﻨﻲ ﻓﺄﻧﺎ ﻓﻲ ﻏﺎﻳﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻀﻴﻖ .
_ ﻣﻦ أﻧﺖ ؟
_ ﻳﺎ ﻋﺠﺒﺎ ! .. أﻧﺎ ﻋﺜﻤﺎن ﺧﻠﻴﻞ ..
_ وﻣﺎذا ﺗﺮﻳﺪ ؟
_ أﻧﺎ ﻋﺜﻤﺎن ! ﻟﻘﺪ وﻗﻊ اﶈﺬور وأﻧﺎ ﻣﻄﺎرد ..
ﲢﺴﺴﺖ ﺟﺴﻤﻪ ﺑﻴﺪي وﻗﻠﺖ :
_ ﻟﻴﺲ ﻫﺬا ﺑﺠﺴﻢ ﺳﻤﻴﺮ ﻓﻤﺎذا ﺗﻌﻨﻲ ﻫﺬه اﳌﺮة ؟
_ ﺳﻤﻴﺮ ! إﻧﻚ ﺗﺨﻴﻔﻨﻲ ..
_ وﻟﻜﻦ ﻟﻦ اﺧﺎف وﻟﻦ أﻋﺪو ﻛﺎﺠﻤﻟﻨﻮن ..
ﻓﻠﻤﺲ ذراﻋﻲ وﻗﺎل :
_ ﺑﺎﻟﻠﻪ ﺣﺪﺛﻨﻲ ﻛﺼﺪﻳﻖ و ﻻ ﺗﺪﻓﻊ ﺑﻲ إﻟﻰ اﻟﻴﺄس ﻣﻨﻚ .
_ وﻣﺎذا ﻳﻬﻢ ؟
_ أﺻﻎ اﻟﻲ ﻳﺎ ﻋـﻤـﺮ ، اﻧﻲ ﻓﻲ ﻣـﻮﻗﻒ ﺧـﻄﻴـﺮ ، اﻧﻬﻢ ﻳﺒـﺤـﺜـﻮن ﻋﻨﻲ ﻓﻲ
ﻛﻞ ﻣﻜﺎن واذا اﻟﻘﻮا اﻟﻘﺒﺾ ﻋﻠﻲ ﻫﻠﻜﺖ ..

13
Textual genre as a factor
in translation:
Supplement
_______________________________
PRACTICAL  13
Practical 13.3  Genre
Assignment
Consider the differences between the following three texts: (a) Kuwait Says
it will not Give in to Terrorism (concentrate on paragraphs 1 and 2 only), (b)
Kuwait Sets an Example (concentrate on paragraph 1 only), and (c) اﺧـﺘﻄﺎف
( اﻟﻄﺎﺋﺮة .. اﺧـﺘـﻄﺎف اﻟﻌـﻘﻞPractical 13.1). How does the presentation of the
material in the three articles differ? Why do you think motivates these
differences? What genres would you classify the three articles as?
Contextual information
The texts Kuwait Says it will not Give in to Terrorism, Kuwait Sets an
Example, and  اﺧـــــﺘﻄـﺎف اﻟﻄﺎﺋـﺮة .. اﺧـــــﺘﻄﺎف اﻟـﻌـــــﻘﻞrelate to an incident in
1988 when Iranian-backed gunmen hijacked a Kuwaiti aircraft and demanded
the release of 17 pro-Iranian prisoners from a Kuwaiti jail. The text Kuwait
Says it will not Give in to Terrorism  is from the Guardian (April 1988), and
the text Kuwait Sets an Example is from the Washington Post (April 1988).

70
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
(a) From The Guardian, April 1988.
Kuwait says it will not
give in to terrorism
THE hijack of the Kuwaiti Jumbo jet entered its second week with no
sign of either side modifying its position. The hijackers continued to
demand the release of 17 prisoners from a Kuwaiti jail; the Kuwaiti
Foreign Minister, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah, said: ºKuwait is
unshakable. It will not bend to any pressure. We shall not give in to
blackmail or terrorism.‚ The presence on the Boeing 747 of three members
of the royal family ºwill not influence our decision. The hijackers are
mistaken if they think this way. In Kuwait we are all one family, with all
citizens equal.‚
The government of Cyprus, where the plane was finally allowed to
land after being refused permission at Beirut, is caught in the middle.
There were indications this Tuesday that the plane might be refuelled and
go on to Algeria.
The affair began on Tuesday when the plane, on a flight from Bangkok
to Kuwait, was taken over as it approached the Persian Gulf and forced to
divert to Mashhad in Northern Iran. Eventually the foreigners aboard,
including 22 Britons and 35 other nationalities, were released there, leaving
50 Kuwaitis still aboard. The Iranian authorities, after first refusing, agreed
to refuel the plane, which left intending to land at Beirut. It circled for
several hours, the pilot getting increasingly desperate as his fuel began to
run out and the Syrian authorities in Lebanon told him the plane would be
fired on if it tried to land.
The difficult choices before the Cypriot ministers are between giving
in to the hijackers‚ demands by refuelling the plane and letting it fly on (a
course adamantly opposed by the Kuwaitis) authorizing a bloody and
unpredictable assault on the aircraft, and trying to carry on the talks
without any negotiating leeway, a policy likely to result in more of the
passengers being killed. One, a Kuwaiti security guard, was murdered on
the Saturday,  another, a 20-year-old Kuwaiti fireman, on Monday.

Textual genre as a factor in translation: Supplement
71
(b) From The Washington Post, April 1988.
Kuwait Sets An Example
BEHIND the macabre drama of the latest hijacking lie the calculus and
will of one gutsy country, Kuwait. A small place forever needing to
balance off big neighbours (Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia) and diverse groups
in its own population, Kuwait decided as the tumultuous º80s unfolded
that it needed to add toughness to the suppleness which had long marked
its policy. When pro-Iranian Shi‚ites launched a wave of bombings on a
single December day in 1983, killing five persons and wounding more
than 80, the Kuwaitis braced themselves for the consequences and tried
the perpetrators, handing down death and prison sentences on 17 men.
The consequences have included repeated acts and threats of violence
from elements openly hostile to Kuwait‚s quiet conservative ways. What
is in a sense worse, the Kuwaitis have also met subtle pressures from their
supposed friends. The truck bombing of the US embassy in Kuwait had
been among the terrorists‚ 1983 crimes. Nonetheless, the Reagan
administration, ignoring its public solidarity with Kuwait‚s no-concessions
policy, secretly undertook to induce the Kuwaitis to exchange the 17
convicts for Americans held hostage in Lebanon. This was a shocking,
selfish, and unprincipled thing for a superpower to put before a small
country confronting mortal threats from both internal forces and an avenging
Iran. Kuwait refused to go along.
Given the record, it‚s no surprise that Kuwait has so far refused to
yield up the 17 to a gang, that, to free them, hijacked a Kuwaiti flight out
of Thailand last week. First the terrorists flew to Iran, their evident spiritual
home. There the authorities, professing aversion to terrorism, proceeded
to fail the two essential tests that lie before a country in that situation. The
Iranians did not find  a way to engage the hijackers in protracted negotiations.
They allowed the plane to be refuelled so that it could continue on and,
by the drama and progress of the flight, reap the sort of media coverage
that terrorists seek in order to increase their bargaining leverage. A Kuwaiti
newspaper reports, moreover, that on the ground in Iran the terrorists
were able to smuggle aboard more accomplices and arms.
By Tuesday this week the terrorists, having forced their presence upon
Cyprus, had tortured and killed two persons and were subjecting others
on the plane to a frightful ordeal, pausing only to assert their claim to be
acting in a ºhumanitarian‚ way. Cypriots and others were negotiating.
And – it could change, but we hope it doesn‚t – the Kuwaitis were
holding steady.

14
Translating technical
texts:
Supplement
_______________________________
14.1.1 Cultural commonality vs. cultural non-commonality
It is useful to make a basic distinction between two types of technical texts:
culturally common technical texts, i.e. those technical texts whose basic
notions are shared by both the SL culture and the TL culture; and culturally
non-common technical texts, i.e. those technical texts whose basic notions
are not shared by both the SL culture and the TL culture. (It will, of course,
be possible to find texts which fall some way between these two types; the
distinction is, however, useful for practical purposes.)
Examples of culturally common texts are natural-scientific and
mathematical texts; these involve notions which are (or are considered to be)
universal, and therefore properly speaking independent of particular cultures.
Another example of a culturally common text would be a text detailing the
rules of football (soccer); the notions involved here are common to both the
English-speaking world and the Arab world; though not universal in the
sense that mathematics and the natural-sciences are taken to be universal,
they are culturally shared.
The main problems which arise translating culturally common technical
texts are likely to relate to technical terms, although there may also be
difficulties relating to genre. Quite a lot of translation takes place between
European languages in the natural sciences and associated technical areas.
Although English has become the predominant global language in these areas,
enough is still written in French, German, Spanish and other European
languages to make this an area in which professional translators can specialize.
In Arabic, on the other hand, one is unlikely to come across primary research
in the natural sciences, and fairly unlikely to come across highly technical

Translating technical texts: Supplement
73
technological material. It is much more likely that the professional translator
will be called upon to translate government documents and other official
material from Arabic to English, which while not technical in the full sense,
contain enough technical material to require specialist knowledge on the
translator‚s part.
Good examples of culturally non-common texts, where the basic notions
are not shared between the SL and TL cultures, are texts in the traditional
Islamic disciplines such as exegesis – whether Qur‚anic ( )ﺗﻔــــﺴـــﻴـــﺮor poetic
( ,)ﺷـﺮحIslamic Jurisprudence ( ,)ﻓــﻘــﻪand traditional Arabic grammar ()ﻧﺤـــﻮ
and rhetoric ( .)ﺑـﻼﻏــــــــــﺔAnother example is texts in the modern discipline of
Islamic Finance, which draws centrally on Islamic Jurisprudence. A
professional translator is not likely to be asked to translate texts on traditional
Arabic grammar (although some academics do so). He or she is also relatively
unlikely to be asked to translate texts in Islamic Jurisprudence, although
there is a market for such translation amongst non-Arabic speaking Muslims,
and there exist several organizations in Britain, the United States and elsewhere
devoted to promoting such translation. With the rapid growth of Islamic
banks over the past few years, however, it is quite likely that Islamic Finance
will become an area in which specialized translators are in demand.
As is shown by the examples of the three types of lexical problem discussed
in § 14.2, access to up-to-date specialist dictionaries and databanks is essential
for technical translators working in scientific and technological fields. Of
course, even the most recent materials will by definition lag slightly behind
innovations and new coinages, because all scientific and technological fields
are constantly developing. In any case, even the best reference material does
not always give a single, unambiguous synonym for a particular technical
term. This means that the normal caveats concerning use of dictionaries
apply also to technical translation, but in particularly acute form. That is,
translators can only select the appropriate TL term from those offered by the
dictionary if they have a firm grasp both of the textual context and of the
wider technical context. The problem is not lessened, of course, by the fact
that some of the context may remain obscure until the correct sense of the ST
terms has been defined! This brings us to the two conceptual reasons why
technical texts may be difficult to translate.
14.3 CONCEPTUAL PROBLEMS IN TECHNICAL TRANSLATION
As noted in § 14.3, conceptual problems in technical translation may arise
from ignorance of underlying knowledge taken for granted by experts, but
not understood by non-specialists and not explicit in the ST. We may term
this kind of conceptual problem a Type 1 conceptual problem. However,
conceptual problems may also arise from ignorance of what might be called
the ºlogic‚ of a discipline – methods of argumentation, the development of

74
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
relations between concepts. We may term this kind of conceptual problem a
Type 2 conceptual problem.
Conceptual problems are particularly well illustrated by culturally non-
common texts, although they can also be evident in culturally common texts.
Consider the following text by the person considered to be the father of
traditional Arabic  grammar, ( ﺳـــــﻴـــــﺒـــــﻮﻳﻪ1975, vol. 1: 34). Here ﺳـــــﻴـــــﺒـــــﻮﻳﻪ
discusses the use of the word order VERB-OBJECT-SUBJECT in Arabic
 taking as an example sentence ِ ,ﺿَـﺮَبَ زﻳﺪاً ﻋـﺒـﺪُ اﻟﻠﻪas opposed to the more
normal VERB-SUBJECT-OBJECT word order, as illustrated by ُﺿَـــﺮَبَ ﻋــﺒـــﺪ
 اﻟﻠﻪِ زﻳﺪاًwhich he has just discussed.
ST
ﻓـﺈن ﻗَﺪﱠﻣﺖَ اﳌﻔـﻌﻮل وأﺧّـﺮتَ اﻟﻔﺎﻋـﻞ ﺟﺮى اﻟﻠﻔﻆ ﻛـﻤﺎ ﺟـﺮى ﻓﻲ اﻷول وذﻟﻚ
ﻗـــﻮﻟـﻚ »ﺿـــﺮب زﻳﺪاً ﻋــــﺒـــﺪُ اﻟﻠـﻪِ«، ﻷﻧﻚ إﳕﺎ أردت ﺑـﻪ ﻣـــﺆﺧـــﺮاً ﻣــــﺎ أردت ﺑﻪ
ﻣــﻘــﺪﻣــﺎً وﻟـﻢ ﺗُﺮِد أن ﺗُﺸــﻐِﻞ ﺑـﺄول ﻣﻨﻪ وإن ﻛــﺎن ﻣــﺆﺧـــﺮاً ﺑﺎﻟﻠﻔﻆ ]...[ ﻛـــﺄﻧﻬﻢ
إﳕﺎ ﻳُﻘﺪﱢﻣﻮن اﻟﺬي ﺑﻴﺎﻧﻪ أﻫﻢّ ﻟﻬﻢ وﻫﻢ ﺑﺒﻴﺎﻧﻪ أﻋﻨﻰ
It is worth giving a fairly literal translation of this text first, in order to make
the Arabic material, which is quite difficult to follow, more comprehensible.
A fairly literal English translation of the ST is as follows:
Literal TT
If you prepose the object and postpose the subject, the utterance will be
the same as in the first example; this is your saying,  ِ,ﺿﺮب زﻳﺪاً ﻋﺒﺪُ اﻟﻠﻪ
because you only intend by having it postposed what you intended by
having it preposed. You did not intend to cause government in something
which came first, even if it is postposed in the utterance. [...] It is as if
they prepose that whose presentation is more important to them and what
they are more concerned to present.
A more idiomatic translation of this, which attempts to respect some of the
conventions of academic writing in English is as follows:
Idiomatic TT
If the direct object is preposed and the subject postposed – i.e. when the
form  ﺿـــﺮب زﻳـﺪاً ﻋـــﺒـــﺪُ اﻟـﻠﻪis used – the utterance will be essentially the
same as in the previous example (i.e. ً .)ﺿَــــــــــﺮَبَ ﻋـــــــــﺒــــــــــﺪُ اﻟـﻠـﻪِ زﻳـﺪاThis is
because the denotative meaning of an utterance containing a postposed
subject is the same as that of an utterance containing a preposed subject; it
is not intended that the verb should govern something which comes before
the subject, even if the subject is postposed in the utterance. [...] Rather, it
seems to be the case that the Bedouin Arabs prepose the element whose
presentation is more important to them and which they are more concerned

Translating technical texts: Supplement
75
to focus on.
This text contains a number of examples of Type 1 conceptual problems,
i.e. those which arise from ignorance of underlying knowledge taken for
granted by experts, but not understood by non-specialists and not explicit in
the ST.  The following are examples:
(i)
In traditional Arabic grammar different syntactic-sentential (cf.
Supplement, Chapter 8) word-orders are described in terms of ºmovement‚
of elements. Thus, in a word-order VERB-OBJECT-SUBJECT, the object
is said to be ºpreposed‚ ( ,)ﻣــﻘـــﺪمand the object ºpostposed‚ ( ,)ﻣــﺆﺧـــﺮas
compared to what is regarded as a more basic word order VERB-
SUBJECT-OBJECT. Even in this more basic VERB-SUBJECT-OBJECT
word order, however, one can talk about the subject being preposed (as
in the phrase ً ﻣﺎ أردت ﺑﻪ ﻣﻘﺪﻣﺎin this text).
(ii) The word  ,ﻟﻔﻆwhich is given in Wehr as ºsound-group, phonetic complex;
expression; term; word; wording‚ (etc.), has here a technical sense which
seems to comprise not only the forms of the words in question, including
in particular the case endings which the subject and object take, but also
the denotative meaning (Chapter 5).
(iii) The phrase  ﻣﺎ أردت ﺑﻪin this context must be taken to refer to denotative
meaning, rather than the kind of meaning which has to do with
predictability of information, theme and rheme, etc. (Ch. 9.2.2).
(iv) The verb  ﺗُﺸﻐﻞis being used here to refer to the notion of ºgovernment‚.
In traditional Arabic grammar verbs are said to govern nouns; that is to
say, nouns – and particularly direct objects – have the case endings
which they have (in the case of direct objects normally ( )ـً)ـﺎbecause of
the ºgovernment‚ or ºworking‚ ( )إﺷﻐﺎلof the verb.
This text is also rendered extremely difficult to translate by the pervasiveness
of Type 2 conceptual examples, i.e. those involving the ºlogic‚ of the discipline
– methods of argumentation, the development of relations between concepts.
The following are examples of these:
(i)
The entire argument is based on the notion of the reader as  listener
(َ ,ﻷﻧﻚ ,أﺧّﺮتَ ,ﻗﺪّﻣﺖetc.). This directness was well motivated in an oral
context in which a scholar directly addressed his students, as was the
case in Classical Arabic culture. However, such a direct address to the
reader is atypical of modern academic writing; and if an attempt is made
to render this text into a style which is at least reminiscent of such
modern writing a more impersonal style (involving such things as
widespread use of the passive) is required.
(ii) Classical Arabic often made rather vague use of pronouns and other
items whose reference could only be deduced from consideration of

76
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
elements within the wider text. English tends to be more specific. Thus,
the phrase  ﻓـﻲ اﻻولhas been translated in the idiomatic TT as ºin the
previous example (i.e. ً – ‚)ﺿَـﺮَبَ ﻋـﺒـﺪُ اﻟﻠﻪِ زﻳﺪاwith the original Arabic
phrase included in brackets. Similarly, in the phrase  ﻣــــــــــــﺎ أردت ﺑـﻪthe
idiomatic TT makes explicit that the pronoun suffix   ـــﻪrefers to a
postposed subject, by using the noun phrase ºpostposed subject‚. Finally,
in the Arabic ST,   ﻛـــــــــــــــﺄﻧـﻬــﻢrefers back to a fairly distant reference to
( اﻟﻌﺮبwhich in the case of Arabic grammatical writing normally means
the Bedouin Arabs who had retained the older, ºpurer‚ forms of Arabic,
and were therefore felt to be the most reliable sources for correct Arabic
forms). In the English translation, the noun phrase ºThe Bedouin Arabs‚
has been used, in contrast to the Arabic pronominal .ـﻬﻢ
As these examples show, conceptual problems are the most intractable of
all those that face the technical translator. Non-specialists are always likely
to reach a conceptual impasse from which no amount of attention to syntax
or vocabulary can rescue them. In that case they have only two options: to
learn the concepts of the field in which they wish to translate, or work in
close consultation with experts. In practice, trainee translators generally do
both these things, quickly becoming experts themselves with the help of
specialist supervisors. The best qualification for a technical translator is perhaps
a combined technical and foreign language degree. However, not even people
with that kind of qualification can expect to keep abreast of all the latest
research, for instance in a natural science, while at the same time earning
their livings as translators, and they will sooner or later come up against
problems that can only be solved by consulting other experts or, where
possible, the author of the ST.
PRACTICAL  14
Practical 14.3  Semi-technical translation
Assignment
(i)
Consider the strategic problems confronting the translator of the
following text, and outline your own strategy for dealing with them.
You are to translate this article for a pilot English-language version of
 اﻟﻌﺮﺑﻲmagazine, aimed mainly at expatriate English speakers working
in the Middle East.
(ii)
Translate the second and third paragraphs (from  ﻣــﻦ اﳌــﻌــــــــــــــــــﺮوفto
 )ﻛﻮﺣﺪة واﺣﺪةfrom the following Arabic text  اﳌﺎدة اﳌﻈﻠﻤﺔinto English.
The first paragraph and the title are provided in order to give contextual
information only.
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail which you made in producing your TT,

Translating technical texts: Supplement
77
especially those relating to technical questions.
Contextual information
This Arabic article comes from the June 1994 edition of the Kuwait magazine
 ,اﻟـﻌـــــــﺮﺑـﻲwhich is aimed at the general educated reader and covers cultural
and scientific topics. Properly speaking therefore, this is not a piece of technical
translation, but rather what is sometimes termed popular scientific writing.
The text does, however, contain some technical concepts, and therefore provides
practice in some of the problems typical of technical translation.
Included after the Arabic text are a number of footnotes, covering technical
terms and concepts which you will not be expected to be find in a standard
Arabic>English dictionary (such as Hans Wehr).
اﳌﺎدة اﳌﻈﻠﻤﺔ1
ﻟﻐﺰ اﻟﻜﻮن
             
ﺑﻘﻠﻢ: رءوف وﺻﻔﻲ
ﺗﺨـﺘﻠـﻒ  اﳌﺎدة اﳌﻈﻠﻤـﺔ ﻋﻦ أي ﺷـﻲء ﻧﻌـﺮﻓـﻪ أو ﺣـﺘـﻰ ﻧﺘـﺨـﻴﻠﻪ، وﲢــﺘـﺎج
ﻟـﻔــــــﻬﻢ ﺟــــــﺪﻳـﺪ ﲤﺎﻣــــــﺎ ﻟـﻜـﻞ ﻣﻜـﻮﻧﺎت اﻟـﻜـﻮن، وﻟﺴــــــﺒــــــﺮ ﻛـﻨـﻪ أﺳــــــﺮارﻫﺎ ﺗـﺒﻨـﻰ
اﻟﻔﻠﻜﻴﻮن وﻏﻴﺮﻫﻢ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻌﻠﻤﺎء ﻛﺜـﻴﺮا ﻣﻦ اﻷﺳﺎﻟﻴﺐ ﳊﻞ ﻟﻐﺰ اﳌﺎدة اﳌﻈﻠﻤﺔ
وﻫﻢ ﻳﺠﻤـﻌﻮن اﻷدﻟﺔ وﻳﻔﺤـﺼﻮﻧﻬﺎ وﻳﺴـﺘﺨﺪﻣـﻮن ﻗﺪراﺗﻬﻢ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻻﺳـﺘﻨﺘﺎج
ﻟﻠﺘﻮﺻﻞ إﻟﻰ ﺣﻞ ﻣﻘﺒﻮل.
ﻣﻦ اﳌﻌــﺮوف أن اﻟﻜﻮن ﻳﺘﻜﻮن ﻣـﻦ وﺣـﺪات أﺳـﺎﺳــﻴـﺔ ﻫﻲ اﺠﻤﻟــﺮات اﻟﺘﻲ
ﺗـﻌـــــــﺮف ﺑﺄﻧـﻬـــــــﺎ ﲡـــــــﻤـﻊ ﻫﺎﺋـﻞ ﻣـﻦ اﻟـﻨﺠـــــــﻮم واﻟـﺴـــــــﺪم واﻟـﻜﻮاﻛـﺐ واﻷﺟـــــــﺮام
اﻟﻔـــــﻀــــﺎﺋﻴـــــﺔ اﻷﺧــــﺮى واﻟﻐـــــﺎزات اﻟﻜﻮﻧـﻴــــﺔ، ﺗـﺘــــﺨﻠـﻠﻬــــﺎ ﻣـــــﺠــــﺎﻻت ﻛــــﻬــــﺮﺑـﻴــــﺔ
وﻣــﻐـﻨﺎﻃﻴــﺴـــﻴــﺔ ﺟـــﺒــﺎرة، وﺧــﺎرج ﻣـــﺠــﺮﺗﻨـﺎ »اﻟﻄﺮﻳﻖ اﻟـﻠﺒﻨﻲ« ﺗـﻮﺟــﺪ آﻻف
اﳌـﻼﻳﲔ »ﺑـﻼﻳﲔ« اﺠﻤﻟــــــﺮات اﻷﺧــــــﺮى، وﻫﻲ ﻟـﻴـــــﺴـﺖ ﻣــــــﻮزﻋـــــﺔ ﺑـﺎﻧﺘـﻈﺎم ﻓـﻲ
اﻟﻔــﻀــﺎء وإﳕﺎ ﺗﻮﺟــﺪ ﻓﻲ ﺣــﺸــﻮد ﻗــﺪ ﺗﺘــﻀــﻤﻦ آﻻف اﺠﻤﻟــﺮات وﻳﻄـﻠﻖ ﻋﻠﻴــﻬــﺎ
اﻟﻌﻨﺎﻗﻴﺪ اﺠﻤﻟﺮﻳﺔ.2
وأول دﻟـﻴﻞ ﻋـﻠﻰ وﺟــــــﻮد اﳌـﺎدة اﳌﻈـﻠﻤــــــﺔ ﺟــــــﺎء ﻣﻦ ﻣــــــﻼﺣﻈـﺎت ﻟـﻌﻨـﺎﻗـــــﻴــــــﺪ
اﺠﻤﻟــــــــﺮات2، ﻓــــــــﻔـﻲ ﻋــــــــﺎم ٣٣٩١ ﻗــــــــﺎس اﻟـﻔــــــــﻴــــــــﺰﻳـﺎﺋـﻲ اﻟـﻔﻠـﻜـﻲ اﻟـﺴــــــــﻮﻳـﺴــــــــﺮي
»ﻓﻴـﺮﺗﺰزوﻳﻜﻲ«3
« ﺣـﺮﻛـﺔ اﺠﻤﻟـﺮات ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌﻨﻘـﻮد اﺠﻤﻟـﺮي »اﻟﺬؤاﺑﺔ4 وﺗﺒﲔ ﻟﻪ
أن اﺠﻤﻟﺮات اﻟﻔـﺮدﻳﺔ ﺗﺘﺤـﺮك ﺑﺴﺮﻋﺎت ﻛـﺒﻴـﺮة ﺟﺪا، ﺑﺤﻴـﺚ ﻻ ﺗﻈﻞ اﺠﻤﻟﺮات
ﻣـﺘـﺠـﺎورة ﻟﻔـﺘﺮة ﻃـﻮﻳﻠﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﺰﻣﻦ، وﻻ5 ﺑﺪ أن ﺗﺆدي ﺣـﺮﻛﺔ ﻛـﻞ ﻣﺠـﺮة ﻓﻲ
اﻟﻌﻨـﻘــﻮد إﻟﻰ اﺑﺘــﻌــﺎد أﺟـــﺰاء اﺠﻤﻟــﻤــﻮﻋــﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌـــﻀــﻬــﺎ اﻟﺒــﻌﺾ، إﻻ أن ﻋــﻤـﻠﻴــﺔ
اﻟﺮﺻﺪ اﻟﻔﻠﻜﻲ ﺗﺆﻛﺪ أن اﻟﻌﻨﻘﻮد اﺠﻤﻟﺮي ﻻ ﻳﺰال ﻣﺘﻤﺎﺳﻜﺎ ﻛﻮﺣﺪة واﺣﺪة.

78
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
Notes on technical terms and notions appearing in ST
1.  :اﳌﺎدة اﳌﻈﻠﻤﺔºdark matter‚.
2.  :ﻋﻨﻘﻮد اﺠﻤﻟﺮات ,ﻋﻨﻘﻮد ﻣﺠﺮيA distinction is made in astronomy between
galaxy clusters and galactic clusters. Galaxy clusters are clusters of galaxies
(i.e. clusters consisting of galaxies), and it this which seems to be meant
in the Arabic both by  اﻟﻌـﻨﺎﻗــﻴـــﺪ اﺠﻤﻟـــﺮﻳﺔand by ( ﻋﻨﺎﻗـــﻴــﺪ اﺠﻤﻟـــﺮاتpara. 3,
sentence 1). Galactic clusters are a type of star cluster. Galactic star clusters
– or open star clusters – contrast with globular star clusters. Open star
clusters are much less compact than globular star clusters, and are
concentrated towards the plane of the galaxy – hence their alternative
name ºgalactic clusters‚.
3.  :ﻓﺮﻳﺘﺰزوﻳﻜﻲºFritz Zwicky‚.
4.  :اﻟﺬؤاﺑﺔºComa‚ (from Greek, lit. = ºwisp of hair‚; cf. under  ذؤاﺑﺔin Hans
Wehr).
5. In respect of the section:
ﻻ ﺗﻈﻞ اﺠﻤﻟـﺮات ﻣﺘﺠـﺎورة ﻟﻔﺘـﺮة ﻃﻮﻳﻠﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﺰﻣﻦ، وﻻ ﺑﺪ أن ﺗﺆدي ﺣـﺮﻛﺔ
ﻛﻞ ﻣﺠـﺮة ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌﻨﻘﻮد إﻟـﻰ اﺑﺘﻌﺎد أﺟـﺰاء اﺠﻤﻟﻤـﻮﻋﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌـﻀﻬﺎ اﻟـﺒﻌﺾ، إﻻ
أن ﻋــــﻤﻠﻴــــﺔ اﻟـﺮﺻـــﺪ اﻟـﻔﻠﻜـﻲ ﺗﺆﻛــــﺪ أن اﻟﻌـﻨﻘــــﻮد اﺠﻤﻟــــﺮي ﻻ ﻳﺰال ﻣــــﺘـــﻤــــﺎﺳـﻜﺎ
ﻛﻮﺣﺪة واﺣﺪة
consider the following from an article about dark matter entitled The Dark
Side of the Universe (Economist Magazine, June 23, 1990):
The idea that most of the universe is invisible follows from the
strange behaviour of the parts that are not. Galaxies, for example,
spin too fast. If they were nothing more than the shining whirlpools
of stars seen from earth, they would not be heavy enough to hold
themselves together; centrifugal force would tear them apart. Since
they are not falling apart, they must be heavier than they look.
Some hidden mass must provide enough gravitational attraction
to hold them together. Similar arguments apply to the arrangement
of the galaxies. Their clustering can only be explained if the
weight of a cluster is more than that of the bright galaxies it
contains.

15
Translating
constitutional texts:
Supplement
_______________________________
PRACTICAL  15
Practical 15.3  Constitutional translation
Assignment
(i)
Discuss the strategic decisions that you have to take before starting
detailed translation of the following text, and outline and justify the
strategy you adopt. You are to translate the text for a Lebanese political
group which intends to use it as an official translation when dealing
with the English-speaking world.
(ii)
Translate the text into English.
(iii)
Outline the decisions of detail which you made in producing your
translation.
Contextual information
This proposed constitution was drawn up in the 1970s by  ,ﻋــــﺼــــﺎم ﻧـﻌــــﻤــــﺎنa
lawyer and lecturer in constitutional law at the Lebanese University (ﻧﻌـــﻤـــﺎن
1979: 141–2). The text bears an interesting resemblance to the Indian
Constitution discussed in this chapter. Where it is possible to make use of
words and phrases which appear in the Indian Constitution in order to translate
elements of this text, you should do so.

80
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
ST
ﺸﺮﺮﺮﺮووووعععع
ﺸ
ﺸ
ﻣﻣﻣﻣﺸ
ﺠﺠﺠﻤﻤﻤﻤﻬﻬﻬﻬﻮﻮﻮﻮررررﻳﻳﻳﻳﺔﺔﺔﺔ    ااااﻟﻟﻟﻟﻠﻠﻠﻠﺒﺒﺒﺒﻨﻨﻨﻨﺎﺎﺎﺎﻧﻧﻧﻧﻴﻴﻴﻴﺔﺔﺔﺔ
ﺳﺘﺘﺘﺘﻮﻮﻮﻮرررر    ﺟﺟﺟﺟﺪﺪﺪﺪﻳﻳﻳﻳﺪﺪﺪﺪ    ﻟﻟﻟﻟﻠﻠﻠﻠﺠ
ﺳ
ﺳ
ددددﺳ
ﻣﻣﻣﻣﻘﻘﻘﻘﺪﺪﺪﺪﻣﻣﻣﻣﺔﺔﺔﺔ
ﻧﺤﻦ اﻟﺸﻌﺐ اﻟﻠﺒﻨﺎﻧﻲ ،
وﻗــﺪ ﺻـﻤــﻤﻨﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ أن ﳒــﻌﻞ ﻣﻦ ﻟـﺒﻨﺎن ﺟـﻤــﻬــﻮرﻳﺔ ﻋﻠﻤــﺎﻧﻴـﺔ دﳝـﻘـﺮاﻃﻴــﺔ
ذات ﺳﻴﺎدة ، وﻋﻠﻰ أن ﻧﻜﻔﻞ ﳉﻤﻴﻊ اﳌﻮاﻃﻨﲔ :
ﺣـﺮﻳﺔ اﻟﻔﻜﺮ واﻟﺘـﻌـﺒﻴـﺮ واﻟﻌـﻘـﻴـﺪة واﻟﺪﻳﻦ واﻟﻌـﺒﺎدة، وﻋـﺪاﻟﺔ اﺟـﺘـﻤﺎﻋـﻴـﺔ
واﻗﺘﺼﺎدﻳﺔ وﺳﻴﺎﺳﻴﺔ  ،
وﻣﺴﺎواة اﻣﺎم اﻟﻘﺎﻧﻮن وﻓﻲ اﳌﺮاﻛﺰ واﻟﻔﺮص ،
وﻋﻠﻰ ان ﻧـﻨﻤﻲ ﺑﻴـﻨﻬﻢ ﺟــﻤــﻴـــﻌــﺎ أواﺻــﺮ اﶈــﺒــﺔ واﻻﺧـــﺎء ﺿــﻤــﺎﻧﺎ ﻟـﻜﺮاﻣــﺔ
اﻟﻔﺮد ووﺣﺪة اﻟﻮﻃﻦ واﻟﺸﻌﺐ ،
وﻋﻠﻰ ان ﻧـﺸــﺎرك اﺷــﻘــﺎءﻧﺎ اﻟـﻌــﺮب آﻻﻣــﻬﻢ وآﻣـــﺎﻟﻬﻢ اﻧﻄﻼﻗـــﺎ ﻣﻦ وﺣــﺪة
اﻟﺘﺎرﻳﺦ واﳌﺼﻴﺮ ،
وﻋﻠﻰ ان ﻧﺘﺎﺑﻊ ﻣﻘـﻴﻤﲔ وﻣﻐﺘﺮﺑﲔ ، دورﻧﺎ اﳊﻀﺎري ﻓـﻲ ﻧﺸﺮ اﳌﻌﺮﻓﺔ
وﺗﻌﺰﻳﺰ ﻗﻴﻢ اﳊﺮﻳﺔ واﻟﻌﺪاﻟﺔ واﻟﺴﻼم ،
ﻧﻌﻠﻦ وﳕﻨﺢ اﻧﻔﺴﻨﺎ ﻫﺬا اﻟﺪﺳﺘﻮر .
ب    ااااﻻﻻﻻﻻوووولللل
ب
ب
ااااﻟﻟﻟﻟﺒﺒﺒﺒﺎﺎﺎﺎب
ﺳﻴﻴﻴﻴﺔﺔﺔﺔ
ﺳ
ﺳ
ﺳﺎﺎﺎﺎﺳ
ﺳ
ﺳ
ت        ااااﻻﻻﻻﻻﺳ
ت
ت
ااااﳌﳌﳌﳌﻘﻘﻘﻘﻮﻮﻮﻮﻣﻣﻣﻣﺎﺎﺎﺎت
 ﻟﺒـﻨﺎن ﺟــﻤــﻬــﻮرﻳـﺔ ﻋــﺮﺑﻴــﺔ ﻋﻠـﻤــﺎﻧﻴــﺔ دﳝﻘــﺮاﻃـﻴــﺔ ذات وﺣــﺪة ﻻ- اﳌﺎدة ١
ﺗﺘﺠﺰأ وﺳﻴﺎدة ﺗﺎﻣﺔ.
 ﺣـــــــﺪود اﻟﺪوﻟـﺔ ﻫـﻲ ﺗﻠـﻚ اﳌـﻌـــــــﺘـــــــﺮف ﺑـﻬـــــــﺎ دوﻟﻴـــــــﺎ اﳌـﺒـــــــﻴـﻨﺔ ﻓـﻲ- اﳌـﺎدة ٢
اﻟﺪﺳﺘﻮر اﻟﻠﺒﻨﺎﻧﻲ اﻟﺼﺎدر ﻓﻲ اﻷول ﻣﻦ اﻳﻠﻮل ﺳﻨﺔ ٦٢٩١.
 ﻋﺎﺻﻤﺔ اﻟﺪوﻟﺔ ﻣﺪﻳﻨﺔ ﺑﻴﺮوت .- اﳌﺎدة ٣
 ﻟﻐﺔ اﻟﺪوﻟﺔ ﻫﻲ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﻴﺔ .- اﳌﺎدة ٤
 ﻋﻠﻢ اﻟﺪوﻟـﺔ أﺣـﻤـﺮ ﻓـﺎﺑﻴﺾ ﻓـﺎﺣـﻤـﺮ اﻗـﺴـﺎﻣـﻬـﺎ اﻓــﻘـﻴـﺔ ، ﺗﺘـﻮﺳﻂ- اﳌﺎدة ٥
اﻻرزة اﳋﻀﺮاء اﻟﻘﺴﻢ اﻻﺑﻴﺾ اﳌﺴﺎوي ﺣﺠﻢ اﻟﻘﺴﻤﲔ اﻻﺣﻤﺮﻳﻦ ﻣﻌﺎ.

16
Translating consumer-
oriented texts:
Supplement
_______________________________
16.4  GENRE-MIXING IN CONSUMER-ORIENTED TEXTS
The following extracts from three different recipe books in English amply
illustrate potential variations of style in English-language recipes, and therefore
problems of choice in translating recipe material. Thanks to their manifest
consumer orientation, the extracts are also clear concluding reminders that
every text – and therefore also every translation – is made for a specific
purpose and a specific audience.
BOUILLABAISSE
NOTE: This, the most famous of all fish soups, is made chiefly in the
South of France, different districts having particular recipes. It is a kind
of thick stew of fish, which should include a very wide mixture of different
kinds of fish. The original French recipes use many fish not available in
Great Britain. The following recipe is adapted to use the available fish. In
order to get a wide enough variety a large quantity must be made.
[Ingredients listed]
Clean the fish, cut them into thick slices and sort them into 2 groups, the
firm-fleshed kind and the soft kind. Chop the onion, slice the leek, crush
the garlic, scald, skin and slice the tomatoes. In a deep pan make a bed of
the sliced vegetables and the herbs, season this layer. Arrange on top the
pieces of firm-fleshed fish; season them and pour over them the oil. [...]
(Beeton 1962: 119)
ZUPPA DA PESCE
It doesn‚t matter whether you call it bouillabaisse, cippolini, zuppa de
pesce, or just fish stew; whether it has lots of liquid, or, like this, is

82
Thinking Arabic translation: Supplement
simmered in its own richly aromatic juices. It‚s not just good, it‚s wonderful.
To put it in the oven is somewhat illegitimate, but you are less apt to
overcook it. Serve with Spanish rice (for the hearty ones), tossed green
salad, French bread to sop up the juices.
[Ingredients listed]
Put the olive oil and garlic in a warm, deep casserole and heat. Place the
large fish on the bottom, then the mussels and shrimp. Season, and sprinkle
the parsley over all. [...] Baste from time to time with the juices, using an
oversized eyedropper called a baster. Serve in deep hot plates.
Serves 6 generously. Time: 45 minutes.
(Tracy 1965: n.p.)
FISH CAKES
[Ingredients listed]
1. Chop the parsley with both hands, one on the knife handle and one on
the top of the knife blade. This chops the parsley smaller and keeps
your fingers safely out of the way of the knife.
2. Put the potatoes on one plate and mash them up with the fork. Add the
fish and mash it up too. Add the butter, parsley, salt and pepper. Mix
them all together.
3. Turn the mixture out on to the board and make it into a roll with your
hands like a big sausage. Cut off rounds with the knife.
[...]
(Anderson 1972: 26)
PRACTICAL 16
Practical 16.3  Translation of consumer-oriented texts
Assignment
(i)
Discuss the strategic problems confronting the translator of the following
text, and outline your own strategy for dealing with them.
(ii)
Translate the text into English.
(iii)
Explain the decisions of detail which you made in producing your
translation.
Contextual information
This recipe is from the same set of recipe-cards  أﻛـﻼت ﺗﻮﻧﺴــﻴـﺔas the recipe
( ﻣـﻘـﺮوﻧﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﻮﺷـﺔPractical 16.2). Your brief is the same as for the recipe
above. See also the Contextual information for  ﻣــــــــﻘـــــــﺮوﻧـﺔ ﻓـﻲ اﻟـﻜﻮﺷــــــــﺔfor
glosses and other information. The following terms, which are also found in
this text, are probably not guessable by native English speakers (although the
first of them might be accessible to someone who also knows French):
ﻓﺮﻳﻨﺔflour (from French farine). What is intended is possibly a particular
kind of flour (as distinct from the more standard  .)دﻗـــــﻴﻖWe have

Translating consumer-oriented texts: Supplement
83
not, however, been able to ascertain this, and ºflour‚ fits the context
perfectly well.
ﻣﻌﺪوﻧﺲºparsley‚ (the more normal form in Standard Arabic, and in many
dialects is .)ﺑﻘﺪوﻧﺲ
ST
ﻣﻣﻣﻣﺒﺒﺒﺒﻄﻄﻄﻄﻦﻦﻦﻦ    ﺑﺑﺑﺑﺮﺮﺮﺮووووﻛﻛﻛﻛﻮﻮﻮﻮﻟﻟﻟﻟﻮﻮﻮﻮ
ﻣﺪة اﻟﺘﻬﻴﺌﺔ: 20 د ق
ﻣﺪة اﻻﻋﺪاد: ﺳﺎﻋﺔ ورﺑﻊ
ﻣﻘﻮﻣﺎت ﻻرﺑﻌﺔ اﺷﺨﺎص
رأس ﺑﺮوﻛﻮﻟﻮ ﺣﺠﻢ ﻣﺘﻮﺳﻂ
250غ  ﳊﻢ ﻋﺠﻞ
2
) دﺳﻞ  زﻳﺖ زﻳﺘﻮن12
(. م.أ
2م.أ.  ﻣﻌﺪوﻧﺲ ﻣﻘﻄﻊ
6م.أ.  ﻣﻌﺠﻮن ﻃﻤﺎﻃﻢ
1م.أ.  ﻫﺮﻳﺴﺔ
5م.أ.  ﻓﺮﻳﻨﺔ
2ﺑﻴﺾ
1/2
 م.أ.  ﻓﻠﻔﻞ أﺣﻤﺮ
1/2
 م.أ.  ﺗﺎﺑﻞ
1/2
 م.أ.  ﻓﻠﻔﻞ أﺳﻮد
اﻻﻋﺪاد :
ﲢـﻤﻰ 3 ﻣـﻼﻋﻖ زﻳﺖ. ﻧﻀﻊ اﻟـﻠﺤﻢ ﻣـﻘﻄﻮﻋـﺎ ﻗﻄﻌـﺎ ﻣـﺘـﺒـﻼ ﺑﺎﻟﺘـﺎﺑـﻞ واﻟﻔﻠﻔﻞ
اﻻﺳــﻮد واﳌﻠﺢ. ﻧﻀــﻴﻒ اﻟﻄـﻤـﺎﻃـﻢ واﻟﻬـﺮﻳـﺴـﺔ واﻟـﻔﻠﻔﻞ اﻻﺣــﻤــﺮ ﻣـﺤـﻠﻮﻻ ﻓﻲ
ﻣﻘﺪار ﻛﺄس ﻣﻦ اﳌﺎء ﻧﺘﺮك ﻟﻠﻄﻬﻲ ﻋﻠﻰ ﻧﺎر ﻣﺘﻮﺳﻄﺔ ﻣﺪة 40
. دﻗﻴﻘﺔ
ﻳُﻔــــﺮﱠغ اﻟﺒــــﺮوﻛــــﻮﻟﻮ وﻳﻐــــﺴﻞ وﻳـﻄﺒـﺦ ﻓﻲ اﳌﺎء ﻣـﻊ اﳌﻠﺢ ﻣــــﺪة 15 دﻗــــﻴـــﻘــــﺔ
ﻧﺮﻛﺾ اﻟﺒﻴﻀـﺘﲔ ﻣﻊ اﻟﻔﺮﻳﻨﺔ. ﻧﻐﻤﺲ ﻓﺮوع اﻟﺒـﺮوﻛﻮﻟﻮ ﻓﻲ اﳋﻠﻴﻂ ﺣﺘﻰ
ﻟﻔﻬﺎ ﺛﻢ ﻧﻘﻠﻴﻬﺎ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺰﻳﺖ اﶈﻤﻲ.
ﻧـﻀـــــــــﻴـﻒ اﻟـﻰ اﻟـﺼـﻠـﺼـــــــــﺔ ﻣـﻠﻌــــــــــﻘـــــــــﺘـﲔ ﻣﻦ زﻳـﺖ اﻟـﻘـﻠـﻲ وﻧـﻀـﻊ ﻓـــــــــﺮوع
اﻟﺒــﺮوﻛـﻮﻟﻮ اﳌـﻘﻠﻴــﺔ. ﻧﻀـﻴﻒ ﻣــﻘــﺪار ﻛـﺄﺳﲔ ﻣﻦ اﳌـﺎء وﻧﻮاﺻﻞ اﻟﻄﻬﻲ ﻣــﺪة
15
 
.دﻗﻴﻘﺔ
ﻳﻘﻄﻊ اﳌﻌﺪوﻧﺲ واﻟﺒﺼﻞ ﻗﻄﻌﺎ دﻗﻴﻘﺎ ﻟﻠﺘﺰوﻳﻖ.

References:
Supplement
_______________________________
English-language references
Abdulla, A.K. 1994. ºThe translation of style‚, in de Beaugrande, R. et al
(eds.) Language, Discourse and Translation in the West and Middle
East. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing House.
Al-Jubouri, A. 1984.  ºThe role of repetition in Arabic argumentative discourse‚,
in Swales, H. and Mustafa, H. (eds.) English for Specific Purposes in the
Arab World. University of Aston Language Studies Unit.
Anderson, V. 1972. The Brownie Cookbook. London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Arberry, A.J. 1957. The Seven Odes: The First Chapter in Arabic Literature.
London: Allen & Unwin.
Badawi, E. and Hinds, M.J.  1986. A Dictionary of Egyptian Arabic. Beirut:
Librairie du Liban.
Baker, M. 1992. In Other Words. London: Routledge.
Bauer, L. 2003. Introducing Linguistic Morphology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
de Beaugrande, R., Shunnaq, A., and Heliel, M. (eds). 1994. Language,
Discourse and Translation in the West and Middle East. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins Publishing House.
Beeston, A.F.L. 1970. The Arabic Language Today. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Beeton, M. 1962. Mrs Beeton‚s Family Cookery. London: Ward, Lock &
Company.
Brown, C. 1996. Translation of extracts from  ﻣـــــــﺪﻳـﻨﺔ اﻟـﺒـــــــﻐـﻲby ﻋـــــــﻴـــــــﺴـﻰ
 .ﺑﺸﺎرةBA translation project: University of Durham.

References: Supplement
85
Calderbank, T. 1990. Translation Strategies for an Arabic Political
Argumentative Text. Unpublished MA dissertation: University of Salford.
Dickins, J. Forthcoming. ºTwo models for metaphor translation‚. To appear
in Target. Amsterdam and New York: John Benjamins Publishing House.
Dickins, J., Hervey, S.G.J., and Higgins, I. 2002. Thinking Arabic Translation.
London and New York: Routledge.
Dickins, J. and Watson, J.C.E. 1999. Standard Arabic: An Advanced Course.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foreman, D. 1996. Translation of extracts from  اﻟﺴـﻴـﺪ وﻣـﺮاﺗﻪ ﻓﻲ ﻣـﺼـﺮby
 .ﺑﻴﺮم اﻟﺘﻮﻧﺴﻲBA translation project: University of Durham.
Hatim, B. 1997. Communication across Cultures: Translation Theory and
Contrastive Text Linguistics. Exeter: Exeter University Press.
Hetherington, M. 1996. Translation of  ﻟﻌﺒـﺔ اﻟﻀﻔﺎدع واﻟﻌﻘـﺎرب ﻓﻲ ﻋﻮاﺻﻢ
 اﻟﺸﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂby ( ﻋﺎدل ﺣﻤﻮدةfrom  روز اﻟﻴﻮﺳﻒmagazine, no. 3521,
1995). BA translation project: University of Durham.
Holes, C. 1995. Modern Arabic: Structures, Functions and Varieties. London
and New York: Longman.
Humphrys, S. 1999. Translation of extract from اﻟﻌــﺴـﻜﺮ واﳊﻜﻢ ﻓﻲ اﻟـﺒﻠﺪان
 اﻟﻌـــــﺮﺑﻴـــــﺔby ( ﻓـــــﺆاد اﺳــــﺤـــــﺎق اﳋـــــﻮري1990. Beirut: Al-Saqi Books). BA
translation project: University of Durham.
Ives, S. 1999. Translation of  ﻏـﺎرات ﺣﻠﻒ اﻻﻃﻠﺴﻲ ﺳـﺘـﺴﺘـﻤـﺮ اﺳـﺎﺑﻴﻊ وﻟﻦ
 ﺗﺘـﻮﻗﻒ ﺧــﻼل »اﻟﻔـﺼﺢ«and ( ﻣـﺪﻳﻨﺔ اﳌﻮتfrom  اﻟﺸـﺮق اﻻوﺳﻂ2 April
1999). BA translation project: University of Durham.
Johnstone, B. 1991. Repetition in Arabic Discourse: Paradigms, Syntagms
and the Ecology of Language. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
House.
Jones, L. 1999. Translation of ( اﳊﺎج رﺋﻴﺴﺎ ﻟﻠﻜـﺘﺎﺋﺐ ﺑﻔﺎرق ٧ أﺻﻮاتfrom
 اﻟـﻨﻬـــــــﺎرnewspaper, 2 March 1999). BA translation project: University of
Durham.
Leech, G. 1981. Semantics. Harmondsworth: Pelican Books.
Leech, G. and Svartvik, J. 1994. A Communicative Grammar of English. 2nd
edn. London and New York: Longman.
Leith, D. 1983. A Social History of English. London: Routledge, Kegan and
Paul.
Montgomery, A. 1994. Translation of  ﻧـﺨﻠـﺔ ﻋﻠـﻰ اﳉـــــﺪولby اﻟﻄـﻴﺐ ﺻـــــﺎﻟﺢ
(1953. Beirut:  .)دار اﻟﻌﻮدةBA translation project: University of Durham.
Morrey, D. 2000. Translation of extracts from  اﺳـــــﺪ ﺑﺎﺑـﻞby .ﻧﻮاف ﺣـــــﺮدان

86
Thinking Arabic Translation: Supplement
BA translation project: University of Durham.
Newmark, P. 1988. A Textbook of Translation. New York: Prentice Hall
International.
Rolph, D. 1995. Translation of  اﻟﻰ ﺑﻴﺮوت اﻻﻧﺜـﻰ ﻣﻊ ﺣﺒﻲby .ﻧﺰار ﻗﺒـﺎﻧﻲ
(In  ,اﻻﻋﻤﺎل اﻟﺸﻌﺮﻳﺔ اﻟﻜﺎﻣﻠﺔvol II. 1981. Beirut: .)ﻣﻨﺸﻮرات ﻧﺰار ﻗﺒﺎﻧﻲ
BA translation project: University of Durham.
Sekine, F. 1996. Clause Combining in Contextual Grammar in English. PhD
thesis: University of Birmingham.
Sells, M.A. 1989. Desert Tracings: Six Classic Arabian Odes. Middletown:
Wesleyan University Press.
Somekh, S. 1991. Genre and Language in Modern Arabic Literature.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
St John, J. 1999. Translation of   ﺣــــﻘﻞ اﻟﺒـﻨﻔــــﺴﺞand  اﻟﻨـﺎر واﳌﺎءby زﻛـــﺮﻳﺎ
( ﺗﺎﻣــــﺮ1973. In  .دﻣـــــﺸﻖ اﳊـــــﺮاﺋﻖDamascus:  .)دار اﻻﻧﻮارBA translation
project: University of Durham.
Swales, H. and Mustafa, H. (eds.) 1984. English for Specific Purposes in the
Arab World. University of Aston Language Studies Unit.
Tracy, M. 1965. Modern Casserole Cookery. London: Studio Vista.
Tunnicliffe, S. 1994. Translation of  اﳋــﻴــﻮلand   ذﻟﻚ اﻟﺮﺟﻞ وﺗـﻠﻚ اﳌﺮأةby
( ﻋـــــﺒـــــﺪ اﻟﺮﺣـــــﻤـﻦ ﻣـــــﺠـــــﻴـــــﺪ اﻟﺮﺑـﻴـــــﻌﻲ1976. Tunis). BA translation project:
University of Durham.
Arabic-language references
 .ﻓـﺆاد اﺳــﺤـﺎق ,اﳋـﻮري1990.  .اﳊﻜﻢ واﻟﻌــﺴﻜﺮ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺒﻠﺪان اﻟﻌــﺮﺑﻴـﺔLondon:
Al-Saqi Books.
 .اﻟﺰوزﻧﻲN.d. ( .اﳌﻌﻠﻘﺎت اﻟﺴﺒﻊ )ﺷﺮح اﻟﺰوزﻧﻲBeirut: .دار اﳉﻴﻞ
 .ﻳﻮﺳﻒ ,ﺳﻌﺪN.d.  .ﻧﻮادر ﺟﺤﺎCairo: no publisher.
 ,ﻋـﻤـﺮ ﺑﻦ ﻋـﺜـﻤـﺎن ,ﺳـﻴﺒـﻮﻳﻪ1975.  ,اﻟﻜﺘﺎبed. by  .ﻋـﺒـﺪ اﻟﺴـﻼم ﻫﺎرونBeirut:
..ﻋﺎﻟﻢ اﻟﻜﺘﺐ
 .اﻟﻄﻴﺐ ,ﺻﺎﻟﺢN.d.  .ﻋﺮس اﻟﺰﻳﻦBeirut: .دار اﻟﻌﻮدة
 .ﻧﺰار ,ﻗــــﺒـــــﺎﻧﻲ1981.  .اﻷﻋــــﻤـــــﺎل اﻟﺸــــﻌـــــﺮﻳﺔ اﻟـﻜﺎﻣـﻠﺔBeirut: ﻣﻨـﺸـــﻮرات ﻧﺰار
..ﻗﺒﺎﻧﻲ

References: Supplement
87
 .ﳒﻴـﺐ ،ﻣﺤـﻔﻮظN.d.  .اﻻﻋﻤـﺎل اﻟﻜﺎﻣﻠﺔvol. 7 ( .)اﳉﺰء اﻟﺴـﺎﺑﻊBeirut: اﳌﻜﺘـﺒﺔ
.اﻟﻌﻠﻤﻴﺔ اﳉﺪﻳﺪة
 .ﻓــــﺆاد ,ﻣﻄﺮ1984. ( ﺳــــﻘـــــﻮط اﻹﻣــــﺒـــــﺮاﻃﻮرﻳﺔ اﻟـﻠﺒـﻨﺎﻧـﻴــــﺔ5 vols.). Beirut: دار
.اﻟﻘﻀﺎﻳﺎ
 .ﻋـﺼــﺎم ,ﻧﻌــﻤـﺎن1979.   .اﻟﻰ اﻳﻦ ﻳـﺴـﻴــﺮ ﻟـﺒﻨﺎنBeirut: دار اﻟﻄﻠـﻴـﻌــﺔ ﻟﻠﻄـﺒـﺎﻋــﺔ
.واﻟﻨﺸﺮ

