Using Code Interpreter for Data Analysis 
 
What makes the code interpreter so special is this little upload button right here.
 
 
We can upload nearly any type of file, provided it's under 500MB (at time of writing, 500MB 
is the current threshold). 
 
We can upload a data set, a CSV file, an Excel spreadsheet, a JSON file, SQL data, images, 
and then have the code interpreter do some work, such as data analysis and visualization. 
 
The first thing we need to do is find a data set that we can use. In the real world, you might 
have some company data, personal sales data, fitness data etc. Whatever the data set is, you 
can upload it. 
 
The website Kaggle has a plethora of data sets. After creating a free account on Kaggle, you 
can access the data sets.  
 
 
Click on ‘Datasets’ on the left pane and there are tons of different data sets.  
 

 
 
You can sort or search them if you want the most updated, the most popular, or the newest. 
I'm going to choose a simple and easy-to-understand data set to start with. 
 
Do a search for ‘netflix’ and use the ‘Netflix Movies and TV Shows’ dataset: 
 
 
Information about this data set: 
 
 
 
We get a preview of what the data looks like when we scroll down.  

 
 
The different columns include show_id, type, title, director, cast, released_year, country, 
rating, duration etc.  
 
I'll download this data set and unzip it. 
 
Then go back to ChatGPT in a code interpreter session, click on the upload file button and 
upload the csv file.  
 
Once it's done uploading, I can either just hit enter right away or I can provide some 
instructions. I'll start with "tell me a bit about the data".  
 
It gives the following: 
 
The dataset contains information about movies and TV shows available on Netflix. Each row 
corresponds to a unique title, and the columns provide various details about each title. The 
columns include: 
 

 
 
You can click ‘Show Work’ to see the Python code Code Interpreter ran behind the scenes: 
 
 
It imports the pandas library, a popular library for data analysis manipulation. It then loads 
the csv file with pd.read_csv, and calls the method data.head() which returns the first few 
rows of the data set (we can see the result in the lower portion). 
 
Now if you don’t know what to ask, you can ask ChatGPT to suggest some ideas.  

 
It responses with: 
 
 
 
Let's try something simple, like “Who are the directors with the most titles on Netflix?” 
 
The code it runs generates a list showing the director's name, followed by how many titles 
they were in.  
 
The code runs the value_counts() method on the ‘director’ column. And you get the output: 
 

 
 
So you could actually run the code yourself, if you understand pandas, how to import it, how 
to load a csv file and you will get the same output.  
 
Code Interpreter than beautifies the format a little: 
 
 
 
Now let's try something slightly more complicated. How about we do some descriptive 
statistics? For instance, let's perform some basic analysis on ‘duration’.  

 
 
Firstly, as seen from the above, it can clean our data. It can remove rows with missing values. 
 
It can also provide statistics like mean, standard deviation, and medium of the duration.  
 
 
I could ask a follow up question like, "which movie has a duration of 312 minutes?" 
 

 
 
You don't really have to know Python in order to use it here. You can get pretty far without 
knowing what's happening behind the scenes, without understanding the code.  
 
 
 
But if you are a developer, click on ‘Show Work’ (above), read the code, understand, tweak, 
and use the code on your own machine. Alternatively, just leave Code Interpreter to do the 
heavy lifting for us. 
 
In fact, you can use Code Interpreter to fast track learning Python and its data analytics 
libraries like MatPlotLib, Numpy etc.!  
 
In the next section, we'll talk about visualizations, which are also really easy to do with this 
code interpreter. 
 

