

Greek

For Amy and Sophie

Greek
Second Edition
G e o f f r e y  H o r r o c k s
A History of the Language and its Speakers
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This second edition ﬁ rst published 2010
© 2010 Geoffrey Horrocks
Edition history: 1e (Longman Publishing Group, 1997)
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s 
publishing program has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁ c, Technical, and Medical 
business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered Ofﬁ ce
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, 
United Kingdom
Editorial Ofﬁ ces
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial ofﬁ ces, for customer services, and for information about 
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our 
website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of Geoffrey Horrocks to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in 
print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as 
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service 
marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not 
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed 
to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It 
is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional 
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a 
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Horrocks, Geoffrey C.
 Greek : a history of the language and its speakers / Geoffrey Horrocks. – 2nd ed.
  p. cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-4051-3415-6 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Greek language–History. 2. Greek 
language, Medieval and late. 3. Greek language, Modern. 4. Greece–Civilization. I. Title.
 PA227.H76 2010
 480.9–dc22
 
2009025375
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/13pt Sabon by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Printed in Singapore
I 2010

Contents
Preface to the First Edition 
xii
Preface to the Second Edition 
xv
IPA Chart 
xvii
The Greek Alphabet 
xviii
Introduction: The Scope and Purpose of This Book 
1
PART I Ancient Greek: From Mycenae to 
the Roman Empire 
7
1 The Ancient Greek Dialects 
9
1.1 The Coming of the ‘Greeks’ to Greece 
9
1.2 The Earliest Records: Mycenaean Greek 
10
1.3 Greek Dialect Relations and the Place of Mycenaean 
13
1.4 Some Examples 
24
1.4.1 Some basic dialect characteristics 
24
1.4.2 West Greek 
28
(a) Laconian 
28
(b) Cretan 
29
(c) Elean 
30
(d) Phocian 
31
1.4.3 Aeolic 
32
(a) Boeotian 
32
(b) Thessalian 
33
(c) Lesbian 
34
1.4.4 East Greek 
36
(a) Arcadian 
36
(b) Ionic 
37
(c) Attic 
40
2 Classical Greek: Ofﬁ cial and Literary ‘Standards’ 
43
2.1 Introduction 
43
2.2 The Language of Homer and its Inﬂ uence 
44
2.2.1 Ionian epic 
44
2.2.2 Ionian elegy and iambus 
49

vi Contents
2.2.3 Personal lyric 
50
2.2.4 Choral lyric 
53
2.2.5 Athenian drama 
56
2.3 Ofﬁ cial and Literary Ionic 
60
3 The Rise of Attic 
67
3.1 Attic as a Literary Standard 
67
3.2 ‘Great Attic’ as an Administrative Language 
73
4 Greek in the Hellenistic World 
79
4.1 Introduction 
79
4.2 The Koine as an Extension of Great Attic 
80
4.3 The Impact and Status of the Koine 
83
4.4 The Fate of the Ancient Greek Dialects 
84
4.4.1 Introduction 
84
4.4.2 Koineization: the case of Boeotian 
84
4.4.3 Doric koines: Tsakonian 
87
4.5 The Koine in the Hellenistic Kingdoms 
88
4.6 The Koine as an Ofﬁ cial Language 
89
4.6.1 Introduction 
89
4.6.2 Macedonian Koine: the development of 
inﬁ nitival constructions 
90
4.6.3 The articular inﬁ nitive 
94
4.7 Language and Literature in the Hellenistic World: 
The Koine as a Literary Dialect 
96
4.7.1 Introduction 
96
4.7.2 Historiography: Polybius 
97
4.7.3 The Koine as the language of technical prose 
98
4.7.4 Reaction against the Koine: Hellenistic poetry 
98
4.7.5 Reaction against the Koine: Asianism and Atticism 
99
4.7.6 Popular literature: romances 
100
4.7.7 Drama: the ‘new’ Attic comedy and the mime 
101
4.7.8 Jewish literature: the Septuagint 
106
4.8 Clitic Pronouns and the Shift Towards VS Word Order 
108
4.9 Analogical Pressure on the Strong Aorist Paradigm 
109
4.10 The Spoken Koine: Regional Diversity 
110
4.10.1 Introduction 
110
4.10.2 Egypt 
111
4.10.3 Asia Minor 
113
4.11 Private Inscriptions and Papyri: Some Major Trends 
114
4.11.1 Introduction: datives, future periphrases, the 
nom-acc plural of consonant-stems 
114
4.11.2 Phonological developments 
117
4.11.3 Other morphological developments: partial 
merger of the 1st and 3rd declensions 
120
4.12 Conclusion 
122

Contents vii
5 Greek in the Roman Empire 
124
5.1 Roman Domination 
124
5.2 The Fate of Greek 
125
5.3 The Impact of Bilingualism: Greek and Latin in Contact 
126
5.4 Roman Attitudes to Greek Culture 
132
5.5 Atticism and the Second Sophistic 
133
5.6 Atticist Grammars and Lexica: Aelius Aristides 
137
5.7 The Ofﬁ cial Koine in the Roman Republican Period 
141
5.8 Past-Tense Morphology 
143
5.9 Ofﬁ cial Writing of the Roman Imperial Period 
144
5.10 ‘Colloquial’ Literature 
146
5.10.1 Epictetus 
146
5.10.2 The New Testament 
147
5.11 Later Christian Literature: Stylistic Levels 
152
5.11.1 The Apostolic Fathers 
152
5.11.2 The impact of Atticism 
155
5.11.3 Callinicus and Theodoret 
156
6 Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 
160
6.1 Introduction 
160
6.2 Summary of the Principal Developments in the Vowel System 
160
6.3 Some Illustrative Examples 
163
6.3.1 Athenian Attic 
163
6.3.2 Egyptian Koine 
165
6.4 The Development of the Consonant System 
170
6.5 Some Egyptian Texts 
172
6.5.1 Letter 1: clitic pronouns and word order, 
control verbs with i{na ['ina]-complements 
172
6.5.2 Letter 2: ‘short’ 2nd-declension forms, 
the merger of aorist and perfect 
174
6.5.3 Letter 3: the decline of 3rd-declension participles 
178
6.5.4 Letter 4: the decline of the dative 
183
6.6 Conclusion 
187
PART II Byzantium: From Constantine I 
to Mehmet the Conqueror 
189
7 Historical Prelude 
191
7.1 The Later Roman Empire 
191
7.2 The Age of Transition: Ioustinianós and the Arab Conquests 
194
7.3 The Middle Byzantine Period: Iconoclasm, 
Renaissance and Decline 
197
7.4 The Late Byzantine Period: Stabilization, Defeat and Fall 
200

viii Contents
8 Greek in the Byzantine Empire: The Major Issues 
207
8.1 Introduction 
207
8.2 Greek and Other Languages in the Early Byzantine Period 
207
8.3 The Prestige of Greek 
210
8.4 Greek in the Later Empire 
212
8.4.1 Introduction 
212
8.4.2 Byzantine Atticism 
213
8.4.3 The ﬁ rst experiments with the vernacular 
214
8.4.4 The vernacular literature of the 14th and 15th centuries 
216
8.4.5 The romances 
217
8.4.6 Other vernacular material 
219
8.5 ‘The Koine’ in Byzantium 
220
8.5.1 The inheritance from antiquity 
220
8.5.2 Academic and ecclesiastical Greek 
220
8.5.3 Ofﬁ cial and administrative Greek 
221
8.5.4 Practical writing in the middle period 
222
8.5.5 Chronicles 
222
8.5.6 Christian exegetical literature and hagiography 
225
8.5.7 A new written standard in the later empire 
226
8.6 The Balkan Sprachbund: Future Formations 
227
8.7 Conclusion 
229
9 Byzantine Belles Lettres 
231
9.1 Introduction 
231
9.2 The Early Period: Prokópios (First Half of the 6th Century) 
231
9.3 The Middle Period: Michaél Psellós (1018–1078 or 1096) 
233
9.4 The Modal Imperfect 
237
9.5 The Late Period: Anna Komnené (1083–c.1153) 
238
9.6 After the Fall: Michaél Kritóboulos (15th Century) 
240
9.7 Conclusion 
242
10 The Written Koine in Byzantium 
244
10.1 Introduction 
244
10.2 Chronicles in the Early and Middle Periods 
245
10.2.1 Malálas (c.491–c.578): generics 
245
10.2.2 Theophánes the Confessor (c.760–818) 
251
10.3 Hagiography and Exegetical Works 
253
10.3.1 Ioánnes Móschos (c.550–619) 
253
10.3.2 St Germanós (c.640–733) 
256
10.4 Paraenetic Literature of the Middle Period 
258
10.4.1 Konstantínos VII Porphyrogénnetos (905–59) 
258
10.4.2 Kekauménos (11th century) 
262
10.5 The Metaphrases of the Palaiologan Period 
264
10.6 Academic Greek in the Late Period: Máximos 
Planoúdes (c.1255–c.1305) 
268
10.7 Ofﬁ cial Greek of the Later Empire 
270
10.8 Conclusion 
271

Contents ix
11 Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire: 
The Principal Developments 
273
11.1 Introduction 
273
11.2 The Completion of Sound Changes Beginning in Antiquity 
274
11.3 Grammatical Consequences of Aphaeresis 
277
11.4 Old and New Patterns of Subordination: Clitic Pronouns 
and VSO Order 
277
11.5 Dialect Diversity in Medieval Greek 
281
11.6 Later Phonetic and Phonological Developments 
281
11.7 Nominal Morphology and Syntax 
284
11.7.1 The dative case, prepositional phrases 
284
11.7.2 Feminine nouns of the 1st declension: 
paradigm standardization 
285
11.7.3 Masculine nouns of the 1st declension: 
paradigm standardization 
286
11.7.4 Interplay between the 1st and 3rd declensions: 
imparisyllabic paradigms 
286
11.7.5 Neuters 
288
11.7.6 The deﬁ nite article 
289
11.7.7 Adjectives 
289
11.7.8 Pronouns 
292
(a) Indeﬁ nite pronouns 
292
(b) Interrogative pronouns 
293
(c) Relative pronouns 
293
(d) Demonstrative pronouns 
295
(e) Personal pronouns 
296
11.8 Verb Morphology and Syntax 
296
11.8.1 The inﬁ nitive 
296
11.8.2 Participles 
297
11.8.3 Futures and conditionals, pluperfects and perfects 
298
11.8.4 The spread of k-aorists: the aorist passive 
302
11.8.5 Imperfective stem formation 
303
(a) The fate of the -mi [-mi] verbs 
303
(b) Nasal sufﬁ xes 
305
(c) The sufﬁ xes -avzw [-'azo]/-ivzw [-'izo] 
307
(d) The sufﬁ x -euvw [-'evo] and its inﬂ uence: verbs in 
-ptw [-pto] 
312
(e) The contract verbs 
313
11.8.6 Personal endings 
316
(a) Indicative and subjunctive 
317
(b) Past-tense morphology: active and aorist middle/
passive; the augment 
318
(c) The active paradigm: present tense 
319
(d) The middle/passive paradigm: present tense 
320
(e) The middle/passive paradigm: the imperfect 
320
11.9 Conclusion 
323

x Contents
12 Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 
325
12.1 The Early and Middle Periods 
325
12.1.1 Introduction 
325
12.1.2 The Protobulgarian inscriptions 
325
12.1.3 Acclamations: origins of the ‘political’ verse form 
327
12.2 Vernacular Literature of the 12th Century 
333
12.2.1 The epic of Digenés Akrítes 
333
12.2.2 Ptochopródromos 
337
12.3 The 14th and 15th Centuries: The Palaiologan Court and 
Frankish Rule 
342
12.3.1 The original romances of the Palaiologan period 
342
12.3.2 Greek–Romance contact: perfects/pluperfects, 
negative polarity, clitics 
345
12.3.3 The Chronicle of the Morea 
349
12.3.4 The translated romances 
357
12.4 The First Dialect Literature: Cyprus and Crete 
360
12.4.1 Introduction 
360
12.4.2 Early dialect literature in Cyprus: Machairás’ chronicle 
362
12.4.3 Early vernacular literature in Crete 
366
12.5 Conclusion 
368
PART III Modern Greek: From the 
Ottoman Empire to the European Union 
371
13 Ottoman Rule and the War of Independence 
373
13.1 The Early Years 
373
13.2 Ottoman Decline 
374
13.3 Revolution and Independence 
377
14 Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 
379
14.1 The Impact of Turkish 
379
14.2 The Spoken Dialects of Modern Greek 
381
14.2.1 Introduction: diversiﬁ cation, and the basis for 
a modern spoken standard 
381
14.2.2 Local vernaculars in the central region; Soﬁ anós’ 
grammar and the educated standard 
384
14.2.3 Greek in the west: the South Italian dialects 
388
14.2.4 Greek in the south and south-east: the Dodecanese, 
Cyprus and Crete 
391
14.2.5 Greek in the east: Pontus and Cappadocia 
398
14.2.6 The northern dialects 
404
14.3 Popular Culture in the Turkish Period: The Folk Songs 
406
15 Written Greek in the Turkish Period 
413
15.1 Continuity 
413
15.2 The Impact of the Enlightenment 
419

Contents xi
15.3 Contemporary ‘Demotic’ 
423
15.4 The Roots of the ‘Language Question’ 
426
16 The History of the Modern Greek State 
428
16.1 Irredentism: Triumph and Disaster 
428
16.2 Dictatorship and War 
431
16.3 Recovery, the Colonels and the Restoration of Democracy 
433
17 The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 
438
17.1 Koraís 
438
17.2 The Roots of Demoticism: Solomós and the Ionian Islands 
442
17.3 The Rise of Katharévousa 
445
17.4 Reaction: Psycháris and the Demoticist Programme 
446
17.5 The Progress of Demoticism 
454
17.6 The 20th Century: Crisis and Resolution 
456
17.7 Standard Modern Greek 
462
17.8 A Range of Styles 
466
Bibliography 
471
Index 
493

 Preface to 
the First Edition 
 The writing of this book has taken ﬁ ve years, and had I realized at the outset the scale 
of the task I was undertaking, I am not sure I would have had the courage to begin. 
The history of Greek starts with the Mycenaean documents dating from the second 
half of the second millennium  bc , and many scholars have found sufﬁ cient interest 
and material in every period between then and the present day to build their careers 
on the study of issues which here have often had to be treated in a single subsection. 
 Obviously no one writer can be an expert on everything, and I am deeply conscious 
of my reliance on the publications of those who have devoted themselves to the detailed 
study of speciﬁ c topics and periods. It is a pleasure, therefore, to record my particular 
debt to the works of Roddy Beaton, C. Brixhe, Robert Browning, C.D. Buck, John 
Chadwick, P. Chantraine, Anna Davies, F.T. Gignac, A.N. Jannaris, E.M. and M.J. 
Jeffreys, Peter Mackridge, A. Meillet, A. Mirambel, L.R. Palmer, H. Tonnet and M. 
Triandafyll í dis. Without the outstanding contributions of these scholars, it would have 
been impossible to acquire the conceptual grip necessary to deal with nearly 3,500 
years of language history. I would also like to thank David Holton, Torsten Mei ß ner 
and Bobby Robins, each of whom read through earlier drafts of various sections of 
the material in this book, and saved me from all - too - many errors of fact, judgement 
and omission. 
 Because the work covers such a long period, it deals with issues that have tradition-
ally concerned classicists, Byzantinists and neo - Hellenists, as well as historical linguists. 
I have tried to make it accessible to all these groups by avoiding excessive use of tech-
nical jargon (though no serious discussion can dispense with it altogether), and by 
transcribing, glossing and translating every Greek text. Since the orthography of Greek 
has remained conservative, the transcriptions (inevitably often based on more or less 
controversial reconstructions of pronunciation) in fact serve a useful purpose, but I 
remain conscious that different aspects of the presentation will be irritating to different 
subsets of potential readers; I ask for forbearance in the interests of those with differ-
ent academic backgrounds. 
 The book, however, is not a teach - yourself manual, and I have had to assume some 
minimal familiarity with Greek in order to say anything at all. Bobby Robins recently 

Preface to the First Edition xiii
pointed out to me that, even today, discussion of Greek is almost automatically 
assumed to concern the ancient language in the absence of indications to the contrary. 
Following the Robins dictum, I have therefore taken Ancient Greek to be the  ‘ unmarked ’ 
option, though I hope that this will not prove to be an insuperable obstacle to those 
who bring different perspectives to the material presented here. 
 I should say at the outset that the work has been a labour of love, founded on a 
profound admiration for the achievements of Greeks and speakers of Greek throughout 
their long and turbulent history, and on a long - term fascination with their language 
in all its forms. It will perhaps surprise those who know me exclusively as a classicist, 
as a theoretical syntactician, as a historical linguist, or as someone with a growing 
interest in Medieval and Modern Greek, to discover that I am in fact all of these things 
simultaneously. Indeed, had I not been, this book could not have been written. Despite 
the traditional emphasis on antiquity, the history of Greek does not end with the clas-
sical period, or even with the Hellenistic Koine, and my purpose has been to stress the 
continuity of linguistic development, on through the Roman imperial, Byzantine and 
Ottoman periods, down to the present day. 
 Most histories of (Ancient) Greek focus on Mycenaean and the ofﬁ cial and literary 
dialects of the classical period, with the Koine treated almost as an afterthought. In 
the context of the history of Greek as a whole, however, the Ancient Attic dialect, and 
the Koine that evolved out of its wider use in the Greek - speaking world, are of para-
mount importance. The emphasis here, therefore, is necessarily placed on the rise of 
Attic, the development and spread of the Koine, and the role and development of this 
 ‘ common Greek ’ in the Roman and Byzantine periods. Though there are now some 
excellent treatments of the development of Modern Greek from this source within the 
context of the  ‘ language question ’ (i.e. the problems arising from the historical split 
between conservative written forms of Greek and the spoken forms that evolved more 
naturally), it is still the case that the Byzantine period in particular remains for many 
a closed book. I hope very much that the present work will do something to help prise 
it open. 
 That said, I believe very strongly that attempts to conﬁ ne the history of Greek to 
the study of the  ‘ vernacular ’ , motivated in large part by a desire to be seen to be on 
the  ‘ right side ’ in the highly politicized language debate of the 19th and 20th centuries, 
result in distortion and guarantee that only half the story is told. Now that that debate 
has been effectively settled, it is possible to acknowledge that standard Modern Greek 
has in fact incorporated many elements from the learned written tradition, and that it 
continues to do so. It seemed to me, therefore, that the history of written Greek, and 
of the cultural circumstances that led the Greek - speaking intelligentsia, from Roman 
times until surprisingly recently, to employ archaizing written styles, had to be included, 
and I make no apologies for doing so. The two traditions interacted at all times, and 
a projection into the past of the artiﬁ cially polarized positions adopted by theorists of 
both persuasions in the ﬁ rst 150 years of Greek independence does not do justice to 
the complexity of the issues involved. 
 Anyone attempting to write the history of a language has to choose from among 
three options: dealing with its  ‘ external ’ history, presenting its  ‘ internal ’ history, or 
attempting to do both. For me, the choice was easy, even if the implementation of that 
decision proved, in the event, to be rather more difﬁ cult. Some years ago, a friend 

xiv Preface to the First Edition
(who, it should be said, was a theoretical linguist with no background in Greek) made 
her ﬁ rst visit to Athens, and on her return confessed herself disappointed to ﬁ nd that 
it did not resemble Rome with its wealth of architectural and artistic treasures. Since 
ancient Greece and modern Greece now occupy much the same geographical space, 
her natural assumption was that the one had simply emerged out of the other, and 
that the Greeks had somehow carelessly mislaid their medieval and Renaissance herit-
age. I suspect that there is little general awareness of the fact that Greek was the 
dominant language of the whole Roman empire in the east, or that Constantinople 
(now Istanbul) was the epicentre of Greek/Byzantine culture for well over a thousand 
years, during most of which Athens was little more than a village in an imperial back-
water. Nor, despite general awareness of contemporary Greco - Turkish hostility, are 
non - specialists usually conscious of the devastating impact on the Greek - speaking 
world of the crusades and the Turkish conquests of the middle ages, or of the fact that 
for nearly 400 years there was no Greek state at all. Despite the obvious risks, this is 
therefore a history of the Greek language and its speakers, and the treatment of internal 
linguistic developments is carefully interwoven into a study of the changing cultural, 
political and military circumstances of those who used it. Indeed, it seemed to me that 
much of what happened linguistically makes sense only when placed in its wider his-
torical context. 
 It remains to thank John Chadwick, who, many years ago, ﬁ rst aroused my interest 
in the history of Greek, and whose inventive work remains a source of inspiration. I 
should also like to record my thanks to Professor N.M. Panayiot á kis and the staff of 
the Greek Institute in Venice for their generous hospitality and the opportunity to do 
some valuable research in the middle of a frantic term. Above all, however, I must 
take this opportunity to thank my wife Gill, and my daughters Amy and Sophie, for 
their endless support and mainly cheerful, though sometimes necessarily stoic, toler-
ance of my irritable and distracted state during much of the time I spent putting this 
book together. 
 So, all too well aware of my limitations in many of the ﬁ elds in which I have had 
to venture, I offer this book to those who will read it in the hope that they will come 
to share at least some of my fascination with this remarkable language. 
 Cambridge 
 February 1997 
 

 Preface to 
the Second Edition 
 More than 12 years have passed since the ﬁ rst edition of this book appeared, and much 
has happened in that time. First and foremost, the original version is no longer in print, 
following the decision of Pearson, after its takeover of Longman, to terminate the series 
to which it belonged (Longman Linguistics Library). Demand, however, remains high, 
at least to judge from my email  – not to mention the prices that second - hand copies 
currently command! A second edition is therefore timely, and I am very grateful to 
Wiley - Blackwell for all the interest they have shown in this project and for their steady 
encouragement through the years in which it has been in preparation. Its appearance 
has been much delayed by other commitments, most notably the writing (with James 
Clackson) of the  Blackwell History of the Latin Language , which was published late 
in 2007, and the fact that I served as chairman of the Faculty of Classics in Cambridge 
for two years (2007 and 2008), a demanding job which, though always interesting, 
left little time for serious research and writing. 
 This new edition has taken full account of the many reviews that appeared soon 
after the original was published, and I am enormously grateful to all those who 
contributed in this way to its reshaping. A wonderful Greek translation was also pub-
lished in 2006 by Estia in Athens, and I had long discussions with the translators, 
Melita Stavrou and Maria Tzevelekou, from whom I learned a great deal. Many errors 
were corrected in the process, and this new English edition is a major beneﬁ ciary 
of changes that were made then. Some reviewers and one of the translators commented 
that the wealth of detail in the original, though inherently interesting, tended to obscure 
the major theme of the work, namely the effects of early standardization and the 
consequential state of diglossia on the long - term evolution of the language. I had hoped 
therefore to refocus things quite radically in this version in order to help readers 
keep this bigger picture in view. While that objective has not been lost sight of, the 
fact that the ﬁ rst edition is now out of print has meant that I can no longer take its 
availability for granted. I have therefore decided to retain discussion of the speciﬁ cs 
of linguistic history, while simultaneously attempting to subordinate this material more 
effectively to the demands of the overall narrative. With what success remains to 
be seen. 

xvi Preface to the Second Edition
 Two particular issues are perhaps worthy of special mention here. Classicists were 
generally disappointed that I did not pay more attention to the many varieties of 
Ancient Greek. Since the work was never intended to be primarily a history of Ancient 
Greek, the ﬁ rst edition naturally focused on the standardized form of the language 
from which Medieval and Modern Greek evolved. Here, however, I have included a 
little more discussion, and some examples, of the  ‘ other ’ Ancient Greek dialects, both 
literary and epigraphic. While this may well tend to work against the principal thrust 
of the enterprise, I hope it will provide classicists with enough to stave off their hunger 
for a meatier survey. Secondly, my knowledge of Medieval Greek in the mid - to - late 
1990s was, frankly, that of an amateur, and more than one reviewer was quick to spot 
the naivety and superﬁ ciality of some aspects of the presentation. While I cannot claim 
in the interim to have devoted my life to mastering this vast domain, I have had the 
privilege over the last four years of working on the Cambridge - based  ‘ Medieval Greek 
Grammar Project ’ , funded by the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council. The truly 
expert knowledge of my colleagues, Marjolijne Janssen, Tina Lendari, Io Manolessou 
and Notis Toufexis, coupled with my own exposure to a great deal more material than 
I previously had any inkling of, has, I hope, led to signiﬁ cant improvement in this 
important section of the work. 
 During the revision process I have been especially grateful to Juli á n M é ndez Dosuna, 
Peter Mackridge, Marjolijne Janssen and Marc Lauxtermann for their detailed com-
ments on all, or at least signiﬁ cant parts, of the original. These have been invaluable 
to me in reworking the relevant chapters. I should also like to record my special debt 
to two outstanding scholars mentioned in the preface to the ﬁ rst edition, but sadly no 
longer with us, both of whom were at different times instrumental in my professional 
development as a Hellenist and as a linguist, namely John Chadwick and Bobby 
Robins. Without their instruction, good advice and boundless support and enthusiasm, 
none of this would ever have been possible. I miss them both. 
 Last but by no means least, I should like to thank everyone involved in the produc-
tion of this book at Wiley - Blackwell for their encouragement, patience and profes-
sionalism throughout. A special word of thanks is due to Fiona Sewell for copyediting 
a complex manuscript so expertly and for ensuring that the ﬁ nal product looks as good 
as the material allows it to be. 
 Cambridge 
 February 2010  


 The Greek Alphabet 
 The Mycenaean civilization, dating from the second half of the second millennium  bc , 
employed a syllabic script for the writing of Greek. But writing disappears with the 
ﬁ nal collapse of this civilization c.1200  bc , and examples of the novel alphabetic 
writing ﬁ rst appear on pieces of pottery in the 8th century  bc , the earliest, not later 
than 770  bc , coming from a tomb at Osteria dell’ Osa near the Latin city of Gabii 
(Cornell (1995: 103)). Letter forms and spelling conventions display considerable 
regional variation for several centuries thereafter (the Latin alphabet, incidentally, 
derives ultimately from that employed by Euboean colonists in Italy). See Jeffery 
(1990), Powell (1996), Woodard (1997) and Easterling and Handley (2001) for a range 
of views about the origins of the alphabet, some quite controversial, and for examples 
of the diversity of letter forms etc. 
 It seems that these local Greek alphabets were initially developed during the latter 
part of the 9th century  bc on the basis of a brilliant adaptation of the Phoenician 
script, which, like those used for other Semitic languages, did not note vowel sounds. 
By redeploying letters that denoted consonant sounds irrelevant to Greek, the vowels 
could now be written systematically, thus producing the ﬁ rst  ‘ true ’ alphabet. During 
the 4th century  bc the version of the alphabet initially developed in Ionia (the western 
coast of Asia Minor and the adjacent islands), having been adopted in Athens in 403/2 
 bc , gradually assumed the status of a standard throughout the Greek - speaking world, 
a status which it has retained ever since. It will be useful at the outset to present this 
alphabet for reference purposes, along with the customary reconstructed pronunciation 
of the Athenian dialect of the 5th/4th centuries  bc (cf. Sturtevant (1940), Allen (1987a)) 
and the standard modern pronunciation. Digraphs and diacritics are appended:
 Greek letter 
 Ancient pronunciation 
(5th/4th century  BC ) 
 Modern 
pronunciation 
 A a 
 (alpha) 1 
  [a] 
  [a] 
 B b 
 (beta) 
 [b] 
  [b] 
 Γ g 
 (gamma) 
 [g] 
  
 Δ d 
 (delta) 
 [d] 
  
 E e 
 (epsilon) 
  [e] 
  [e] 
 Z z 
 (zeta)  
  [zd] 
  [z] 
 H h 
 (eta) 
 [ ε :] 
 [i] 
 Θ q 
 (theta) 
 [t h ] 
  

The Greek Alphabet xix
 Greek letter 
 Ancient pronunciation 
(5th/4th century  BC ) 
 Modern 
pronunciation 
 I i 
 (iota) 
  [i, i:]  
  [i, j]  
 K k 
 (kappa) 
 [k] 
  [k, c]  
 Λ l 
 (lambda)  
 [l] 
  [l] 
 M m 
 (mu) 
 [m] 
  [m] 
 N n 
 (nu) 
 [n] 
  [n] 
 Ξ x 
 (xi) 
 [ks] 
  [ks] 
 O o  
 (omikron)  
  [o] 
  [o] 
 Π p 
 (pi) 
 [p] 
  [p] 
 P r 
 (rho) 
 [r] 
  [r] 
 Σ s / "  (sigma) 2 
  [s] 
  [s] 
 T t 
 (tau) 
 [t] 
  [t] 
 ϒ u 
 (upsilon)  
 [y, y:]  
  [i] 
 Φ f 
 (phi) 
 [p h ] 
  [f] 
 X c 
 (chi) 
  [k h ] 
  
 Ψ y 
 (psi) 
 [ps] 
  [ps] 
 Ω w 
 (omega) 
 [o:] 
  [o] 
 1.  The distinction between capital and lower - case letters is not ancient; the former 
are now conventionally employed in printed texts of ancient authors both for the initial 
letter of proper names and for the initial letter of the ﬁ rst word of a passage of direct 
speech, but not to mark the ﬁ rst word of each new sentence. The modern conventions 
are as for English.  
 2.  s is used at the beginning or in the middle of words,  " word - ﬁ nally. 
 Digraphs 
 Ancient pronunciation 
(5th/4th century  BC ) 
 Modern pronunciation 
 a i 
 
  [ai] 
 [e] 
 a u 
 
  [au] 
 [af, av]  
 e i 
 
  [e:] 
 [i] 
 e u 
 
  [eu] 
 [ef, ev]  
 o  i 
 
  [oi] 
 [i] 
 o  u 
 
  [u:] 
 [u] 
 
 (with  i 
subscript) 1 
 [a:i] 
 [a] 
 
 (with  i 
subscript) 
 [ ε :i] 
 [i] 
 
 (with  i 
subscript) 
 [o:i] 
 [o] 
 g g 
 
  
 
 g k 
 
  
 
 g c 
 
  
 
 m p  
  [mp]  
 [(m)b] 
 n t 
 
  [nt] 
 [(n)d] 

xx The Greek Alphabet
 1.  Iota in these  ‘ long ’  diphthongs is standardly written subscript in modern texts 
of ancient authors, but was originally written on the line (adscript) in antiquity. This 
residual graphic retention after loss in actual pronunciation was due to later  ‘ archaiz-
ing/puristic ’  tendencies.  
 Diacritics 1 
 Ancient pronunciation 
(5th/4th century  bc ) 
 Modern 
pronunciation 
  (smooth breathing)  
 [null] 
  [null] 
  (rough breathing)  
 
  [null] 
  (acute accent)  
 [rise (+ fall on following syllable)]  
  [stress] 
  (grave accent)  
 [absence of rise]  
  [stress] 
  (circumﬂ ex accent)  
 [rise - fall] 
  [stress] 
 1.  These were retained in the writing of Modern Greek (despite their redundancy 
in the case of the breathings and their equivalence in the case of the accents) until the 
orthographic reform of 1982, which introduced the  ‘ monotonic ’  system whereby the 
breathings were abandoned and stressed vowels were consistently marked by means 
of the acute accent alone.  

 Introduction: The Scope 
and Purpose of This Book 
 Our ﬁ rst concrete examples of Greek come from the second half of the second millen-
nium  bc , and are associated with the Mycenaean civilization named after the Bronze 
Age palace of Mycenae near Argos in the Peloponnese. This civilization is now seen 
as the product of the impact of the brilliant Minoan culture of Crete (named after the 
legendary king Minos) on the mainland sometime towards the end of the 16th century 
 bc . In particular, crucial aspects of the Mycenaean economic and administrative 
systems, including the use of writing, were based on Minoan practice. This involved 
 inter alia  the detailed recording of day - to - day administration on clay tablets by ofﬁ cials 
installed in palaces controlling their surrounding regions. The destruction of these 
palaces by ﬁ re led to the accidental baking and preservation of collections of tablets 
not only at Knossos on Crete (probably c.1400  bc , though some place it 150 – 200 
years later, see MacGillivray (2000)), but also on the mainland (c.1200  bc ), speciﬁ cally 
at Pylos on the western coast of the Peloponnese, at Mycenae and Tiryns in the Argolid, 
and at Thebes in Boeotia. 
 The original language of Minoan Crete remains unknown, but the mainly syllabic 
script used to write it is called  ‘ Linear A ’ , since this was the earlier of two linear writing 
systems discovered to have been in use at the palace of Knossos in Crete by the British 
archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans. In the period when the Mycenaean civilization of the 
mainland was still developing under Minoan inﬂ uence, this script was modiﬁ ed to 
create a new version known as  ‘ Linear B ’ . Thanks to Michael Ventris ’ brilliant deci-
pherment in the early 1950s, we now know that the adaptation was designed to facili-
tate the writing of the Mycenaean language, and that this language was Greek (see 
Chadwick (1967) for an account of the decipherment, Ventris and Chadwick (1973), 
Chadwick (1976a), Hooker (1980), Barton ě k (2003) and Duhoux and Morpurgo 
Davies  (2008)  for surveys of the script, language and content of the tablets, together 
with relevant bibliography). Interestingly, the documents which come from the period 
of the ﬁ nal destruction of the palace at Knossos also use Linear B, a fact that suggests 
a Mycenaean takeover of Minoan territory, probably following earlier destruction of 
the principal Minoan sites during the 15th century  bc . 

2 Introduction
 In (1) below a Linear B document from the palace at Pylos (PY Ta722) is given 
ﬁ rst in the now conventional Romanized transcription, followed by the probable 
phonetic interpretation (based on our knowledge of later Greek and supplemented 
by internal and comparative reconstruction), which vividly reveals the multiple inad-
equacies of the script. An item - by - item gloss is provided beneath, followed by a free 
translation:
 (1)   Ta - ra - nu   a - ja - me - no    e - re - pa - te - jo    a - to - ro - qo    i - qo - qe 
 po - ru - po - de - qe    po - ni - ke - qe   FOOTSTOOL 1 1 
 
 
 
 [t h r â :nus   aia:m é nos   elep h ante í o:i   ant h r ó :k w o:i   h í kk w o:i  
 k w e 
 
  stool(nom)   inlaid(nom)  of - ivory(dat - inst)  man(dat - inst)  horse(dat - inst) - and 
 
  polup ó dei  
 k w e  p h oin í :kei  
 k w e] 2 
 
  ‘ manyfoot ’ , i.e. octopus(dat - inst) - and   grifﬁ n/palm tree(dat - inst) - and 
 ‘ One footstool inlaid with a man and a horse and an octopus and a grifﬁ n/palm tree (all) 
in ivory ’ 
 In the course of nearly three and a half thousand years since this tablet was written 
Greek has obviously undergone many changes, while in the written domain the Linear 
B syllabary was long ago replaced by an alphabet. But speakers of the modern language 
can, with a little help and guidance, still recognize here some extremely ancient cor-
respondents of a number of contemporary words: 3 
 (2) 
 
  ‘ desk/form ’ 
 
 [ele ' fa(n)dinos]   ‘ made of ivory ’ 
 
 
  ‘ man, person, human being ’ 
 
 [ ' ipos] 
  ‘ horse ’  (when talking of  ‘ horse power ’ ) 
 
 
  ‘ polypod, polyp ’ 
 
 [ ' ﬁ nikas]  
  ‘ phoenix/palm tree ’ 
 It is not, however, the case that every word with a Mycenaean heritage has a continu-
ous history in spoken vernaculars. In particular, in the period since Greece gained its 
independence from the Ottoman empire in the nineteenth century a great deal of 
vocabulary previously lost from popular spoken styles has been reintroduced from a 
learned written tradition that had remained much more closely associated with Ancient 
Greek. None the less, the educated modern speaker feels some instinctive familiarity 
with a reasonable part of the Mycenaean lexicon, and indeed with much of the Ancient 
Greek lexicon more generally. 
 But Ancient Greek and the later written varieties based on it are not readily acces-
sible to untrained speakers of the standard modern language. The grammatical and 
lexical divergence between spoken and written forms of Greek began in late antiquity 
and this growing separation eventually became, and in some respects still remains, 
a highly problematical issue. Since the development of distinct spoken/popular and 
written/learned traditions and the consequences of this process will be one of the 
central themes of this book, we may usefully preview some of the issues here, taking 
the examples already given as the basis for a simple illustration. 

Introduction 3
 The Athenian dialect (Attic) equivalents of the Modern Greek words in (2) were 
already spelled in very much the same way at the end of the 5th century  bc , especially 
if we discount the morphological changes that have occurred since then. They were, 
however, pronounced very differently at that time, as the transcriptions in (3) show:
 (3) 
  [t h ra:n í on] 
 
  [elep h á ntinos] 
 
  [ á nt h ro:pos] 
 
  [h í ppos] 
 
  [pol ý pu:s] 
 
  [p h o í ni:ks] 
 (2) and (3) together reveal how a highly conservative orthography, which represents 
the (reconstructed) pronunciation of the 5th/4th centuries  bc quite accurately but is 
clearly rather less suited to the modern language, can utterly conceal the sometimes 
major sound changes of the last 25 centuries. 
 This simple example is just one reﬂ ection of a much more general linguistic con-
servatism that, until very recently, extended far beyond matters of spelling. The phe-
nomenon has its origins in the overwhelming prestige of Athenian culture, especially 
Athenian literature, in the classical period of the 5th and 4th centuries  bc . The emer-
gence of a true classical canon at such an early date had a remarkable fossilizing effect 
on the form of written Greek throughout the subsequent history of the language. The 
resulting problem of  ‘ diglossia ’  (for a classic account see Ferguson (1959)) has domi-
nated the history of Greek almost to the present day, with the spoken language, par-
ticularly of the uneducated majority, evolving in a more or less  ‘ natural ’ way, i.e. 
without the retarding effects of training in an archaizing variety, while the orthogra-
phy, grammar and lexicon of the standardized written language changed very slowly 
or, in certain styles, hardly at all. 
 This enduring emphasis on the supposed perfection of the classical written word 
allowed the fact of sound change to be very largely ignored, and Greeks throughout 
their history have simply read the texts of earlier periods using whatever the current 
pronunciation of the language happened to be. But more importantly it also fostered 
and perpetuated the view amongst the minority who had mastered the archaizing 
written language that changes in spoken Greek represented a form of linguistic decay 
that should not be tolerated in writing. 
 Such a situation obviously presents serious problems for the historical linguist, who, 
working exclusively with written documents, is faced with severe difﬁ culties in trying 
to detect and date the changes that took place in spoken Greek. Concrete evidence is 
often available only in the form of orthographic errors and grammatical or lexical 
departures from classical usage in texts which, by accident or design, exhibit some 
degree of compromise with the contemporary spoken language. Considerations of 
authorial intention and capability, as well as of generic conventions, are therefore 
paramount, and only when we have answered the question of how far a particular 
author was attempting, or indeed capable of, a  ‘ classicizing ’  style can we turn to issues 
concerning the incidence and chronology of change. An archaizing writer of the later 
middle ages, for example, would continue to use classical forms like 
 (though by 

4 Introduction
then pronounced [ ' ﬁ niks]) long after  ‘ modern ’ 
 [ ' ﬁ nikas] had become the norm 
in both spoken Greek and subliterary written styles. Thus despite the unbroken con-
tinuity and the massive volume of documentary material from the time of the ﬁ rst 
alphabetic inscriptions down to the present day, many uncertainties still remain con-
cerning the dating and development of key linguistic changes. 
 Many histories of the Greek language treat the archaizing written language as an 
artiﬁ cial construct devoid of interest for the historical linguist, a  ‘ zombie ’ language 
that was incompetently handled by its practitioners throughout its pseudo - history, and 
which persistently stiﬂ ed creativity because of its ever greater remoteness from the 
realities of spoken Greek (cf. Browning (1983)). This point of view accurately reﬂ ects 
the sympathies of most linguists with respect to the great language debate of the 19th 
and 20th centuries in Greece between the merits of the traditional written language 
and the natural spoken language as a basis for the development of a modern national 
standard, but it involves an anachronistic projection of near - contemporary issues into 
ancient and medieval worlds with rather different perceptions and preoccupations. 
 Furthermore, since those who learned to write in these traditional ways also spoke 
Greek in a contemporary way, bilateral interference between written and spoken varie-
ties among the educated was an inevitable fact which the historian of Greek cannot, 
and should not, ignore. Ideology apart, there is no good reason to assign a uniquely 
privileged position to the development of the spoken language of the illiterate. Instead, 
efforts should be made to understand the reasons for the persistence of diglossia, and 
to evaluate its profound impact on the development of the Greek language over the 
last 2,000 years. It is, after all, emphatically not the case that contemporary standard 
Modern Greek represents the  ‘ pure ’ product of the evolution of the spoken language 
in communities where literacy was unable to play its supposedly deleterious role in 
hampering language development. 
 This book will therefore look at the Greek language in all its varieties, and in the 
context of the changing social and historical circumstances of its speakers/writers. In 
this way it is possible not only to explain, summarize and exemplify the principal facts 
of change, but also to render comprehensible a long - term language situation that has 
often been dismissed as the product of reprehensible folly and slavish imitation on the 
part of those fortunate enough to have enjoyed the beneﬁ ts of a proper education. 
Post - classical and Byzantine intellectuals were not endowed with foreknowledge of 
what was to come, nor were they all fools. 
 In what follows, the story of the Greek language will be told in three sections, 
dealing with Ancient, Medieval and Modern Greek respectively, though the chrono-
logical boundaries are of course conventional and essentially arbitrary. The ﬁ rst step 
will be to examine the array of Greek dialects in the period before the 5th century  bc . 
Against this background we can then seek to account for the emergence of the Attic 
dialect of the region of Athens (Attica) as the pre - eminent form of Greek during the 
4th century. This highly prestigious dialect was the principal foundation for the so -
 called Hellenistic Koine (
 , ancient 
 , modern [ci ' ni],   =  ‘ common (dialect) ’ ) 
that eventually came to dominate the Greek - speaking world, having ﬁ rst been endorsed 
and adopted by the all - conquering Macedonians and then carried throughout the East 
as an administrative and cultural language by the campaigns of Alexander the Great. 
Its evolving local varieties later formed the basis for the evolution of the spoken dialects 

Introduction 5
of Medieval and Modern Greek, but the continuing role of the conservative written 
Koine as an ofﬁ cial and literary language, the latter ever more self - consciously  ‘ Attic ’ 
in character, profoundly affected the spoken Greek of the educated elite throughout 
the middle ages and much of the modern period. The efforts to develop a modern 
standard both before and after Greek independence are therefore a tale of struggle, 
and ultimately of partial reconciliation, between advocates of the spoken and written 
traditions as the proper foundation for a language ﬁ t to meet the complex and varied 
needs of a modern European nation. In the event, as often, actual developments on 
the ground ﬁ nally overtook both sets of ideologues, though what to do about the 
 ‘ burden of the past ’ still remains a live issue among a people who are more sensitive, 
and indeed more opinionated, than most about matters of language use, language 
teaching and language change. See Georgakopo ú lou and Silk ( 2009 ) for a fascinating 
collection of analyses and interpretations of the key issues from antiquity to the 
present. 
 Notes 
1  FOOTSTOOL transcribes an ideogram, and 1 a numerical sign.  
2  See the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) Chart (p. xvii) for the symbols employed here 
and henceforth. The only departure from standard usage concerns the ancient  ‘ pitch ’  accent: 
this was a contonation involving either a monosyllabic rise - fall on a single long vowel or 
diphthong, marked in transcriptions as ^ , or a rise, marked  , on one syllable followed by 
a fall (unmarked) on the next; in certain circumstances, not exempliﬁ ed here, the rise was 
neutralized in some way, marked  (see Allen (1973, 1987a), Devine and Stephens (1994) 
for details).  
3  See  ‘ The Greek Alphabet ’ (pp. xviii – xx) for details of both classical and modern pronuncia-
tions of Greek. In the phonetic transcriptions of Modern Greek the symbol   precedes the 
syllable to be stressed; see note 2 for the accentuation marks used in the transcriptions of 
Ancient Greek.  


PART I
 Ancient Greek 
 From Mycenae to 
the Roman Empire 


1
 The Ancient Greek 
Dialects 
 
 1.1   The Coming of the  ‘ Greeks ’  to Greece 
 It is now generally believed that speakers of an Indo - European dialect or dialects 
arrived in the Balkan peninsula in the early second millennium  bc (see Drews  (1988) , 
Klingenschmitt  (1994) , Garrett  (1999) for a range of views), and that the language we 
call Greek developed its distinctive form there through the subsequent evolution and 
diversiﬁ cation of the speech of those of these newcomers who ﬁ nally settled in the 
region. The process of development must have been inﬂ uenced by language contact 
with populations already in place, some of whom may have been indigenous, others 
earlier migrants, though we are not now in a position to identify the peoples and 
languages concerned despite widespread speculation about the possible impact of 
 ‘ Pelasgian ’ , about which nothing is known, and even Luwian, a language of the Indo -
 European family related to Hittite and attested historically in Asia Minor. 
 A considerable number of words, often exhibiting characteristically non - Greek 
sufﬁ xes, were borrowed into the emerging Greek language at this time. Unsurpri-
singly, these are typically the names of places and geographical landmarks (e.g. 
   ‘ Mycenae ’ , 
  ‘ Athens ’ , 
  [k ó rint h os] 
 ‘ Corinth ’ , 
 [parnass ó s]  ‘ (Mount) Parnassus ’ , 
 [lykab ε :tt ó s] 
 ‘ (Mount) Lykabettos ’ , 
 [k ε :p h is ó s]  ‘ (the river) Cephisus ’ ), as well as of plants 
and artefacts (e.g. 
 [ter é bint h os]  ‘ turpentine tree ’ , 
 [hy á kint h os] 
 ‘ hyacinth ’ , 
 [d á p h n ε :]  ‘ laurel ’ , 
 [s ŷ :kon]  ‘ ﬁ g ’ , 
  [as á mint h os]  ‘ bath 
tub ’ , 
 [d é pas]  ‘ cup ’ , 
 [pl í nt h os]  ‘ brick ’ , 
  [ks í p h os]  ‘ sword ’ ). 1 
 Characteristic innovations which deﬁ ne Ancient Greek as a distinct language within 
the Indo - European (IE) family include those listed in (1). Most of these are prehistoric 
and cannot be securely dated, though the ﬁ nal stages of some, such as the ﬁ rst case of 
(a), perhaps belong to the historical period of the Linear B tablets (see  1.2 ), while a 
very few, such as (i), were completed only after the Mycenaean collapse: 
 (1)  (a)   Initial IE   * y - [j] partly developed to [h], as in 
 [h ó s]  ‘ who ’ beside Sanskrit 
 y á s , while medial   * - y - was lost, as in 
  [tr ê :s]  ‘ three ’ ,   <  earlier 
 

10 Ancient Greek
[tr é (j)es] by vowel contraction, beside Sanskrit  tr á yas . In other cases, and 
under unknown circumstances,  * y   >  [dz], later metathesized to [zd] as in 
 [zd ý gon]  ‘ yoke ’ , beside Latin  iugum . 
 (b)  The voiced aspirates of IE (  * bh ,   * dh ,   * gh ,   * g w h ) were de - voiced, as in 
 [p h ero:]  ‘ carry/bear ’ , beside Sanskrit 
 . 
 (c)  Initial prevocalic   * s - and intervocalic   * - s - developed to [h], and medial 
[h] was then often lost, as in 
 [hept á ]  ‘ seven ’ and 
  [g é nu:s] 
 ‘ race, stock (gen) ’ ,   <  earlier 
  [g é ne(h)os] through contraction of 
vowels: cf. Latin  septem , Sanskrit  sapt á , and Sanskrit  j á nasas . Many cases 
of intervocalic [s] were, however, retained/restored on the analogy of 
formations in which [s] occurred postconsonantally (e.g. 
 [epo í ε :se] 
 ‘ s/he made ’ beside 
  [ é blapse]  ‘ s/he hurt ’ ). 
 (d)  Final consonants other than [n, r, s] were lost, as in  t i [ti]  ‘ something ’ , 
beside Latin  quid , Sanskrit  cit. 
 (e)  Word - initially there are vocalic reﬂ exes of original  ‘ laryngeal ’ consonants 
before resonants other than   * y (i.e. [l, r, m, n, w]), which the remaining 
IE languages apart from Armenian have lost, as in 
  [eryt h r ó s]  ‘ red ’ 
beside Latin  ruber , Sanskrit  rudhir á - . 
 (f) 
 The originally  ‘ free ’ (late) IE word accent, based primarily on pitch vari-
ation and best preserved in Vedic Sanskrit, was conﬁ ned to one of the 
last three syllables.  
 (g)  The superlative sufﬁ x  - t  a t o  " [ - tatos] is an innovation exclusive to Greek.  
 (h)  Full grammaticalization of the locative case form originally belonging to 
certain n - stem deverbal nouns in order to form the regular active inﬁ nitive 
of verbs in  - w [ - o:] (the thematic verbs, in which a theme - or stem - forming 
vowel [e] or [o] intervenes between the root and the ending) is distinctively 
Greek: thus  - e i n [ - e:n] or  - h n [ - ε :n] according to dialect, both arising by 
contraction   <   - e - e n [ - e(h)en]    <   * - e - sen . 
 (i) 
 The ﬁ nal syncretism of cases, whereby ablative and genitive functions 
come to be expressed by the  ‘ genitive ’ case forms and dative, locative and 
instrumental functions by the  ‘ dative ’  case forms, is also a key marker of 
Greek. 
 1.2  The Earliest Records: Mycenaean Greek 
 As noted in the Introduction, the decipherment of Linear B in the 1950s ﬁ rmly estab-
lished Mycenaean as the earliest documented variety of Greek, making this the European 
language with the longest recorded history, from the 15th/14th (or, taking the later 
date for the ﬁ nal destruction of Knossos, the 13th/12th) centuries  bc to the present 
day. This is not the place to attempt a full - scale description, but it will be useful to 
provide a brief account of Linear B and the problems that arise in describing the highly 
archaic form of Greek written in it, one which retains, for example, the inherited sound 
[w] in all positions and a distinct instrumental case form, at least in the plural. 
Interestingly, however, for all its antiquity this dialect already shows some character-
istic innovations of  ‘ East Greek ’ type (see  1.4 for details). 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 11
 Although the Linear B script uses ideograms to denote classes of objects and has 
special signs for weights, measures and numerals, the heart of the writing system 
comprises some 89 syllabic signs, of which 73 have been assigned more or less agreed 
phonetic values. Each represents either a vowel sound (V), rarely a diphthong, or a 
combination of one, rarely two, consonants with a following vowel ((C)CV). But 
contrasts of vowel length, an important property of Ancient Greek, are not noted, and 
the set of symbols representing diphthongs is incomplete and only sporadically used, 
so diphthongs are written inconsistently, either by using the signs for two vowels 
in combination or by suppressing the notation of a diphthong ’ s second element 
altogether. 
 Linear B also largely fails to represent the characteristic Ancient Greek oppositions 
in the plosive system based on aspiration and voice, having only one sign for each 
vowel when preceded by any of the three labial or three velar stops, and with only the 
voiced member distinguished in the dental series: 
 (2) 
  (a) 
  [p, (b) 2 , p h ] +V  
  represented by:  
  pa, pe, pi, po, pu 
 (b) 
  [t, t h ] +V  
  represented by:  
  ta, te, ti, to, tu 
 [d] +V  
  represented by:  
  da, de, di, do, du 
 (c) 
  [k, g, k h ] +V  
  represented by:  
  ka, ke, ki, ko, ku 
 The IE labio - velars   * k w , * g w , * g hw developed in classical Greek to labials or, via pala-
talization before front vowels, to dentals (cf. 
 [t í s]  ‘ who? ’ ,  t e [te]  ‘ and ’ beside Latin 
 quis ,   - que ). But in Mycenaean these are still retained across the board, always allowing 
for the characteristic Greek de - voicing of the voiced aspirate to [k hw ] (cf. (1b)). The 
labio - velars are also represented by a single series of syllabic signs, as in  a - pi - qo - ro 
[amp h í k w oloi]  ‘ attendants ’ beside classical 
 [amp h í poloi],  qo - u - ko - ro 
[g w ouk ó loi]  ‘ cowherds ’ beside classical 
 [bu:k ó loi], and  qe - ra - si - ja  [k hw ε :ras í a:i] 
 ‘ mistress of the beasts (dat) ’ beside classical 
  [t h ε :r í on]  ‘ wild beast ’ . Note that 
[r] and [l] are not graphically distinguished either. 
 Assuming that Linear B values can be ascribed to corresponding Linear A signs, the 
evidence suggests that the Minoan language for which this syllabary was originally 
invented must have had a very different type of phonological system from that of 
Greek. Note, for example, that incomplete sets of signs are occasionally used to write 
unusual syllables beginning with clusters containing [w], speciﬁ cally [dwe], [dwo], 
[twe], [two] and [nwa]. Perhaps these once belonged, along with those representing 
the labio - velars, to complete sets representing syllables beginning with labialized 
consonants in a language in which this secondary articulation was contrastive and 
generalized. 
 There is a further incomplete set of signs  za ,  ze ,  zo , for syllables (probably) begin-
ning with dental affricates, either 
 , 
 , 
 or [tsa]/[dza], [tse]/
[dze], [tso]/[dzo]. These regularly appear where we later ﬁ nd classical  ζ [zd] plus vowel 
(note, however, that classical 
 is usually the result of a post - Mycenaean metathesis 
of 
 , cf. Allen ( 1987a : 54)). In particular, these signs often represent the initial sound 
of certain words originally beginning with a   * y -  that did not develop to [h] (see (1a)), 
as 
  [zd ý gon]  ‘ yoke ’ : so Mycenaean  ze - u - ke - u - si  [dze ú geusi]  ‘ yokers (dat pl) ’ . They 
may, however, also represent the product of the palatalization of voiced dentals and 

12 Ancient Greek
velars before [j]   +  vowel, as in  e - ne - wo - pe - za  [ennewo - p é dza:]  ‘ ?with nine feet 
(fem) ’    <   * [ - pedja:], cf. later (non - Attic/Ionic) 
 [ - p é zda:]). By contrast, Mycenaean 
seems in general already to have passed the affricate stage in the treatment of voiceless 
[tj, kj] plus vowel, showing forms such as  to - so  [t ó s(s)os]  ‘ so much ’ beside later 
 [t ó s(s)os]   <   * tot - jos , and  pa - sa - lo  [pass á lo:]  ‘ pegs (dual) ’ , analogous to later 
 [p á ssalos],   <   * pakjalos . But in a few cases the z - series also represents 
an inter mediate affricate stage [  , ts], as in  ka - zo - e  [k á tso(h)es]  ‘ worse ’  (nom pl),
   <  
 . Once again these signs may rep-
resent the residue of a complete Linear A series representing syllables beginning with 
systematically assibilated dentals ([t s a]/[d z a] etc). 
 Other problems follow from the fact that Ancient Greek had many consonant clus-
ters, and therefore many syllables both beginning and ending in a consonant. Linear 
B, whose signs normally represent either V or CV, is therefore poorly suited for writing 
Greek, and various spelling conventions were employed in consequence, involving 
either suppression (e.g. word - ﬁ nal consonants and syllable - ﬁ nal [r, l, m, n, s] are regu-
larly omitted, as is word - initial pre - consonantal [s]) or the introduction of  ‘ dummy ’ 
vowels borrowed from the following, more rarely the preceding, syllable. The profes-
sional scribes who wrote the Linear B tablets obviously knew the situations they were 
recording and were in any case accustomed to reading and writing such highly approxi-
mate spellings, but a great deal of reconstruction was required, based on interpretation 
of the real - world context and knowledge of later Greek and other IE languages, in 
order to ﬂ esh out these bare orthographic  ‘ skeletons ’ . Typical examples, again using 
the standard Romanized transcription of the Linear B syllabic signs, are  pe - ma  repre-
senting [sp é rma]  ‘ seed ’ ,  ka - na - pe - u representing [knap h e ú s]  ‘ fuller ’ , and  pa - te  represent-
ing [p á ntes]  ‘ all (nom pl) ’ . 
 A further major difﬁ culty is that much of the morphology of Ancient Greek involves 
changes in ﬁ nal consonants or the alternation of ﬁ nal vowels with diphthongs, none 
of which is represented directly in the script. Thus the evidence of later Greek and 
related IE languages shows that the endings of the singular of a standard feminine 
ﬁ rst - declension noun of the Mycenaean period must have been nominative [ - a:], accu-
sative [ - a:n], genitive [ - a:s], dative [ - a:i], all of which are spelled with   - a in Linear B. 
The task of reconstructing the morphological paradigms of Mycenaean was therefore 
highly problematical, and a number of questions still remain open. To give just one 
example, a distinct instrumental case is noted in plural paradigms, ending in   - pi  [ - p h i] 
in all but second declension o - stems, and this is retained as a variant for a range of 
oblique cases in the later language of the Homeric epics (as  - φ i [ - p h i]). In the singular, 
however, the spelling system could not distinguish an instrumental from other cases 
(e.g. in the ﬁ rst declension it would end in [ - a:], spelled yet again as   - a ). Should we 
then assume that there was also a separate instrumental case in the singular, or that 
this function had already been syncretized with those of the dative( - locative) forms as 
in later Greek? As things stand, there is no internal evidence that can be brought to 
bear directly on this question and answers depend very largely on what individual 
researchers ﬁ nd  ‘ plausible ’  (see, for example, Hajnal  (1995) , Thompson  (1998)) . 
 The art of syllabic writing largely disappeared with the collapse of the Mycenaean 
civilization, and the Greek world then entered a  ‘ Dark Age ’ . We should note, however, 
that another syllabic script related to Linear A is attested on Cyprus in the period from 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 13
the 16th to the 12th centuries  bc . Though this  ‘ Cypro - Minoan ’ syllabary was probably 
not used for writing Greek at that time, a modiﬁ ed version was developed for this 
purpose from at least the 8th century  bc and remained in use till the 3rd (see Chadwick 
 (1987)) . More recently, however, it has been argued that the earliest surviving Greek 
text is from the 11th/10th century, and that Greek literacy on Cyprus has a more or 
less continuous history from the period following the Mycenaean collapse (see Olivier 
( 2007 : no. 170)). 
 Elsewhere, however, writing was reintroduced during the late 9th century  bc in the 
form of an adaptation of the Phoenician alphabet, in which redundant consonant signs 
were redeployed for the ﬁ rst time to represent vowel sounds. The earliest surviving 
alphabetic inscription can be dated to the ﬁ rst half of the 8th century, and the volume 
of epigraphic material increases steadily thereafter, with large collections of inscrip-
tions on stone and bronze available from most parts of the Greek - speaking world after 
400  bc . It was at this time that the Ionic version of the alphabet was standardized (see 
 ‘ The Greek Alphabet ’ , pp. xviii – xx), and the modern version used in this book derives 
ultimately from that source. The remainder of this chapter will be concerned with the 
array of Ancient Greek dialects attested epigraphically in the alphabetic period down 
to Hellenistic times, but will focus mainly on their likely prehistory and early develop-
ment in the light of the much older data provided by Mycenaean.  
 1.3   Greek Dialect Relations and the Place of Mycenaean 
 If a group of travellers had set out from Athens in the early 5th century  bc and made 
their way westwards in the direction of Megara they would, as they left the region of 
Attica (cf. Map  1 for this and subsequent  ‘ trips ’ ), have encountered forms of speech 
strikingly different from the Attic dialect of Athens and its environs. Megarian was a 
member of the Peloponnesian Doric subgroup of dialects, spoken in fact not only in 
the Peloponnese (with the major exception of the remote central region of Arcadia), 
but also on the islands of the southern Aegean (e.g. Melos, Crete, Thera, Cos and 
Rhodes), and in many of the Greek cities of Magna Graecia ( ‘ Great Greece ’ , the heavily 
colonized regions of southern Italy) and Sicily. These dialects, along with those of 
north - west Greece (including the dialect of Elis in the north - western Peloponnese), 
formed the  ‘ West Greek ’ family, so called from the general geographical distribution 
of the majority of its members. 
 If on the other hand our travellers had made their way northwards from Athens 
into Boeotia, they would again have heard dialects very different from that of Attica, 
but this time also distinct from those of the West Greek family, including the speciﬁ -
cally North - West Greek varieties spoken immediately to the west of Boeotia in Phocis, 
Locris and Aetolia. Continuing northwards, however, they would have perceived a 
clear relationship between Boeotian and the dialects of Thessaly. But if they had instead 
boarded a ship in the Piraeus and made their way eastwards, island - hopping across 
the central and northern Aegean to the central regions of the coast of Asia Minor, they 
would have encountered a continuum of very closely related forms of speech, the Ionic 
dialects, with at least the most western variants (on the island of Euboea) displaying 
a close afﬁ nity with the Attic of their point of departure. 

14 Ancient Greek
 The ancient Greeks, just like speakers of any other language, were highly sensitive 
to such dialectal differences, and had long divided themselves into three principal 
 ‘ tribes ’ : Ionians (comprising speakers of Attic and the Ionic dialects), Dorians (speakers 
of the North - West Greek and Peloponnesian Doric dialects) and Aeolians (speakers of 
Boeotian and Thessalian, together with speakers of the dialects of Lesbos and adjacent 
territory on the northern Aegean coast of Asia Minor). Within these broad groupings, 
however, many local differences existed, and since the Greek world in this period was 
politically fragmented, with each major city forming, together with its surrounding 
territory, an autonomous state, it was usual for local dialects to enjoy ofﬁ cial status 
as written languages and to be employed, in a slightly elevated or reﬁ ned form, to 
record both public and private business. None the less, in areas where larger cultural 
or political units began to emerge, as ﬁ rst with the major Ionian cities of Asia Minor, 
a regional written standard, transcending the most obvious local peculiarities, quickly 
began to emerge. As we shall see (chapter  3 ), it was precisely the emergence of such a 
larger political unit in the 5th century  bc which lay behind the initial development of 
Attic as an administrative and literary language outside Attica. 
 Since the total corpus of inscriptional material is very considerable, even if often 
geographically and chronologically patchy (especially in the period before the 6th 
century  bc ), Greek is one of the few ancient languages for which we have a reasonably 
detailed picture of the overall dialect situation. Modern dialectological research has, 
overall, conﬁ rmed the validity of the ancient dialect divisions, though it is usual now 
to recognize a fourth dialect group comprising Arcadian (spoken in the central 
Peloponnese) and Cypriot, and further to divide Ionic into Western, Central and 
Eastern varieties, treating Attic as a closely related but distinct member of a super-
ordinate Attic - Ionic group. Attic - Ionic and Arcado - Cypriot are collectively known as 
 Map 1   The Ancient Greek dialects 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 15
 ‘ East Greek ’ , just as Peloponnesian Doric and North - West Greek together constitute 
 ‘ West Greek ’ , the labels reﬂ ecting their general distribution in the period when they 
are ﬁ rst documented. Aeolic is now widely seen as fundamentally of North - West Greek 
type (albeit with some probable prehistoric East Greek admixture from the Mycenaean 
south), but to have had an early period of strong independent development in the 
post - Mycenaean period before undergoing renewed North - West Greek inﬂ uence on 
the mainland and East Greek inﬂ uence in Lesbos and neighbouring territory (Garc í a -
 Ram ó n  (1975) , Brixhe  (2006) ; see also below). Brief mention should also be made 
here of the isolated, poorly preserved and very poorly understood dialect of Pamphylia 
in southern Asia Minor. The region may well have had a Mycenaean presence in the 
Bronze Age, though many later settlements such as Aspendos, supposedly founded 
from Argos, are probably of Dorian origin (cf. also the Rhodian colonies in neighbour-
ing Lycia). Given that contacts with Crete and Cyprus persisted into the classical 
period, and that the surrounding area was populated by speakers of Lycian, Sidetic 
and Cilician (descendants of ancient Luwian, see Wallace  (1983)) , we should not be 
surprised that what little we have of this dialect shows a  ‘ mixed ’ set of characteristics 
making it all but impossible to classify according to traditional East/West criteria (cf. 
Brixhe  (1976) ). 
 Modern work on Ancient Greek dialectology has tended to fall into two broad 
types. It should be emphasized, however, that these are in no way mutually exclusive, 
and many scholars have made signiﬁ cant contributions to both. The ﬁ rst stresses the 
importance of the compilation of comprehensive descriptions and analyses of the evi-
dence provided by the surviving documents in all its chronological, spatial and social 
diversity as an essential prerequisite for a successful classiﬁ cation of the dialects and 
a proper understanding of their historical development. See, for example, the reviews 
of such work in Brixhe  (1985, 1988a)  alongside recent studies of particular dialect 
corpora, such as Arena  (1994, 1996) , Bile  (2006) , Bl ü mel  (1982) , Brixhe  (1987) , 
Dobias - Lalou  (2000) , Dubois  (1986, 1995, 2002) , Garbrah  (1978) , Hodot  (1990) , 
M é ndez Dosuna  (1985) , and Threatte  (1980, 1996) . Since most traditional handbooks 
(e.g. Buck  (1955)) have based their descriptions on phenomena attested in relatively 
small corpora of inscriptions, a great deal has been achieved in recent years to improve 
our knowledge of the make - up and diversity of the different dialects. 
 The other approach has focused on the way in which sets of isoglosses (i.e. points 
of agreement between dialects at a given point in time) can be interpreted as having 
arisen at different times in the past, thereby creating a relative chronology of the 
changes involved. This can then serve as the basis for reconstructing aspects of the 
prehistory of Greek (see, for example, Risch  (1955) , Chadwick  (1956) , Garc í a - Ram ó n 
 (1975) , and for some speciﬁ c case studies, Morpurgo Davies  (1992, 1993) , Vott é ro 
 (2006)) . Such an approach requires a careful evaluation of the nature of each isogloss. 
 Certain isoglosses, for example, may be interpreted as evidence of  ‘ shared inherit-
ance ’ by a set of  ‘ daughters ’ from a  ‘ common parent ’ that had acquired its distinctive 
identity by introducing these very features, as innovations, to the exclusion of all other 
varieties. In this way we can interpret the relevant synchronic agreement as evidence 
for an immediately preceding unity, so that Attic - Ionic, for example, becomes the name 
not only of a group of historical dialects sharing certain innovative characteristics but 
also the name of the putative parent dialect that had earlier become differentiated from 

16 Ancient Greek
the rest of Greek by introducing these same features. The logic, then, is that grouping 
of varieties is predicated on the assumption of a common inheritance of innovations 
that distinguished the immediate parent of the relevant group from the rest of the 
language. 
 By interpreting key isoglosses in this way and then dating the emergence of different 
bundles of isoglosses to different periods, a dialect  ‘ family tree ’ can be constructed. 
Consider, for example, the diagram in (3) (which is presented here simply to illustrate 
the point and is not intended to be deﬁ nitive): 
 (3)  
 Here the relevant isoglosses linking Megarian etc. (i.e. the Peloponnesian Doric dia-
lects) are assumed to have been inherited from a prehistoric  ‘ Peloponnesian Doric ’ 
dialect that had earlier innovated in just these respects to the exclusion of  ‘ North - West 
Greek ’ . Similarly, the key features linking  ‘ Peloponnesian Doric ’ with the  ‘ North - West 
Greek ’ group are assumed to have been jointly inherited in a still earlier period from 
a prehistoric  ‘ West Greek ’ dialect that had become differentiated from  ‘ East Greek ’ by 
introducing just these distinguishing properties. And the characteristics shared by both 
 ‘ West Greek ’ and  ‘ East Greek ’ are assumed to have derived earlier still from an undif-
ferentiated  ‘ Common Greek ’ , distinguished in turn by exactly this set of innovations 
from the rest of Proto - Indo - European (on which see (1)). If there were, for example, 
no innovations characteristic of  ‘ West Greek ’ as a whole, both  ‘ Peloponnesian Doric ’ 
and  ‘ North - West Greek ’ would become the labels of branches descending directly from 
 ‘ Common Greek ’ , always assuming that each of these was distinguished by its own set 
of characteristic innovations; if there were no characteristic innovations for  ‘ North -
 West Greek ’ , say, then  ‘ Phocian etc. ’ would similarly become labels for a set of 
branches descending directly from  ‘ Common Greek ’ . 
 This kind of model, central to traditional studies of Greek dialectology and deriving 
from standard methodological assumptions of 19th - century work on Indo - European 
comparison (see Morpurgo Davies  (1998)) , is based on the view that languages develop 
through divergence initiated by innovation on the part of subgroups within a previ-
ously uniform parent. But this is clearly an unrealistically restricted view of language 
development, particularly when it is known that speakers of the different varieties 
involved remained in long - term social and geographical contact: Greek, for example, 
developed initially within the conﬁ nes of the Balkan peninsula, and any assumption 
of clean and permanent breaks between endlessly diverging varieties is plainly implau-
sible. In these circumstances isoglosses can readily arise through local convergence 
Common Greek
time
East Greek
West Greek
Arcado-Cypriot
Attic-Ionic
NW Greek
Pelop. Doric
Arcadian etc.
Attic etc.
Phocian etc.
Megarian etc.

The Ancient Greek Dialects 17
between dialects that are,  ‘ genetically ’ speaking, quite remote from one another. Shared 
innovations of this kind can have no bearing on the structure of a family tree designed 
to show only divergence caused by innovation within former unities, and if they are 
mistakenly used as evidence for family relationships, they will only distort and falsify 
the picture. 
 Other isoglosses may be due simply to independent parallel innovation (i.e. not 
reﬂ ect innovations ﬁ rst made in a common ancestor) and so must again be discounted 
in constructing a tree depicting dialectal subfamilies. Still other isoglosses may repre-
sent a shared inheritance of highly archaic features from the supposed source of all 
the dialects ( ‘ Common Greek ’ ), or of somewhat less archaic features from the still 
temporally remote ancestor of a major subgroup of dialects (like  ‘ East Greek ’ ). Such 
retentions are likely to be scattered quite randomly among the historical descendants, 
with conservative varieties often retaining more than innovative ones, but they plainly 
offer no good evidence for grouping dialects into the subfamilies that the model 
presupposes. 
 Since isoglosses do not come ready categorized with dates attached, scholars may 
well disagree, not only about which are the innovations and which the archaisms, but 
crucially about which innovations are the ones most likely to reﬂ ect a shared inherit-
ance from a common parent. It should also be said that not all scholars are equally 
scrupulous in selecting those isoglosses which, strictly and logically, provide the proper 
evidence for genetic classiﬁ cation. After all, the most characteristic thing about a given 
dialect group may well be its conservative rather than its innovative tendencies. In 
these circumstances establishing the  ‘ correct ’ reconstruction of prehistory in terms of 
family relationships is no straightforward matter, and many different views have in 
fact appeared in the literature (see below). 
 But the most important point to bear in mind here is that the family - tree model 
cannot, even in principle, provide a complete account of language history or prehistory, 
because the process of language development is in practice so much more complex 
than it allows for. Isoglosses reﬂ ecting the retention of archaisms, independent innova-
tions and, above all, contact - induced convergence cannot simply be ignored because 
they too provide evidence for development, albeit of other kinds. It is imperative, 
therefore, that any family - tree account be supplemented and indeed corrected in the 
light of a more complete and realistic approach. In particular, allowance must be made 
for  ‘ mixed ’  dialects, partial divergences, and periods of parallel development promoted 
by contact (see especially Finkelberg  (1994)  for an attempt to construct such an evolv-
ing dialect continuum in Greece for the period 1900 – 900  bc ). 
 The impact of more modern dialectological methodology has led, on the basis of 
the seminal works of Porzig  (1954) and Risch  (1955)) , to a radical reappraisal of the 
prehistory of Greek. None the less, the detailed reconstruction of the developments 
behind the geographical arrangement of dialects seen in the 5th century  bc remains an 
issue of controversy, depending as it does on particular selections and interpretations 
of isoglosses, and on the equally controversial question of the place and signiﬁ cance 
of the Mycenaean evidence. Since the issues involved are not strictly relevant to the 
core theme of this book, what follows is simply an attempt at a consensus view, based 
on key works of the last 50 or so years, amongst which we may note the following in 
particular: 

18 Ancient Greek
 (4)   (a)  General surveys: Cassio  (1984) ; Chadwick  (1956, 1975, 1976a) ; Coleman 
 (1963) ; Crespo et al.  (1993) ; Finkelberg  (1994) ; Porzig  (1954) ; Risch 
 (1955, 1979) ; Wyatt  (1970) . 
 (b)  The position and interpretation of Mycenaean: Barton ě k  (2003) ; Cowgill 
 (1966) ; Duhoux and Morpurgo Davies  (2008) ; Morpurgo Davies  (1992) ; 
Risch  (1966) ; Ruijgh  (1961, 1966, 1991) ; Thompson  (1996/7) . 
 (c)  The origins and development of the West Greek dialects: Chadwick 
 (1976b) ; Barton ě k  (1972) ; M é ndez Dosuna  (1985) ; Risch  (1986) . 
 (d)  The emergence and development of Aeolic: Garc í a - Ram ó n  (1975) ; Ruijgh 
 (1978a) ; Brixhe ( 2006 : 49 – 55); Vott é ro ( 2006 : 137 – 42). 
 The spread of Peloponnesian Doric both westwards to Italy and Sicily and eastwards 
across the southern Aegean, the presence of Aeolic speakers in Lesbos and northern 
parts of the coast of Asia Minor, the close relationship between Arcadian and the 
geographically remote Cypriot, and the existence of an Ionic dialect continuum across 
the central Aegean extending into central and southern regions of the Asia Minor coast 
can all be readily explained by reference to the extensive colonization movements from 
the Greek mainland which began during the so - called Dark Age following the collapse 
of the Mycenaean civilization and continued down to the 6th century  bc . 
 Some difﬁ cult issues, however, remain, especially the question of how far back in 
time the familiar dialect divisions go, and, if things were indeed different in the Dark 
Age and beyond, what pattern of dialect distribution preceded them. Major obstacles 
to the development of clear - cut answers to these questions include the often uncertain 
interpretation of Mycenaean (reﬂ ecting the limitations of Linear B), the complete 
absence of documentary evidence from the period between the earliest alphabetic 
inscriptions (early 8th century  bc ) and the time of the latest Linear B tablets, and the 
continuing dearth of alphabetic material from before the 6th century  bc . The overall 
situation obviously leaves ample room for scholarly disagreement. 
 The traditional solution to the problem of the distribution of the Greek dialects was 
provided by means of a theory of three successive  ‘ waves ’ of invaders (Kretschmer 
 (1896, 1909)) , according to which Greek was supposed to have developed as a separate 
branch of the Indo - European family somewhere outside the Balkan peninsula and 
to have split into dialects prior to the settlement of the Greek mainland. First the 
ancestors of the Ionians (c.2000  bc ), then the  ‘ Achaeans ’ (c.1700  bc , this group com-
prising the ancestors of the Aeolians and Arcado - Cypriots, who were thought to 
represent the northern and southern branches respectively of an originally unitary 
dialect group), and ﬁ nally the Dorians (c.1200  bc ) allegedly swept into Greece in turn, 
with each successive invasion leading to displacements of the established population. 
In this way the overthrow of the Mycenaeans and the isolated position of Arcadian in 
historical times could be explained as the result of a massive inﬂ ux of Dorians into 
the Peloponnese which left only a small pocket of the earlier population in the remote 
central mountains. 
 This approach, however, has now been shown to entail quite serious archaeological 
and linguistic difﬁ culties. First, it soon became clear that there was little or no evidence 
in the archaeological record for the inﬂ ux of Dorians that the theory required. Indeed 
the whole notion of hordes of invading Indo - Europeans occupying vast expanses of 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 19
territory across Europe and Asia has been seriously called into question (e.g. Renfrew 
 (1987) , Garrett  (1999, 2006)) , and many archaeologists now argue instead for more 
gradual movements of Indo - European peoples, in part at least associated with the 
adoption and spread of farming. Secondly, it was noted that many of the adopted place 
names and vocabulary items borrowed from the pre - Greek languages of the Aegean 
basin had undergone dialectally diagnostic sound changes. The almost certainly bor-
rowed word for  ‘ sea ’ , for example, has the following forms: 
 (5)  
 both of which reveal the dialectally standard products of the palatalization of an 
original voiceless dental or velar by a following semi - vowel. 3 Consider the example 
in (6): 
 (6)  
 Allen  (1958) explains this divergent dialectal development on the assumption of a 
generalized heavy palatalization of /t/ in Boeotian: the Attic reﬂ ex is then probably due 
to close contact with Boeotian at the time of the change (on which see further below). 
But the fact that loanwords such as that in (5) undergo developments identical to those 
undergone by native vocabulary (even though we cannot, of course, discover the exact 
form in which such words were ﬁ rst borrowed) strongly suggests that the division of 
Greek into the historical dialects attested in literature and alphabetic inscriptions had 
only taken place after all its future speakers had become established in the Aegean 
area. 
 Crucially, just as the old questions of Greek dialectology began to be re - examined 
in this way, the language of the Linear B tablets was successfully deciphered by Michael 
Ventris (see Chadwick  (1967) for an absorbing account), thus adding an important 
new dimension to the problem by revealing a form of Greek many centuries older than 
anything hitherto attested. It very quickly became apparent that, although the tablets 
from Knossos and Pylos came from sites quite remote from one another, the Mycenaean 
dialect employed was in general rather uniform, presumably therefore reﬂ ecting a 
semi - standardized written language that differed in key respects from ordinary spoken 
varieties of the period. It is, however, a dialect which is already clearly of East Greek 
type, displaying, for example, the characteristic innovatory  ‘ assibilation ’ of original [t] 
before [i] (i.e. [ti]  >  [t s i]  >  [si]) in the diagnostic environments comprising: the 3sg/3pl 
verb endings  - s i / - n s i [ - si/nsi] (vs. West Greek  - t i / - n t i [ - ti/nti]), the numeral 
 

20 Ancient Greek
[ é :kosi]  ‘ twenty ’ (vs. West Greek 
 [(w) í kati]), the morpheme 
 [ - k ó sioi] 
 ‘ (X) - hundred ’ (vs. West Greek 
 [ - k á tioi]), and the adjectival forms 
 
[ap h rod í :sios]/
  [artem í sios] (vs. West Greek 
 [ap h rod í :tios]/
 [artam í tios]) from the names of the goddesses Aphrodite and Artemis. 
Thus the original primary (non - past) 3pl sufﬁ x  - n t i [ - nti] is preserved intact in West 
Greek, but assibilated in East Greek, including Mycenaean: 
 (7)  
 Furthermore, Mycenaean was apparently in use in large parts of central and south-
ern Greece, as established by the Linear B archives from Thebes and Pylos, in which 
either West Greek (the Peloponnese and Crete) or Aeolic (Boeotia and Thessaly) were 
spoken in later times. Clearly, then, dialects ancestral to West Greek and Aeolic must 
have co - existed with Mycenaean and other East Greek varieties in the Mycenaean 
period, and the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization must have entailed considerable 
population movement if we are to explain successfully the changes of dialect involved 
in several areas of the mainland. One obvious possibility is that Mycenaean central 
and southern Greece were  ‘ East Greek ’ - speaking (note that, on this view, the tradi-
tional terminology is no longer appropriate for this earlier period, and some scholars 
have therefore substituted  ‘ South ’  or  ‘ South - East ’  Greek), while non - Mycenaean north-
ern, and more speciﬁ cally north - western, Greece was  ‘ West Greek ’ in speech (again, 
some scholars have substituted  ‘ North ’  or  ‘ North - West ’ Greek). West Greek speakers 
from the north might then have moved gradually into the power vacuum as the 
Mycenaean civilization failed, leaving pockets of East Greek speakers in the Attic 
peninsula and the mountains of Arcadia (with many others emigrating to the Aegean 
islands and Asia Minor). 
 This remains the standard view, but in the continued absence of convincing archaeo-
logical evidence for large - scale Dorian incursions into southern Greece in the late 
Bronze Age, Chadwick  (1976b) suggested that many West Greek speakers were already 
living in the south as a working class to serve the Mycenaean aristocracy. If correct, 
this would mean that the former underclass simply took control in most of the areas 
where it had always lived. In support, Chadwick noted that some variation of usage 
in the tablets had already been interpreted as evidence for the existence of two 
Mycenaean dialects, the one dubbed  ‘ normal ’ , the other  ‘ special ’ (Risch  (1966) , Nagy 
 (1968) ; see also the later contribution of Woodard  (1986)) . The key features in ques-
tion are as follows ( ‘ normal ’  Mycenaean is given ﬁ rst and  ‘ special ’ Mycenaean second 
in each case): assibilation versus non - assibilation of   - ti -    >   - si - in certain words (mainly 
place names, personal names and ethnic adjectives); alternation between   - e [ - ei] and   - i 
[ - i] in the  ‘ dative ’ singulars of consonant - stem nouns (the former representing the 
inherited dative ending, subsequently lost, the latter the original locative ending and 
also the classical form, cf. 
 [p h  ý laki]  ‘ guard (dat) ’ ); and alternation between [o] 
and [a], the latter again representing the classical norm, as reﬂ exes of original syllabic 
nasals (i.e. nasals functioning vocalically to form a syllable) in the context of labial 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 21
consonants, as in  pe - mo [sp é rmo] versus  pe - ma  [sp é rma]  ‘ seed ’   <   * 
 , cf. clas-
sical 
 [sp é rma]. But where Risch argued that  ‘ special ’ Mycenaean reﬂ ected the 
spoken East Greek of the lower classes and constituted the source of historical Arcadian 
and Cypriot ( ‘ normal ’ Mycenaean having died out with the overthrow of the Mycenaean 
artistocracy), Chadwick, arguing that non - assibilated   - ti -  points rather to West Greek, 
proposed that the Mycenaean lower classes were in fact speakers of a West Greek 
dialect. This interpretation was, however, rejected by Risch  (1979) , and it is certainly 
true that the absence of clearly Dorian names is striking, given that non - Greek names 
of indigenous peoples appear in some numbers. 
 But it should be noted at this point that we would not necessarily expect any non -
 prestigious spoken variety to inﬁ ltrate ofﬁ cial documents composed by a highly trained 
scribal elite. More recently, therefore, the whole theory of class - based dialect variation 
in the Linear B tablets has been seriously challenged, most notably by Thompson 
 (1996/7, 2002/3) , who argues that most of the observed variation is simply evidence 
of language change in progress. By taking into account the (probable) relative chronol-
ogy of tablets from Crete and the mainland together with the relative seniority/ages of 
different scribes (as reﬂ ected in the importance of the business for which they are 
responsible), Thompson has sought to show that ofﬁ cial Mycenaean evolved over time, 
with differences in scribal practice observable between different periods and even 
different generations. First, the relevance of the unassibilated forms is dismissed: virtu-
ally none belong to the small class of elements that systematically distinguish East from 
West Greek, and many remain unassibilated even in East Greek dialects of the classical 
period. With regard to the remaining phenomena, however, there is plausible evidence 
for the progressive replacement of  ‘ normal ’  forms with  ‘ special ’ ones as Mycenaean 
developed into a more regular - looking East Greek dialect, i.e. one with datives in 
[i] and reﬂ exes of syllabic liquids in [a], as in the classical period. If correct, this 
new approach undermines both Risch and Chadwick in that lower - class language 
(of whatever type) would no longer be attested even sporadically in the documentary 
record. 
 Whatever the truth of the matter, much of the dialect diversity of the classical age 
is now widely taken to be of post - Mycenaean origin. As noted, the old assumption of 
successive waves of invaders has been abandoned in favour of the view that the 
 ‘ Greeks ’ came to Greece in a single, albeit possibly gradual, population movement 
around the beginning of the 2nd millennium  bc , and that Greek  in toto  is the product 
of the consequential contact between the Indo - European dialect(s) of the incoming 
population and the language(s) of the indigenous populations. The division into East 
(South) and West (North) Greek varieties had clearly taken place by the late Bronze 
Age, as the dialect of the Linear B tablets shows, perhaps as a simple function of geo-
graphical and political separation, perhaps under different substrate inﬂ uences. 
 Much necessarily remains uncertain about this remote period, but when we turn to 
the later historical dialects it is clear that Arcadian (see Dubois  (1986))  remains the 
closest to a direct descendant of the weakly differentiated  ‘ East Greek ’ varieties assumed 
to have been spoken in southern Greece, of which Mycenaean may be taken to have 
been the ofﬁ cial written form. The closely related Cypriot (see Masson  (1961)) , then, 
must represent the later development of the East Greek dialect of early Bronze Age 
colonists. The North - West Greek dialects (M é ndez Dosuna  (1985) , Bile  (2006))  are 

22 Ancient Greek
correspondingly taken to represent the more or less direct descendants of the weakly 
differentiated  ‘ West Greek ’ dialects of the Bronze Age. 
 Other cases, however, are more complex. The Ionic dialects, for example, including 
here Attic, share typical East Greek innovations with Arcado - Cypriot (e.g. assibilation 
of original 
  in the diagnostic contexts, cf. (8) below), and so must in origin represent 
co - descendants of the East Greek group in the Bronze Age. They have, however, 
undergone a number of characteristic innovations to the exclusion of Arcado - Cypriot, 
many of which are demonstrably post - Mycenaean, including the shift of original [a:], 
preserved in Mycenaean, to [ ε :], a shift that is complete in Ionic but more restricted 
in Attic, where [a:] is retained, or perhaps restored, after [i, e, r]. Thus Attic - Ionic 
   ‘ mother ’ , for example, corresponds to 
 [m á :t ε :r] elsewhere, 
including Mycenaean (cf. the place name  ma - to - (ro) - pu - ro  [ma:tr ó pulos]  ‘ mother city 
of Pylos ’ ). Many therefore now regard Attic - Ionic as a dialect group that acquired a 
strongly independent identity only after c.1000  bc , probably in an area comprising 
eastern Attica and, following colonization, the western and central Aegean basin. 
 But while Attic shares most of its characteristic innovations with Ionic, it also has 
important innovations in common with Boeotian, as noted above (see the discussion 
of (5) and (6)). Thus the early phases of palatalization in Attic follow those of Ionic 
(both dialects having, e.g., 
 [t ó sos]  ‘ so much ’ , against Boeotian 
 [t ó tt j os], 
all from  * [t ó t - jos]), but the dialect subsequently fell into line with Boeotian (Ionic 
having, e.g., 
 [p h yl á sso:]  ‘ I guard ’ , against Attic/Boeotian 
 [p h yl á tto:]/
[p h ul á tt j o:], all from  * [p h ul á k j - jo:], as noted). The most likely explanation is that 
western Attica, separated by high mountains from the eastern areas, came under 
Boeotian inﬂ uence in the post - Mycenaean period some time after Ionic, including at 
least eastern Attica in its developmental domain, had begun to evolve as a distinct 
variety. The subsequent political uniﬁ cation of Attica would then have produced the 
 ‘ mixed ’  dialect of the classical period, a dialect of broadly Ionic type, but with a 
number of strikingly discordant features vis - à - vis the Ionic norm. The use of  - t t - [tt] 
forms then extended in part to the Ionic dialects of the neighbouring island of Boeotia. 
 Interestingly, Attic - Ionic also shares a number of innovations with Peloponnesian 
Doric to the exclusion of both Arcado - Cypriot and North - West Greek. The preposition 
 [en], for example, was used originally both locatively with the dative (=  ‘ in ’ ) and 
allatively with the accusative (=  ‘ into ’ ), an archaism preserved in both Arcadian and 
North - West Greek. In Attic - Ionic and Peloponnesian Doric, however, a ﬁ nal [s] was 
added when the preposition was used allatively, giving originally 
 [ens], but subse-
quently forms such as 
 [es] and 
 [e:s] through simpliﬁ cation of the cluster and 
compensatory lengthening (cf. note 3 above: 
 [es] and 
 [e:s] were originally pre -
 consonantal and prevocalic contextual variants, with different dialects then making 
different choices). Thus both East Greek and West Greek seem to have been divided 
in the early post - Mycenaean period into more conservative and more innovative 
members, i.e. Arcado - Cypriot (conservative) vs. Attic - Ionic (innovative) on the one 
hand, and North - West Greek (conservative) vs. Peloponnesian Doric (innovative) on 
the other. Beginning with Risch  (1955) , this has been widely interpreted as evidence 
for a brief but intense period of parallel development on the part of the innovative 
dialects, perhaps originating in southern Boeotia and northern parts of Attica as 
Dorians, making their way to the Peloponnese, passed through and/or settled in for-

The Ancient Greek Dialects 23
merly East Greek - speaking lands. These innovations clearly cut across the earlier and 
more general East – West division, thus making Attic - Ionic and Peloponnesian Doric 
somewhat  ‘ mixed ’  varieties. Subsequently, however, particularly with the advent of 
colonization, the two groups seem to have resumed their largely separate courses of 
development. 
 The Aeolic dialects are also now commonly regarded as being largely post - 
Mycenaean developments (Garc í a - Ram ó n  (1975) , critically reviewed by Ruijgh 
 (1978a) ; see also now Brixhe  (2006) and Vott é ro  (2006)) , being originally only weakly 
differentiated from (North - )West Greek in the Bronze Age. One possibility, taking a 
strongly areal rather than a genetic approach to dialect development, is that Aeolic 
formed a kind of bridge between southern  ‘ East ’  Greek and northern  ‘ West ’ Greek at 
that time, since there is evidence that proto - Aeolic had already incorporated a number 
of East Greek features into its otherwise broadly West Greek make - up: e.g. 1pl verb 
inﬂ ection  - m e n [ - men] in place of West Greek  - m e " [ - mes], and East Greek vocalism in 
forms such as 
 [hier ó s]  ‘ holy ’ , 
 [ á rtemis]  ‘ Artemis ’  vs. West Greek 
 
[hiar ó s], 
 [ á rtamis]. Many distinctively Aeolic features, however, can be shown 
to be innovations dating from the early post - Mycenaean era. A crucial example is the 
common, though by no means universal, development before front vowels of labial 
reﬂ exes of the labio - velar series   * k w ,   * g w ,   * g hw (still preserved in Mycenaean, albeit 
with de - voicing of the voiced aspirate, as noted). All later non - Aeolic dialects, by 
contrast, consistently show dental reﬂ exes. Thus while Mycenaean has both   - qe [k w e] 
 ‘ and ’  and  qe - to - ro - [k w etro - ]  ‘ four - ’ (in compounds), and all later dialects have  t e [te] 
 ‘ and ’ , Boeotian has 
 [p é ttares] and Thessalian  p e t r o  - [petro - ]  ‘ four - ’ , beside 
Attic 
 [t é ttares]. 
 The Aeolic - speaking areas of the mainland must once have been contiguous, and 
probably extended further west and south than in the classical period, by which time 
Thessalian was geographically separated from Boeotian by North - West Greek, and the 
dialects of both western Thessaly and Boeotia show clear signs of relatively recent 
North - West Greek inﬂ uence. In western Thessaly, for example, the genitive singular 
of the second declension ends in  [ - o:] (later  - o  u [ - u:]), the regular formation in North -
 West Greek, and distinct from the eastern sufﬁ x  - o  i [ - oi]: both these forms    <  earlier 
 - o  i o  [ - ojo], by loss of [j]   +  contraction, and apocopation, respectively. Similarly in 
Boeotia, we begin to ﬁ nd the substitution of the typically West Greek velar sufﬁ x 
 - x a - [ - ksa - ] for  ‘ true ’ Boeotian  - t t a - [ - tt j a] in the aorist (past perfective) stem of verbs 
with an original stem - ﬁ nal dental, e.g. 
 [ekomiks á - met h a] for 
 
[ekomitt j á - met h a] ( <  * [ekomit j - s á - met h a]),  ‘ we carried away ’ , the extension of the velar 
being based on the existence of presents in  - z w [ - zdo:] from both dental ( * [ - d+jo:]) and 
velar ( * [ - g+jo:]) stems, with subsequent paradigmatic confusion. Unsurprisingly, it is 
the dialect of eastern Thessaly, relatively insulated from the surrounding North - West 
Greek, that best preserves its distinctively Aeolic look. 
 Within this overall approach, Lesbian represents the dialect of colonists from 
Thessaly who made their way across the Aegean around 1000  bc and whose speech 
subsequently underwent a period of development under the inﬂ uence of the neighbour-
ing Ionic dialects (albeit with inﬂ uence also in the other direction), producing yet 
another mixed variety, but this time with a heavily East Greek component. Particularly 
signiﬁ cant in this connection is the Lesbian inﬁ nitive of athematic verbs (i.e. those in 

24 Ancient Greek
which inﬂ ectional endings are added directly to the root without the thematic or stem -
 forming vowel [e/o], contrast 
   [ é z - men]  ‘ we are ’ with 
 [pe í t h - o - men] 
 ‘ we persuade ’ ). This has the sufﬁ x  - m e n a i [ - menai], which seems to reﬂ ect the inﬂ uence 
of East Greek  - n a i [ - nai] on the original West Greek/Aeolic  - m e n [ - men]. 5 
 This brief and necessarily selective overview is intended to do no more than supply 
the background against which to present the later history of the Greek language. The 
prehistory and early history of Greek remain highly contested ﬁ elds of inquiry, and 
many scholars would certainly wish to challenge aspects of the account which has been 
presented here, for example by insisting on a greater degree of dialect differentiation 
in the Bronze Age than has been allowed for and by further downplaying attempts at 
a genetic classiﬁ cation in favour of a model based primarily on areal development. No 
view is wholly unproblematical, however, since all are necessarily based on what 
remains a very limited foundation of factual knowledge and on particular selections 
and interpretations of isoglosses.  
 1.4   Some Examples 
 1.4.1   Some  b asic  d ialect  c haracteristics 
 It remains to illustrate something of the diversity of Greek in the classical period by 
summarizing some of the most important dialect characteristics and considering a few 
short extracts from dialect inscriptions (for which see now Colvin  (2007)  alongside 
Buck  (1955)) . We may begin with the fundamental contrast between East Greek and 
West Greek. In each item of (8) below the typically East Greek characteristic is given 
ﬁ rst, followed by its West Greek equivalent, though we should note that speciﬁ c evi-
dence is sometimes lacking for particular dialects and that there are localized excep-
tions. Furthermore, while the Aeolic dialects tend generally to follow West Greek in 
their retention of inherited/archaic characteristics, they do not show many of the more 
typical West Greek, particularly Peloponnesian Doric, innovations, or even consistently 
make the same choices as West Greek from among sets of inherited options. This is 
only to be expected in view of what has been said above about the relative conservatism 
of North - West Greek (the subgroup geographically closest to the Aeolic homeland) 
beside Peloponnesian Doric, the probably mixed character of Aeolic even in the Bronze 
Age (involving some inﬁ ltration of East Greek features from the south), its strongly 
independent development during the Dark Age, and the susceptibility of the historical 
dialects to the inﬂ uence of neighbouring varieties thereafter (North - West Greek for 
Thessalian and Boeotian, Ionic for Lesbian). Some speciﬁ cally Aeolic characteristics 
are therefore appended, as (8j): 
 (8)  (a)  Assibilation vs. non - assibilation of original [ti] in the key diagnostic envi-
ronments listed in the discussion preceding (7) above. 
 Thessalian and Boeotian retain the inherited forms as in West Greek, 
while Lesbian has been inﬂ uenced by East Greek.  
 (b)  The expected aorists (perfectives) in  - s a -  [ - sa - ] for verbs in  - ζ w [ - zdo:] 
with non - velar stems, vs. aorists in  - x a -  [ - ksa - ] quite generally for this 
class, extended from the velar stems where they originate. 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 25
 There is some later spread of the West Greek forms into Boeotian, 
Thessalian and even East Greek Arcadian, but this is not attested in 
Lesbian, whose speakers must have migrated before this development 
took place on the mainland.  
 (c)  The masculine and feminine plural of the deﬁ nite article in  ,  [hoi, hai] 
or  , 
 [oi, ai] (by analogy with the singular forms  , 
 [ho, ha:/h ε :] or 
 , 
 [o, a:/ ε :]), vs. 
 , 
 [to í , ta í ]. Cretan is a major exception, perhaps 
because of Mycenaean/East Greek substrate inﬂ uence (Brixhe  (1991)) . 
 Thessalian and Boeotian retain the inherited forms as in West Greek, 
while Lesbian has again been inﬂ uenced by East Greek.  
 (d)  1pl ending in  - m e n [ - men], originally the secondary/past ending, vs.  - m e " 
[ - mes], originally the primary/non - past ending. 
 Aeolic here follows East Greek, this being a feature that was probably 
adopted from the south during the Mycenaean period.  
 (e)  Future forms in unaccented  - s w [ - so:] vs. 
 [ - s é o:] or, by contraction, 
 [ - s ô :]. The latter are characteristic of Peloponnesian Doric but poorly 
attested for North - West Greek (Delphian only). They are clearly innova-
tive, perhaps representing a blend of the standard type with forms derived, 
through the usual loss of 
 , from stems in liquids and nasals originally 
followed by an IE  ‘ laryngeal ’ consonant that surfaced in Greek as [e], as 
in 
 [bal é o:/bal ô :]  ‘ I will throw ’ ,   <  
 [bal é so:]). 
 Aeolic retains the inherited formation.  
 (f) 
 Athematic inﬁ nitives in  - n a i [ - nai] (e.g. 
 [ ê :nai]  ‘ to be ’   <   * [ é s - nai], vs. 
 - m e n [ - men] (e.g. 
 [ é mmen]   <   * [ é s - men]). 
 Thessalian and Boeotian follow West Greek, though Lesbian  - m e n a i 
[ - menai] has apparently been modiﬁ ed by contact with East Greek.  
 (g)  Dialectically diagnostic conditional/modal elements:  
 (i) 
 conditional conjunction  [e:]  ‘ if ’ , vs. 
 [ai]. 
 The latter is also general Aeolic. 
 (ii) 
 modal (conditional/generic) particle 
 [an] (in Attic - Ionic and 
Arcadian, though not Cypriot, which has  k e [ke]) vs.  k a [ka:]. 
 The latter is also Boeotian; Thessalian and Lesbian also have  k e 
[ke], presumably the original Aeolic form. 
 (iii)  the word order 
  ‘ if 
ever anyone ’ vs. 
  ‘ if anyone ever ’ . 
 This order is not normal Aeolic, cf. Boeotian 
 
[ ε : (d é ) k á : tis]/Lesbian 
  [a í k é tis]  ‘ if (and) ever anyone ’ , 
but it does appear occasionally in Boeotian documents, under 
North - West Greek inﬂ uence. 
 (h)  Adverbs 
 [t ó te]  ‘ then ’ , 
 [p ó te]  ‘ when? ’ , 
 [h ó te]  ‘ when ’ , vs. 
 
[t ó ka], 
 [p ó ka], 
 [h ó ka]. 
 The latter are also Boeotian, but Lesbian has 
 [t ó ta] etc., with the 
same ending as in Attic 
 [ ê :ta]/
 [ é pe:ta]  ‘ then ’ , in contrast 
with Ionic 
 [ ê :te(n)]/
 [ é peite(n)]. Boeotian shows North -
 West Greek inﬂ uence, with Lesbian perhaps retaining the original Aeolic 
forms. 

26 Ancient Greek
 (i) 
 Some dialectally diagnostic words or forms of words: 
 (i) 
 
  [(e)t h é lo:]  ‘ want, wish ’ vs. 
 [l é :o:/l é o:]. 
 The latter is not Aeolic.  
 (ii)   
  [b ú :lomai/b ó lomai]  ‘ will, wish ’ , with the o - grade 
of the root   * gwe/ol(s) -  , vs.  
 
with the e - grade. 
 Here Thessalian 
 [b é llomai] and Boeotian 
 
[b é :lomai] follow West Greek, while Lesbian 
 [b ó llo-
mai] has again been inﬂ uenced by East Greek.  
 (j) 
 Aeolic also has a number of characteristic innovations of its own, includ-
ing: labial reﬂ exes of labio - velars before front vowels (e.g. Lesbian/
Thessalian 
 [p é mpe]  ‘ ﬁ ve ’ for the usual 
 [p é nte]); active perfect 
participles in  - w n / - o  n t o  " [ - o:n]/[ - ontos] rather than  - w " / - o  t o  " [ - o:s]/[ - otos], 
e.g. Lesbian 
 [katel ε :l ú t h o:n]  ‘ having returned ’ ; dative plurals 
of consonant - stems in  - e s s i [ - essi] (e.g. 
 [p ó dessi]  ‘ feet ’ , rather 
than  - s i [ - si], cf. 
   [po(s)s í ]). 
 Lesbian and Thessalian also share the athematic ( - m i [ - mi]) inﬂ ection 
of contract verbs, i.e. those with stem - ﬁ nal [ - a/a:( ε :),  - e/ ε :,  - o/o:] (e.g. 
Thessalian 
 [euerget é - s]  ‘ beneﬁ ting (nom sg) ’ , with participial 
 - ( n ) " [ - (n)s] added directly to the stem - vowel just as in Attic athematic 
verbs, cf. 
 [tit h é :s]   <   * t i q e - n " [tit h e - ns]), and assimilation in clusters 
of [l, r, m, n]   +  [j] or original (and non - ﬁ nal) [s], leading to double liquids/
nasals, as opposed to cluster simpliﬁ cation followed by compensatory 
lengthening (e.g. Lesbian 
 [kr í nno:]  ‘ I judge ’ , rather than Attic 
 
[kr í :no:],    <  
 [kr í n - jo:]). 6 Boeotian and Thessalian share the exten-
sion of athematic  - m e n [ - men] to thematic inﬁ nitives (e.g. Boeotian 
 
[p h er é - men]  ‘ to carry ’ , rather than 
 [p h er ê n] etc).  
 Some brief examples of West Greek (both Peloponnesian Doric and North - West 
Greek), Aeolic, and East Greek (Arcadian, Ionic and Attic) are presented below, with 
a short commentary on each. We should ﬁ rst note, however, that punctuation in the 
transcriptions of epigraphic texts is mostly editorial and written accentuation a matter 
of convention. In reality we know almost nothing about the accentuation of dialects 
other than Attic - Ionic (see Probert  (2006)  for a thorough discussion), and it might 
therefore be better to omit written accents altogether. We are, none the less, informed 
by later grammarians that the accentuation of Lesbian was  ‘ recessive ’ , i.e. that the 
accent fell as far from the end of a word as the rules permit. Texts in Lesbian dialect 
are therefore conventionally accented in this way. But in so far as Greek grammarians 
focused their attention exclusively on literary texts, we might reasonably wonder 
whether recessive accentuation was a more general property of Aeolic (there being no 
surviving literature in Thessalian, and only the most minimal attestation of literary 
Boeotian). 
 Both here and in subsequent chapters, [ ] enclose restorations of illegible or damaged 
letters, { } superﬂ uous letters inscribed in error, ( ) editorially corrected letters or expan-
sions of abbreviations, and    <   > letters mistakenly omitted. Other points to note include 
the following: where the sound [w] was retained, it is written with the letter digamma 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 27
 ; iotas later written subscript, as in dative singulars etc., here appear adscript; most 
local alphabets prior to the standardization of the Ionic version did not distinguish 
long e - or o - vowels from the corresponding short ones, the letters E/ e and O/o denot-
ing both, so long e - and o - vowels that do not carry a circumﬂ ex accent (itself a marker 
of length) are indicated here with a macron above:  ,  . 
 The notion of  ‘ long ’  e - and o - vowels, however, requires some further comment. In 
some dialects short e - and o - vowels were closer in articulation than their long coun-
terparts (whether generally, as in Attic and Ionic, or in certain environments only, for 
which see below), while in other dialects they had the same quality. Furthermore, 
though many long e - and o - vowels were inherited, others arose secondarily from con-
traction and compensatory lengthening. According to dialect, therefore, these processes 
could lead to long vowels that were closer in articulation than the inherited ones (in 
that they retained the quality of the affected short vowels), or to long vowels that 
corresponded with these. Once the Ionic alphabet was standardized, in the early 4th 
century  bc , those dialects in which the new and inherited long vowels fully corre-
sponded used H for all long e - vowels and  W for all long o - vowels, while those in which 
they differed in quality, whether generally or in part, used these two symbols for more 
open long vowels and EI and O ϒ for closer ones, a usage made possible by the fact 
that the diphthongs which these digraphs once represented had earlier been monoph-
thongized to a close [e:] and a close [o:] respectively (the latter then raising further to 
[u:]). Prior to this, however, E and O were used in most areas for all long e - and 
o - vowels, whatever their quality (as noted). 
 The dialects that regularly use only H and  W from the 4th century onwards are 
Arcadian, Lesbian, and a subset of West Greek including Laconian, Heraclean and 
Cretan, though earlier Cretan evidence suggests that there was once a qualitative dif-
ference, subsequently lost, between the long vowels resulting from contraction (closer) 
and those arising from compensatory lengthening (more open). In some other West 
Greek dialects (e.g. Theran, Cyrenaean, Rhodian and Coan) this difference appears to 
have persisted longer, with contraction again leading quite generally to a closer articu-
lation than lengthening (though once again there is a tendency for this distinction to 
be lost over time in some areas). Boeotian and Thessalian are potentially misleading 
here, in that all long e - vowels in both dialects, along with all long o - vowels in 
Thessalian, had been raised in articulation before the introduction of the Ionic alphabet 
and these are therefore standardly noted from the 4th century onwards with EI and 
O ϒ . Accordingly, these dialects belong properly with Arcadian, Lesbian etc. 
 Note ﬁ nally that the letter H/ η was originally used to mark word - initial aspiration, 
and in this function is transcribed below as  H/h . Since such aspiration was lost very 
early in the eastern Ionic - speaking area, the letter was recycled, being used ﬁ rst to 
denote the new, very open, long e - vowel [ æ :] deriving from original long [a:] (a highly 
characteristic Attic - Ionic sound change) and then to represent the inherited long 
e - vowel [ ε :] too, once these two sounds had merged. The use of H to represent open 
long e - vowels spread quite early to the central Ionic - speaking area and also to the 
Doric - speaking islands of the southern Aegean, where it doubled up both as the marker 
of aspiration and as a symbol for open long e - vowels (though in Crete, where word -
 initial aspiration was also lost early, it was naturally used only for the latter). It was 
eventually generalized as a means of denoting open long e - vowels [ ε :] with the stand-

28 Ancient Greek
ardization of the Ionic alphabet. We may also note in passing that the rough and 
smooth breathings of the version of the Ionic alphabet used here are in origin graphic 
reductions of the left - and right - hand  ‘ halves ’ of H respectively. 
 In view of the considerable additional variation in archaic local alphabets beyond 
what has already been discussed (especially in the notation of the voiceless aspirates 
and of [ps, ks]), and given the many remaining uncertainties of interpretation in a 
range of speciﬁ c cases, no attempt will be made here to offer a systematic phonetic 
transcription, though each text is accompanied by a word - for - word gloss and a free 
translation. 
 1.4.2   West Greek 
 (a)  Laconian (Sparta, Peloponnesian Doric) 
 IG V.1.123, 5th century  bc . Record of the victories of Damonon and his son.
 ‘ Damonon made this dedication to Athana ( Athene ) Poliachos, having won victories in 
such a way as no man alive today has ever done before. Damonon was victorious in the 
following contests with his own four - horse chariot, himself holding the reins: in the games 
of the Earthshaker ( Poseidon ) four times and the games of Athana four times and the 
Eleusinian games four times. And Damonon won the games of Pohoidan ( Poseidon ) at 
Helos seven times, and his courser on the same occasions, himself holding the reins, with 
ﬁ llies from his own mares and by his own stallion.  … ’ 
 Characteristic of all non - Attic - Ionic dialects is the retention of original long [a:] (as in 
 [ni:k á :ha:s]  ‘ having won ’ beside Attic 
 etc.) and, where 
contraction occurs, the development of [a:]   +  an o - vowel to [a:] rather than [o:] (as in 
 [t â :n]  ‘ the (fem gen pl) ’ beside Attic 
 [t ô :n], both    <  
 [t á :o:n]. We may also 
note here the typically West Greek  - p o  k a [ - poka] (cf. (8h)) alongside speciﬁ cally 
Laconian features such as the use of  - k i n [ - kin] as the sufﬁ x for numeral adverbs (e.g. 
 [hept á kin]  ‘ seven times ’ beside Attic 
 [hept á kis]) and the general 
weakening of intervocalic [s] to [h] (as in 
 [en í :ka:he]  ‘ he won ’ beside Attic 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 29
  [en í :k ε :se] etc.). Such a change had occurred generally in Greek during the 
Bronze Age, but in many cases the sound was restored analogically on the basis of 
parallel forms in which the [s] occurred after a consonant (see (1c)): the weakening 
here is a later local development, beginning in the 5th century. On the basis of make-
shift Athenian spellings with  S of the sound in Laconian words that is elsewhere spelled 
with  Q , it also seems likely that  Q already represented the fricative 
 in Laconian (so 
  = 
 [t h e ó s]  ‘ god/goddess ’ ). As we shall see in subsequent chapters, frica-
tivization of all three voiceless aspirated plosives eventually took place everywhere, 
and it is therefore conceivable that the process was already complete in Laconian. In 
any case, this example shows clearly that we should not imagine that local orthogra-
phies were routinely adapted to reﬂ ect sound change: thus spellings with  S appear in 
Laconian inscriptions only after the universal adoption of the Ionic alphabet in which 
 Q still represented [t h ]. It also follows that the changes in question may also have been 
taking place in other areas at this time. Similar problems of orthographic conservatism 
arise in connection with major changes in the vowel system, as discussed brieﬂ y below 
in connection with Boeotian and at length in later chapters.  
 (b)   Cretan (Gortyn, Peloponnesian Doric) 
 GDI 4991, mid - 5th century  bc . The Gortyn law code; disputes over the ownership of 
slaves.
 ‘ Gods. Whoever is about to bring suit with regard to a free man or a slave shall not make 
seizure before the trial. If he makes seizure, he ( the judge ) shall condemn him to a ﬁ ne of 
ten staters in the case of a free man, ﬁ ve in the case of a slave, because he seizes him, and 
shall decree that he release him within three days. But if he does not release him, in the 
case of a free man he ( the judge ) shall condemn him to a ﬁ ne of a stater, in the case of a 
slave a drachma, for each day until he releases him; and as to the time the judge shall 
decide under oath.  … ’ 
 Typical West Greek features here include aorist stems in [ - ks - ] from non - velar roots 
(e.g. 
 [katadikaks á to:]  ‘ let him condemn ’ beside Attic 
 
[katadikas á to:], cf. (8b)) and the forms 
 and  k a [ai, ka:]  ‘ if, ever ’ (see (8g)). Note 
that the archaic alphabet used on Crete at this time did not distinguish voiceless 
[p, k] from aspirated [p h , k h ], employing only  P and K (cf. 
 [amp h i - ], 
 

30 Ancient Greek
[dark h n á :n]  ‘ drachma (acc) ’ ). Some regular Cretan characteristics include psilosis (loss 
of initial aspiration, as in 
 [os]  ‘ who ’ beside Attic 
 [hos]), assimilation of [zd] to 
[dd] (as in 
 [katadikadd é tto:]  ‘ let him condemn ’ beside Attic 
 
[katdikazd é to:]), short - vowel aorist/perfective subjunctives (as originally in this athe-
matic formation, and guaranteed for Cretan by later spellings: contrast 
 
[lag á se:]  ‘ s/he should release ’ with corresponding Attic forms modelled on the long -
 vowel thematic subjunctives of the present/imperfective stem), and thematic inﬁ nitives 
in  - e n [ - en] (cf. 
 [kr í :nen]  ‘ to judge ’ beside Attic 
  [kr í :ne:n]). None of these 
features, however, is exclusively Cretan or even exclusively West Greek.  
 (c)  Elean (Olympia, North - West Greek) 
 GDI 1152, early 6th century  bc . The immunity of Patrias.
 ‘ The decree of the Eleans. Patrias shall have legal protection along with his family and 
his property. And if anyone brings a charge, that man is to stand trial as [he would if he 
brought a charge] against an Elean. And if whoever should hold the highest ofﬁ ce and 
the basilaes ( magistrates ) should not apply his rights, each of those who fail to do so 
should pay ten minas dedicated to Olympian Zeus, and the Hellanodikas ( chief judge with 
jurisdiction at the Olympic games ) should take care of this, and let the board of dami-
ourgoi ( magistrates ) take care of his other rights;  … ’ 
 The interpretation of this text remains uncertain in several respects. Some take 
 [patri á :n] (differently accented) to be a common noun meaning  ‘ clan ’ rather 
than a proper name and the subject of the ﬁ rst sentence to be unspeciﬁ ed accused 
people who are to enjoy security in respect of  ‘ clan, family and property ’ . The target 
of the charge in the second sentence must then be an accused ’ s  ‘ clan, family and prop-
erty ’ , but this raises difﬁ culties for the interpretation of the following elliptical clause, 
which apparently states that such an accuser shall stand trial  ‘ as in a case against an 
Elean ’ . Are the accused and his clan and family not likely to be Eleans themselves? 
The alternative, adopted here, is to take Patrias to be a foreigner who is given 
legal protection on the same basis as an Elean (cf. Koerner ( 1981 : 190 – 4), Colvin 
( 2007 : 168)). 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 31
 Once again West Greek features are in evidence, most obviously the conditional con-
junction  [ai] (cf. (8g)) and the plural article 
 [toi] (cf. (8c)), along with the a - vocal-
ism in 
 [iar ó s]  ‘ sacred ’ beside Attic 
  [hier ó s], as in 
 [kat - iar - a ú seie] 
 ‘ s/he should imprecate/accuse ’ beside Attic 
 [kat h - ier - e ú seie]. Speciﬁ cally 
North - West Greek is the shift of [e]    >  [a] before [r] seen in 
 [w á rr ε :n]  ‘ to stand 
trial ’ beside 
 [(w) é rro:] elsewhere (this latter normally with the non - technical 
meaning of  ‘ go away/go to ruin ’ ). Characteristically Elean are the use of the optative 
with  k a [ka:] to frame an injunction (e.g.  k a 
 [ka: apot í :noi]  ‘ s/he should pay 
back ’ ) and of the bare optative in generic relative clauses rather than the subjunctive 
with the generic/conditional particle (e.g. 
 [or  … t é los  é xoi]  ‘ whoever 
holds ofﬁ ce ’ . 7 Note too the psilosis, some apocopation of prepositions, shortening of 
ﬁ nal long diphthongs as in dative 
 [to î ]  ‘ to - the ’  beside Attic 
 [t ô :i], the shift of 
[ ε :]   >  [a:], as in 
 [wa:le í ois]  ‘ for - Eleans ’ , and of [e]    >  [a] after as well as before 
 , 
as in 
 [kat - iara ú - seie], and partial rhotacism of ﬁ nal [s]    >  [r], as in 
 
[to î r] beside Attic 
  [to î s]; in later inscriptions the r - spellings become uniform, though 
s - spellings remained in use earlier, as here, with the r - spellings originally typical of pho-
nologically weak forms such as (clitic) articles and pronouns. We may note too the 
diphthongal product of compensatory lengthening in ﬁ nal syllables originally ending in 
[ns], as in accusative feminine plural 
  ‘ dedicated ’  beside Attic 
  [katat h yt á :s], both from an original  * [kata - t h ut á ns]. The spelling with Z of 
what elsewhere would be represented by  Δ , as in  for  [de], 
  for 
 [d í kaia] 
etc., probably represents the early fricativization of [d]    >  
  (cf. M é ndez Dosuna  (1991) : 
Z was free to be redeployed in Elean because it was no longer required to represent [dz, 
zd], which had earlier assimilated to [dd] and then simpliﬁ ed initially to [d]). As we shall 
see in later chapters, the three voiced plosives were eventually fricativized everywhere, 
and this may already have been the case in Elean despite the absence of parallel ortho-
graphic evidence for [b, g]. We should also remember that changes that are directly or 
indirectly attested graphically in certain localities in a given period may already have 
taken place more widely, but without any corresponding orthographic clues.  
 (d)   Phocian (Delphi, North - West Greek) 
 CID I.3, ﬁ rst half of 5th century  bc . Prohibition of the removal of sacred wine.
 ‘ People should not remove the wine from the racecourse; if someone does remove it, let 
him propitiate the god for whom it is mixed, and let him offer a sacriﬁ ce in place of it 
and pay back ﬁ ve drachmas; and half of this is to go to the accuser. ’ 
 Though found in a wall dated to the late 4th century the language here generally has 
an older appearance, though some  ‘ modern ’ spellings (e.g.  - o  u for 
 as the genitive 
singular in 
  [to: dr ó mo:]  ‘ the racecourse ’ ) suggest we may actually be 

32 Ancient Greek
dealing with a later copy of an older inscription. Note once again the characteristic 
West Greek conditional conjunction 
 [ai] and particle  k a [ka:] (8g), and the aorist 
stem in [ - ks - ] from a non - velar root in 
 [hilaks - á st h o:] (8b). This last form 
also shows one of the typical North - West Greek  S T spellings discussed in note 7 for 
Elean, and may once again provide indirect evidence for a fricative pronunciation of 
the voiceless aspirates in other contexts. There is also the North - West Greek shift of 
[e]    >  [a] before [r] in 
 [f á ren]  ‘ to carry ’ beside Attic 
 [p h é re:n]. The short 
vowel form of the inﬁ nitive ending is not, however, the norm in North - West Greek, 
though it is characteristic of Phocian speciﬁ cally, along with the o - stem form of the 
word for  ‘ half ’ , 
 , beside Attic 
 (though neither 
of these features is exclusively Phocian). The preposition 
 [eks]  ‘ out of ’ usually 
appears as 
 [ek] before consonants, but in some dialects, as here, the cluster simpli-
ﬁ ed to 
  [ess/es] in this environment.  
 1.4.3   Aeolic 
 (a)  Boeotian (Thebes) 
 IG VII.2418, mid - 4th century  bc . List of contributions for the Sacred War beginning 
355  bc .
 ‘ The following contributed money to the war fought by the Boeotians for the temple at 
Delphi against those committing sacrilege against the temple of Pythian Apollo. In the 
archonship ( magistracy ) of Aristion: the people of Alyzia  … ; the elders Charops son of 
Dadon, Aristo -  … ; the people of Anaktorion 30 minas; the elders  … son of Phormos, 
Arkos son of Tereus  … ’ 
 The most distinctively Aeolic feature here is the labial reﬂ ex of an original labio - velar 
before the front vowel in 
  [belp h o î s]  ‘ Delphi (dat) ’ beside Attic 
 [del-
p h o î s], both    <   * g w elbh -  ‘ womb ’ (cf. (8j)). But mainland Aeolic, as noted, often agrees 
with North - West Greek, whether as a reﬂ ex of its early history or as the result of later 
convergence. The use of the preposition 
 [en] with the accusative to mean  ‘ to/into ’ 
(
 [en ton p ó lemon]  ‘ to/for the war ’ ) is clearly an archaism shared by 
these two groups (as well as by Arcadian and Cypriot), while the form 
 [hiar ó n] 
 ‘ temple ’ , with a - vocalism, is common to mainland Aeolic and West Greek in general. 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 33
 Some typical Boeotian features are reﬂ ected in the orthographic system, which dis-
plays an unusal degree of adaptation to sound change over time. In particular, Boeotian 
provides early graphic evidence of major changes in the vowel system that eventually 
became universal. By the mid - 4th century, for example, standard Boeotian spellings, 
in which I [i:], EI [e:] and H [ ε :] are used where EI [e:], H [ ε :] and AI [ai] would 
normally be expected, show that [e:] ( < [ei]) and [ ε :] (all original and secondary 
long e - vowels) had been raised to [i:] and [e:] respectively, while the diphthong 
[ai] had been monophthongized to [ ε :]. Examples from this text include 
 
[pri:zg ê :es]  ‘ elders/ambassadors ’ beside Thessalian 
 [pre:zb é :a]  ‘ rank of elder/
embassy ’ , 8 
  [k h r é :mata]  ‘ property/money ’ beside Attic 
 , 
   ‘ Alyzaians ’ beside Attic 
 [alyzda î oi]. As always (see also 
the discussion of fricativization in connection with Laconian and North - West Greek 
above), it is unclear just how much of a pioneer Boeotian truly was in this respect, 
given that other alphabets, most importantly the standardized Ionic alphabet, were 
much more conservative. This complex issue will be addressed in more detail in later 
chapters. Note too the regular raising of [e]    >  [i] before another vowel, as in 
 
[epol é mi - on]  ‘ they fought ’   <  
 [epol é me - on], and the characteristic mainland 
Aeolic 3pl ending in 
 [suneb á lont h o]  ‘ they - contributed ’ , for standard  - n t o  
[ - nto], perhaps with extension of the aspirate from 1pl  - m e q a [ - met h a] and 2 pl  - s q e 
[ - st h e]. 
 (b)   Thessalian (Matropolis in  w estern Thessaly) 
 SEG 36.548, second half of 3rd century  bc . The privileges of the Basaidai clan.
 ‘ God; good fortune; agreement for those of the Basaidai belonging to the four tribes and 
participating in perpetuity in the taga ( chief magistracy ), both for themselves and for the 
offspring issuing from them. It shall not be permitted to accept anyone into equality of 
privilege nor should they assign the taga outside the clan.  … ’ 
 Note once again the Aeolic reﬂ ex of an original labio - velar before a front vowel in 
  [pett á ru:n]  ‘ four ’ , beside Attic 
 [tett á ro:n] (with palatalization, cf. 
Latin  quattuor for the original sound), and also the typically Aeolic consonant - stem 
dative plural ending in  - e s s i [ - essi] as in 
 [ é :nt - essi]  ‘ being (dat pl) ’ , beside the 
Ionic 
 [e û si]   <   * [e ó nt - si] (cf. (8j)). 9 The motive for this development appears to 
have been avoidance of the stem allomorphy resulting from the simpliﬁ cation of [ - nts - ], 

34 Ancient Greek
with the ending itself based on the analogy of the o - stem nominative  - o  i [ - oi] beside 
dative  - o  i s i [ - oisi], so that the usual dative  - s i [ - si] was added to the nominative plural 
 - e " [ - es]. 
 Of particular importance here are the Thessalian treatment of both original and 
secondary long e - and o - vowels, which had evidently raised to [e:] and [u:] (spelled  E  I  
and  O Á ) respectively, e.g. 
 [sunt h é :ka:]  ‘ agreement ’ (cf. Attic 
 ) 
and 
 [basa í du:n]  ‘ Basaidai (gen pl) ’ (cf. Attic 
 [basa í do:n]). The form 
of o - stem dative plurals in  - e i " [ - e:s] rather than  - o  i " [ - ois], as in 
 [t ê :s], 
 
[aut ê :s] and, later in the text, 
   [t ú :te:s], points to the monophthongization and 
subsequent partial loss of lip - rounding attested graphically in this period also for 
Boeotian (i.e. [oi]    >  [ ø :]   >  [e:]); but the ﬁ nal stage appears still to be conﬁ ned to pho-
nologically weak articles and pronouns if we compare 
 [d ø :n]  ‘ they should give ’ 
and, later in the inscription, 
 [ksend ó k ø :]  ‘ witnesses (nom) ’ . Similar changes 
eventually took place everywhere, and in all environments, though with all the usual 
problems of establishing the proper chronology. 
 In this particular inscription, however, there are some further unexpected spellings 
in ﬁ nal syllables which have been taken by Chadwick  (1993)  as evidence of the shift 
from the inherited pitch accent to a stress accent, with an associated loss of vowel 
quality (vowel weakening) in post - tonic unaccented syllables containing short [o], and 
in clitic elements such as articles. Thus 
 (normally spelled 
 
[ton  … k h r ó non]  ‘ (for - )the time ’ ) may well represent 
 , while the 3pl 
optative form 
 [d ø :n] suggests the complete syncopation of such a vowel (
 
[ ' d ø :en]). Once again, this shift in the character of the accent eventually occurred 
everywhere in Greek, but as always with many uncertainties about the timing. As we 
shall see in later chapters, the advent of a stress accent was intimately bound up with 
the loss of contrastive distinctions in vowel quantity, though this complication has 
been ignored in the tentative transcriptions offered here. Evidence for such vowel 
weakening, however, remains a peculiarity of Thessalian, at least in native varieties of 
Greek, and indeed of this document. 
 Apocopated prepositions and preverbs are the norm in this dialect, e.g.  p o  t [pot] 
for 
 [pot í ], and 
 [po(d) - ' deksast æ :] for 
 [poti - d é ksast h ai], 
where the  S T spelling, which is rare and relatively late in Thessalian compared with 
North - West Greek, may once again provide evidence for the fricativization of voiceless 
aspirates in other environments (though this possibility has not been adopted in the 
transcriptions). 10 Other oddities remain unexplained, however. The negative 
 , appar-
ently [ma:], for example, is unique to this inscription (elsewhere 
 [me:] is used in 
Thessalian, as expected), and it is quite uncertain why the root element of the demon-
strative meaning  ‘ this ’ is written  t u t -  rather than  t o  u t - [tu:t - ] in the usual way (though 
it implies that the pronunciation of the original diphthong [ou] may have developed 
differently from that of the long o - vowels). See Garc í a - Ram ó n  (1987)  for a thorough 
discussion of this text.  
 (c)  Lesbian (Mytilene) 
 IG XII.2.6, soon after 324  bc . Settlement of disputes between exiles returning under 
an edict of Alexander the Great and the remaining citizens of Mytilene.

The Ancient Greek Dialects 35
 ‘ And the basilees ( magistrates ) shall bestow favour on those who have returned from exile 
on the grounds that those who were previously in the city are contriving deceit. But if any 
of those who have returned from exile does not abide by these resolutions, he shall not 
 … any property from the city nor shall he lay claim to anything that those who were 
previously in the city surrendered to him, but of those who were previously in the city 
those who surrendered property to him shall lay claim to this, and the strotagoi ( magis-
trates ) shall return the property thereafter to those who were previously in the city.  … ’ 
 Another important Aeolic feature in evidence here is the perfect participle with 
stem in  -  o  n t -  [ - ont - ], as in the imperfective participle, rather than the usual  - o  t - [ - ot - ], 
so 
 [katel ε :l ú t h - onti]  ‘ having returned (dat) ’ rather than Attic 
 
[katel ε :l ý t h - oti] (see (8j)). The conditional particle  k e [ke] is regular in both Lesbian 
and Thessalian (Boeotian  k a [ka:] is probably a North - West Greek feature), while 
3pl imperatives in  - n t o  n [ - nton] (active, cf. 
  [st é :k h o - nton]  ‘ let them walk 
(upon)/lay claim to ’ ) and  - s q o  n [ - st h on] (medio - passive, cf. 
 [prost í t h e:st h - 
on]  ‘ let them add/bestow ’ ) are characteristically Lesbian; Attic has  - n t w n [ - nto:n] and 
 - s q w n [ - st h o:n] respectively. The ﬁ nal  - i [i] of long diphthongs started to be lost quite 
early in Lesbian, and from the late 4th century forms with plain long vowels prevail, 
so here 
  [emm é n - ε :]  ‘ s/he abide by (subjunctive) ’ beside Attic 
 
[emm é n - ε :i]. 
 An important feature of Lesbian not illustrated here is  ‘ diphthongal ’  compensatory 
lengthening following the simpliﬁ cation of [n]   +  word - ﬁ nal [s] or, medially, [n]   +  sec-
ondary [s] (i.e. resulting from the assibilation of [ti] or the simpliﬁ cation of  * [ts] ( < 
 * [t - j])), as in 
 [pa î sa]  ‘ all (fem sg) ’ beside Attic 
 [p â :sa], both from 
 
[p á nsa] ( < 
 [p á nt - ja]). Since accusative plurals of the ﬁ rst and second declension 
therefore end in  - a i " [ - ais] and  - o  i " [ - ois] ( <  - a n " [ - ans] and  - o  n " [ - ons]), 11 it follows 
that the dative plurals of these declensions will normally have  ‘ long ’ forms in  - a i s i 
[ - aisi] (cf. 
 [ta ú taisi]  ‘ these (dat pl) ’ ) and  - o  i s i [ - oisi]); only the article has the 
short forms, though conventionally with a different written accent from the accusative, 
so dative 
 [ta î s] vs. accusative 
 [ta í s] etc.  

36 Ancient Greek
 1.4.4   East Greek 
 (a)  Arcadian (Mantinea) 
 IG V.2.262, 5th century  bc . Judgement against those guilty of sacrilege against Athena 
Alea, whose temple had been the scene of a ﬁ ght.
 ‘ The following have been condemned to pay retribution to Athena Alea:  … Whoever the 
oracle condemns or is condemned by judicial process to forfeit his property, this together 
with his household slaves shall belong to the goddess, and he shall distribute the houses 
he may own in addition. Inasmuch as we, both the goddess and the judges, have passed 
judgement on the condemned on the following terms, that they should hand over their 
allotted portion of property and be banished in the male line for all time from the temple, 
this shall be propitious. And if anyone allows anything else, contrary to these provisions, 
that shall be impious.  … ’ 
 Some standard East Greek features in evidence here include aorists in  - s a -  [ - sa - ] rather 
than  - x a - [ - ksa - ] from verbs in  - ζ w [ - zdo:] with non - velar stems (cf. (8b)), as 
  
[edik á sa - men]  ‘ we - judged ’ ), the East Greek 1pl ending  - m e n [ - men] (cf. (8d)), the plural 
article 
 [oi] (cf. (8c)), and the conditional conjunction 
 [e:] (cf. (8g)). Arcadian, 
however, is a conservative East Greek dialect, as noted, and several archaisms are also 
apparent, including the use of  [in] with the accusative =  ‘ into ’ , as also in North - West 
Greek and mainland Aeolic (
 [en] through the characteristic Arcado - Cypriot 
raising before [n], as also in the participial ending  - m i n o  " [ - minos]), and the 3sg middle/
passive ending in  - t o  i [ - toi] (as in 
 [ é a: - toi]  ‘ s/he allows ’ ), inherited directly from 
Mycenaean (e.g.  e - u - ke - to( - qe)  [e ú k h e - to í ( - k w e)] PY 140  ‘ (and) s/he - declares ’ ), beside 
the innovative  - t a i [ - tai] used elsewhere. Characteristically Arcadian are the absence 
of compensatory lengthening when ﬁ nal [ - ns] is simpliﬁ ed (
  [apek h om í nos] 
beside Attic 
 [apek h om é nu:s]  ‘ being kept away (acc pl) ’ , both    <  
  
[ - menons]), the apocopated prepositions and preverbs with subsequent assimila-
tion and simpliﬁ cation of double consonants (
  [ka - kr í n ε :]   <  [kak - kr í n ε :]   <  
[kat - kr í n ε :]   <  [kata - kr í n ε :]  ‘ s/he condemn (subjunctive) ’ ,  p e 
   … [pe tois  … ]   <  [pet 
tois  … ]   <  [ped tois  … ]   <  [peda tois  … ]  ‘ with the  … ’ ), short diphthongs in the dative 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 37
singulars of a - and o - stem nouns (probably representing original locatives, as in 
  [toi iero î ]  ‘ the temple (dat) ’ ), and the use of the dative rather than the usual 
genitive with ablatival prepositions (
 [apu toi iero î ]  ‘ from the temple 
(dat) ’ , as also in Cypriot). Uniquely in this inscription 
 [kas] is used for the later 
and more usual 
 [kai]  ‘ and ’ (with assimilation to [w] and simpliﬁ cation in 
 
[ka woik í as]  <  [kaw woik í as]  <  [kas woik í as])), but this form is also shared by Cypriot 
and must be original in the dialect, as is 
 [ ó nu]  ‘ this ’ (also shared with Cypriot) 
for the usual 
 [h ó de]. The prepositions 
 [ped( á )]  ‘ with ’  and 
 [ap ú ]  ‘ from ’ 
are attested in Mycenaean, and presumably represent a direct inheritance from the 
Bronze Age. 
 The letter  И is used here to indicate the current stage in the development of the 
palatalization of labio - velars before front vowels in this dialect, as in  и i "  ‘ someone ’ 
(beside  t i " [tis] elsewhere) and 
  ‘ to - whomever ’ (= Attic 
  [h ó - teo:i]), but 
mysteriously not in  t e [te]. 12 It probably represents 
 in that an earlier Arcadian 
inscription (IG V.2.554, late 6th/early 5th century) has a spelling with Z implying an 
affricate pronunciation (
  ‘ whoever ’ , perhaps = [ ó - tsis]), while later Arcadian 
employs the usual t - spellings, showing that a t - element was involved throughout.  
 (b)   Ionic 
 (i)  Eastern (Berezan  n ear Olbia, a  c olony of Miletus on the Black Sea) 
 SEG 26.845, late 6th century  bc . Letter on lead from Achillodoros to his son Protagores.
 ‘ Protagores, your father ( Achillodoros ) writes to you. He is being abused by Matasys, for 
he holds him as a slave and has robbed him of his shipping business. Go to Anaxagores 
and inform him; for he ( Matasys ) says that he ( Achillodoros ) is Anaxagores ’ slave, claim-
ing:  “ Anaxagores has all my stuff, slave men and slave women and houses. ” But he 
( Achillodoros ) shouts out in protest and denies that there is anything between himself and 
Matasys and declares that he is a free man and that there is nothing between himself and 
Matasys. If, however, there is anything between him (Matasys) and Anaxagores they 
themselves know between themselves.  … ’ 

38 Ancient Greek
 The Ionic dialects, with Attic, form the more innovative branch of East Greek. The 
most characteristic Ionic innovation here is the shift of original [a:]    >  [ ε :] (standardly 
written H) in all environments. As noted earlier, this innovation is shared with Attic 
but there [a:] is retained/restored after [i, e, r]. So here we have 
 
[anaksag ó r ε :s] etc. where other dialects, including Attic, would have 
 
[anaksag ó ra:s]. Equally characteristic of Attic - Ionic are the optional presence of a ﬁ nal 
[ - n] ( ‘ movable  nu ’ ) in dative plurals in  - s i ( n ) [ - si(n)] and verb forms in  - s i ( n ) [ - si(n)]/
 - e ( n ) [ - e(n)]), as 
 [p h ε :s í n]  ‘ s/he says ’ , and the process of  ‘ quantitative metathesis ’ , 
which involves the shortening of an open long e - vowel before an o - or a - vowel, fol-
lowed by synizesis (a running together of the two vowels, involving a semi - vocalic 
pronunciation of [e] noted here as [  ]) and, when the second element was originally 
short, a form of compensatory lengthening (M é ndez Dosuna  (1993a)) ; thus [ ε :o]   >  [  o:], 
as in 
  ‘ Anaxagores (gen) ’ , with  - e w 
   <   - η o [ - ε :o]   <   - a o  
[ - a:o] (in Attic the genitive ending of masculine a - stems was replaced by  - o  u [ - u:], 
borrowed from the o - stem paradigm). 
 Other Ionic features include the form of the reﬂ exive pronoun 
 [eo:ut ó n] etc. 
beside Attic 
 [hea:ut ó n], the levelling of the plural paradigm of a number of 
irregular verbs (so here 
 [o í d - a:si]  ‘ they - know ’  reformed to the singular 
 
[o î d - a]  ‘ I - know ’ etc., in place of the opaque 
 [ í s - a:si] still retained in Attic), and 
the apparent falling together of an original sequence [eo] with the diphthong [eu], as 
reﬂ ected in the spelling of the latter in 
  ‘ free ’ , normally 
 [ele ú t h eros]; 
  ‘ claiming ’ was probably therefore pronounced [myt h e ú menos]. 13 Speciﬁ -
cally Eastern Ionic is the loss of aspiration, as in 
 [eo:ut ô :i]  ‘ to himself ’ 
or 
  ‘ tell (imperative) ’ , beside Attic 
 [hea:ut ô :i] and 
  . 
 (ii)  Central/Cycladic (Delos) 
 IG XII.5.2, late 7th/early 6th century  bc . Verse dedication of Nikandre of Naxos to 
Artemis (on a statue of a female ﬁ gure).
 ‘ Nikandre dedicated me to the Far - shooting Showerer of Arrows ( Artemis ), 
 Daughter of Deinodikes the Naxian, exalted above other women, 
 Sister of Deinomenes, and now wife of Phraxos. ’ 
 This inscription in hexameters, the metre of Ionic epic and most notably of the Homeric 
poems (see chapter  2 for details), shows that Central Ionic still retained word - initial 
aspiration, with H used to represent not only [h] (in fact the whole initial syllable [he] 
in 
 [hek æ :b ó lo:i]  ‘ Far - shooting ’ ) but also the current stage in the develop-

The Ancient Greek Dialects 39
ment of long [a:] towards [ ε :], presumably [ æ :]. Evidently this had not yet merged with 
original [ ε :], since the latter is still spelled with E (as in 
 [an - é t h ε :ken]  ‘ s/he 
dedicated ’ ). The letters borrowed as K ( kappa ) and  ( koppa ) represented distinct 
phonemes in the Semitic languages, namely /k/ and /q/, but since there was no such 
contrast in Greek, the latter was quickly dropped, though it still appears in a few early 
inscriptions, as here, to mark the allophone of /k/ before o - and u - vowels. 
 Interestingly, the metre shows that the endings seen in 
  (appar-
ently [de:nom é n - eos]),  
 (apparently 
 ) and 
 (apparently 
 ) all actually scan as single heavy syllables. With regard to the ﬁ rst of 
these, we may compare the later spellings with  E  ϒ (note 13) and recall the probable 
diphthongal pronunciation of  - e o  - as [eu] in (i). But the later Ionic spellings of the 
second two cases, namely  - e w n 
  and  - e w  
 , suggest that these had developed 
their monosyllabic status through synizesis (with compensatory lengthening of the 
second element when this was originally short), cf. again (i) above. The metrical values 
of these endings here therefore show that [ æ :o(:)] had already undergone these changes, 
making the orthography conservative and the probable pronunciation 
  and 
 . 
 (iii)  Western (Eretria in Euboea) 
 IG XII.9.187, late 5th century  bc . Stone honouring Hegelochos of Taras (Tarentum) 
for his part in the liberation of Eretria from Athens in 411  bc .
 ‘ Gods. The Council decreed that Hegelochos of Taras should be a proxenos ( ofﬁ cial friend 
of Eretria and political representative of Eretrians in Taras ) and benefactor, both himself 
and his sons, and that meals should be provided at public expense both for himself and 
his sons whenever they are in the city, and the privilege of occupying front seats at the 
games, because of his help in freeing the city from the Athenians. ’ 
 As might be expected from its geographical location, the Ionic of Euboea is in some 
ways closer to Attic than are more Eastern varieties. In particular, Euboean shows 
initial aspiration, Attic - style [tt] and [rr] where other Ionic dialects have [ss] and [rs] 
(e.g. in 
 [t h á latta]  ‘ sea ’ and 
  [t h á rros]  ‘ boldness ’ ), and also lacks compen-
satory lengthening in words such as 
 [ks é nos] beside regular Ionic 
  [ks ê :nos], 
both   <  
  [ks é nwos]. None the less, it shares with the rest of Ionic the shift of 
original [a:]    >  [ ε :] in all environments (cf. 
 [pro(h)edr í ε :n]  ‘ privilege - of - front -

40 Ancient Greek
 seats ’ ), a marked resistance to certain vowel contractions (as in 
 
[epid ε :m é o:rin]  ‘ they - are - in - town (subjunctive) ’ beside Attic 
 [epid ε :m ô :sin]) 
and the formation of feminine abstract nouns from s - stem adjectives with the sufﬁ x 
  [ - é ε :/ - e: ε :] ( < 
 [ - es - í a:]) rather than  - e i a [ - e:a] (so 
 [atel é ε :] 
 ‘ exemption from taxes ’ , rather than 
 [at é le:a], both    <  
   ‘ free -
 from - charges ’ ). The shortening of long diphthongs, seen here in the article 
 [tei] but 
not yet in the noun 
  ‘ council ’ , is typical of Euboean after around 400 
 bc . The rhotacism of intervocalic [s]    >  [r], as in 
  [pair í ]  ‘ children (dat pl) ’ for 
 [pais í ] etc., is a marked peculiarity of the dialect of Eretria and Oropos.  
 (c)  Attic 
 IG I.3.40, 446/5  bc . Stone from the acropolis of Athens regulating relations between 
the city and Chalcis in Euboea following the revolt of the island from the Athenian 
league.
 ‘ The Council and the People resolved, the Antiochis tribe was presiding, Drakontides was 
in the chair, Diognetos put the motion: the Council and jurors of the Athenians shall 
swear the oath as follows: I shall not expel the Chalcidians from Chalcis nor lay waste 
their city nor deprive any individual of his rights nor punish him with exile nor arrest him 
nor put him to death nor deprive anyone of his property untried without the People of 
the Athenians  … ’ 
 The  ‘ old ’  Athenian alphabet did not include the letters  H  and  W , or use the digraphs  E I 
and  O ϒ other than to note what had been genuine diphthongs:  E  and  O are therefore 
employed to represent all e - and o - vowels. Similarly,  C  S and  Φ S were used where  Ξ and  Ψ 
would appear after the adoption of the Ionic alphabet, cf. 
 
 ‘ I shall arrest ’ : these spellings imply that [s] was perceived as having an acoustic 
effect on the preceding plosive analogous to aspiration. Where a diphthong ending in 
[i] was followed by a vowel there was a tendency in several dialects, including Attic, 
for this to acquire a consonantal articulation [j] and then, at least optionally, to be 
dropped. In some common words this pronunciation became the norm and was 

The Ancient Greek Dialects 41
reﬂ ected in the standard orthography, cf. 
  ‘ I shall make/do ’ ,   < 
 
 (though the etymological spelling was later restored, 
leading eventually to a spelling pronunciation). As we shall see in subsequent chapters, 
the use of periphrases comprising an abstract noun with a verb like  ‘ do ’ (e.g. 
 [an á staton 
 ]  ‘ ruined I - shall - make ’ ) is a characteristic of the 
language of Athenian ofﬁ cialdom that was to have a long - term future in this register. 
 A developed variety of Attic was soon to play the dominant role in the subsequent 
development of Greek, a history from which all other ancient dialects eventually dis-
appeared almost without trace. This story will be taken up in detail in chapter 3, but 
ﬁ rst we must consider the role of the ancient dialects in literature, and in particular 
the emergence of speciﬁ cally literary dialects, since this issue lies at the heart of the 
problem of diglossia which has characterized Greek for most of its history.  
 Notes 
1  The conventional written accents on Ancient Greek words are normally transferred directly 
into phonetic transcriptions (see Introduction, note 2), except in the case of articles, relative 
pronouns, prepositions and certain conjunctions which, in connected speech, were unac-
cented proclitics, just as forms of the 3rd - person anaphoric pronoun 
 [aut ó n]  ‘ him ’ 
etc. were enclitic (see M é ndez Dosuna ( 2000 : 279 – 8, for relevant evidence and examples). 
In later chapters, dealing with periods when the ancient pitch accent had changed to one 
characterized by stress, analogous conventions are applied.  
2  /b/ is largely the product of later developments, deriving particularly    <   * /g w /, on which see 
immediately below, and may not even have been a sound of Mycenaean at all (cf. Thompson 
 (2005) ). 
3  Normally [j], though palatalization of [t] also occurs before original [w], as in Ionic 
 [t é sseres]/Attic 
 [t é ttares]    <  IE   * k w etwor -  , perhaps involving the fronting 
of [w]    >  [j w ] caused by an inherently palatalized articulation of /t/ as [t j ] in at least this 
environment. 
4  The group [ns] has here been simpliﬁ ed and the preceding vowel lengthened in  ‘ compensa-
tion ’  to maintain the original  ‘ heavy ’ syllable quantity. The ancient pitch accent was associ-
ated with a syllable - timed rhythm, reﬂ ected directly in poetry, which required ﬁ xed metrical 
sequences of light and heavy syllables, the latter being  ‘ closed ’  (by a consonant or length), 
the former  ‘ open ’ (i.e. not so closed). See Allen  (1973) , Devine and Stephens  (1994) for a 
full discussion of the issues. 
5  The element  - a i [ - ai] occurs in other inﬁ nitives (e.g. that of the sigmatic aorist active and 
in medio - passives) so the extension of this to  - m e n [ - men] may be partly a matter of para-
digmatic levelling. But the addition is only to the athematic inﬁ nitive ending, which suggests 
that a speciﬁ c model, i.e. one involving this ending in just the athematic inﬁ nitives, must 
have provided the impetus for the change.  
6  It is a moot point whether the non - Aeolic simpliﬁ cation that precedes compensatory length-
ening is of the original cluster or of a geminate liquid/nasal of the Aeolic type.  
7  Note that Elean spellings with  S K  and  S T , e.g. 
 for 
 [p á sk h o]  ‘ I suffer ’ or medio -
 passive inﬁ nitives in  - s t a i for  - s q a i [ - st h ai], suggest that voiceless aspirates had in general 
become fricatives as in Laconian, but that a preceding [s] had blocked the process. So here 
 [ é xoi] etc.  
8  In Aeolic [g] is the normal reﬂ ex of the voiced labio - velar before [u], and [b] before e - vowels, 
but there was much analogical levelling within paradigms and among related word forms.  

42 Ancient Greek
9  The Thessalian stem is athematic, with the unexpected long vowel perhaps deriving analogi-
cally from participles like 
  [p h il ê :ntes]  ‘ loving (nom pl) ’ , remodelled from 
 
[p h il é ntes] on the basis of the stem in 
  [p h í le:mi]  ‘ I love ’ , cf. 
 
[koina:n é :ntu:n]  ‘ participating (gen pl) ’ in this text, again showing the long stem - vowel and 
the athematic conjugation of vowel - stem verbs characteristic of Thessalian and Lesbian (as 
well as of Arcadian and Cypriot) but not of Boeotian (cf. (8j)): contrast 
  [epol é mi -
 o - n] in  1.4.3 (a). This may therefore have been a feature of Mycenaean that also character-
ized the North - West Greek of the  ‘ bridge ’  areas where Aeolic was later to develop its own 
distinctive identity, with Boeotian subsequently reverting to North - West Greek norms, as 
often. 
10   The ﬁ nal  - a is perhaps just a mistake for  - a i [ - ai], though this does not rule out the pos-
sibility of a monophthongized pronunciation similar to that written with H in Boeotian (as 
suggested in the transcription).  
11  Prevocalic ﬁ nal [ - ns] simpliﬁ ed to [ - s] prehistorically in all dialects, but remained unchanged 
pre - consonantally, being subject to simpliﬁ cation only later (and then not everywhere); 
in the latter case compensatory lengthening of some kind took place. Most dialects then 
generalized one or the other form, though the original distribution is preserved in the 
forms of the article in early Cretan, as in the Gortyn law code.  
12  It is also used, in a unique aberration from normal spellings, to mark a similar, though 
presumably voiced, pronunciation of original [d] before a front vowel in 
 
?[apu - dzedo - m í nos]  ‘ having given away ’ (cf. Attic 
  [apodedom é nu:s]). 
13  Spellings with  - e u -  [eu] of original [eo] - sequences are sometimes later attested (and even 
appear in the text of Homer, presumably as an editorial correction for the sake of the metre, 
cf.  2.2 number (4)).  

2
 Classical Greek: Ofﬁ cial 
and Literary  ‘ Standards ’ 
 
 2.1   Introduction 
 Though there were certainly differences based on class, age and gender within the 
dialect of any given city, there is little to suggest that there was any signiﬁ cant differ-
ence in prestige between the geographically deﬁ ned varieties of spoken Greek down 
into the classical period. Indeed, there was no basis for such differentiation in the 
absence of a uniﬁ ed Greek state and the cultural pre - eminence typically associated with 
the dialect of a dominant class within a larger political structure transcending the 
boundaries of individual cities. 
 Much the same situation obtains for the ofﬁ cial written versions of local dialects 
known to us from inscriptions (key characteristics and examples are given in 1.4), 
though the great Ionian cities of Asia Minor appear to have adopted a more or less 
uniﬁ ed ofﬁ cial standard from early times, in recognition of their collective cultural iden-
tity and shared political interests. Otherwise, the ﬁ rst dialects to acquire a truly panhel-
lenic status were those employed in early Greek literature during the 7th, 6th and 5th 
centuries  bc . Though our texts have undoubtedly suffered from editorial  ‘ correction ’ 
and copyists ’ error over the centuries, enough remains clear to enable us to conclude, on 
the basis of comparison with inscriptional material, that the earliest examples of work 
in any particular genre are composed in stylized versions of the dialects of the regions 
where those who ﬁ rst gave that genre its deﬁ nitive form lived and worked. 
 The prestige attaching to such classic works soon led to what seems, from a modern 
point of view, a rather surprising development. During this period most genres (deﬁ n-
able in terms of metre, subject matter and manner of performance) attracted authors 
from across the Greek - speaking world, and their work was routinely composed in the 
traditionally associated literary dialects even when the authors concerned came from 
areas in which a different variety was spoken. This genre - conditioning of dialect is a 
striking feature of the earliest Greek literature and is not only a sign of respect for 
tradition but also a natural consequence of the ready availability within any particular 
written dialect of established and reﬁ ned literary conventions and verbal  ‘ tools of the 

44 Ancient Greek
trade ’ . See Cassio  (2008) for an up - to - date survey of the Ancient Greek literary dialects, 
together with relevant bibliography.  
 2.2   The Language of Homer and  i ts Inﬂ uence 
 2.2.1   Ionian  e pic 
 To understand this situation properly we must ﬁ rst examine the language of the earliest 
surviving Greek literature, that of the  ‘ Homeric ’  epic poems the  Iliad and the  Odyssey . 1 
The dialect of the texts that have been transmitted to us is essentially an archaic eastern 
Ionic 2 but with an admixture of Aeolic features (some ancient, some more recent, and 
with different regional origins), and a number of conspicuous archaisms not charac-
teristic of any one particular historical dialect or region (see Palmer  (1962) , Horrocks 
 (1980, 1987, 1997) ). A sample of the relevant diagnostic data is given in (1): 
 (1)  (a)  Ionic: 
 (i) 
 original [a:]    >  [ ε :] in all environments (e.g. 
  [b í ε :]  ‘ force ’ ). 
 (ii) 
 ‘ quantitative metathesis ’ (e.g.  - h o  [ - ε :o]   >   - e w 
 , as in 
  ‘ the son of Peleus (gen) ’ , cf.  1.4.4 (b)(i)).  
 (iii)  athematic inﬁ nitives in  - n a i [ - nai] (e.g. 
 [t h e:nai]  ‘ to put ’ ). 
 (iv)  conditional 
 [ ε :n]  ‘ if ’ , and modal particle 
 [an].  
 (v) 
 compensatory lengthening in 
 [ks ê :nos]  ‘ stranger/guest ’  etc. 
after simpliﬁ cation of clusters consisting of a liquid/nasal   +  [w] 
(eastern and in part central Ionic, but not western).  
 (b)  Aeolic: 
 (i) 
 labial reﬂ exes of labio - velars before [i, e] (e.g. 
 [p í syres] 
 ‘ four ’ ). 
 (ii) 
 gemination of liquids/nasals rather than simpliﬁ cation of clusters 
involving liquids/nasals with [j] or original [s] followed by compen-
satory lengthening (e.g. 
 [ é mmen(ai)]  ‘ to be ’   <   * [ é s - men(ai)] 
etc.: not Boeotian).  
 (iii)  thematic inﬁ nitives in 
 [ - é - men], mainland Aeolic (e.g. 
 [aku: é men]  ‘ to hear ’ ). 
 (iv)  athematic inﬁ nitives in  - m e n [ - men], mainland Aeolic (e.g. 
 
[ í men]  ‘ to go ’ ). 
 (v) 
 athematic inﬁ nitives in  - m e n a i [ - menai], Lesbian (e.g. 
 
[ é mmenai]  ‘ to be ’ ). 
 (vi)  dative plurals of consonant - stem nouns in  - e s s i [ - essi] (e.g. 
 
[p ó dessi]  ‘ feet ’ ). 
 (c)  Archaisms (many probably of Mycenaean vintage): 
 (i) 
 o - stem genitives in  - o  i o  [ - oio] (e.g. 
 [d ó moio]  ‘ house ’ ). 
 (ii) 
 the oblique case ending  - f i [ - p h i] (e.g. 
 [ ó resp h in]  ‘ mountains ’ . 
 (iii)  much vocabulary, such as 
 [ á naks]  ‘ ruler ’ , 
 [d é pas]  ‘ cup ’ , 
   ‘ sword ’ , etc.  
 Ionic predominates throughout and the Aeolic and archaic forms normally provide 
semantically equivalent variants that are metrically distinct in terms of their patterning 

Classical Greek 45
of light and heavy syllables. 3 This plainly artiﬁ cial amalgam is explained by arguing 
that the Greek epic tradition was in origin an oral one (for the development of the 
original hypothesis see M. Parry  (1928a, 1928b, 1930, 1932) , and A. Parry  (1971) ; 
the bibliography is now enormous). Its origins almost certainly go back into the Bronze 
Age (cf. Horrocks  (1980, 1997) ) and its ﬁ nal development, culminating in the  Iliad 
and  Odyssey, probably took place in Ionia during the 8th century  bc . Dialect mixture 
and archaism are typical of traditional oral poetry, and the reason has to do with the 
typically  ‘ formulaic ’ character of oral poetic diction, which, in a world without writing, 
evolves organically within the framework of a ﬁ xed metre as an aid to composition 
and memory. 
 Recall that in the absence of contrastive stress the ancient pitch accent was associ-
ated with a syllable - timed speech rhythm. Early Greek poetry therefore exhibits a range 
of stylizations of natural phonological phrasing into  ‘ lines ’ , or sometimes  ‘ stanzas ’ , 
characterized by sequences of light (  ) and heavy (  ) syllables organized into metrical 
feet. Greek epic, for example, is composed in dactylic hexameters, lines of six feet 
consisting either of dactyls (
 ), truncated in the sixth foot to (
 ), or spondees 
(
 ); the fourth foot is typically, and the ﬁ fth foot overwhelmingly, dactylic: 
 (2)  
 
 Over time, as a natural consequence of the composition, performance and transmission 
of  ‘ text ’ without the aid of writing, recurrent themes come to be characterized by sets 
of conventional, though always adaptable, descriptive phrases occupying different sec-
tions of the line. Such  ‘ formula systems ’ are not merely rendered more memorable by 
their metricality, but crucially facilitate new composition by providing the poet with 
ready - made sets of metrically different ways of saying the same or similar things (cf. 
Hoekstra  (1965) , Hainsworth  (1968) , Horrocks  (1980, 1997) ). In (3), for example, 
we have the formula system for describing a weeping male in the accusative case, where 
each variant occupies a different slot within the last four feet of a hexameter (the 
optional adjectives, with different meanings and metrical structures, provide for extra 
ﬂ exibility over and above the core components): 
 (3)  

46 Ancient Greek
 Ultimately the feasibility of composition, memorization and performance depends 
on the availability of such conventionalized diction across the core thematic spectrum, 
and the poet ’ s capabilities would be seriously damaged if these fundamental building 
blocks were undermined by the replacement of traditional forms with more modern 
equivalents with different metrical properties. Earlier, or dialectally distinct, grammati-
cal forms and phrases were therefore retained whenever these offered metrical options 
distinct from their 8th - century Ionic equivalents, especially if these were embedded in 
a range of formula systems. In the case of (3), for example, the option of separating 
a preverb from its verb (so - called  ‘ tmesis ’ , as in 
 [kata  … k h é onta]) is a 
very ancient construction that had probably passed out of vernacular use centuries 
earlier but had remained central to the oral poet ’ s formulaic repertoire. Such traditional 
elements could, of course, also be exploited freely outside the network of formula 
systems, since metrically different endings, word forms and phrases of identical or 
closely related meaning are self - evidently helpful across the board. The propensity of 
oral traditions to retain archaic and  ‘ foreign ’ dialect forms long after the introduction 
of more modern, or more local, equivalents needs no further explanation. 
 Thus, although such an artiﬁ cial language could never have been the spoken dialect 
of any particular region, the fundamentals of grammar and diction were regularly 
modernized in line with the spoken Greek of those localities where epic bards were 
working at any given time. The major proviso, as noted, was that such updating should 
not seriously damage the poets ’ traditional compositional and stylistic repertoire, 
thereby guaranteeing the retention of older and  ‘ foreign ’ elements at each stage. For 
the Homeric poems, the eastern Ionic of the 8th century  bc provided the latest, and 
so the dominant, layer of linguistic fabric into which other elements remained inextri-
cably woven. Of these, the residual archaisms are readily explained as formulaically 
protected, or stylistically characteristic, survivals from the Bronze Age, but there are 
two competing scenarios to account for the presence of the Aeolicisms. According to 
one theory, epic story - telling in the post - Mycenaean era was initially developed in areas 
where Aeolic speech was emerging and only passed over to Ionia at a later date for 
the ﬁ nal  ‘ phase ’  of its artistic evolution (cf. West  (1988) , Peters  (1986) , and see Haug 
 (2002)  for a recent attempt to support this hypothesis). The other theory, perhaps 
more realistically, sees hexameter poetry in some form as a common inheritance of 
both the Aeolic - and Ionic - speaking areas after the Mycenaean collapse, with borrow-
ing and adaptation of material between the two traditions until the time when the 
Ionic tradition, perhaps in part as a result of the monumental composition of the  Iliad 
and  Odyssey , ﬁ nally eclipsed its rival. Horrocks  (1987, 1997)  offers some arguments 
in favour of the hypothesis that Homer ’ s Aeolicisms were borrowed from such a 
parallel tradition rather than representing the residue of an earlier Aeolic phase of the 
tradition (see also Wyatt  (1992) ). 
 Only when the epic tradition shifted from a truly creative to a more recitative phase, 
a change standardly associated with the effects of the return and spread of writing 
during the 8th and 7th centuries, did the Homeric poems and other traditional hex-
ameter poetry eventually come to be seen not as a corpus of material inevitably to be 
adapted over time but rather as constituting a set of deﬁ nitive  ‘ texts ’ for recitation, 4 
texts which also provided a linguistic model for any future, increasingly literate, com-
position in hexameters. The ﬁ rst Greek literary dialect was thus created, and its impact 

Classical Greek 47
was to be immense and lasting. The unprecedented scope and outstanding quality of 
the Homeric poems undoubtedly contributed to the decline and ultimate demise 
of innovative composition, and may even have prompted the earliest extended use of 
writing as a means of recording them (see Powell  (1996) ). Whether or not this is so, 
their prestige in antiquity cannot be overestimated. They were felt to embody the very 
essence of Greek culture and quickly formed the cornerstone of traditional education 
throughout the Greek - speaking world. It was therefore entirely appropriate, though 
also entirely accidental, that their dialect was not that of a particular region but a 
 ‘ poetic ’ variety which, while clearly related to contemporary Ionic, transcended the 
parochialism of local and even ofﬁ cial varieties through the elevating effects of archa-
ism and high - ﬂ own formulaic phraseology and the distancing effect of Aeolic loan-
words and grammatical formatives. These linguistic qualities of the ﬁ rst, universally 
admired, masterpieces of Greek literature determined the Greek view of what was 
linguistically appropriate within the higher levels of poetic discourse for many centuries 
to come (see, for example, Aristotle  Rhetoric 1404b,  Poetics 1458a – b, and cf. Passa 
 (2008a)  for an up - to - date survey of the various issues involved). 
 In (4) Achilles replies to king Priam of Troy, who wishes to ransom the body of his 
son Hector, killed by Achilles in revenge for the death of his friend Patroclus: 5 
 (4)  

48 Ancient Greek
 ‘ So he spoke, and stirred in him some passion of grieving for his own father. He took the 
old man ’ s hand and pushed him gently away, and the two of them remembered, Priam 
slipping down before Achilles ’ feet and weeping vehemently for Hector slayer - of - men, 
Achilles for his own father and then again for Patroclus. Their wailing rose through the 
house. Then when noble Achilles had taken his ﬁ ll of sorrow and the passion had gone 
from his mind and limbs, he rose forthwith from his seat and raised the old man by the 
hand, pitying his grey head and his grey beard, and addressed him aloud in winged words: 
 ‘ Ah unlucky man, you have surely endured many evils in your heart. How could you dare 
to come alone to the ships of the Achaeans, before the eyes of the man, myself, who have 
killed many ﬁ ne sons of yours? Your heart is surely made of iron. Come and sit down 
now upon this chair, and despite our grieving we will let our sorrows at least lie still in 
the heart. For there is no gain in chill lamentation. ’ 
 Assuming an east Ionic origin for the monumental Homeric poems, as seems most likely, 
the writing of word - initial aspiration, though reﬂ ected here in the transcription, must be 
assumed to be post - Homeric and of editorial origin (recall that east Ionic is psilotic 
from the time of the earliest records). Alongside the characteristic Ionic forms with 
[ ε :] from original [a:] (
   ‘ wailing ’ , 
  ‘ s/he raised up ’ , 
  ‘ gain ’ ), we may also note here the Aeolic thematic inﬁ nitive 
 
[elt h é men]  ‘ to come ’ and the Aeolic treatment of the initial labio - velar in 
 

Classical Greek 49
[p é letai]  ‘ there exists ’ (this verb did not survive in Ionic so the expected 
 [t é letai] 
would have been impossible). Among the archaisms in evidence the metrically useful 
o - stem genitive singular in  - o i o [ - oio] appears rather more frequently than the  ‘ modern ’ 
 - o u [ - o:] (just twice in 
 [t h r ó no:]  ‘ seat ’ ); there are also two examples of tmesis, 
namely 
  ‘ s/he somewhat (passion) aroused ’ , 
and 
 [kat ar h é zdeu]  ‘ down (then) sit (imp) ’ , the latter with Ionic - style 
contraction of  - e o [ - eo]   >   - e u [ - eu], cf.  1.4.3 (b)(i) (though the spelling is probably late). 
 The use of a stylized regional dialect blended with a range of  ‘ archaic ’ ,  ‘ foreign ’ and 
 ‘ poetic ’ features associated with a particular genre is also characteristic of other varie-
ties of poetry in the 7th and 6th centuries  bc . 6 Though the earliest surviving examples 
necessarily come from the alphabetic period, it is almost certain that each of the genres 
was shaped by a long oral tradition during which it had evolved its own dialectal 
characteristics and stylistic conventions. But by the time we have access to these tradi-
tions there was already widespread exploitation of epic forms and epic diction. This 
is not to say that early Greek poetry is fundamentally unoriginal: literary dialects were 
always adaptable, and individual poets were capable of signiﬁ cant experimentation 
and innovation. But all genres display in varying degrees a  ‘ distanced ’ quality deriving 
in part from their own internal evolution but also reﬂ ecting a universal appreciation 
of the value of epic - style diction in imparting a universal quality to work that was 
increasingly aimed at a panhellenic audience.  
 2.2.2   Ionian  e legy and  i ambus 
 Some of the earliest poetry of the archaic age comes from Ionic - speaking areas and is 
composed in dactylic or iambic/trochaic rhythms, i.e. metres based on combinations 
of dactyls and spondees (
 and 
 ) on the one hand, and of iambs/trochees and 
spondees (
 /
 and 
 ) on the other. Most of this dactylic poetry is not composed 
purely in hexameters, however, but in  ‘ elegiac couplets ’ , each consisting of a hexameter 
followed by a (so - called) pentameter: 
 (5) 
 
 
 Leading ﬁ gures include Archilochus (7th century, from Paros in the Cyclades, but left 
for Thasos), Callinus (7th century, from Ephesus), Mimnermus (7th century, probably 
from Smyrna, though apparently descended from immigrants from Colophon), 
Semonides (7th century, originally from Samos but led a colony to Amorgos) and 
Hipponax (6th century, from Ephesus), though there are also practitioners of Ionic -
 style poetry from other dialect areas, including Tyrtaeus (7th century, from Sparta), 
Solon (7th/6th century, from Athens) and Theognis (6th century, from Megara), all of 
whom seemingly make only minimal use of elements from their own local vernaculars. 7 
In general, the dactylic character of elegiac poetry allows for straightforward deploy-
ment of epic formulae and diction, and the impression is overwhelmingly of traditional 
foundations rooted in the language of the epic, though with additional contemporary 
elements, chieﬂ y from Ionic, as required by the subject matter. 8 By contrast, the Ionian 
tradition of iambic/trochaic poetry, a genre that had clearly evolved independently of 
the epic, makes signiﬁ cantly less use of epic precedent and convention and its diction 

50 Ancient Greek
appears to be correspondingly closer to the Ionic vernacular. Both genres deal with an 
astonishing range of subject matter (see West  (1974) , Bowie  (1986) , Passa  (2008b) , 
Kaczko  (2008a) ). 
 Archilochus 5, which is probably a complete poem, is a good example of the more 
personal, and often much more cynical, tone of Ionic elegiac poetry: 
 (6) 
 
 ‘ Some Thracian tribesman rejoices in my shield (blameless equipment that I abandoned 
unwillingly beside a bush), but myself I saved. What does that shield mean to me? To hell 
with it! I ’ ll get another one just as good. ’ 
 Sextus Empiricus ( Pyrrhoneioi Hypotyposeis  3.216) slightly misquotes the ﬁ rst three 
lines of this poem in connection with the story of the Spartan mother who told her 
son to return from battle with his shield or on it (i.e. dead). Though there is nothing 
remotely heroic, or indeed Homeric, about the sentiments here, almost all of the phra-
seology that is so skilfully and wittily recycled can be found somewhere in the  Iliad 
and  Odyssey, including the epic Aeolicism 
 [k á llipon]  ‘ I abandoned ’ , with 
apocopation of the preverb 
 [kata - ]. But the use of the singular 
 [ é ntos] 
 ‘ (piece of) equipment ’ is apparently an innovation, while 
  ‘ blameless ’  appears 
just once in the Homeric corpus, at  Iliad 12.109.  
 2.2.3   Personal  l yric 
 The personal lyric poetry of Alcaeus and Sappho, both from 7th/6th - century  bc Lesbos, 
appears at ﬁ rst sight to make quite natural use of the Lesbian dialect, though we have 
no early epigraphic material to compare directly and we should remember that our 
texts are largely the work of Hellenistic scholars of the 3rd and 2nd centuries who 
 inter alia seem to have introduced a number of false hyper - Aeolic forms. But both 
poets were working within a tradition that must have had long - term links with the 
various Ionian traditions, and which allowed occasional use of epic - style features and 
phraseology, not only in poems with dactylic rhythms, such as Sappho 44, 9 but also 
more generally. Noteworthy among these are: genitives of o - stems in  - o i o [ - oio] beside 
Lesbian  - w [ - o:] (Alcaeus 174(a), 
 [erk h om é noio]  ‘ coming ’ ); dative plurals of 

Classical Greek 51
o - stems in  - o i " [ - ois] beside  - o  i s i [ - oisi] (Sappho 94.12, 
 [p ó llois 
 …  step h á nois]  ‘ many  … garlands ’ ); dative plurals of consonant stems in  - s i ( n ) [ - si(n)] 
beside  - e  s s i [ - essi] (Alcaeus 129.22, 
 [p ó sin]  ‘ feet ’ ); 3pl aorists (past perfectives) 
of athematic verbs in  - s a n [ - san] rather than  - n [ - n] (
 [ é dosan]  ‘ they gave ’ ); 
omission of the augment in past - tense indicative verb forms beside the regular aug-
mented forms (Alcaeus 332.2, 
 [k á tt h ane]  ‘ s/he died ’ ); and the thematic inﬂ ec-
tion of contract verbs 10 beside the native athematic conjugation (Sappho 44.33, 
  rather than 
  ‘ calling upon (nom 
pl) ’ . See Bowie  (1981) for a full discussion of  ‘ poetic ’  and other features that were 
probably alien to the contemporary vernacular of the island; Tribulato  (2008a)  pro-
vides a contemporary survey of the core issues and an up - to - date bibliography. 
 Sappho 1, quoted by Dionysius of Halicarnassus ( De Compositione  173 – 9), pro-
vides a good sense of the intensely personal character of much of this poetry. The ﬁ rst 
three stanzas of the poem, which is cast in the form of a prayer, are given in (7); the 
metre is the Sapphic stanza, comprising three hendecasyllabic lines, followed by an 
Adonean: 
 (7)  

52 Ancient Greek
 ‘ Aphrodite of the richly worked throne, immortal, wile - weaving child of Zeus, I pray 
to you: tame not my heart, lady, with pain and anguish, but come hither if ever at other 
times you heard my voice afar and listened, and leaving your father ’ s golden house 
you yoked your chariot and came; and beautiful swift sparrows brought you over 
the black earth from heaven through the midst of the ether whirling their close - packed 
wings;  … ’ 
 The Lesbian dialect was characterized by psilosis and recessive accentuation, and the 
editors have marked the text accordingly. Note here too the characteristic dative 
plurals in  - a i s i [ - aisi], the temporal adverbial in  - t a [ - ta] (
  ‘ on other 
occasions ’ ), and the preposition/preverb 
 [up á ] (
 ] [hyp ó ])  ‘ under ’ , as well as 
the diphthongal product of compensatory lengthening seen in the feminine participles 
 [a í oisa]  ‘ hearing ’ , 
 [l í poisa]  ‘ leaving ’ etc. (Attic has  - o  u s a [ - u:sa], with 
both endings   <  [ - onsa]  <  * [ - onts j a]  <    * [ - ont - ja]). The athematic inﬂ ection of contract 
verbs seen in 
  [d í nnentes]  ‘ whirling ’ (beside Attic 
 [d:n é ontes]) is a 
feature of both Lesbian and Thessalian, while the labial reﬂ ex of an original labio - velar 
before a front vowel in 
 (contrast Attic 
 [t ε :l û :])  ‘ afar ’ is character-
istic of all Aeolic dialects. Note, however, that the double nasal in 
 [d í nnentes] 
is a hyper - Aeolic form, based analogically on the genuine doubling of nasals and liquids 
in place of compensatory lengthening seen in forms like 
 [kr í nno:]  ‘ I judge ’ beside 
Attic 
 [kr í :no:] (both    <   * [kr í n - jo:]). 11 Epic inﬂ uence is apparent in the word 
  ‘ swift ’ , which is only epic/poetic, in the artiﬁ cial lengthening of the ﬁ rst 
syllable of 
 [a:t h an á t(a:)]  ‘ immortal ’ , and in the disyllabic pronunciation of 
 
[dia]  ‘ through ’ , which elsewhere appears either prevocalically with the ﬁ nal vowel 
elided or pre - consonantally as a monosyllable written 
  (though Z here is also edito-
rial, reﬂ ecting a much later epigraphic spelling of what by then had perhaps become 
[z j a], but which was almost certainly still [dja] in Sappho ’ s time). Overall, the third 
stanza provides some particularly clear echoes of epic diction, e.g. in the use of the 
formulaic phrase  ‘ black earth ’ (also in Archilochus 58.2) and in the description of the 
birds  ‘ whirling their close - packed wings ’ (cf.  Odyssey  2.151). 
 The last great practitioner of such solo song was Anacreon (6th/5th century), who 
hailed from Ionian Teos in Asia Minor but joined a colony to Abdera in Thrace after 
the Persian occupation of his homeland and later worked both on Samos, at the court 
of the tyrant Polycrates, and then at Athens, at the court of the tyrant Hipparchus. 
His poems in lyric metres, following the essentially  ‘ local ’ traditions of the genre, are 
composed in a stylized eastern Ionic 12 with many Homeric echoes, and deal mostly 

Classical Greek 53
with love and drinking. They are characterized by meticulous attention to technique 
and a striking wit.  
 2.2.4   Choral  l yric 
 By contrast, choral lyric was traditionally associated with performance at public, par-
ticularly religious, festivals. Its thematic range is correspondingly wide, including 
hymns, paeans (addressed to Apollo), dithyrambs (traditionally in honour of Dionysus), 
mythological narratives, processional songs, songs speciﬁ cally for choruses of girls, 
dance songs, wedding songs, drinking songs, erotic songs, eulogies, dirges and victory 
odes. But there are a number of recurrent elements that characterize the genre as a 
whole, most notably honour for the gods, comment on the celebrants and the use of 
mythology for moralizing purposes, and these remain more or less central down into 
the middle of the 5th century. 
 The language of choral lyric underwent its most important early development in 
Doric - speaking areas and is therefore often described as  ‘ Doric ’ , but the impact of the 
epic was from the ﬁ rst much more pervasive than in personal lyric, especially in its 
phraseological reminiscences, and there is also evidence of an already conventionalized 
input from an Aeolic tradition (with certain features demonstrably Lesbian). Important 
among these Aeolic features are dative plurals of consonant stems in  - e s s i [ - essi] (also 
epic), athematic forms of contract verbs, words with double liquids and nasals like 
  [kleenn ó s]  ‘ famed ’ , 13 and above all speciﬁ cally Lesbian forms showing the 
characteristic diphthongal outcome of compensatory lengthening following the simpli-
ﬁ cation of [ns], such as 
 [mo î sa]  ‘ Muse ’ , 
  [p h é roisa]  ‘ bearing (fem) ’ , 
  [p h é roisi]  ‘ they bear ’ . In this connection we may note that the poet Terpander 
of Lesbos is supposed to have founded a school of music in 7th - century Sparta (see 
West  (1992) , Cassio  (2005) ). 
 The earliest writer of choral lyric of whose work substantial fragments survive is 
Alcman, who again worked in 7th century Sparta but may originally have come from 
Sardis in Lydia (Asia Minor). Since we have only around 200 lines of his poetry 
(roughly half on papyrus, the remainder in brief quotations), and since there are neces-
sarily many uncertainties about the transmission of the text, it is difﬁ cult to say much 
more than that the dialect is of West Greek type, already blended with a number of 
epic and Aeolic features. Unusually for the genre, however, there are also some speciﬁ -
cally Laconian elements which, if they are not simply later additions, may reﬂ ect the 
essentially local character of the occasions for which Alcman was writing (though we 
should not forget that Alcman was working within a tradition that normally avoids 
such linguistic parochialism; see Cassio  (2007)  for a full discussion). 
 Later practitioners whose work survives in part are: Stesichorus (7th/6th century), 
who was born in south Italy at Mataurus or Locri but lived and worked mainly at 
Himera in northern Sicily; Ibycus (6th century) from Rhegium in south Italy, who, like 
Anacreon, settled at the court of the tyrant Polycrates on Samos; Simonides (6th/5th 
century), who came from Ionian Ceos but travelled widely, spending time in Athens, 
Thessaly and ﬁ nally at the court of the tyrant Hieron I in Syracuse; Pindar 
(late 6th/5th century) from Cynoscephalae in Boeotia, who was partly educated in 
Athens and again travelled extensively in connection with his work; and Bacchylides 

54 Ancient Greek
(late 6th/5th century), the nephew of Simonides, who went to Syracuse with his uncle 
before later being exiled from Ceos to the Peloponnese. The last two names are espe-
cially linked to the composition of victory odes associated with the celebration of the 
major panhellenic games at Olympia, Delphi and the isthmus of Corinth. 
 The varied geographical and dialectal backgrounds of these poets, coupled with 
their cosmopolitan lifestyles, naturally supported the emergence and establishment of 
a stylized literary Doric which, rather in the manner of Homer ’ s Ionic, vaguely sug-
gested the regional/ethnic origins of the genre but simultaneously transcended these 
through its acknowledgement of the contribution of Lesbos and its self - consciously 
 ‘ poetic ’ vocabulary based in part on epic forms and phrases. The foundational Doric 
features include: 
 [a:] where Ionic has secondary  - h - [ ε :]; genitive singulars of mas-
culine a - stems in  - a [ - a:] ( <  - a o  [ - a:o]) and genitive plurals of all a - stems in 
 [ - â :n] 
( <  - av w n [ - á :o:n]); non - assibilated  - t i [ - ti]/ - n t i [ - nti]; the accusative clitic prounouns  n i n 
[nin] (3rd person) and  t i n [tin] (2nd person); and the conjunctions 
 [h ó ka]  ‘ when ’ 
and  [ai]  ‘ if ’ (albeit alongside the epically sanctioned 
 [h ó te] and  [e:]). It should 
be said, however, that the permitted components are not uniformly blended in all 
authors. In particular, Stesichorus ’ surviving work comprises fragments of narrative 
poetry on epic - style themes in predominantly dactylic rhythms, a combination that 
favoured the choice of epic diction and language, thus rendering the Doric component 
comparatively marginal despite the fact that he was himself a West Greek speaker (the 
main Doric marker in evidence is simply 
 [a:] for secondary Ionic  - h - [ ε :]). 
 A common consideration, however, seems to have been that the language should 
be distinguished from contemporary Ionic, so grammatical forms and features taken 
from epic are often of the hallmarked  ‘ poetic/archaic ’ variety (e.g.  - o i o [ - oio] genitives 
in the second declension or optional augments), though metrically useful epic/eastern 
Ionic forms such as 
 [ks ê :nos]  ‘ foreigner/guest ’ , with compensatory lengthening 
after simpliﬁ cation of a group comprising a nasal/liquid and [w], are admitted, along 
with use of the modal particle 
 [an] beside Aeolic  k e [ke]. But athematic inﬁ nitives 
in  - n a i [ - nai] and forms showing  - h - [ ε :]   <  original [a:], presumably felt to be among 
the more distinctive of those Ionic markers still current, are almost universally avoided. 
 Interestingly, however, much of what is most strongly characteristic of Doric (e.g. 
the modal particle  k a [ka:], aorists in  - x a [ - ksa] from verbs with non - velar stems in 
 - z w [ - zdo:], futures in 
 [ - s é o:/ - s ô :], 14 or feminine participles in  - o n s a [ - onsa]/
 - w s a [ - o:sa]) is also disfavoured, as is anything readily identiﬁ able as a regionally 
speciﬁ c form within West Greek (e.g. word forms with the Laconian shift of intervo-
calic [ - s - ]    >  [ - h - ], as in the feminine participial ending  - w h a [ - o:ha]). Ultimately, then, 
the language of choral lyric, with its hybrid dialect and predilection for unusual words 
and elaborate compounds, is as artiﬁ cial as that of Ionian epic. Carefully distanced 
from local vernaculars and validated by poetic tradition, it carried the prestige and the 
mystique required of a language to be used for artistic communication with the wider 
Greek - speaking world. See Tribulato  (2008b)  for a recent discussion of key issues and 
relevant bibliography. 
 In (8) we have the ﬁ rst stanza of Pindar ’ s ﬁ rst Olympian ode, composed for Hieron 
of Syracuse on the occasion of his victory in the horse race of 476  bc . The poem as a 
whole has a repeated triadic structure involving four groups of three stanzas (a strophe 
and an antistrophe with the same metrical structure, followed by an epode). The ﬁ rst 

Classical Greek 55
three words will be familiar to those who have visited the Pump Room in Bath, where 
they appear over the entrance: 
 (8) 
 
 ‘ Best of all is water, though gold is pre - eminent among lordly wealth, just as blazing ﬁ re 
stands out by night; but if, dear heart, you wish to speak of prizes, no longer look by day 
for another bright star in the empty sky that is warmer than the sun, nor let us speak of 
a place of contest better than Olympia; from where the famous song of praise embraces 
the undertakings of wise men ( poets ), so they can sing out loud of the son of Cronus 
( Zeus ) when they come to the rich and happy hearth of Hieron,  … ’ 
 The long a - vowels of West Greek appear throughout (cf. 
 [meg á :noros] 
 ‘ lordly (gen) ’ , 
 [ha:lio:]  ‘ sun (gen) ’ , 
 [ha:m é ra:i]  ‘ day (dat) ’ ), while the short -

56 Ancient Greek
 vowel inﬁ nitive in  - e n [ - en] (
 [ga:r ú - en]  ‘ to say/speak ’ ), characteristic of many but 
not all West Greek dialects, provides a metrically useful variant to  - e i n [ - e:n]; neither 
feature is uniquely Doric, however, and neither is readily localizable. A few Aeolic forms 
are interwoven into the mildly Doric backcloth, namely 
 [p h aenn ó n]  ‘ bright/
shining ’ , with its double nasal (
 [p h a(w)es - n ó - ], though see note 11), and 
 [m ε :t í - essi]  ‘ plans/thoughts ’ , with its dialectally characteristic dative plural 
ending; the latter is an epic Aeolicism, however, and once again neither has any very 
speciﬁ c regional identity. Epic is also the source of many vocabulary items and turns of 
phrase: 
 [ait h ó memon p û r]  ‘ blazing ﬁ re ’ , for example, is formulaic, but the 
use of the neuter plural of the adjective 
 [ é ksok h os]  ‘ distinguished (among) ’ as a 
kind of preposition with the genitive is also Homeric, as are the verbs 
 [ é ldomai] 
 ‘ I desire ’ and 
 [aud á :o:]  ‘ I speak ’ , and the comparative adjective 
 [p h é rteros] 
 ‘ braver/better ’ . This is all characteristically  ‘ poetic ’  vocabulary, much of which also 
turns up later in Attic tragedy (on which see immediately below).  
 2.2.5   Athenian  d rama 
 Although choral lyric began to fall out of favour during the second half of the 5th 
century  bc , it continued to play an important part in Athenian drama, where a chorus 
retained an integral role both in tragedy and, to an increasingly lesser extent, in 
comedy. Such was the power of tradition that, beyond the increased use of poetic 
vocabulary and epic - style archaism in lyric passages, a small set of  ‘ Doric ’ features (in 
practice mainly 
 [a:] for secondary Attic  - h - [ ε :]   <  [a:], though only selectively, and 
1st - declension genitives with contraction of a - and o - vowels to 
 [a:]) 15 was still 
superimposed on the still largely Attic - based, though emphatically not vernacular, 
language of the choral passages of the tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides. 
 The comparatively more  ‘ natural ’ spoken dialogue, however, was composed mostly 
in lines comprising six iambi (
 ), with spondaic and other variants permitted in 
certain positions. The basic metrical pattern, said by Aristotle to resemble most the 
rhythms of normal speech, is given in (9): 
 (9)  
 
 But even tragic dialogue was composed in an Attic deliberately distanced from the 
vernacular. 16 In particular, the key Attic phonological markers of  - t t - [tt] and  - r r - [rr] 
are consistently shunned in favour of the otherwise all but universal variants  - s s - [ss] 
and  - r s  -  [rs] (which also happened to be Ionic with all the prestige of its literary tradi-
tions; see Colvin  (2004) , who argues that deliberate dissociation from Boeotian, which 
also had  - t t - [tt], was an additional factor). Furthermore, much everyday vocabulary 
is often replaced by words with a poetic, mainly Homeric/Ionic, pedigree, or by unusual 
neologisms (e.g. 
 [ap ó ti:mos]  ‘ dishonoured/unworthy ’ for 
 [ á ti:mos]; 
 [h ó maimos]  ‘ brother ’ , lit.  ‘ same blood ’ , for 
 [adelp h ó s] etc.). While 
some of these elements doubtless helped to impart a more digniﬁ ed quality to the 
language, the use of other, apparently quite ordinary, grammatical and lexical features 
of contemporary Ionic seems to reﬂ ect a more general inﬂ uence of Ionian literature on 
the early evolution of literary Attic. 

Classical Greek 57
 Typical archaic/epic features deliberately selected (one assumes) to elevate tragic 
diction include the following; the ordinary Attic equivalents are given in parentheses: 
 (10)  (a)  Paradigms such as perfect 
 [ ó po:pa]  ‘ I have seen ’ (
 
[he ó ra:ka]), gen sg 
 [dor ó s/du:r ó s/d ú :ratos]  ‘ spear ’ 
(
 [d ó ratos]). 
 (b)  Epic vocabulary such as 
 [ é k h t h os]  ‘ hatred ’ (
 [ é k h t h ra:]); 
 
[h ê :ma]  ‘ cloak ’  (
 [hi:m á tion]); 
 [hipp ó t ε :s]  ‘ horseman/
knight ’  (
 [hippe ú s]); 
 [p ó sis]  ‘ husband ’ (
 ); 
 
[d á mar]  ‘ wife ’ (
 ); 
 [mol ê :n]  ‘ to go ’ (
 [elt h ê :n]); 
 [le ú sse:n]  ‘ to see ’ (
 [hor â :n]). 
 Amongst the contemporary Ionicisms in evidence we may note: 
 (11)  (a)  The replacement of typically Attic morphology, as in the use of 3pl 
imperatives formed by the addition of  - s a n [ - san] to the 3sg in  - t w [ - to:] 
rather than with the original 
  [ - [ ó ]nto:n], e.g. 
 [ í to: - san] 
beside Attic 
 [i - ó nto:n],  ‘ let them go ’ . 
 (b)  Assorted vocabulary items (the normal Attic words are again given in 
parentheses): 
 [histor ô :]  ‘ I enquire ’ (
  [ero:t ó :]); 
 
[agre ú o:]  ‘ I hunt ’ (
 [t h ε :re ú o:]); 
  ‘ dowry ’ (
 
[pro î ks]); 
  [neok h m ó s]  ‘ new ’ / ’ novel ’ (
 [ne ó s]). 
 Finally, there is a small set of words that apparently come from a  ‘ Doric ’ tradition 
distinct from that of choral lyric. The most likely source is the western Greek world, 
with Sicily in particular strongly linked to the development of drama (cf. Bj ö rck 
 (1950) ). Epicharmus of Syracuse, for example, was a leading exponent of comedy in 
the late 6th/5th centuries, and we also know Sophron of Syracuse as a 5th - century 
writer of mime. Though comedy and mime are unlikely to have inﬂ uenced Athenian 
tragedy directly, it is not impossible that there were also more serious, if also less 
developed, dramatic traditions that could have inspired Attic writers much as 
Epicharmus is said to have done in the ﬁ eld of comedy. Whatever the truth of the 
matter, it is striking that the originally Doric - looking items in (12) ﬁ rst entered Attic 
via tragedy, apparently in preference to both native and epic/Ionic equivalents: 17 
 (12)  
 [da:r ó s]  ‘ long ’ ; 
  [opa:d ó s]  ‘ attendant ’ ; 
 [kyna:g ó s] 
 ‘ hunter ’ , lit.  ‘ hound - leader ’ ; 
 [na: ó s]  ‘ temple ’ ; 
 [la: ó s]  ‘ people ’ 
 These all contain an original long 
 [a:] in contexts where both Attic and Ionic had 
long had  - h - [ ε :], though the standard Attic forms for the last two items are actually 
  [ne ó :s] and 
  [le ó :s], derived by  ‘ quantitative metathesis ’ from the expected 
  [n ε : ó s] (attested in Homer and Ionic historiography) and 
 [l ε : ó s] (not Homeric, 
where 
 [la: ó s] is always used, but attested in some manuscripts of the historian 
Herodotus). See Kaczko  (2008b) for a recent discussion of these and other issues, 
together with useful bibliography. 
 The short extract in (13) from Sophocles ’  Oedipus Tyrannus  gives a good sense of 
the tragic style. Oedipus, having discovered that years before he had unknowingly 
killed his father and married his mother, has just put out his eyes. He now addresses 
the chorus of Theban elders: 

58 Ancient Greek
 (13)  

Classical Greek 59
 ‘ Do not try to persuade me that what has been done thus is not best done, and counsel 
me no more. For I do not know with what eyes, as a man with sight, I could have looked 
upon my father when I came to Hades, or my poor mother, to both of whom I have 
done things far too bad for hanging. Was then the sight of my children, born as they were 
born, something I might wish to look upon? Never, at least with these eyes of mine. Nor 
were the city or its wall of towers or the holy statues of the gods, which I, the utterly 
wretched man once raised most nobly of all in Thebes, forfeited by telling all to expel the 
impious one myself, the one now shown by the gods to be unholy, and of the race of 
Laius ( his father ). ’ 
 The language here is fundamentally Attic, but it has been very carefully elaborated and 
adapted. Note ﬁ rst of all the substitution of [ss] for [tt] in 
 [kr é :ssona] 
 ‘ greater/better (neut pl) ’ : the normal Attic form is 
 [kr é :tto:n] (masc sg), and 
the true Ionic equivalent is 
 [kr é sso:n]. More generally, both syntax and diction 
are highly  ‘ poetic ’ , often involving the incorporation of epic/Ionic elements. Thus the 
normal order of noun and speciﬁ er is reversed in 
 [ ó mmasin po í ois] 
 ‘ with what kind of eyes? ’ , while the use of a modiﬁ ed abstract noun in 
 
[h ε : t é kno:n  ó psis], literally  ‘ the of - children sight/the child - y sight ’ , to mean  ‘ my chil-
dren (if) visible ’ , with the participle 
 [blast û :sa]  ‘ having been born ’ agreeing 
with 
 [ ó psis], is a particularly bold extension of epic - style periphrases in which a 
noun meaning  ‘ force/strength ’ (
 [m é nos], 
 [b í ε :], 
 [ í s], 
 [st h é nos]) is 
combined with the genitive of a proper name, as in 
 [hier ò n 
m é nos alkin ó oio]  ‘ (the) mighty strength of - Alcinous ’ , a formula meaning  ‘ the mightily 
strong Alcinous ’ that recurs throughout the Phaeacian episode of the Odyssey. As far 
as vocabulary is concerned, 
 [ ó mma]  ‘ eye ’ , 
 (aorist 
 ) [bl ó :sko:/ é molon] 
 ‘ come/go ’ , 
 [ep h h í meros]  ‘ desirable ’  (in Hesiod but not Homer), 
 
 ‘ sprout/be born ’ (not in epic, but  ‘ poetic ’  when used of people rather than plants), 
  [(pros)le ú sso:]  ‘ see ’ , 
  ‘ suffering ’ and 
 
[enn é po:]  ‘ tell ’ are for the most part ﬁ rst attested in Ionic hexameter poetry and then 
widely used in other poetic genres, including tragedy, but are all generally avoided in 
prose writing of the 5th and 4th centuries  bc . 
 This determined avoidance of the prosaic and  a fortiori  the contemporary vernacu-
lar together with the striving for a style linked to prestigious panhellenic, especially 
Ionic traditions marks the beginning of the formation of a literary variety of Attic. As 
with the other literary dialects already discussed, this Ionicized form of Attic soon 
evolved into a panhellenic literary language in its own right, but in this case one that 
was no longer strictly genre - conditioned. Instead Attic emerged as  the common literary 
language for the whole Greek world, effectively replacing all other dialects if we 
exclude short - lived revivals in certain genres. The linguistic experimentation of the 
Athenian dramatists certainly helped to pave the way for this development, but the 
ﬁ nal triumph of Attic as not only a literary but also an ofﬁ cial  ‘ common language ’ for 
the whole Greek - speaking world depended ultimately on the development of Attic 
prose writing, and above all on the political circumstances of the 5th and 4th centuries 
 bc . These issues will be discussed in detail in the following chapters, but ﬁ rst we must 
consider the origins and growth of prose writing in Ionia, which played a central role 
in the early evolution of a belletristic Attic prose style.  

60 Ancient Greek
 2.3   Ofﬁ cial and Literary Ionic 
 Much early literature is composed in verse because ﬁ xed rhythms and the associated 
formulaic phraseology are invaluable aids to composition and memory in predomi-
nantly oral cultures. But by the beginning of the 6th century  bc Ionia (comprising 
western Asia Minor and adjacent islands) was at the centre of the development of Greek 
commercial life and, equally importantly, of the ﬁ rst ﬂ owering of  ‘ classical ’  Greek civi-
lization. As such it offered a highly congenial, prosperous and increasingly literate social 
context for the revolutionary deployment of prose for intellectual pursuits such as scien-
tiﬁ c and philosophical speculation and the development of historiography in a form that 
went far beyond the mere recording of ofﬁ cial and personal business. 18 
 Some of the early Greek philosophers like Xenophanes of Colophon (Ionia, 6th/
early 5th centuries, but worked chieﬂ y in Sicily), Parmenides of Elea (southern Italy, 
late 6th/5th centuries) and Empedocles of Acragas (Sicily, ﬁ rst two - thirds of the 5th 
century) followed in the Hesiodic tradition of didactic verse (see note 4) and expounded 
their doctrines in epic - style hexameters. 19 But most of the great innovative thinkers 
from Ionia, like Thales (Miletus, 7th/6th centuries), Anaximander (Miletus, late 7th/6th 
centuries), Anaximenes (Miletus, 6th century) and Heraclitus (Ephesus, 6th/5th centu-
ries), all wrote in prose, as did the geographer and historiographer Hecataeus (Miletus, 
6th/5th century). Perhaps they felt that the character of the material they wished to 
present (data based on observation and reasoning) and the novel ways in which they 
wished to present it (precisely, sometimes abstractly, and without adornment superﬂ u-
ous to the argument) did not lend themselves so readily to expression in a medium 
that had evolved in very different circumstances and for rather different purposes. 20 
Whatever the actual motivation, prose was already in use for ofﬁ cial business, and it 
was clearly felt that it could be successfully adapted to fulﬁ l more ambitious functions 
in philosophical and scientiﬁ c discourse. 
 As already noted, ofﬁ cial inscriptions from the major cities of Ionia reveal from the 
earliest times a more or less uniform written dialect, a variety superordinate to the 
four different spoken varieties identiﬁ ed by the 5th - century historian Herodotus (I.142, 
unfortunately without linguistic details), 21 and a crucial indicator, alongside the estab-
lishment of the Ionian League centred on the holy site of the Panionium at Mycale, of 
the existence of a common civilization that transcended the limits of the traditional 
city state. 22 Unsurprisingly, then, the dialect employed in early Ionian prose is also of 
a generalized eastern Ionic character, broadly parallel, as far as we can tell, to that of 
ofﬁ cial documents in its major characteristics, but signiﬁ cantly different in others. One 
particular difference is, however, likely to be more apparent than real. Most ofﬁ cial 
eastern Ionic documents have forms of interrogative, indeﬁ nite and relative adverbs 
and pronouns beginning with [p - ] before o - and u - vowels, just as elsewhere in the 
Greek world, and such forms also appear in epic/didactic poetry and in the texts of 
some of the early elegiac/iambic poets. These same words, however, begin with [k - ] in 
other early Ionic poetry and in surviving fragments of early Ionic scientiﬁ c prose, as 
well as in the text of Herodotus and in subsequent Ionic historiography and technical 
writing. This difference apparently reﬂ ects divergent treatments of the original labio - velar 
 * [k w - ] during the Greek Dark Age following the Mycenaean collapse: 

Classical Greek 61
 (14)  
 It is important to note, however, that the few epigraphic counterexamples are all earlier 
than the p - forms, which ﬁ rst appear only in documents from the second half of the 
4th century  bc . Oddly, the attested forms are all relative pronouns or adverbs, namely: 
 [oko î a]  ‘ of whatever kind (neut pl) ’ , from Erythrae ( IErythr  205.11, ﬁ rst half of 
the 4th century); 
 [ ó ko:]  ‘ where ’ , from Sigeum in southern France, a colony of 
Miletus (SEG 38, 1036.7, last half of the 5th century); 
 [ok ó so:]  ‘ of how much/
at what price ’ from Emporium in Spain, a colony of Phocaea (SEG 37, 838.13, c.500 
 bc ). 23 Perhaps, then, the k - forms were the original eastern Ionic ones, but were simply 
replaced under the growing inﬂ uence of Attic on the local dialect during the course of 
the 4th century (for which see chapter  3 ). 
 Recall now that in post - Homeric Ionic literature k - forms appear in the texts of the 
poets Anacreon (Teos), Callinus (Ephesus), Hipponax (Ephesus, then exiled to 
Clazomenae), Mimnermus (Smyrna, originally an Aeolian city but occupied in the 9th 
century by Ionians from Colophon) and Semonides (Samos), as well as in the prose 
fragments of Heraclitus (Ephesus), all of whom were from Ionian cities. By contrast, 
our texts of Archilochus (Cycladic Paros, but left young for Thasos), Solon (Athens), 
Theognis (Megara) and Tyrtaeus (Sparta) all show p - forms. Assuming that this distinc-
tion in the textual tradition is not accidental, it conﬁ rms that the k - forms were indeed 
characteristic of early eastern Ionic (and known to have been so by later editors). 24 It 
is unfortunate that we have no relevant evidence for the prose of the early Milesian 
philosophers, but it seems that Heraclitus and the later Ionian prose writers, including 
Herodotus, employed these local k - forms not only as a marker of their Ionian identity 
but as something that simultaneously linked their work to an established literary 
 Kunstsprache . 
 Herodotus is the only writer of Ionic prose whose work has survived in sufﬁ cient 
quantity to attempt any serious stylistic assessment, and we shall therefore focus on 
his work henceforth. He was born c.485  bc in the originally Dorian city of 
Halicarnassus, though it was by then a mixed Greek - Carian town that had recently 
fallen within the Ionian sphere of inﬂ uence. He subsequently travelled widely in the 
Greek world and beyond, and also spent time in Athens, where he may have been 
exposed to some of the rhetorical techniques currently being taught to the sons of the 
wealthy by visiting Ionian sophists (itinerant higher - education tutors, cf. chapter  3 ). 
One may surmise that the Ionic idiom in use at Halicarnassus, given its location, was 
broadly of the Carian type (see note 21), though perhaps with some residual West 
Greek characteristics. But the prevailing cultural climate ensured that no one would 
attempt to use a local vernacular for literary purposes. Given the status of Miletus as 
the dominant centre of philosophical and scientiﬁ c inquiry in Ionia, a natural assump-
tion would be that the language ﬁ rst used for technical prose writing would have been 
a suitably stylized version of that city ’ s dialect, and that Herodotus would have taken 

62 Ancient Greek
this as the principal foundation on which to develop a suitably literary variety of Ionic 
for his history. But his artistic ambition and cosmopolitan outlook ensured an outcome 
that, even in antiquity, was seen as linguistically heterogeneous and highly  ‘ poetic ’  in 
style. 
 Two particularly striking stylistic attributes are the loose attachment of background 
information to principal clauses through the use of participles, and the repetition of 
phrases, rather like brackets or bookends, at the beginning and end of digressions to 
help differentiate these from the main narrative. Another is the vast number of appar-
ently epic/Homeric forms and phraseological reminiscences. Unfortunately, we cannot 
be sure just how well our texts represent his original usage, since, as always, they 
passed through the hands of later editors and copyists who may well have embellished 
what they found or  ‘ restored ’ on  a priori  grounds what they took to be correct Ionic. 
On the other hand, the impulse to develop a distinctively literary form of Ionic for 
belletristic prose writing must have been strong in a culture characterized by traditional 
poetic  Kunstsprachen , and the epic/Ionic tradition in particular must have seemed an 
attractive source (cf. Cassio ( 1996 : 147 – 50)). As a result, it is often impossible to 
determine the true status of particular elements, and though Herodotus is described 
as 
 [hom ε rik ó :tatos]  ‘ Homeric in the highest ’ by the literary critic 
Longinus ( On the Sublime  13.3), it may be that this commentator of the early Roman 
empire was in part misled by the handiwork of Hellenistic predecessors. Nor should 
we forget that at least some  ‘ epic ’ elements that look archaic/poetic to us, and already 
seemed so to Hellenistic and Roman scholars, may still have been in more or less 
current use in 5th - century Ionia. 
 A few examples will help to clarify the issues. Items like 
 [ ú :noma]  ‘ name ’ 
and 
 [h é :neka/ - ken]  ‘ for the sake of ’ almost certainly represent editorial 
spellings based on Homeric forms in which the initial vowel was artiﬁ cially lengthened 
 metri gratia  (older texts would have had  O N  O M A ,  E N E K A  etc.). Such forms had no 
place in the  ‘ normal ’  Ionic used by other prose writers (cf. note 20), and it is hard to 
see what extra value they would have added to Herodotus ’ original text. Similarly, 
metrical considerations make it clear that adjacent vowels that are in principle subject 
to contraction have in many cases already been contracted in Ionic elegiac and iambic 
poetry, and analogously, that combinations of [e]   +  [a]/[o(:)] have undergone synizesis 
(despite persistently conservative spellings, cf.  1.4.4 (b)(ii)). By the mid - 5th century 
contracted forms are also quite normal in Ionic inscriptions. It seems likely, therefore, 
that the superﬁ cial appearance of Herodotus ’ text, in which uncontracted forms pre-
dominate, is misleading, and that Homerically inspired spellings such as 
  ‘ it was 
necessary ’ , or 
  ‘ mind ’ , again represent editorial interpretations of earlier spellings 
like  E  D  E  and  N  O  S  (pronounced [ é de:], [nu:s]) that should properly have been respelled 
 , 
 . Notice in support the presence of spurious but epic - looking forms like 
 
 ‘ s/he lies ’ (2.164.1), apparently representing [k é etai]. Since this word originally con-
tained the diphthong [ei] there could be no contraction of [e]   +  [e] to  ‘ undo ’ , and the 
correct form 
 [k ê tai] is actually attested elsewhere, e.g. 7.198.2. None the less, 
there remains the remote possibility that Herodotus himself decided to pay tribute to 
the fountainhead of Ionian literary culture by deliberately using at least some highly 
archaic Homeric forms (though it is doubtful that he would have invented something 
like 
 ). On the other hand, we may be quite sure that the marking of initial aspi-

Classical Greek 63
ration is purely editorial, not only because eastern Ionic was psilotic but because there 
is no trace of the aspirate in compounds: thus 
 [ap - ikn é :tai]  ‘ s/he arrives ’ 
rather than 
 [ap h - hikn é :tai] etc. 
 Whatever the truth of the matter in speciﬁ c cases, the prestige of Ionian achievement 
soon led to this new literary language becoming the model for prose writers elsewhere, 
above all for historians and scientists who readily exploited a vocabulary and exposi-
tory style developed speciﬁ cally for the treatment of their respective disciplines. Thus 
the historians Antiochus of (Dorian) Syracuse and Hellanicus of (Aeolian) Lesbos both 
used the Ionic literary standard in the last quarter of the 5th century  bc , as did 
Hippocrates from (Dorian) Cos when compiling his medical treatises (assuming that 
at least some of the writings of the large Hippocratic corpus can be attributed to an 
individual author of that name). See Vessella  (2008a)  for further discussion of the 
development of technical and literary prose in Ionic. 
 The following extract from Herodotus ’ history of the conﬂ icts between Greece and 
Persia is a typical example of the sort of discursive background story in which he took 
great delight. The context is the aftermath of a major battle during the Persian invasion 
and conquest of Egypt (beginning c.525  bc ), in which the Egyptians have been routed: 
 (15)  

64 Ancient Greek
 ‘ I saw there a great marvel that I learned about from the local people. The bones of those 
who had fallen on either side in this battle still lay scattered separately (for the bones of 
the Persians lay apart, just as they had originally been separated, with those of the 
Egyptians on the other side). Now the skulls of the Persians are so weak that if you were 
to hit them with a single pebble you will pierce them, while those of the Egyptians are 
somehow so strong you could hardly smash them if you struck them with a stone. They 
told me that the reason for this (and I for my part was readily persuaded) was that the 
Egyptians right from childhood shave their heads so that the bone thickens through expo-
sure to the sun. This is also the reason for their not going bald; for of all mankind you 
would see the fewest bald heads among the Egyptians. So this is the reason why they have 
strong skulls, and the reason why the Persians have weak skulls is as follows: from the 
beginning they seek shade by wearing felt  “ tiaras ” . ’ 
 The reader will see that the written aspirate has been ignored in the transcription 
and that some of the more dubious graphic distensions of probably contracted forms 
have been  ‘ recontracted ’ , so 
  ‘ weak (nom pl) ’ is assumed to have been pro-
nounced [ast h en ê :s] etc.; some manuscripts have more of these than others, e.g. 
 
[ek é eto] for 
 [ é ke:to]  ‘ lay ’ . Other uncontracted forms have been left, however, 
as almost certainly characteristic of the contemporary dialect, e.g. 
 [ost é a] 
 ‘ bones ’  etc. Also characteristically Ionic are the shift of original [a:]    >  [ ε :] even after 
[e, i, r], as in 
 [ski ε :trop h e û :si]  ‘ they - seek - shade ’ , the crasis (blending) of 
juxtaposed o - and a - vowels   
  ‘ the same (neut) ’ (
 [t ò 
aut ó ]), the conservative spelling of 1st - declension genitive plurals in 
 despite the 
almost certain synizesis 
 , and the long forms of dative plurals of the 1st and 2nd 
declensions in 
  [ - ε :isi]/ - o  i s i [ - oisi]. The heavy use of adjunct participles is apparent 
throughout. 
 We have already seen that in the dialogue of Athenian tragedy the local dialect was 
accepted in an elevated and internationalized form that incorporated material from 
earlier poetic traditions, most notably the Ionian epic. The ﬁ rst Athenian prose writers 
were similarly affected by the usage of their Ionian predecessors, despite the fact that 
Athens had acquired an empire during the course of the 5th century and was building 
a formidable reputation of its own as a centre of education and culture. We can there-
fore trace signiﬁ cant differences between the conservative ofﬁ cial Attic of this period 
and the self - consciously literary Attic of, for example, Thucydides, who wrote his 
famous history of the war between Athens and Sparta in the latter part of the 5th 

Classical Greek 65
century  bc . The nature of the rise of the Attic dialect to pre - eminence, both as an 
ofﬁ cial and as a literary language, must now be considered in detail.  
 Notes 
1  The true author(s) are unknown, but it is convenient to retain the traditional name of 
Homer. 
2  The fact that our text of Homer has interrogative/indeﬁ nite pronouns and adverbs begin-
ning with  p -  [p] rather than  k -  [k], as in 
 [p ô :s]  ‘ how? ’  etc., is not a decisive argument 
against this conclusion, which is strongly supported by (1a)(v). Though the text of Herodotus 
(from Halicarnassus in south - western Asia Minor) certainly has the k  - forms, our text of 
Homer may well have been  ‘ amended ’  in the course of its transmission. See  2.3 for further 
discussion. 
3  A heavy syllable is closed by a consonant or by length (as in the case of long vowels and 
diphthongs), light syllables are open (i.e. not so closed).  
4  These include the  ‘ didactic ’  poetry of Hesiod ’ s  Theogony  and  Works and Days , the 
Homeric Hymns and the lost poems of the so - called epic cycle (cf. Janko  (1982) ). The 
language of Hesiod, who according to tradition hailed from Aeolic - speaking Boeotia, is all 
but identical to that of Homer: Cassio  (2006) discusses the principal differences, which are 
perhaps attributable to local developments within a mainland tradition of Ionic hexameter 
poetry. The Homeric Hymns as we have them are most probably of a later date than the 
Homeric and Hesiodic poems.  
5  In the transcriptions of most of the following extracts a distinction is drawn between 
close [o:] (written 
 ) and open O:
[
] (written  W ) when both exist. In Attic the change of 
[o:] to [u:] probably took place during the late 5th century (partly because original [u:] had 
already shifted to [y:]). In the Attic extract, therefore, O ϒ is transcribed as [u:] and  W as 
[o:]. 
6  With the exception of the work of Theognis of Megara (6th/early 5th century), all of this 
poetry has survived not in regular manuscript tradition but accidentally, either through the 
discovery of papyrus fragments in Egypt or because later writers saw ﬁ t to quote extracts 
from it.  
7  Though the texts we have are not always reliable in matters of linguistic detail, a few of 
these  ‘ local ’ features are guaranteed by metrical factors: e.g. Doric - style futures in 
 
[ - s ô :]   <  
 [ - s é o:] as in 
 [aloi ε :se û men]  ‘ we shall thresh/smash ’ in Tyrtaeus 
1.55, which is in all other respects an epic form (including the Ionic - style contraction of 
[ - eo - ]   >  [ - eu - ]). 
8  Unlike in Homer, the texts of Callinus and Hipponax (from Ephesus), of Mimnermus (from 
Smyrna), and of Semonides (originally from Samos) show  k - forms of interrogative, relative 
and indeﬁ nite pronouns and adverbs (e.g. 
 [k ô :s]  ‘ how? ’  rather than 
 [p ô :s] etc.), just 
like the text of Herodotus (from Halicarnassus). The text of the 6th/5th - century lyric poet 
Anacreon (from Teos) and the prose fragments of the 6th/5th - century philosopher Herakleitos 
(again from Ephesus) also have the k - forms. Cf. note 2, and see  2.3 for further discussion.  
9  Composed in so - called  ‘ Aeolic dactyls ’ : 
 
10  I.e. those with stems ending in one of [ - a,  - e,  - o], which then frequently  ‘ contracts ’  with 
the ﬁ rst vowel of the (thematic) personal ending; e.g. Attic 
 [ti:m á :o:]    >   
 [ti:m ô :], 
etc. Lesbian and Thessalian have 
 [t í :ma:mi] etc., with the (athematic) endings added 
directly to the stem.  
11   The spelling of 
  ‘ heaven (gen) ’ represents the reverse phenomenon, viz. the 
writing of a long o - vowel for the sake of the metre even though the original was probably 

66 Ancient Greek
 ; in the local alphabet the word would have been written  O R A N  O , allowing 
for both options when transcribed into the Ionic alphabet.  
12  Note, for example, the absence of internal aspiration in the compound 
 [k á todos] 
 ‘ way - down/descent ’  in 395.11 (Attic has 
 [k á t h - hodos] with manner assimilation of 
the plosive). His text also has the k - forms of interrogative and indeﬁ nite pronouns and 
adverbs (cf. notes 2 and 8 above, and see  2.3 ). 
13  This might be another epic Aeolicism, even if the particular words are not always attested, 
but we must be wary of what may be editorial interpretations of original spellings like 
 K L E N O S  etc.  
14   Cassio  (1996)  sees these relatively rare future forms as mainly intrusive and due to the 
inﬂ uence of later editions made in Sicily where there was interference from local dialects 
(especially that of Syracuse).  
15  Thus 
 [m á :t ε :r]  ‘ mother ’ but 
 [h ε :d ý s]  ‘ sweet ’ , etc. The majority of distinctively 
Doric features (e.g. forms with unassibilated  - t i [ - ti]/ - n t i [ - nti] or athematic inﬁ nitives in 
 - m e n [ - men]) are entirely absent, as are the Lesbian forms with  -  o  i -  [oi] where Attic has 
 -  o  u - [u:]. The 3rd - person pronoun  n i n [nin] is used, however, and some Aeolic forms with 
double nasals.  
16   As might be expected, the language of Old Comedy, represented almost entirely by the 
surviving plays of Aristophanes, is, as far as we can tell, rather closer to varieties of con-
temporary Athenian speech, and some scholars have used these texts as a basis for socio-
linguistic studies (Dover  (1987) , Willi  (2003) ). There is, however, a great deal of word - play 
and parody of other genres, especially tragedy and choral lyric, and any scholar engaged 
in such work must remain sensitive at all times to issues of style and context.  
17  Some of these eventually lost their  ‘ high ’  poetic associations and evolved into everyday 
vocabulary items in the Koine (see the later chapters of this part).  
18  Doric was put to similar uses in Magna Graecia, but relatively little survives from this 
tradition and we have correspondingly little sense of its origins and development (see Cassio 
 (1989) , Vessella  (2008a) ). 
19   Xenophanes was also a more traditional poet and wrote elegiacs and iambics on a variety 
of other themes. 
20  Dionysius of Halicarnassus (1st century  bc ) characterizes the language of early Ionic prose 
as  ‘ clear and normal, pure and concise ’ . 
21  According to Herodotus the 12 members of the Ionian League were dialectally divided as 
follows: (a) the Carian cities (Miletus, Myus and Priene), (b) the Lydian cities (Ephesus, 
Colophon, Lebedos, Teos, Clazomenae and Phocaea), (c) Erythrae (though also in Lydia) 
and the neighbouring island of Chios, and (d) the island of Samos, just off the Aegean coast 
between Ephesus and Miletus. Colonies of these cities would presumably have retained 
something close to the dialect of their mother city.  
22  The only signiﬁ cant qualiﬁ cation relates to the written dialect of the island of Chios, which 
shows some Lesbian traits (most notably the 3pl verb ending  -  o  i s i [ - oisi]). 
23  The development might even have begun in these relative forms, where there was a fully 
lip - rounded environment (i.e. with o - or u - vowels both preceding and following the labio -
 velar) to encourage dissimilation of the  ‘ sandwiched ’  consonant, with later generalization 
to the interrogative/indeﬁ nite adverbs and pronouns.  
24  The fragments of the poetry of Xenophanes of Colophon show p - forms despite his Ionian 
origin. We should bear in mind, however, that Xenophanes abandoned Colophon as a 
young man following the Persian conquest c.545  bc , and spent the rest of his life travelling, 
especially in the Greek west. His use of the more international p - forms is not, therefore, 
surprising, always assuming that the text can be taken seriously.  

3
 The Rise of Attic  
 3.1   Attic as a Literary Standard 
 By the time of Herodotus ’ history Ionia had long lost its independence to Persia. Athens, 
however, as a leading city of the Ionian tribe, had not only supported an unsuccessful 
Ionian revolt, but also played a leading role in defending Greece proper against the con-
sequential Persian aggression of the early 5th century  bc . The city emerged from these 
confrontations as a major maritime power, with most of the islands of the Aegean and 
a number of important cities around its coasts falling under Athenian domination. By 
the mid - 5th century Athens was an imperial city that could rival Dorian Sparta, the 
established military power, for the leadership of Greece, a rivalry which extended also 
into the political sphere, since Athens was the foremost democratic city of the age, while 
Sparta retained a more traditional oligarchic form of government. 
 At the same time, and partly in consequence of its new pre - eminence in other 
spheres, Athens was rapidly becoming a major centre of learning and culture, attracting 
leading intellectuals (the so - called  ‘ sophists ’ , peripatetic teachers of various skills and 
theories who provided higher education for the well - to - do) from all parts of the Greek 
world, and beginning the development of its own cultural and educational institutions. 
Most importantly, in this atmosphere of military and material success and growing 
national pride, the Athenians developed a literature in a version of their own dialect, 
particularly in the ﬁ elds of tragedy, comedy, history, oratory and philosophy. 
 The core of the language of Athenian tragedy, as noted in  2.2.5 , is essentially Attic, 
despite the overlay of a range of  ‘ distancing ’ features. The same is true of the ordinary 
(i.e. non - parodic) language of Old Comedy, familiar from the plays of Aristophanes, 
though this is, as far as we can tell, much closer to colloquial varieties of the Attic of 
the period. Similarly, rhetoric, one of the most notable  ‘ inventions ’ of the 5th - century 
Greek enlightenment, and the key instrument of democratic political life, achieved its 
deﬁ nitive form in the dialect of Athens. Many sophists laid great emphasis on the 
importance of effective speaking as a means of managing one ’ s affairs and manipulat-
ing circumstances to one ’ s advantage, and found willing customers for their educa-
tional services in a society which gave free rein to the exploitation of such skills. 

68 Ancient Greek
Notable names in this connection include the early practitioner Protagoras (c.490 –
 c.420  bc ), from Abdera in Thrace, and a little later, Gorgias of Leontini in Sicily 
(c.483 – 375  bc ), and Thrasymachus (c.459 – c.400  bc ) from Chalcedon on the Asian 
side of the Bosporus. The evolution of a speciﬁ cally Attic prose style is certainly due 
in part to the inﬂ uence of these non - indigenous, mainly Ionic - speaking, visitors, an 
inﬂ uence which manifests itself both in the style and organization of argument and in 
the use of language, particularly through the introduction of Ionic technical terminol-
ogy and the semantic extension of existing vocabulary. 
 Unsurprisingly, then, the historian Thucydides, who was born around 460  bc and 
exiled in 424  bc for his failure as a general during the  ‘ Peloponnesian ’ war between 
Athens and Sparta (431 – 404  bc ), wrote his account of that conﬂ ict in a rather inter-
nationalized Attic, which suppresses the most characteristically Attic features in favour 
of Ionic equivalents (cf. the substitution of [ss] and [rs] for [tt] and [rr] in relevant 
words). His style was perhaps typical of the sophist - trained generation of pre - war days 
in that nothing in the work, which crucially includes  ‘ speeches ’  put into the mouths of 
key ﬁ gures at critical moments, suggests the direct inﬂ uence of the highly speciﬁ c codiﬁ -
cation of rhetorical practice initiated by Gorgias after his arrival in Athens in 427  bc . 
This involved what is, to a modern sensibility, a rather unnatural striving for impact 
through antithesis, formal parallelism, and the routine exploitation of auxiliary rhyth-
mical and phonetic  ‘ special effects ’ . Thucydides ’ narrative, in contrast, is relatively 
linear and straightforward in structure, and even the speeches, though often broadly 
antithetical in their articulation of material, display none of the precise matching and 
equalization of clauses espoused by Gorgias, but instead aim for a deliberate variety of 
phrasing and syntax. What is perhaps most characteristic of Thucydides ’ speeches is the 
extreme compression of both thought and diction, which often leads to highly complex 
structures that demand the most careful reading. This style is therefore in equally 
marked contrast to the doctrines of Thrasymachus, who advocated logical ordering and 
clarity of expression as the primary virtues of a good rhetorical style. 
 In all probability, then, the reputation of Gorgias as the founding father of Attic 
prose is somewhat exaggerated. It seems more likely that he developed and reﬁ ned 
tendencies that were already in train, as seen perhaps in Thucydides ’ speeches, and 
attempted to formulate the results as rules of composition. His excessive mannerism, 
however, though doubtless initially highly effective in what was still a very new 
domain, fell rapidly out of favour, and it is the work of Thrasymachus that had the 
more lasting inﬂ uence. A shift of this kind can perhaps be traced in the work of the 
orator and speech writer Antiphon (born c.480  bc , executed in 411), whose early 
speeches are markedly antithetical, with some exploitation of clausal equalization and 
associated phonetic contrivances, but who later adopted a more expansive sentence 
structure with fewer Ionic or  ‘ poetic ’ characteristics (which often amount to the same 
thing, since much of what was current in early Ionic prose had come to be felt as poetic 
because of the continued use of the same words and expressions in contemporary 
archaizing poetry). It is in any case worth noting that there is a clear contrast between 
Antiphon ’ s rhetorical exercises and his genuine forensic oratory, which makes a much 
more straightforward appeal to the audience, as appropriate to its real - world context. 
Lysias (c.459 – c.380  bc ) also wrote speeches for the Athenian middle class, 1 and again 
did so in a relatively ordinary Attic with few blatant rhetorical  ‘ tricks ’ ; colloquial 

The Rise of Attic 69
directness and simplicity of diction apparently gave a better impression of honesty in 
a court of law. By contrast, Demosthenes (384 – 322  bc ) is famous principally for his 
political oratory, especially in urging decisive action against the growing power of 
Macedonia. His writing combines passionately held conviction with clarity of structure 
and great verbal dexterity. He is widely regarded as the greatest of the Attic orators 
for his ability to deploy his array of rhetorical skills precisely and effectively, according 
to the needs of the situation. 
 In terms of long - term inﬂ uence, however, perhaps the key ﬁ gure in the ﬁ eld of 
rhetoric is the great rhetorical theoretician Isocrates (436 – 338  bc ), who, though a pupil 
of Gorgias in his youth, clearly owed a great deal more to Thrasymachus in his devel-
opment of a technically reﬁ ned, though to modern tastes rather bland, prose style, 
most particularly in his emphasis on precision of diction, the avoidance of  ‘ poetic ’ , i.e. 
often Ionic, expression (in marked contrast to the earliest prose), the paramount 
importance of transparency of sentence structure within the context of a complex 
periodic style, and the need for a restrained approach to the rhythmical reinforcement 
of the message. The later inﬂ uence of Isocratean rhetoric on the great Roman states-
man and man of letters Cicero, and through him on the subsequent evolution of prose 
writing in Europe, cannot easily be overestimated. 
 We should not, however, leave the subject of rhetoric without ﬁ rst observing that 
a broadly  ‘ rhetorical ’ style came to characterize other genres besides oratory. The case 
of Thucydides ’ history has already been mentioned, but no one can read a play of 
Euripides or Aristophanes without becoming acutely aware of the impact of a rhetori-
cal education on the construction of dramatic dialogue, particularly in set - piece con-
frontations. It is quite clear that early rhetoric had the most profound effect not only 
in the context of the Athenian Assembly and the law courts but much more generally 
through the education system on the vocabulary and thinking of the educated classes, 
and ultimately on the lexicon and stylistic conventions of the literary and even ofﬁ cial 
varieties of the Attic dialect. 
 Alongside the development of rhetoric we see in Athens in the late 5th century the 
growth of moral philosophy, in marked contrast with the essentially scientiﬁ c specula-
tions of the earlier Ionian philosophers. This was directly associated with the general 
intellectual ferment of the period and particularly with the pressing need for a funda-
mental examination of basic ethical and political issues in the context of the freedoms 
and responsibilities afforded by democratic government. Some philosophers, among 
whom Socrates stands out as one who claimed to have nothing to teach but only ques-
tions to ask, favoured a dialectic method over exposition of theory, and a new literary 
genre, the philosophical dialogue, eventually emerged in consequence, with Socrates ’ 
pupil Plato (427 – 348/7  bc ) its greatest exponent. 
 Plato came from the most highly cultured of backgrounds and was steeped in the 
traditions of Greek poetry. Despite his general distrust of poetry as perpetuating a 
distortion of reality, it is striking that when his subject matter becomes more abstract 
and his purpose more overtly didactic, as in the famous  ‘ mythical ’ passages of the 
 Republic , the style and vocabulary begin to exhibit marked similarities with those of 
Attic tragedy. In the more  ‘ natural ’ parts of his dialogues, however, we seem to be 
dealing, as in Aristophanes (and always allowing for differences of genre and intent), 
with an artful approximation to the conversational style of the educated classes. 

70 Ancient Greek
 With the development of literature of the highest quality in a purely Athenian 
context during the late 5th and early 4th centuries  bc we see the gradual emancipation 
of Attic prose from the direct inﬂ uence of Ionic precedent, though it should be empha-
sized that certain lexical and grammatical features of Ionic prose had by then become 
permanent ﬁ xtures and a hallmark of the  ‘ high ’ style. The inﬂ uence and prestige of 
this variety were enormous, so that, by the time of Plato, Attic prose is the only prose 
literature of which we have any surviving record. This clearly demonstrates that Attic 
literature had by then come to dominate Greek culture and that the Attic dialect, as 
the international language of cultural debate and learned exposition (even, it should 
be noted, in the ﬁ eld of historiography, where Ionic had earlier reigned supreme), 
already served as a model for the whole Greek - speaking world. In an earlier age 
Thucydides had felt obliged to tone down his Attic and to position his history in the 
Ionian tradition of technical prose writing; but now the 4th - century historian 
Theopompus, despite the fact that he came from the Ionian island of Chios, had little 
choice but to write in the literary Attic of his period. The role of classical Attic as the 
model for literary composition in drama and prose was assured, and its inﬂ uence was 
to last for the next two thousand years. See Denniston  (1952)  and Dover  (1997)  for 
classic treatments, and Vessella  (2008a)  for an up - to - date survey. 
 By way of illustration, consider now the following three extracts, exemplifying three 
very different styles of Attic prose writing: 
 (1) 
 

The Rise of Attic 71
 ‘ When the news reached Athens, they refused for a long time to believe that the entire 
force could have been so utterly destroyed in this way, even when those outstanding 
soldiers who had made their escape from the action itself gave clear reports; and when 
they ﬁ nally came to understand, they were bitter towards those orators who had joined 
eagerly in promoting the expedition, as if they had not voted for it themselves, and they 
also grew angry with the oracle - mongers and the soothsayers and all those who had in 
any way led them to hope with their divination that they would take Sicily. Everything 
on every side distressed them and in the wake of what had happened they were beset with 
fear and the greatest possible consternation. ’ 
 ‘ And some also bewail the indignities of old age experienced by friends and relatives, and 
on this basis recite a litany of complaint against it as the cause of all their own misfortunes. 
But it seems to me, Socrates, that they do not blame the true cause. For if this  were 
responsible, I too would have experienced the same effects as far as old age is concerned, 
and all the others who have reached this age too. But on the contrary, I have in the past 
encountered others who are not like this, and on one particular occasion I was with 

72 Ancient Greek
Sophocles when someone asked:  “ How ’ s your sex - life, Sophocles? Can you still get it on 
with a woman? ” And he said:  “ Shush, my good man. I ’ m really very glad to have escaped 
from that. It ’ s just like getting away from a vicious crazy taskmaster. ” 
 ‘ So when, gentlemen of Athens, when will you do what is required? In what event? 
When there is some emergency, for God ’ s sake? But how are we to think of the current 
situation? I for my part believe that the greatest emergency for free men is disgrace 
in the face of events. Or, tell me, do you just want to go around asking one another: 
 “ What ’ s the news? ” Could there be anything more newsworthy than a Macedonian 
beating the Athenians in war and managing the affairs of Greece?  “ Is Philip 
dead? ”  “ No, dammit, but he  is ill. ” Assuredly, if something does happen to him, 
you will quickly create another Philip if you attend to things like this. For this man 
has not gloried over us so much because of his own strength as because of our 
negligence. ’ 

The Rise of Attic 73
 3.2   ‘ Great Attic ’ as an Administrative Language 
 The emerging dominance of Attic as a written medium is all the more remarkable when 
one reﬂ ects that at the beginning of the 5th century this was still the local dialect of 
a rather backward and isolated region, archaic and conservative in its grammatical 
structure, with its literary potential undeveloped. In the sharpest contrast, eastern 
Ionic, as the dialect of a large and burgeoning frontier region with a mixed population, 
had long been dynamically innovative, and had already been used in a stylized form 
not only for poetry of different kinds but increasingly as a sophisticated instrument of 
scientiﬁ c and historical exegesis (cf. chapter  2 ). In the course of its development as a 
spoken medium Ionic had lost many grammatical archaisms and irregularities that 
Attic retained, and these sometimes quite radical simpliﬁ cations had automatically 
found their way into Ionic literary productions. We may note, for example, the 
following: 
 (2)  (a)  The dual number had disappeared.  
 (b)  Certain morphological irregularities were levelled out, such as:  
 (i) 
 
 [ í z - men], 
 [ í s - te], 
 [ í s - a:si], the plural forms of 
 
[o î d - a]  ‘ I know ’ ; replaced by the analogical, and predictable, 
 
[o í d - amen], 
 [o í d - ate], 
 [o í d - asi]. 
 (ii)  
 [ é - t h e - men], 
 [ é - t h e - te], 
 [ é - t h e - san], the plural of 
past perfective (aorist) 
 [ é - t h ε :k - a]  ‘ I put ’ (and other plurals of 
the aorist of athematic verbs with similar root alternation); levelled 
to the singular to give 
 , 
 , 
 [ é - t h ε :k - an]. 
 (c)  The commonest athematic verbs in  - m i [ - mi] had begun to be transferred 
to the thematic paradigm, so 
 [ í st ε :mi]  ‘ I stand ’   >  
 [ist ô :], 
 
[t í t h ε :mi]  ‘ I put ’ ,   >  
  [tit h ô ]. 
 Given this background, it should not be surprising that the earliest literary mani-
festations of Attic, such as tragedy and Thucydides ’ history, not only rejected the most 
characteristically  ‘ local ’ (and unliterary) phonological features like [tt] and [rr] in 
words like 
 [gl ô :tta]  ‘ tongue ’ and 
 [t h á rros]  ‘ boldness ’ , in favour of the 
more  ‘ international ’  and prestigious Ionic forms with  - s s - [ss] and  - r s - [rs], but also 
began to adopt Ionic grammatical characteristics, e.g. by restricting the use of the dual 
number and incorporating 3pl aorist forms of the type seen in (2b)(ii): 
 (3)  (a)   3pl 
  ‘ they let go/passed over ’ 
 Thucydides IV.38.1  
 (b)  3pl 
  ‘ they sent forth/let go ’ 
 Euripides  Bacchae  448  
 But despite the dramatic transformation in Athens ’ fortunes during the course of 
the 5th century and the advent of a greater readiness to use genuine Attic forms, at 
least in prose, Ionic prestige still continued to shape the development of Attic as a 
written medium. Before long, therefore, a number of Ionic characteristics that had ﬁ rst 

74 Ancient Greek
appeared in Attic literary texts also began to appear in ofﬁ cial Athenian inscriptions. 
To illustrate the point, we may note examples such as those in (4) and (5) (see L ó pez -
 Eire  (1986, 1993)  for a full discussion): 
 (4)  (a)  The verb 
 [epain ô :]  ‘ praise ’  takes the dative in the earliest Attic 
inscriptions, exactly as in Homer:  
 (5)  As already noted, the extension of the stem of the singular of aorists of athe-
matic verbs to the plural occurs ﬁ rst in Ionic prose (e.g. Herodotus III.128.4) 
and passes from there, at least in part, into Athenian literature (cf. (3) above). 
It then begins to appear in ofﬁ cial Attic inscriptions in the early part of the 
4th century (e.g. IG II 2 1412 23: 385/4  bc ). We may also note that Ionic litera-
ture employs the conjunctions 
 [ho:s  á n] or 
 [h ó po:s]  +  subjunctive 
in purpose clauses ( ‘ in order that ’ ), while traditional Attic in early  ‘ conserva-
tive ’ inscriptions uses 
 [h ó po:s  á n]. However, 
 [ho:s  á n] and bare 
 [h ó po:s] appear already in Thucydides ’ history (cf. VI.91 for the former, 
I.126 for the latter), and then start to turn up in Attic inscriptions from the 
mid - 5th century onwards (e.g. IG I 3 156 2: 440 – 25  bc for 
 [ho:s  á n], IG 
I 2 226 40: 343 – 2  bc for 
 [h ó po:s]). 
 The overall picture that emerges, therefore, is of an unequal struggle between a 
traditional conservative variety of Attic and a more modern Ionicized Attic, a variety 
 (b)  In Herodotus ’ Ionic, however, we ﬁ nd the accusative used for the object, 
as with  ‘ regular ’ transitive verbs, and this Ionic construction is regularly 
preferred in Athenian literature:  
 (c)  By the end of the 5th century this usage also begins to compete with the 
traditional one even in ofﬁ cial documents, and eventually supplants it:  

The Rise of Attic 75
that was already established in literature and intellectual discourse, and which eventu-
ally supplants its rival even in administrative documents. Other diagnostic features of 
this  ‘ modern Attic ’ style include: 
 (6)  (a)  A liking for periphrases consisting of a noun   +  the verb 
 [poi û :mai] 
 ‘ I make ’ : e.g. 
 [epim é le:an poi û :mai] lit.  ‘ I make care 
(for) ’ in place of the verb 
 [epimel û :mai]  ‘ I take care of ’ , ﬁ rst 
in Ionian prose (e.g. Herodotus VI.105.2), then in Attic literature (e.g. 
Thucydides VII.56.1) and ﬁ nally in Attic inscriptions (e.g. IG II 2 659 10: 
287  bc ). 
 (b)   ‘ Short ’ dative plurals in  - o i " / - a i " [ - ois/ - ais] in place of  - o  i s i / - a i s i [ - oisi/ 
 - aisi]. (This is a development internal to Attic based on the generalization 
of the short forms already standardized in the article at the beginning of 
the 5th century.)  
 (c)  
 [s ý n] for 
 [ks ý n]  ‘ with ’ . 
 Interestingly, in IG I 3 40 (a treaty of 446  bc between Athens and the city of Chalcis 
on the island of Euboea) the traditional forms of (6b) and (6c) are used in the formal 
oath to be sworn by the Athenians and the Chalcidians, but the modern ones appear 
in the additional clauses proposed by individual Athenians, a distribution which high-
lights perfectly the contrast between the traditional ofﬁ cial style and the more  ‘ normal ’ 
educated usage of the period (see L ó pez - Eire  (1997) ). 2 
 Unsurprisingly, it is the more modern forms which eventually ﬁ nd their way into 
the Attic - based Koine, the natural historical continuation of this somewhat simpliﬁ ed 
and partly Ionicized form of ofﬁ cial Attic that is often called  ‘ Great Attic ’ since the 
pioneering work of Thumb  (1901, 1906) . No longer the written dialect of Athens and 
Attica alone, it was ﬁ rst used for all ofﬁ cial written communication within the Athenian 
empire, and subsequently its use spread still wider, doubtless aided by the prestige of 
Attic as the principal vehicle of contemporary Greek literary culture. Thus even after 
Athens had been defeated by the Spartans in 404  bc , the importance of its written 
language remained intact, and its use for ofﬁ cial purposes in territories outside Attica 
continued and even expanded, particularly with the revival of Athens in the 4th century 
and the formation of a second Athenian alliance in 377  bc . It is no accident, for 
example, that a document recording the decision of a federation of all Greek cities 
(except Sparta) not to assist the semi - autonomous rulers of the territories of Western 
Asia Minor (the  ‘ satraps ’ ) in their revolt against the Persian king (IG IV 556: 362/1 
 bc ) should be composed in Great Attic, with forms like innovative 3pl 
 [o í dasin] 
 ‘ they know ’ in place of traditional 
 [ í sa:sin]. If literary Attic in its developed 
form represented a panhellenic high style for belletristic purposes, Great Attic repre-
sented the standard written language of business and administration among the middle 
and upper classes. It was, we may assume, still quite close to the formal speech of 
educated Athenians but rather different from the language of the urban masses or the 
conservative varieties of rural Attica. A fragment of Aristophanes (552/706 K - A) 
perhaps draws attention to the register of Attic usage that originally underpinned Great 
Attic: 

76 Ancient Greek
 (7)  
 ‘ (a man) with the middle - of - the - road speech of the city, neither the rather effeminate urban 
variety ( i.e. associated with the aristocracy ) nor the crude rather countriﬁ ed one ’ . 
 The process of Attic - Ionic convergence can be seen from another perspective in Ionic 
documents of the 5th and 4th centuries  bc , in which Attic forms and phrases, ﬁ rst 
introduced through Athenian administrative and legal documents, begin to inﬁ ltrate 
steadily. Only the most characteristic  ‘ markers ’  of Ionic are resolutely adhered to, such 
as the use of  - h [ ε :] after  i / e / r [i/e/r], where Attic had retained or restored 
the original long  - a [a:], e.g. 
 [symmak h í ε :]  ‘ alliance ’ not 
 [symma-
k h í a:]. There is interesting conﬁ rmation of the widespread prestige of Great Attic in 
the 4th century  bc in the fact that the incorporation of Attic characteristics applies 
not only to the inscriptions of original Ionic - speaking communities but also to those 
of foreign territories such as Caria (in south - west Asia Minor), where the ruling class 
had earlier adopted the Greek of the Ionian cities as its ofﬁ cial language (cf. Brixhe 
 (1987, 1993b) ). In SIG 167 (367 – 54  bc ), for example, which comprises three decrees 
of the Carian city of Mylasa, we still ﬁ nd a strongly Ionic foundation, but many Attic 
features already intrude (e.g. 
 [at é le:a]  ‘ freedom from taxation ’ for 
 
[atel í : ε :]; 
 [u:s í ε :]  ‘ property ’ for 
 [eu:s í ε :], though retaining the Ionic ending 
in  - h [ -  ε :]; genitive singulars of masculine 1st - declension nouns in  - o u [ - u:] as well as 
Ionic  - e  w 
 etc.). 
 A further example of this convergence is provided by a treaty between the cities of 
the Chalcidian league and the Macedonian king Amyntas III (SIG 135, c.393  bc ). Here, 
since the mother city of Chalcis was on the island of Euboea, we ﬁ nd the expected 
western Ionic base, including: the general Ionic use of  - h - [ ε :] after  i / e / r [i/e/r], e.g. 
 [k h ó :r ε :n],  ‘ country ’ ; the absence of contraction of  - e o - / - e a -  [eo/ea] in forms such 
as 
 [tel  ó ntas],  ‘ paying (acc pl) ’ (Attic 
 [tel û :ntas]; the Euboean 
dative singular of o - stems in  - o i [ - oi] rather than the Attic (and standard Ionic)  - w i 
[ - o:i], e.g. 
 [ep ì pol é moi]  ‘ for war ’ ; and the Euboean inﬁ nitive of 
 [e:mi] 
 ‘ I am ’ , namely 
 [ ê :n], not Attic/standard Ionic 
 [ ê :nai], perhaps reﬂ ecting an 
extension of the Ionic trend for irregular athematic verbs to be assimilated to the 
regular thematic ( - w [ - o:]) class, e.g. 
 [tit h ê :n] not 
 [t í t h enai] as the inﬁ nitive 
of 
 [t í t h ε :mi]  ‘ I put ’ ). 
 Alongside this, however, there are clear signs of Attic inﬂ uence: the conjunctions 
 [ea:n]/
 [a:n]  ‘ if (ever) ’ rather than Ionic 
 [ ε :n] (though the latter also begins to 
appear in more colloquial registers of Attic through the convergence process); some 
o - stem dative singulars in  - w i [ - o:i], e.g. 
 [koin ô :i]  ‘ community ’ ; the form 
 
[mi â :s]  ‘ of one (fem) ’ , with original long  - a -  [a:] preserved after  - i -  [i] (contrast Ionic 
 ). It is typical of such Attic inﬁ ltration that it seems ﬁ rst to have affected 

The Rise of Attic 77
 ‘ small ’  grammatical words, where the process would have been largely subconscious, 
or to have involved the use of technical terminology in a legal or other institutional 
context in which earlier Athenian jurisdiction and continuing inﬂ uence would have 
standardized the Attic forms. 
 Similar observations can be made about dialect inscriptions from other areas during 
the course of the 4th century, as the impact of Great Attic becomes steadily more 
visible through the encroachment of interference phenomena. We may note, for 
example, the use of Athenian legal terminology, albeit in dialect guise, such as 
 
[up ó dikon]  ‘ liable to trial/forfeit ’ in IG XII 2 1, a monetary agreement in Lesbian 
between the city of Mytilene and Ionic - speaking Phocaea dating from the ﬁ rst half 
of the 4th century, or the appearance of typically Attic phraseology such as 
  [to:n peri p ú rrho:na da:miorg ô :n]  ‘ the demiurgi (ofﬁ -
cials) under Pyrrhon ’ , complete with Attic 
 [peri] for local 
 [par], in an Elean 
inscription of 335  bc (Schwyzer 424). As the dominant position of Athens, politically 
and culturally, became increasingly apparent, more and more educated people became 
familiar with written Attic, ofﬁ cial and literary, and this growing familiarity translated 
itself steadily into direct inﬂ uence on the formal expression of ofﬁ cial business in dialect 
inscriptions from all parts of the Greek - speaking world. 
 The particularly rapid convergence between Attic and Ionic at the ofﬁ cial level must 
have been complemented by the fact that most of the subject peoples of the Athenian 
empire in the 5th century  bc were Ionic speakers who had to deal routinely with 
Attic - speaking Athenian ofﬁ cials and with Athenian administrative documents com-
posed in Attic. It was, furthermore, Athenian practice to send out colonies ( ‘ cleruchies ’ ) 
to imperial territories, where speakers of Attic and Ionic then mixed freely. Conversely, 
many Ionic speakers inevitably had to come to Athens on business, and some took 
up residence there alongside other aliens who had been drawn to what was rapidly 
emerging as the principal commercial and educational centre of the Greek world. The 
consequential rapid change in the city vernacular during the 5th century naturally 
prompted complaints from elderly conservatives about the degenerate state of the 
contemporary language (cf. The Old Oligarch/(Xenophon)  Athenaion Politeia  2.7: 
cf. Cassio  (1981) ). 
 It should not, then, be surprising, given the close genetic relationship between Attic 
and Ionic and the early onset of convergence set in train by Athenian administration 
of much of Ionic - speaking territory, that Ionic should be the ﬁ rst of the classical dialects 
to disappear as a distinct variety from the written record before the relentless spread 
of Great Attic (Ionic is effectively defunct as an ofﬁ cial dialect by c.300  bc ). We should 
not, however, forget that this expanded form of Attic had itself incorporated far -
 reaching Ionic inﬂ uences in its own developmental phase, and that this was the form 
of Attic that was shortly to evolve into the Hellenistic Koine.  
 Notes 
1  As the son of a Syracusan metic (resident alien) he was not allowed to speak himself, apart 
from a brief period in 403  bc when he enjoyed citizen rights.  
2  It may be signiﬁ cant, however, that the observation about dative plurals applies speciﬁ cally 
to the proper name 
 [at h ε :na í ois(i)]), in which self - conscious archaism in the 

78 Ancient Greek
context of a formal oath is perhaps most naturally to be expected (the form 
 
[pe:t h ó menois]  ‘ obeying (dat) ’ appears alongside this in the Athenian oath). The fact that 
individual Athenians propose both the formal text of the oaths and the further clauses is 
probably less signiﬁ cant, since a formal oath is a formal oath, and as such subject to tradi-
tional stylistic conventions (even if not entirely consistently applied). Cf. M é ndez Dosuna 
 (2000) . 

4
 Greek in the 
Hellenistic World  
 
 4.1   Introduction 
 During the latter half of the 4th century  bc the kingdom of Macedonia ﬁ rst became 
the controlling power in mainland Greece, and then, through the spectacular conquests 
of Alexander III ( ‘ the Great ’ , 356 – 323  bc ), acquired control of the whole of the eastern 
Mediterranean, including Asia Minor, Syria and Egypt, and ﬁ nally extended its rule 
throughout the former Persian empire to the borders of India. Great new cities were 
founded in the conquered territories, most notably Alexandria in Egypt, Pergamum in 
Asia Minor, and Antioch in Syria, and Greek culture and language were spread as far 
as the plains of the Punjab. 
 Curiously there was no consensus in antiquity as to whether the Macedonians were 
themselves of Greek origin or not, with Herodotus perhaps in favour of the proposi-
tion (I.56, VIII.43) and Thucydides against (IV.124 – 7). But as the growing power of 
Macedonia under Philip II began to threaten the autonomy of the Greek city states in 
the 4th century  bc , the argument became intensely politicized, and those who advo-
cated a strong military response to the growing threat, such as the Athenian orator 
Demosthenes, were in no doubt that they were  ‘ barbarians ’  (i.e. non - Greek speakers, 
cf.  Olynthiacs III 24). There is in fact evidence to suggest that Macedonian was not 
readily understood by most Greeks (e.g. Plutarch,  Alexander 51 4), and this fact alone 
would distinguish it from the Greek dialects that were discussed earlier, since we never 
hear otherwise of Greeks being unable to understand one another (e.g. at panhellenic 
festivals). We should not, however, discount the possibility that what is being described 
in such sources as  ‘ Macedonian ’ is in fact the language of Paeonian, Illyrian or Epirote 
subjects of the Macedonian king. 
 For what it is worth, the few fragments we have of what is alleged to be the 
Macedonian language suggest that it was either a highly aberrant Greek dialect or an 
Indo - European dialect very closely related to Greek, perhaps representing the speech 
of a group who had become detached from the majority of the invaders who, further 
south, eventually became speakers of Greek during the ﬁ rst half of the second millen-
nium  bc (cf. chapter  1 , and see Kretschmer ( 1896 : 283 – 8)). It had, for example, 
apparently failed to undergo certain otherwise  ‘ common ’ Greek sound changes, such 
as the de - voicing of the voiced aspirated series of plosives standardly reconstructed for 

80 Ancient Greek
Indo - European, but to have de - aspirated them instead. We therefore ﬁ nd Macedonian 
names such as 
 [ber(e)n í :k ε :] instead of 
 [p h eren í :k ε :],  ‘ Bringer - of -
 victory ’ , where the ﬁ rst element derives from the Indo - European root   * bher - ,  ‘ bear/
carry ’ (cf.  1.1 , (1a)). For further discussion see Kall é ris  (1954, 1976) , Kati č i č  (1976) , 
Crossland  (1982) , Sakellar í ou  (1983)  and Sowa  (2006) . 1 
 Whatever the truth of the matter, the Macedonian dialect/language clearly lacked 
the prestige necessary to serve as the linguistic and cultural concomitant to Macedonian 
imperial ambition. But Attic, as the dialect of the culturally dominant city of classical 
Greece, already widely in use outside its region of origin as a literary and administra-
tive language, obviously suited the purpose. It was therefore entirely natural that the 
Macedonian kings, in search of a  ‘ civilization ’  to underpin their growing military and 
political power, should have established the study of classical Greek literature, much 
of it in literary Attic, as a central plank of their education system and adopted con-
temporary Great Attic as their own ofﬁ cial language of state. Though this formally 
took place during the reign of Philip II (360/59 – 336  bc ), the introduction of Greek 
civilization from the south had in fact begun during the late 5th century  bc , when the 
Athenian tragic poet Euripides, along with other famous artists of the period, had 
spent time at the court of King Archelaus. This Atticization of the Macedonian aris-
tocracy was to be the crucial factor in the future history of the Greek language, since, 
continued Athenian cultural prestige notwithstanding, the emergence of Great Attic as 
a true national language (the Koine) would surely have been long delayed, or even 
prevented altogether, without the substitution of the military and political power of 
Macedonia for the declining inﬂ uence of Athens. 
 Alexander ’ s conquests ushered in the Hellenistic age, which is conventionally dated 
from his death in 323  bc to the battle of Actium in 31  bc , in which the forces of Mark 
Antony and Cleopatra VII, the last Greco - Macedonian monarch of Egypt, were 
defeated by Octavian, soon to be the ﬁ rst acknowledged Roman emperor with the title 
Augustus. It should be noted, however, that Roman involvement in the Greek world 
had begun very much earlier (see  5.1 ), and that a clear dividing line between the later 
Hellenistic and Roman periods cannot easily be drawn. 
 In the early Hellenistic period the conquered territories were quickly divided among 
a number of hereditary monarchies, though a few well - established kingdoms in Asia 
Minor managed to retain their autonomy, notably Bithynia and Pontus on the southern 
shores of the Black Sea, and Cappadocia in central Anatolia. The major dynasties 
included the Antigonids of Macedonia, the Ptolemies of Egypt and the Seleucids of 
Syria and Persia. Since the Macedonian aristocracy had long been Atticized, the study 
of classical literature remained central to the Hellenistic education system, and the 
Koine or  ‘ common ’ written language of the Hellenistic world, employed from the outset 
as an ofﬁ cial language by the new Macedonian rulers of the East, was simply the 
product of the natural evolution of Great Attic within its extended new environment.  
 4.2   The Koine as an Extension of Great Attic 
 Since it has been argued on theoretical grounds (Fr ö s é n  (1974) ) that the Koine was in 
fact a creolized version of Attic which grew out of a putative Attic  ‘ pidgin ’ used in the 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  81
Athenian empire in the 5th century  bc , it is important to stress that, quite apart from 
the inherent implausibility of such a pidgin in the Attic - Ionic context, where the dialects 
were not only mutually comprehensible but genetically very closely related, all the 
empirical evidence points to its being essentially the established language of commerce, 
diplomacy and ofﬁ cialdom, a variety distinct even from the Attic vernacular of the 
Athenian lower classes let alone the kind of pidgin put in the mouth of the Scythian 
archer by Aristophanes in the  Thesmophoriazousae  (cf. Brixhe  (1988a, 1990, 1993b) , 
Brixhe and Hodot  (1993) , L ó pez - Eire  (1986, 1993) ). 
 Thus the language of the decrees of the Macedonian kings is in practice indistin-
guishable from the  ‘ evolved ’ Great Attic/Koine already familiar from the ofﬁ cial 
inscriptions of a number of Greek cities outside Athens in the same period (see, for 
example, SIG 286, a treaty between Olbia, on the north coast of the Black Sea, and 
its mother city Miletus in Ionia, dated c.330  bc ). This is quite clear from an example 
such as the decree in (1) below (Nachmanson HGI 52), in which, after his victory over 
the Persians at the river Granicus in 334  bc , Alexander makes arrangements for the 
residents of Naulochum (the old port of the Ionian city of Priene in Asia Minor). The 
stone is fragmentary, though modern editors have supplied likely restorations for at 
least some of the lacunae: 
 (1) 
 
 
 
 
‘ ( Decree ) of king Alexander. ( I command that ) all of those living in Naulochum who are 
Prienian citizens shall be autonomous and free, retaining both their land and all the houses 
in the city and their country estates; but all those who are not Prienian citizens shall live 
in whatever villages they themselves request;  … I decree to be my own estate. ( I also 
command that ) those living in these villages shall pay tribute; but I exempt the city of the 
Prienians from the contribution, and the garrison  … ’ 

82 Ancient Greek
 The only clear marker of the Koine here is the use of 
 [gi:n ó :sko:] for classical 
Attic 
 , an originally Ionic form that had passed into the every-
day/ofﬁ cial written language of the Greek world but not the more literary registers of 
Attic. Indeed, the documents of Macedonian ofﬁ cialdom are often hard to distin-
guish linguisti cally from those of contemporary Athens, displaying such characteristi-
cally Attic features as: 
 (2)  (a)  The change of  * [a:]   >  
 except after  i / e / r [i/e/r] (the change applies across 
the board in Ionic).  
 (b)  Regular contraction of  e a / e o [ea/eo]    >   h /o u [e:/u:] (often uncontracted in 
Ionic, or with synizesis).  
 (c)  The conditional conjunction 
 [ea:n/a:n]  ‘ if ’  (Ionic has 
 ). 
 (d)  The gen sg of masc a - stem (1st declension) nouns in  - o u [ - u:] (Ionic has 
 - e w [ -  o]). 
 (e)  The gen sg of i - stem and eu - stem nouns in  - e w " 
 and 
 [ - é o:s] 
respectively (cf. 
 [basil é o:s] above: Ionic often has  - i o " [ - ios] and 
 [ - é os]). 
 (f) 
 The participle of the verb  ‘ to be ’ is 
 [ ó :n] (Ionic has 
 [e ó :n]). 
 (g)  The use of 
 as aorist of 
 [p h é ro:]  ‘ I carry ’ (Ionic has 
 ). 
 (h)  The use of 
 [m é :zdo:n]  ‘ bigger ’ , 
 [koin ó s]  ‘ common ’ , 
 
[ek ê :nos]  ‘ that ’ (Ionic has 
 [m é zdo:n], 
 [ksun ó s], 
 
[k ê :nos]). 
 None the less, a number of  ‘ local ’ Attic features are either missing or of highly 
restricted occurrence in the expanded, panhellenic version of administrative Attic used 
outside Athens/Attica, and Macedonian Attic is no exception. Thus in addition to the 
use of 
 [gi:n ó :sko:]  ‘ I know/judge ’ , and 
 [g í :nomai]  ‘ I become ’ , with the 
simpliﬁ cation of Attic  - g n - 
 mentioned above, we may also note: 
 (3)  (a)  Preference for  - s s - / - r s - [ss/rs] over  - t t - / - r r - [tt/rr].  
 (b)  Common avoidance of contraction where it would produce an anomalous 
paradigm: e.g. 
 [ost é on]  ‘ bone ’ is often preferred to 
 [ost û :n], 
to maintain conformity with the regular paradigm of 2nd - declension 
neuters in  - o n [ - on]. 
 (c)  Much regularization of once irregular verbs, by which the stem of the sg 
is carried over to the pl: e.g. 
 [o î damen] etc. for 
 [ í zmen]  ‘ we 
know ’ , after 
 [o î da]  ‘ I know ’ ; 
 [ed ó :kamen] etc. for 
 
[ é domen]  ‘ we gave ’ , after 
 [ é do:ka]  ‘ I gave ’ , etc. (cf.  3.2 ). 
 (d)  More limited use of the optative mood (very widely employed not only 
to express wishes but also in a range of subordinate clauses in  ‘ past - time ’ 
contexts in classical Attic).  
 Such traits, mainly of Ionic origin, represent simpliﬁ cations or regularizations of 
their traditional Attic counterparts, and having passed into Great Attic during the 
course of the 5th and 4th centuries  bc continued straightforwardly into the Koine. 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  83
Even Athenian Attic assimilated some of these into its literary registers (partly because 
of Ionic literary precedent but also because of their progressive naturalization in the 
educated spoken Attic of the time), and they eventually also began to appear, at ﬁ rst 
sporadically, in ofﬁ cial Athenian documents as the prestige of Great Attic/Koine began 
to outstrip that of the local form of the dialect (cf. chapter  3 ). 
 There is, however, one apparently non - Attic (and non - Ionic) feature of the Koine 
which calls for special comment. A particular subset of words which had undergone 
ﬁ rst the Attic - Ionic shift of  * [a:]   >  
 and then the Attic change of quantitative metath-
esis had produced an anomalous paradigm (the so - called  ‘ Attic ’  declension); thus where 
most dialects had 
 [la: ó s]  ‘ people ’  and 
 [na: ó s]  ‘ temple ’ , normal Attic had 
 
[le ó :s] and 
 [ne ó :s]. But Great Attic in part, and the Koine quite regularly, employ 
the former in preference to the  ‘ genuine ’ Attic variants except when the words appear 
as the ﬁ rst element of compounds so that no declensional difﬁ culties arise. The reason 
once again is quite clearly the desire to avoid morphological irregularity (regular 2nd -
 declension masculine nouns end in  - o " [ - os]). But while it is doubtless true that this 
represents the  ‘ natural ’ selection of the  ‘ majority ’ Greek forms against the  ‘ parochial ’ 
Attic( - Ionic) ones, it does seem strange, given the general dialectal make - up of Great 
Attic/Koine. 
 We should note here that a number of other words with original [a:] also ﬁ nd their 
way into the Koine without there being any parallel morphological justiﬁ cation. 
Examples include 
 [opa:d ó s]  ‘ attendant ’ , still used in Modern Greek, and various 
compounds involving the root of the verb 
 [ á go:]  ‘ lead ’ , such as 
 
[poda:g ó s]/[hoda:g ó s]  ‘ guide ’ , though these latter were employed alongside the cor-
responding  ‘ Attic ’  forms with  - h - 
 . It is surely not accidental in this connection that 
the Attic tragedians also routinely employed the  ‘ common ’ Greek forms of these par-
ticular words with [a:], or that some of them then appear later in Athenian comedy 
and prose (cf.  2.2.5 ). The conclusion seems inescapable that this set of items containing 
[a:], originally characteristic of a particular variety of literary Attic, and perhaps ﬁ rst 
borrowed from an earlier dramatic tradition of Dorian Sicily, had begun to ﬁ nd their 
way into ordinary speech and even ofﬁ cial documents during the later 5th century  bc 
(just like many of the Ionic - inspired simpliﬁ cations in (3)), and that these had passed 
into Great Attic/Koine as being the  ‘ Attic ’ forms that not only corresponded to major-
ity dialect practice but in crucial cases avoided a parochial morphological anomaly. It 
is important to note that the Koine cannot have incorporated these words directly from 
West Greek or Aeolic sources, despite standard views to the contrary, since there is 
simply no reason why dialects which otherwise made no substantive contribution to 
the formation of the Koine should have been plundered for just this otherwise random 
set of words.  
 4.3   The Impact and Status of the Koine 
 What has been said so far has concentrated on the Koine as a written standard. It was, 
however, also increasingly spoken throughout the Greek world, ﬁ rst by the upper and 
middle classes as a common language of business and social interaction, and then more 
generally. The uniformity of the written Koine in its higher registers across a vast 

84 Ancient Greek
geographical area almost certainly implies a corresponding homogeneity in the speech 
of the Greek elite as far as lexicon, syntax and morphology are concerned, though we 
may safely assume that there were regional differences at least in pronunciation. 
 Within  ‘ old ’  Greece this expansion of the Koine naturally took place at the expense 
of the ancient dialects, written and spoken, while in the new Hellenistic kingdoms the 
Koine was from the ﬁ rst the only written standard, and the spoken language of the 
Greco - Macedonian aristocracy. It was soon learned widely by non - native speakers 
(though not always perfectly), and it inevitably shaped the development of spoken 
Greek among the colonists who went out from many different parts of Greece to popu-
late the newly founded cities. It is essential, then, to see the Koine not only as the 
standard written and spoken language of the upper classes (periodically subject to 
inﬂ uences from belletristic classical Attic), but also more abstractly as a superordinate 
variety standing at the pinnacle of a pyramid comprising an array of lower - register 
varieties, spoken and occasionally written, which, in rather different ways in the old 
and the new Greek worlds, evolved under its inﬂ uence and thereafter derived their 
identity through their subordinate relationship to it (cf. Cardona  (1990) , Consani 
 (1991) ). These developments will be surveyed in more detail in the next two sections.  
 4.4   The Fate of the Ancient Greek Dialects 
 4.4.1   Introduction 
 In the Hellenistic period the Greek city states lost much of their former autonomy, and 
what had been  ‘ national ’  governments became little more than town councils. The 
Hellenistic monarchs controlled the international affairs of the Greek world and 
between them imposed a degree of centralized government on most of the old cities 
and their colonies. In  ‘ old ’ Greece, therefore, an inevitable consequence of the routine 
conduct of business in the Koine, backed up by an education system based on the 
reading of  ‘ classical ’ authors, including many writers in Attic, was a steady decline 
in the status of the local dialects, which eventually became purely spoken varieties, 
characteristic of the uneducated population of remote areas, before ﬁ nally dying out 
altogether in late antiquity. 
 During the transitional period, however, even the middle and upper classes still 
spoke their local dialects at home, and also continued to write them for a time when 
dealing with local affairs. But the prevailing diglossia (see Ferguson  (1959)  for the 
term) is clearly manifested in the ever - growing Koine interference in dialect inscriptions 
of the era (cf. Buben í k  (1989) for a study of the top - down  ‘ Koineization ’  of the dia-
lects). By Roman imperial times, written dialect had been largely abandoned apart 
from  ‘ revivals ’ (most notably in Laconia, cf. Bourguet  (1927) , and Lesbos, cf. Cassio 
 (1986) , Hodot  (1990) ) representing temporary elevations of spoken patois, perhaps 
under the stimulus of Roman imperial policy (essentially  ‘ divide and rule ’ ). 
 4.4.2   Koineization: the case of Boeotian 
 The general situation is well illustrated by the collection of Boeotian manumission 
decrees dating from the 3rd and 2nd centuries  bc . These grant freedom to slaves in 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  85
return for a payment, the act of manumission often taking the form of a dedication 
or sale to the divinity of a local shrine who then serves as guarantor. As might be 
expected in the light of what has been said above, some of these documents are in 
dialect (as beﬁ ts documents of purely local signiﬁ cance), some are in the Koine (as the 
 ‘ standard ’  administrative language), and some are in a mixture of the two; unfortu-
nately it is still difﬁ cult to reconstruct the detailed sociolinguistics of this complex situ-
ation, and what is needed, both for Boeotia and elsewhere, is a detailed analysis of the 
inscriptional corpora in the light of modern sociohistorical studies (see now Vott é ro 
 (1996, 2006) ). 
 A good example of the dialectally mixed category of inscription is provided by IG 
VII 3352 from Chaeronea: 
 (4) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ Diocles and Cotila dedicate their slave, whose name is Zopurina, to the safe keeping of 
Serapis, provided that she has remained in service with them blamelessly for as long as 
they live; they make this dedication through the council according to the law. ’ 
 A few words about the orthography of Boeotian inscriptions are in order at this 
point, since this contrasts sharply with Attic practice. The old Attic orthography had 
naturally been based on the speech of the Athenian aristocracy, and this remained the 
case after the adoption of the Ionic alphabet at the end of the 5th century  bc (cf. 
Teodorsson  (1974) ). Subsequently the existence of a  ‘ classic ’  literature (regarded as a 
panhellenic possession), together with the widespread use of Attic outside Attica as a 
written language (for both creative writing and ofﬁ cial business), resulted in an early 
conservative standardization of the orthography, so that even when sound change 
began to affect upper - class Athenian speech, the spelling conventions of what had 
become the panhellenic written standard inevitably remained ﬁ xed according to 
classical precedent; it was clearly impossible, and in the case of classic texts undesir-
able, for the orthography to be adapted locally to reﬂ ect the pronunciation of all who 
used it. 
 By contrast, Boeotian, in the absence of any prestigious literary tradition or  ‘ national ’ 
status as a written language, seems to have regularly adapted its orthography in line 
with sound change, both before and especially after the introduction of the Ionic 
alphabet (Morpurgo Davies  (1993) ). Accordingly, certain sound changes in Boeotian, 
some of which probably also characterized the lower registers of local Attic at roughly 

86 Ancient Greek
the same time (see chapter  6 for details), but for which we have to seek indirect evi-
dence in the form of spelling mistakes in subliterary documents, are directly represented 
in ofﬁ cial as well as private Boeotian inscriptions. 
 Particularly striking in (4) above are the monophthongization of /ai/ to 
 , written 
 - h - (e.g. in 
  ‘ and ’ ), and the associated, chain - effect, raising of original 
 to 
/e:/, written  - e i -  (e.g. in 
 [diukl ê :s]). These are both features in which Boeotian 
seems to  ‘ anticipate ’ developments in Attic and the Koine, though in fact it may well 
be that the apparent time lag has been exaggerated by the camouﬂ aging effects of the 
standardized Attic orthography. Other typical Boeotian characteristics include: 
 (5)  (a)  The preservation of /w/, e.g. in 
 [wid í an]. 
 (b)  The apocopation of prepositions/preverbs (as in 
 [an - t í t h e - nti], 
where Attic would have 
 [ana - ]). 
 (c)  The preservation of original [t] in the 3pl sufﬁ x in the same form (where 
East Greek assibilated to [s], a development often involving further 
changes, cf. chapter  1 ), and its occasional aspiration to [ - t h i] (e.g. in 
 
[z ô :nt h i]  ‘ they live ’ (subjunctive) under the inﬂ uence of 3pl middle forms 
 - n q i [ - nt h i]/ - n q o [ - nt h o], having themselves borrowed the aspiration from 
1pl/2pl  - m e q a [ - met h a]/ - s q e  [st h e]). 
 (d)  The use of the West Greek modal particle  k a [ka:] (where East Greek uses 
 [an]).  
 (e)  The monophthongization of original /oi/ to /e:/, as in masc dat pl 
 
[aute:s]. 
 The spelling change in (5e) began in the early 2nd century  bc and perhaps represents 
the completion of a series of shifts [oi]    >  [ ø i]    >  [ ø :]    >  [e:]. The letter  u is used to rep-
resent the penultimate stage in earlier Boeotian inscriptions; this denotes [y(:)] in Attic, 
but presumably [ ø :] in Boeotian, given that the loss of lip - rounding leads here to [e:] 
not [i:] (cf. M é ndez Dosuna  (1988, 1989) . The corresponding changes ([oi]    >  [ ø i]    >  
[ ø :]   >  [y:]   >  [i:]) may also have gone through in popular Athenian Attic by the 4th 
century  bc (cf. Teodorsson ( 1974 : 286ff)), but the process took many more centuries 
to be completed in the Koine, based as it was on more conservative, higher - register 
varieties (see chapter  6 ). 
 Alongside the Boeotian characteristics in (5), however, there are also a number of 
clear Koine forms: 
 (6)  (a)  Non - apocopated preverbs and prepositions are also used (e.g. in 
 [para - m é :na:san] and 
 [kata ton n ó mon]). 
 (b)  Original initial [zd - ], written  ζ - , had evolved to [z - ] in the Koine but to 
[d - ] in Boeotian; the Koine form appears in 
 [z ô :nt h i]. 
 (c)  The original form of the participle 
 [poj ú :mene:] was 
 
[poje - ó menoi]. In Boeotian antevocalic [e] was subject to synizesis, and 
eventually the non - syllabic [e] became a glide [j], spelled  i , giving 
 [poj(j) ó men - ø :/ - e:]; in Attic/Koine, by contrast, [e] and [o] 
contracted to give [u:]. The form 
 [poj ú :mene:] is a conﬂ ation, 
involving a Boeotian pronunciation of the Koine form.  

Greek in the Hellenistic World  87
 In general, it is easy to imagine how a higher education system involving the study of 
Attic authors combined with an ever greater use of the Koine for ordinary business 
transactions and administration to lead to the progressive adoption of Attic - style detail 
even in dialect writing and speech among the educated classes. Eventually the borderline 
between a version of Boeotian heavily inﬂ uenced by the Koine and a local version of the 
Koine with residual Boeotian features and a local pronunciation was crossed; and a 
similar pattern of development can be traced throughout the areas of old dialect speech. 
 For the ﬁ rst time the notion of  ‘ Greek ’ , which hitherto had uniﬁ ed the dialects only 
as an abstraction, acquired a more or less concrete instantiation in the form of the 
standard written, and increasingly spoken, Koine (cf. Morpurgo Davies  (1987) ). 
Henceforth the local spoken dialects and their written variants came steadily to be 
subsumed under this unifying standard, and in their higher registers approximated ever 
more closely to it. True dialect writing thus disappeared, partly through erosion, but 
ultimately as a conscious choice in the face of the international prestige of the Koine 
and the diminished status of the local varieties. At the same time genuine dialect speech 
(as opposed to dialect - inﬂ uenced Koine) became increasingly restricted to the illiterate 
population of country districts, and even there eventually succumbed, though in 
varying degrees, to the now irresistible inﬂ uence of the common tongue. But the emer-
gence of a standard should not blind us to the protracted existence of these variably 
Koineized spoken varieties, and it is clear that many of the (rural) spoken dialects of 
modern Greek, in so far as these still survive as distinct variants beneath the  ‘ umbrella ’ 
of standard Modern Greek, descend ultimately from regional forms of the Koine that 
ﬁ rst emerged during the Hellenistic and Roman periods.  
 4.4.3   Doric koines: Tsakonian 
 One particularly strong dialect  ‘ survival ’ is worthy of mention at this point. In most 
Doric dialect inscriptions we ﬁ nd evidence of some Attic inﬂ uence by the late 4th 
century  bc , but there gradually evolved more standardized written Doric varieties, 
stripped of major local peculiarities and with a non - haphazard (i.e. consciously selected) 
Attic/Koine admixture, which prevailed in ofﬁ cial use in the last three centuries  bc , and 
which can be viewed as temporary Dorian rivals to the Attic - based Koine of the period. 
 The ﬁ rst such Doric koine (some prefer koina), based on the power of the island of 
Rhodes as the principal emporium of the eastern Mediterranean and major trading 
partner of Ptolemaic Egypt, was employed for a time in ofﬁ cial documents throughout 
the southern Aegean islands in which Doric dialects were traditionally spoken (though 
see Bile  (2006) for a sceptical assessment of its alleged distinctiveness and signiﬁ cance). 
The second Doric koine was associated with the political activity of the Achaean league 
(c.280 – 146  bc ), a federation of Peloponnesian townships south of the Gulf of Corinth, 
which had been formed initially to resist the power of Macedonia but eventually found 
itself appealing for Macedonian help against the Spartans. A similar situation prevailed 
in north - western Greece, where we ﬁ nd a parallel adaptation and standardization 
based on the North - West Greek dialects, again with a controlled Attic/Koine mixture. 
The use of this written variety was again closely associated with the political power 
of a federation, this time the Aetolian league (c.290 – 146  bc ), whose purpose was also 
to achieve a degree of political independence from Macedonia, but which found itself 

88 Ancient Greek
ﬁ ghting the Achaeans after they had enlisted Macedonian aid against Sparta. It was 
employed for a time not only in Aetolia and in ofﬁ cial decrees of the league, but also 
in Locris, Phocis, Doris, Malis, and those parts of the Peloponnese that fell temporarily 
under Aetolian domination. Finally we may note the resistance of West Greek in 
southern Italy and Sicily to the encroachments of the Koine, in part due to the relative 
isolation of the area from the Greek mainstream and in part to earlier convergence 
and consolidation of written varieties based on the power of Syracuse (see Consani 
 (1996) , Mimbrera  (2006) ). 
 These West Greek written standards are clear testimony to the exceptional underly-
ing tenacity of Doric speech and Dorian identity in the face of the spread of the Attic -
 based Koine. Indeed, we hear of dialect speakers well into the Christian era, particularly 
in Rhodes (Suetonius  Tiberius 56) and the less accessible parts of the Peloponnese 
(Strabo 8. 1. 2, Dio Chrysostom  Orations  1. 54, Pausanias 4. 27. 11). Though progres-
sively Koineized as time went on, clear Doric substrate features, particularly lexical 
items and toponyms preserving the original 
 [a:] in contexts where Attic/Koine has 
 - h - 
 (modern [i]), persist in the Modern Greek dialects of a number of areas of 
traditional Doric speech (see Kapsom é nos ( 1958 : 26 – 31)). 
 The most striking example, however, is that of Tsakonian, spoken (though now 
exclusively in conjunction with standard Modern Greek) in villages on the north -
 eastern slopes of Mount Parnon in the Peloponnese. Despite having undergone very 
considerable inﬂ uence from the Koine and its later local descendants, this dialect has 
retained an unusually large number of features of ancient Laconian type (cf. Bourguet 
 (1927) , Pernot  (1934) , Kost á kis  (1951, 1980) , Kapsom é nos  (1958) , Charalamb ó poulos 
 (1980) ), and we can perhaps see here a unique survival of the kind of intermediate 
phase that all other local dialects went through in antiquity before ﬁ nally losing their 
identity to the Koine.  
 4.5   The Koine in the Hellenistic Kingdoms 
 The establishment of Greek civilization in vast new territories demanded a high -
 prestige vehicle for its expression, a role which only Great Attic/Koine and its  ‘ classical ’ 
literary counterpart could perform. This combination obviously fulﬁ lled an important 
unifying function, particularly for the Greco - Macedonian elite, by cementing in place 
the idea of a common Greek culture based on a common intellectual heritage expressed 
in a common Greek language. Furthermore, in territories without a Greek past or 
traditional city - state loyalties, the top - down imposition of the Koine by the ruling 
dynasties and their aristocratic courts very quickly began to shape the development of 
new forms of Greek among the dialectally heterogeneous immigrant masses from old 
Greece, most of whom in fact came from areas where dialects other than Attic and 
Ionic were spoken. Their native speech, uprooted by the simple fact of emigration, had 
no status in the new communities, and the result was a fairly rapid process of homog-
enization in which army service, where the Koine was the sole language of command, 
played a vital role. Thus written documents showing traces of the old dialects are 
exclusively early (e.g. Egyptian papyri of the 4th century  bc , such as UPZ I 1), and it 
seems that the common language was widely adopted not only as a written but also 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  89
as a spoken medium by the immigrant population during the course of the 3rd century 
 bc , though in the latter case almost certainly alongside native varieties for at least a 
time. Lines 87 – 95 in Theocritus ’ poem number XV, for example, strongly imply that 
a form of Doric was still used by the Dorian immigrants of Alexandria in the 3rd 
century (see Ruijgh  (1984) for an assessment of Theocritus ’ Doric). 
 Already spoken by the Greco - Macedonian elite and increasingly by the immigrant 
Greek population as a whole, the Koine soon came to be used (with varying levels of 
competence and interference) by sectors of the indigenous populations too, especially, 
but by no means exclusively, in the heavily Hellenized cities. A knowledge of Greek 
was clearly essential for employment in the army or the civil service at any level, and 
doing any kind of business with Greek speakers presupposed at least a minimal 
command of the language. In this regard, we are very fortunate that ancient papyri 
from Egypt (see below) provide us with a wide cross - section of text - types reﬂ ecting 
both formal and informal styles of composition by both Greeks/Macedonians and 
native Egyptians. While some are clearly the work of barely literate authors of non -
 Greek origin, the majority of the informal documents composed by and for Egyptians 
in Greek, despite the fact that they come from areas outside the capital, in fact display 
a surprisingly competent knowledge of the language. This suggests that the process of 
Hellenization, including some exposure to traditional education at a basic level, had 
progressed quite quickly and efﬁ ciently. Thus even those who have difﬁ culties with the 
orthography, reﬂ ecting the widening gulf between classical spelling and contemporary 
speech in later periods, almost always control morphology, syntax and lexicon with 
some facility, and the differences between ofﬁ cial and more informal private documents 
do not generally stem from imperfect knowledge, but simply reﬂ ect differences of 
stylistic level that are paralleled in other areas, and so provide us with valuable insights 
into the evolution of popular forms of Greek in the period. 
 Thus the Great Attic/Koine employed by the Greco - Macedonian aristocracy for 
both speaking and writing quickly shaped the development of a broad spectrum of 
subordinate spoken and written varieties. As the only ofﬁ cial variety of Greek, it was 
for all practical purposes the only form of the language worth learning, and all local 
vernaculars, whether reﬂ ecting regional dialects of Greek still spoken by incoming 
soldiers and tradesmen, or the product of interference between the Koine and native 
languages, were increasingly perceived as no more than substandard variants of the 
superordinate Koine. And once the Koine had become ﬁ rmly established in the new 
territories, it naturally began to develop independently of the local Attic of Attica, 
which, in accordance with the loss of political power under Macedonian hegemony, 
and eventually even of cultural prestige in the face of the rise of the major new centres 
of learning such as Alexandria and Pergamum, itself came eventually to accept the 
 ‘ common ’ forms involved.  
 4.6   The Koine as an Ofﬁ cial Language 
 4.6.1   Introduction 
 While it is true that the education system, based on the study of classical literature, 
encouraged classicizing tendencies in even ofﬁ cial documents, particularly when these 

90 Ancient Greek
were designed to impress upon the world the achievements of an imperial dynasty or 
dealt in a public way with issues of national or international importance, the vast 
majority of ofﬁ cial documents concern more routine matters, and display a clear 
pattern of linguistic evolution in their own right, involving a continuous compromise 
between natural developments in the educated spoken language and a certain conserva-
tivism of usage characterized by traditional  ‘ markers ’  of the ofﬁ cial style, and permit-
ting formulaic variants determined by  ‘ genre ’  (e.g. imperial edicts, public proclamations, 
reports of ofﬁ cial inquiries, judicial proceedings and petitions, contracts and tenders, 
ofﬁ cial correspondence, etc.). Good examples of the ofﬁ cial/business Greek of the 
Hellenistic period are provided by the collections of inscriptions from the great cities 
of Asia Minor, speciﬁ cally Magnesia (Nachmanson  (1903) , Thieme  (1906) ), Priene 
(Dienstbach  (1910) , Stein  (1915) ), Pergamum (Schweizer  (1898) ) and Miletus (Scherer 
 (1934) ). There is also Dittenberger ’ s  Orientis Graecae Inscriptiones Selectae   (1903) , 
while for Egypt we have a wealth of Ptolemaic, and later Roman imperial, papyri 
(Grenfell et al.  (1898 – 1994) ; a representative selection of the public documents is 
conveniently compiled in Hunt and Edgar  (1934) ). 
 Since the upper classes spoke a conservative variety of the Koine and the 
classical orthography in any case remained unchanged, the spelling of these docu-
ments is much less revealing of phonological developments than is that of the more 
heterogeneous private documents (cf.  4.8 and  4.9 ). None the less, the beginnings 
of a real gap between (classical) Attic and the ofﬁ cial Koine in terms of grammar 
and lexicon can still be discerned from as early as the end of the 3rd century  bc , 
and this gap widens steadily as we pass into the later Hellenistic and Roman 
periods. 
 4.6.2   Macedonian Koine: the  d evelopment of  i nﬁ nitival  c onstructions 
 We may consider ﬁ rst the extracts in (7) from two letters of the Macedonian king 
Philip V, dated 219 and 214  bc respectively, to the city of L á risa in Thessaly, and 
included in the text of a decree of that city (IG IX.ii.517): 
 (7) 
 
 
 [The following transcription is an attempted reconstruction of the standard educated 
pronunciation of the period; full details of the phonological developments involved are 
given in chapter  6 .] 
(7)

Greek in the Hellenistic World  91
 (a) 
  
 ‘ They revealed to me that your city too needs more inhabitants; for the present I decree 
that citizenship be granted to those of the Thessalians living among you. ’ 
 (b) 
   
 ‘ I discover that those who had been enrolled as citizens in accordance with my letter have 
been erased from the register. If indeed this is the case, those who advised you failed to 
promote the best interests of your country. For I do not think any one of you would deny 
that it is best of all for the city to be strong. So I persist even now in calling upon you to 
approach the matter without personal ambition and to restore their citizenship to those 
who had been selected, while postponing judgement on those who are unworthy; warn 
those about to condemn these people, however, not to be found to be acting in this way 
for reasons of personal ambition. ’ 
 The sometimes unexpected use of past - tense forms in letters (of the type:  I was well ; 
 I hope you are well too , cf. the pluperfects in the conditional sentence at the beginning 
of (7b)) is due to the convention of taking the time of writing as a reference point for 
the temporal anchoring of  ‘ background ’  events and circumstances peripheral to the 
 ‘ core ’ information communicated:  ‘ if (at the time I wrote my letter) this had (already) 
happened, then those who advised you had (already) missed the mark ’ . The perfect, 
however, is also often used in place of the expected aorist (past perfective) to denote 
events central to the narrative when their continuing relevance at the envisaged time 
of reading by the recipient is highlighted: thus  ‘ I told X to do Y ’ becomes  ‘ I have told 

92 Ancient Greek
X to do Y ’ if this is not simply a piece of background information, and the writer 
wishes somehow to involve the recipient in the outcome. 
 Turning to speciﬁ cs, a number of  ‘ post - classical ’ features are already in evidence 
here. The following are perhaps most worthy of comment: 
 (8)  (a)  The use of a prepositional phrase in place of a possessive adjective or the 
genitive of a personal pronoun, as in 
 [te:m par 
em û : epistol è :n], lit.  ‘ the from me letter ’ , at the beginning of (6b); although 
the original source sense is clearly still appropriate here, expressions of 
this kind lie behind the later  ‘ simple possessive ’ use that is highly charac-
teristic of the ofﬁ cial Koine. 
 (b)  The use of 
 [u:t h î :s]  ‘ no one ’ in (6b) in place of classical 
 
[u:d î :s], the latter representing the product of the prehistoric compound-
ing of 
 and 
 [u:d è  +  h ê :s]  ‘ not - even   +  one ’ : [u:d è h ê :s]   >  [u:de(h) é :s] 
 >  [u:d é :s]   >  [u:d í :s]. The innovative form probably originates with 
semantic weakening leading to a fresh composition of 
  ‘ neither/
nor one ’ : [ ú :te h ê :s]   >  [u:t h h ê :s]   >  [u:t h h é :s]   >  [u:t h í :s]. 2 This replaces the 
classical form in Athenian inscriptions after 378  bc as a marker of 
 ‘ Athenian ’ Attic, whence it passed for a time into Great Attic/Koine texts 
in recognition of the continuing prestige of Athens. Thereafter, Athenian 
Attic lost ground with the growth of the importance of the new Hellenistic 
cities and the classical form eventually superseded it as the written stand-
ard in the Koine. After c.60  bc this form was reintroduced into Athenian 
inscriptions too, in conformity with the now standard practice of the 
Koine. 
 (c)  The form 
 [m é nton] has replaced classical 
 [m é ntoi] in the 
last sentence of (7b); this is usually explained as due to the inﬂ uence of 
adverbs such as 
 [pr ô :ton]  ‘ ﬁ rst ’ , 
 [loip ó n]  ‘ furthermore ’ , etc.  
 (d)  The sufﬁ x of the verb 
 [e:stok h é :ki:san], the 3pl pluperfect 
of 
 [astok h ô :]  ‘ miss the mark ’ , contrasts with the classical ending 
 - e s a n [ - esan], and derives from the by now familiar generalization 
of singular patterns to the plural in paradigms showing allomorphy. 
In this case all the sg forms had a long e - vowel in classical Greek 
(
 ); in the Koine the  - e i [ - e:] of 3sg was 
generalized throughout the singular, and the plural fell into line.  
 (e)  This last verb, along with 
 [poli:tograp h ô :]  ‘ I enrol as a 
citizen ’ and the noun 
 [hyp é rt h esis]  ‘ postponement ’ , are not 
attested classically; indeed the phrase 
 [hyp é rt h esin 
poj î :st h ai] is expressly criticized by the later Atticist Julius Polydeuces 
(Pollux) as a Koine clich é (9. 137). Evidently ofﬁ cial business quickly 
spawned a jargon of its own.  
 (f) 
 The occasional replacement of the classical accusative and participle con-
struction after  ‘ factive ’ verbs of knowledge and perception (i.e. those 
whose complements necessarily express facts, e.g. lit. I know [him being 
in trouble] =  ‘ I know that he is in trouble ’ ) with the more common accu-
sative and inﬁ nitive construction, as in the ﬁ rst sentence of (7b), though 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  93
the latter is itself already under some pressure from alternative markers 
of complementation.  
 Indeed, from the point of view of the later history of Greek, the most important issue 
here concerns the spread of complement structures with ﬁ nite verbs. In (7a), for 
example, the verb  ‘ vote ’ is followed by a clause introduced by 
 [h ó po:s]  ‘ that ’ , 
lit.  ‘ how ’ ,  +  subjunctive. In classical Greek this construction was used to introduce a 
 ‘ ﬁ nal ’  (purpose) clause, though the same conjunction could also be used with a future 
indicative after verbs of  ‘ planning/organizing the future ’ (e.g.  ‘ see to it [that/how X 
will happen] ’ ). Though we might, by a simple extension, have expected the latter 
option after a verb such as  ‘ vote ’ , the classical language in fact used an inﬁ nitive, either 
alone ( ‘ vote [to X] ’ ) or with an accusative subject if this was distinct from the subject 
of the main verb ( ‘ vote [(for) X to do Y] ’ ). 
 A striking feature of the ofﬁ cial Koine (and  a fortiori  of lower - level compositions) 
is the decline in the use of such accusative   +  inﬁ nitive constructions, which were 
employed classically both to complement verbs of  ‘ saying ’ etc. (still used, for example, 
in the ﬁ rst sentence of (7b)) and, as in the example under discussion, to express 
intended future outcomes after potential  ‘ control ’ verbs (i.e. those whose subjects or 
objects may  ‘ control ’  the interpretation of the unexpressed subject of a future - referring 
inﬁ nitival complement: e.g.  I intend to leave  means  ‘ I intend that I leave ’ , etc.). In the 
former type the alternative, and syntactically simpler, classical construction of 
 [h ó ti] 
 ‘ that ’  +  indicative eventually superseded the inﬁ nitival option, while in the latter type, 
as here, it was the  ‘ ﬁ nal ’  construction that predominated. 
 For the latter development, we may compare the very similar constructional overlap 
in English ( I voted [for him to go]/I voted [that he should go] ), and note that  that  may 
also serve as a ﬁ nal conjunction (albeit in rather archaic styles, and allowing a different 
choice of modal auxiliary:  He resigned, that his family should/might be spared more 
distress ). Such overlaps are very common, and a further familar example is provided 
by the uses of  ut  +  subjunctive in Latin,  inter alia  a conjunction introducing ﬁ nal clauses 
and future - referring complements after control verbs such as  impero  ‘ order ’ , etc. The 
last sentence in (7b) contains a similar subjunctive substitute for the classical inﬁ nitive 
after a verb of  ‘ telling/warning ’ . 
 This particular development should be seen primarily as an internal simpliﬁ cation 
of the language by which a particular type of subordinate complement clause (the 
accusative and inﬁ nitive construction) was gradually replaced in its two different func-
tions (complementing verbs of  ‘ saying ’ etc., and expressing intended future outcomes 
after  ‘ control ’ verbs) by two distinct, but crucially already existing, constructions. As 
a result of this replacement, all subjects could be nominative, and the verbs of all 
subordinate clauses with an expressed subject could be ﬁ nite, the choice between 
indicative and subjunctive being determined by the  ‘ type ’  of main verb involved. Later 
contact with Latin, however, doubtless did something to accelerate the advance of 
subjunctive clauses introduced by originally  ‘ ﬁ nal ’ conjunctions at the expense of the 
inﬁ nitive across a range of semantically overlapping complement functions (cf.  5.3 
below). 
 Inﬁ nitives remained standard, none the less, in cases involving true control relations 
(i.e. in which main and subordinate subjects were semantically identical, and no subject 

94 Ancient Greek
was expressed overtly in the subordinate clause), and also to express purpose (a non -
 classical usage, based on the semantic overlaps discussed above). There was, however, 
a gradual advance even here of clauses with subjunctive verbs, beginning in late antiq-
uity and continuing through the middle ages, with the result that in standard Modern 
Greek the inﬁ nitive has disappeared altogether. The tracing of this process, which has 
its origins in the Hellenistic period, will be a major theme of the chapters that follow 
(cf. Joseph  (1983)  for a survey of the data and issues). 
 We might also note in passing the rather restricted use of participles in comparison 
with classical literary Attic. There the participle might well be described as the instru-
ment of subordination  par excellence , with virtually every type of clausal adjunct and 
even certain types of complement permitting, or in some cases requiring, a participial 
realization. Even the longest sentences therefore regularly contain relatively few ﬁ nite 
verb forms in comparison with their English translations. While there was no resistance 
to subordination as such in the ofﬁ cial Koine (routine parataxis is characteristic of 
lower - level styles, see  4.7.6 ,  4.7.7  and  4.7.8 below), the use of participles in this func-
tion was considerably reduced in favour of clauses containing ﬁ nite verbs introduced 
by conjunctions. 3 Thus for the most part the participles in (7) are used with the article 
to form substantives (e.g. lit.  ‘ the having X - ed ’ =  ‘ those who had X - ed ’ etc.), and 
increasingly participles with a subordinating function are conﬁ ned to  ‘ circumstantial ’ 
roles (though there are no examples in this particular extract). This could again be 
seen as a simpliﬁ cation of the grammar in favour of forms of subordination with 
properties analogous to those of main clauses (nominative subjects and ﬁ nite verbs), 
i.e. structures which avoided the frequently rather complex long - distance agreement 
requirements of participial adjuncts. Wider use of explicit conjunctions (meaning 
 ‘ since ’ ,  ‘ because ’ ,  ‘ when ’ ,  ‘ although ’ ,  ‘ if ’  etc.) also promoted precision and clarity of 
expression in legal, technical and ofﬁ cial documents. 
 4.6.3   The  a rticular  i nﬁ nitive 
 There was, however, one particular non - ﬁ nite alternative to classical participial syntax 
which combined much of the ﬂ exibility of the latter with the formal precision of ﬁ nite 
alternatives, but also crucially avoided complex agreement patterns. This was the 
substantivized inﬁ nitive functioning as a gerund (lit.  ‘ the to - do X ’ =  ‘ doing X ’ ), typi-
cally governed by a preposition to impart a determinate sense to the expression, but 
also used alone in the genitive to express purpose (a usage perhaps derived from an 
adnominal origin, e.g. lit.  ‘ intention/plan/desire [of - the to - do X] ’ ). This latter construc-
tion, in line with the weakening of the sense of the original ﬁ nal conjunctions in 
subjunctive clauses, was then employed simply as a  ‘ strengthened ’ inﬁ nitive, used 
loosely as an exegetical adjunct or even as a complement after control - type verbs in 
rivalry with the 
 [h ó po:s]  +  subjunctive construction. 
 In sharp contrast with the fate of the accusative and inﬁ nitive as a complement 
structure, the nominalized inﬁ nitival quickly became a stock feature of the Koine and, 
though based on a classical construction, soon acquired a frequency and range of usage 
that went well beyond the practice of classical prose writers. This may seem surprising 
in view of the decline of the  ‘ bare ’ inﬁ nitive in subordinating functions, but it is a 
rather common phenomenon that a category under pressure is ﬁ rst conﬁ ned to a 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  95
restricted range of contexts and functions and then undergoes a period of extended 
usage in that limited context before ﬁ nally disappearing. 
 By way of illustration, consider the following extract from a letter of King Attalus 
II of Pergamum (Dittenberger  (1903) , no. 315 IV S.486), dated 159  bc and addressed 
to Attis, a priest of Cybele at Pessinus: 
 (9) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ Menodoros, whom you sent, gave your long and friendly letter to me, and himself gave 
an account at length of the matters about which he said he had instructions. I accepted 
your proposal because I consider you to be well - disposed towards our affairs on all occa-
sions, and I myself then discussed with him what I thought it necessary for you to know 
and told him to announce this to you. ’  
 Apart from the prepositional - phrase possessives and the prepositional strengthening 
of the dative of time (
 [em pant ì kair ô :i]  ‘ on every occasion ’ ), an 
increasingly common feature of the Koine at a time when the dative was coming under 
pressure as a result of sound change and functional overlap with other cases (see 
below), the key feature here is the long inﬁ nitival structure in the ﬁ nal sentence intro-
duced by the preposition 
 [dia]  ‘ because of ’ . A writer of classical Greek would 
probably have used the participle 
 [t h eo:r ô :n]  ‘ considering ’ , agreeing with the 
subject of the sentence and preceded by the particle 
 [ho:s],  ‘ as ’ , to show that a 
reason was being given. Here this has been replaced by a substantivized inﬁ nitive 
(involving the neuter deﬁ nite article 
 [to]) governed by a causal preposition. The 
result is a verbal noun analogous in use to the English gerund (cf.  because of consider-
ing  … ), which avoids the need for agreement, and conveniently retains the complement 
structure that the corresponding participle would have required. 
 This construction became a favourite form of subordinate adverbial clause in the 
Hellenistic chancelleries, and was frequently used, by reason of its inherent ﬂ exibility, 
compactness and precision, in preference even to ﬁ nite alternatives. Thus accusative 

96 Ancient Greek
subjects could be included as necessary (the one area where the accusative and inﬁ ni-
tive enjoyed a reprieve), and the inﬁ nitive itself readily tolerated even the most complex 
complement and modiﬁ cational structures, as in the following example taken from a 
petition to a village scribe (BGU 1256, 2nd century  bc ): 
 (10) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ on account of my having neither the means nor the substance for the provision of 
resources for the lampadarchy ( the ofﬁ ce of presiding over a torch race, the cost of which 
had to be borne by the incumbent ). ’ 
 Here we have both an expressed subject and an extended complement structure in 
which the direct object of the ﬁ rst inﬁ nitive governs a prepositional phrase containing 
a second nominalized inﬁ nitive together with its own object complement. But it was 
the sheer convenience of having a form of subordinate clause that could be used after 
prepositions that presumably lay behind the dramatic growth in its popularity, since 
its capacity to turn a complex proposition into an inﬂ ectable nominal expression was 
indispensable not only in legal/administrative contexts but also in abstract philosophi-
cal discourse (on which see  4.7 below). The construction thus became a stock feature 
of the ofﬁ cial Koine, and its popularity persisted well into the middle ages.  
 4.7   Language and Literature in the Hellenistic World: 
The Koine as a Literary Dialect 
 4.7.1   Introduction 
 Some scholars deny the existence of a  ‘ literary ’ variety of the Koine, and reserve the 
term for the continuum of non - literary varieties of Greek ranging from  ‘ higher ’ written 
forms (attested in public and private documents of various kinds and at the highest 
levels subject to the standardizing effects of Attic literature and higher education) to 
 ‘ lower ’ , essentially spoken, forms (used e.g. by traders and soldiers and, because freed 
from the normalizing effects of literacy, more prone to the inﬂ uence of foreign lan-
guages and regional substrates). However, many prose authors of both Hellenistic and 
Roman imperial times, with the historian Polybius (c.200 – 120  bc ) and the essayist 
and biographer Plutarch (c.  ad 46 – 120) among the best - known examples, used a liter-
ary language distinct from the  ‘ classical ’ Attic of Athenian authors of the 5th and 4th 
centuries  bc which might fairly be regarded as an artistically  ‘ developed ’ version of 
the Koine employed by the Hellenistic/Roman bureaucracies. Whether we choose to 
see this as a diluted variety of classical Attic or refer to it rather as a  ‘ literary ’ version 
of the Koine is ultimately no more than a terminological issue. 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  97
 4.7.2   Historiography: Polybius 
 To illustrate, we may take the example of the historian Polybius, who came from 
Megalopolis in Arcadia, a prominent member city of the Achaean league. When the 
Romans under the younger Scipio broke the power of Macedonia at the battle of Pydna 
in 169  bc (see  5.1 ), a number of prominent Achaeans, including Polybius, were taken 
to Rome. Initially a prisoner, Polybius soon became a friend of Scipio ’ s, and wrote an 
account of Rome ’ s imperial expansion in the conviction that this was to prove decisive 
for the future history of the world. His grammatical usage loosely follows that of the 
classical historians, with the optative, for example, still employed in ways which would 
already be unusual in contemporary ofﬁ cial documents. Nevertheless its occurrence is 
clearly limited in comparison with classical practice, and we can see here the emergence 
of a distinction between Attic (studied in school as a central part of the higher educa-
tion system) and even belletristic forms of the contemporary Koine. Typically the latter 
are characterized by a conservative compromise which preserves certain classical fea-
tures as a mark of the literary style, but employs them in a more limited way that 
obliquely reﬂ ects their diminished status in contemporary speech and in writing of a 
more practical nature. 
 Such mild classicism apart, however, Polybius is in general very much a man of his 
own times, both in his choice of vocabulary, which manifests a liking for the innova-
tive abstract nominal formations characteristic of Hellenistic technical writing (on 
which see immediately below), and in his overall style, which exhibits the typical 
verbosity of the Hellenistic chancellery, most particularly in the complex sentence 
constructions which make characteristically heavy use of nominalized inﬁ nitives as an 
instrument of subordination (cf.  4.6.3 , one of the clearest  ‘ markers ’  of the Koine in its 
middle - to - high registers). 
 We can also draw attention to a number of other non - classical features which are 
typical of the general evolution of the language at this time (see Foucault  (1972) ): 
 (11)  (a)  Extensive use of deictic pronouns to control discourse structure and 
to link complex sentences (cf.  4.7.6 on Menander and  4.7.7 on the 
Septuagint). 
 (b)  Some blurring of the formal distinction between the comparative and 
superlative degrees (with the article   +  comparative sometimes substitut-
ing for the latter).  
 (c)  A more restricted use of the dative case and a corresponding increase in 
prepositional phrase replacements, particularly in certain adverbial func-
tions (such as temporal, comitative, causal and instrumental).  
 (d)  A more restricted use of certain participles, most particularly the future.  
 These traits all reﬂ ect developments in the contemporary spoken and written languages 
of educated discourse, and  a fortiori  in lower - level spoken varieties too, where they 
had doubtless already gone further. They are highly signiﬁ cant for the evolution of the 
language in later times, and we shall have occasion to mention them frequently in other 
contexts below. 
 Alongside Polybius ’ many lexical and grammatical innovations, however, we also 
ﬁ nd words which from the point of view of classical Attic prose were  ‘ old Ionic ’ or 

98 Ancient Greek
 ‘ poetic ’ , i.e. associated with poetry of an archaizing type such as tragedy, but which 
in reality had remained in current use in many spoken idioms outside Athens and now 
made their ﬁ rst appearance in prose writing. Many survive in Modern Greek (albeit 
with modiﬁ cations in their phonetic and sometimes their morphological form). 
Examples include: 
 (12)   
 
 4.7.3   The Koine  a s the  l anguage of  t echnical  p rose 
 Apart from its use in historiography the written Koine, having evolved as an admin-
strative language by combining an expanding abstract vocabulary with a formal preci-
sion of style, proved to be a particularly good vehicle for philosophy, science and 
scholarship across a whole range of technical subjects. The great philosophical systems 
of Cynicism, Stoicism and Epicureanism all have their roots in the Hellenistic age, and 
the founding of the great library at Alexandria promoted vital editorial work on the 
manuscripts of ancient Greek authors and led to wide - ranging study of earlier mani-
festations of the Greek language, including the collection of information about its 
ancient dialects and the  ‘ sources ’ and meanings of rare and unusual words in classical 
texts. Signiﬁ cant progress was also made in astronomy, geography, medicine and 
mechanics, much of this built on the brilliant mathematical foundations provided by 
ﬁ gures such as Euclid (late 4th/early 3rd centuries  bc , origins unknown) and Archimedes 
(287 – 212  bc , from Dorian Syracuse in Sicily, who perhaps used the Koine in some of 
his early work, though he also wrote a standardized literary Doric based on Sicilian 
regional varieties, and it is possible that the works in the Koine are in fact  ‘ transla-
tions ’ ). A scientiﬁ c and philosophical vocabulary of some range and precision was 
already available from the earlier Ionic - Attic tradition, and this furnished the verbal 
resources and above all the precedents of word formation necessary for the coining of 
new terms for new concepts and technical innovations. It is not perhaps widely appre-
ciated that much of the technical, scientiﬁ c and abstract vocabulary of modern European 
languages in fact goes back ultimately (often via Latin calques) to the lexical inventive-
ness of the Hellenistic philosophers, mathematicians and scientists who used the Koine 
in their ground - breaking work.  
 4.7.4   Reaction  a gainst the Koine: Hellenistic  p oetry 
 But a universal prose language devoid of local roots and speciﬁ cally adapted for 
administrative and scholarly purposes soon proved to be seriously lacking in literary 
vitality and emotional resonance. In the context of a growing scholarly interest in the 
ancient literary dialects, the Hellenistic poets, among whom the 3rd - century  bc con-
temporaries Callimachus, Apollonius and Theocritus are the greatest, rejected the 
Koine, and themselves turned to the past, to the dialects and genres of early Greek 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  99
literature, in search of the inspiration and the  ‘ character ’  that the Koine could not 
provide. This concrete expression of the artistic links between the old and the new 
Greek worlds reﬂ ects the beginnings of the problem of the  ‘ burden of the past ’ created 
by the existence of a canonized corpus of classical literature and resulted, for example, 
in Hellenistic epic in the language of Homer, Hellenistic epigrams in the language of 
early Ionian poetry, and even Hellenistic imitations of the Lesbian poets Sappho and 
Alcaeus, though always with subtle variations of phraseology and imaginative innova-
tions in content and approach as well as in lexicon and style. 
 A particularly striking example of Alexandrian inventiveness is provided by 
Theocritus, who,  inter alia , elevated the traditional singing of shepherds into a sophis-
ticated literary genre of pastoral poetry through the striking juxtaposition of epic metre 
with rustic subject matter, and employed for the purpose a Doric dialect (recall the 
tenacity of Doric in many rural areas) which was based partly on literary precedent 
and incorporated certain epicisms but which also reﬂ ected, albeit in the oblique fashion 
of the literary dialects of the classical period, aspects of contemporary spoken varieties 
(including perhaps that of the Doric - speaking community of Alexandria, drawn largely 
from the old city of Cyrene to the West, cf. Ruijgh  (1984) , Molinos Tejada  (1990)  for 
discussion of the complex issues involved). 
 As noted, this approach was made possible because such literature was written by 
and for an urban elite which, largely excluded from political activity, had turned 
instead to the great libraries and the study of the roots of their culture. Creative litera-
ture soon became immensely learned and allusive, with its practitioners seeking novelty 
and strangeness in hitherto underexplored subject matter, in arcane mythology and in 
the examination of personal relationships. But perhaps most importantly from our 
point of view, the careful editing and preservation of classical texts, in prose as well 
as verse, raised for the ﬁ rst time serious questions to do with the determination of 
linguistic  ‘ correctness ’ in the context of an awareness of earlier linguistic diversity and 
subsequent language change, and thus prompted serious consideration of issues of 
grammar and lexicography from a non - philosophical and non - rhetorical point of view 
(see Matthews  (1994) for a thorough survey). The essentially retrospective approach 
of the tradition of prescriptive grammar, with rules based on the usage of the  ‘ best ’ 
authors of earlier  ‘ classical ’ periods, derives ultimately from the philological work of 
this era, and the resultant prioritizing of traditional forms of the written language was 
soon to have enormous consequences for the history of the Greek language (see  5.5 ). 
 4.7.5   Reaction  a gainst the Koine: Asianism and Atticism 
 The role of rhetoric also changed somewhat in post - classical times. Although a well -
 crafted appeal to the autocratic rulers of the Hellenistic world might still make an 
impact on the ultimate course of events, few people were in a position to take advan-
tage of such opportunities, and the cultivation of eloquence became primarily an 
educational objective. The relevant techniques were learned and practised in the class-
room through the study of classical Attic models as part of the process of familiarizing 
the elite with the tradition that gave the Hellenistic world its cultural cohesion. 
 During the course of the 3rd century  bc , however, there was a reaction in the schools 
against the symmetrical periods and easy intelligibility of the classical Isocratean style, 

100 Ancient Greek
motivated in part by a desire for something fresh in the face of the growing uniformity 
of usage engendered by an increasingly rigid approach to the teaching of composition 
and the strict conventions of ofﬁ cial discourse. As with poetry so with rhetoric, this 
reaction against the perceived banality of the linguistic practice of the present took the 
form of a creative revival of the past, and the Asianic school (so called because it began 
in Asia Minor) was characterized by the abandonment of the traditional period and a 
return to Gorgianic precepts (cf. chapter  3 ), involving the emotive accumulation of 
vocabulary and rapid successions of short antithetical clauses with a heavy emphasis 
on metaphor, word - play,  ‘ poetic ’ vocabulary, and contrived rhythmic and phonetic 
effects. Asianism blossomed, and naturally inﬂ uenced other forms of literary composi-
tion and eventually even ofﬁ cial writing, with the long inscription of Antiochus I of 
Commagene (Dittenberger  (1903) , I. 383) standing as a major example in the latter 
category of the  ‘ lofty ’ pretensions of the Asianic style. 
 The inevitable counter - reaction to the often overwrought vacuousness of much 
Asianically inspired composition set in during the 1st century  bc in the form of a return 
to the classical models that Asianism had supplanted. This new Atticist movement was 
dedicated to the re - establishment of the practice, and above all the language, of the 
 ‘ best ’ classical Attic writers, and its impact was to be both profound and lasting, not 
only in the ﬁ eld of rhetoric but in all literary composition thereafter. Where earlier 
historians like Polybius had settled for a practical compromise between the classical 
Attic of the writers studied in the classroom and the usage of the contemporary written 
Koine, the ideologues and devotees of revivalist Atticism modelled their style and usage 
directly on that of the authors of ancient Athens. This crucial development in the 
history of written Greek, which represents the origins of the diglossia that plagued the 
attempts to develop a standard form of Modern Greek in the 19th and 20th centuries, 
will be taken up in chapter  5 . 
 4.7.6   Popular  l iterature:  r omances 
 The Hellenistic world was not, however, exclusively a locus of advanced scientiﬁ c 
inquiry, academic scholarship and elitist literary experimentation. Other, more popular, 
literary forms also ﬂ ourished, most notably the prose romance. Its two stock themes are 
travelling adventures, usually with a fabulous dimension, and the passion of love. The 
former element, of course, belongs to a tradition that goes back at least to the  Odyssey , 
but the interest in far - away places, real and imaginary, was fuelled to an unprecedented 
degree by Alexander ’ s expedition. Indeed, the  Alexander Romance , an imaginative 
recreation of the great man ’ s exploits somewhat inexpertly compiled in perhaps the 3rd 
century  ad from a variety of earlier historical and ﬁ ctional sources, is testimony to the 
legendary character which Alexander ’ s conquests had already assumed in the popular 
imagination of late Hellenistic times. An interest in love as a motivating force can also 
be traced back to the classical period (cf., for example, the exploration of its destructive 
power in Euripides ’  Hippolytus ), but again it was in the Hellenistic period, particularly 
in poetry of the 3rd century  bc , that erotic themes were developed with fresh vigour, 
though now with an emphasis on ﬁ delity at the expense of pleasure. 
 The appearance of a new genre binding these two thematic elements together was 
in many ways a natural reaction to the times. Just as the new philosophical systems 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  101
of Stoicism and Epicureanism emerged as ways of coping intellectually with individual 
powerlessness in a world where the scope for political action lay exclusively in the 
hands of autocrats, so the romance, by focusing on foreign/imaginary lands and ideal-
ized images of constancy in the face of the arbitrariness of fate, emerged as a response 
to the need for escapism and as a reﬂ ection of the renewed importance of personal 
loyalty. 
 Though substantial fragments of a number of Hellenistic romances, most notably 
the  Ninus Romance  (dating probably from the 2nd century  bc ), are now known to us 
thanks to the relatively recent discovery of large quantities of ancient papyri, preserved 
in the desert sand by the dry Egyptian climate, the best - known examples (Chariton ’ s 
 Chaireas and Callirhoe , Heliodorus ’  Aethiopica , Longus ’  Daphnis and Chloe , and 
Xenophon of Ephesus ’  Ephesiaca ) belong to the period of the Roman empire. There 
is, however, a clear linguistic distinction between Chariton ’ s polished literary Koine 
and the increasingly elaborate artiﬁ ciality of the language of the other romances, and 
on the basis of this evidence it seems that,  ‘ popular ’ content notwithstanding, they 
were designed primarily for the entertainment of a highly educated audience fully 
familiar with the classical language and equipped with a rhetorical higher education 
(see chapter  5 for a full account of the impact of Atticism on the Greek literature of 
the Roman empire).  
 4.7.7   Drama: the  ‘ n ew ’  Attic  c omedy and the  m ime 
 A great deal of other, previously unknown, material of a broadly  ‘ popular ’ character, 
and composed in a more natural form of language, has also become known from 
papyrus discoveries. The importance of the non - literary documents will be discussed 
below. Of particular interest here for the historian of the Greek language are Athenian 
New Comedy and the fragments of genuinely popular work that seem to have belonged 
to a kind of urban music - hall tradition involving the development of the traditional 
mime, a realistic and dramatic portrayal of some aspect of daily life, associated origi-
nally with the Greek west, and ﬁ rst developed into a distinct literary form in the 5th 
century  bc by Sophron of Syracuse (who employed his native Doric and a semi -
 rhythmical prose that might equally fairly be described as metrically irregular verse). 
These will be considered brieﬂ y in turn. 
 In the wake of Alexander ’ s conquests the city of Athens, remote from the new 
economic and commercial centres, soon lost its former preeminence. Political decisions 
were now taken by a Macedonian governor, and, with the abandonment of the demo-
cratic practice of public payment for attendance at the assembly and law courts, social 
divisions increased dramatically. The drift of power to the east also diminished the 
opportunities for enterprise and the acquisition of capital, and what wealth remained 
was increasingly invested in land and property as the best guarantee of steady value. 
The rentier class therefore came to control the residual public life of the city, and the 
social and political ties that had bound the classical polis together were replaced by a 
culture of individualism. 
 Thus whereas the Old Comedy of Aristophanes had been intensely political, and 
targeted at prominent individuals, the New Comedy of Menander (c.342 – 292  bc ) 
focused on the  ‘ dramas ’  of middle - class family life, revealing little of the external chaos 

102 Ancient Greek
of the times, and we move from a world of political satire to a form of situation comedy 
that portrays human foolishness with an acute but sympathetic irony. 
 Menander ’ s language closely reﬂ ects the contemporary development of spoken 
Greek in Attica, with the style carefully adapted to the age, social status and gender 
of the speaker (a feature much admired in antiquity, cf. Quintilian 10. 1. 69 and 71). 
But the fact that he could not be regarded as a reliable example of  ‘ pure ’ (i.e. classical) 
Attic was damaging to the preservation of his plays once the Atticist revival came to 
dominate attitudes to language in the schools, and our knowledge of them therefore 
depends exclusively on papyrus discoveries. A comparison with the (non - parodic) 
dialogue of Aristophanes provides a good measure of the extent of the changes over 
two centuries, and what we ﬁ nd is a  ‘ local ’ form of Attic that reﬂ ects the contemporary 
state of the educated spoken language in Attica quite closely and which is rather more 
conservative than the  ‘ international ’  Attic/Koine of the Hellenistic world at large. 
 Features of Menander ’ s language (ultimately, mainly of Ionic origin, cf. chapter  3 ) 
that reﬂ ect the contemporary development of the Koine include those in (13): 4 
 (13)  (a)  Absence of the dual number (used routinely in Aristophanes).  
 (b)  The parallel use of 
 [u:d í :s] and 
 [u:t h í :s]  ‘ no one ’ , perhaps 
reﬂ ecting the use of both as spoken forms in the period (cf.  4.6.2 , (8b)), 
the former traditional, the latter an Athenian innovation.  
 (c)  A tendency for declensionally anomalous nouns to be replaced with 
regular synonyms, e.g. 2nd - declension neuter 
 [pr ó baton] 
 ‘ sheep ’ for irregular 3rd - declension 
 [o î s], etc.  
 (d)  The routine use of regularized (sub)paradigms of many irregular verbs 
in  - m i  [ - mi], a sporadic feature already apparent in 5th - century literary 
works under the impact of Ionic, but now standard: e.g. 
 [ é t h e:kan] 
 ‘ they put (aorist) ’ for 
 [ é t h esan], 
 [di:kn ý o:]  ‘ I show ’ for 
 [d í :kny: - mi], etc.  
 (e)  The replacement of the old Attic 
  ‘ I become ’ , 
  ‘ I (get to) know ’ , with forms beginning 
 g i n -  [gi:n - ]. 
 (f) 
 The beginnings of the breakdown of the functional distinction between 
the aorist (past perfective) and perfect (originally expressing the present 
relevance of a past action, especially a resultant state).  
 On the other hand many features in Menander ’ s Greek reﬂ ect a slightly  ‘ retarded ’ 
process of development in comparison with contemporary Koine: 
 (14)  (a)  The optative disappeared quite quickly in non - literary registers of the 
Koine, except in its  ‘ core ’ meaning of expressing a wish, because its 
classical use in various kinds of subordinate clause in past time contexts 
was often semantically opaque, as in reported speech, or already subject 
to replacement by subjunctives, as in ﬁ nal clauses; various modal auxil-
iaries were also available to take on the sense of possibility which, in 
conjunction with the particle 
 [an], it conveyed in main clauses. 
Menander, however, despite the colloquial character of his dialogue, 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  103
still employs the optative quite regularly in all its traditional functions, 
though overlaps with the subjunctive are more common than in classical 
Attic (see, for example,  Epitrepontes 446 ff., where ﬁ rst a subjunctive 
and then an optative appear in a ﬁ nal clause after aorist 
 
[prosepoje:s á me:n]  ‘ I pretended ’ ). 
 (b)  Where the Koine fully regularized the paradigm of 
 [o î da]  ‘ I know ’ , 
Menander has 2nd sg 
 [o î st h as] rather than 
 [o î das] for origi-
nal 
 [o î st h a]; this semi - regularizing 2nd sg  - " [ - s] is also added to 
 [ ê :st h a]  ‘ you were ’ , where the Koine increasingly favoured the fully 
regularized 
 [ ê :s]. 
 (c)  In classical Attic the middle and passive voices were morphologically 
distinguished only in the aorist and the future. In the Koine, however, 
the endings of the aorist middle (
 [ - (s) á me:n], 
 [ - ó me:n], 
etc.) were increasingly replaced by those of the aorist passive ( - ( q ) h n 
[ - (t h )e:n], etc.). The original forms are, however, routinely retained 
by Menander (e.g. 
 [egen ó me:n]  ‘ I became ’ , 
 
[apekrin á me:n]  ‘ I answered ’ ). 
 As an example of Menander ’ s style we may consider the following extract from the 
 Dyscolus (370 – 82), involving an interchange between Sostratos (a wealthy young man 
in love), Gorgias (a young peasant farmer) and Daos (Gorgias ’ slave): 
 
   

104 Ancient Greek
 
 ‘ So: I ’ m ready to do all I ’ m told. Come on.  Go:  Why force yourself to suffer?  Da:  ( aside ) 
I want us to do as much work as possible today and for him to sprain his back while he ’ s 
at it so he stops coming here and pestering us.  So: Bring out a mattock.  Da:  Take mine 
and go ahead. Meanwhile I ’ ll build up the dry - stone wall. That needs doing too.  So: Hand 
it over. You ’ ve saved my life  –  Da: I ’ m off, young master. Follow me on there.  So:  – for 
this is my position. I must now die in the attempt or win the girl and live.  Go:  If you 
mean what you say, good luck to you. ’ 
 General features worthy of comment here include the widespread use of personal and 
demonstrative pronouns, in conformity with the naturally deictic/vivid character of 
dialogue, and the comparative rarity and frequently odd placement (cf. 
 [gar] as 
fourth word in l. 376) of the  ‘ second position ’ connective and discourse particles so 
typical of elaborated classical Attic (even, we may note, in the  ‘ naturalistic ’ dialogue 
of Plato or Aristophanes). While we may safely assume that tone of voice 
and context could do much in a dramatic interchange to supply the information pro-
vided explicitly by particles in a more discursive style, it is surely no accident that the 
later history of Greek in its lower - level spoken and written forms provides eloquent 
testimony to the decline of these elements. Sentences involving the delayed placement 
of 
 [gar] (ll. 376 and 379) can perhaps best be explained on the assumption that 
the initial constituent in each case functions as a displaced  ‘ focus ’ , with the particle 
appearing in second position within the residue of the sentence (the comment on the 
focus), and that this was a feature of casual conversational styles rather than of formal 
writing. 
 Other features of the colloquial style perhaps include the frequent elision of ﬁ nal 
 - a i [ - ai] (cf. 
 [pa ú sast h (ai)] in l. 374), the use of prepositional phrases to 
express possession in place of possessive adjectives or the genitives of personal pro-
nouns (cf. 
 [te:n par em û :] l. 375, cf.  4.6.2 , (8a)), and the use of 
 
[hyp á go:] and 
 [di ó :ko:] to mean simply  ‘ go ’ and  ‘ follow ’  respectively rather than 
 ‘ advance/withdraw slowly ’ and  ‘ pursue ’ . This use of the former is already attested 
in Aristophanes (cf.  Birds 1017), and is the source of Modern Greek 
 [ ' pao]  ‘ go ’ ; 
the use of  ‘ expressive ’ words in  ‘ simple ’ meanings is, of course, typical of colloquial 
speech. 
 The local Attic character of the language is also well illustrated by the use of 
 
[t é :meron] in l. 372 rather than 
 [s é :meron]  ‘ today ’ ;  - t t - [ - tt - ] is also routinely 
preferred to  - s s - [ - ss - ] in words such as 
 [t é ttara]  ‘ four ’ , where the penultimate 
a - vowel is also local Attic, the Koine normally employing Ionic 
 [t é ssera]. Note 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  105
also the use of 
 [poe:t é on] in l. 377 in place of 
 [poje:t é on]; the loss 
of intervocalic [ - j - ] in this word is a typical feature of 4th - century Attic, and one which 
passed for a time into the Koine as a rival to the fuller form, only to be eventually 
eliminated as a parochialism following the decline of Athenian prestige (cf. 
 
[u:t h i:s] in (8b) above). 
 Turning ﬁ nally to the later Hellenistic period and the mime, one particular adapta-
tion of the genre is now familiar from the work of the 3rd - century poet Herodas, who, 
in characteristic Alexandrian fashion, combined its low - life subject matter with the 
dialect (Ionic) and metre ( ‘ limping ’  iambics, i.e. with a ﬁ nal spondee) of Hipponax, 
the vitriolic poet of the 6th century  bc (see chapter  2 ). 
 But there seems to have been a great diversity of such mimetic presentations, reﬂ ect-
ing a wide variety of folkloric traditions and involving both songs and spoken pieces, 
prose and verse, monologue and scenic performance. One of the more famous pieces 
is the 2nd - century  bc  Alexandrian Erotic Fragment  or  Maiden ’ s Complaint  (Powell 
( 1933 : 177 – 80)), a lyric song for solo performance in which a girl laments her lover ’ s 
faithlessness in front of his door. Though the dialect is superﬁ cially Ionic and occasion-
ally archaic (perhaps reﬂ ecting some particular tradition), the structure is extremely 
simple and direct, and contains little that could not be readily followed by any speaker 
of Greek in the period. 
 We also have part of a farce (Page ( 1950 : no. 76)), written in vaguely rhythmical 
prose with verse interludes, which is contained in a papyrus of the 2nd century  ad , 
but perhaps belongs in origin to a somewhat earlier period (the original editors, 
Grenfell and Hunt, placed it not much later than the  Maiden ’ s Lament ( 1903 : 41 ff)). 
It appears to be a parody of Euripides ’ play  Iphigenia in Tauris  in which a Greek girl, 
Charition, is living against her will amongst Indians. Her friends eventually succeed 
in rescuing her after various ludicrous complications, the whole being punctuated 
(somewhat incomprehensibly) by the persistent farting of a clown. The language is of 
a vernacular character and is characterized by the presence of a number of decidedly 
 ‘ modern - looking ’ features, including: 
 (16)  (a)  The vocative adjective 
 [mo ' re], 5 lit.  ‘ idiot ’ , but verging here on the 
modern use (sometimes abbreviated to ( b ) r e [(v)re]    <  
 [mre]) as a 
familiar/friendly form of address (ll. 4 and 58), and already  ‘ bleached ’ 
of much of its offensiveness. 
 (b)  The use of 
 [ ' t h elo]  ‘ I want ’ with a  ‘ bare ’ subjunctive complement 
when the subject of the complement clause is distinct from that of the 
main clause (ll. 21 – 2), alongside the classical inﬁ nitival construction 
when like subjects are involved (l. 57). As noted in 4.6.2 for the ofﬁ cial 
Koine, this development (with or, as here, without a conjunction) marks 
the beginning of the replacement of the inﬁ nitive as a complement to 
 ‘ control ’ verbs like  ‘ want/expect ’ , initially involving cases where a dis-
tinct (accusative) subject had to be speciﬁ ed. 
 (c)  The use of 
 [ly ' pon] (l. 59) as a sentence connective meaning  ‘ so/
well then ’ (literally and originally  ‘ as for the rest ’ ) in very much the 
Modern Greek way.  

106 Ancient Greek
 4.7.8   Jewish  l iterature: the Septuagint 
 This Greek translation of the Old Testament made in the 3rd – 2nd centuries  bc con-
stitutes one of our most important examples of surviving  ‘ vernacular ’  literature of the 
period. By the 3rd century the majority of the Jews of Ptolemaic Egypt (perhaps as 
many as one million, cf. Philo  In Flacc.  43)) had Greek as their mother tongue, and 
it was judged essential that they should have a translation of their holy scriptures if 
knowledge of them was not to be conﬁ ned to an increasingly narrow circle. The work 
was supposedly entrusted to a team of 72 scholars summoned from Jerusalem and is 
accordingly known as the Septuagint ( septuaginta  is Latin for  ‘ 70 ’ ). 
 Given the nature of the material, the translation in general reﬂ ects neither the Greek 
literary tradition nor the preoccupations of the rhetoricians, and to that extent is a 
valuable source of information about the ordinary written Greek of the period. It was 
once thought that the very considerable differences between the Greek of the Septuagint 
and the literary Greek of the mainstream tradition were due to Semitic substrate and 
translation effects. But while it is undeniable that, as a close translation of a sacred 
text, it embodies Hebraisms (especially where the obscurity or formulaic language of 
the original led to literalness), the analysis of the ordinary language of contemporary 
private papyrus documents from Egypt has now demonstrated conclusively that the 
Septuagint ’ s general grammatical and lexical make - up is that of the ordinary, everyday 
written Greek of the times, and that it therefore constitutes an important source of 
information for the development of the language in the Hellenistic period. The transla-
tion of the Pentateuch, for example, seems to be in a very natural contemporary Koine 
(Thackeray ( 1909 : 13)), though certain other books display a rather mechanical literal-
ness (e.g. Lamentations), while others exemplify a spread of styles ranging from near -
 vernacular (e.g. Tobit, from the Apocrypha) to consciously  ‘ literary ’ (e.g. Esther, with 
4 Maccabees being positively Atticizing). 
 The following extracts from the Second Book of Kings (18. 17 – 21) provide a good 
example of the middle style: 
 (17) 
 
 
(17)

Greek in the Hellenistic World  107
 
 ‘ 17. And the king of Assyria sent  … Rab - shakeh  … to king Hezekiah with a heavy force 
against Jerusalem  … 18. And they shouted to Hezekiah, and Eliakim  … and Shebna  … 
came to him ( Rab - shakeh ). 19. And Rab - shakeh said to them:  “ Tell Hezekiah ( that ) the 
king the great king of Assyria speaks thus,  ‘ what is this conﬁ dence in which you trust? ’ 
20. You say  … ,  ‘ Counsel and strength for war ’ ; in whom then do you place your trust 
in refusing to accede to my will? 21. Look, you trust now on your own behalf in this staff 
of bruised reed, in Egypt; if any man leans on it, it will enter his hand and pierce it through; 
such is Pharaoh king of Egypt for all those who place their trust in him. ”  ’ 
 The phonetic transcription (which is in some ways reminiscent, allowing for the loss 
here of vowel length distinctions, of that of the earlier Boeotian document discussed 
in 4.4.2), is an attempt to represent the likely majority pronunciation, i.e. neither 
aristocratic/conservative nor vulgar, of the Koine in Egypt in the 2nd century  bc (cf. 
Teodorsson  (1977) for a full analysis of the data). Since a comprehensive treatment of 
phonological developments in the Koine is provided in chapter  6 , the following obser-
vations are conﬁ ned to points of grammar and lexicon. 
 The simple paratactic style is at once apparent; although this certainly reﬂ ects the 
organization of the original text, it is also characteristic in some degree of all mid - to 
low - level writing in the Koine, and in fact constitutes a feature of unsophisticated 
non - literary language throughout the history of Greek. The only probable Semitism 
here (i.e. feature of Hebrew wholly alien to Greek) is the  ‘ redundant ’ use of 
 [ke] 
 ‘ and ’  to introduce the main clause of the conditional sentence in para. 21 (cf. also the 
discussion of New Testament Greek in chapter  5 ). 
 Compared with classical Greek, there is once again a marked increase in the use of 
pronouns in positions where the literary language would permit, indeed almost require, 
an ellipsis, the sense being the obvious one in context. We may note, for example, the 
penultimate sentence of 21, which contains the possessive 
 , referring as a 
bound variable to any man who leans on the staff, and the direct object 
 , 
referring to such a man ’ s hand, introduced as the object of a preceding verb. Already 
apparent in Menander (cf.  4.7.7 , discussion of (15)), this becomes the normal usage 
of colloquial Greek henceforth. 
 Also noteworthy is the decline in the range of the dative (cf. Polybius ’ usage at 
even the highest levels,  4.7.2 , (11c)), a development most apparent here in the use of 

108 Ancient Greek
prepositional phrase replacements after verbs of  ‘ saying ’ ,  ‘ trusting ’ and  ‘ disobeying ’ . 
Note in this connection that a particular feature of the ordinary Koine in this, and the 
immediately following, period is the widespread use of 
 [en]   +  dative as a semanti-
cally  ‘ empty ’  means of strengthening the ﬂ agging dative in a variety of functions (e.g. 
comitative in para. 17, simple verbal complement to 
 in para. 20). 
Despite this rearguard action, however, the accusative is already advancing as the 
primary prepositional case at the expense of the dative: cf. verbs of  ‘ saying ’ and  ‘ shout-
ing ’ with 
 [pros]   +  accusative in paras. 18 and 19, and 
 [ ' pep ø t h a epi] 
and 
  +  accusative in para. 21. 
 We might also take note of the semantically idiosyncratic Homeric and Ionic perfect 
 [ ' pep ø t h a]  ‘ I trust ’ (in paras. 19, 20 and 21: from 
 [ ' pit h o]  ‘ I persuade ’ ), 
which is strongly disfavoured in classical Attic prose, but resurfaces here in the popular 
written Koine as another form with a continuous history in the (Ionicized) spoken 
vernacular. 
 4.8   Clitic Pronouns and the Shift Towards  VS Word Order 
 We should also note in this last extract the dramatic increase in the frequency of verb –
 subject order compared with classical Greek, a feature which is again typical of the 
ordinary Koine in general. The reasons for this shift are complex, but seem to have 
been connected with the problems presented by clitic pronouns (cf. Horrocks  (1990) 
for a full discussion). 
 Originally these typically collocated with sentence connectives in second position in 
a sentence (cf. Wackernagel  (1892) , a proposal which has since spawned a vast descrip-
tive and theoretical literature): 
 (18)   
 
 
 
 ‘ and in less time this woman bears for him  … ’ 
 The frequently wide separation of such pronouns from their natural governors soon 
led, however, to a tendency for them to appear instead immediately after the relevant 
head in a syntactic phrase: 
 (19)   
 
 
 
 ‘ and continual fevers hounded me ’ 
 But as we move into the Hellenistic period, the tension between these two options 
began to be resolved by placing the verb initially before clitic pronouns in second 
position, thus combining the traditional distribution of the latter, as in (18), with the 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  109
semantically transparent head – complement order seen in (19). The result was an 
increasingly standard V(erb) – clitic – S(ubject) – O(bject) order, with VSO then becoming 
routine even in the absence of a motivating clitic, as in (17). 
 This distribution was typically disrupted only under certain circumstances, 
e.g. when some clausal element, including a subject, was preposed as an emphatic/
contrastive  ‘ focus ’ , or when some sentential  ‘ operator ’ (e.g. expressing negation, inter-
rogation, or modality over the clause as a whole) occupied the initial slot. In these cases 
we ﬁ nd instead the order F(ocus)/Op(erator) – clitic – V, i.e. with V as near to initial posi-
tion as possible, but still adjacent to its dependent pronoun; all other constituents follow. 
 Verb - ﬁ nal thus ceased to be a  ‘ natural ’ order in popular Greek, and typically arose 
only when an object was preposed for emphasis. Furthermore, the dual distribution 
of clitics (i.e. V – cl in most cases, cl – V in the presence of initial F/Op) continued into 
Medieval Greek, and even into some modern dialects (e.g. Cypriot). In standard 
Modern Greek, however, the order clitic – verb has now been generalized except in the 
case of imperatives and gerunds. 
 As an example of both types together, consider the following sentence from an early 
Ptolemaic will (P. Eleph. 2. ii. 10 – 11, 284  bc ): 
 (20) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ if Dionysios or Kallista should be in need during their lifetimes, their sons collectively 
shall support them. ’ 
 In the subordinate clause there is the conditional conjunction in initial position, setting 
up a timeless/generic proposition, and controlling the subjunctive mood of the follow-
ing verb; since initial position is ﬁ lled by an operator, the clitic pronoun appears second 
and the verb follows immediately, with subject and other elements in its train. 
 With respect to the main clause, recall that the classical 3rd - person anaphoric pro-
nouns, 
 [aut ó n]  ‘ him ’  etc., function effectively as clitics (cf. Dover  (1960) ), despite 
their written accent, in that they never occur sentence - initially in this role; they are, of 
course, the source of the modern clitic pronouns  t o n  [ton] etc., via the reduced forms 
 [a ' ton] etc. that are sometimes attested in low - level texts of the Hellenistic and 
Roman periods. 6 Since there is here neither a focus nor a semantic operator, the verb 
naturally comes ﬁ rst, with its dependent clitic following immediately in second position 
and the subject once again coming last.  
 4.9   Analogical Pressure on the Strong Aorist Paradigm 
 Returning to (17), we may note ﬁ nally the beginnings of the levelling of the distinction 
between the irregular  ‘ strong ’  aorist paradigm (with 1/2/3 sg forms ending in  - o n  [ - on], 

110 Ancient Greek
 - e "  [ - es],  - e [ - e]) and the regular  ‘ weak ’  aorists (with 1/2/3 sg forms in  - ( s ) a [ - (s)a], 
 - ( s ) a " [ - (s)as], ( s ) e [ - (s)e]). Thus alongside  ‘ classical ’ 
 (in para. 18) we 
ﬁ nd 
 [ ' ip - as] (in para. 20), in which the classical 
 [ ' ip - es] has been replaced 
by a form with the weak sufﬁ x. 
 For certain verbs (including 
 [ ' ipon]) this paradigm shift was already charac-
teristic of classical Ionic. It affected the Attic equivalents only in part, but passed into 
the Ionicized Koine, and with time spread to become an increasingly common feature 
of its middle - to - low registers; the ﬁ nal product of this interference will be considered 
in chapter  5 and again in Part II (Byzantine Greek).  
 4.10   The Spoken Koine: Regional Diversity 
 4.10.1   Introduction 
 The examination of the linguistic usage of  ‘ vernacular ’  literature leads the way to a 
general consideration of the lower registers of the Koine, in particular of the written 
evidence available for reconstructing aspects of its structure and history as a popular 
spoken language. 
 The issue of regional variety in old Greece has already been considered above in 
connection with Boeotian/Koine and Doric/Koine interference ( 4.4.2 ,  4.4.3 ). Signiﬁ cant 
progress has been made in recent years in getting to grips with the sociolinguistics of 
dialect choice and dialect mixture in different regions and a general picture has emerged 
of growing diglossia and two - way dialect/Koine interference, followed by the pro-
gressive marginalization of the local varieties and the corresponding emergence of 
regionally differentiated versions of the Koine (see, in particular, Brixhe  (1993a, 1996, 
1998) ). 
 Outside the territories in which it had been long established, however, Greek in the 
early 3rd century  bc was essentially the native language of the educated elite of the 
new urban centres and of the relatively impoverished colonists who had gone out to 
populate them. It was not the native language of the Hellenistic world as a whole, 
and only in Asia Minor did Greek eventually, after many centuries, come anywhere 
close to eliminating the indigenous languages as a universal medium of communication 
(cf.  8.2 ). 
 None the less a great many people of non - Greek origin inevitably acquired a knowl-
edge of Greek as a second language, and any who looked for employment in govern-
ment service had to have a high - level command of the language, both spoken and 
written. Thus although the Greco - Macedonian elite remained determinedly monolin-
gual for the most part, many low - ranking local ofﬁ cials of native origin became fully 
competent in Greek, in part as a result of a rigorous training to judge from the very 
high grammatical and orthographic standards of many quite ordinary papyrus docu-
ments from Egypt. 
 Again, though the upper classes very largely kept themselves to themselves, inter-
marriage and daily contact between Greeks and non - Greeks in the lower strata of 
society inevitably promoted bilingualism on a considerable scale, and it is above all in 
private documents composed by the (more or less) literate members of this sector of 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  111
the population that the interference phenomena of daily speech are best reﬂ ected and 
evidence of regional variety within the lingua franca of ordinary Greeks, Egyptians, 
Arabs, Syrians, Jews, and Persians can most clearly be discerned. 
 We should recall, however, that the category of private documents is a broad one, 
and we should not expect that they will all be equally revealing of interference or 
substandard phenomena, or that statistical analyses of different usages will necessarily 
be informative; some composers of private documents were highly educated, and others 
could always hire the services of a professional scribe who was likely to be fully literate 
and reasonably well - trained in the conventions of the relevant document - type. None 
the less, where the Koine was superimposed on indigenous languages other than Greek, 
we do ﬁ nd evidence for diatopic variation in at least lower - level documents (cf. Buben í k 
( 1989 : ch.  5 ), Consani  (1993) ), and we may take as illustrative examples the Koine of 
Egypt and Asia Minor.  
 4.10.2   Egypt 
 As with many alleged Semitic phenomena in the Septuagint (and also the New 
Testament, see  5.10.2 ), a large number of features once thought to be  ‘ Egyptian ’  have 
now been shown, through both their recurrence in contemporary Greek elsewhere and 
their continuation in Medieval and Modern Greek, to belong to the regular internal 
history of the language. 
 In the case of Egypt, however, the work of Mayser and Schmoll  (1970) , Gignac 
 (1976, 1981)  and Teodorsson  (1977) has provided a solid philological base for the 
identiﬁ cation of true markers of Egyptian Greek, at least some of which are due to the 
impact of Coptic (the ﬁ nal form of the old Egyptian language prior to its demise). 
Most bilingual regionalisms, of course, tell us more about the substrate language than 
about Greek, and these obviously had no lasting effect on the subsequent development 
of the language as a whole. Occasionally they coincide with general patterns of evolu-
tion in the language, but in this case there is no reason to interpret them as the direct 
result of substrate interference, even if the substrate may have reinforced the develop-
ment locally. 
 As an example, Coptic regularly used voiced allophones of its plosives after nasal 
consonants, and this is also attested in Greek documents from Egypt, rarely at ﬁ rst, 
but with growing frequency as we move into the Roman period: e.g. 
 [pa ' t h in 
di], with  d i for  t i [ti],  ‘ to suffer something ’ . But there is evidence for voicing in this 
context from elsewhere (most strikingly in Pamphylia, because of its very early attesta-
tion there in the 4th century  bc ), and voicing is now the rule in standard Modern 
Greek. In such cases, then, we must be dealing with sporadic  ‘ phonetic ’  spellings 
reﬂ ecting a current pronunciation even among monoglot Greek speakers, and not only 
in Egypt but in many other areas of the Greek - speaking world. 
 Concentrating here on phonology, which is arguably the most important area of 
differentiation in standard languages, the following characteristics of Egyptian Koine 
emerge most clearly (cf. Consani  (1993) , and see the relevant sections of Teodorsson 
 (1977)  and, for the Roman period, Gignac  (1976) , where full documentation is 
provided): 

112 Ancient Greek
 (21)  (a)  The graphic interchange of both voiceless aspirated and voiced plosives 
with their voiceless counterparts.  
 (i) 
 The aspirated/voiceless overlaps are contextually conditioned in the 
main (after [s], before another aspirate, and in the context of liquids 
and nasals) and reﬂ ect an internal development of Egyptian Greek 
that is paralleled in part in some ancient dialects; the cases that fall 
outside the usual patterns are perhaps due to the fact that 
only one Coptic dialect (Bohairic, spoken in the Delta area) had 
aspirated stop phonemes.  
 (ii)  With respect to the unconditioned voiced/voiceless interchanges, 
we should note that the number of spelling mistakes involving 
the labials is fewer than those for the dentals and velars. Since 
Coptic lacked contrasts in its plosive system based on [ ± voice] 
but did have a phonologically signiﬁ cant opposition between the 
voiceless labial plosive /p/ and the voiced fricative 
 , the explana-
tion seems straightforward; errors decrease in number in the articu-
latory area where a voicing opposition existed in the  ‘ native ’ 
language (see Worrell  (1934) , Till  (1961) , Vergote  (1973) , Loprieno 
 (1995) ). 
 (b)  Spelling interchange between  s and  z also reﬂ ects the absence of a pho-
nemic contrast between /s/ and /z/ in Coptic.  
 (c)  The common graphic interchange of o/ w and o u implies some confusion 
of /o/ and /u/ in the speech of some writers; this is also probably a Coptic 
substrate effect since the contrast between /o/ and /u/ was neutralized 
after [m] and [n], and frequently in ﬁ nal position when the vowel was 
unstressed. 
 (d)  Similarly, interchanges between  a and  e / a i ,  a and o/ w , and o/ w  and  e / a i 
in unaccented (i.e. by now unstressed) syllables imply some assimilation 
of the low/mid unstressed vowels [a], [e] and [o] to the 
 of Coptic.  
 Certain other features, however, seem to be internal developments of Egyptian 
Greek itself. We may note, for example, the sporadic omission of the liquids [l] and 
[r] in the context of occlusives, and the frequent interchange of  a i and  a in Ptolemaic 
papyri, implying a lower than usual articulation for the former (i.e. as [ æ ] rather than 
[e], with consequential  a i / a , as well as the more usual  a i / e interchanges). 
 The weakness of word - ﬁ nal [n] is also often reﬂ ected directly by its omission in 
spelling, but this particular feature seems to have been quite common in vernacular 
Greek generally to judge from the evidence, say, of Attic inscriptions (cf. Teodorsson 
 (1974, 1978) , Threatte  (1980, 1996) ). We may compare here the Modern Greek situ-
ation in which, certain dialects such as Cypriot apart, ﬁ nal [n] survives in only a 
handful of words, and under speciﬁ c contextual conditions (cf. Parts II and III for this 
development, which is distinct from the sporadic and unconditioned dropping of ﬁ nal 
[ - n] attested in the papyri). Similar remarks apply to ﬁ nal [s], though in this case 
Medieval and Modern Greek provide clear evidence of early resistance to any potential 
loss, presumably for grammatical reasons ([ - s] being a major morpho - syntactic marker 
in a large number of inﬂ ectional paradigms). 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  113
 The more general weakness of syllable - ﬁ nal nasals before plosives, however, as 
evidenced by frequent omission and hypercorrect insertion, though occasionally paral-
leled in Asia Minor Koine and classical dialects, including even Attic (cf. Teodorsson 
( 1978 : 89), Brixhe ( 1987 : 33)), seems to have been specially characteristic of Egyptian 
Greek from Ptolemaic times onwards. Both medially and word - ﬁ nally this process 
sometimes involved not simply the loss of the nasal, with or without nasalization of 
the preceding vowel, but complete assimilation to the following consonant: cf. spellings 
like 
 [pros é :nekken]  ‘ s/he brought ’ , for 
 , 3rd century  bc . 
 On the other hand evidence for the retention of the medial nasal and for its voicing 
effect on a following voiceless plosive increases steadily in the Roman period, as noted 
above, and this seems to have been the general situation elsewhere, to judge from the 
evidence of Modern Greek. Thus even those modern dialects that have now eliminated 
nasals in this context show evidence of their former presence through the retention of 
voiced plosives (in some areas still geminated, as a consequence of assimilation to the 
already voiced plosive, cf. Newton ( 1972 : 93 – 9)): e.g. [ ' pente]    >  [ ' pende]    >  [ ' pedde] 
( > [ ' pede])  ‘ ﬁ ve ’ . 
 4.10.3   Asia Minor 
 Turning brieﬂ y to Asia Minor, the pioneering work of Brixhe  (1987)  has provided 
important new insights and a comprehensive bibliography (cf. also Consani  (1993) ). 
Here the coastal regions had undergone a very early Hellenization, as already noted, 
and the indigenous populations of the interior were, unlike in Egypt, extremely hetero-
geneous both ethnically and linguistically, with Phrygian and Pisidian in particular 
surviving alongside Greek into the Christian era. The impact of the Koine was therefore 
variable according to region, but certain features are also well - attested in other areas 
and as such represent part of the general development of the language. 
 We may note, for example, the steady increase in instances of aphaeresis (loss of 
initial unaccented vowels) and syncope, the co - occurrence of standard  a u / e u [af/ef] and 
substandard  a / e spellings (the latter reﬂ ecting allegro pronunciations) in words such 
as 
 [a[f]ton]  ‘ him ’ , and the synizesis of [i] and [e] in the context of a following 
vowel (e.g. [ - ia]/[ - ea]    >  [ - ja], with accent shift to the ﬁ nal vowel if the [i] or [e] was 
originally stressed). 
 On the other hand, evidence for the weakness of word - ﬁ nal nasals, otherwise widely 
attested, is notably sparse in this region, and it is interesting to observe that the sys-
tematic retention of ﬁ nal [ - n] was already a characteristic of Cypriot Koine (despite 
Ptolemaic rule, cf. Consani  (1986, 1990) ), and that this remains a feature of the con-
temporary dialect. It is also a marked feature of the modern dialects of Chios and the 
Dodecanese, and was typical of those Greek dialects (Cappadocian, Bithynian and 
Pontic) widely spoken in Asia Minor up until the exchange of populations with Turkey 
in 1923 (see Part III). 
 Here, then, there seems to be modern dialect evidence for a speciﬁ cally eastern type 
of Koine spoken in Asia Minor, Cyprus and other adjacent islands (cf. Thumb ( 1901 : 
ch.  5 , 1906, 1912), Dawkins ( 1916 : 213 – 14)). Other features shared by some or all 
of these modern dialects, at least until recently, include the continued use of the article 
as a relative (Cyprus, Rhodes, Cos, Cappadocia; an old Asiatic Ionic characteristic, 

114 Ancient Greek
common in Homer and Herodotus, and also shared by ancient Lesbian), the continued 
use of possessive adjectives (Chios, Cappadocia, Pontus; replaced elsewhere by prepo-
sitional expressions, now defunct, or the simple genitive of personal pronouns), and a 
pool of common vocabulary items and/or special senses of otherwise familiar words. 
 Other features, however, seem once again to be potentially attributable to substrate 
effects, for example the frequency of prothetic vowels in Phrygia and the contextually 
conditioned closure of unaccented [e]    >  [i] and [o]    >  [u]. The latter phenomenon is 
familiar from some ancient dialects, but the regularity of these changes and their 
general restriction to unstressed ﬁ nal syllables in the Asia Minor Koine suggest quite 
strongly that they reﬂ ect the paralel properties of the /e/ ∼ /i/ and /o/ ∼ /u/ neutralizations 
of Phrygian. Such vowel raising remained, incidentally, a characteristic of many varie-
ties of modern Cappadocian, Bithynian and Pontic, in which, unlike in the northern 
dialects of Modern Greek (cf. Part III), the process was again largely conﬁ ned to post -
 tonic, particularly ﬁ nal, syllables. 
 Similarly, the frequent graphic interchange of voiceless and aspirated plosives, 
though again partially paralleled elsewhere, seems to have a randomness right across 
Asia Minor (examples from Mysia, Lydia, Caria, Phrygia, Lycia, Pisidia, Pamphylia, 
Galatia, Lycaonia) that points to the general absence of such a contrast in the relevant 
native languages. 
 Such  ‘ local ’ features could readily be compiled for the Koine of Palestine and Syria 
(cf. Buben í k ( 1989 :  4.6 ,  5.2 ), where Aramaic, including Syriac, continued in use after 
the Arab conquest of the 7th century  ad . Unfortunately relatively little work has been 
done on the Hellenistic inscriptions of this region, with most effort concentrated on 
the supposed Semitisms of the Septuagint (cf.  4.7.8 ) and the New Testament (see  5.7 
and  5.8 ). But enough has been said to illustrate the point that the Koine was, in its 
more popular registers, very far from being a uniform language; its considerable het-
erogeneity, both in old Greece and in the new kingdoms, is already clearly apparent 
from documents of the later Hellenistic period, with local differences deriving from 
both ancient dialectal/foreign - language substrate effects and language - internal develop-
ments within particular regions. Both categories naturally include features which are 
important for an understanding of the later dialect geography of Greek as well as 
dead - end traits which eventually wither away in their region of origin leaving no sig-
niﬁ cant trace on later history. 
 This diversity should not, however, blind us to changes which, in the light of 
Medieval and Modern Greek, anticipate or reﬂ ect the general development of the 
language as a whole. The private inscriptions and papyri provide invaluable evidence 
for a number of such innovations in the more popular varieties of Greek, and the 
particular value of these documents in this connection must now be illustrated.  
 4.11   Private Inscriptions and Papyri: Some Major Trends 
 4.11.1   Introduction:  d atives,  f uture  p eriphrases, the  n om - a cc  p lural of 
 c onsonant - s tems 
 We have already seen that literary texts written in a language subject to the conserva-
tive inﬂ uence of literary, cultural and grammatical tradition reveal relatively little of 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  115
the development of spoken Greek, and that even more popular productions, 
though reﬂ ecting certain grammatical and lexical changes more directly, show 
almost nothing by way of phonological change because written in the standard 
orthography. 
 By contrast, even though all who had learned to write had, by the very nature of 
the exercise, come into contact with the grammatical/literary tradition, the private 
documents of the less well - educated sometimes provide vital additional insights, 
through their numerous spelling mistakes and relatively unselfconscious grammatical 
structures, into changes at all linguistic levels in the everyday language of the majority 
of the Greek - speaking population. 
 We may begin with the following extracts from a papyrus letter written by one 
Apollonios to his elder brother ( ‘ father ’ in the piece is a conventional form of address 
to a man older than oneself), dated c.152  bc (P. Par. 47/UPZ 70): 
 (22) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ Apollonios to Ptolemaios his father ( i.e. older brother ) greetings. I swear by Serapis that 
if I did not have a little compunction you would never have seen my face again, because 
you lie all the time and your gods likewise, because they dropped us ( the letter reads  you , 
but this is an error ) into a grand business in which we may well die and if ever you see 
( in a vision ) that we are about to be saved we are sunk at once. Know that the  ‘ runaway ’ 
( a term of abuse for an enemy ) will try to stop us being in the place  … It is impossible 
for me to hold up my head in Trikomia ever again for shame that we have given ourselves 
away  … A reply to the purveyors of truth. ’  

116 Ancient Greek
 Particularly striking is the author ’ s reluctance to use the dative outside the formulaic 
greeting at the beginning. Thus in the main clause of the conditional sentence that 
follows we would perhaps have expected a so - called  ‘ ethic ’ dative of oblique involve-
ment, but instead we ﬁ nd the accusative  m e [me]. The often  ‘ goal - orientated ’  sense of 
the indirect object (cf.  ‘ give to/send to ’ etc.), together with the use of two accusatives 
rather than an accusative and a dative with verbs like  ‘ teach ’ , encouraged such overlaps 
between the dative and the accusative, and a tendency to replace datives with accusa-
tives spread to other uses too, most particularly in the case of the clitic pronouns, 
as here. 
 We might also note, incidentally, the rather later but wholly parallel overlap 
between such oblique datives and possessive genitives. This begins with cases like (23) 
(P. Flor. 127): 
 (23)  
 
 
 
 where the genitive pronoun is undoubtedly a marker of possession, but the possibility 
of placing it, as a clitic, in the classic  ‘ second position ’ in the sentence (rather than 
after the head within the relevant noun phrase) encourages comparison with the dative 
pronouns that also naturally appear there. In this particular case, since the dative 
could also be used to express possession (cf.  ‘ the letter to - me ’ etc.), we would most 
naturally still assume a possessive sense. But from here it was a small step, given an 
appropriate context, to interpret such a displaced genitive pronoun as overlapping 
more widely with the dative, ﬁ rst in the ethic/oblique involvement function ( ‘ s/he 
seized to/for - me the cloak ’ ) and ﬁ nally as an indirect object ( ‘ s/he gave to - me the 
reward ’ ). We should not be surprised, then, to see many examples in the later papyri 
of both accusative and genitive pronouns functioning as indirect objects in place of 
the classical dative. 
 Once ﬁ rmly established in the pronoun system these usages also began to extend to 
full noun phrases, most particularly in the case of the genitive (though in general 
prepositional phrases are preferred). In Modern Greek the northern dialects have now 
generalized the accusative as the case for indirect object pronouns, the southern dialects 
the genitive. 
 As is often the case, such functional overlaps coincided with the destructive effects 
of sound change in undermining the dative case. With the loss of the ﬁ nal i - element 
of the long diphthongs and the equalization of vowel length the dative singular of 
many classes of noun became virtually homophonous with the accusative singular 
(given the weakness of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n]). Thus 1st - declension 
 [ ' k h ora(n)]/
 [ ' k h ora] 
 ‘ country ’ , 2nd - declension 
  ‘ word ’ , etc. This inevitably led 
to further overlapping usages even where the accusative and dative forms were clearly 
distinguished, as in 1st/2nd - declension plural and in the 3rd declension. The problem 
was further exacerbated in Egypt by the frequent neutralization of /o/ and /u/ in un -
stressed ﬁ nal syllables (cf. (21c)), so that singular 2nd - declension genitives and datives 
were also often homophonous in casual varieties: cf. 
 . 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  117
 As further evidence of the decline of the dative we should note that the accusative 
 s e [se] in the prepositional possessive 
 [h ø para se t h e ' ø ], lit.  ‘ the beside 
you gods ’ , is in fact an authorial correction for dative  s o i [s ø ] (an  ‘ ablatival ’  genitive 
being manifestly inappropriate here); only after the preposition 
 [en]  ‘ in ’ does 
Apollonios feel comfortable with the dative case, and we have already noted above 
how this particular preposition came to be used widely as a virtually meaningless 
support for the dative in a variety of adverbial functions. 
 Similar remarks apply to the use of accusative  m e [me] after 
 [uk  ' esti]  ‘ it 
is impossible ’ , where the classical language would ordinarily have employed a dative; 
this could also be interpreted as a shift to an accusative and inﬁ nitive construction ( it 
is impossible for - me [to X]    >   it is impossible [(for) me to X] ), but the general trend 
was away from such structures (James  (2007) ). 
 Other features of interest here include the avoidance of the future passive in favour 
of a periphrasis with 
 [ ' melo]   +  aorist passive inﬁ nitive, 
  ‘ we - are - about to - be - saved ’ ; such periphrases gradually spread 
throughout the future system with the passage of time, particularly after sound change 
had effectively destroyed the distinction between the aorist subjunctive and the future 
indicative in the active paradigm of many verbs (cf. chapter  5 ). 
 The use of the classical optative (in conjunction with the particle 
 [an]) in the 
 ‘ root ’  sense of possibility has similarly been replaced by the use of modal auxiliaries, 
both personal (
 [dy ' namet h a], =  ‘ we may ’ rather than  ‘ we are able ’ , and in the 
sense  ‘ it is possible that we  … ’ rather than  ‘ we are allowed to  … ’ ) and impersonal 
(
 [ ' esti]  ‘ it is possible ’ ), both in conjunction with inﬁ nitival complements. 
 Finally, we should note the use of the 3rd - declension nominative in  - e " [ - es] for the 
accusative in  - a " [ - as] in the participle 
 at the very end of the docu-
ment (in fact on the reverse). This is paralleled in some dialect inscriptions from as early 
as the 6th century  bc (most notably in Elean), and appears to be the product of various 
analogies with 3rd - declension forms in which no distinction was made between these 
two cases in the plural. 7 In Attic, and subsequently in the Koine, the use of  - e i " [ - is] 
as both nominative and accusative plural in the i - and u - stems (cf. i - stem 
 [ ' polis] 
 ‘ cities (nom/acc pl) ’ etc.) seems to have affected ﬁ rst the eu - stems, where the innovative 
nominative plural 
 [ - ' i s] (as in 
 [ β asi ' lis]  ‘ kings ’ , replacing earlier 
 ) 
came to have both functions at the expense of the original accusative 
 [ - ' eas]. From 
here the pattern (if not the actual endings) started to spread to consonant - stem forms 
of the 3rd declension, as here. The longer - term effect was to undermine the distinction 
between the nominative and the accusative plural even in the 1st (a - stem) declension, 
as a result of further changes to be discussed below. In Modern Greek masculine and 
feminine nouns of the 3rd declension have very largely assimilated to the 1st declension, 
and all have nominative and accusative plurals in [ - es]. 
 4.11.2   Phonological  d evelopments 
 Full details of the phonological development of the Koine in Egypt and elsewhere in 
the Hellenistic and Roman periods are provided in chapter  6 . The major points to be 
discussed here are therefore mainly methodological, though particular details have 
been selected to illustrate the issues involved. 

118 Ancient Greek
 First, we should note that many private letters written at much later times than (22) 
employ a more  ‘ correct ’ orthography, and that level of education is therefore at least 
as important a factor as date in determining the extent to which spelling reﬂ ects sound 
change directly. Here, for example, there is a frequent substitution of  i for  e i (cf.  [i] 
for   ‘ if ’ , 
 [ ' ides] for 
  ‘ you saw ’ and several other examples), which clearly 
demonstrates the raising of at least some allophones (especially in pre - consonantal and 
word - ﬁ nal positions) of  ‘ classical ’ /e(:)/ (written  e i ) to [i], and correlates with what we 
see both in earlier ofﬁ cial Boeotian inscriptions and more sporadically in low - level 
Attic documents from the 5th century onwards (cf. Teodorsson ( 1974 : 175 – 8, 251, 
254 ff). The change was completed in the later Roman period and the resultant merger 
is a feature of Modern Greek. 
 Similarly, the regular confusion of o and  w (cf. 
 [om ' nyo] for 
 , 
 for 
 , etc.) shows that vowel - length opposi-
tions had already disappeared, a change that is directly correlated with the shift from 
the classical pitch accent to an accent characterized primarily by greater loudness. 
There are in fact a few indirect signs of this shift even in classical dialect inscriptions 
(see chapter  1 ,  1.4.3  (b)). Here we should simply note that the phonological contrast 
between the acute accent (rise on the accented vowel, fall on the following syllable) 
and the circumﬂ ex accent (rise - fall on the accented long vowel or diphthong) could 
not be sustained when there ceased to be inherently long vowels and diphthongs 
capable of bearing the accentual contonation alone. On the assumption that the equali-
zation of vowel length resulted in a neutralization in favour of the acute accent, and 
that the rise in pitch had always been associated secondarily with at least some increase 
in amplitude, the ﬁ nal result would have been a single type of word accent character-
ized by both a rise in pitch and an increase in volume, but with the latter now placed 
in sharper focus by the loss of contrastiveness in the former. In due course, and doubt-
less with the help of substrate languages with primary stress accents such as Coptic, 
the rise in pitch came to be interpreted increasingly as a secondary concomitant of 
greater loudness. 
 On the other hand, though  ‘ classical ’ /oi/ eventually merged with /y/, o i and  u are 
never confused in (22), implying that for this speaker at least the former still repre-
sented an intermediate stage in the development from [oi], namely [ ø ]. On the other 
hand, the word for  ‘ us ’ (normally 
 ) is spelled 
 , the word for  ‘ you ’ . Since this 
is a not uncommon error in the papyri of the period, it seems that in certain circum-
stances (e.g. in initial pretonic syllables, particularly where a labial context would 
encourage dissimilation of a rounded front vowel) and/or in certain words of high 
frequency (e.g. personal pronouns) changes had already gone through that otherwise 
took effect much later. Thus despite the absence of confusion between  u and  h else-
where, it seems that in these words at least both letters represented the same sound, 
namely [i], and that the two pronouns were therefore homophonous. This naturally 
led to the eventual replacement of the classical forms (see chapter  6 and Part II). 
 Apparently, then, 
 and [y] had shifted to [i] under certain conditions. But the fact 
that contemporary 
 (written  η , the product of the raising of  ‘ classical ’ 
 to ﬁ ll the 
 ‘ gap ’ created by the partial merger of original /e:/ with /i(:)/) had not itself yet raised 
to merge with /i/ across the board (as in Modern Greek) is strongly implied by the 
absence of any interchanges between  h and  e i / i . The parallel absence of interchanges 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  119
between  u and  e i / i similarly shows that /y/, represented by  u , had not yet generally 
lost its lip - rounding (cf. Modern Greek once again for conﬁ rmation of this develop-
ment), despite the isolated use here of  u to represent [i] in 
 . Similarly, the absence 
of  e / a i confusion implies a value [ æ ] for the latter, intermediate between classical [ai] 
and its ﬁ nal realization as [e] (cf.  4.10.2 on Egyptian Koine). 
 Notice throughout that the attempt to interpret the evidence of the spellings has 
been based on both graphic interchanges (or the lack of them) internal to the document 
and the general picture that can be built up by a comparison with other documentary 
evidence, both contemporary and from other periods, and drawn not only from the 
same region but also from elsewhere. The whole exercise is subject to overall interpre-
tation in the light of the ﬁ nal outcomes known from Modern Greek and its dialects. 
In this way odd mistakes and purely local developments can be distinguished fairly 
reliably from phenomena of genuine signiﬁ cance for the history of the language. 
 This is not to say, however, that the issues are always clear cut. We may compare, 
for example, the following extracts from a letter of 154  bc (P. Par. 43/UPZ 66) written 
by one Sarapion to his brothers Ptolemaios and Apollonios (the same individuals as 
are involved in (22)). Though all the brothers presumably had a very similar education, 
and enjoyed similar social standing, the spelling in this letter is in some respects 
indicative of a more  ‘ advanced ’ state of phonological development than that of the 
preceding one: 
 (24) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ I have made a contract with the daughter of Hesperos, and I shall marry her in the month 
of Mesore. Please send half a chous ( a liquid measure ) of oil. I have written to you so 
that you may know  … Come for the ( wedding ) day. ’ 
 Certain features argued for above are here conﬁ rmed; for example, the supposition 
that  h and  u signify [i] in initial pretonic syllables in a labial environment (cf. 
 
[hi ' mik h un] for 
 , [hi ' min] for 
 ). On the other hand, the  a i / e confusion 
evidenced in 
 for 
 strongly suggests that / æ / has already merged 
with /e/ for this speaker. 
 Obviously the minutiae of different documents (even from the same period and 
from members of the same family) can be extremely confusing. It is crucial, therefore, 
despite the obvious difﬁ culties, to stand back and to look for the broader trends, 
because these documents provide our best, and often our only, direct evidence for the 

120 Ancient Greek
details and the chronology of sound change. Many of the changes ﬁ rst attested in the 
private documents of the moderately educated eventually begin to make a sporadic 
appearance in ofﬁ cial documents too. But if they do appear in such texts, there is 
often a very considerable time lag in matters of grammar and lexicon, and as far 
as spelling is concerned we should never forget that the aim of all who composed 
ofﬁ cial texts throughout the history of Greek was to use the classical orthography 
correctly. 
 It is important also to recognize that the same sets of changes may have gone 
through at slightly different times in different areas, or even at different times in the 
same area, the variation being determined by factors such as social class (the aristoc-
racy being generally very conservative, the urban masses more innovative, and the 
majority of the literate population occupying a middle position). 
 Nor should we forget that in Athenian Attic innovation seems to have begun from 
the bottom up, while in the new Greek territories, such as Egypt, it seems to have been 
the emergent middle - register norm, based on the old Attic language of business and 
administration, that crucially shaped both the originally mixed dialectal speech of the 
lower classes and the second - language Greek of the native populations. We should 
not, then, be surprised to discover that evidence for a given set of changes in Egyptian 
or other varieties of the Hellenistic Koine is generally later than that for Athenian Attic/
Koine. 
 4.11.3   Other  m orphological  d evelopments:  p artial  m erger of the 1st 
and 3rd  d eclensions 
 A fuller account of the relevant changes in this domain will be presented in chapter 
 11 , once the further developments of the Roman and Byzantine eras have been exam-
ined. Here, to effect the transition to the later period, we may add just one ﬁ nal 
example of a private document, an inscription on a statue base from Magnesia on the 
Meander (Kern ( 1900 : 145)), dating from the 1st century  bc : 
 (25) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ Sophea, daughter of Lucius Sopheus, and wife of Lucius Valerius Flaccus, son of Lucius, 
the proconsul. ’ 
 The kingdom of Pergamum, which included the city of Magnesia, had been bequeathed 
to the Roman state by King Attalus III in 134  bc , probably to avoid an imminent 
social revolution. The document is testimony to Roman pragmatism in adopting the 
established language of their new province of Asia not only for ofﬁ cial but also for 
private purposes (see also chapter  5 ). 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  121
 Here we may note the preference for  - e u - rather than  - o u - as a transcription of the 
long Latin /u:/, perhaps because the former spelling, despite the tendency to a fricative 
pronunciation for the second element in the diphthong /eu/, still retained a  ‘ long ’ pro-
nunciation, while the latter now represented only [u]. The use of  f to represent Latin 
/f/ is also interesting, though in view of the consistent Roman preference for  ph as a 
transcription of  f into the late imperial period, this is presumably a matter of using 
the best available representation for an alien sound rather than evidence for the routine 
frication of /p h / in this period. 
 The really important point here, however, is the addition of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] to the 
accusative singular 
 [jy ' neka - n]  ‘ wife ’ . The accusative singular marker in all 
declensions in which the ﬁ nal element of the stem was vocalic was  - n [ - n]:  - a n [ - an], 
 - o n [ - on],  - i n [ - in],  - u n [ - yn]. In the consonant stems, however, the classical ending was 
 - a [ - a], the prehistoric product of a syllabic 
 conditioned by the consonantal 
context. It was only a matter of time before an analogical  - n [ - n] was added to the 
consonant - stem accusative ending, and sporadic examples duly appear in classical 
Cypriot, Thessalian and Elean inscriptions (Buck ( 1955 : 89)), in the later inscriptions 
of many other dialects, and in the Ptolemaic papyri from the 3rd century  bc onwards 
(Mayser and Schmoll ( 1970 : I2.1.172)). There are also occasional examples in some 
manuscripts of the Septuagint (where they may, of course, be due to later copyists). 
 The example here is one of the earliest inscriptional examples in the Koine, and is 
testimony to the steady spread of the phenomenon from local and substandard varieties 
of spoken Greek into somewhat higher written registers. It is of crucial importance for 
the later history of Greek because it marks the beginning of the breakdown of the 
distinction between the consonant - stems of the 3rd declension and the a - stems (1st 
declension). Eventually new nominatives in  - a [ - a] (feminine) and  - a " [ - as] (masculine) 
were built to these accusatives in  - a n [ - an], and the whole class of masculine/feminine 
nouns was ﬁ nally absorbed into the a - stem paradigm (as in standard Modern Greek). 
The process, however, took many centuries to approach completion, because of the 
normative inﬂ uence of the literary and ofﬁ cial written languages. Indeed, some modern 
dialects still retain the old consonant - stem genitive singular sufﬁ x  - o " [ - os], while 
written forms such as 
 [e ' las]  ‘ Greece ’ , genitive 
 , also persist, 
e.g. on the T - shirts of national sports teams and in the names of banks, alongside the 
more colloquial 
 , genitive 
 . 
 This paradigmatic interference was not unidirectional, however. The nominative 
plural (and, in the popular vernacular, increasingly the accusative plural) of consonant -
 stems ended in  - e " [ - es] (cf. above). When the pronunciation of classical /ai/ shifted to 
[e], and so merged with /e/, the a - stem nominative plural  - a i [ - e] began in Byzantine 
times to acquire a ﬁ nal  - " [ - s] in popular speech, doubtless as a consequence of the 
great frequency of nominative plurals ending in [ - s] in the masculine and feminine 
nouns and adjectives of the 3rd declension (consonant - stems, i - stems, u - stems, eu -
 stems). Once again, the inﬂ uence of the archaizing literary and ofﬁ cial languages long 
delayed the appearance of such innovative nominative plural forms in higher - register 
writing, though they do start to occur sporadically in mid - to low - level popular litera-
ture from the early Byzantine period onwards (spelled  - e " and, later,  - a i " , the latter 
becoming available, as a compromise with the classical orthography, after the demise 
of the homophonous dative plural).  

122 Ancient Greek
 4.12   Conclusion 
 It should be clear from this rather selective survey of the development of the Koine 
in the Hellenistic period that quite a few of the changes characteristic of Modern 
Greek were already beginning to take effect in the more popular spoken and written 
varieties of the language in the last centuries of the pre - Christian era. These are 
best reﬂ ected in the private documents of the less well - educated, but grammatical 
and lexical innovations also have some impact on popular literary styles, and 
even some ofﬁ cial writing, though the inﬂ uence of the classical language increases 
steadily as we move towards the highest - level ofﬁ cial and self - consciously belletristic 
styles. (See the chapters on Ancient Greek in Georgakopo ú lou and Silk  (2009)  for 
some interesting discussion of issues relating to the notion of a standard language in 
antiquity.) 
 To a great extent this pattern of development continues throughout the Roman and 
Byzantine periods, with the important difference that the Koine ceases for a time to 
be a genuinely literary language under the impact of the Atticist movement. Henceforth 
high - level literary productions (i.e. those that fall into the genres of the classical tradi-
tion) aim more consistently at an Attic or Atticizing style, while the language of the 
ofﬁ cial Koine and more popular forms of literature (e.g. novel genres such as chronicles 
and hagiography) continues to compromise, in varying degrees according to the genre/
level of the text in question, between its own highly conservative practice and the usage 
of the contemporary spoken language. These issues are taken up and developed in 
chapters  5 and  6 . 
 Notes 
1  The proposal of Brixhe and Panay ó tou  (1994) , developed in Brixhe  (1997) , that a 
curse tablet found at the Macedonian capital of Pella in 1986, perhaps dating from the 
4th century  bc and written in a variety of West Greek, represents the  ‘ true ’  Macedonian 
dialect has not won universal support. There are still too many uncertainties of inter-
pretation in what is a very vernacular text, and the population of the city was in any 
case quite heterogeneous, including speakers of the North - West Greek dialects to 
the south.  
2  M é ndez Dosuna  (2000)  suggests the feminine 
 [u:dem í a:] remained unchanged 
because of its morphological transparency. 
3  Note, however, that the  ‘ classical ’  use of participles as complements to verbs of knowledge 
and perception was relatively well maintained, and these resisted replacement by ﬁ nite alter-
natives for longer than inﬁ nitives (see James  (2007) ). 
4  The phonetic transcriptions in what follows are an attempt to reconstruct the likely conserva-
tive/upper - class pronunciation of Attic in Attica in the late 4th century (cf. Teodorsson 
 (1974, 1978)  for details, and see chapter  6 ). 
5  There is evidence that a number of major sound changes had gone through in the speech of 
the majority of Greek speakers by c.150  bc , and these are reﬂ ected in the phonetic transcrip-
tion here and in subsequent sections: these include loss of distinctive vowel length, the related 
shift from a pitch to a stress accent, the monophthongization of all diphthongs with [ - i] as 
their second component, and the development of a fricative articulation 
 , later [f/v], 

Greek in the Hellenistic World  123
for the second element of diphthongs originally ending in [ - u]; double consonants tend 
to be simpliﬁ ed, and voiced plosives are beginning to develop fricative articulations, but 
fricativization seems not yet to have affected the voiceless aspirates widely. See chapter  6 for 
a full summary.  
6  It is assumed here that tonic forms were used after proclitic prepositions, however, and this 
remains the case in Modern Greek.  
7  In Elean numerals appear to have played a major role, with 
 [tr ê s]  ‘ three (nom/acc) ’ 
leading to the use of 
 [t é tores]  ‘ four ’  as both nominative and accusative, with this 
leading on to parallel use of all plurals in  - e " [ - es]. 

5
 Greek in the Roman 
Empire 
 5.1   Roman Domination 
 The Seleucids lost control of Alexander ’ s far eastern conquests, Persia and Bactria, 
during the mid - 3rd century. Though the latter remained under the control of a Greek 
dynasty, the former came to be ruled by an Iranian (Parthian) monarchy with 
the revival of Persia as the dominant regional power. But the heartlands of Hellenistic 
civilization, in Greece and Macedonia, in Asia Minor, in the middle East (Syria and 
Palestine) and in North Africa (Egypt and Cyrenaica) progressively fell ﬁ rst under the 
inﬂ uence and then under the direct control of Rome during the course of the 2nd 
and 1st centuries  bc , as Republican Rome began its dramatic period of imperial 
expansion. 
 Southern Italy and Sicily were already very largely in Roman hands by the end of 
the 3rd century, the latter as a direct result of Rome ’ s ﬁ rst war with Carthage (264 – 241 
 bc ). But the Romans ’ deadly struggle with the Carthaginians was far from resolved; 
by 215  bc the Carthaginians under Hannibal had attained an apparently dominant 
position, and in Greece the squabbling Aetolian and Achaean leagues, the latter in 
alliance with Philip V of Macedon, had quickly sought to close ranks when brought 
face to face with the dire implications of an imminent resolution to this conﬂ ict. Philip, 
however, made a treaty with Hannibal with a view to securing his own position in 
neighbouring Illyria, and the Romans replied swiftly by concluding their own treaty 
with the Aetolians and waging war ﬁ rst on Philip and the Achaeans together (211 – 205 
 bc ), and then, after their victory over Hannibal, on Philip alone (200 – 197  bc ), whose 
aggression along the coasts of Asia Minor had provoked the Pergamenes, Rhodians 
and Egyptians to appeal for help. Although the Romans proclaimed  ‘ Greek freedom ’ 
(i.e. from Macedonia) as their motive, the real consequence of their military successes 
against Macedonia was in fact a considerable tightening of the constraints on the 
freedom of action left to the cities of the Greek mainland. Roman victory thus left the 
Aetolians, who had aided their Roman allies against Philip, seriously disgruntled. 
 At this time Antiochus III, the Seleucid monarch of Syria, was seeking to extend his 
own control over the cities of the Asia Minor seaboard, and the Aetolians therefore 
rashly invited him to  ‘ liberate Greece ’ and settle their grievances with Rome. In the 
ensuing war (192 – 188  bc ) the Romans won another decisive victory, with the result 

Greek in the Roman Empire 125
not only that Aetolian power was further diminished in Greece but also that the 
Seleucids were effectively banished from Asia Minor west of the Taurus mountains. 
This left the friendly Attalid kings of Pergamum, who had already established their 
independence from the Seleucids in the ﬁ rst half of the 3rd century  bc , as the dominant 
power in Asia Minor. 
 Though Philip had fought as a Roman ally against Antiochus, he received little in 
return, and after a series of subsequent territorial disputes had been resolved in Rome ’ s 
favour, his successor Perseus tried to recover Macedonian inﬂ uence in Greece. When 
he was further alleged to have hostile intentions towards Rome ’ s ally Pergamum, the 
Romans initiated a third Macedonian war (171 – 168  bc ) in which Perseus was ﬁ nally 
subjected to a crushing defeat. After a short period organized as four  ‘ independent ’ 
tribute - paying republics, Macedonia was made into a Roman province in 149  bc . 
Shortly afterwards the continued intransigence of the Achaean league led in 146  bc to 
the destruction of Corinth, the dissolution of the league and the ﬁ nal subjection of the 
Greek city states to the direct control of the Roman governor of Macedonia. 
 A little later, in 133  bc , Attalus III, king of Pergamum, fearing revolution, bequeathed 
his kingdom to the Romans, and this fabulously rich territory was henceforth admin-
istered as the new province of Asia. Alarmed by this seemingly irresistible spread of 
Roman power, Mithridates VI, king of Pontus, sought, soon after his accession to the 
throne in c.120  bc , to consolidate his position by seizing control of the neighbouring, 
and previously independent, kingdoms of Bithynia and Cappadocia. Though Mithridates 
was eventually driven out of his Asian  ‘ empire ’ , Nicomedes IV of Bithynia decided to 
follow Attalus ’ example, and to leave his kingdom too to the protection of Roman 
government (74  bc ). His concern was understandable, since in 88  bc Mithridates had 
sought to take advantage of Roman preoccupations in Italy (a rebellion of Italian 
states) by invading Macedonia and Greece, where a number of states supported his 
cause. Though Mithridates was also forced out of Europe by Sulla, his ﬁ nal defeat 
took place only in 66  bc . The victorious general Pompey then organized Bithynia and 
Pontus together into another new province (63  bc ), and at the same time converted 
the much - reduced Seleucid kingdom, long racked by internal disunity and economic 
decline, into the province of Syria. 
 Now only Ptolemaic Egypt remained formally independent of Rome, but though 
the country ’ s last monarch, Cleopatra VII, sought to preserve and even revive her 
empire through her association ﬁ rst with Julius Caesar and then with Mark Antony, 
Egypt too was ﬁ nally annexed when in 31  bc Antony ’ s Romano - Egyptian ﬂ eet was 
defeated at Actium off north - west Greece by his enemy and arch - rival Octavian (soon 
to be known as Augustus, the ﬁ rst emperor of imperial Rome).  
 5.2   The Fate of Greek 
 Though these conquered and inherited territories were administered as Roman prov-
inces, Greek remained routinely in use alongside Latin, knowledge of which remained 
rather limited among the Greek - speaking population as a whole despite its imposition 
in the legal profession and the army, and the obvious need for bilingualism in the 
bureaucracy. As the vehicle of the widely admired ancient Hellenic civilization and the 

126 Ancient Greek
long - established ofﬁ cial language and universal lingua franca of the east, Greek was 
simply too prestigious and too well entrenched over too much territory for any more 
far - reaching programme of Latinization to seem either desirable or practicable (see e.g. 
Cicero  Pro Archia  23), and the Romans were by and large content to come to terms 
with the status quo. 
 Indeed, it became a matter of routine for the Roman elite, in recognition of the 
status of Greek as the primary cultural and international language of the age, both to 
learn a  ‘ practical ’ everyday Koine and to acquire at least a reading knowledge of liter-
ary Attic (cf. Kaimio  (1979) , Biville  (1992, 1993) , Clackson and Horrocks ( 2007 : 6.2)). 
The extent to which Greek was appropriated is tellingly revealed by the biographer 
Suetonius, who has the emperor Claudius remark in surprise at a  ‘ barbarian ’ s ’ command 
of both Latin and Greek ( Claudius  42.2):  ‘ you know both  our languages ’ ( utroque 
sermone nostro ). Even the Atticist/Asianist controversy (cf.  4.7.5 and see below) was 
reﬂ ected directly in the theory and practice of Roman orators (cf., for example, Cicero 
 Orator 226,  Brutus  325), and one of the leading ideologues of the early Atticist move-
ment, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, came to Rome in 30  bc and taught there for the 
next 22 years. We may also compare the case of Plutarch, who was able to lecture in 
Rome between c.  ad 75 and 90 in his own language, and never felt it necessary to 
master Latin, while the whole of Quintilian ’ s  Institutio Oratoria  provides eloquent 
testimony to the pervasiveness of Greek language and culture among the Roman 
aristocracy. 
 The combined effect, unsurprisingly, of direct Roman administration of the east, 
the partial politico - economic assimilation of the Greek aristocracy, and the cultural 
Hellenization of its Roman counterpart was a great deal of reciprocal lexical borrow-
ing/calquing (cf. Quintilian I. 5. 58) and a certain amount of phonological and gram-
matical convergence between Greek and Latin in their higher registers, particularly 
literary and ofﬁ cial Latin (cf. Coleman  (1977) ) and ofﬁ cial Greek (the Latinisms of the 
latter having a limited  ‘ trickle - down ’ effect in more popular registers, cf. Garc í a 
Domingo  (1979) ). 
 The long - established presence of major colonial cities in southern Italy, followed by 
a major inﬂ ux of slaves and freedmen from the east, likewise ensured a parallel impact 
of popular Greek on popular Latin, most obviously revealed by the wholesale replace-
ment of native Latin words by Greek equivalents (Coleman  (1977) ). Compare, for 
example, classical Latin  crus  ‘ leg ’ ,  ictus   ‘ blow ’ ,  lapis  ‘ stone ’ ,  gladius  ‘ sword ’ , with 
Italian  gamba ,  colpo ,  pietra ,  spada , all derived from Vulgar Latin words borrowed 
and adapted from Greek: 
 [kam ' bi], 
 [ ' kolap h os], 
 [ ' petra], 
 
[ ' spat h i]. At a slightly higher level, the generally very ordinary Koine of the New 
Testament (see  5.10.2  below) had a marked impact on the development of Christian 
Latin through close translations of the original (the so - called  Vetus Latina ) and the 
establishment by St Jerome of a standard text (the Vulgate) based on these versions.  
 5.3   The Impact of Bilingualism: Greek and Latin in Contact 
 The most that can be attempted here is a brief examination of a number of apparently 
parallel developments in the two languages that took place in the period up to the 

Greek in the Roman Empire 127
4th/5th centuries  ad . The Greek inﬂ uence on Latin, as noted, became increasingly 
pervasive as the latter took on the role of a world language. The Latin inﬂ uence on 
Greek, by contrast, was more restricted. General interaction with the Roman admin-
istration and exposure to Roman institutions quickly led to the standard use of bor-
rowed/calqued vocabulary items and phraseology, and their spread in the language, 
together with the later and more gradual adoption of certain grammatical character-
istics, was supported by the long - term presence of Latin - speaking ofﬁ cials, traders and 
soldiers, whose native Latin may eventually have assimilated certain Hellenisms and 
whose acquired Greek, with its Latin substrate effects, may in turn have come to inﬂ u-
ence native practice. 
 In general, such developments involved extensions of usage based on loan trans-
lation effects and/or the natural selection and subsequent evolution in parallel of 
constructional options which were already available in both languages. Much direct 
grammatical inﬂ uence, however, was effectively limited to the ofﬁ cial Koine, and 
reﬂ ected the cumulative impact on bureaucratic Greek of the large - scale translation of 
administrative documents composed originally in Latin; such features (including, for 
example, a liking for verb - ﬁ nal word order and the general use of the accusative and 
inﬁ nitive construction, cf.  5.9 below for some further discussion), were often rather 
alien to the natural direction of development in Greek, and so tended not to affect its 
subsequent evolution very signiﬁ cantly. 
 We may begin, uncontroversially, with the administrative, military, commercial and 
other vocabulary that was borrowed directly into spoken and  ‘ business ’  Greek, but 
rarely if ever used in the literary language, in the period up to the end of the 5th century 
 ad  (cf. Viscidi  (1944) , Zilliacus  (1935) ). Typical examples include (the pronunciation 
is that assumed for educated speakers in the 4th/5th centuries  ad , see chapter  6 for a 
summary): 
 (1)  

128 Ancient Greek
 Where possible syntactic convergence is concerned, however, things become very 
much more controversial, and even where inﬂ uence is likely, the crucial question of 
its direction is often uncertain; in many cases we may simply be dealing with shared 
developments based on a pre - existing structural similarity or parallel developmental 
trend. 
 To take a simple example of the highly complex interactions that may be at work, 
we may consider the case of 
 [af ' tos]. The demonstrative use of 
 [af ' tos] in 
pre - articular position is a regular option in Modern Greek (cf. 
 [af ' to 
to vi ' vlio], lit.  ‘ this the book ’ , etc.), and sporadic examples can already be found in 
the papyri of the Roman period. But in the classical language 
 [af ' tos] before the 
deﬁ nite article meant only  ‘ self ’ (in the intensifying sense, e.g.  the general himself  etc.), 
while after the article it meant  ‘ (the) same ’ (for the connection, cf. English expressions 
such as  the self same man  etc.). In the absence of any co - occurring nominal, the oblique 
cases were also used as  ‘ weak ’ (effectively enclitic) anaphoric pronouns. 
 Modern Greek, however, has two sets of pronouns derived from this element; inde-
pendent  ‘ strong ’  forms, related to the demonstrative use of 
 [af ' tos], and clitic 
forms, with concomitant loss of the ﬁ rst syllable, derived from the weak pronominal 
 [afton] etc. 
 The shift of meaning from  ‘ the same ’ to  ‘ this ’ can readily be explained in terms of 
overlapping discourse functions, since  ‘ the same X ’ can be used to refer back anaphori-
cally to some previously mentioned entity in much the same way as the true demon-
strative  ‘ this X ’ ; it is then simply a matter of extending the discourse - internal use of 
 ‘ the same ’ to parallel the genuinely exophoric (deictic) use of the demonstrative. 
 Once this true deictic use was established, 
 [af ' tos] began to appear in the 
regular pre - articular position of other demonstratives: e.g. 
 [to af ' to 
 ' xrono]  ‘ (in) the same year/(in) this year ’ ,  
 [af ' to to  ' xrono]  ‘ (in) this 
the year ’ . And once established as a demonstrative, 
 [af ' tos] quickly acquired the 
related use as a  ‘ strong ’  anaphoric pronoun. 

Greek in the Roman Empire 129
 In the same period, however, i.e. from around the end of the 2nd century  ad , Latin 
 ipse (or in its more  ‘ vulgar ’ form  ipsus ), meaning  ‘ self ’ , came to be used in combination 
with other demonstratives (e.g.  hic ipse   ‘ this self ’ ,  iste/ille ipse   ‘ that self ’ , cf. Italian 
 stesso   <   iste ipse ) in the sense of  ‘ the same ’ , replacing the original form  idem.  A little 
later,  ipse also came to be used alone as a demonstrative/anaphoric pronoun (cf. Italian 
 esso ) in competition with  iste/ille ; and examples are common in texts from around  ad 
400 (see Clackson and Horrocks ( 2007 : 278 – 9). 
 Clearly, the Greek and Latin developments are very similar. But was the develop-
ment of  hic ipse  as a replacement for  idem modelled on the classical Greek construction 
  [o af ' tos]? We might equally well ask whether the anaphoric/demonstrative 
use of 
 [o af ' tos] was connected with the comparable use of  idem  and its 
replacements; or whether the development of a demonstrative ( ‘ strong ’ pronominal) 
use of hitherto  ‘ weak ’ 
 [afton] etc. derived not only from partial identiﬁ cation 
with the newly demonstrative 
 [af ' tos] but also from the fact that Latin demon-
stratives ( hic/ille/iste ) doubled as anaphoric pronouns; or indeed whether the demon-
strative/anaphoric use of the hitherto intensive  ipse was acquired through association 
with the new demonstrative/ ‘ strong ’  anaphoric uses of the intensive 
 [af ' tos]. 
These questions cannot be satisfactorily answered at the present time, and we may 
simply observe here that (a) the changes are semantically  ‘ natural ’ and so could in 
principle be independent, but that (b) the very close parallelism of development in 
exactly the same period is at least highly suggestive. 
 To complete this survey of possible areas of convergence in the popular spoken 
registers of Greek and Latin it may be useful to append a few further parallels, this 
time involving the development of the verb system: 
 (2) 
 The extension of ﬁ nite (subjunctive) clauses introduced by 
 [ ' ina] at the 
expense of inﬁ nitival structures: this was possibly connected with the historically 
wider range of uses of Latin  ut , e.g. in ﬁ nal and consecutive clauses, indirect com-
mands, and various  ‘ future - referring ’  complement and adjunct structures.  
 Since this process began in the Hellenistic period (cf.  4.4.1 ), however, the most we can 
say is that contact with Latin may have reinforced and/or accelerated an established 
trend. Thus in classical Greek the present and future indicative were very largely dis-
tinguished from the present and aorist subjunctive respectively by distinctions of vowel 
quality and vowel length that were subsequently lost (quite widely by the middle of 
the 2nd century  bc ): e.g. 
  [pa ú - e:s]  ‘ you stop ’ , 
 [pa ú - ε :is]  ‘ you may stop ’ , 
both  >  
 ; 
  [pa ú - s - omen]  ‘ we shall stop ’ , 
 [pa ú - s - o:men]  ‘ we 
may stop ’ , both    >   
 . The damaging effects of sound change therefore led 
to a growing need to  ‘ mark ’ subjunctives as such, and 
 [ ' ina] therefore began to 
develop language - internally as a lexically  ‘ empty ’ mood marker, ﬁ rst in subordinate, 
but eventually also in main clauses that required a modal verb form (a process that 
was ﬁ nally completed in the early middle ages).
 (3) 
 The popularity in the written Koine of articular inﬁ nitives governed by prepo-
sitions: this might have been inﬂ uenced by the comparable use of Latin gerunds.  

130 Ancient Greek
 Again, the fact that this was already characteristic of the style of Hellenistic ofﬁ cialdom 
(cf.  4.6.3 ) means that Latin can have done no more than encourage a development 
that was already in place. Similar observations apply both to the progressive loss of 
distinctive middle morphology (outside the future and aorist paradigms, middle and 
passive forms were always identical, and some middle verbs already employed passive 
sufﬁ xes in the aorist even in classical Greek), and to the disappearance of the optative 
mood, which was steadily replaced, according to its function, by subjunctives (e.g. in 
past - time ﬁ nal clauses), indicatives (e.g. in past - time indirect speech after 
 [ ' oti], 
 ‘ that ’ ), or modal periphrases (e.g. in speculative future conditionals, and generally in 
the potential sense of what  ‘ could happen ’ ). These processes can also be traced back 
to developments in classical and Hellenistic Greek, and were largely motivated by a 
desire for greater semantic transparency (the optative contributing very little that was 
clearly deﬁ nable in the majority of its uses outside the basic sense of expressing a wish). 
Thus the fact that Latin has only one set of medio - passive endings (e.g.  uertor  =   ‘ I turn 
(myself) round/I am turned round ’ , etc.) and a single subjunctive mood that fulﬁ lled 
the combined functions of the Greek subjunctive and optative (in part) seems once 
again to have been no more than an external reinforcement for an internally motivated 
evolution.
 (4) 
 The formal renewal of the future by means of periphrases involving a modal 
verb  +  inﬁ nitive (at ﬁ rst replacing the future passive, but later more generally, fol-
lowing the changes in the vowel system discussed in 6.2). Initially 
 [o ' p h ilo] 
 ‘ I owe/ought ’ , and 
  [ ' melo]  ‘ I intend/am about to ’ , were more common, but 
later 
  [ ' ek h o]  ‘ I have/am able/must ’ , and then 
 [ ' t h elo]  ‘ I wish ’ , became the 
preferred variants. This in principle allowed the marking of aspect in the future for 
the ﬁ rst time, by providing a choice between the aorist (perfective) and present 
(imperfective) inﬁ nitives. Although this was not reﬂ ected in Latin, where time refer-
ence always took precedence over aspect, the general pattern of development may 
be connected with the parallel replacement of the future in Vulgar Latin by inﬁ ni-
tival periphrases with  debeo  ‘ I owe ’ ,  uolo  ‘ I wish ’ , and above all  habeo  ‘ I have/am 
able/must ’ : cf. French  donner - ai/donner - as    <   donare habeo/donare habes  (cf. 
Clackson and Horrocks ( 2007 : 279 – 80)). 
 Although Balkan Romance forms its futures with  uolo  ‘ wish ’ rather than  habeo, we 
should note that the Romanian forms are not attested until relatively recently, by which 
time periphrases with 
  ‘ wish ’ had replaced those with 
 [ ' exo] in Greek. 
This may therefore represent one of the convergent features of the famous Balkan 
 Sprachbund  (see  8.6 ). In earlier periods, however, when the Roman/Byzantine empire 
still extended over much of the eastern Mediterranean, there is no reason to expect 
Greek in general to have anticipated such speciﬁ cally Balkan developments of the later 
middle ages. 
 Thus even though the use of periphrases to replace the future passive began in 
Hellenistic times, the subsequent parallelism of development in late antiquity is 
particularly striking, and surely reﬂ ects a mutual reinforcement of already partly 
convergent constructional innovations. We may also note the parallel use of the past 

Greek in the Roman Empire 131
tenses of 
 [ ' ek h o]/ habeo (and the other future auxiliaries)   +  inﬁ nitive to supply a 
 ‘ conditional ’  (or future - in - the - past) to express  ‘ unreal ’ or  ‘ hypothetical ’  consequences 
in the sense of  ‘ would/would have ’ (see Part II for further discussion of this important 
issue).
 (5) 
 The falling together of perfect and aorist, functionally and then formally (cf. 
 6.5.2 ), may have been inﬂ uenced by the dual use of the Latin perfect as a past 
perfective and a present stative. The renewal of the  ‘ true ’ (stative) perfect by peri-
phrases with 
 [ ' ek h o]  ‘ have ’ and 
 [imi]  ‘ be ’  +  perfect (or functionally equiva-
lent aorist) passive participle, the former in an active sense, the latter in a passive 
one, may also reﬂ ect the inﬂ uence of the parallel (Vulgar) Latin constructions: cf. 
 hoc habeo factum ,  ‘ this I - have in - a - having - been - done - state ’   =   ‘ I have done this ’ ,  hoc 
factum est ,  ‘ this in - a - having - been - done - state is ’  =   ‘ this is done ’ . 
 We should note, however, that the functional merger of aorist and perfect had begun 
in Hellenistic times (there is possible evidence of overlapping use already in Menander, 
for example, cf.  4.7.7 ). Furthermore, the passive construction with 
  [imi]  ‘ be ’ was 
already an option in classical Greek (alongside a much more limited use of the active 
equivalent, i.e. with a perfect or aorist active participle). Originally used primarily to 
form active and passive  ‘ modal ’ perfects (subjunctive and optative) and the morpho-
logically difﬁ cult 3pl perfect indicative passive (where the ﬁ nal consonant of a verb 
stem could not readily be combined with the sufﬁ x  - n t a i [ - ntai]), the periphrastic 
constructions gradually spread through the paradigm in the popular Koine, presumably 
because of their semantic transparency and the fact that the paradigms of the verb  ‘ to 
be ’ and the relevant participles had in any case to be mastered independently. 
 But as the use of the inﬂ ected participles of the 3rd declension (i.e. present/future/
aorist active, and aorist passive) began to wither away, in part because of their mor-
phological complexity (cf.  6.5.3 ), the periphrasis with the perfect passive participle, 
which deployed a combination of  ‘ regular ’  2nd - and 1st - declension endings, 
 
(masc)/
  (fem)/
 (neut) [ - ' menos/ - ' meni/ - ' menon], emerged as the major sur-
vivor in popular Greek of the medieval period. None the less, the use of the past tense 
of  ‘ be ’ with an aorist active participle, originally fully inﬂ ected in  - s a " (masc)/ - s a s a 
(fem)/ - s a n (neut) [ - sas/ - sasa/ - san], but later reduced to the invariant  - s a n t a [ - sanda] 
and remodelled on the pattern of the indeclinable present participle in  - o  n t a [ - onda], 
is also well attested as a pluperfect substitute (cf. chapter  11 ). 
 There is, then, little reason to see here any particular impact of the Latin perfect in 
general or of the Latin perfect passive periphrasis in particular, other than as providing 
a general external stimulus to the Greek trends already under way. 
 The situation is rather different, however, in the case of 
 [ ' ek h o]   +  perfect passive 
participle used in an active, transitive sense. This is a wholly unclassical construction, 
which begins to appear in the more polished  ‘ literary ’ registers of the Koine in the 
Roman period (e.g. in the writings of the historian Diodorus Siculus or the biographer 
and essayist Plutarch). It is not used by the Atticists (cf.  5.5 and  5.6 ), and it does not 
appear in low - level literary or subliterary texts. Furthermore, with the advent of a 
more stringent Atticist approach in the 2nd century  ad , it quickly disappeared even 

132 Ancient Greek
from stylistically middle - brow compositions, and eventually reappears in popular 
varieties of Greek only after the  ‘ Latin ’ conquest of much of the Byzantine empire after 
the capture of Constantinople by the fourth crusade in 1204 (see chapters  7 and  11 ). 
 This construction is therefore a very strong candidate for classiﬁ cation as a  ‘ Latinism ’ 
in the Koine, though not one which made much impact at the time, being alien to the 
general structure of a still prestigious world language. It was, however, later reintro-
duced with more lasting effect, following the collapse of the Byzantine state and the 
abandonment of classical models in the areas under western control, as a product of 
long - term Greek/Romance bilingualism in the later middle ages and early modern 
period. 
 Looking at all these developments together, therefore, it seems that those which had 
a long - term impact on Greek typically represent no more than the carrying through 
of changes which had already begun in the classical or early post - classical language. 
Although many can be paralleled in imperial Vulgar Latin, it is probably safe to con-
clude that the majority are simply a by - product of the transition of both (Attic) Greek 
and Latin from the status of local dialects to world languages, with the well - known 
drift towards greater grammatical analyticity that such a role almost invariably entails, 
at least in more popular registers. Given that the changes in question are for the most 
part structurally and semantically  ‘ natural ’ (and as such, well - attested elsewhere), and 
given that the two languages were in any case members of the same  ‘ family ’ , with 
many partial structural correspondences already in place, a certain parallelism of evo-
lution under similar external conditions of expansion and use by non - native speakers 
was only to be expected. Against this background, the fact of extensive Greek/Latin 
bilingualism in the six centuries prior to the collapse of the Roman empire in the west 
can have been only a contributory factor in the promotion of the attested structural 
convergence. 
 5.4   Roman Attitudes to Greek Culture 
 The pervasive inﬂ uence of Greek language and culture remained a highly problematical 
issue for many Romans throughout the imperial period. Conversely, despite the politi-
cal and economic advantages that Roman rule eventually brought with it, many Greeks 
felt a profound sense of alienation; continuity with the past was correspondingly high-
lighted, and Roman literature and education largely ignored. Thus, even though some 
aspects of Roman culture (e.g. architectural style/technique, bath houses and gladiato-
rial combat) did begin to make an impact, the overall outcome of Greco - Roman 
cohabitation, even after several centuries, could hardly be called harmonious. In late 
antiquity east and west eventually went their separate ways, with the eastern empire 
evolving into the distinctive Orthodox Christian civilization of Byzantium (see Part II). 
 The reasons for this state of affairs are not hard to ﬁ nd. For the Romans civilization 
was deﬁ ned primarily in terms of long - standing customs (urban life, the rule of law, 
ethical ideals, etc.) which were never regarded as their exclusive property. Rather, the 
Roman aristocracy felt proud, having adopted these values and mores themselves, to 
have imposed them upon their subject peoples and  ‘ Romanized ’ them. Since Roman 
identity so conceived was not underwritten by ethnic origin or a common native lan-

Greek in the Roman Empire 133
guage, the incorporation of outsiders was widely seen as a demonstration of Rome ’ s 
success in its civilizing mission. 
 But although this view worked well enough for the  ‘ barbarian ’ west, the incorpora-
tion of the Hellenistic world presented serious difﬁ culties. The Greeks had not only 
reached a high level of civilization without Roman help, but had also, initially through 
contacts between Rome and the Greek colonies in Italy but then more widely, directly 
contributed to the development of the very customs and practices of which the Romans 
were so proud. This bred a respect for the Greeks which the Romans did not feel for 
other subject peoples. But when the vast and superior cultural resources of alien 
Hellenism began to make a wider impact on Roman life, the changes seemed to many 
to threaten their Roman identity. This led to a more selective approach to Greek culture 
based on a sharp distinction between the Greeks of old, who were believed to have 
had  ‘ true ’  civilization, and the Greeks of the contemporary world, who were increas-
ingly seen as frivolous, self - indulgent and insincere, and so just as much in need of the 
ﬁ rm hand of Roman rule as western provincials, albeit for different reasons. 
 By contrast, the Greeks themselves had always adopted a highly exclusive deﬁ nition 
of their own identity, built largely upon notions of common religion, common descent 
from mythical ancestors and the use of a common language. Thus  ‘ barbarians ’ , includ-
ing Romans, could never become Greek, however far their adopted Hellenism went, 
while the participation of Greeks in the economic and social advantages of the empire 
in no way undermined their Greekness. None the less, the Roman view of the Greeks 
as a people with a great past readily reinforced the Greeks ’ own increasing obsession 
with former glories. Nostalgia therefore became an increasingly central characteristic 
of the Greek world view in the early empire, though it should be stressed that this 
reverence for the past was not wholly divorced from contemporary considerations, 
since, as we shall see in  5.5 , (qualiﬁ ed) Roman respect for earlier Greek achievement 
offered enterprising Greeks of the 2nd and 3rd centuries  ad an important resource 
to exploit in jockeying for support and patronage (see, for example, Woolf  (1994) , 
Swain  (1996) ). 
 5.5   Atticism and the Second Sophistic 
 As we have already seen, the role of rhetoric had changed considerably in post - classical 
times, since neither the Hellenistic monarchies nor the Roman empire provided a 
context in which public speeches by individuals could be expected to have a major 
impact in the wider world of politics and international affairs. 
 Nevertheless, the demand in aristocratic circles for a rhetorical education remained 
consistently high in the Roman period, and the  rhetors  (or  ‘ sophists ’ ), i.e. public speak-
ers offering rhetorical training, enjoyed a correspondingly high social status. The 
reasons are not hard to ﬁ nd. Administration and civic life still demanded rhetorical 
skills, since formal speeches, often with some political content, were routinely given 
on major public occasions. A successful performance could lead directly to imperial 
patronage and the channelling of resources towards a particular city or project, while 
a reputation for eloquence could readily lead to signiﬁ cant personal advancement. 
Eulogies of the emperor naturally constituted an important genre, but speeches were 

134 Ancient Greek
also given to commemorate visits by imperial ofﬁ cials, appointments to imperial con-
sulships, the construction of monumental buildings and, after the adoption of 
Christianity by Constantine I (reigned 306 – 37), the dedication of major churches. 
 The school curriculum, however, in line with the retrospective mood of the times, 
remained strictly based on a canon of already ancient texts that were felt to embody 
 ‘ the glory that was Greece ’ , and students ’ exercises revolved around themes taken 
exclusively from the period between the Persian Wars and the reign of Alexander the 
Great. 
 Although there had been some cultural nationalism (marked in particular by an 
efﬂ orescence of rhetoric) as early as the late Republic, it is perhaps from the reign of 
Augustus (27  bc – ad 14) onwards that we see the beginnings of a true revival in Greek 
self - conﬁ dence, based at least in part on Roman willingness to allow the major Greek 
cities to retain a degree of autonomy within which a continuing Hellenic identity could 
foster the illusion of the survival of past glories. 
 During the 2nd century  ad in particular, a series of positively philhellenic emperors 
(Hadrian, Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius) ushered in a period of real economic 
resurgence distinguished by monumental building and civic benefactions on the one 
hand and increasing Greek membership of the equestrian and senatorial orders on the 
other. The Greeks were quick to appreciate that linking their past to the Roman present 
offered a fast route to money and privilege, and the 2nd century marks the beginning of 
a period of strikingly ﬂ amboyant Hellenism generally known as the  ‘ Second Sophistic ’ 
(the term was coined by the Athenian sophist Philostratus in the early 3rd century  ad , 
the  ‘ First Sophistic ’ having occurred in the 5th century  bc , cf. chapter  3 ). A wealthy 
aristocracy was now only too pleased to pay distinguished sophists to teach its sons, 
while citizen bodies, increasingly culturally aware, looked forward to regular public 
entertainments by renowned speakers in the newly built  odeia. Against this background, 
the leading sophists quickly evolved into an intellectual and social elite, offering ostenta-
tious displays of competitive disputation and enjoying high - ranking connections and 
popular adulation on a scale reserved today for rock stars and Hollywood heroes. 
 While those looking for a higher education had had, since the time of Plato and 
Isocrates, a choice between rhetoric and philosophy, the greater accessibility and sheer 
entertainment value of the former now led to the temporary eclipse of the latter. The 
sophists soon became the primary symbol of the resilience of the Greek urban aristoc-
racy, and the central component of a literary and cultural renaissance founded in 
nostalgia for a lost but glorious past. Indeed, Christianity notwithstanding, the long -
 term inﬂ uence of these guardians of the Hellenic heritage, whose knowledge and 
learning seemed to allow them to commune directly with the ancient classics, was so 
profound that they effectively determined the linguistic and literary mind - set of the 
educated Greek elite for the next eighteen hundred years. 
 It is against this background that the phenomenon of  ‘ Atticism ’ must be assessed. 
The perception of the written Koine as a  ‘ technical ’  or  ‘ bureaucratic ’ language had 
always militated against its unadorned use as a vehicle for  ‘ higher ’ literary purposes 
(cf.  4.7.4 ,  4.7.5 ), and the Hellenistic education system therefore required the study and 
imitation of classical authors. Thus an initial preference for the Isocratean  ‘ periodic ’ 
style was soon replaced, with the advent of the Asianic reaction in the 3rd century  bc , 
by a striving for a quirky Gorgianic restlessness that quickly became fashionable and 

Greek in the Roman Empire 135
never ceased to attract adherents. This movement enjoyed something of a revival in 
Nero ’ s time (reigned  ad 54 – 68), and again in the 2nd century in the age of Hadrian 
(reigned  ad 117 – 38). 
 As already noted, the  ‘ Atticist ’ response, which set in during the 1st century  bc , 
was dedicated to re - establishing the style and ultimately the language of the  ‘ best ’ Attic 
writers. Though both Asianism and Atticism can be seen initially as the product of 
dissatisfaction among writers of literary prose with the perceived sterility of the Koine, 
the eventual triumph and long - term success of Atticism can ultimately be attributed 
to the fact that it found its natural milieu in the context of the antiquarianism of the 
Second Sophistic. The precious link with the classical past could, it seemed, best be 
secured by addressing the ancient masters in their own Attic dialect, thereby obtaining 
their tacit endorsement for the products of the present. While the written Koine could 
be accepted as the language of business, the expression of the highest forms of Greek 
culture demanded better, and only Attic, the embodiment of the  ‘ purest ’ and  ‘ noblest ’ 
form of the language, could possibly serve as its vehicle (cf. Aelius Aristides  Panathenaic 
Oration 322 – 30). 
 This development had the further advantage that it  ‘ solved ’ the problem of the 
steadily widening gap between the language of the classical texts studied in school and 
the different varieties of contemporary Greek. Educated Greeks soon came to feel that 
their contemporary language fundamentally  was Attic, if only it had not been allowed 
to decline through vulgarity and ignorance, and an ability to use the classical language 
(rather like the use of  ‘ BBC English ’ until very recently) came to be regarded as a 
conspicuous and exclusive badge of class membership. 
 The resultant dichotomy between an unchanging Attic ideal (resembling nothing so 
much as a Platonic form) and the Koine in all its heterogeneity (ranging from the 
standardized written language of ofﬁ cial documents at the highest level down to the 
speech of bilingual peasants) quickly established a formal state of diglossia that became 
steadily more problematical with the passage of time, and which was not to be ﬁ nally 
abandoned until the late 20th century (see Part III). 
 It should be stressed, however, that the notion of a clear - cut dichotomy, though 
ideologically vital to the educated classes, was in reality largely theoretical. In the ﬁ rst 
place, there was no consensus as to which  ‘ classical ’  authors could legitimately be 
appealed to, nor was there any overall consistency of usage in even the subset of 
authors who were generally acknowledged as suitable models. Thucydides, for example, 
used a rather Ionicized and  ‘ old - fashioned ’ Attic compared with, say, Plato, whose 
usage in turn did not fully conform to that of orators such as Lysias or Demosthenes, 
while the Attic tragedians employed a distinctively  ‘ marked ’  and archaizing style all 
of their own (cf.  2.2.5  and  3.1 ). Thus few, if any, writers were in practice able to 
sustain a consistent  ‘ Attic ’  style, and many simply fell back on the expedient of deco-
rating a grammatically antiqued Koine (key  ‘ rules ’  were learned at school, see  5.6 . 
below) with vocabulary and phraseology randomly excerpted to meet the needs of the 
moment. Self - doubt and confusion were rife, and what had begun as a mildly  ‘ classical ’ 
corrective to Asianic excess soon evolved into an increasingly problematical obstacle 
to clear and conﬁ dent self - expression (cf. Schmid  (1887 – 97)  for detailed statistics 
about the usage of particular authors, and Anderson ( 1993 : ch. 4) for bibliography 
and a general survey of the issues). 

136 Ancient Greek
 At the same time the highest registers of the written and spoken Koine, employed 
by people who had been educated to think of Attic as the  ‘ correct ’  form of the language 
(at least for the most reﬁ ned forms of writing and public address), inevitably absorbed 
an increasing number of Attic traits with the passage of time. The educated/standard 
Koine thus found itself uneasily poised between the cultural imperative of unchanging 
Attic perfection and the practical need for a  ‘ working ’ written language that recognized 
and represented (at least some of) the changes in spoken Greek which, education in 
the classics notwithstanding, eventually penetrated even the most conservative circles. 
In the Roman imperial and Byzantine periods, therefore, the ofﬁ cial language of admin-
istration at the highest levels became somewhat more detached from even educated 
spoken Greek than had previously been the case. 
 Since the all - important distinction between classical Attic and the Koine was in 
practice far from absolute, even the most learned devotees of Atticism routinely left 
themselves open to attack for their  ‘ solecisms ’  (cf. Fabricius ( 1962 : 20)), and Atticism 
might best be thought of not as a well - deﬁ ned body of doctrine but as a state of mind 
inculcated by the education system and reinforced by the practice and prejudices of 
the aristocracy. Well - known practitioners of this  ‘ puristic ’ Attic revivalism in the 
period of the Second Sophistic include: the orators Aelius Aristides (c.  ad 129 – c.189) 
and Herodes Atticus ( ad 101 – 77, the multimillionaire benefactor of Roman Athens); 
the writer of  ‘ philosophical ’  medleys Claudius Aelianus (Aelian: c.  ad 172 – c.235); the 
historians Flavius Arrianus (Arrian: c.  ad 95 – 175) and Appian (2nd century  ad ); the 
sophists ’ biographer Philostratus (born c.  ad 160/170); the antiquarian/geographer 
Pausanias (2nd century  ad ); and the romance writers Achilles Tatius (c. 2nd century 
 ad ) and Longus (c. late 2nd/early 3rd century  ad ). 
 From a modern perspective, however, Lucian, born in Syrian Commagene c.  ad 
120, and a native speaker of Syriac who  ‘ learned his Greek at school ’ ( Bis Accusatus 
27), is perhaps one of the more successful practitioners. By adopting a relatively relaxed 
attitude to classical precedent, he managed to impart an unusual degree of  ‘ vitality ’  to 
a language already  ‘ dead ’ for some ﬁ ve centuries, while his attitude (amused scepticism) 
and subject matter (essays, treatises and dialogues on a wide range of issues of intel-
lectual interest) are more immediately congenial than those of many other contempo-
rary writers. 
 Yet as early as the ﬁ rst century  ad  the essayist and biographer Plutarch (c.  ad 
46 – 120) was complaining about the banality of thought and clich é d verbiage that the 
doctrine of Atticism was tending to produce in its less talented practitioners ( Moralia 
42 DE), and even Lucian himself, despite having begun his career as a successful, if 
rapidly disillusioned, orator, repeatedly satirizes the excesses of Atticist pedantry 
( Lexiphanes, Pseudologista, Pseudosophista ). 
 Plutarch, however, was among the last exponents of the Hellenistic tradition, exem-
pliﬁ ed by writers such as Polybius (cf.  4.7.2 ) and the historian/geographer Strabo (c.64 
 bc – ad  19), a tradition which was increasingly out of tune with the mood of the times. 
Despite the fact that Atticism tended to smother natural invention by encouraging a 
preoccupation with linguistic form and institutionalizing a state of mind that equated 
a surface dressing of  ‘ hallmarked ’  items with learning and good taste, the hold of the 
movement in educated circles was such that those who failed to display the expected 
knowledge of approved grammar and diction forfeited all prospect of serious consid-

Greek in the Roman Empire 137
eration by their peers. Only writers of scientiﬁ c prose, such as the Pergamene physician 
Galen ( ad 129 – 99), were in a position to reject its demands (in part) in the interests 
of clarity and precision. 
 Following the excesses of the 2nd century, however, a more realistic Atticism, well 
exempliﬁ ed by the historian Cassius Dio (Cocceianus) (c.  ad 155 – 235), eventually 
began to prevail. This shift perhaps partly reﬂ ects the diminution of scholarly activity 
and enthusiasm in the midst of the very real political and economic difﬁ culties of the 
period, which enjoyed no fewer than 23 emperors, or would - be emperors, between  ad 
238 and 284 (see  7.1 ). The gradual recognition of the practical unattainability of the 
Attic ideal and the new atmosphere of relative linguistic tolerance led to the near -
 universal acceptance of certain non - classical constructions alongside strictly Attic 
usage, and to the development of a generally  ‘ Atticizing ’  style, in which Attic gram-
matical and lexical elements were combined with certain well - established features of 
the higher - level Koine (cf. Fabricius  (1962) ). This standard prose language was soon 
used by virtually all literary writers, whose styles now differed principally in the degree 
to which they incorporated speciﬁ cally Attic markers into their writing. This literary 
standard remained, subject to greater or lesser degrees of Atticizing, the basis for bel-
letristic writing throughout late antiquity and the middle ages down into the modern 
period (cf.  8.4.2  and chapter  9 ), its relationship with spoken Greek becoming ever 
more tenuous. 
 A more practical, non - Atticizing Koine was, however, retained for everyday pur-
poses in the Chancery, although even this  ‘ simple ’  administrative style, despite making 
concessions to change in the interests of communicative efﬁ ciency, became increasingly 
conservative, irrespective of sporadic Atticist inﬁ ltration, through the rigorous training 
of clerical ofﬁ cials (and indeed all who learned to read and write at a basic level) in 
the conventions of traditional  ‘ business Greek ’ . 
 But one particular version of this basic style of written Greek eventually evolved, 
under the inﬂ uence of the relatively unpretentious language of the New Testament (cf. 
 5.10.2 ), into a rival  ‘ middle - brow ’ literary language that permitted aspects of contem-
porary speech to be directly represented, and which was widely employed in biogra-
phies and works of reference aimed at the ediﬁ cation of a wider, more popular audience 
(cf.  5.10 ,  8.5.5 ,  8.5.6 ,  10.2 ,  10.3 ). But the spoken language itself was not to become 
a primary basis for the development of a written form of Greek until the later middle 
ages (and even then was subject to strict genre - conditioned restrictions on its use, 
cf.  8.4.3 – 8.4.6  and chapter  11 ). 
 In the following sections a sample of varieties of Greek from the Roman period 
(ranging from the 1st to the 5th centuries  ad ) will be presented and discussed, begin-
ning with the Atticizing style of belles lettres, and passing on to ofﬁ cial and (semi - )
literary versions of the Koine. The evidence for spoken Greek provided by the private 
documents of the barely literate is considered separately in chapter  6 . 
 5.6   Atticist Grammars and Lexica: Aelius Aristides 
 Those who wanted to write the best Attic, or at least to avoid writing what the guard-
ians of the language most despised, clearly needed help. And since no one had spoken 

138 Ancient Greek
the prescribed model Attic for centuries, grammatical handbooks and lexica became 
indispensable for the would - be author. Important hallmarks of correct Attic usage 
included the following: 1 
 (6)  (a)  - t t - [tt] and  - r r -  [ - rr - ] for  - s s - [ss] and  - r s - [ - rs - ] in the relevant words, 
e.g. 
 [ ' t h alatta]  ‘ sea ’  and 
 [ ' t h arros]  ‘ courage ’ . 
 (b)  
 [ksyn] for simpliﬁ ed 
 [syn]  ‘ with ’ . 
 (c)  The formation of abstract nominals with the neuter article 
 [to] and an 
adjective in agreement.  
 (d)  Regular use of the dual number (long dead in the Koine).  
 (e)  Extensive use of the dative in all its traditional functions (often to 
excess, and sometimes wrongly, in an attempt to demonstrate one ’ s 
 ‘ education ’ ). 
 (f) 
 Use of the  ‘ contracted ’ forms of nouns in which the root/stem originally 
ended in a vowel and the inﬂ ectional ending began with a vowel; the 
Koine (following Ionic) generally preferred the uncontracted variants: e.g. 
 [o ' stu:n] not 
 [o ' steon]  ‘ bone ’ etc.  
 (g)  Retention of the Attic declension of 
 [le ' o:s/ne ' o:s] in place of 
 [la ' os/na ' os]  ‘ people/temple ’ . 
 (h)  
  ‘ I become ’ , 
  ‘ I get to know ’ , 
for simpliﬁ ed 
 [ ' jinomai], 
 [ji ' nosko]. 
 (i) 
 The use of the synthetic perfect rather than periphrases with the perfect 
middle/passive participle and the verb  ‘ to be ’ in the subjunctive, optative 
and 3pl middle/passive; so 
 [ ' lelyntai] rather than 
 
[lely ' meny isi]  ‘ they have been set free ’ . 
 (j) 
 Extensive use of middle verb forms, both where the Koine had replaced 
anomalous middles with regular actives or passives, and also gratuitously 
as a mark of  ‘ learning ’ . 
 (k)  Use of the optative in its full range of classical functions, sometimes also 
erroneously, again in an effort to emphasize the writer ’ s  ‘ knowledge ’ . 
 (l) 
 The use of monolectic perfect forms with a  ‘ stative/present ’ rather than a 
 ‘ simple past ’ meaning (perfect and aorist were already falling together in 
the Koine as past tenses).  
 In the same sort of way lexicographers established a  ‘ correct ’  (i.e. classically attested) 
vocabulary. The most important of such lexica is the  Selection (Ecloga) of Attic Verbs 
and Nouns , from the work  The Atticist by Phrynichus (later 2nd century  ad ). Adopting 
Plato, the orators Aeschines, Isocrates and Lysias, and the tragedians Aeschylus, 
Sophocles and Euripides as his principal (if far from homogeneous) models of correct 
usage, he excoriated selected later authors for their failure to write the Attic of the 5th 
and 4th centuries  bc as employed by his chosen masters. A typical example of Phrynichus ’ 
approach is provided by his observations on the word 
 
 ‘ glutton ’ , as used by the recognized master of New Comedy, Menander (c.342 – 292  bc ): 
 (7)  

Greek in the Roman Empire 139
 ‘ Kataphagas : where did you sweep up this refuse collection of so many nouns from, 
Menander, and so disgrace our forefathers ’ language? ’ 
 Apparently the notion that the style and vocabulary of Phrynichus ’ chosen classical 
models might have been ridiculous (when not used parodically) in the mouth of a slave 
or some ne ’ er - do - well character in a comedy was well beyond his grasp, as indeed was 
any concept of change that did not also imply decay. 
 When particular authors are not viliﬁ ed in this way, Phrynichus ’ dictionary entries 
usually take the form of simple injunctions as to what to say and what to avoid, thus 
indirectly providing valuable information (under the heading of what is to be avoided) 
about the ordinary usage of the period. For example: 
 (8)  
 ‘ Akmen for  eti . They say Xenophon used it once. But you avoid using it and say  eti . ’ 
 In almost every case it is of course the stigmatized form (if any) that has survived in 
modern Greek; thus the modern word for  ‘ still/yet ’  is 
 [a ' komi/a ' koma], 
derived from 
 [ak ' me:n], apparently under the inﬂ uence of Italian  ancora . 
 Similar observations apply to the lexicon of Moeris (ﬂ . c.  ad 200), whose entries 
are organized more epigrammatically, contrasting in each case what  ‘ Atticists ’  and 
 ‘ Greeks ’ say, the latter form in each case (if it has survived) being once again the source 
of the corresponding modern word. We also have, in excerpt, the  Onomasticum  of 
Julius Polydeuces (Pollux: later 2nd century  ad , and Phrynichus ’ successful rival for 
the chair of rhetoric at Athens), and fragments of other lexica including a (probably 
also 2nd - century  ad )  ‘ Antiatticist ’  dictionary by an unknown writer who sought to 
extend the range of permitted usage by ﬁ nding exceptions to Atticist  ‘ rules ’ . This simi-
larly preserves useful insights into the contemporary spoken language, but in an inverse 
format: e.g  ‘ they (the Atticists) say you should use X rather than Y or Z ’ , often with 
counterexamples from  ‘ reputable ’ authors. 
 All in all, the Atticist lexicographers ’ often contradictory and sometimes mistaken 
advice only contributed to the difﬁ culties faced by the would - be writer. Koineisms, 
analogical hyper - Atticisms and straight grammatical mistakes occur in even the most 
carefully contrived compositions, a natural product of attempts to employ a form of 
the language which was, by deﬁ nition, imperfectly controlled and understood. 

140 Ancient Greek
 We may conclude this section with a brief extract from Aelius Aristides, addressed, 
as one might expect of a true Atticist, to Plato himself, in order to illustrate the 
 ‘ hard - core ’ Atticizing style: 
 (9)  
 ‘ For it is impious to believe of the god that he proclaimed one who had failed in everything 
( to be ) the wisest of men. But Socrates, it seems, was telling the truth when he used to 
say that he was master of no craft. So though he did study with Anaxagoras, he clearly 
did not respect his teachings. To this one fact, then, Socrates does bear witness, that it is 
no disgrace not to have mastered a craft, if indeed he was not ashamed to talk about 
himself. ’ 
 Note in particular the rather unnatural word order in the ﬁ rst sentence, where the 
predicate, comprising 
  [t h emi ' ton]  ‘ right (according to divine law) ’ , and its 
inﬁ nitival complement appear together as the ﬁ nal constituent rather than immediately 
after the negative 
 [u:], and where 
 [t h emi ' ton] itself (the head of the predicate 
expression) is placed in penultimate position in its phrase, splitting the inﬁ nitive from 
its prepositional phrase dependent. This tendency to place the verb next - to - last, thereby 
creating a discontinuity between the elements of its complement structure (hyper-
baton), was a classical stylistic option and one which became highly characteristic of 
Atticist writing, even inﬁ ltrating the higher levels of the Koine (cf.  5.9 ). In some writers 
(e.g. Eusebius, the author of a 4th - century history of the early Christian church, see 
 5.11.2 ), it is so habitual as to become something of an irritation. 
 The neuter dative relative  [ho:i], employed as a conjunction in the sense  ‘ while/
whereas ’ , is extremely rare, and also illustrates a major Atticist tendency, namely the 
use of abstruse forms and constructions in an effort simultaneously to maximize the 
distance between the literary and the spoken languages and to impress one ’ s rivals 
with one ’ s knowledge. 

Greek in the Roman Empire 141
 There is also an  ‘ error ’ in the use of the optative 
 [an ' (h)eloi]  ‘ he ordained ’ in 
the indirect statement dependent on 
 [pi ' stewsai ho:s]  ‘ believe that ’ . 
Strictly, the optative may be used in subordinate clauses of this type when the verb 
that introduces the indirect statement is in a past tense; it should not be employed 
simply when what is said or believed occurred in the past, as here.  ‘ Mistakes ’ of this 
kind are so common that it is in fact more constructive to look at the Atticist pro-
gramme less as an attempt to recreate the language of the past, and more as a com-
mitment to forge a contemporary written style which employed the grammatical and 
lexical resources of the past (as far as possible), but which also allowed these to be 
developed in unclassical ways, the primary objective being to distance the literary 
language from the Koine. Attic might then be seen as a learned, and learn è d,  ‘ living ’ 
language rather than strictly as a  ‘ dead ’ one, and we should not then be surprised, 
given the relative freedom from constricting associations with the contemporary ver-
nacular, to see evidence of purely internal developments that conﬂ ict with, or at least 
display a freedom of usage that goes well beyond, the  ‘ rules ’  of the classical language 
in its original form. We may compare the language of the epic, or the literary revivals 
of classical dialects in Hellenistic times, for similar processes of internal evolution in 
the literary dialects of earlier periods. 
 This use of Atticized Greek as a semi - living language by the educated classes is 
highly problematical for most modern scholars, and the whole issue has in any case 
been distorted by the anachronistic interpretation of the phenomenon in the terms of 
the language controversy of the 19th and 20th centuries (the struggle between those 
who advocated a classicizing written language and those who sought a national lan-
guage based on the vernacular, cf. Part III). We should never forget that, however 
unnatural this situation may seem to us, the Greek elite was content to employ a clas-
sicizing written style, without complaint or resistance, right up until the modern period 
and the belated impact of the European Enlightenment on a Greek world under 
Ottoman domination. Neither antiquity nor the middle ages provided a sociopolitical 
environment in which the empowering of the masses through access to literature and 
knowledge could ever become an issue; the primary consideration throughout was for 
the educated minority to maintain its Greco - Roman identity through cultural and 
linguistic continuity with the classical, and later the Christian, traditions, an objective 
that eventually came to be equated with national survival in the period of Turkish 
domination. 
 5.7   The Ofﬁ cial Koine in the Roman Republican Period 
 Macedonia had ﬁ nally become a Roman province in 149  bc , and not long afterwards 
the Achaean league was crushed and the city of Corinth razed to the ground. Within the 
Greek cities, however, pro - Roman parties had begun to emerge much earlier, and civil 
discord between traditionalists and Roman apologists became common. Against a back-
ground of growing land shortage and indebtedness, the situation was readily exploited 
by the shrewd Roman oligarchy, and Roman willingness to use the Koine as an ofﬁ cial 
language of diplomacy and administration is well illustrated by the following extracts 
from a translation of a decree of the Senate ( senatusconsultum ), dated 170  bc , concern-

142 Ancient Greek
ing the city of Thisbae in Boeotia. This decree, incidentally, is contemporaneous with the 
manumission decree in Boeotian dialect discussed in  4.4.2 , and so provides a nice 
example of the relative status of local dialects and the Koine in the period. 
 (10)  
 ‘ Concerning those matters about which the citizens of Thisbae made representations. 
Concerning their own affairs: the following decision was taken concerning the proposal 
that those who remained true to our friendship should be given the facilities to conduct 
their own affairs; that our praetor/governor Quintus Maenius should delegate ﬁ ve members 

Greek in the Roman Empire 143
of the senate who seemed to him appropriate ( arbiters ) according to the interests of the 
Republic and his personal integrity. Resolved. 
 Concerning the ( Thisbians ’  ) proposal that those who left for other cities and did not 
present themselves to our praetor/governor should not return to their rank, it was resolved 
to send a letter to the consul Aulus Hostilius to the effect that he should pay heed to our 
intentions in whatever way seemed most appropriate according to the interests of the 
Republic and his personal integrity. Resolved. ’ 
 The pompous formulaic style of ofﬁ cialdom is at once apparent in the elaborate 
sequential reﬁ nement of the subject of the decree, a practice that directly reﬂ ects the 
traditional Latin of Roman  senatusconsulta . Indeed, it is quite clear that this is a 
translated document, e.g. in the routine verb - ﬁ nal orders typical of ofﬁ cial Latin, in 
the use of modal verb forms introduced by  ‘ ﬁ nal ’ conjunctions after 
 [ é dokse]  ‘ it 
was resolved ’ (reﬂ ecting Latin  ut - clauses) in place of the normal Greek accusative - and -
 inﬁ nitive structures, in the use of the subjunctive in a relative clause to express purpose 
(
  [hois  … ekse:g é :so:ntai]  ‘ by which  … they may conduct ’ (the 
native construction requires the future indicative), and in the literal rendering of the 
formula  quei ei e re publica ﬁ deque sua uideantur   ‘ who(ever) should seem to him to 
be advantageous to the Republic and consistent with his personal integrity ’ . We should 
also note, however, a number of characteristic features of normal ofﬁ cial Koine that 
suggest that the translators were acquainted with aspects of traditional Greek practice 
too, e.g. the liking for prepositional possessives and the absence of any attempt to 
replicate the Latin sequence of tense rules, leading to the now normal use of subjunc-
tives even in a past time context (here after 
 [ é dokse]  ‘ it was resolved ’ ) at the 
expense of the classical optative, a mood increasingly associated exclusively with 
the literary language (see Clackson and Horrocks ( 2007 : 5.4) for a full discussion of 
 senatusconsulta ). 
 5.8   Past - Tense Morphology 
 A ﬁ nal noteworthy development in (10) involves the sufﬁ x on 3pl aorist 
 
[ é :lt h o - san]  ‘ they went ’ , in the second extract. The interaction in the Koine between 
the regular weak aorists in  - ( s ) a [ - (s)a] (where the s - element is strictly part of the aorist 
stem of the relevant verbs) and the irregular strong aorists in  - o  n [ - on] has already been 
discussed in 4.9. On this basis, we might have expected a 3pl 
 [ ê :lt h - an] to replace 
classical 
 [ ê :lt h - on], and this is indeed well attested (becoming in due course the 
preferred form). But in the higher Koine many strong aorists resisted such assimilation 
to the weak paradigm for a considerable period, and we ﬁ nd many classical forms 
widely retained. Thus even 
 [ î :pa] for 
 [ î :pon]  ‘ I said ’ , and 
 
for 
  ‘ I brought ’ , though particularly common, continue to be used 
alongside the corresponding strong forms. 
 It was, however, a particular mark of the ofﬁ cial Koine in this period to allow the 
substitution of the regular weak sufﬁ x  - s a n [ - san] for the original  - n [ - n] in the 3pl of 
the strong aorist, as here. 3 This was doubtless due in part to the fact that the resulting 
form was distinctive, while the classical 3pl ending was homophonous with that of the 

144 Ancient Greek
1sg, but the process also continued an analogical extension that had already affected 
many 3pl aorists in the irregular  - m i [ - mi] paradigm (cf. Attic/Koine 
 [ é t h e - san] 
 ‘ they put ’ for original 
 [ é t h e - n], etc.). Since this same analogy had also affected the 
3pl imperfect of such verbs (cf. 
 [ ê :san]  ‘ they were ’ for original 
 , 
 
[et í t h e - san]  ‘ they used to put ’ for original 
 [ é tit h e - n] etc.), it also began to affect 
3pl imperfects more widely in the Koine, particularly since the regular imperfect shared 
the endings of the strong aorist (the two paradigms being distinguished only by root 
allomorphy or suppletion). Early examples are found in late dialect inscriptions as well 
as in the Ptolemaic papyri and the Septuagint. 
 Eventually, however, the strong aorist/imperfect paradigm, including the innovative 
3pl forms, succumbed to the model of the numerically superior weak aorists, but 
as often happens in cases of paradigm interference, the ﬁ nal product in the Byzantine 
period shows that the process was in fact a two - way one. What eventually 
emerged was a common set of  ‘ past - tense ’ endings with elements taken from both 
paradigms:
 (11)   1/2/3sg: 
 - ( s ) a 
  - ( s ) e "   
  - ( s ) e 
 [ - (s)a  
 - (s)es  
  - (s)e] 
 1/2/3pl: 
 - ( s ) a m e n 
  - ( s ) e t  e / - ( s ) a t e   - ( s ) a n 
 [ - (s)amen  
  - (s)ete/ - (s)ate  
  - (s)an] 
 Here the a - vowel comes from the weak aorists and the e - vowel from the strong aorists/
imperfects (3sg  - e [ - e] being common to both); the s - element naturally appears in just 
those forms (the majority of weak aorists) which had displayed it in the classical 
language. 
 5.9   Ofﬁ cial Writing of the Roman Imperial Period 
 To complete this brief sketch of the Koine in Roman times we may turn brieﬂ y to the 
imperial period proper, and to the following letter addressed by the emperor Hadrian 
in  ad  119 to the Egyptian prefect Rammius (BGU 140). Originally composed in Latin, 
it was translated into Greek and put on public display in accordance with the emperor ’ s 
wishes: 4 
 (12)  

Greek in the Roman Empire 145
 ‘ I know, my dear Rammius, that persons who were acknowledged to be legitimate by 
their parents in the time of their military service have been prevented from succeeding to 
their fathers ’ property, and this did not seem harsh in so far as they had acted contrary 
to military discipline ( i.e. soldiers were forbidden to marry and their children were there-
fore illegitimate ). But I myself very gladly put forward the principle by which I interpret 
more humanely the rather strict rule established by the emperors before me. Therefore, 
although those acknowledged as legitimate in the time of their fathers ’ military service 
are not their fathers ’ lawful heirs, I decree that they too are able to claim possession of 
the property through the clause of the edict in which this right is granted also to kinsmen 
by birth. It will be your duty to make this bounty of mine well known both to my soldiers 
and to my veterans, not for the sake of my appearing to them to take the credit, but so 
that they may use this privilege if they are ignorant of it. ’ 
 The usual conservativism of ofﬁ cial Greek is apparent in the continued general use of 
nominalized participles (the only exception is to express background circumstances in 
the form of a genitive absolute), and the use of the articular inﬁ nitival clause to express 
purpose in the last sentence, both structures permitting extensive complements and/or 
optional modiﬁ cation. Nevertheless, the archaizing impact of the Atticist revival is also 
apparent in the scrupulous avoidance of prepositional possessives, in the penultimate 
position of the verb 
 [a ' nilando] within the relative clause of the ﬁ rst sentence, 

146 Ancient Greek
splitting up the temporal expression ( ‘ hyperbaton ’ : cf.  5.6 ), and in the use there of a 
simple dative of time (e.g. 
 [to  …  ' k h rono]; recall that prepositions were 
earlier quite standard in support of the increasingly  ‘ weak ’ dative case (cf. the discus-
sion of (22) in  4.11.1 , and the phrase 
 [em pant ì kair ô :i] in (9) in 
 4.6.3 )). 
 The routine use of accusative and inﬁ nitive constructions, where at least some ﬁ nite 
clause replacements might have been expected on the basis of earlier ofﬁ cial practice 
and popular contemporary usage, is perhaps to be explained in the same way, though 
the impact of the Latin original (presumably itself composed in a style closer to the 
 ‘ classical ’ than the  ‘ vulgar ’  language, where this construction was standard) should not 
be discounted. In this connection we may also note the predilection in (12) for placing 
verbs in clause - ﬁ nal position, a feature clearly contrary to the general drift in the 
development of spoken Greek (cf.  4.8 ), and again perhaps representing the overuse of 
a classicizing characteristic that happened to enjoy Latin reinforcement. The cumula-
tive impact of such interference phenomena undoubtedly had some effect on educated 
written usage even among native speakers, at least for as long as the two languages 
remained in close contact.  
 5.10   ‘ Colloquial ’  Literature 
 5.10.1  Epictetus 
 Epictetus (c.  ad 60 – 140) was a slave from Hierapolis (modern Pamukkale,  ‘ Cotton 
Castle ’ , famous for its spectacular calciﬁ ed spring) in Phrygia in Asia Minor. He owed 
his freedom to his master, a court ofﬁ cial by the name of Epaphroditus, and having 
had the opportunity to hear the Stoic philosopher Musonius, himself spent some time 
teaching in Rome before gathering a circle of students at Nicopolis in Epirus. Although 
he apparently wrote nothing himself, his  ‘ discourses ’ , in a plain and forceful language, 
have been  ‘ preserved ’ for us by his admirer Arrian (c.  ad 95 – 175), the author of the 
famous account of Alexander ’ s expedition. The language of these homely presentations 
of aspects of Stoic philosophy is probably the closest thing we have, with due allow-
ance for the philosophical terminology and a certain abstractness of style engendered 
by the subject matter, to a representation of the educated spoken language of the 2nd 
century  ad . 
 The following brief extract (II.6, 3 – 4) is typical: 5 
 (13)  

Greek in the Roman Empire 147
 ‘ Knowledge of one ’ s own preparation and resources is a good thing too, so that in matters 
for which you have not prepared yourself you may be at peace, and not get angry if others 
have the advantage over you in these. For you in turn will expect yourself to have the 
advantage in philosophical reasoning, and if they get angry at this, you will console them: 
 “ I have studied, but you have not. ”  ’ 
 5.10.2  The New Testament 
 There are striking parallels between Epictetus ’ style and diction and the language of 
the New Testament. This is not, any more than that of the Septuagint (4.7.8), a special 
variety of Greek used by the Jews of the Near East (comparable, say, to the Jewish -
 Spanish of the Sephardic communities), as once was commonly thought, but a reason-
ably close reﬂ ection of the everyday Greek of the majority of the literate population 
in the early centuries  ad , subject, as always, to the inﬂ uence of the ordinary written 
language of business and administration learned in school. 
 This is not to say, however, that there are no peculiarly regional features (cf.  4.10 ). 
Although the New Testament was composed in the main by men without a higher 
education, and so is largely devoid of Atticistic traits, it was none the less written in 
an area where Aramaic was the ﬁ rst language of the majority, and some books at least 
are probably translations from Aramaic originals. Furthermore, some knowledge of 
the Septuagint must be supposed for the mainly Jewish authors/translators involved. 
We therefore ﬁ nd evidence of substrate and translation effects, as well as sporadic 
Septuagintisms, particularly in highly traditional passages, such as the two hymns in 
Luke 1. 46 – 55 and 68 – 71. 
 The identiﬁ cation and classiﬁ cation of relevant examples has long been, and still 
remains, a matter of considerable controversy. By way of illustration, we might list 
the following phenomena from the gospel according to St Mark (cf. Maloney  (1981) , 
Blass et al. ( 1984 : 273 ff), Buben í k ( 1989 : 65 – 7) for detailed discussion): 
 (14)  (a)  
 [ke]  ‘ and ’ , beginning a new paragraph.  
 (b)  
 [ke]  ‘ and ’ , introducing the apodosis of conditional clauses.  
 (c)  Noun – genitive – adjective order, instead of the usual pre - head position 
for the adjective.  
 (d)  Use of modifying genitive NPs where ordinarily Greek would use an 
adjective. 
 (e)  Use of positive adjectives with the value of comparatives.  
 (f) 
 
 [is]  ‘ one ’ (masculine), or 
 [ ' ant h ropos]  ‘ man ’ , used as an 
indeﬁ nite pronoun (instead of  t i " [tis]  ‘ someone ’ ). 

148 Ancient Greek
 (g)  Use of redundant resumptive pronouns in relative clauses introduced by 
an appropriately inﬂ ected relative pronoun. 
 (h)  Nominative in expressions of temporal duration in place of accusative.  
 (i) 
 Nominative NPs with preposed deﬁ nite article used instead of the simple 
vocative. 
 (j) 
 Nominative topic, with  ‘ weak ’ resumptive pronoun.  
 Most of these can be paralleled in the Septuagint, and most could equally well 
reﬂ ect contemporary Hebrew or Aramaic (with (b), (d), (h) and (i) perhaps most likely 
to reﬂ ect some direct inﬂ uence from the contemporary vernacular). But many can 
also be paralleled in low - level Koine documents from Egypt (e.g. (a), (b), (f)  – at 
least for 
  [is], (i) and (j)), and so presumably reﬂ ect either more general tenden-
cies of colloquial Greek which were specially reinforced by Jewish bilingualism in 
Palestine, or accidental correspondencies between Coptic and Hebrew/Aramaic 
(e.g. (i)). 
 The successful identiﬁ cation of substrate/translation effects is likely to remain 
a problematical area for the foreseeable future, since it must be based on clear evidence 
that the construction in question is alien to the natural development of Greek. This 
is a less straightforward matter than might at ﬁ rst appear to be the case. Taking 
the example of nominative topic   +   ‘ weak ’ resumptive pronoun (14j), we should note 
that this type of dislocated structure is in fact typical of early legal and gnomic 
texts in many Indo - European languages, but that classical Greek here demands 
a  ‘ strong ’ demonstrative pronoun and case agreement for the topic in resumptive 
function: 
 (15)  
 ‘ He who sharpens his spear also sharpens his soul somewhat besides. ’ 
 On 
the 
face 
of 
it 
examples 
such 
as 
St 
Mark, 
4.25: 
 
 , lit.  ‘ who for has, it - shall - be - given 
to - him ’ , would appear to violate these rules (though note that the topic here is strictly 
caseless, since the nominative relative is required by the syntax of the clause that con-
tains it), as do related examples from Egypt with genuine nominative topics, e.g. 
P. Merton 23 (2nd century  ad ), P. Fay. 127 (2nd/3rd century  ad ), and BGU 385 
(2nd/3rd century  ad ). But loosely constructed nominative topics are typical of the 
breakdown of formal agreement patterns seen also in the case of adjunct participles 
(cf.  6.5.3 ), and we should also note the sporadic evidence from this period that stressed 
  [af ' tos] was already in use as a demonstrative, exactly as in Modern Greek 
(cf.  5.3 ), e.g.: 

Greek in the Roman Empire 149
 (16)  
 ‘ concerning this matter ’ 
 There is, then, no obstacle in principle to taking the use of 
 [af ' tos] in  ‘ popular ’ 
Koine texts as reﬂ ecting this development, so that, where necessary, the relevant forms 
could be stressed and used as  ‘ strong ’ pronouns equivalent to demonstratives (again 
as in Modern Greek). There is, therefore, no compelling reason to treat (14j) as a 
Semitism, despite the obvious parallels in Hebrew/Aramaic. 
 It is nevertheless undeniable that not all putative Semitisms can be explained away 
in such terms and that many, whatever their ultimate source, remain ﬁ rmly in place 
(e.g. (14a, c, d, e, and also possibly h and i). It is important, however, to note that 
votive, legal and sepulchral inscriptions from Palestine do not in general display much 
comparable evidence for Semitic substrate effects, being, to all intents and purposes, 
linguistically parallel to similar inscriptions from, say, Syria or Asia Minor. This con-
trast with much Jewish literary writing, including even the moderately Atticizing 
translation of the original Aramaic text of Josephus ’ (born  ad 37/38) history  On the 
Jewish War , as well as the more  ‘ vernacular ’  New Testament, is presumably testimony 
to the efﬁ cacy of the education system in imposing the conventions of  ‘ ofﬁ cial ’  Greek 
for the composition of routine non - literary documents. 
 In general, however, the language of the New Testament reﬂ ects quite closely the 
natural development of the language in the early centuries  ad , always allowing for 
stylistic variation determined by the level of education of the author. Thus Hebrews 
and James are in some respects quite  ‘ classical ’  (though far from Atticist), while Luke, 
Acts and the Pauline epistles are written on a higher level than Matthew, Mark and 
John (Luke, for example, sometimes implicitly  ‘ corrects ’  the corresponding passage in 
Mark, cf. Browning ( 1983 : 49)). John and Revelation (Apocalypse), however, are 
almost wholly uninﬂ uenced by the archaizing conventions of the literary and/or ofﬁ cial 
traditions, and the author of the latter in particular has been seen by some as revelling 
in his imperfect command of Greek and deliberately adopting an  ‘ anti - cultural ’  style 
that deﬁ es ordinary grammatical constraint (cf. Robertson ( 1919 : 135), Moulton 
et al. ( 1976 : 33)). 
 The generally  ‘ popular ’  quality of the language overall is perhaps most clearly dem-
onstrated by a comparison of standard New Testament usage with the injunctions of 
Phrynichus (cf.  5.6 ), who was of course commenting on the kinds of  ‘ mistake ’ , i.e. 
non - classical elements of living Greek, typically made by pupils in literary composition. 
Two examples will serve to illustrate the point. Compare  Ecloga 10: 6 
 (17)  
 ‘ None of our approved models said  eucharistein  but  charin eidenai . ’ 

150 Ancient Greek
 ‘ Brechein in place of  hyein  … the term is to be roundly rejected. ’ 
with Matthew 5. 45: 
 (20)  
 and  Ecloga 255: 
 (19)  
with John 11. 41: 
 (18)  
 ‘ It rains on the just and the unjust. ’ 
 The following, very famous, extract from the beginning of St John ’ s gospel provides 
a nice example of the  ‘ simple ’  Koine style within the spectrum of New Testament 
writing: 7 
 (21)  

Greek in the Roman Empire 151
 ‘ In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him 
was not anything made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. 
And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. There was a 
man sent from God, whose name was John. The same came for a witness, to bear witness 
of the Light, that all men through him might believe. He was not that Light, but was sent 
to bear witness of that Light. That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the 
world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many 
as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that 
believe on his name: Which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the ﬂ esh, nor of 
the will of man, but of God. ’ 
 Apart from the obvious simplicity of construction, involving routine co - ordination of 
clauses with ﬁ nite verbs, we may note the simple but effective rhetorical device of 
repeating a key noun phrase from one sentence as the initial  ‘ topic/subject ’  of the next. 
Where such a topic is syntactically complex, as with the relative clause in para. 12, 
there is a resumptive pronoun in the  ‘ comment ’ that follows (cf. (14j), (15), (16) 
above); from this basis the use of resumptive pronouns was progressively generalized 
to other topic constructions, including those involving simple noun phrases, as in 
Modern Greek. These typical features of the simple Koine fall into line with the use 

152 Ancient Greek
of the subjunctive in the ﬁ nal clause after a past - time main verb in para. 7 (the classical 
optative, already optional even in 5th - century Attic Greek, having long been a mark 
of the archaizing literary style), and the use of the indicative for the optative (a par-
ticularly opaque usage of the classical language, cf. Horrocks  (1995) ) in the past - time 
generic clause in para. 12. 
 We should note, however, that  ‘ weak ’  pronouns still remain enclitic on the initial 
constituent (as in the earliest Greek), and have not yet become phonologically attached 
to the verb that governs them (as in Modern Greek). Thus weak pronouns frequently 
follow an initial topic in  ‘ second position ’ , and the verb, though typically standing as 
close as possible to the pronoun (in order to reconcile the inherited clitic position with 
the natural requirement that a head and its pronominal complement should ordinarily 
be contiguous, cf.  4.8 ), may nevertheless still be separated from it by the negative 
particle (e.g. in paras. 5, 10 and 11); this contrasts sharply with the situation in Modern 
Greek, where the position of the clitic, as an element phonologically dependent on the 
verb, is ﬁ xed, and the corresponding order is negative   +  clitic  +  verb (cf. 
 
[ ' en don i a]  ‘ not him I - saw ’ , etc.). 
 We may, however, compare the order in para. 12 (relative pronoun  +  connec-
tive  +  verb  +  enclitic), where the weak pronoun follows the verb rather than the con-
nective, a position well attested in classical Greek, but one which demonstrates the 
fact that the tension between the  ‘ second - position ’  and  ‘ head - adjacency ’ requirements 
had not yet been fully reconciled in the written Koine (cf. Horrocks  (1990) ). Note too 
that, in contrast with the lowest levels of the Koine as discussed in chapter  6 , the 
correct use of the dative in its core functions (e.g. indirect object, locative after preposi-
tions, etc.), the proper use of control inﬁ nitives (in para. 12), and the appropriate use 
of correctly inﬂ ected participles (e.g. in paras. 9 and 12) are all still routine; it cannot 
be overemphasized that, despite the obvious departures from classical usage, this is 
good, basic Koine Greek of its time. 
 One ﬁ nal issue concerns the status of subjunctive clauses introduced by 
 [ ' ina], 
as in para. 8. Though the sense of this particular example is not altogether certain 
(perhaps  ‘ he should/must bear witness ’ ), it is clear that this  ‘ conjunction ’ , like its suc-
cessor   n a [na] in Modern Greek, could already be used with a main verb to express 
permission/obligation, and that it had accordingly been downgraded in certain contexts 
to the status of a mood marker, thus becoming available in main as well as subordinate 
clauses. There are many clear examples of such usage, both positive and negative, in 
the Septuagint and elsewhere in the New Testament, and there are also instances in 
the Egyptian papyri, though these are quite rare.  
 5.11   Later Christian Literature: Stylistic Levels 
 5.11.1  The Apostolic Fathers 
 The Christian writers of the earliest period (the so - called Apostolic Fathers) generally 
followed the model of the New Testament and continued to write in a simple Koine 
style, partly as a mark of their contempt for pagan grammarians and rhetoricians, but 

Greek in the Roman Empire 153
partly also from a conviction that the message would be better received by the masses 
if it were presented in a language that they understood and which crucially lacked the 
taint of snobbery conveyed by the archaizing literary norm. Thus the New Testament 
Apocrypha and many of the early saints ’ lives are composed in a language that displays 
a fairly consistent lack of regard for the purist tradition and follows the practice of 
the unelaborated, day - to - day written Koine of the time. 
 We may consider, for example, the following extract from  The Shepherd  (I, 1 – 2), 
a mid - 2nd - century work comprising a series of revelations made to an individual by 
the name of Hermas: 
 (22)  
 ‘ The man who brought me up sold me to a certain Rhoda in Rome. After many years 
I came to appreciate her qualities, and began to love her as a sister. After a while I 
saw her washing in the River Tiber, and gave her my hand and pulled her out of the river. 
Then when I saw her beauty I began to reﬂ ect in my heart saying:  “ I would be happy 
if I had a wife of such beauty and character. ” I resolved on this alone, and nothing 
else. ’ 
 We may note once again that this is a  ‘ good ’ Koine style of the period, involving  inter 
alia a full range of inﬂ ected participles, the correct use of the dative in its core func-
tions, aorist middle forms (often replaced by the aorist passive in less accomplished 
writing), and a willingness to vary word order for stylistic effect (e.g. the preposing of 
the participial complement clause dependent on 
 [ ' idon]  ‘ I saw ’ , leaving the main 
verb in ﬁ nal position). 

154 Ancient Greek
 Other standard features of the Koine at this time include: 
 (23)  (a)  The use of the accusative with 
 [is] in literal locative function in 
place of classical 
  +  dative (a feature already well established as 
an option in the New Testament and the papyri); only the  ‘ extended ’ 
usage 
 [en di kar ' dja]  ‘ in the heart ’ shows the classical 
construction. 
 (b)  The perfect 
 [ ' peprake(n)]  ‘ he sold ’ used as a simple alterna-
tive to the aorist (cf.  6.5.2 for an extended discussion of this 
development). 
 (c)  The use of the imperfect in the protasis and apodosis of a  ‘ remote ’ future 
conditional in place of the classical optative (combined with 
 [an] in 
the apodosis). The development of modal syntax is considered in detail 
in  9.4 , cf. also Horrocks  (1995) ; here we may simply note the dual use, 
i.e. past habitual/future supposition, of past indicatives and periphrases 
with  would  in English (cf.  if ever she met her real father she would weep ), 
and observe that imperfective  ‘ past ’ indicatives may readily acquire such 
modal uses cross - linguistically. 
 (d)  The beginning of the transfer of the verb  ‘ to be ’ from the irregular  - m i 
[ - mi] paradigm to the regular middle paradigm in  - m a i [ - me]. This seems 
to have begun, as here, with the recharacterization of the 1sg imperfect 
 [in] as 
 [ ' imin], a form which is already well attested in 
the Ptolemaic papyri, and served to distinguish the 1sg from the homo-
phonous 3sg; Phrynichus (130) naturally stigmatizes it. From this base 
a largely middle paradigm was gradually built up in more popular reg-
isters of the Koine through the later Roman and early Byzantine periods, 
the major exception being the forms of the 3sg/3pl present indicative, 
which derive from the use of the accented adverb 
 [ ' eni], ﬁ rst used 
synonymously with the compound 
 [ ' en - esti],  ‘ there is/are ’ , 
but later as a simple replacement for classical 
 [esti]/
 [isi]  ‘ is/are ’ . 
The form was eventually adapted to the rest of the paradigm, with ﬁ rst 
the sufﬁ x ( - n a i [ - ne]) then the stem (
 [i - ]) recharacterized on the model 
of 1sg/2sg 
 [ ' ime]/
 [ ' ise]. We thus obtain the following para-
digm for the early/middle Byzantine period (cf. Part II,  11.8 (34a), for 
details): 
 Here the 2pl form has borrowed the aorist middle ending, and the 3pl 
has been recharacterized with  - t - [ - t - ] on the basis of the 3sg; many 
earlier forms remained in use alongside these, however, especially 2sg/
pl 
  [is]/
  [ ' ite] and 3pl 
  [ ' isan]. 

Greek in the Roman Empire 155
 5.11.2  The impact of Atticism 
 This use of the  ‘ common ’ style worked well for as long as Christianity was primarily 
a religion of the poor and underprivileged. But as it began to make an impression 
on the educated classes, there arose a need to preach and develop doctrine in a more 
 ‘ acceptable ’ form of language, the lower levels of the Koine being viewed as a 
mark not merely of poor taste but of ignorance and degeneracy. Christian discourse 
was therefore increasingly  ‘ elevated ’ from the  ‘ vulgar ’ level of the New Testament, 
and, from the beginning of the 3rd century onwards, intellectual apologists such as 
Clement of Alexandria (2nd/3rd century  ad ), Origen ( ad 184 – 254) and Eusebius (c. 
 ad  260 – 340) began to expound Christian history and doctrine in a language and style 
adapted from the pagan Greek historical, rhetorical and philosophical traditions that 
blended the new religious terminology into a variably Atticized scholarly Koine. 
 This trend was soon consolidated by political developments. By the early 4th century 
 ad  profound changes were taking place in the administration of the Roman empire. 
The inland site of Rome was becoming steadily more impractical and irrelevant as 
Italy became increasingly vulnerable to barbarian incursions. Since the Balkans and 
Asia Minor were already the main sources of recruitment to the Roman army, it was 
natural that when the emperor Constantine I (ruled  ad 306 – 37) decided to found a 
 ‘ New Rome ’ , he should select a site in the eastern part of his empire. His choice was 
the apparently impregnable site of ancient Byzantium, perched on the end of a penin-
sula and surrounded on three sides by the sea of Marmara, the straits of the Bosporus 
and the deep river estuary of the Golden Horn. Constantine, who was himself a formal 
convert to Christianity on his death - bed, had earlier instituted a policy of religious 
tolerance, and Constantinople (
 [konstandin ' upolis]) was founded 
on 11 May  ad 330 as a Christian city which incorporated three great churches, 
the Holy Wisdom (
 [a ' jia so'  ﬁ a]), the Holy Peace (
 [a ' jia 
i ' rini]) and the Holy Apostles (
 [ ' aji a ' postoli]), within its grand 
design. 
 By the end of the century imperial patronage had secured for Christianity a position 
as the ofﬁ cial religion of the Roman state, and many of the great church fathers of 
the 4th century, such as St Basil ( ‘ the Great ’ , c.  ad 329 – 79), St Gregory of Nazianzus 
(c.  ad  330 – c.389), St Gregory of Nyssa (c.  ad 335 – c.394) and John Chrysostom 
(c.  ad  347 – 407), were naturally members of the upper classes who had received a 
higher education. They in turn instinctively turned their backs on the lowly origins of 
their faith and wrote in the language of their class, though the prestige of the scriptures 
was indirectly maintained in the form of  ‘ quotations ’  of key terms incorporated into 
an otherwise classical style of discourse. The incorporation of Christianity into the 
Roman establishment and the new religious impetus behind the classicizing tradition 
created an archaizing  ‘ ecclesiastical ’ Greek that quickly permeated the upper strata of 
Roman society and guaranteed the perpetuation of the diglossia initiated by the ﬁ rst 
Atticists nearly ﬁ ve hundred years before. Though a more basic style of Christian 
writing continued in the form of saints ’ biographies and chronicles, the opportunity 
provided by the new status of Christianity for the development of a high - prestige 
written language based on contemporary spoken Greek was effectively lost.  

156 Ancient Greek
 5.11.3  Callinicus and Theodoret 
 We may, by way of illustration, take the work of two fairly minor Christian authors 
of the 5th century  ad (the data in what follows are taken from Hult  (1990) ). At one 
end of the spectrum, in the  Life of Hypatius by the monk Callinicus, we ﬁ nd a high 
concentration of relatively  ‘ low ’ features, consistently avoided by those adopting a 
self - consciously classicizing style. Many of these can be seen in ordinary administrative 
documents from the Hellenistic period onwards, and include: 
 (24)  (a)  The widespread use of the pleonastic genitive article 
 [tu] to strengthen 
what would be simple inﬁ nitive complements in the classical language 
after adjectives, verbs of commanding and verbs of promising.  
 (b)  The use of such articular inﬁ nitives in a ﬁ nal sense (where the classical 
construction involves a future participle or, more regularly, 
 [ ' ina] 
 ‘ (in order) that ’ ,  +  subjunctive or optative according to whether the tense 
of the main verb is non - past or past.  
 (c)  The frequent use of 
 [a ' po], lit.  ‘ from ’ , to mark the agent in passive 
constructions (where the classical language has 
 [y ' po], 
 [pa ' ra], 
and various other prepositional options, or, with the perfect passive, a 
simple dative, see George  (2005) ). 
 (d)  The use of  ‘ ﬁ nal ’ 
 [ ' ina] to introduce consecutive clauses (where the 
classical language has 
 [os/ ' oste]  ‘ (so) that ’  +  inﬁ nitive), and con-
versely, the use of  ‘ consecutive ’  
 [os/ ' oste]  +  inﬁ nitive to intro-
duce a ﬁ nal clause. 
 (e)  The use of  ‘ ﬁ nal ’ 
 [ ' ina] after verbs of  ‘ commanding ’ (where the clas-
sical language has a simple inﬁ nitive). 
 (f) 
 Parataxis involving ﬁ nite (subjunctive) verb forms rather than an inﬁ ni-
tive complement after verbs of  ‘ wishing ’ (though sometimes also with 
 [ ' ina]). 
 (g)  The use of the present indicative of 
 [ ' exo], lit.  ‘ have ’ , with an aorist 
(perfective) inﬁ nitive in place of the classical synthetic future.  
 (h)  Frequent use of 
 , classically   =   ‘ happen/chance (to 
be) ’ , in the sense of  ‘ to be ’ ; and of an impersonal construction with 
 
[ ' etyxe]  ‘ it happened ’  +  accusative and inﬁ nitive (lit.  ‘ it - happened [X 
to - Y] ’ ), in place of the classical personal construction with a participle, 
 ‘ X happened [Y - ing] ’ , in the sense  ‘ X happened [to Y] ’ . 
 This last is not, strictly speaking, a  ‘ popular ’  construction (recall the general avoidance 
of the accusative and inﬁ nitive in the lower registers of the Koine), but reﬂ ects the 
bureaucratic style of the administrative language, whence it may have been absorbed 
into the vernacular as something of a clich é . 
 Other non - classical features of Callinicus ’ style, however, also occur in more middle -
 brow writing, and even crop up occasionally in the work of those who strive hardest 
for puristic effect. These might be thought of as  ‘ established ’ Koineisms derived from 
the higher, i.e. ofﬁ cial and scientiﬁ c/technical, registers of the written language, which 
were clearly also acceptable in unpretentious literary composition: 

Greek in the Roman Empire 157
 (25)  (a)  The use of 
 [ ' oti]  ‘ that ’ after verbs of  ‘ thinking ’  (the classical usage is 
regularly an accusative and inﬁ nitive) and verbs of perception (where in 
classical Greek we have an accusative and participle).  
 (b)  The use of quoted speech rather than a subordinate clause after verbs 
of  ‘ saying ’ . 
 (c)  A liking for the  ‘ impersonal ’ passive  ‘ it is said [that X] ’ , etc. (where the 
classical language more usually has  ‘ s/he is said [to X] ’ , etc.).  
 (d)  The use of articular inﬁ nitives governed by a  ‘ goal - denoting ’  preposition 
to express purpose, and more generally of  ‘ prepositional ’ inﬁ nitives 
functioning in the manner of gerunds (a construction which is neither 
routine in classical Greek nor colloquial, but which characterized 
bureaucratic Greek from Hellenistic times).  
 In general, then, we have the impression of a fairly natural written Koine into which 
only certain well - established elements from the higher registers of the ofﬁ cial language 
have intruded. 
 By contrast, the  History of the Monks in Syria  by Theodoret (born in Antioch in 
the late 4th century  ad ), who clearly received an excellent education, is replete with 
Atticizing traits such as the use of the dual and the avoidance of normal contemporary 
vocabulary (e.g. 
  [ar ç ie ' refs], lit.  ‘ chief - priest ’ , is employed for the regular 
 [e ' piskopos], lit.  ‘ overseer ’ , the ultimate source of our word  ‘ bishop ’ ). 
Typical syntactic markers of the  ‘ high ’  Attic style, which are unusual in the Koine and 
wholly absent from Callinicus, include: 
 (26)  (a)  The use of future participles, or 
 [os (an)/ ' opos an]  ‘ so 
that ’ , with the subjunctive in ﬁ nal constructions (alongside the more 
neutral 
 [ ' ina]); 
 [ ' opos an] was particularly characteristic of 
ofﬁ cial Attic in the 5th century  bc , after which time it dropped out of 
favour. 
 (b)  The use of 
 [y ' po] with the dative (rather marginal in classical Attic, 
but so much the better from an Atticist perspective), 
 [pros] with 
the genitive, or a simple dative to mark the agent of a passive construc-
tion, alongside the neutral 
 [y ' po]   +  genitive; the popularity of the 
moribund dative, whether after prepositions or alone, was a specially 
clear Atticist trait (cf. again George  (2005) ). 
 (c)  Overuse of the indicative beside the more regular inﬁ nitive in consecutive 
clauses with 
 [ ' oste],  ‘ (so) that ’ . 
 (d)  A general effort to preserve the synthetic future in all its forms.  
 (e)  The use of the classical participial construction with 
 , 
 ‘ X happens [being/doing Y] ’ , etc.  
 There are, however, certain other Attic features in Theodoret ’ s style that also recur 
in middle - register writing. These may be seen as  ‘ unmarked ’ elements of the less elabo-
rated literary style of the period, i.e. as Atticisms which were used relatively unself-
consciously rather than as part of a deliberate demonstration of learning. They may 
be seen as complementing the  ‘ neutral ’ Koineisms of (25): 

158 Ancient Greek
 (27)  (a)  The inﬁ nitive in indirect commands, especially the use of an active inﬁ ni-
tive in a context where no agent is speciﬁ ed  –  ‘ s/he ordered [to send 
messengers] ’ , etc.  
 (b)  The use of the irregular verb 
 [ﬁ  ' mi]  ‘ say ’ with an accusative and 
inﬁ nitive beside the regular 
 with 
 [ ' oti]  ‘ that ’   +  ﬁ nite verb. 
 (c)  The  ‘ personal ’  passive construction  ‘ s/he is said [to X] ’ for the more 
popular  ‘ it is said [that X] ’ etc.  
 (d)  The use of the optative in past - tense contexts in both ﬁ nal clauses and 
indirect speech (replaced by the subjunctive and the indicative respec-
tively in less elevated literary work). 
 Overall, therefore, we gain the impression of a clear preference for constructions that 
were either under pressure in, or had already disappeared from, the ordinary spoken 
language, whether pure antiques or Attic traits that had become embedded as conserva-
tive elements in the higher registers of the Koine. 
 We thus have to deal with a scale of registers running from (a) more or less strict 
Atticism, through (b) a blend of Attic with  ‘ high - level ’  written Koineisms, down to 
(c) an amalgam of  ‘ standard ’  written Koineisms with ordinary contemporary speech; 
only those with minimal education wrote in a style (d) that was virtually free of such 
written Koineisms altogether (see chapter  6 for exempliﬁ cation). It seems, then, that 
all educated writers strove, in accordance with the relevant generic conventions, for a 
style that was in some degree distanced from the spoken vernacular, with a more or 
less clear division emerging between (a) and (b) on the one hand (Attic  < - > high - level 
ofﬁ cial/technical Koine) and (c) and (d) on the other (basic/administrative Koine  < - > 
vernacular). In other words, while a blend of (a) and (b) was quite normal (with 
attempts at (a) alone reserved only for the most ambitious forms of literary composi-
tion), a combination of (a)/(b) with either (c) or (d) was relatively  ‘ unnatural ’ , and 
generally the mark of an overambitious stylist with an inadequate educational 
background. 
 This state of affairs is entirely to be expected, since learning to write necessarily 
meant learning, however imperfectly, one or more of the standard forms of written 
Greek, with the Atticizing style constituting the preserve of those able to afford the 
luxury of a rhetorical higher education. Only in the later middle ages did the vernacular 
begin to make a serious impact on high - level literary composition, and then only in 
selected genres and/or under circumstances of political fragmentation and foreign rule 
(see  8.4.4 – 8.4.6  and chapter  12 ). We should not, then, be surprised, however odd this 
may seem from a modern perspective, to discover, for example, that the account by 
Krit ó boulos of Imbros of the Turkish capture of Constantinople in 1453 is written in 
a form of Greek that any student of the classical language of the 5th century  bc can 
read with ease, despite the passage of nearly two thousand years (cf.  9.6 ). 
 We should not, however, imagine that choice of style was simply a function of social 
class. Certain forms of Christian writing, such as martyrdoms and biographies, were 
traditionally more  ‘ popular ’  in character than those with a classical/Hellenistic herit-
age, since their authors ’ primary purpose was to reach as wide an audience as possible. 
Our earliest examples include the anonymous  Martyrdom of Polycarp  (probably 2nd 
century  ad ) and Athanasius of Alexandria ’ s  Life of St Anthony  (4th century  ad ). There 

Greek in the Roman Empire 159
is no reason to doubt that many such authors, like Athanasius, were in fact very well 
educated indeed (cf.  8.5.5 ,  8.5.6 ,  10.2 ,  10.3 ). 
 The Christianization of the empire also brought with it the need for the chronologi-
cal harmonization of the contemporary world and its classical past with the Hebrew 
world of the Old Testament, and so brought into being the important new genre of 
the universal chronicle. By the 5th century  ad such chronicles were a major source of 
reference for Christians of all classes, and their compilers, while again aiming for a 
wide audience, assumed that it would at least overlap with readers of  ‘ literary ’ histories 
of the traditional kind (cf. Jeffreys et al.  (1990) ). But while histories required the high 
style, the more practical function of world chronicles demanded the use of the routine 
written language of the day, based on the normal language of adminstration. 
 But before examining further the transition of the (eastern) Roman empire from 
the sophisticated urban civilization of antiquity to the medieval world of Orthodox 
Byzantium, it remains to complete Part I of this book by considering the evidence for 
the development of the Koine as a spoken language in the Roman period.  
 Notes 
1  The transcription of the Attic variants here and in (7), (8) and (9) below is intended to reﬂ ect 
the likely pronunciation of the Atticizing elite in the 2nd century  ad , that of the correspond-
ing Koine forms the contemporary, moderately educated norm.  
2  The following transcription assumes a conservative pronunciation of the period, as appropri-
ate for an ofﬁ cial document. 
3  We should note, however, that 
 [ î :pa - san]  ‘ they said ’ is also attested in this inscrip-
tion, where this same sufﬁ x has even replaced the ﬁ nal  -  n [ - n] of the already innovatory 
 [ î :p - an]. This unusual form, if not a simple mistake, may reﬂ ect less than perfect 
control of Greek morphology on the part of the translator.  
4  The transcription is again supposed to represent an educated pronunciation of the period.  
5  The pronunciation is intended to reﬂ ect that of normal spoken discourse among the educated 
classes at the time.  
6  It is assumed that Phrynichus would have employed a highly conservative pronunciation.  
7  A pronunciation typical of the majority of the basically literate is assumed in the 
transcription. 

6
 Spoken  K oine in 
the  R oman Period 
 
 
 6.1   Introduction 
 A great deal of valuable information about the evolution of  ‘ normal ’ Greek in the 
Roman period is naturally provided by the private documents of the not very well -
 educated, both inscriptions and, in the case of Egypt, papyri. The extracts from private 
papyrus letters given below give a fair sample of the relevant phenomena. But before 
looking at these in detail, a general survey of the phonological developments of the 
Hellenistic and Roman imperial periods will help to set the scene.  
 6.2   Summary of the Principal Developments 
in the Vowel System 
 Before elaborating the details of the attested graphic interchanges and their implica-
tions, it will be useful to summarize the principal developments by means of conven-
tional vowel diagrams, and to list the spelling options employed in substandard works 
for the representation of particular sounds in particular periods. 
 The whole process can be seen as a radical simpliﬁ cation and reduction of the clas-
sical system of long vowels and diphthongs, with the effect that, once distinctions of 
vowel length were lost, the former long - and short - vowel systems fell naturally together 
into a simple six - vowel triangle distinct from the Modern Greek system only in the 
continued presence of /y/. 
 To a very large extent the changes involved can be explained in terms of a series of 
interconnected  ‘ chain - effects ’ , as proposed, for example, by Ruip é rez  (1956)  and Allen 
 (1987b) , and motivated by the principle of maximizing the differentiation of the reali-
zation of phonemes within the available articulatory space (cf. Martinet  (1955) ). 
Teodorsson has provided detailed studies of Attic for the late classical  (1974)  and 
Hellenistic periods  (1978) , and also of Ptolemaic Koine  (1977) , while the Roman and 
early Byzantine papyri have been analysed by Gignac  (1976) . Threatte  (1980)  is an 
extremely thorough and cautious account of the phonology of Attic inscriptions, and 
we may usefully compare that with Ruijgh  (1978b)  for a  ‘ conservative ’ critique of 
Teodorsson ’ s  (1974)  methodology and rather  ‘ radical ’ results. 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 161
 The emergence in Attic, perhaps during the 9th century  bc , of a new long vowel 
 * [a:], as the product of cluster simpliﬁ cation and compensatory lengthening (e.g. 
nom sg  * p a n t -" [pants]  ‘ all ’   >   * p a n -" [pans]    >  
 [pa:s]), seems to have had the 
effect of rephonologizing the reﬂ exes of the original long a - vowel inherited from 
Indo - European; the  ‘ lower ’ allophones of this latter, occurring after [i, e, r], merged 
with the new long a - vowel, while its remaining  ‘ higher ’ allophones were  ‘ pushed ’ up 
the front axis of the vowel triangle to merge with those of original / ε :/ (the familiar 
 shift of Attic - Ionic; for convenience, the resulting long a - vowel will be represented 
/a:/ henceforth): 
 (1)   
 
i:
ε:
ɑ:
(:)
1
2
 
 Shortly afterwards, probably in the 8th or early 7th century  bc , the original diphthongs 
/ei/ and /ou/ were monophthongized to produce new mid - high vowels /e:/ and /o:/. 
Since the system already contained the inherited mid vowels / ε :/ and 
 , the result was 
a degree of overcrowding, particularly on the back axis, and the eventual consequence 
was a raising of /o:/ towards /u:/, a movement which in turn  ‘ dragged ’ original 
 
towards the position of /o:/ and  ‘ pushed ’ original /u:/ around to the front axis to 
become /y:/: 
 (2)   
 
i:/y:
o:
a:
ɔ:
u:
e:
ε:
ei
ou
1
1
2
3
4
 
 This is essentially the classical long - vowel system as described, for example, in Allen 
 (1987a) , where  i  =  /i:/,  e i  =  /e:/,  h  =  / e :/,  a  =  /a:/,  w  =  /o:/,  o  u  =  /u:/,  u  =  /y:/. 
 On the front axis the relative infrequency of original /i:/ and the corresponding 
overcrowding following the advent of /e:/ had the combined effect of pulling /e:/ ( e i ) 
towards /i:/ (affecting ﬁ rst the pre - consonantal and word - ﬁ nal allophones, but then 
applying generally), with which it eventually merged. This seems in turn to have pulled 
original / ε :/ ( h ) towards the position abandoned by /e:/, which then exercised a monoph-
thongizing effect on /ai/ ( a i ) to create a new phoneme / æ :/, later / ε :/, to ﬁ ll this further 
vacant slot: 

162 Ancient Greek
 (3)   
 
i:/y:
o:
a:
u:
e:
ε:
ai
1
2
3
 
 This still somewhat  ‘ crowded ’ front axis then underwent further simpliﬁ cation, through 
a second raising of /e:/ ( h ) to /i:/, and a corresponding upward drift of / ε :/ ( a i ) towards 
the vacated position. In broadly the same period the distinction between long and short 
vowels was also lost (in conjunction with the shift from a primary pitch to a primary 
stress accent), so that the changes represented in (4): 
 (4)   
 
a(:)
o(:)
e(:)
u(:)
i(:)/y(:)
ε(:)
1
2
 
 led to a system that easily merged with the existing short - vowel system in (5) (which 
had changed only in the fronting of original /u/ to /y/, in line with the corresponding 
development in the long - vowel system): 
 (5)   
 
 
 This gave the new six - vowel system in (6), where /e/ (written  e ,  a i ) is used for conven-
ience to represent the surviving mid vowel on the front axis: 
 
i/y
o
a
u
e
 
 The picture is complicated slightly by the development of the remaining diphthongs. 
Already in the classical period /yi/ ( u i ) had begun to merge with /y:/, at least in popular 
registers, and this then fell together with /y/, as noted. Similarly, /oi/ ( o  i ) had shifted, 
via 
  , to / œ i/ or / ø i/, which in turn then monophthongized to / œ (:)/ or / ø (:)/, and 
ﬁ nally raised to /y/. Eventually /y/ ( u ,  o  i ,  u i ) lost its lip - rounding to merge once 
 (6)   

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 163
again with /i/, though the completion of this last shift belongs to the middle Byzantine 
period. 
 Of the long diphthongs, /a:i/ ( a i / a/ ) and /o:i/ ( w i /  ) simply lost their ﬁ nal element 
and merged with the corresponding long vowels, which then fell together with the 
corresponding short vowels, as we have seen. In more popular varieties, however, the 
diphthong / ε :i/ ( h i / h /) seems to have partly fallen together with /e:/ (normally written 
 e i , cf. the spelling of the 2sg middle ending with either  - h i /h/ or  - e i ) from the late 5th 
century  bc . In word - ﬁ nal position, however, there was at least a partial restoration of 
[e:i] ( h i ) from the end of the 3rd century  bc , perhaps reﬂ ecting the more conservative 
pronunciation of the resurgent aristocracy; this eventually lost its ﬁ nal element along 
with the other long diphthongs, and raised to [i:]. 
 The diphthongs ending in [u], however, namely /au/ ( a u ), /eu/ ( e u ) and [ ε :u/ ( h u ), 
adopted an ever closer articulation of the ﬁ nal element, a process that eventually led, 
via the development of 
 , to a pronunciation [af/v], [ef/v], 
[if/v], with voicing triggered by a following voiced segment. 
 For most of these developments, the crucial issue of chronology still remains to be 
established. This will be considered ﬁ rst for Athenian Attic, and then for Egyptian 
Koine (with some additional observations about the Koine in general).  
 6.3   Some Illustrative Examples 
 6.3.1   A thenian  A ttic 
 In  4.4.2  above it was noted that orthographic changes in ofﬁ cial Boeotian inscriptions 
are regularly taken to indicate that this dialect underwent many of the changes listed 
above at a very early date in comparison with, say, Attic. We thus ﬁ nd  i used for  e i 
already in the 5th century  bc (implying /e:/    >  /i:/), and, from the early 4th century,  h 
used for  a i and  e i for  h (implying /ai/    >  / ε :/ following the shift of original / ε :/   >  /e:/, 
with later substitution of i suggesting further raising of the latter to /i(:)/). By the mid -
 3rd century the use of  u for  o  i similarly suggests that /oi/ had already been monoph-
thongized to / ø (:)/, while the occasional 2nd - century use of  e i for  o  i implies an early 
loss of lip - rounding (i.e. 
 ). 
 These developments have been placed in an interesting light by the work of 
Teodorsson  (1974) . Using both epigraphic material and a range of secondary evidence 
to draw a distinction between the conservative pronunciation of the aristocracy and 
that of the majority (as evidenced in the spelling mistakes of private documents and 
the casual observations of contemporary writers), it is argued that vernacular Attic, 
far from being slow off the mark in comparison with Boeotian, had in fact already 
undergone many of the changes listed above by the end of the 4th century  bc . The 
onset of these  ‘ progressive ’ developments is associated directly with the role of Athens 
as an imperial capital and major emporium, and particularly with the extreme form 
of democratic government that gave unusual prominence and prestige, albeit on a 
temporary basis, to more popular forms of the dialect. 
 Much inevitably hinges on the interpretation of the signiﬁ cance of what remains a 
small number of documents exhibiting the relevant errors, and the overall picture 
depends in particular on the extent to which we can be sure that the mistakes in 

164 Ancient Greek
question were committed by local native speakers rather than by resident aliens, includ-
ing many non - native speakers of Greek, who may have had difﬁ culty with the subtleties 
of the Attic dialect (cf. Ruijgh  (1978b) and Threatte  (1980)  for less radical views about 
the chronology of change, especially in the popular varieties). But even if Teodorsson 
has overinterpreted his data, he is surely right to emphasize the importance of distin-
guishing different levels within the Attic of the period, and it is certainly helpful to be 
able to see the Boeotian facts as forming part of a more general pattern of development 
in the 5th and 4th centuries  bc rather than as revealing an isolated and otherwise 
unexplained  ‘ pioneer ’ . 
 By the mid - 4th century a distinction may fairly be drawn between a conservative 
system retained by the aristocracy and an innovative system representing the speech 
of the moderately educated, a variety that is further distinguished from the  ‘ vulgar ’ 
Attic of the urban poor. Teodorsson ’ s reconstruction ( 1978 : 94 – 6) of the conservative 
system is given in (7), where / − C, V, #  =  ‘ in the context of a following consonant, 
vowel, or word - boundary ’ : 
 (7)  (a)   Phoneme 
 Spelling 
 /i:/ 
 i ,  e i / – C or #  
 /i/ 
 i 
 /y:/ 
 u ,  u i 
 /y/ 
 u ,  u i 
 /e:/ 
 e i / – V,  h , 
 
 /e/ 
 e 
 /a:/ 
 a 
 /a/ 
 a 
 /o:/ 
 w 
 /o/ 
 o  
 /u:/ 
 o  u 
 /u/ 
 o  u 
 (b)   Diphthongs  
 Spelling 
 /a:i/ 
 a i  
 /ai/ 
 a i 
 /au/ 
 a u 
 /eu/ 
 e u 
 /e:u/ 
 h u 
 /o:i/ 
 w i 
 
 /oi/ 
 o  i 
 Subsequently, he ﬁ nds evidence only for the loss of the ﬁ nal [i] - element from 
the relevant long diphthongs in the period between c.150 and c.50  bc . The eventual 
elimination of vowel - length distinctions and the associated shift from a primary pitch 
to a primary stress accent (on which see below) belongs to the Roman imperial period. 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 165
 By contrast Teodorsson argues that the majority system was already far advanced 
by c.350  bc ( 1974 : 286 – 99): 
 (8)  (a)   Phoneme 
 Spelling 
 /i/ 
 i ,  e i / − C or #,  h ,  h i 
 ,  u ,  u i 
 /y/ (? / ø /) 
 o  i 
 
 
 e ,  e i / – V 
 / e / 
 a i 
 /a/ 
 a ,  a i 
 
  
 w i 
 
 /o/ 
 o ,  w 
 /u/ 
 o  u 
 (b)   ‘ Diphthongs ’  
 Spelling 
 /iw/ 
 h u 
 /ew/ 
 e u 
 /aw/ 
 a u 
 According to Teodorsson, therefore, distinctive vowel length had already been lost 
and a primary stress accent was already in place; monophthongization was also com-
plete, including the onset of the frication of the ﬁ nal [u] - element of the relevant diph-
thongs. He also offers evidence of the shift of [i]   >  [j]/ − V (i.e. of synizesis), particularly 
in the sufﬁ x  - i a [ - ia/ - ja]. Most strikingly, it is suggested that the loss of lip - rounding 
in /y/ ( u ) had also been been largely completed, though the product of the monoph-
thongization of /oi/ ( o  i ) seems not yet to have been affected and so should perhaps be 
represented as / ø /, to explain its continued distinctiveness at this time. From 330  bc 
onwards, however, the prestige of this system, associated by Teodorsson with the 
democratic government of earlier periods, appears to have declined under the growing 
importance of oligarchic groups under Macedonian hegemony. Thus the only further 
signiﬁ cant change he ﬁ nds in the period up to c.50  bc , as the conservative variety 
became steadily more prevalent among the population at large, involves the merger of 
the mid vowels on the front and perhaps also the back axis. 
 It is the reconstructed chronology of change in the majority dialect that is perhaps 
the most controversial aspect of Teodorsson ’ s proposals, and given the limited quantity 
and quality of evidence available to support it, it may well be more realistic to push 
at least some of these changes back by a century or more, most obviously the loss 
of vowel - length distinctions and the associated shift to a stress accent, but also the 
completion of the raising of [e:] ( h )   >  [i:] and the loss of lip - rounding in [y:] ( u ). 
 6.3.2   E gyptian  K oine 
 It is of the greatest importance to recall that the Koine was based on a conservative, 
though not ultra - conservative/aristocratic, variety of Attic, continuing the spoken and 
ofﬁ cial written Attic (Great Attic) used widely in the Greek world from the 4th century 

166 Ancient Greek
 bc  onwards. The Macedonians thus made a decisive contribution to the maintenance 
of aspects of  ‘ Old Attic ’ phonology, with the result that, while the subsequent evolu-
tion of the Koine as a spoken lingua franca in the Hellenistic east follows the general 
pattern of development already seen in the majority variety of Athenian Attic, its 
progress is somewhat retarded by comparison (even assuming later dates for key 
changes than those supposed by Teodorsson), with some developments taking place 
only in the late Hellenistic and Roman imperial periods. 
 In Egypt speciﬁ cally, it seems that the royal court in Alexandria maintained a 
highly conservative pronunciation throughout the Ptolemaic period, and that the 
educated urban population quickly developed its own standard from this foundation. 
At lower levels, however, the rapidly evolving Koine base was inﬂ uenced both by the 
native dialects of Greek immigrants (though only in the earlier period) and by the 
substrate effects of the Egyptian/Coptic spoken by the native population (cf.  4.5 , 
 4.10.2 ). 
 Teodorsson ( 1977 : 251 – 6) represents the standard (i.e. non - aristocratic, non - vulgar) 
pronunciation of the educated majority in the mid - 3rd century  bc as follows: 
 (9)  (a)   Phoneme 
 Spelling 
 /i:/ 
 i ,  e i / − C or #,  h i (h/) 
 /i/ 
 i 
 /y:/ 
 u 
 /y/ 
 u 
 /e:/ 
 e i / − V,  h 
 /e/ 
 e 
 /a:/ 
 a 
 /a/ 
 a 
 /o:/ 
 w 
 /o/ 
 o  
 /u:/ 
 o  u 
 /u/ 
 o  u 
 (b)   Diphthongs  
 Spelling 
 /yi/ 
 u i 
 /eu/ 
 e u 
 /e:u/ 
 h u 
 /a:i/ 
 a i  
 /ai/ 
 a i 
 /au/ 
 a u 
 /o:i/ 
 w i 
 
 /oi/ 
 o  i 
 This is essentially the same as the conservative version of Athenian Attic set up for the 
mid - 4th century  bc , except that the diphthong /yi/ ( u i ) has not been monophthongized 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 167
to /y:/ (perhaps a feature of Great Attic as opposed to its local Athenian analogue), 
while the old diphthong / ε :i/ ( h i ,  ) has here merged with the product of the early 
monophthongization of original /ei/ ( e i ), namely /e:/, and, along with the latter, raised 
to /i:/; we may again note the conﬂ ict between 
 and  - e i as the spelling for the 2sg 
middle ending in Athenian Attic, the former representing a conservative, the latter a 
modernizing trait that was apparently followed in Great Attic and the Koine. 1 
 By the mid - 2nd century  bc , however, it is argued that this majority system had 
undergone signiﬁ cant changes, most notably monophthongization, the loss of distinc-
tive vowel length, and the shift to a primary stress accent: 
 (10)  (a)  
 ‘ Diphthongs ’  
 Spelling 
 /yi/ 
 u i 
 /iw/ 
 h u 
 /ew/ 
 e u 
 /aw/ 
 a u 
 Phoneme 
 Spelling 
 /i/ 
 i ,  e i / − C or #,  h i 
 
 /y/ 
 u 
 
 
 e i / − V,  h 
 / ø / 
 o  i 
 /e/ 
 e ,  a i 
 /a/ 
 a ,  a i ( a /) 
 /o/ 
 o ,  w ,  w i 
 
 /u/ 
 o  u 
 (b)  
 The change of / ø / ( o  i )   >  /y/ seems to have gone through by the middle of the 1st 
century  bc , though the lip - rounded pronunciation of  u / o  i remained standard for many 
centuries to come. In the later Roman and early Byzantine periods the positional allo-
phones of 
 ( e i / − V,  h ) progressively merged with those of /i/, even in the standard 
dialect, while the frication of the [u] - element of the relevant diphthongs progressed 
through 
 to 
 , and probably, by early Byzantine times, to [f/v] ([f] / − [ − voice], 
[v] / − [+voice]). The result is essentially the modern Greek system, apart from the ﬁ nal 
merger of /y/ ( u ,  o  i ) with /i/: 
 (11)  (a)   Phoneme 
 Spelling 
 /i/ 
 i ,  e i ,  h ,  h i 
  
 /y/ 
 u ,  u i ,  o  i 
 /e/ 
 e ,  a i 
 /a/ 
 a ,  a i  
 /o/ 
 o ,  w ,  w i 
 
 /u/ 
 o  u 

168 Ancient Greek
 (b)   ‘ Diphthongs ’  
 Spelling 
 /if, iv/  
 h u 
 /ef, ev/  
 e u 
 /af, av/  
 a u 
 The written evidence for the chronology of these developments, as attested in the 
papyri, can be summarized brieﬂ y as follows: 
 (12)  The general graphic interchange of  e and  a i , of  u and  o  i , and of  i ,  e i and  
(/ ε :i/ having probably merged with /e:/ by the beginning of the 4th century  bc ) 
provides good evidence for the ﬁ nal merger, through a combination of systematic 
monophthongization and the loss of distinctive vowel length, of the classical /e/ and 
/ai/ to /e/, of /y(:)/ and /oi/ to /y/, and of /i(:)/ and original /e:/ to /i/. These develop-
ments began in the Koine in the 3rd and 2nd centuries  bc , but considerably earlier 
in many of the old Greek dialects.  
 (13)   (a)  Interchange of  h and  i / e i is attested from late Ptolemaic times onwards, 
but despite more frequent occurrence with the passage of time, never 
quite becomes general even in the Roman period.  
 (b)  Many of the earliest examples involve substitution of  h for  e i in a prevo-
calic context, and so probably provide evidence that the older value of 
 e i , namely 
 , was retained there for a time: i.e. original / ε :/, written  h , 
raised to 
 when original /e:/, written  e i , merged with /i/ other than 
prevocalically during the 3rd century  bc , thus making both  h and  e i 
available to render 
 before vowels.  
 (c)  Alternations of  h with  e i / i allegedly occur most frequently before vowels, 
liquids, nasals and /s/, and, somewhat later, before consonants with 
tongue - tip articulations more generally (cf. Teodorsson ( 1977 : 252)); 
similar claims are made for interchanges of  e / a i with  h , and of all three 
graphs with  i / e i (cf. Gignac ( 1976 : 330)). Traditionally, this has been 
 ‘ explained ’  in terms of a specially close articulation of 
 in these envi-
ronments, but the explanation is phonetically implausible and may simply 
rest on a statistical illusion. In the Roman period many examples of the 
interchange of  h with  e i / i occur in unaccented syllables or unstressed 
minor words, where a clear distinction between a close 
 and [i] is more 
difﬁ cult to sustain, while others seem to have been conditioned by a 
variety of non - phonetic considerations (e.g. the falling together of aorist 
and perfect in popular varieties of the Koine led to confusion between 
aorist 
 and perfect 
 [ ' hika], from 
 
 ‘ send ’ , with the resultant perfect/aorist sometimes misspelled 
 [ ' hika]). 
 (d)  But given the absence in even the most uneducated material of routine 
interchanges of  h with  e i / i on anything like the scale of those between 
 e i and  i or  a i and  e , it would probably be premature to assume the full 
merger of 
 and /i/ before the early Byzantine period.  
 (14)  Similar observations apply to the interchanges of  u with  e i / i and of  u with  h 
(where the latter represents [i]), except that these are even less common, thus 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 169
strongly implying that /y/ did not merge with /i/ for the majority in the Roman 
period, and that any partial overlap was due to speciﬁ c phonetic environments (e.g. 
dissimilation in a labial context) and/or substrate effects (Coptic having no /y/ 
phoneme). The ﬁ nal falling together of these phonemes in educated speech probably 
took place as late as the 9th/10th century  ad . 
 (15)  (a)  The progressive narrowing of the articulation of the second element of 
the original diphthongs /au, eu/, beginning in the 3rd century  bc and 
leading, via [aw, ew], to audible friction, i.e. 
 , is ﬁ rst 
attested in the spellings  a ( u ) o  u / e ( u ) o  u , which seem to reﬂ ect the conso-
nantal character of the second element. By the Roman period, after the 
loss of the simultaneous lip - rounding, we seem to be dealing simply with 
a pronunciation 
 , or perhaps even [af/av, ef/ev] as in 
Modern Greek; spellings with  b (which by this time represented 
 or 
/v/, see below) become increasingly common in late Roman and early 
Byzantine documents.  
 (b)  We should also note spellings in which the second element has been 
dropped altogether, a  ‘ popular ’ characteristic reﬂ ecting allegro pronun-
ciations and affecting unstressed pronouns in particular, e.g. 
 [ato(n)] 
for 
 [afto(n)]  ‘ him ’ etc. These occur sporadically in  ‘ vulgar ’ Attic 
texts from late classical times and begin in the Ptolemaic papyri from 
the mid - 3rd century  bc onwards.  
 (16)  The frequent omission of prevocalic  i /i/ is standardly taken to indicate a 
regular popular/allegro pronunciation of  i  +  vowel as [jV] in that position (cf. Mayser 
and Schmoll ( 1970 : 126 – 7), Teodorsson ( 1977 : 237,  1978 : 82)); such synizesis 
was inevitably associated with a shift in the position of the accent when /i/ had origi-
nally been the accented vowel: e.g. [ - ' ia]    >  [ - ' ja] etc. The development in question 
certainly took place (cf. modern 
  ‘ children ’ etc.), and it almost cer-
tainly began in this period, but we should acknowledge that the complete omission of 
 i before another vowel is a less than transparent way of spelling [jV], and recognize 
that some apparent examples may be no more than spelling mistakes, cf. M é ndez 
Dosuna ( 2000 : 281 – 2). Gignac ( 1976 : 302 – 4), however, reports that the omission is 
especially common after liquids and nasals, and in these contexts phonetic absorp-
tion of [j] is at least a possibility (e.g. 
 [cy ' ria]   >  [cy ' rja]   >  [cy ' ra], spelled 
 ). 
 (17)  (a)  The change from a primary pitch accent to a primary stress accent 
was directly associated with the loss of vowel - length distinctions, and 
was widespread by the middle of the 2nd century  bc ; it is occasionally 
associated in writing with the omission of unstressed vowels and/or 
some confusion of vowel quality (see Chadwick  (1993)  for possible 
evidence that this shift was already affecting 3rd - century Thessalian).  
 (b)  As noted earlier, the loss of long vowels and diphthongs destroyed 
the environment for the occurrence of the circumﬂ ex accent (=   rise - fall 
on a single  ‘ long ’  syllable), and so neutralized the contrast between 
circumﬂ ex and acute (=  rise   +  fall over two successive syllables). This 
in turn highlighted the increase in volume that was almost certainly 

170 Ancient Greek
associated secondarily with the rise in pitch, a development aided 
regionally by substrate effects (e.g. Egyptian/Coptic had a strong stress 
accent) and one that led to the perception that increased amplitude 
rather than a rise in pitch was the primary marker of word accent.  
 6.4   The Development of the Consonant System 
 The most important changes of the Hellenistic and Roman periods are listed in the 
paragraphs below (see Gignac  (1976) for a detailed survey of the evidence): 
 (18)  In the consonant system the voiceless plosives /p, t, k/ remained unchanged, 
except that voiced allophones were increasingly regularized after nasals: hence  m p , 
 n t ,  g k  =  [mb, nd, 
 ]. Palatalized allophones of /k/ were naturally used before [i/y, 
e, j], as expected (see (25)). 
 (19)  The shift of the voiced plosives /b, d, g/ to voiced fricatives 
 was 
complete for the majority of literate speakers by the 4th century  ad (cf. Gignac 
( 1976 : 64)), the only exception being the allophones after nasals, where a plosive 
pronunciation was retained. This process apparently began with the velar /g/, and 
had perhaps been carried through by the 2nd century  bc (cf. Teodorsson ( 1977 : 
254)). The new 
 phoneme seems to have had the allophones [j] before the high 
front vowels [e, i], [g] after a nasal, and 
 elsewhere. Fricativization then affected 
the labial /b/ (
 by the 1st century  ad , except after nasals), and ﬁ nally the 
dental /d/ (
 other than after nasals from the 3rd/4th century  ad onwards). 
There appears to be no good phonetic reason to suppose, with Gignac ( 1976 : 75 – 6), 
that fricativization of [d] had occurred much earlier than this before [j, i] (cf. 
M é ndez Dosuna ( 2000 : 282)).  
 (20)   (a)  Neither Teodorsson  (1977) nor Gignac  (1976)  ﬁ nds any compelling 
evidence for the corresponding shift of the voiceless aspirates /p h , t h , k h / 
to fricatives /f,  q , x/ in Egypt in the Hellenistic, Roman imperial or early 
Byzantine periods. Whether this reﬂ ects a conservative peculiarity of 
Egyptian Greek under the inﬂ uence of Coptic (at least the Bohairic 
dialect had /p h , t h , k h /, and special symbols distinct from  f and  c were 
introduced to represent /f/ and /x/ in those dialects which had these 
phonemes), or reﬂ ects a more general state of affairs in the Koine, is 
difﬁ cult to determine.  
 (b)  There is, however, direct evidence that /t h /   >  / q / in Laconian in the 5th 
century  bc ; cf. spellings such as 
  ‘ god/goddess ’ in Athenian attempts 
to represent the likely Laconian pronunciation presumably [ q j ó s], and 
the use of the same spellings by the Spartans themselves after the adop-
tion of the Ionic alphabet in the 4th century (cf.  1.4.2 (a)); it seems that 
this really did develop to /s/, perhaps quite early, since many Tsakonian 
words now show /s/ where the rest of Modern Greek has / q /, see  4.4.3 ). 
 (c)  There is also possible evidence for a fricative pronunciation of /k h / (2nd 
century  bc ) and /p h / (2nd century  ad ) in the Asia Minor Koine (Schweizer 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 171
( 1898 : 109 – 15)). Similarly, Threatte ( 1980 : 470) agrees with Meisterhans 
( 1900 : 78) in ﬁ nding evidence for the change of /p h /   >  /f/ in spellings 
such as 
 ([ef(f)ro ' nis], IG 2 2 .11507: for 
 [efp h ro ' nis]) and 
 ([ef ' (f)reos], IG 2 2 . 5310: for 
 [ef ' p h reos]) in less literate 
Attic inscriptions of the early 2nd century  ad . 
 (d)  Thus, though the evidence is frankly meagre, it would perhaps be rea-
sonable to assume that fricativization in the Koine began in various areas 
outside Egypt during the Hellenistic period and that it had been widely, 
though by no means universally, carried through by the end of the 4th 
century  ad . 
 (e)  The change perhaps involved an initial assimilatory shift from [p h , t h , 
k h ] to [pf, t q , kx], followed by loss of the plosive element. To judge from 
the examples given in (c), a likely starting place would be after a voice-
less fricative, a context commonly arising with the fricativization of the 
second element of the former diphthongs  a u and  e u , where the difﬁ cult 
sequences [f - pf], [f - t q ], [f - kx] would be prone to simpliﬁ cation ([f - pf, f - t q , 
f - kx]  >  [f - f, f - q , f - x]). A similar reduction would presumably apply to 
these elements after the fricative /s/ ([s - pf, s - t q , s - kx]    >  [s - f, s - q , s - x]), and 
also when they occurred in combination, involving initially the second 
and then the ﬁ rst member of each pair ([pf - t q , kx - t q ]    >  [pf - q , kx - q ]    >  [f - q , 
x - q ]), cf. Buben í k ( 1983 : 104 – 8). From here the shift to a fricative pro-
nunciation in all contexts was only a matter of time, though doubtless 
this was initiated and carried through at different times in different areas 
(with Egypt probably retaining a more conservative system because of 
the local substrate).  
 (21)  Assimilation affected original /zd/ (written  ζ ) to produce [zz], with subsequent 
simpliﬁ cation to [z], ﬁ rst word - initially and then across the board; this created a 
new phoneme /z/, since the occurrence of [z] (as an allophone of /s/) was no longer 
exclusively conditioned by a following voiced consonant.  
 (22)  The simpliﬁ cation of double consonants generally, beginning from the 3rd 
century  bc onwards, is indicated by the apparently arbitrary use of double graphs 
in the private documents of the less well - educated in most areas.  
 (23)  The phoneme /h/, occurring only word - initially and in composition, was 
progressively lost during the period of the Koine, beginning with more popular 
varieties (recall that  ‘ psilosis ’  was already a feature of many traditional Greek 
dialects) but eventually affecting even the pronunciation of the most educated 
speakers by the late Roman/Byzantine period.  
 (24)  Throughout the Hellenistic and Roman periods in Egypt there is widespread 
evidence for the articulatory weakness of both ﬁ nal [n] and ﬁ nal [s], especially before 
a following plosive. This takes the form of omission and also, in the case of [n], 
assimilation (a process that occurs also in medial positions), though there seems to 
be no clearly deﬁ nable contextual delimitation to these processes. Note, however, 
that only ﬁ nal [n] comes anywhere close to disappearing from Greek in the later 
middle ages (though with important dialectal exceptions), and the resilient cases 

172 Ancient Greek
that do survive in standard Modern Greek do so under precise phonetic and 
morpho - lexical conditions (see Parts II and III). The Egyptian phenomena therefore 
appear to be largely irrelevant to the later history of the language in general.  
 (25)  It is assumed that in this period the natural palatalization of velars before 
[i/y, e, j] (hitherto not noted) became more marked. Accordingly, the relevant 
allophones of 
 are now transcribed 
 . 
 6.5   Some  E gyptian Texts 
 With this background, we may now examine some illustrative extracts from a number 
of papyrus letters dating from the early 2nd to the late 4th century  ad . The phonetic 
transcriptions are intended to indicate a pronunciation typical of the more popular 
Koine of the relevant period, though speciﬁ cally Egyptian phenomena (cf.  4.10.2 ) are 
largely suppressed if they have no direct bearing on the subsequent development of 
Greek. 
 6.5.1   Letter 1:  c litic  p ronouns and  w ord  o rder,  c ontrol  v erbs with 
 
[ ' ina] - c omplements 
 The ﬁ rst piece (P. Fay. 114,  ad 100) is written by a discharged veteran to his son: 
 (26)   
 
 
 ‘ Lucius Bellenus Gemellus to his son Sabinus greetings. On receipt of my letter you will 
kindly send me Pindarus the ﬁ eld - guard from Dionysias to the city, as Hermonax has 
asked me for permission to take him to Kerkesoucha to examine his olive grove, as it is 
dense and he wants to cut out some trees from it, so that those to be cut down may be 
cut skilfully  …  ’ 
 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 173
 Many of the major phonological developments listed above are well illustrated here. 
We may note for example: 
 (27)   (a)  Interchange of 
 [hy ' jo]  ‘ son ’ , 
 [ ' ina]  ‘ (so) 
that ’ , 
 [ ' pem(p)sis]  ‘ you will send ’ , 
 [e ' pi] 
 ‘ since ’ , 
 [katama ' t h in]  ‘ to examine ’ , 
 
[ ' t h eli]  ‘ wants ’ , 
 [em ' biros]  ‘ skilfully ’ . 
 (b)  Interchange of  o  i / u : 
 [hy ' jo]  ‘ son ’ , 
 
 ‘ having done ’ ,  m u ( m o  i ) [my]  ‘ to me ’ . 
 (c)  Confusion of long/short vowels: 
 [em ' biros]  ‘ skil-
fully ’ . 
 [eks af ' ton]  ‘ from them ’ is a possible further 
example, if this pronoun is indeed genitive plural, as commonly assumed; 
the sense, however, is better if we take it as an accusative singular, 
 
[af ' ton], and assume that the preposition here takes a non - classical 
accusative in place of the genitive (a development already under way in 
popular texts with the largely synonymous 
 [a ' po]  ‘ from ’ ). 
 Other features worthy of note include: 
 (28)   (a)  The avoidance of verb - ﬁ nal word order except in the formulaic address 
(cf.  4.8 ), with subjects typically following an initial verb, especially in 
subordinate clauses. Clitic pronouns normally appear immediately after 
the verbs that govern them, except where there is an initial scope - bearing 
element (e.g. mood - marking conjunctions, interrogatives, negatives, 
foci). After 
 [ ' ina], for example, the pronoun still occupies second 
position in the clause but the verb has been pushed out of ﬁ rst position 
and so follows the clitic: cf. 
 [in(a) a(f)ton  ' lavi]  ‘ that 
he may take him ’ . This pattern of word order and clitic distribution 
continues into (vernacular) Medieval Greek and survives in certain 
modern dialects, though standard Modern Greek has generalized the 
preverbal clitic position.  
 (b)  The use of a subjunctive clause introduced by the  ‘ ﬁ nal ’ conjunction 
 
[ ' ina] in place of an inﬁ nitival construction after 
 
 ‘ asked ’ . Since this is in principle a control structure ( he asked to take 
 … ), we might have expected the inﬁ nitive to survive (cf.  4.6.2 ), but the 
inclusion of an object pronoun ( m e [me]  ‘ me ’ ) introduces a potential 
ambiguity ( he asked me to take  … ,    =   ‘ that he take ’ or  ‘ that I take ’ ?) 
and the ﬁ nite construction with overt agreement morphology on the verb 
is therefore preferred. We may assume that structures of this type rep-
resent the ﬁ rst step towards the generalization of subjunctive clauses 
even where coreferential subjects are involved in main and subordinate 
clauses (cf. Modern Greek 
 [ ' q elo na  ' pao] ( <  Koine 
 ), lit.  ‘ I - want that I - go ’ , etc.). 
Inﬁ nitives otherwise survive strongly, however, both as complements 
(e.g. 
 [e ' kopse]  ‘ to cut off ’ after 
 [ ' t h eli]  ‘ wants ’ ) and as 

174 Ancient Greek
adjuncts (e.g. 
 [katama ' t h in]  ‘ to examine ’ , used here to express 
a purpose clause).  
 (c)  Participles are still used quite freely to express background circum-
stances (e.g. 
 [komi ' samenos]  ‘ having received ’ ) and in 
nominalized structures (e.g. 
 [ta  ' melonda 
e ' koptest h e]  ‘ the (ones) about to be cut down ’ ). Note, however, that the 
future passive is in decline, and that the future passive participle here 
has been replaced by a periphrastic construction with a future auxiliary 
and a passive inﬁ nitive (cf.  4.11.1 ). Such periphrases come to be used 
more widely (along with a range of other options, see below) as the 
future indicative and the aorist subjunctive came to be homophonous in 
the majority of verbs.  
 (d)  The origins of the 3rd - person clitic pronouns of modern Greek can be 
seen in structures such as 
 [in(a) a(f)ton  ' lavi]  ‘ that he 
may take him ’ , where the weak form of the pronoun, [aton] (cf. (15) 
above), follows a word ending with [ - a], with resultant elision of the 
ﬁ nal vowel. Resegmentation as [ina ton] then produces the basis for a 
paradigm  t o  n / t h n / t o  [ton/tin/to]  ‘ him/her/it ’ etc. Cf. 
 
[ton ele ' on(a) a(f) ' tu]. 
 6.5.2   Letter 2:  ‘ s hort ’ 2nd - d eclension  f orms, the  m erger of  a orist 
and  p erfect 
 Our second letter (P. Oxy. 1155) dates from  ad 104, and reveals a number of addi-
tional phenomena characteristic of vernacular Greek in the early second century: 
 (29)   
 
 
 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 175
 ‘ Thonas to his dearest Apion very many greetings. I want you to know that I have gone 
(or  went ) directly to Alexandria, I ( have ) immediately addressed the matter you asked me 
to. I found the man doing well in the main. Greet all our friends. I ( have ) sent you the 
governor ’ s actual written order so that you might deal promptly with what concerns you 
 … Give this to Apion the priest ( who carries the image of the god Isis ) at the temple of 
Isis. ’ 
 Over and above the by now familiar graphic interchanges, we should note that the use 
of iota subscript here, as in other papyri, is simply a modern editorial device. Iota in 
the  ‘ long diphthongs ’ was written adscript for as long as it was pronounced, and it is 
therefore frequently omitted in papyri from the middle of the 2nd century  bc onwards. 
Its widespread graphic restoration from the end of the 2nd century  ad is testimony to 
the impact of Atticism and the renewed emphasis on  ‘ correct ’  usage (cf.  5.5 ,  5.6 ). Other 
points of phonological signiﬁ cance include: 
 (30)  (a)  There is possible evidence of vowel weakening in some unaccented syl-
lables, a concomitant of the shift from pitch to stress in an area where 
the native language had a strong stress acccent and regular vowel -
 weakening phenomena; thus 
 for 
 [oti]  ‘ that ’  might represent 
 , 
though this could just as easily be a spelling mistake; and the accusative 
plural 
 for 
 [ ' pandas]  ‘ all ’ could represent 
 , though 
the form here may simply be one more example of the increasingly 
general levelling of nominative and accusative plural forms in conso-
nant - stem nouns and so best be explained analogically, cf.  4.11.1 . 
 (b)  Note the graphic simpliﬁ cation of double consonants in 
 [ ' pra-
sonda] (for 
 [ ‘ prasonda])  ‘ doing ’ and 
 
(for 
 )  ‘ affair ’ ; early examples, as here, typically 
involve those consonants with a continuant pronunciation (i.e. fricatives, 
nasals and liquids).  
 (c)  From as early as the 3rd century  bc the o - vowel in certain categories of 
2nd - declension noun, namely masculine personal names in  - i o  " [ - ios] 
(the only such subclass) and neuters in  - i o  n [ - ion]/
 [ - ' ion], started to 
be lost in popular speech, either through syncope of an unstressed vowel 
in a period before the synizesis of antevocalic [i] had begun (cf. (16)), 
or through the regular change of prevocalic [i] to [j], followed by loss 
of the o - vowel and revocalization of [j]    >  [i] (through a process known 
as  samprasarana ). 2 The sufﬁ x  - i o  n [ - in] was extremely productive in the 
Koine, not only because of its originally affective quality as a diminutive 
but more importantly because it provided morphologically regular alter-
natives to 3rd - declension nouns with difﬁ cult declensional patterns 
involving stem allomorphy: e.g. 
 [pes], gen 
 [pe ' dos]  ‘ child ’ , 
replaced by 
 [pe ' dion], gen 
 [pe ' diu]; 
 [us], gen 
 
[o ' tos]  ‘ ear ’ , replaced by 
 [o ' tion], gen 
 [o ' tiu] etc. This type, 
without the o - vowel, duly became a major neuter subclass of medieval 

176 Ancient Greek
and modern Greek. In (29) above the form 
 [i ' sin] for 
 [i ' sion] 
 ‘ temple of Isis ’ suggests that the 
 [ - ' ion] sufﬁ x characteristic of the 
names of  ‘ establishments ’  has been assimilated on phonetic grounds to 
the regular neuter pattern.  
 The major grammatical issue in (29) is the evidence it provides for the merger of 
the aorist and the perfect. Note ﬁ rst of all the form 
 [cf. 
 ]  ‘ you (have) 
asked ’ , where the  ‘ past - tense ’ 2sg sufﬁ x  - e " [ - es] has replaced classical  - a " [ - as]. The 
set of common  ‘ past - tense ’ endings (cf.  4.9 ,  5.8 ) in fact came to be used increasingly 
in the perfect paradigm too (though with perfect  - k - [k] in place of aorist  - s - [s] in the 
stem where appropriate). Thus: 
 (31)   (a)   1/2/3sg:  - ( k ) a /  - ( k ) e " /  - ( k ) e 
 [ - (k)a/  - (k)es/ - (k)e] 
 (for classical  - ( k ) a /  - ( k ) a " /  - ( k ) e 
 [ - (k)a/ - (k)as/ - (k)e]) 
 (b)   1/2/3pl:  - ( k ) a m e n /  - ( k ) a t e /  - ( k ) a n 
 [ - (k)amen/ - (k)ate/ - (k)an] 
 (for classical  - ( k ) a m e n /  - ( k ) a t e /  - ( k ) a s i  [ - (k)amen/ - (k)ate/ - (k)asi]) 
 This formal development was promoted by the diminution of the functional distinction 
between perfect and aorist revealed by the increasing use in the Koine of the perfect 
as a simple past tense. In (29), for example, it is clear that, while some perfect forms 
may be interpreted as true perfects, e.g. 
  ‘ I have gone ’ , 
 
[e ' melce]  ‘ it has concerned ’ (with augment for reduplication and apparent syncopation 
of unstressed [i] if this is not merely a spelling error, cf. 
 ), neither 
of these actually demands a perfect reading. On the other hand, the form already cited 
in the preceding paragraph, 
 , seems clearly to have an aoristic 
value here (=    ‘ you asked ’ ), while the aorist 
 [ ' epempsa]  ‘ I sent ’ seems equally 
clearly to require a perfect interpretation in the context (=  ‘ I have sent ’ ). 
 The merger may in part reﬂ ect the inﬂ uence of Latin, where the so - called perfect 
forms performed both functions (cf.  5.3 ). But its origins can be traced already in the 
usage of authors such as Menander, and Latin can have done no more than promote a 
trend that was already under way. The basis for the Greek development therefore 
demands closer investigation. The perfect, considered purely as an aspect, involves the 
postulation of a  ‘ viewing point ’ from which a given  ‘ event ’ , having previously taken 
place, is seen to be already completed. This is the essence of perfect aspect, which entails 
the notion of some continuing relevance for the earlier event at the later viewing 
point (sometimes, but not necessarily, involving a resultant state: cf. 
 
 ‘ I have died/I am dead ’ ). The viewing point may then be located objectively in time. 
In the case of a past perfect, the event is earlier than a viewing point that is in the 
past with respect to the time of utterance (i.e. the event is anterior to the past - time 
viewing point). In the case of a future perfect, the event is earlier than a viewing 
point that is in the future with respect to the time of utterance (i.e. the event is 
anterior to the future viewing point, but still itself potentially in the future). In the case 
of the present perfect, there can be no present viewing point distinct from the time 
of utterance (the present is the present), and the event is simply earlier than  ‘ now ’ . 
In each case, the time reference of an aspectually perfect - tense form is determined by 
the location not of the viewed event but of the viewing point with respect to the time of 
utterance. 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 177
 But the importance of the formal expression of this retrospective viewing of an 
event, and the consequential emphasis on its continued relevance at the viewing point, 
is easily downgraded, and the grammaticalized temporal focus then shifts immediately 
to the event itself, with the result that what was the viewing point becomes instead 
the temporal reference point for the location of that event: cf. the virtual equivalence, 
when uttered by someone who wants to start cooking at the time of utterance, of  have 
you got the chops out of the freezer?  (the point from which the past is viewed is  ‘ now ’ ) 
and  did you get the chops out of the freezer?  (i.e. in the past vis - à - vis  ‘ now ’ , but still 
with inferable contemporary relevance). In this way the perfect may come to be under-
stood not just as an alternative to the simple past when continued relevance at the 
time of utterance is to be emphasized but also, through confusion of the aspectual 
viewing point with the temporal reference point (natural in the case of the present 
perfect), as a general alternative to the simple past in all contexts. 
 This functional overlap between aorist and perfect was instrumental in the 
adoption of the  ‘ past - tense ’ endings by perfect forms in the Koine. We should note, 
however, that the process of formal interference was, as often, bidirectional, and that 
perfect 3pl  - a s i [ - asi] came to rival  - a n [ - an] as a past - tense sufﬁ x in both aorist and 
imperfect paradigms (e.g. 
  ‘ they came ’ , BGU 275.5,  ad 215). 
The survival of this particular perfect formant was favoured by the existence of the 
formally parallel 3pl present ending  - o  u s i [ - usi], and it is still retained in many of the 
modern dialects of the south - eastern subgroup (e.g. Cypriot and some Dodecanesian 
varieties). 
 The merger was supported by further morphological considerations. Past tenses 
were characterized in classical Greek by the addition of the  ‘ augment ’ , ordinarily the 
syllable 
 [e - ], to the beginning of the relevant verb form: e.g. 1sg aorist 
 
[ é - ly:sa], from 
 [l ý : - o:]  ‘ I set free ’ . Perfects, by contrast, were characterized by 
 ‘ reduplication ’ , involving the addition of a syllable Ce - [Ce - ] to the beginning of the 
relevant form (where C   =  the initial consonant of the verb root, with the exception 
that aspirated plosives were reduplicated by their unaspirated counterparts): e.g. 1sg 
perfect 
 [l é - ly - ka]  ‘ I have set free ’ . But where a verb began with a vowel, the 
augment regularly took the form of a lengthening of that vowel, and the reduplication 
was identical (e.g. aorist 
 , perfect 
 [h ε :m á rt - ε : - ka], 
from 
 [hamart - á n - o:]  ‘ I err ’ ). Similarly, if a verb began with a consonant 
cluster (other than stop   +  liquid) it was usual for the augment 
 [e - ] to serve also as 
the reduplication: e.g. aorist 
   [ é - gno: - n], perfect 
 [ é - gno: - ka], from 
  ‘ I ascertain ’ . 
 In the Koine, however, once the functional merger of the aorist and perfect began 
in earnest, reduplication ceased to have any clear independent signiﬁ cance, and the 
already established partial equivalence of augment and reduplication spread very 
quickly even to verbs beginning with a single consonant (cf. 
 [e ' melce] in (29)). 
Thus alongside augmented  ‘ perfects ’ such as 
  ‘ I ﬁ lled/have 
ﬁ lled ’  (for classical 
 : P. Oxy. 2729.21, 4th century  ad ), we 
ﬁ nd both perfect forms with no reduplication (e.g. 
 [ ' ptocen]  ‘ I fell/have fallen ’ , 
for classical 
 [ ' peptoce(n)]: P. Mich. 235.3,  ad 41) and aorists with redupli-
cation in place of the augment (e.g. 
  ‘ I ﬁ lled ’ , for the classical 
 : P. Oxy. 1489.5, 3rd century  ad ). 

178 Ancient Greek
 Ultimately, however, augmented perfects came to be seen as simply alternative forms 
of the aorist, and a number of modern Greek spoken dialects (e.g. some Peloponnesian 
varieties, including Tsakonian in part, together with the so - called Old Athenian group, 
cf. Kondos ó poulos ( 2001 )) eventually generalized the forms ending in  - k a [ - ka] at the 
expense of standard  - s a [ - sa]. But even standard Modern Greek has expanded the 
scope of  - k a [ - ka] as an aorist active sufﬁ x in certain verbs, as well as generally in 
the passive (see Parts II and III for details). 
 Finally, we should note that the functional merger of perfect and aorist inevitably 
led to a formal renewal of the true perfect. For the most part this involved the extension 
of a periphrastic alternative to the monolectic perfect that had already been in use in 
classical Greek, namely 
 [imi]  ‘ I am ’ , emphasizing the ongoing relevance of a prior 
event, in combination with either a perfect or an aorist participle (active or passive) 
expressing the prior event itself. This is well attested in the papyri, especially where 
modal (subjunctive/optative) perfects are required. In the Byzantine period only the 
construction with the perfect passive participle survives strongly, almost always with a 
clear stative force equivalent to that of a predicative adjective (cf.  6.5.3 and  11.8.2 ). 
 6.5.3   Letter 3: the  d ecline of 3rd - d eclension  p articiples 
 Our third letter (BGU 846) also dates from the 2nd century  ad and is addressed by a 
contrite young man to his long - suffering mother, who has apparently washed her hands 
of him: 
 (32) 
 
 
 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 179
 ‘ Antonius Longus to Nilous his mother very many greetings. I pray always that you are 
well. I also make supplication for you before the lord Serapis every day. I want you to 
know that I was not expecting you to be going up to the metropolis ( Arsinoe, the capital 
of the Fayum nome ). Therefore I did not go to the city either. I was ashamed to come to 
Karanis ( a village in the Fayum where Nilous lives ) because I walk around in ﬁ lth. I wrote 
to you that I am naked. I beg you, mother, be reconciled to me. When all is said and 
done, I know what I have brought upon myself. I have learned the necessary lesson. I 
know that I have sinned. I heard from  … who found you in the Arsinoite nome, and you 
have been told everything just as it is. Do you not know that I would rather be crippled 
than realize I still owe a man an obol ( a small coin )?  … 
 To Nilous his mother from her son Antonius Longus. ’ 
 A number of important phonological developments are well illustrated here: 
 (33)   (a)  Interchange of  a i and  e is routine and shows that classical /ai/ has 
now merged with /e/; cf.  s a i [se] for  s e  ‘ you ’ , 
 for 
  ‘ each ’ , 
 for 
 [ana ' venis] 
for 
 , etc.  
 (b)  The erratic, frequently hypercorrect, marking of assimilatory aspiration 
in word - ﬁ nal consonants before words which in earlier Koine (and 
in educated usage probably still) began with /h/ shows that, for 
this writer at least, the sound was no longer real; cf. 
 
 for 
 for 
 
 ). 
 (c)  Note the apparent confusion of genitive and dative in the ﬁ nal line, with 
 (?dat) in apposition with 
 (gen) 
 . There 
were already in classical Greek large numbers of hypocoristic male 
names in 
 [ - â s] with genitive in  [ - â ], alongside names of non - Greek 
origin in  - a " [ - as] and  - w " [ - os] with genitives in  - a [ - a] and  - w [ - o] (espe-
cially in Ionic/Koine inscriptions from Asia Minor). Over time this 
very common vernacular declensional pattern led, beginning in the 1st 
century  ad , to the parallel treatment of  ‘ regular ’  a - stem nouns in  - a " 
[ - as] and  - h " 
 , leading to apparently more  ‘ natural ’ genitives in  - a [ - a] 
and  - h 
 (later [ - i]) alongside the anomalous classical sufﬁ x  - o  u [ - u]. In 
due course these became the standard forms of the genitive for masculine 

180 Ancient Greek
nouns of the 1st declension (as in Modern Greek). Here the pattern of 
nominative in [ - Vs], genitive in [ - V], may have been extended to 2nd -
 declension names, thereby creating a form homophonous with the dative 
(surely a contri butory factor in the loss of the latter, see also  4.11.1 ). 
Note, however, that the author uses the hypocoristic form of his name in 
 - i " [ - is] when addressing his mother (see  6.5.2 , (30c)), but the full form 
in the formal address at the end. According to what has just been said, 
the former would naturally have a genitive in  - i [ - i], 3 and this may in 
turn have inﬂ uenced the form of the genitive at the end, according 
to the proportion: [an ' donis]  :  [an ' doni]   ::  [an ' donios]   :  [ando ' nio] 
(i.e. on the assumption that the  ‘ correct ’  forms add an [o] after [i] in 
both cases). 
 In view of the evidence here and elsewhere of the progressive desystematization of 
the dative case, we should also note that the phrase: 
 (34)  
 
 
 
 might be interpreted as involving the transfer of the clitic pronoun from the govern-
ment domain of the noun to that of the verb, thus making the genitive here do the 
work of an indirect object (=   beneﬁ ciary). This is precisely the sort of situation in 
which dative – genitive functional overlap was ﬁ rst actively promoted, and it is striking 
that substitution of the genitive for the dative occurs ﬁ rst quite widely in the clitic 
pronoun system (beginning in the 1st century  bc ) before it spreads to full noun phrases 
in the early centuries  ad (cf.  4.11.1  and  6.5.4 ). 
 Further points of grammatical interest include: 
 (35)   (a)  Retention of the accusative and inﬁ nitive only in formulaic phrases: 
 [ ' efk h o ' me se y ' jenin]  ‘ I pray (for) you to be well ’ ; 
 [ji ' noscin se  ' t h elo]  ‘ I want you to know ’ . Thus the 
verbs 
 and 
 [ ' yda], for example, take ﬁ nite clauses 
introduced by 
 [ ' oti]  ‘ that ’ . 
 (b)  The spread of prepositional expressions at the expense of the dative: e.g. 
  ‘ (on) every day ’ in place 
of the simple dative of  ‘ time when ’ . The classical use of this preposition 
in temporal expressions is distributive,  ‘ day by day ’ , and the use here is 
an easy extension.  
 (c)  The spread of the accusative as the  ‘ default ’  prepositional case: e.g. 
 [ ' k h arin  ' tuto]  ‘ because of this ’ , in place of classical 
 [ ' tutu  ' k h arin] with a dependent genitive and postnominal 
position for what was originally an adverbial use of an accusative 
noun. 
 (d)  The use of weak endings on formerly strong aorist forms: e.g. 
  ‘ I came (to) ’ . 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 181
 (e)  The  ‘ past - tense ’ ending on the perfect form 
 [ ' ydes]  ‘ you know ’ (this 
verb was in fact present in sense even in Ancient Greek, but its perfect 
form led to its assimilation to the new perfect paradigm).  
 (f) 
  (i) 
 The apparent breakdown of agreement in participial syntax: 
 [tu  … ymu] (gen) 
 [ton e ' vronda 
se] (acc), lit.  ‘ from the  … the (one) having - found you ’ . This seems 
to reﬂ ect a growing sense of the accusative as the default oblique 
case, seen also in its spread after prepositions. The genitive, for 
example, is typically used when semantically motivated, i.e. to 
express possession and other forms of adnominal dependence and 
increasingly as a dative substitute to mark a secondary involvement 
with the verbal action; but the purely  ‘ formal ’ agreement involved 
in cases like this is less carefully observed, and accusative participles 
begin to appear in a variety of looser, appositive structures.  
 (ii)  In a similar fashion the nominative starts to appear as the 
unmarked case for loosely constructed  ‘ topics ’ , cf. BGU 385, 
2nd/3rd 
century 
 ad : 
 
 , lit. 
 ‘ the (one) bringing you the letter (nom), give to - him (dat) another 
 … ’ 
 This kind of grammatical imprecision is clearly connected with more general pressure 
on the morphology of the participle system. Eventually, in popular varieties of late 
antique and early Medieval Greek an indeclinable participle in  - o  n t a [ - onda], increas-
ingly formed from the imperfective stem alone, was used in a range of both attributive 
and adjunct/adverbial functions, though with its interpretation progressively restricted 
thereafter, in the absence of the agreement morphology required to link it to speciﬁ c 
noun phrases, to that of a subject - orientated gerund expressing the manner in which 
an action is carried out (e.g.  she entered running ) or circumstantial background (equiva-
lent to an adverbial clausal adjunct, e.g.  weeping, she signed the letter ). In this role it 
eventually acquired the overtly adverbial sufﬁ x  - " [ - s], as in Modern Greek, the shift 
necessarily involving the abandonment of the substantivized participle as a referring 
expression in its own right or as an adnominal relative clause equivalent. 
 This functional and formal reduction of the participial system was motivated in part 
by the ambiguity inherent in the subordinating function of participles but more impor-
tantly by the morphological complexity of most of the relevant classical paradigms. 
Consider, for example, the imperfective active participle of 
 [ ' lyo]  ‘ I set free ’ : 
 (36)  
 
 where the feminine form belongs to the 1st declension and the masculine and neuter 
forms to the 3rd declension, with the latter pair exhibiting further stem allomorphy, 
e.g. gen sg 
 [ ' ly - ond - os], dat pl 
 [ ' ly - ou - si]. When the masculine and 
feminine consonant - stem nouns of the 3rd declension began to be shifted to the more 
regular 1st declension (the a - stem paradigm, cf.  4.11.3 ), the fate of the increasingly 
isolated 3rd - /1st - declension participles (i.e. the majority, including present, future, 

182 Ancient Greek
aorist and perfect active, and aorist passive) was effectively sealed, though they sur-
vived successfully in learned literary works throughout the later history of the lan-
guage, and probably also in formal educated discourse more generally. 
 A reasonably plausible account of this process can be reconstructed on the basis of 
sporadically attested forms and usages in the Roman and early Byzantine papyri. 
Evidence of paradigm levelling, for example, is quite common from around the 1st 
century  ad onwards, typically involving the substitution of masculine forms for femi-
nine, and the use of the accusative masculine singular in  - o  n t a [ - onda] for the neuter 
nominative/accusative singular in  - o  n [ - on]. This last development was characteristic 
of all 3rd - declension adjectives and participles in this period, and was presumably 
motivated by the analogy of the morphologically  ‘ regular ’  2nd - declension o - stem adjec-
tives, where the single sufﬁ x  - o  n [ - o(n)] marked both the masculine accusative singular 
and the neuter nominative/accusative singular. 
 Since the borrowed ending of the neuter singular was usually homophonous with 
that of the neuter plural (e.g. both end in  - o  n t a [ - onda] in the case of participles), the 
result was a tendency towards the formal and functional identiﬁ cation of the neuter 
singular with the neuter plural in the nominative/accusative. The old plural (or new 
singular) forms naturally predominate in this dual function, though there are also 
parallel examples, at least for a time, of the old (unrecharacterized) singulars doubling 
as plurals. 
 Such nominative/accusative 3rd - declension neuters (both original singulars and new 
singular/plurals) then began to be used to represent any case function of the singular 
or plural. This can be explained partly in terms of the difﬁ culties engendered by the 
inherent complexity of these paradigms, but must also reﬂ ect speciﬁ c uncertainty about 
which set of oblique endings (singular or plural) to use to complete the paradigms of 
nominative/accusative neuter forms that were apparently neutral with respect to 
number. As an example we may take SB 9251.2, 2nd/3rd century  ad : 
 
[pro men pan], lit.  ‘ before EMP everything ’ , with an (old) accusative singular, in place 
of the formulaic 
 [pro men  ' pandon/pan ' dos], with the genitive 
plural or the genitive singular. 
 Given that neuter plural adjectives in  - a [ - a] had been used adverbially from classical 
times, this uncertainty and attendant loss of morphological distinctiveness in the neuter 
adjectival paradigms must have helped promote the interpretation of not only neuter 
sg/pl participles in  - o  n t a [ - onda] but also of the homophonous masculine/feminine accu-
sative sg as essentially adverb - like modiﬁ ers, with no need for agreement morphology. 
This assumption, once it took root, led to the progressive elimination even from the (now 
common) masculine/feminine paradigm of inﬂ ected forms other than  -  o  n t a [ - onda], 
which was eventually identiﬁ ed with the neuter form formally and functionally. 
 In the long transitional period, however, we inevitably ﬁ nd increasing numbers of 
examples involving violations of concord, and a growing preference for the accusative 
as an all - purpose oblique case, both in the singular, because of the favoured  - o  n t a 
[ - onda] sufﬁ x, and in the plural, where nominative and accusative were in any case 
tending to fall together formally (cf.  4.11 ,  6.5.2 ), thus applying pressure in turn on 
the distinct nominative singular in  - w n [ - on]. 
 Such errors reﬂ ect the interaction of diminishing control of the relevant paradigms, 
as the inﬂ ected forms slowly disappeared from the colloquial language, with a strong 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 183
desire, inculcated at school, to be seen to use the language  ‘ correctly ’  and to avoid the 
 ‘ vulgar ’  use of the indeclinable participle. The level of success in reproducing the clas-
sical forms therefore depends very much on the level of education of the author. A 
nice example is provided by P. Merton 91.6,  ad 316: 
 [i ' min  … ev 
vi ' undes], lit.  ‘ for us (dat)  … well living (nom/acc pl) ’ , where the participle shows 
agreement in number and gender, but not in case (the irregular 
 [vi ' usi], involving 
a dying case within an independently dying paradigm, being beyond the writer ’ s 
control). Similar examples of the use of the nominative/accusative in place of other 
oblique cases can be found in other 3rd - declension adjectival paradigms, e.g. P. Oxy 
2274.14, 3rd century  ad : 
 [meta ton i ' mon  ' pandes], lit.  ‘ with 
the us (gen) all (nom/acc) ’ . 
 Manol é ssou  (2005a) , however, points out that there must also have been a syntactic 
dimension to this process, given that the transition from inﬂ ected participle to gerund 
is a common process cross - linguistically (e.g. in Romance, Slavic and Baltic) that 
cannot depend solely on the impact of accidental changes in participial morphology. 
In particular, the later history of Greek shows a clear functional divide between the 
perfect passive participle in  - m ev n o  " [ - ' menos], which, in line with its morphology, 
evolves into an adjective of the  - o  " / - h / - o ( n ) [ - os/ - i/ - o(n)] type, while the gerund repre-
sents the result of a contrasting specialization as a purely verbal category, the process 
as a whole reﬂ ecting the typologically well - attested separation into two clear - cut cat-
egories of a grammatical element that originally combined both nominal/adjectival and 
verbal characteristics.  
 6.5.4   Letter 4: the  d ecline of the  d ative 
 Our ﬁ nal extract (P. Oxy. 1683) dates from the ﬁ nal years of the 4th century  ad , and 
is addressed by one Probus to his  ‘ sister ’ Manatine: 
 (37) 
 
 
 

184 Ancient Greek
 ‘ To my lady sister Manatine Probus her brother greeting. Above all I pray to the lord 
god concerning your well - being that you receive my letter in good health and in good 
spirits. I want you to know, my lady sister, ( that you must ) go to Petronius my guarantor. 
Get from him out of my pay one and a half ( talents )  … For you too know that we 
have no witness but god and you and my wife. So hand them over to my wife. Do not 
cause me distress. Give them to her, therefore, since my son needs them. As proof, when 
I met you in the Caesareum and said to you  “ give me one of the coins that you keep for 
me so I can buy myself a pot  … ” , ( and ) you said  “ … take your own and I will give it to you 
later  … ”  ’ 
 The general drift is more or less apparent, though the author is not well - educated and 
lacks the gift of clear exposition, regularly falling back on epistolographic formulae 
that are not well joined together. In particular, the intended signiﬁ cance of the absence 
of other witnesses and the import of the  ‘ proof ’  are rather difﬁ cult to determine. 
 Note, however, that the participle 
 [y ' jenonda]  ‘ in good health ’ , employed 
as an indeclinable subject - orientated adjunct in place of the nominative feminine sin-
gular 
 [(h)y ' jenousa], is exactly what we might have expected in the light 
of the discussion above, and presumably corresponds to the writer ’ s normal usage. 
But what of the dative 
 [ef q i ' mundi]? We might speculate that Probus (or 
his not very professional professional scribe) was distracted by the misspelling of 
nominative 
 [sy] as  s o  i , which looks like a dative, and then carelessly continued with 
an  ‘ agreeing ’ dative participle. Alternatively, he may simply have excerpted 
 
[ef q i ' mundi] from a quite different formulaic expression in which the dative was justi-
ﬁ ed, and then used it here mechanically. 
 It is in any case clear that, though Probus (or his scribe) has been instructed to 
use the dative in writing, the case barely features in his normal spoken register, as 
evidenced in the non - formulaic parts of this letter. Note, for example, the random 
use of genitive and accusative pronouns in place of the dative as verbal complements 
(cf.  4.11.1 ): 
 [i ' pandi ' ka sou], lit.  ‘ I met to you ’ , 
 [ ' irika su] 
 ‘ I said to you ’ , with genitive for dative, alongside 
 [ ' e ç iz me]  ‘ you have 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 185
(for) me ’ , 
 [ ' ipez me]  ‘ you said (to) me ’ , 
  ‘ I give (to) 
you ’ , with accusative for dative. Datives are still introduced, however, in 
  ‘ give  … to - the wife of - me ’ 
(with an intrusive ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] apparently anticipating the nasal of the following 
pronoun), 
  ‘ give to me ’ , and 
  ‘ I 
buy for myself ’ (with reduced form of 
 [em - af ' to], lit.  ‘ me - self ’ ), classic 
 ‘ indirect object ’ environments involving recipients or beneﬁ ciaries where use of the 
dative seems to have survived longest. 4 
 For the very real problems that some writers of Greek had with the dative in this 
period we may compare P. Oxy. 1300, from the 5th century  ad : 
 (38) 
 
 
 
 ‘ … to send greetings to you  … and to my brother Theon and to my lady sister  … and to 
my sweetest little siblings Herais and Nonna  … and Phoebammon  …  ’ 
 Of the two 3rd - declension consonant - stem forms 
 [ ' q eoni] is dative and 
 
[fy ' vamon] (a nice blend of Greek and Egyptian) is nominative and apparently treated 
as indeclinable. In the 2nd declension (cf. 
 ) the 
genitive marks the recipient of the greeting, while in the 3rd - declension i - stems it is the 
accusative that fulﬁ ls this function (cf. 
 [ira ' in]). 5 Only in the 1st declension does a 
separate dative seem to be in use (cf. 
 ), 
though we should not forget the weakness of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n], and the frequent homophony 
of dative and accusative forms (the usual provisos concerning accentuation and subscript 
iotas therefore apply). All these functionally equivalent case forms (at best only partially 
differentiated formally) are seemingly freely combined according to the author ’ s idiosyn-
cratic preferences and/or knowledge. 
 We are clearly very close here to the demise of the dative in popular Egyptian Greek, 
and therefore equally close to a time when either the genitive or the accusative (prepo-
sitionally strengthened outside the pronominal system) would be automatically substi-
tuted in its place. We should not, however, imagine that the evidence presented here 
is indicative of the state of Greek in general at this time. Although it is clear that the 
domain of the dative was everywhere in retreat, especially with regard to its old adver-
bial functions (time, place, instrument etc.), Humbert  (1930) , the only fully detailed 
study of the decline of the dative to date, argues that the dative in its core grammatical 
function of marking a secondary object did not ﬁ nally disappear from the spoken 
language of native speakers until the 10th century  ad (see Part II for further 
discussion). 

186 Ancient Greek
 Other important features in (37) include the following: 
 (39)   (a)  The use of 
 apparently as a simple negative, exactly as in 
Modern Greek (having developed as a proclitic to the verb, it subse-
quently suffered aphaeresis to  d e n 
 , cf. chapter  11 ). 
 (b)  The partial shift of masculine 3rd - declension nouns to the 2nd declen-
sion (a temporary expedient for dealing with a dying declensional 
class, but popular for a time as an alternative to the shift to the 1st 
declension discussed earlier): cf. acc sg 
 [ ' martyro(n)] for 
 [ ' martyra]. 
 (c)   (i) 
 The development of new  ‘ strong ’ forms of personal pronouns (cf. 
 [e ' menan]  ‘ me ’ , involving the addition ﬁ rst of a character-
izing accusative  -  n [ - n] to the classical 
 [e ' me], and then of the 
typical 3rd - declension accusative sufﬁ x  - a [ - a], perhaps on the 
analogy of elements like 
 [tina]  ‘ someone ’ , 
 [ ' ena]  ‘ one/a(n) ’ , 
a form itself ﬁ nally recharacterized by the addition of a further ﬁ nal 
 - n [ - n]). 
 (ii)  The 2nd-person pronoun 
 [sy] also acquired an initial 
 [e - ], by 
analogy with 1st - person nom/acc 
 , to 
give 
 [e ' sy/e ' sena(n)], and new plural forms were then 
built to the singular to solve the problem of the homophony of 
classical 
 [i ' mis/i ' mis]  ‘ we/you ’ , namely 
 
[e ' mis/e ' sis]. 
 (iii)  The earliest examples of the fully extended accusative form of the 
1st - person singular pronoun date from the 4th century  ad . The 
corresponding forms of the 2nd - person singular pronoun appar-
ently belong to the Byzantine period proper, though a version of 
the new 2nd plural forms is attested in P. Ross. Georg. iii, 10 
(4th/5th century  ad ): acc/gen/dat 
 [i ' sas/i ' son/i ' sin]. 
 (d)  The use of 
 [is] with the accusative (
 [is to ci ' sarion]) 
in place of 
 [en] with the problematic dative to express location as 
well as goal (examples occur from Ptolemaic times onwards); another 
example of the accusative as the default prepositional case.  
 (e)  (i) 
 The use of the article, almost always in oblique cases, as a relative 
pronoun (
 [apo ton  ' e ç is]  ‘ from what you have ’ ). The 
classical forms 
 [os/i/o] lacked bulk, and were prone to loss 
when preceding or following words that ended or began with a 
vowel. The use of the forms of the article, which began with a 
 ‘ protective ’ plosive apart from masc/fem nom sg/pl, started in 
Hellenistic times (where it was perhaps in part a continuation of 
earlier Ionic practice), and became increasingly common with the 
passage of time.  
 (ii)  Alternatively, 
the 
classical 
indeﬁ nite/generic 
 
[ ' ostis/ ' itis/ ' oti]  ‘ whoever/whatever ’ , and more rarely the interroga-
tive 
 [tis/ti]  ‘ who/what? ’ , could also be used as simple rela-
tives. The wider relative use of the indeclinable adverb 
 [ ' opu], 

Spoken Koine in the Roman Period 187
lit.  ‘ where ’ , is also attested from the 5th century  ad onwards 
(Gignac ( 1981 : 179), Bakker ( 1974 : 87 – 94), Nicholas ( 1999 : 
200 – 11)), and this became increasingly prevalent with the passage 
of time (though documentary evidence is lacking between the 
end of the 6th century and the beginning of the 12th), eventually 
becoming the modern Greek norm, again with aphaeresis    >   p o  u 
[pu]. 
 (f) 
 The transfer of 
 to the regular paradigm in  - w [ - o], 
 . Eventually all the verbs in  - m i [ - mi] were assimilated to the 
regular paradigm, though many older forms persist into the Byzantine 
period, even in more popular texts, presumably because of their great 
frequency. Note that the present form is used here as a future, a common 
feature in a period when the present indicative and present subjunctive 
and the future indicative and aorist subjunctive respectively had very 
largely fallen together through sound change and subsequent analogical 
levelling (cf.  5.3 , (2)). The combined future indicative/aorist subjunctive 
forms were regularly used as perfective  ‘ futures/subjunctives ’ (where 
distinct forms were involved, e.g. in cases of suppletion, it was normally 
the aorist subjunctive that predominated); the merged present indicative/
subjunctive forms were similarly used as both present indicatives and 
imperfective  ‘ futures/subjunctives ’ . 
 6.6   Conclusion 
 The evidence of low - level papyri from Roman times has been discussed in some detail 
in this chapter because these documents provide one of the most important sources of 
evidence for vernacular Greek in a period that was instrumental in the transition from 
the ancient to the modern language, with many of the most characteristic phonological 
differences between the classical and contemporary languages already in place and the 
ﬁ rst stages of many of the more important grammatical changes well reﬂ ected in more 
popular varieties. With a clear understanding of the beginnings of this transition in 
place, we are now ready to consider the subsequent history of the language in the 
middle ages and beyond.  
 Notes 
1  [e:i] ( h i ) was partly restored in conservative Athenian Attic from around 200  bc and then 
lost its ﬁ nal element together with the other long diphthongs, eventually raising to /i:/ at a 
much later date.  
2  The ﬁ rst could in principle have affected both accented and unaccented sufﬁ xes equally, 
while the second seems likely, on phonetic grounds, to have involved only unaccented 
 - i  o  " [ - ios]/ - i  o  n [ - ion], requiring us to suppose subsequent analogical levelling in the accented 
cases. 
3  Subsequently the homophony of  - i " [ - is]/ - i [ - i] with 1st - declension  - h " / - h led to this subpara-
digm being assimilated to the 1st declension, as in Modern Greek.  

188 Ancient Greek
4  Some editors also write dative 
 after nominative 
 [ ' provos], but this 
is surely an example of  w [o] for o [o] (the iota subscript is editorial), with ﬁ nal  - " [ - s] omitted, 
as not infrequently.  
5  This was originally a dental - stem with accusative 
 , here assimilated to the i - stems 
because of the identical nominative in 
 [ - ' is]). 

PART II
 Byzantium 
 From Constantine I to 
Mehmet the Conqueror 


7
 Historical Prelude  
 7.1   The Later Roman Empire 
 After the relative stability and general prosperity of the ﬁ rst and second centuries  ad , 
the ﬁ fty years after the fall of the Severan dynasty, from 235 to the accession of 
Diocletian in 284, was a critical period for the empire, with constant warfare against 
the Persians in the east and Germanic tribes to the north and west leading to an 
enhanced role for the military, economic difﬁ culties, and a rapid turnover of emperors, 
each provincial army putting up, and as quickly murdering, its own pretenders (see 
Brown  (1989) , Cameron  (1993) , Mitchell  (2007)  for readable introductions to late 
antiquity). 
 The overall result was a reduction in the importance of the old imperial capital and 
its aristocracy as emperors increasingly based themselves in strategically important 
provincial centres, though the decentralization of power also created a context in which 
local cultures (and local languages such as Coptic and Syriac) could thrive, and in 
which Christianity, still very much a minority and provincial religion, could begin to 
develop solid institutional structures. 
 Between the accession of Diocletian in 284 and the death of Constantine I in 337, 
the political and military situation stabilized and administrative reforms were put in 
place which formed the basis of the system of government until the  ‘ end ’ of the Roman 
empire (Rome itself fell to a Gothic pretender in 476, though in the east we have to 
wait for the Arab conquests of the 7th century for a clear break with the world of 
classical antiquity). In particular, Diocletian sought to bring the army under central 
control by consolidating the ﬁ nancial and administrative privileges which had been 
granted by various predecessors, and instituting a fairer and more reliable means of 
raising revenue (partly in the form of requisitions in kind) so as to guarantee the steady 
supply of resources needed for the army to defend the empire ’ s security. He also reor-
ganized provincial government by separating civil and military commands and reduc-
ing the size of the provinces themselves (thereby increasing their overall number, but 
reducing the power of individual governors). 

192 Byzantium
 Diocletian did not, however, succeed in reversing the long - term decline of Rome. 
In an attempt to end the political instability that had plagued the 3rd century, he set 
up the  ‘ tetrarchic ’ system by which power was to be shared between two senior emper-
ors, or Augusti, each aided by a junior emperor, or Caesar, who would eventually 
succeed him. This consolidated the established tendency towards decentralization by 
dividing the empire informally into eastern and western spheres of inﬂ uence and led 
to the emergence of a number of new regional  ‘ capitals ’ . Diocletian himself had his 
main residence at Nicomedia (Izmit) in Bithynia, his Caesar Galerius was based in 
Thessaloniki, while the other Caesar, Constantius, had his base in Augusta Treverorum 
(Trier) close to the Rhine frontier. Emperors now spent a great deal of time travelling 
between such centres, and this in turn fostered new building and urban development, 
the foundation of Constantinople on the site of Byzantium by Constantine I being the 
most important example. 
 When Diocletian and his fellow Augustus Maximian abdicated on 1 May 305, 
Galerius succeeded in the east, Constantius in the west, as planned. But after Constantius 
died in York in the following year, his son Constantine was proclaimed Augustus by 
his father ’ s troops (see Lenski  (2006) for background to the age of Constantine). 
Maximian quickly returned from his short - lived retirement, and the tetrarchic arrange-
ments for the succession broke down in the face of renewed rivalry. Constantine ﬁ rst 
sought to consolidate his position through an alliance with Maximian, but by 310 
Maximian ’ s own son, Maxentius, had seized Rome, and Maximian himself had turned 
on both of them. Maximian, however, committed suicide when Constantine took up 
arms against him, and two years later, in 312, Maxentius was defeated at the battle 
of the Milvian Bridge outside Rome. 
 Things had become similarly confused in the east, where Licinius had been appointed 
Augustus at the Conference of Carnuntum (on the Danube) in 308, despite the 
fact that Diocletian ’ s immediate successor, Galerius, was still alive. When Galerius died 
in 311, his nephew Maximin, who had himself been proclaimed Augustus by his troops 
three years earlier, seized Asia Minor from Licinius, and it was only in 313 that Licinius 
ﬁ nally defeated his rival and emerged as sole Augustus of the east. Constantine 
and Licinius then concluded an alliance which continued, despite an inconclusive 
clash in 316, until the decisive campaign of 324 in which Licinius was defeated at 
Chrysopolis. Constantine then became the sole ruler of the Roman world until his 
death in 337. 
 In general, Constantine sought to consolidate Diocletian ’ s military, provincial and 
administrative arrangements, but where previous emperors had tried periodically 
to stiﬂ e Christianity by persecution, Constantine committed himself to its protection 
and eventual triumph, and so began the process of integration which led to a crucial 
developmental period in which acceptance of Christianity became increasingly routine 
in even the highest levels of society, speciﬁ cally Christian forms of art and literature 
were developed within the context of the cultural mainstream, and the ﬁ rst deﬁ nitions 
of  ‘ correct doctrine ’ , or orthodoxy, were attempted (see Brown  (1997)  on the 
Christianization of the empire). Constantine himself, in an important precedent for 
establishing the role of the emperor in the affairs of the church, presided over the 
ﬁ rst ecumenical council at Nicaea, modern Iznik, in 325, which had been called 
to pronounce on Arianism (the doctrine of Arius, a Syrian monk who had become 

Historical Prelude 193
presbyter of Alexandria, which denied Christ ’ s full divinity and was duly declared a 
heresy). 
 When Constantine founded his  ‘ New Rome ’ on the site of the old Greek city of 
Byzantium on the Bosporus in  ad May 330, therefore, it was not merely as a centre 
of Roman culture and Latinity in the east but also as a capital city that was to be 
imbued from the outset with the spirit of the Christian faith. In due course it provided 
the physical and spiritual centre for the medieval Byzantine state. 
 Though at various times after Constantine ’ s death several Augusti again ruled 
simultaneously (with a number of strikingly short - lived reigns, including that of his 
sole pagan successor, Julian, 361 – 3), the traditional urban life of antiquity, with its 
largely money - based economy, continued more or less intact, and the empire remained 
at least formally undivided until the death of Theodosius I in 395. Thereafter, his sons 
Arcadius and Honorius shared the Roman world between them, the former taking the 
east, the latter the west (with the seat of government transferred to Ravenna), in what 
was to prove to be a permanent division. 
 By this time  ‘ barbarian ’  Germanic tribes, including the Franks and Alamanni in the 
west and the Visigoths and Ostrogoths in the east, had begun to occupy the richer 
lands adjoining the Mediterranean. The migration of the east German peoples from 
lands between the Danube and the Don was motivated chieﬂ y by changing economic 
conditions, but the arrival of the Huns, a nomadic tribe from the steppes of central 
Asia, may have been a contributory factor. In their journey south and west the Goths 
defeated a Roman army at Adrianople (Edirne) in 378, and having been partly forced, 
partly bribed out of the Balkans by Theodosius, moved on into Italy, where they 
eventually sacked Rome in 410. 
 In this period, the recruitment of barbarian auxiliaries and even the appointment 
of barbarian generals had become routine, in order to avoid the trouble of conscrip-
tion. The policy also proved (temporarily) proﬁ table, to the extent that the treasury 
could exact taxes in lieu. But the resumption of political rivalry in both east and west 
after the death of Theodosius allowed ambitious barbarian generals, backed by their 
mercenary recruits, to exploit the situation for their own ends, and by the end of the 
4th century even the regular army was in disarray. 
 Though the situation eventually stabilized in the east, after the government in 
Constantinople (following the massacre of the garrison of the rebel Goth Gainas in 
400) ﬁ rmly turned its back on barbarian troops and generals, the position in the west 
continued to deteriorate. In the face of political instability, economic weakness and 
institutional fragmentation, forces stationed in the provinces were withdrawn and 
Roman territory was progressively settled by Goths (Italy and Spain), Franks (France) 
and Vandals (North Africa). The end of Roman government ﬁ nally came, according 
to the conventional dating, with the overthrow of the young Romulus Augustulus by 
his Gothic master of the soldiers, Odoacer, in 476. 
 Latin survived, however, as the language of administration, culture and everyday 
communication (as witnessed by the Romance languages), while many Roman tradi-
tions and institutions continued in modiﬁ ed forms. But there were to be no more 
Roman emperors in the west, and though Rome continued to be the seat of the senior 
bishop of the Christian church, the eastern Roman empire, with its capital at 
Constantinople, now stood alone.  

194 Byzantium
 7.2   The Age of Transition: Ioustinian ó s and 
the Arab Conquests  1 
 After the formal division of the empire in 395, east and west grew steadily apart, and 
while the west declined, the eastern empire enjoyed considerable prosperity in the 
period from the late 4th to the early 6th centuries, initiating major new building pro-
grammes and seeing its principal cities grow substantially in size and population. See 
Mango  (1980) , Whiting  (1981) , Treadgold  (1997)  for general introductions to 
Byzantium, including the early period in which the independent east Roman, or 
Byzantine, state was formed Jeffreys et al.  (2008)  provides authoritative surveys of all 
aspects of Byzantine history and culture. 
 The decision to abandon the recruitment of barbarian generals and mercenaries was 
a major factor in re - establishing effective government and military efﬁ ciency, despite 
periodic tensions surrounding the imperial succession and the continued ambitions of 
generals. Whereas in the west central control was weak, and powerful provincial 
families had been allowed unrestrained extension of their wealth through land acquisi-
tion, the east retained a more resilient economic system based on the continuity of 
prosperous villages and a free peasantry alongside, and even within, the estates that 
emerged with the rise of the provincial aristocracy. Peasants paid taxes and were avail-
able for recruitment to the army, and this guaranteed the ﬁ nancial and military 
resources necessary to resist, or buy off, barbarian invaders (e.g. the Huns, who raided 
freely in the mid - 5th century, extorting vast sums from the empire). It was in response 
to this threat that Theod ó sios II, who reigned 408 – 50, ordered the construction of the 
massive land walls of Constantinople, which were ﬁ rst breached by force in 1453. 
 With the reserves built up in the wake of the ﬁ scal reforms of Anast á sios I (ruled 
491 – 518), the emperor Ioustinian ó s I (Justinian, reigned 527 – 65, a native speaker of 
Latin from an Illyrian peasant family) embarked on an ambitious campaign of recon-
quest in the west (see Moorhead  (1994) , Maas  (2005)  for background to the man and 
the period). Having concluded a treaty with the Persians in 522 to safeguard the eastern 
frontier, he ﬁ rst sent his general Belis á rios to recover the Vandal kingdom in North 
Africa. Following his rapid success there, Belis á rios was transferred to Italy, where, 
aided by the Armenian general Nars é s, the eventual submission of the Ostrogoths was 
secured in 550. A third force was then dispatched to Spain in 552, and the south - east 
corner of the peninsula recovered, perhaps to provide a defensive barrier for Africa. 
 These military successes followed a major codiﬁ cation and reform of Roman law 
carried out by Ioustinian ó s ’ legal adviser Tribonian ó s, and coincided with a cultural 
revival and a great expansion of trade based on silk production (precious silkworm 
eggs having been smuggled out of the east). In the same period the great churches of 
San Vitale and Sant ’ Apollinare in Classe were built in the new western capital of 
Ravenna, while at Constantinople the vast new Hag í a Soph í a, which still stands, was 
constructed to replace Constantine ’ s original church that had been destroyed by ﬁ re 
in the aftermath of a serious anti - government uprising in January 532. 
 This riot, named after the chant (
 [ ' nika]  ‘ win! ’ ) employed by the Hippodrome 
factions (the notorious Blues and Greens) involved in its instigation, seems to have 
been motivated by resentment of domestic repression and the high levels of taxation 

Historical Prelude 195
needed to fund the wars. After a day at the games, this crystallized into demands 
for the release of prisoners and the dismissal of unpopular ofﬁ cials, up to and including 
the emperor himself. The successful containment of the riot (some tens of thousands 
were massacred) gave Ioustinian ó s the pretext and the authority to assert his role 
as God ’ s vice - gerent on earth. This useful validating role was then assumed by all 
later Christian Roman emperors, and the Roman/Byzantine state began to deﬁ ne 
itself increasingly in religious terms, as a kind of earthly reﬂ ection of the heavenly 
kingdom. 
 In his new capacity as God ’ s agent, Ioustinian ó s felt a duty to deﬁ ne and impose 
Orthodox belief, though in this he was less successful. The Platonic Academy in Athens 
was closed in 529, and the teaching of pagan philosophy restricted to Christian institu-
tions (philosophy thus becoming a  ‘ historical ’ subject rather than a living body of rival 
doctrine). Then, having tried unsuccessfully to suppress the heresy of Monophysitism, 
which saw Christ as a God who had ceased to be also a man (and rather inconveniently 
included the emperor ’ s wife Theod ó ra among its adherents), Ioustinian ó s sought to 
reconcile the Monophysites by making concessions, but succeeded only in antagonizing 
the western church, which was implacably hostile to the doctrine. He also alienated 
many of his own bishops from Egypt and Syria, where the doctrine enjoyed overwhelm-
ing support. 
 Unfortunately, Ioustinian ó s ’ military successes also proved to be short - lived. The 
cost of reasserting universal Roman rule was more than the empire could bear, and it 
was ill - equipped to deal with any fresh assaults. The Lombards (another Germanic 
tribe) were therefore able to occupy all of north and central Italy before the end of the 
6th century, and prosperity was seriously undermined by earthquakes and plague 
epidemics (spread in part by the devastation of endless warfare), which led to the col-
lapse of many urban centres and a serious reduction in the quality of life in the cities 
that survived. 
 The situation became critical when the Balkans, already threatened by nomadic 
Turkic peoples in Ioustinian ó s ’ time, came under pressure from an alliance of Avars 
(another tribe from the Asian steppes) and Slavs, who had moved south from the river 
valleys of central Europe. By the 580s these groups had penetrated the Peloponnese, 
leaving only a few coastal towns, including the great city of Thessaloniki, in Byzantine 
control. Soon after, at the beginning of the 7th century, came the Persian invasions of 
Syria, Armenia, Asia Minor and Egypt; Antioch fell in 612, Jerusalem in 614, Ephesus 
in 615, and Alexandria in 619. This devastating period marks the ﬁ rst clear break with 
classical antiquity in the east, and still worse was to come. In 626, while the emperor 
Her á kleios (a capable soldier and administrator of Armenian descent, who reigned 
610 – 41) was away on campaign against the Persians, an army of Persians, Avars and 
Slavs besieged Constantinople itself, though the capital held out successfully thanks to 
its land walls and its control of the sea. This proved to be a turning point, and there-
after Her á kleios succeeded in recovering the empire ’ s losses in Asia Minor and Syria, 
and ﬁ nally won a decisive victory at Nineveh in 627, which led to the collapse of the 
Persian empire. In 630 he was able to enter Jerusalem in triumph. 
 But success was again short - lived. The power vacuum was ﬁ lled almost immediately 
by the recently Islamicized Arabs, who now embarked on a campaign of aggressive 
expansion. Persia, in disarray after Her á kleios ’ triumph, fell in 636, and the Romans 

196 Byzantium
themselves came under attack immediately afterwards; Jerusalem fell again in 638, and 
remained under Islamic control until the ﬁ rst crusade at the end of the 11th century. 
In 640 the Arabs advanced into Egypt, and then pressed on ruthlessly throughout north 
Africa, so that this territory too was lost permanently to the empire. On several occa-
sions in the late 7th and early 8th centuries Constantinople was again besieged, though 
the emperor L é on III (a Syrian from Germanicea, reigned 716 – 40) began the long ﬁ ght 
back by raising the second Arab siege of the capital in 717 – 18 and defeating an Arab 
army in the ﬁ eld in 740. 
 The Arab advance by land was, however, halted in Asia Minor, the last great recruit-
ing ground for the Roman/Byzantine army, and though raids continued for some 300 
years, it was to be the Turks, not the Arabs, who ﬁ nally deprived the empire of its last 
great territorial possession. Nevertheless, Byzantium had suffered a stupendous blow; 
Syria, Palestine and Egypt were among its richest provinces, and Egypt in particular 
was a major supplier of grain to the capital. Henceforth the reproachful ghost of uni-
versal Christian empire hung over the residual Byzantine state, inculcating a state of 
mind to which the retrospective quality of mature Byzantine culture has often been 
attributed (cf. Mango ( 1980 : 4 – 5)). 
 The successful resistance to the Arabs in Asia Minor was achieved because of the 
imposition of martial law and the fact that its provinces had earlier been divided by 
Her á kleios into administrative/military districts known as themes, each under the 
command of a governor/general who reported directly to the emperor. This reform 
gave pre - eminence to the military as a career path, and circumscribed the power of 
the landed aristocracy by consolidating the position of the villages as the units of taxa-
tion and recruitment. Many soldiers had already been given lands in the themes so as 
to provide a standing army, but this period saw massive new population movements 
as different ethnic groups were relocated to meet fresh military contingencies. 
 As a result of this system of economic and military organization, Byzantine society, 
already isolated by the Slav settlements in Greece and the Balkans, was set on a radi-
cally different course from that of western Europe, so that feudalization began only in 
the 10th century, and a fully formalized system of feudal relations, as developed in the 
west, was never established because of the revival of urban life and a trading economy 
(see 7.3, 7.4 below). This separation of east and west was reinforced on the linguistic 
front. Knowledge of Greek in the west had already declined by the end of the 4th 
century, as St Jerome ’ s translations of Greek patristic texts into Latin and St Augustine ’ s 
dependence on translations of Greek philosophical texts clearly demonstrate. Similarly 
in the east, though Latin had originally been used in court circles in Constantinople, 
it was Greek which had always been employed for practical administrative purposes, 
and throughout the Roman imperial and Byzantine periods Greek remained the only 
language of higher education, the principal language of culture (though Syriac and 
Coptic also emerged as major literary languages in the Christian era), and the sole 
vernacular lingua franca of the multiethnic empire, acquired as a ﬁ rst language by 
many, and as a second language by many more. The position of Latin as the language 
of the Roman  ‘ establishment ’  therefore became increasingly precarious, though in the 
army, the legal profession and imperial ceremonial it continued to enjoy prestige as 
the  ‘ true ’  language of the Romans, and remained in use, albeit in an increasingly for-
mulaic way, until the end of the 6th century. 

Historical Prelude 197
 But Greek had begun to supplant Latin in even its residual functions by the ﬁ rst half 
of the 5th century, when the key ofﬁ ce of praetorian prefect, virtually that of deputy 
emperor, had been ﬁ lled by a Greek - speaking Egyptian. A century later, Ioustinian ó s ’ 
praetorian prefect, Io á nnes the Cappadocian, reduced the use of Latin in the eastern 
prefecture still further in recognition of the linguistic realities, and his successor in that 
post was not familiar with Latin at all. Similarly, though Ioustinian ó s ’ codiﬁ cation of 
the law was carried out in the traditional legal language, the great bulk of the  ‘ novels ’ 
(i.e. supplements to, or replacements of, earlier legislation) were already composed in 
Greek, and a Greek version of the  Institutes had already been published in 534. 
 Though the inﬂ ux of Italian refugees during the wars of reconquest temporarily 
enhanced the Latin - speaking element in the capital (which brieﬂ y became a major centre 
of Latin culture), the Latin speakers were simply one of many minorities in the essen-
tially Greek - speaking capital of an empire dominated by the Greek culture and Orthodox 
Christianity. By the end of the 6th century it was already extremely difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd 
anyone who could translate Latin into Greek competently. Thereafter, the growing 
independence of Byzantium, and the need to devote all available resources to the strug-
gle for survival in the 7th and 8th centuries, guaranteed the ﬁ nal demise of Latin.  
 7.3   The Middle Byzantine Period: Iconoclasm, Renaissance 
and Decline 
 The  ‘ dark age ’ that lasted from the 7th century to the middle of the 9th was dominated 
by a religious crisis which jeopardized the very survival of Byzantine culture. Many 
had come to believe that the military disasters of the 7th century were divine punish-
ment for a failure of religious observance, and in 730 the emperor L é on III, acting in 
accordance with his religious duty to purify the faith of his subjects, decreed that the 
icons should be removed from churches. These images of Christ and the saints had 
acquired a central place in popular religious practice during the 5th and 6th centuries 
as providing a channel of communication through which, in response to prayer, inter-
cession might be obtained and miracles worked. But many felt that they were being 
misused as objects of worship in their own right, and that view was apparently con-
ﬁ rmed by the fact that the victorious Arabs had banned the use of ﬁ gural images. 
 When German ó s the ecumenical patriarch (the senior bishop and leader of the 
Orthodox church) declined to comply with L é on ’ s edict, he was summarily replaced, 
and the destruction of icons and persecution of dissenters began. The emperor ’ s ortho-
doxy was swiftly rewarded by a dramatic improvement in Byzantine fortunes, which 
continued into the reign of his son Konstant í nos V (ruled 741 – 75). Though iconoclasm 
was suppressed in 787 in a period of relative military security, it was reintroduced in 
814 after fresh reverses in the Balkans, including the defeat and execution of the 
emperor Nikeph ó ros I in 811 by Krum, the formidable Khan of the Bulgars (yet 
another Turkic tribe threatening the northern frontier; though eventually absorbed 
linguistically by their Slavic subjects, the name was retained), and the policy was per-
manently abandoned only in 843, at the beginning of what was to prove to be 
Byzantium ’ s golden age. The pattern of enforced iconoclasm in the face of disaster 
followed by restoration of the images as circumstances improved suggests that the 

198 Byzantium
policy enjoyed little popular support, and was no more than stoically tolerated as a 
necessary expedient in times of crisis. 
 The eventual stabilization of the military situation had already engendered some-
thing of an intellectual revival under The ó philos (reigned 829 – 42), the last of the 
iconoclast emperors, but the advent of the  ‘ Macedonian ’ dynasty, marked by the suc-
cession, amidst intrigue and murder, of Bas í leios I (reigned 867 – 86), an illiterate 
peasant of Armenian descent from the Macedonian theme in Thrace, marks a crucial 
turning point in Byzantine fortunes. His son L é on VI (ruled 886 – 912) was known 
as  ‘ the wise ’ because of his legal reforms, while his grandson Konstant í nos VII 
Porphyrog é nnetos (reigned 913 – 59, though until 944 under the shadow of a powerful 
regent) was a scholar who played a vital role in the  ‘ Macedonian Renaissance ’ as 
patron of intellectual and creative activity in the capital. After his death imperial 
support for scholarship lapsed again until the mid - 11th century. 
 In the same period Roman ó s I Lakapen ó s (another Armenian peasant, who became 
admiral of the ﬂ eet and ruled on Konstant í nos ’ behalf from 920 to 944), succeeded in 
neutralizing a renewed threat from the Bulgars under Syme ó n, while his general 
Io á nnes Kerkou á s pressed on with the reconquest of territory from the Arabs. 
Thereafter, through marriages with the powerful generals Nikeph ó ros II Phok á s (ruled 
963 – 9, a member of one of the great Armenian military families of Asia Minor) and 
Io á nnes I Tzimisk é s (ruled 969 – 76, an Armenian aristocrat from Tshemeshgadzak in 
Mesopotamia), who effectively usurped the throne by posing as guardians of the right-
ful heirs, the dynasty retained a tenuous grip on power, and Byzantium embarked on 
a fresh series of successful military campaigns. Nikeph ó ros Phok á s ( ‘ the white death 
of the Saracens ’ ) recovered Crete from the Arabs in 961, took Aleppo in Syria in 963, 
drove the Arabs out of Cyprus in 965, and in 969 regained Antioch itself. He had, 
however, rashly invited the Rus (Vikings from Sweden who had planted colonies along 
the Russian rivers) to invade Bulgaria as  ‘ allies ’ , and it was left to Io á nnes Tzimisk é s, 
his wife ’ s lover and his murderer, to drive them out of the Balkans. Tzimisk é s then led 
a series of brilliant campaigns in the east, destroying the forces of the emir of Mosul 
and the Egyptian caliph, and restoring the Mediterranean coastline from Caesarea to 
Antioch, and many of the inland cities (though not Jerusalem), to Byzantine rule. 
 He was succeeded by Bas í leios II (reigned 976 – 1025), the true heir of the Macedonian 
dynasty, who, having put down rebellions by relatives of his two predecessors, 
embarked on the destruction of the troublesome Bulgar state in a 15 - year campaign 
which earned him the nickname  ‘ Boulgarokt ó nos ’ (Bulgar - slayer). He also supervised 
the annexation of Georgia, and crucially sought to constrain the growing power of the 
landowning aristocracy, who were buying out the small farmers on whom the military 
and economic structure of the provinces depended. This problem of increasing prosper-
ity had ﬁ rst been noted by Roman ó s Lakapen ó s, and was now addressed by new 
legislation to protect the interests of the peasants. 
 In this period of cultural self - conﬁ dence, a booming monetary economy and consist-
ent military success, Byzantium had begun to turn its attention northwards, to the 
Balkans and central Europe, to the lands north of the Black Sea, and even to Russia. 
Between the mid - 9th and mid - 11th centuries Byzantine culture, spearheaded by 
Christian missions that brought with them religion, law, art and literature, was spread 
as far as the Baltic, leaving the legacy of the Cyrillic alphabet (an adaptation of the 

Historical Prelude 199
Greek alphabet designed by Byzantine monks for the writing of Slavic languages) and 
Orthodox Christianity in much of this territory to the present day. 
 The mid - 11th century also saw the resumption of scholarly study under the patron-
age of Konstant í nos IX Monom á chos (reigned 1042 – 55), and the emergence of ﬁ gures 
such as the philosopher, historian and statesman Micha é l Psell ó s (1018 – 78 or 1096) 
and a group of contemporary scholars that included Io á nnes Mavr ó pous (teacher of 
Psell ó s, later bishop of Euchaita in Pontus), Io á nnes Xiphilin ó s (also trained by 
Mavr ó pous, later head of the law school and patriarch of Constantinople), and Io á nnes 
Ital ó s (a philosopher from southern Italy who studied with Psell ó s, but was later 
obliged to recant his  ‘ heretical ’ ideas). 
 But underlying problems had long been building up. Of the two original patriar-
chates that had remained outside Arab control during the 7th and 8th centuries (i.e. 
Rome and Constantinople), it was the eastern capital which had come to enjoy the 
dominant position because of its unbroken association with the sole surviving Roman 
emperor. But the beginnings of a revival in the west soon led, with the crowning of 
the Frank Charlemagne as emperor in the west by the pope in 800, to a rival bid for 
universal religious authority. The efﬁ cacy of the patriarchate ’ s ecclesiastical diplomacy 
in Moravia and Bulgaria during the 9th century, where Rome and Constantinople were 
ﬁ elding rival missions, only heightened the tension, and in 858 the appointment as 
patriarch of the layman Ph ó tios (one of the greatest scholars of the middle ages, famous 
for his  Bibliotheca , a commentary on nearly 300 books that symbolizes the revival of 
learning in the east) scandalized the pope and led to a temporary schism between the 
eastern and western churches. 
 The dispute also had a doctrinal dimension, the central issue being the interpolation 
by the western church of the word  ﬁ lioque ( ‘ and from the Son ’ ) into the statement in 
the Nicene creed that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father. Originally adopted in 
6th - century Spain as a defence against Arianism, this addition spread through the 
Frankish empire and became a central plank of Charlemagne ’ s  ‘ anti - Greek ’  polemic, 
now actively promoted by missionaries from Rome among the Slavs and Bulgars. The 
Byzantines were greatly offended by this heretical doctrine of  ‘ double procession ’ , 
which in their view made a hopeless muddle of Trinitarian theology as established by 
the great ecumenical councils. 
 Though the crowning of Charlemagne as emperor  ‘ in the west ’ caused equal offence, 
it carried little real signiﬁ cance for the Byzantines, and the schism of 858 was quickly 
repaired. Even when the German king Otto I was crowned emperor  ‘ of the Romans ’ in 
963, his presumption could still be dismissed with contempt by Nikeph ó ros Phok á s. But 
by the mid - 11th century western Christendom was beginning to pose a genuine threat 
to the authority of Constantinople, and when Latin Christians began to make pilgrim-
ages to the Holy Land via the eastern capital they were treated with growing suspicion. 
Politico - religious conﬂ ict thus came to be a dominant factor in Byzantine affairs, and the 
ﬁ nal schism between the eastern and western churches in 1054, prompted by a clash 
between the patriarch Micha é l Keroull á rios and the pope ’ s legate, Cardinal Humbert, 
was no more than a reﬂ ection of the growing gulf in culture and ideology. 
 To add to these difﬁ culties, a certain governmental complacency had begun to set in 
following the death of Bas í leios II in 1025. His successors were largely content 
to sit back and enjoy the prestige and prosperity they had inherited, a particularly unfor-

200 Byzantium
tunate development given that the reconquests of the previous century had engendered 
new internal problems that demanded an effective response. The most important of 
these problems was the rise of a military aristocracy that had grown rich from warfare 
and was now using its wealth to buy out the peasantry, thus undermining the ability of 
the central administration to control its land and people. Where earlier emperors had 
sought to stem the tide by legislation, their 11th - century successors did nothing, and the 
resultant subversion of the theme system was soon to prove disastrous. 
 The new landed gentry increasingly objected to living under a form of martial law 
imposed by the emperor and the civilian bureaucracy in Constantinople, and the most 
powerful provincial families sought to establish a more independent relationship with 
the distant capital. In this way the successful integrated autocracy of the middle 
Byzantine period gradually gave way to a more fragmented social system based on the 
local wealth of a semi - detached hereditary aristocracy, a trend which also initiated 
the development of a semi - feudalized society in rural areas. It was in this period 
that the use of surnames ﬁ rst became routine, as individuals sought to advertise their 
afﬁ nities with the great provincial families (e.g. Phok á s, Komnen ó s, Do ú kas, 
Palaiol ó gos), some of which were soon to emerge as imperial dynasties. 
 This fatal weakening of the empire ’ s cohesion, and its consequential incapacity to 
martial the resources necessary to defend itself, were all too soon made apparent (and 
we may compare here the fate of the west in the 5th century, in the face of similar 
fragmentation). Though attacks by the Russians and the Petcheneks (another Turkic 
tribe) in the middle years of the 11th century were successfully staved off, the invasion 
of the Byzantine provinces in southern Italy and Sicily by the Normans, culminating 
in the capture of Bari in 1071, quickly resulted in the loss of Byzantine control. Soon 
afterwards, the Normans crossed the Adriatic, seized Dyrr á chion (now Durr ë s in 
Albania) on the mainland, and advanced through Macedonia and Thessaly, seemingly 
with the intention of seizing the capital itself. 
 Meanwhile in the east, the Seljuks, chiefs of a confederation of Islamicized Turkish 
tribes that had taken over the Arab caliphate in Baghdad, began to inﬁ ltrate Asia 
Minor, and in the fatal year of 1071 the Byzantine army was subjected to a crushing 
defeat at Manzikert (Malazgirt, north of Lake Van in what is now eastern Turkey). 
So weak and overstretched had control of the empire ’ s former heartlands become that 
no serious further resistance could be offered. Within a decade much of Asia Minor 
had been occupied, and the Turks had advanced as far as Nicaea. The new sultanate 
of  ‘ Rum ’ (Rome) was now ﬁ rmly and permanently established on former imperial 
territory, with only a few residual strongholds remaining under the nominal control 
of the emperor. 
 Faced with a hostile and suspicious west and threatened by powerful enemies on 
all sides, the survival of what remained of the Byzantine state, so recently at the pin-
nacle of its wealth and inﬂ uence, began to seem very doubtful indeed.  
 7.4   The Late Byzantine Period: Stabilization, Defeat and Fall 
 By the late 11th century Byzantium was obliged to turn for help to Venice, then still 
very much in thrall to Byzantine culture (the church of San Marco, for example, was 

Historical Prelude 201
modelled on the Holy Apostles in Constantinople), but also, thanks to its shrewd 
exploitation of Byzantine weakness, on the brink of achieving military and economic 
domination of the Mediterranean (see Angold  (1984)  for a political history of this 
critical period). 
 The middle Byzantine period was still very much characterized by the suspicion and 
dour self - reliance that had originated in the dark ages of the 7th and 8th centuries. 
This led to a lack of enterprise, which, in combination with renewed military crisis, 
left the Byzantines highly vulnerable to predatory outsiders. Venetian merchants had 
been settled in Constantinople since the 10th century, but when the Venetians recap-
tured the key port of Dyrr á chion, they demanded in return exemption from customs 
dues throughout the empire and grants of land for quays and warehouses in 
Constantinople. Other Italian cities quickly followed this lead in obtaining trading 
concessions, and the growing foreign domination of the Byzantine economy eventually 
led to its destruction. 
 For a time, however, the emperor Al é xios I Komnen ó s (reigned 1081 – 1118) was able 
to restore something of Byzantium ’ s former authority. This was achieved partly through 
skilful diplomacy (by playing Venice off against the Normans in the west, engineering 
the destruction of the Petcheneks through the manipulation of another nomadic tribe, 
the Cumans, and recruiting Turkish  ‘ allies ’ in Asia Minor), and partly through resolute 
military campaigning, in the face of repeated setbacks, against the Normans in the 
Balkans, the sole imperial territory in which the administration still worked effectively, 
and the only remaining source of imperial revenue. These external successes were largely 
facilitated by internal military and administrative reforms through which Al é xios 
exacted obligations from the hereditary landowners to supply troops (who were then 
combined with the growing body of mercenaries to form a new regular army), and 
instituted a revamped provincial administration which collected taxes and rounded up 
peasants for military service with the ruthlessness of an occupying army. 
 This remarkable military aristocrat was the founder of a dynasty which ruled until 
1185 and gave the empire a century of desperately needed stability. The urban renewal 
which had begun during the late 9th century was therefore able to continue throughout 
the 10th and 11th centuries, reaching a peak in the early 12th. This was naturally 
accompanied by the growth of an urban bourgeoisie, a class which was instrumental 
in the promotion of a more lively intellectual climate, especially in the capital, and 
which, by the time of the Komneno í , had grown accustomed to a comfortable lifestyle. 
Despite all the difﬁ culties, therefore, the Komnenian period witnessed a renewed surge 
of interest in cultural and literary pursuits and the beginnings of a distinctively  ‘ modern ’ 
outlook on the part of the Constantinopolitan intelligentsia. 
 Thus despite Al é xios ’ part in the suppression of philosophical  ‘ heresy ’ , as embodied 
in the Platonic and Neoplatonic research of Io á nnes Ital ó s, other, less dangerous forms 
of scholarship and creative writing were allowed to ﬂ ourish. Important ﬁ gures of this 
period include Al é xios ’ daughter, Anna Komnen é (1083 – c.1153, who composed a 
history of her father ’ s reign universally recognized as a masterpiece of Byzantine litera-
ture), The ó doros Pr ó dromos (c.1100 – 65, court poet of Al é xios ’ wife Eir é ne Do ú kaina, 
and of her son and grandson, Io á nnes II and Manou é l I Komnen ó s), Io á nnes Tz é tzes 
(c.1110 – c.1180, a classical scholar of prodigious learning and energy), Eust á thios 
(c.1115 – c.1195, a scholar, rhetorician and theologian, who served as bishop of 

202 Byzantium
Thessaloniki) and the brothers Micha é l (c.1138 – c.1222) and Nik é tas (c.1150 – 1215) 
Choni á tes, (the former a pupil of Eust á thios who became bishop of Athens, the latter 
a distinguished statesman and one of the most important Byzantine historians). 
 In 1095, with the return of effective rule in the Balkans, Al é xios was ready to 
embark on the reconquest of Asia Minor; the main Seljuk empire in the Middle East 
was beginning to break up, and the time seemed ripe to take advantage of the crisis. 
But his plans had to be shelved indeﬁ nitely when news reached Constantinople of the 
imminent arrival of hordes of westerners. After the Arab conquests Christian pilgrim-
age to the Holy Land had been allowed to continue, but this amicable arrangement 
came to an end with the arrival of the Seljuks in Jerusalem in 1077. Al é xios had repeat-
edly asked the west for help in recapturing Byzantine territory from the Seljuks, but 
was quite unprepared for the arrival of a mass crusade, backed by the pope, with 
leaders from most of the states of western Europe. 
 Since the Normans were prominent among the leaders of the crusade, there could 
be no doubt that Byzantium faced a new and terrible threat, but Al é xios managed to 
force an oath of allegiance from the army outside the walls of his city, together with 
a promise to restore any recaptured territory to the empire. The collapse of Seljuk 
power in the Middle East gave the crusaders their opportunity; Antioch fell in 1098, 
and in the following year Jerusalem was retaken. Unsurprisingly, these conquests were 
not handed over as promised, but instead became  ‘ Frankish ’  (i.e. western/Latin) prin-
cipalities, and when the Muslims were reunited under the Arab rulers of Mosul, their 
recovery of lost territory proceeded rapidly; Edessa and Damascus were taken in 1144 
and 1154, and Jerusalem fell to Salah ad - Din (Saladin) in 1187. Prior to these coun-
terstrikes, however, the empire enjoyed some successes of its own. In the course of a 
campaign in Asia Minor and Syria, Al é xios ’ son Io á nnes II (reigned 1118 – 43) forced 
the Latin ruler of Antioch to surrender and swear allegiance to him, while in 1159 his 
successor Manou é l I (ruled 1143 – 80) compelled the king of Jerusalem to recognize 
Byzantine sovereignty over the Latin east as a whole. 
 At this point Manou é l sought to extend a diplomatic olive branch, but his efforts 
were rebuffed by the western emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who dismissed him con-
temptuously as  ‘ king of the Greeks ’ . Nevertheless, Manou é l maintained a broadly 
conciliatory attitude towards the west, despite having had the increasingly lawless 
Venetian merchants arrested in 1171 as a threat to national security, and this approach 
eventually engendered a wave of anti - Latin feeling which led, soon after his death, to 
the massacre of Pisan and Genoese merchants in the capital in 1182. The Italian cities 
were now thirsting for revenge, and their opportunity was not long in coming. 
 An initially successful campaign against the Seljuks had turned to disaster with the 
crushing defeat of Manou é l ’ s army at Myriok é phalon in Asia Minor in 1176. Soon 
after, the different national groups in the Balkans began to break away into the inde-
pendent states of Serbia and Bulgaria, and the papacy was able once again to extend 
its inﬂ uence in the region. Finally, an alliance between Hungary and Serbia led to an 
attack on the Balkan cities in 1183, and the Normans swept through Greece in 1185, 
destroying Thessaloniki on their way. What was left of the Byzantine state now virtu-
ally ceased to function; whole territories passed into the hands of powerful local fami-
lies and the sad remainder was ground down by punitive taxation. In 1194 the German 
emperor Henry IV succeeded to the Norman kingdom of Sicily and demanded territory 

Historical Prelude 203
and tribute from Byzantium. This could no longer be raised by taxation and the tombs 
of the emperors in the Holy Apostles had to be stripped to raise the money. The end 
could not be far away. 
 In the east the crusades had greatly intensiﬁ ed ill - feeling towards the Latins, and 
the greed of the Italian merchants had steadily sapped the empire ’ s wealth, provoking 
still greater hostility and violence as people began to understand the full extent of 
Byzantine impotence. In the west, however, many argued that the Byzantines had 
deliberately sabotaged the crusades and that their refusal to join the Roman church 
justiﬁ ed western intervention in the interests of their own salvation (not to mention 
the commercial interests of the invaders). 
 An unexpected opportunity soon presented itself after Pope Innocent III called for 
a fresh crusade to the Holy Land and Enrico Dandolo, doge of Venice, had agreed to 
provide the necessary ships and ﬁ nance in return for the lion ’ s share of any booty. At 
this critical juncture Al é xios Angelos, a pretender to the Byzantine throne, asked for 
western assistance in return for a large cash payment, and in 1203 the fourth crusade 
diverted to Constantinople to instal him. The new emperor, however, faced with 
implacable public hostility towards the crusaders and himself, sought to regain popular 
support by distancing himself from his backers. But without the crusaders ’ protection 
he was overthrown and murdered by Al é xios Mo ú rtzouphlos, who then set himself 
the task of destroying the foreign invaders. Though their position was increasingly 
desperate, with supplies running alarmingly low during the winter of 1204, the crusad-
ers stuck to their task, and after a failed assault on 9 April 1204, ﬁ nally secured a 
tenuous foothold within the city on 13 April. At this point Byzantine morale failed 
and the crusaders found that the city was theirs by default. They sacked it ruthlessly, 
and a thousand years of accumulated treasure, including the most precious Christian 
relics, was stripped away, while the lands of the empire were partitioned among the 
victors. 
 That the Christian capital of the east, which had survived all manner of barbarian 
and Islamic assaults for the best part of a thousand years, should have been sacked by 
a Christian army from western Europe left a permanent legacy of irredeemable bitter-
ness and distrust. The Venetians were the principal beneﬁ ciaries, gaining nearly half 
of Constantinople (including Hag í a Soph í a) together with most of the Greek islands 
and ports, including the Ionian islands (K é rkyra/Corfu, Kephaloni á , Z á kynthos/Zante), 
Euboia and Crete. Other Frankish lords carved up the rest of Greece, Thrace and 
north - west Asia Minor, with Baldwin of Flanders installed as emperor overall. The 
crusaders built castles throughout their new domain (many still to be seen today) and 
formed a new feudal overlay above their Greek subjects. 
 Byzantium was not, however, totally obliterated. Governments in exile were formed, 
based on the local power of individual families, in Trebizond (Trapezo ú s/Trabzon) on 
the south - eastern shore of the Black Sea, in Epirus in north - western Greece, and at 
Nicaea (N í kaia/Iznik) in north - west Asia Minor. Trebizond survived longest, falling 
to the Turks only in 1461, but was too far removed from the mainstream of events to 
have much inﬂ uence on their course. The rivalry between Epirus and Nicaea was 
resolved by the defeat of the Epirote ruler by the Bulgarians, and though the territory 
retained its independence until formally incorporated into Serbia in 1337, only Nicaea 
remained in a position to claim the inheritance of the Byzantine empire. 

204 Byzantium
 The Latin empire had already suffered a defeat at the hands of the Bulgarians 
in 1205, and Thessaloniki was taken by the Epirotes in 1224. With the Latins 
apparently no longer able to maintain effective self - defence, the empire in Nicaea, 
already conducting itself as the legal government of Byzantium, ﬁ nally sent its forces 
to enter Constantinople in 1261, and Micha é l VIII Palaiol ó gos, a general who 
had seized power at Nicaea three years before, was duly crowned emperor in Hag í a 
Soph í a. 
 But in reality his  ‘ empire ’ was now a pathetic remnant. All national groups apart 
from the Greeks had long ago fallen away, while the greater part of former Byzantine 
territory still remained in  ‘ Frankish ’ , Arab or Turkish hands. Some land, however, was 
successfully recovered, most notably the south - east of the Morea (as the Franks called 
the Peloponnese) with its fortiﬁ ed townships of Mystr á s and Monembas í a, from which 
the reconquest of much of the rest of the Peloponnese was able to proceed. Mystr á s 
in particular came to enjoy considerable prosperity, serving as the capital of the  ‘ des-
potate ’ of the Morea, with its rulers drawn from families close to the throne, including 
a junior branch of the imperial family itself. 
 Though the recovery was inevitably only partial, the new geographical compactness 
gave a remarkable political and cultural cohesion to the Palaiologan period, which 
produced one ﬁ nal Byzantine renaissance before the inevitable fall. Its artwork (icons, 
frescos and mosaics) is particularly striking, and the period also produced scholars 
central to the survival of classical Greek texts, such as M á ximos Plano ú des (c.1255 –
 1305) and Dem é trios Trikl í nios (14th century). But the material decline was all too 
apparent; Constantinople in particular was now far too big for its population and large 
areas of the city simply reverted to open countryside, while the imperial palace, having 
fallen into disrepair, was replaced by a much smaller, and more affordable palace in 
the Blachernai district, beside the city ’ s land walls. 
 For the ﬁ rst 20 years of his reign Micha é l Palaiol ó gos was obliged to maintain an 
army to cover the western approaches in case the long - threatened Latin retaliation 
materialized. This left his eastern frontier dangerously undermanned, and when the 
Mongol invasions of the mid - 13th century brought confusion to the Seljuk states of 
Asia Minor, the emergence from among them of the aggressive Osmanli (Ottoman) 
dynasty presented a new threat against which the impoverished Byzantine state could 
mount no effective response. Nicaea fell in 1329, and by the 1350s Gallipoli on the 
European side of the Bosporus was also under the sultan ’ s control. 
 By this time the Byzantine coinage had been replaced by the Venetian ducat, and 
the  ‘ empire of the Romans ’ was little more than a petty kingdom fought over by a 
succession of pretenders who were the vassals of the Italians or the Ottoman Sultan. 
As in the dark days of the 8th and 9th centuries, this political and economic crisis once 
again went hand in hand with a religious controversy. Monks on Mount Athos (the 
Holy Mountain) in Chalkidik é had developed a method of silent prayer called  hesych í a 
(
  [isi ' ç ia]  ‘ silence ’ ) based on the teaching of an 11th - century mystic, and its 
practitioners soon came to be known as Hesychasts. Though approved by a church 
council in 1351, it became a central issue in the civil war between the general Io á nnes 
Kantakouzen ó s, who espoused the Hesychast cause, and the legitimate regent Io á nnes 
V Palaiol ó gos (reigned 1341 – 91), who was supported by the mass of the populace and 
backed  ‘ orthodox ’  religious practice. This view was also endorsed by the patriarchs, 

Historical Prelude 205
who preached that all would eventually turn out well if only the Byzantines held to 
their true faith. 
 But Byzantium had not sought alliances with the other Balkan powers, including 
the expanding Serbian empire which now controlled most of Macedonia. These lands 
were picked off one by one by the Turks in the late 14th century, Macedonia in 1371, 
Serbia in 1389 and Bulgaria in 1393. Constantinople itself was blockaded in 1397 and 
saved only by the fact that the Mongols under Timur Lenk (Tamburlaine) attacked 
the Turks ’ eastern front and drew the besieging army away. 
 As Ottoman forces progressively overran eastern Europe, leaving only the capital 
and the despotate of the Morea in Byzantine hands, the hated west remained the sole 
possible source of help, and desperate appeals were duly made, including a personal 
tour of western capitals by Manou é l II Palaiol ó gos (ruled 1391 – 425) in 1399. But the 
enduring schism between the eastern and western churches proved to be an insuperable 
problem. Proclamation of union on the basis of accepting the  ﬁ lioque clause in the 
creed was the price demanded for western aid, and this Byzantium could not pay in 
the face of resolute popular feeling against it. 
 The respite from the ﬁ nal act of Turkish aggression lasted for some ﬁ fty years and 
during this period several more attempts were made to achieve church union and so 
draw in the west. A draft agreement was eventually reached in 1438 by the emperor 
Io á nnes VIII Palaiol ó gos, who had led a delegation to the Council of Ferrara – Florence, 
but he was still unable to impose the terms on his deﬁ ant subjects, whose distrust of 
the  ‘ Franks ’ persisted unabated. The promised relief army was in any case destroyed 
by the Turks at Varna in 1444, and no further help was then forthcoming. 
 Byzantium therefore had to meet the ﬁ nal attack alone, though with the courageous 
assistance of the remaining Italian residents of the city. The Ottoman sultan, Mehmet 
II ( ‘ the Conqueror ’ ), prepared his forces meticulously and the siege began on 6 April 
1453. Huge cannon blasted holes in the land walls but the defenders, only some 7,000 
in number, consistently managed to ﬁ ll the breaches with rubble. A crucial moment 
came when the sultan opened a second front by bringing his ships into the Golden 
Horn overland on a primitive railway, so bypassing the defensive mole across the 
entrance to this waterway and threatening the harbour walls directly. 
 By the last week in May the defenders could offer little further resistance and huge 
crowds gathered in Hag í a Soph í a on 28 May, despite their previous boycott in the 
face of the attempted imposition of church union. That same night the ﬁ nal assault 
was launched and the Turks eventually broke through a small gate near the Blachernai 
palace just before sunrise on 29 May. The last Roman emperor, Konstant í nos XI 
Palaiol ó gos, a former despot of the Morea who had been crowned at Mystr á s in 1449, 
died in the ﬁ ghting along with some 4,000 others. Approximately 50,000 more were 
taken prisoner and, in accordance with Islamic custom, three days of looting were 
permitted, though the destruction of buildings was limited on the orders of the sultan, 
and some of the churches were left untouched for the future use of the Christian popu-
lation (see Runciman  (1965) , Nicol  (1992) ). 
 From this time until the proclamation of the independent Greek kingdom in the 
19th century there was no autonomous Greek - speaking state, and the vast majority of 
Greek speakers lived in relative poverty, isolated from the artistic, cultural and tech-
nological developments that soon began to reshape the west.  

206 Byzantium
 Note 
1  The Byzantines, acutely conscious of the linguistic and ethnic differences between themselves 
and the Latins of the west, will henceforth be referred to by means of conventional transcrip-
tions of their Greek names rather than the Latinized equivalents standardly used by British 
and American Byzantinists.  

8
 Greek in the Byzantine 
Empire: The Major Issues  
 8.1   Introduction 
 The Byzantine state survived for over a thousand years, and during that time under-
went many ethnographic and territorial upheavals. It is perhaps most useful to begin 
with an account of the status of Greek in the early period, at the time of Ioustinian ó s ’ 
reconquest of Italy and North Africa in the late 6th century (cf. Mango ( 1980 : 13 – 31)). 
Some important shifts of outlook began to set in during the course of the successful 
middle Byzantine period (see  8.3 ), and we eventually see some limited experimentation 
with the potential of  ‘ popular ’  Greek during the 11th/12th - century revival ushered in 
by the Komnenian dynasty after the catastrophic loss of Asia Minor (see  8.4 ). 
 8.2   Greek and Other Languages in the Early Byzantine Period 
 In Ioustinian ó s ’ time Latin and Greek served as the primary cultural and the sole 
ofﬁ cial languages of the Roman empire, and in the cities would have served adequately 
for purposes of communication, written and spoken, at all levels. Linguistically, the 
empire was divided by a line running above Thrace, Macedonia and Epirus, and down 
across the Mediterranean to divide north Africa at the western end of Cyrenaica: north 
and west of this line Latin was the common language, elsewhere Greek fulﬁ lled this 
function. Each was spoken competently in its respective part of the empire by all edu-
cated people and the majority of city - dwellers, even if neither Latin nor Greek was 
their native language. Before the fall of the west, universal Roman institutions and 
general mobility guaranteed that many people had at least a working knowledge of 
the  ‘ other ’ ofﬁ cial language as well, though this was already becoming rarer by the 
6th century. The rural majority, of course, remained largely uneducated, and many of 
those who came from areas where other languages were learned natively would have 
known neither Greek nor Latin well, if at all.  

208 Byzantium
 Constantinople had been a cosmopolitan city from its foundation, and now included 
communities of Jews, Goths, Huns, Thracians, Syrians, Egyptians, other north Africans, 
Illyrians (including the emperor Ioustinian ó s himself) and Italians. The last three 
groups still spoke Latin among themselves, but despite the residual role of Latin in the 
army, the law and the administration, Greek had always been the ﬁ rst language of the 
majority in the city and was already in practice the ofﬁ cial language of the state; all 
who aspired to high ofﬁ ce were obliged to know and use it. 
 The coastal areas of Asia Minor had been culturally and linguistically Hellenized 
(and then Romanized) for nearly a millennium and a half. Though the Anatolian 
plateau inland had begun to come under the inﬂ uence of this dominant culture only 
after Alexander ’ s conquests, the descendants of indigenous peoples such as the Lycians, 
Pamphylians (Sidetians), Isaurians, Pisidians, Lycaonians, Carians, Lydians, Phrygians 
and Cappadocians, as well as immigrant groups of Celts, Goths, Jews and Persians, 
were also fairly well Hellenized by the 6th century, as evidenced not only by the many 
thousands of public and private inscriptions in Greek from all areas in Hellenistic and 
Roman times, but also by the survival of pockets of Greek in villages right across Asia 
Minor until the 19th or early 20th centuries. By that time these were located primarily 
in Pontus, Cappadocia and the district around Ph á rasa, but isolated settlements also 
survived in Bithynia, Lydia, Caria, Lycia and S í lli, close to Konya in Lycaonia (Dawkins 
 (1916) ). Though some of the most western Greek settlements, particularly in Bithynia 
and Caria, originated in Turkish times with the transfer of people from Europe, there 
is good evidence that the majority of these Greek dialects in fact represented a frag-
mented residue of the Asiatic Koine as it developed through the middle ages. By con-
trast, though some of the native languages of Asia Minor are attested epigraphically 
(Neumann  (1980) , Brixhe  (2002) , Rutherford (2002)), the material becomes quite 
 Map 2   Linguistic map of the Byzantine empire c.560 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 209
meagre by the later Hellenistic period and dies out completely in early Christian times. 
Some of these languages presumably continued as spoken patois for a considerable 
time after that, but the evidence for the dominant position of Greek by the early 
Byzantine period is overwhelming. 
 To the east of Cappadocia lay the provinces of Armenia, which had been acquired 
in the 4th century  ad and served as a northern buffer against Persia. Here Armenian 
had been developed as a literary language from the 5th century onwards, initially for 
the purpose of providing translations of Christian texts composed in Greek and Syriac, 
and this, in conjunction with Monophysite belief, had fostered the retention of a strong 
sense of national identity. Though many Armenians migrated westwards into Asia 
Minor and as far as Thrace and Macedonia, becoming thoroughly Hellenized and 
serving the empire as soldiers (and some even as emperors), the majority in Armenia 
itself proved consistently resistant to cultural and linguistic imperialism; cf. the emperor 
Maur í kios ’  proposal, quoted by the 7th - century Armenian historian Sebeos (Macler 
( 1904 : 30 – 1)), to resettle these  ‘ unsubmissive scoundrels ’ , or the uniformly hostile 
references in Anna Komnen é ’ s 12th - century  Alexiad . 
 To the south of the Armenian provinces lay the western tip of Mesopotamia, where 
Syriac, the lingua franca of the Persian empire, remained the dominant language as 
part of the legacy of the Parthian occupation from the mid - 2nd century  bc to the mid -
 2nd century  ad . Syriac and other Aramaic dialects extended southwards through Syria 
and Palestine as far as the borders of Egypt, and from the 4th century onwards, Syriac 
had also become an important religious and literary language in line with the growing 
importance of local cultures in the east following the upheavals of the 3rd century and 
the weakening of central Roman control. 
 Despite intensive colonization in the Macedonian period, and the continuous opera-
tion of a Greek - speaking administration, Greek in Syria and western Mesopotamia 
was still primarily conﬁ ned to the major cities, where the upper classes at least were 
bilingual. The urban centres of the Phoenician coast, however (Byblos, Beirut, Sidon, 
Tyre), were more heavily Hellenized, and bilingualism in Greek and Phoenician had 
gradually given way there to the use of Greek alone, at least as a written language. To 
the south too, where Palestine enjoyed great prosperity because of pilgrimage to the 
holy places, Greek was widely known among the native population at all levels of 
society (cf. Ros é n  (1980) ), though we should not forget the testimony of the 4th -
 century Spanish pilgrim Egeria ( Peregrinatio Egeriae ) that church services in Jerusalem 
were translated into both Latin and Aramaic for the beneﬁ t of western visitors and 
locals who did not know Greek. 
 In Egypt, Greek was naturally the dominant language of Alexandria and the other 
Hellenistic foundations of Naucratis and Ptolemais. Administrative documents intended 
for the population as a whole, however, were standardly published in both Greek and 
Coptic, and it seems certain that a great many Greeks and Egyptians remained virtually 
monolingual. But though the urban upper classes kept themselves very much to them-
selves (indeed intermarriage was expressly forbidden in certain cities), social interaction 
between ordinary Greeks and native Egyptians was more routine, and this, along with 
the widespread employment of Egyptians as local administrators, promoted some 
degree of bilingualism, as evidenced by the vast numbers of papyri written in Greek by 
Egyptians. Ofﬁ cial documents in particular are routinely composed in an excellent 

210 Byzantium
Koine, and it is only in examples of private correspondence that any real variations in 
competence are revealed (cf. Teodorsson ( 1977 : 11 – 24), L ü ddeckens ( 1980 : 248 – 60)). 
 Egyptian/Coptic, however, had always enjoyed high status among the native 
Egyptians because of its long written tradition and its association with the old religion. 
This prestige was enhanced from the end of the 3rd century  bc onwards, when a  ‘ native 
reaction ’ to Ptolemaic rule began, reﬂ ected in uprisings, strikes and the growing power 
of the priesthood. From c.  ad 300 Coptic became a major vehicle for Egyptian 
Christianity in a period when the local church, again committed to Monophysite doc-
trine, had begun to dissociate itself from the orthodoxy of the capital, and Greek was 
often presented as the language of an alien hierarchy imposed from Constantinople. 
 The western provinces of north Africa had all been thoroughly Romanized in clas-
sical times, though Phoenician (residually in Carthage) and Berber (in country areas 
generally) remained in use alongside  ‘ ofﬁ cial ’  Latin. Across the Mediterranean, Latin 
naturally remained the principal language of Italy, and served as the ofﬁ cial language 
in the new western capital of Ravenna, though Greek survived strongly in the south 
of Italy and in eastern Sicily. The Balkans, however, were overrun by successive groups 
of Huns, Goths, Avars, Bulgars and Slavs, and the native population of Illyrians, 
Dacians, Moesians, Thracians and Greeks was in great distress. By the early 7th 
century only major coastal cities such as Thessaloniki, Athens and Corinth had been 
able to resist the barbarian inﬂ ux intact, and many people sought refuge on offshore 
islands or simply emigrated to safer territory. One can only assume from the fact of 
the survival of Greek and the eventual elimination of Slavic dialects from the southern 
part of the Balkan peninsula that a majority there continued to speak the language at 
this time. 1 
 8.3   The Prestige of Greek 
 If we follow Mango ( 1980 : 23), and take the approximate population of the eastern 
empire in the mid - 6th century to have been around 30 million (8 million in Egypt, 9 
million in the Middle East, 10 million in Asia Minor, and 3 million in the Balkans), 
then Greek, despite its supreme status as the only international cultural language, the 
sole language of higher education, the universal language of imperial administration 
and the spoken lingua franca, would probably have been a true ﬁ rst language for only 
about one third of that population, the majority of these in the Balkans and Asia 
Minor. 
 This can be explained partly by traditional Greek exclusiveness, which inhibited the 
Greco - Macedonian aristocracies of the Hellenistic age from pursuing an active policy 
of Hellenization among their subject peoples (despite the founding of major cities), 
and partly as a result of the retention of a sense of national consciousness on the part 
of major ethnic groups such as Egyptians, Syrians and Armenians throughout the 
Roman period. But while it is certain that many of the poorest peasants outside Greece 
and coastal Asia Minor knew little or no Greek, the fact that a great deal of popular 
Christian literature (e.g. martyrdoms and saints ’ lives) was composed in a non - 
classicizing form of the language throughout the east in the late antique and early 
Byzantine periods (see  8.5.6 ) implies an extensive knowledge of spoken and basic 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 211
written Greek at other levels of society. This was the inevitable product of long - term 
Roman/Byzantine administration, primary education, routine employment in the 
bureaucracy, and intermarriage. Similarly in the middle Byzantine period, the standard 
use of Greek for the evangelization of non - Christian peoples who had settled within 
imperial territory, e.g. the Slavs in the Balkans, evidently presupposes some prior 
familiarity with at least the spoken language among the target audience, even if the 
process was painfully slow, cf. Mango ( 1980 : 28 – 9). 
 Nevertheless, in the early Byzantine period, when the empire still included the 
Middle East and Egypt, there could be no question of the development of any speciﬁ -
cally  ‘ Greek ’  national consciousness. The local elites, once so conscious of the cultural 
and ethnic differences between themselves and their Roman rulers, had been steadily 
recruited into the higher levels of Roman society, where their pervasive inﬂ uence 
transformed the old Roman ruling class and facilitated the creation of a genuinely 
Greco - Roman civilization. But in the course of this blending process the Greek -
 speaking upper classes had themselves been transformed. As the traditionally dominant 
group in the east, they had been able to retain a unique position of prestige and inﬂ u-
ence, and by exploiting these advantages, had once again come to dominate much of 
the political and economic life of the eastern provinces. They thus gradually became 
 ‘ Romans ’ not merely in law but also in sentiment, as the principal beneﬁ ciaries of an 
administration which, with the passage of time, they could increasingly view as being 
under their own, rather than alien, control. 
 This growing identiﬁ cation of the Greek - speaking aristocracy with the interests of 
the Roman state inhibited the development of any clear sense of apartness. By the 6th 
century Greek, as we have seen, was not merely the native language of  ‘ Greeks ’ , but 
the universal spoken, cultural and ofﬁ cial language of the upper classes in four - ﬁ fths 
of what remained of the Roman empire. Unlike Coptic, Syriac or Armenian, therefore, 
it could never be seen simply, or even primarily, as a deﬁ ning characteristic of a par-
ticular national group or region. Indeed, since the Byzantines, irrespective of ethnic 
background, quite reasonably referred to themselves as Romans, the contemporary 
form of their language also came to be known as  ‘ Roman ’ (
  [ro ' meika]), a 
name routinely used for spoken Greek until the 19th century, and sometimes still 
employed today. 
 Thus even though Greek was without question the dominant language, the early 
Byzantine empire remained a multiethnic and multilingual state in which traditional 
Greco - Roman culture, reshaped within the context of Christian Orthodoxy, played 
the major unifying role (despite the periodic emergence of  ‘ heretical ’ movements). 
Before the ﬁ nal breakdown of settled urban civilization in the 7th century, this culture 
was still largely common to east and west (cf., for example, the great Byzantine 
churches of Ravenna), despite the Latin/Greek divide and the emergence of differences 
in liturgical practice. 
 But the isolation of the Byzantine  ‘ dark age ’ during the 7th and 8th centuries inevi-
tably led to greater cultural and religious divergence, and this ushered in the long 
process of political and ecclesiastical alienation that was ﬁ nally to culminate in the 
disaster of 1204. By the beginning of the middle period, two hundred years of autono-
mous development had led to a growing awareness that contemporary  ‘ Romania ’ 
(now deprived of Egypt and Syria) was something very different from the Frankish 

212 Byzantium
 ‘ Holy Roman Empire ’ that had been constructed out of the ruin of the west. The 
scholar - emperor Konstant í nos VII Porphyrog é nnetos (reigned 913 – 59), for example, 
notes in the introduction to his work  On the Themes  (Pertusi  (1952) ) that his pre-
decessors in the time of Her á kleios  ‘ had been Hellenized and discarded the language 
of their fathers, the Roman tongue ’ . Konstant í nos ’ assertion is true to the extent that 
this period indeed marks the ﬁ nal abandonment of Latin in even its residual functions, 
but it also conﬁ rms that by the 10th century a distinct  ‘ east Roman ’ identity had been 
constructed by the Byzantine aristocracy. 
 This marks a shift towards the closer identiﬁ cation of eastern Romanness with the  
speciﬁ cally Greek contributions to the Byzantine cultural heritage, and it became a 
major preoccupation of the Byzantine elite throughout the history of the middle and 
later empire, pursued with great determination in periods of military and economic 
stability, to preserve and contribute to what was perceived as a continuous tradition 
incorporating ancient Greek, Hellenistic and Orthodox Christian components. They 
may still have been Romans, with an unbroken line of emperors in Constantinople 
going back 600 years, but they were also the trustees of ancient Hellenism and 
Orthodox Christianity, with their own language and cultural and religious traditions 
increasingly distinct from their western counterparts. The text of the patriarch Micha é l 
Keroull á rios ’  anathematization of the papal legation in 1054 (Will ( 1861 : 155 – 68)) 
already refers to the latter as  ‘ men coming out of the darkness ’ , and imperiously dis-
misses the pope ’ s letter of excommunication as blasphemous.  
 8.4   Greek in the Later Empire 
 8.4.1   Introduction 
 The end of the middle Byzantine period is usually associated with the loss of eastern 
and central Anatolia to the Seljuks, and of Sicily and southern Italy to the Normans 
(e.g. Kazhdan and Franklin ( 1984 : 14)). Thereafter, educated Byzantines of the 11th 
and 12th centuries, conventional rhetoric about universal empire notwithstanding, 
were obliged to rethink their place in the world (see Beaton ( 1996 : 7, 207 – 27), 
Magdalino  (1991, 1992, 1993) , Ricks and Magdalino  (1998)  for a range of views). 
The immediate effect of the disastrous territorial losses at the end of the 11th century 
was to reduce the Byzantine state to an area comprising parts of the Balkans (essentially 
Greece, including Macedonia and Thrace) and the western coasts of Asia Minor, an 
area in which a majority were native speakers of Greek (Bryer  (1981) ). Under threat 
from Muslim Turks and Catholic Franks, it was natural that the Byzantine elite should 
have sought a fresh demonstration of the continuing cultural vigour of the New Rome, 
and one manifestation of this aspiration was a heightened interest in the literary tradi-
tions of ancient Greece. In the Komnenian period (1081 – 1180), therefore, rhetoric 
returned to centre stage and there was a renewed engagement with long - neglected ﬁ elds 
such as romantic ﬁ ction and satire  – alongside the appearance of an entirely new genre 
of wryly comic begging poetry reﬂ ecting the more hierarchical structure of society and 
the development of a system of patronage. But there were other factors at work besides. 
Although the shift from the more profound intellectual climate of the 11th century has 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 213
been associated with the re - emergence of an audience for popular forms of secular 
literature (Mango ( 1980 : 237)), we should not forget that Al é xios I Komnen ó s was a 
ruthless autocrat who had terminated the revival of pagan philosophy by staging the 
trial of the then professor, Io á nnes Ital ó s, on charges of heresy. In an increasingly 
totalitarian environment a return to literary preoccupations and a retreat into the 
fantasy world of romance are not difﬁ cult to understand. 
 8.4.2   Byzantine Atticism 
 After the excesses of 2nd - century Atticism, the prose writers of late antiquity had 
combined features of classical Attic and higher registers of the Koine into a more - or -
 less sustainable literary standard (see  5.5 ). This sort of style returned to favour fol-
lowing the dark age of the 7th and 8th centuries, and in the absence of a wider reading 
public in the early middle ages, began to inﬂ uence forms of composition that had 
traditionally employed a more popular register (cf.  8.5 below). Collections of martyr-
ologies and saints ’ lives, for example, were transposed into a higher register by the 
civil servant and monk Syme ó n Metaphrast é s ( ‘ Translator ’ , second half of the 10th 
century), and even chronicles came to be written in a more learned form of Greek. 
Henceforth the continuum of normal written Greek ranged from an updated literary 
Koine with Attic - style ﬂ ourishes down to plainer ofﬁ cial and academic varieties, includ-
ing the language of ecclesiastical discourse. Great efforts were made to sustain these 
forms of writing, which remained a powerful symbol of cultural prestige, and after the 
military disasters of the late 11th century we see, as noted, a renewed interest in clas-
sical models, but also in elaborated stylistic and rhetorical ﬂ ourishes that widened still 
further the gap between spoken and literary Greek. 
 It should be emphasized, however, that even the most literary of Byzantine writers 
did not think of themselves as actually writing classical Attic (cf. Renauld  (1920) , 
Dawkins ( 1953 : 256),  Š ev č enko  (1981) ). Those who strove for a  ‘ classical ’  style still 
saw themselves as contributing to a continuous tradition, and so felt free to model 
their usage as much on the practice of the writers of the Second Sophistic, or on that 
of their immediate predecessors, as on that of classical writers  sensu stricto . The 
complex intertextuality of literary work of this period has often been underestimated 
because of the misconception that medieval writers remained in a ﬁ xed linguistic rela-
tionship with models taken from the golden age of Athens. The form of language used, 
for example, in the histories of Anna Komnen é (dealing with the reign of her father 
Al é xios I, 1081 – 1118) or Nik é tas Choni á tes (recounting the period from 1118 up to 
the capture of Constantinople by the fourth crusade in 1204), is best seen, rather like 
that of the original Atticists, as an afﬁ rmation of the continuing importance of a cul-
tural tradition threatened by external forces. It cannot be overemphasized that these 
writers did not merely perpetuate the language and genres of the past in an attitude 
of mindless servility; their approach was motivated by considerations of national pride, 
and their usage involved a consciously creative blending of all the rich and diverse 
materials at their disposal (see chapter  9 ). 
 Accusations of pastiche, therefore, or of failure to write  ‘ correctly ’ in the Attic of 
the 5th century  bc (see, for example, Mango ( 1980 : ch.  13 )), are largely beside the 
point. All Greek literary dialects, beginning with that of the Homeric epic, evolved 

214 Byzantium
 ‘ artiﬁ cially ’ in the hands of later practitioners, since we are dealing in each case not 
with slavish attempts to copy, but with the creative redeployment of learned forms of 
the language in new cultural contexts. Nor should we forget that stylization of diction 
and content along generic lines was a key characteristic of ancient writing; the appar-
ent  ‘ timelessness ’ of much Byzantine work (Mango ( 1980 : 241)) simply shows that its 
authors had also followed the conventions of a medium whose role in the present 
demanded continuity with the practice of the past. It is pure anachronism to blame 
Byzantine writers for facilitating the transmission of a state of mind that spawned the 
now reviled  kathar é vousa (the  ‘ puriﬁ ed ’ written language adopted as a national stand-
ard in the 19th century, cf. Part III, chapter  17 ). 
 It is, none the less, undeniable that Byzantine literary prose, with its recherch é 
vocabulary, elaborated word orders, rhetorical tropes and abundant literary quotation, 
today tends to convey an impression of verbose and clich é d opacity. But Byzantine 
tastes and expectations were very different; in particular, rhetorical manipulation was 
greatly enjoyed, and overt originality (as opposed to inventive redeployment) was less 
highly valued in a cultural context in which the authority of the tradition remained 
paramount. Nor should we forget that the ancient classics, with which Byzantine 
writing is often disparagingly compared, represent the merest fraction of total output, 
surviving in large part precisely because of their exceptional merit. The signiﬁ cant fact 
about Byzantine literature is not that mediocrity predominates (a universal state of 
affairs), but that works of distinction were composed in every period in which intel-
lectual life was able to ﬂ ourish. Taking historiography as our example, we may 
mention Prok ó pios from the time of Ioustinian ó s, Micha é l Psell ó s from the dying years 
of the Macedonian period, Anna Komnen é and Nik é tas Choni á tes from the Komnenian 
period, and Nikeph ó ros Gregor á s and Micha é l Krit ó boulos from the Palaiologan 
Renaissance and the ﬁ rst years of Ottoman rule.  
 8.4.3   The  ﬁ rst  e xperiments with the  v ernacular 
 The learned romances of the Komnenian period were naturally written in a traditional 
form of archaizing Greek and looked back to antiquity for much of their inspiration. 
But the revival of interest in the genre may also owe something to the model provided 
by the  ‘ popular ’  tale of  Digen é s Akr í tes , which celebrates in verse the exploits of a 
Roman hero against the Arabs on the old Euphrates frontier (Alex í ou  (1985) , Beaton 
 (1996) , Ricks  (1990) , Beaton and Ricks  (1993) , Jeffreys  (1998) , and see  12.2.1 ). 
Though six versions survive, the earliest and most important are the vernacular version 
of the Escorial manuscript (E) and the more learned version of the Grottaferrata 
manuscript (G). The text of the former, dating to the end of the 15th century, has 
an episodic character with many serious distortions, including unmetrical lines, that 
require painstaking reconstruction on the part of modern editors. Alex í ou and Ricks 
have none the less argued for an original composition of the 12th century, now lost, 
whose style and content are best reﬂ ected in E, while the more uniﬁ ed account of G 
is seen as the result of transposition into a middle written register in conformity 
with the literary expectations of the period. Others are more cautious (e.g. Jeffreys 
 (1998) ): the issue of priority between vernacular and learned versions is unlikely to be 
settled deﬁ nitively without signiﬁ cant new information, and even if the vernacular 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 215
version does prove to be the earlier, the reliability of a problematical 15th - century 
manuscript as a witness to a supposed 12th - century original cannot be taken for 
granted. 
 If, however, we adopt the existence of such an original as a working hypothesis, 2 
its author may have been a refugee, living in the capital after the battle of Manzikert 
(1071), who wished to preserve examples of oral heroic poetry from his Anatolian 
homeland through a  ‘ literary ’ compilation of thematically linked tales (hence the 
episodic character of E, cf. Beaton  (1996) , Ricks  (1990) ). A possible example of the 
putative ballad - style source material is provided by the surviving  Song of Armo ú res , 
which shares the use of the unrhymed 15 - syllable  ‘ political ’  verse (on which see  12.1.3 ). 
It is proposed that the literarization of this previously oral/popular genre was validated 
through deployment of thematic and structural conventions taken from the hagio-
graphic tradition (cf.  8.5.6 ,  10.3 ), through the incorporation of material familiar from 
the secular novels of antiquity (the renewed interest in which is reﬂ ected in the learned 
romances), and even by a comparison with Homer. Though much necessarily remains 
uncertain, this scenario offers an appealing, and not altogether implausible, reconstruc-
tion of the background to E. 
 The language is certainly consistent with such a view of the poem ’ s genesis, showing 
 inter alia  such oral features as formulaic repetition, preference for parataxis (i.e. avoid-
ance of complex subordination) and the grammatical and lexical heterogeneity typical 
of an oral tradition, including the metrically motivated preservation of variant forms. 
It is also overwhelmingly  ‘ popular ’  in character (Mackridge  (1993a) ) and, as far as we 
can tell, dialectally non - speciﬁ c. The presence of archaizing elements of grammar and 
diction, especially in religious contexts, is also consistent with the proposed supple-
mentation from written sources involved in developing a new literary language out of 
the traditional diction of oral poetry (Ricks ( 1990 : 24)). 
 But even if we assume that this account approximates to the reality of the times, 
the potentially revolutionary use of the vernacular for the literary composition of verse 
romances seems not to have had widespread or immediate impact. Only in the later 
Palaiologan period, in a cultural climate in which western inﬂ uences, affecting  inter 
alia attitudes to language, were pervasive, was the blending of popular and learned 
components reintroduced on a signiﬁ cant scale, speciﬁ cally as the standard form of 
language for ﬁ ctional literature (cf.  8.4.5 ,  12.3.1 and  12.3.4 ). There was, however, a 
brief period of experimentation with the vernacular in court circles prior to the capture 
of Constantinople by the fourth crusade in 1204. This small body of work is themati-
cally unrelated to heroic/romantic ﬁ ction, but again uses the  ‘ popular ’ 15 - syllable verse 
form, presumably in line with its own non - traditional subject matter. It comprises the 
four comic begging poems ( Poems of Poor Pr ó dromos ) often attributed to the court 
poet The ó doros Pr ó dromos (Eideneier  (1991) , Alex í ou  (1994) ), and a composition 
entitled  Verses Written while Held Imprisoned  by the chronicler and imperial civil 
servant Micha é l Glyk á s. The  Poems of Poor Pr ó dromos exhibit a vernacular style that 
incorporates a great deal of contemporary urban vocabulary, but they also include 
elements from the language of the court, and the deliberate juxtaposition of the two 
registers is exploited as a source of humour (cf.  12.2.2 ). Glyk á s ’ usage is also mixed, 
varying according to whether he is making serious pleas to the emperor (in a rhetori-
cally elaborated and learned style), narrating his own racy anecdotes (in a register 

216 Byzantium
perhaps reﬂ ecting the aristocratic vernacular), or quoting and elaborating on prover-
bial words of wisdom (apparently in a more popular variety). 
 The restricted and predominantly comic use of the vernacular at this time indicates 
that a written language based on spoken Greek (even the spoken Greek of the aristoc-
racy) was not yet a serious long - term option. Though there is no reason to doubt that 
the conversational Greek of the upper classes was closer to spoken norms than the 
formal language of the court (cf. Dawkins ( 1953 : 258)), or indeed that the Greek 
written for everyday purposes was signiﬁ cantly less conservative than the conventional 
language of literature and scholarship, the literary exploitation of such varieties could 
only have seemed an amusing distraction to an elite whose education and instincts led 
them to seek validation by reference to tradition, and for whom the capacity to read 
and write the forms of Greek supplied by that tradition remained fundamental to their 
sense of who they were. The beginnings of a readjustment to traditional Byzantine 
perceptions were initiated by the catastrophe of 1204, and promoted thereafter by the 
ever greater inﬂ ux of western ideas and practices occasioned by the decentralization 
of power following the advent of western rule and western settlers in much of the 
former territory of the empire.  
 8.4.4   The  v ernacular  l iterature of the 14 th and 15 th  c enturies 
 Though all serious literature continued to require traditional media within the residual 
Byzantine state, western use of the modern Romance languages for writing, especially 
the writing of romances, was inﬂ uential in the development of a corresponding Greek 
idiom for the kind of ﬁ ctional literature that was once again in demand during the 
14th and 15th centuries (cf.  8.4.5  and  12.3 ). Other vernacular work of this period 
includes a collection of political allegories ostensibly dealing with animals, birds, fruit 
and ﬁ sh, the last two of which are, for the ﬁ rst time, written in prose (Beck ( 1971 : 
173 – 9)). 
 A further consequence of western rule was an extension of the vernacular style to 
compositions with near - contemporary historical content, such as the  Chronicle of the 
Tocco , celebrating the exploits of the ruling dynasty in Epirus, and the  Chronicle of 
the Morea , an early 14th - century account of the capture of Constantinople and the 
subsequent deeds of the de Villehardouin family in the Peloponnese (cf.  12.3.3 ). To 
judge by its anti - Byzantine views, the latter is probably by a writer of French immigrant 
stock who cared little for the Greek literary tradition (cf. Shawcross  (2009) ) and intro-
duced elements of his own spoken Greek, presumably reﬂ ecting the Peloponnesian 
vernacular of the era, into language otherwise reminiscent of traditional forms of 
popular verse. 
 Another, long - term, consequence was the eventual emergence of distinctively dia-
lectal literature in major cultural centres such as Cyprus and Crete (cf.  12.4 , and see 
Part III,  14.2.4 ). There can be no doubt that the spoken Greek of the middle ages, 
particularly among the lower social classes, was already well - diversiﬁ ed by region (cf. 
chapter  11 ). But the decisive break with traditional cultural values occasioned by 
western government brought local varieties into prominence as written (ofﬁ cial and 
literary) media in an unprecedented way, particularly in the two greatest of the Greek 
islands, both of which had already experienced disruption in the continuity of Byzantine 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 217
rule prior to 1204. We therefore have poetry with recognizably Cretan characteristics 
from the latter part of the 14th century, marking the beginning of a literary tradition 
that culminates in the masterpieces of the 16th/17th - century  ‘ Cretan Renaissance ’ . 
From Cyprus there is the translation of a corpus of French legal texts ( Assizes , 14th 
century), a collection of poems in the manner of Petrarch, and prose chronicles by 
Ge ó rgios Boustr ó nios and Le ó ntios Machair á s ( Recital Concerning the Sweet Land of 
Cyprus ) all composed in an early form of Cypriot.  
 8.4.5   The  r omances 
 The period of literary experimentation with spoken registers in the 12th century was 
brief, dying out some twenty years before the capture of Constantinople in 1204. When 
the vernacular reappears in work of the mid - 13th, 14th and 15th centuries, including 
both original romances and tales translated from western originals, it is as an increas-
ingly uniform art - language with little regional variation or local character and a mixed 
(vernacular/learned) appearance. It is immediately clear from the array of variant read-
ings in the surviving manuscripts that the verbal accuracy expected in the copying of 
classical or learned texts did not extend to such work. These linguistic and textual 
issues merit consideration. 
 The story of  L í bistros and Rod á mne  perhaps belongs to the mid - late 13th century 
(Agapit ó s  (2006) , Lend á ri ( 2007 : 65 – 71)), those of  Kall í machos and Chrysorr ó e and 
 B é lthandros and Chrys á ntza to the ﬁ rst half of the 14th century; the  Tale of Achilles 
is now thought to date to the mid - 14th century. Of these original romances, only the 
tale of  Kall í machos and Chrysorr ó e can be attributed with any conﬁ dence to a known 
author, namely Andr ó nikos Palaiol ó gos, nephew of the ﬁ rst Palaiologan emperor, 
Micha é l VIII. They display afﬁ nities with both earlier vernacular work and the learned 
romances of the 12th century, and probably once again represent the work of a literary 
circle closely connected with the imperial court in Constantinople (see Beaton  (1996) ). 
 By contrast, such evidence as we have suggests that the translated romances origi-
nated in Latin - dominated lands. The  War of Troy  (from the  Roman de Troie  by Beno î t 
de St Maure) is perhaps the earliest of these, dating to around 1350. It involves some 
reduction of the original, and also shows evidence of inﬂ uence from the learned verse 
chronicle composed in 12th - century Constantinople by Konstant í nos Manass é s  (8.5.5) . 
 Phl ó rios and Pl á tzia - Phl ó re (translated from a Tuscan version of the French  Fleur et 
Blancheﬂ eur ) is usually assigned to the late 14th/early 15th century, and the translator 
seems most probably to have lived in the French - occupied Peloponnese. Its relatively 
simple language and versiﬁ cation reﬂ ect a popular/vernacular style in some ways remi-
niscent of the  Chronicle of the Morea , but the composition is more accomplished, with 
evidence of borrowing from the didactic poem  Span é as (a 12th - or 13th - century 
transposition into the vernacular of an earlier Byzantine collection of moral precepts). 
 Imp é rios and Margar ó na is more a pr é cis than a translation of its apparent source 
( Pierre de Provence et la Belle Maguelonne ), though the Greek text may well predate 
the earliest surviving French manuscript, dated 1453, and so be based on a version 
now lost. Both this tale and that of  Apoll ó nios of Tyre  (translated from a 14th - century 
Italian prose text some time before 1450) enjoyed great popularity down into the early 
modern period, as evidenced by the publication in Venice of a new Greek translation 

218 Byzantium
of  Apoll ó nios , in rhyming couplets, c.1525, and a rhymed version of  Imp é rios  in 1543. 
The Greek translation of Boccaccio ’ s  Theseid  was also printed in Venice in 1529, 
though the translation itself was most probably carried out in the late 15th/early 16th 
century in Venetian - ruled Crete. In language and style it shows inﬂ uence from the 
earlier romances but also links the 14th/15th - century tradition with the later dialect 
literature of the Cretan Renaissance  (14.2.4) . 
 By contrast, the poem conventionally called  The Old Knight  (the manuscript offers 
no title) belongs to the very different tradition of the Arthurian cycle, a collection of 
stories that normally lacked any Greek connection. This particular tale, however, 
makes reference to  ‘ Palamedes from Babylon ’ , a minor character who ﬁ rst appears in 
the Arthurian tradition in the early 13th century, and this seems to have motivated an 
isolated translation from an otherwise alien corpus. The Greek text is thought to date 
from the early 15th century and to be based on a French or Italian version derived 
from an  ‘ introduction ’  added to the French romance  Guiron de Courtois  (or  Palamedes ) 
in the late 13th century. Its language and style are markedly more archaic than those 
of the other romances, and its allusions to Homer are alien to both the western tradi-
tion and the mainstream Greek romance. 
 The chief issue for historians of the Greek language, however, is that of the origin 
and development of the mixed language of the romances. This is intimately connected 
with the question of why the romances display so many common themes and so much 
common diction, and why there are so many textual discrepancies among different 
versions of the same story. Competing theories are surveyed by Beaton  (1996) , whose 
principal conclusions are summarized here. 
 M. and E. Jeffreys have argued individually (e.g. M. Jeffreys  (1973, 1974, 1987) , 
E. Jeffreys  (1979, 1981) ) and jointly (e.g. 1971, 1979, 1983, 1986) that the textual 
discrepancies are the product of partially oral transmission involving a mind - set on 
the part of copyists that led them to  ‘ improve ’  their material in the manner of the epic 
rhapsodes of pre - classical Greece. According to this approach, the metre and diction 
of written vernacular poetry (though not its subject matter) were modelled on a 
centuries - old oral tradition of narrative verse that had produced a linguistic amalgam 
of archaisms and more contemporary forms. Others have argued that some of the 
poems may be the direct products of such an oral tradition (e.g. Tryp á nis ( 1981 : 
535 – 43), or that different manuscript readings reﬂ ect different performances of orally 
transmitted texts (e.g. Eideneier  (1987) , Smith  (1987) ). By contrast, Spadaro  (1966, 
1975, 1976a, 1976b, 1977, 1978a, 1978b, 1981, 1987)  has sought to explain these 
common features as the product of straightforward plagiarism by literate writers 
lacking creative talent, while van Gemert and Bakker  (1981) , Bakker  (1987) , Bakker 
and van Gemert  (1988) , prefer an account in terms of scribal interpolation and con-
tamination, the occurrence of which is well supported by the conspicuous sharing of 
verbal characteristics by two or more poems in a single manuscript to the exclusion 
of other versions of the same poems. 
 The latter approach is clearly valid in speciﬁ c cases, but the overall similarities of 
structure, theme and diction must ultimately be due to factors of the kind proposed 
by the Jeffreys and Spadaro, namely widespread borrowing, including the incorpora-
tion of traditional Greek elements into the translated romances. But elements that are 
ultimately of oral origin might easily have become the subject of fully literate borrow-

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 219
ing and further development at a later date, as suggested by connections between the 
original romances and poetry of the 12th century, and by the fact that some of the 
 ‘ oral ’  phraseology in the romances appears to be compositionally non - functional or 
even original (Ba ü ml  (1984) ). In all probability, then, the literate authors/translators 
of the romances appealed simultaneously to traditional oral poetry, to learned and 
vernacular literary compositions of the 12th century, and to the contemporary ﬁ ctional 
literature of the west, sometimes developing new turns of phrase of their own that 
were in turn borrowed and adapted in a process leading to the development of a 
 ‘ modern ’ literary vernacular. Furthermore, since these were far from being classic 
works of an established literary canon, their status remained correspondingly low and 
transmission often lay in the hands of copyists who also composed (Eideneier  (1982/3) ), 
thus allowing for easy adaptation and redeployment of other people ’ s material in their 
own work, or of their material in the work of others. 
 From this perspective, the mixed language of the romances may well reﬂ ect a distant 
oral background, but is not itself primarily or exclusively of oral origin. After all, the 
principal initiative for using a written version of the vernacular came  ‘ from above ’ in 
both the 12th and the 14th centuries, and the earliest authors, all members of the 
metropolitan elite, seemingly forged a new literary language with a vernacular base 
out of the heterogeneous spoken and written varieties familiar to them. With the 
passage of time, however, the language of romances became steadily more popular, as 
vernacular forms replaced learned counterparts in the context of the breakdown of 
political and educational institutions in the Greek - speaking world, a process applying 
both to later compositions/translations and to later copies of earlier texts. 
 But this process was never taken to completion in Byzantine lands, where, in the 
wake of Turkish occupation, the survivors instinctively reverted to traditional forms 
of written expression. In Venetian Crete, by contrast, where the evolution of a modern 
written style continued until the island fell to the Turks in 1669, a literary vehicle of 
great range and subtlety was developed out of just such a blend of learned and spoken 
(now speciﬁ cally dialectal) elements, cf.  14.2.4 . But Crete alone could not provide a 
standard for the fragmented Greek world as a whole, and when partial Greek inde-
pendence came in the 19th century, the debate about the form a modern standard 
language should take was undertaken virtually  ab initio (cf. Part III,  15.4 and 
chapter  17 ). 
 8.4.6   Other  v ernacular  m aterial 
 In the later middle ages basic literacy began once again to extend down the social scale 
in a process reﬂ ected in a steady demand for written material of a practical kind. From 
around the beginning of the 14th century, therefore, we have the renewed appearance, 
in both Byzantine and Latin - dominated territories, of homilies, sermons, reference 
works (e.g. home cures, horoscopes and travel guides) and assorted low - level docu-
mentation (e.g. personal letters, local archives, wills and other private legal docu-
ments), all composed in forms of language signiﬁ cantly closer to the spoken norms of 
the age than traditional written varieties hitherto (see, for example, Panayiot á kis 
 (1993) ). Much of this was inevitably produced by people who were unable to write 
in a more learned fashion, but there may also be a few texts written by members of 

220 Byzantium
the elite on practical matters, such as the three letters of Cardinal Bessar í on (1403 – 72) 
discussed in L á mbros  (1908) , which contrast starkly with his Atticizing literary letters 
(see Mohler  (1942) , Trapp  (1993) ). 3 The volume of such vernacular prose material is 
still considerable, though its inherent banality militated against general survival. In 
areas later subject to Ottoman rule the trend to wider literacy was in any case slowed. 
This is, none the less, an important corrective source of information about the state 
of spoken Greek in the period, which has traditionally been based heavily on the evi-
dence of vernacular poetry (cf. Manol é ssou  (2003a) ). 
 8.5   ‘ The Koine ’ in Byzantium 
 8.5.1   The  i nheritance from  a ntiquity 
 The Koine in late antiquity already represented a wide range of written and spoken 
styles whose use passed seamlessly into the early middle ages. At the top end of this 
spectrum was the heavily Atticized Greek used for literary composition and epistolog-
raphy. This shaded downwards into the ofﬁ cial language of imperial and patriarchal 
administration and the more free - ﬂ owing style of academic and theological debate (see 
Hinterberger  (2006) for the notion of a high Byzantine  Schriftkoine ). All of these 
varieties retained an essentially ancient form on the surface, especially in morphology, 
but in different degrees incorporated elements of contemporary syntax and lexicon 
through natural interference with spoken Greek, many of which then became standard 
in the relevant style through imitation and repeated use. 
 In the centre of the linguistic spectrum was the more routine language of day - to - day 
administration, which was syntactically simpler, and, in the interests of wider intelli-
gibility, allowed a greater degree of compromise with spoken Greek. Alongside this 
was the  ‘ literary ’ colloquial based on the practice of the New Testament and other 
early Christian writing, which was much more lively and varied in its usage, and at 
least in the early stages of its development, permitted a fairly direct interface with the 
spoken language. 
 Although the social and regional dialects of spoken Greek in late antiquity were 
also treated as varieties of the Koine in Part I, it is customary, as above, to refer to 
the spoken Greek of the Byzantine period, and to the written varieties eventually based 
on it, as  ‘ the vernacular ’ . Since the elaborated literary language of the elite also stands 
apart from the norms of the written Byzantine Koine, this term ( ‘ the Koine ’ ) will be 
used henceforth to refer speciﬁ cally to the spectrum of established but non - 
belletristic varieties of written Greek that were inherited from the ancient world and 
then adapted and developed in their new medieval context.  
 8.5.2   Academic and  e cclesiastical Greek 
 Alongside the Atticized writings of authors such as Micha é l Psell ó s (see B ö hlig  (1956) 
for discussion), there was an  ‘ academic ’ style that continued the technical, philosophi-
cal and scientiﬁ c Koine of late antiquity. This is well illustrated by the  Bibliotheca of 
the 9th - century patriarch Ph ó tios, certain sections of the private works of the emperor 
Konstant í nos VII in the 10th century (see  8.5.4 and  10.4.1 ), the miscellaneous writings 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 221
of the churchman Eust á thios from the 12th century (though not his historiography), 
and the scholarly works of M á ximos Plano ú des and The ó doros Metochit é s from the 
Palaiologan period. This practical style of the educated elite, employed for discussion 
of matters of a learned nature, shows a steady pattern of retarded compromise with 
the evolution of educated varieties of spoken Greek, as we shall see in chapter  10 . 
 The church hierarchy also employed a plainer continuation of the Koine for most 
purposes, including ecclesiastical administration, since the recherch é classicizing of 
higher forms of secular writing was felt to characterize literature associated with pagan 
antiquity (see Hunger and Kresten  (1981) , Cupane et al.  (1995) , Koder et al.  (2001) 
for a full edition of the documents of the 14th century). A distinctively ecclesiastical 
variant of scholarly Greek also evolved during the middle and late Byzantine periods, 
involving its own characteristic vocabulary, but similarly lacking the more  ‘ elegant ’ 
(i.e. Attic/literary) features of secular belles lettres and the  ‘ livelier ’ (i.e. vernacular) 
elements of popular forms of written Greek. A good example of this style is provided 
by the work of the 14th - century theologian Greg ó rios Palam á s, bishop of Thessaloniki 
and author of the work  Defence of the Holy Hesychasts  (Chr é stou  (1962, 1966, 
1970) ). 
 In the Ottoman period the Greek intelligentsia increasingly identiﬁ ed itself with the 
Orthodox church, which at that time offered the only institutional structures capable 
of sustaining scholarly activity. The language of ecclesiastical administration and the 
language of academic, now primarily theological, discourse therefore developed hand 
in hand, until eventually Greek speakers, ﬁ rst in western and then in Ottoman terri-
tories, began to assume positions of inﬂ uence and responsibility in contemporary poli-
tics and commerce and more generally to broaden their intellectual horizons. Under 
the impact ﬁ rst of the Renaissance (mainly in the west) and then of the European 
Enlightenment, the normal written language of the educated classes started to develop 
in line with the revival of secular learning and the emergence of new perspectives. 
Many elements of contemporary spoken Greek were now absorbed, together with a 
great deal of new terminology calqued on the usage of western languages, especially 
French. By the latter part of the 18th century this had led to the emergence of a 
common rhetorical style among Greek intellectuals which, acrimonious debate not-
withstanding, formed the  de facto  basis for the ofﬁ cial language of the independent 
Greek kingdom in the early 19th century (see chapter  15 ). 
 8.5.3   Ofﬁ cial and  a dministrative Greek 
 The Egyptian papyri peter out in the 8th century in the wake of the Arab conquest 
and inscriptions of all kinds become exceedingly rare after c.600 (see  12.1.2 for the 
major exception). Our knowledge of ofﬁ cial writing in the middle ages therefore 
depends almost exclusively on the survival of manuscript copies of imperial and eccle-
siastical decrees, diplomatic documents and correspondence. Such archive material 
begins to be preserved in ever greater quantity from the latter part of the 10th century 
onwards (see, for example, the collections in Miklosich and M ü ller  (1860 – 90) ), and 
is composed for the most part in a modernized version of the high administrative Koine 
of late antiquity, providing eloquent testimony to the ingrained conservatism of the 
Greek - speaking establishment (see  10.7 ). 

222 Byzantium
 During the period of western rule after 1204, however, and even in the Ottoman 
period, Greek retained something of its status as a diplomatic language in the eastern 
Mediterranean, and the style employed for such purposes by foreigners and Greeks 
operating outside the sphere of the Constantinopolitan establishment was rather closer 
to that of the educated speech of the relevant periods (cf.  15.1 ). 
 8.5.4   Practical  w riting in the  m iddle  p eriod 
 Given the dearth of relevant documentary material, we are obliged, in attempting to 
trace the development of less elevated forms of Greek through the middle Byzantine 
period (i.e. from the 7th to the 12th centuries), to rely on those literary sources which, 
for traditional or generic reasons, permitted rather higher levels of compromise with 
developments in the spoken language than the varieties considered so far. 
 In the secular domain we have a number of texts dealing with practical rather than 
scholarly matters, and designed exclusively to inform rather than to entertain. These 
typically employ a more basic style than that of strictly academic discourse, and espe-
cially when not intended for general publication, provide valuable insights into the 
educated colloquial Greek of their times. Notable in this connection are the conﬁ dential 
works attributed to the emperor Konstant í nos VII Porphyrog é nnetos (905 – 59), which 
originally circulated privately among the members of the imperial household. 4 The  De 
Caeremoniis , for example, is a guide to court ceremonial, while the  De Administrando 
Imperio , composed in the form of an advisory memorandum to his son, Roman ó s II, 
includes much secret information about foreign policy. In the introductions to both 
works, the emperor justiﬁ es, in a literary style, the deliberate avoidance thereafter of 
 ‘ Atticized ’ writing in the interests of clarity and effective instruction (cf.  10.4.1 ). 
Collectively, however, they remain the works of educated men, ranging stylistically 
from a near - academic register, with inﬂ uences from the language of imperial admin-
istration, to a more basic variant that owes much to the conventions of the chrono-
graphic tradition (see  8.5.5  below). 
 There are also military handbooks (the  Corpus Tacticorum ), and a late 11th - century 
piece entitled  Strategik ó n ( ‘ generalship/strategy ’ ) by a man named Kekaum é nos, a 
landowner in northern Greece who belonged to a family of Armenian origin. He may 
or may not be the distinguished Byzantine general Katak á lon Kekaum é nos, but he 
certainly based his manual of advice to his son on personal experience as a military 
commander and provincial governor. Besides military counsel, the book also offers 
guidance on aspects of daily life, and reveals the conservative piety and deep - seated 
suspicion of a landed aristocrat who believed the old order was passing away. He 
professes not to have received a literary education (191), and writes accordingly in a 
simple style (see  10.4.2 ), providing valuable insights into the educated colloquial of 
the period, and revealing a written language poised between the constraints of ancient 
written precedent and contemporary spoken norms.  
 8.5.5   Chronicles 
 Perhaps the most important genre falling within the general category of middle - to -
 popular writing, however, is the world chronicle or chronography, in which secular 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 223
and religious interests combine (cf. Croke  (1990) , Scott  (1990) , and see  10.2 ). Work 
of this kind had its origins in the Hellenistic period, when the clash of Greek, Egyptian 
and Jewish traditions in the great cosmopolitan cities had ﬁ rst highlighted the need 
for the synchronization of different traditions and the establishment of chronological 
priorities. Subsequent Christianization brought an increased sensitivity to such ques-
tions, centring on the origins of particular beliefs and principles of behaviour. But once 
the Christian Greco - Roman world, including its classical past and traditional mythol-
ogy, had been  ‘ successfully ’ synchronized with the Hebrew world of the Old Testament, 
the focus was transferred, towards the end of the 3rd century, to the construction of 
an absolute chronology of  ‘ events ’ , from the creation, via the incarnation, to the 
present, and the development of a framework for the calculation of future events 
prophesied in scripture (above all the second coming and the end of the world). Many 
of the great Christian writers of the Roman imperial period (e.g. Clement, Origen and 
Eusebius) played an important role in these enterprises, and by the 6th century a large 
body of relevant work had been compiled, which then served as source material for 
the eclectic chronographers of the subsequent era. 
 We should note at the outset that chronicles and histories had fundamentally dif-
ferent purposes. Narrative history in the classical tradition, composed in an Atticizing 
style and carefully distinguishing  ‘ history ’  from  ‘ myth ’ , dealt with designated periods 
in a spirit of enquiry, and was intended to provide knowledge and recreation for an 
educated elite while simultaneously praising the achievements of emperors. The last 
example before the Byzantine dark age is the history of the reign of the emperor 
Maur í kios (582 – 602) by Theoph ý laktos Simok á ttes. Chronicles on the other hand had 
universal scope, treated the creation and the wars of Ioustinian ó s alike as  ‘ events ’ in 
time, and were intended to serve as works of reference for literate Christians of all 
ranks. In general they do little more than list occurrences by year, although religious 
and political polemic became an established component of the tradition. 
 This rather sharp distinction became somewhat blurred during the Iconoclastic 
period, when the widespread collapse of urban civilization occasioned by the Arab 
conquests led to the demise of narrative history and other scholarly activity, and 
traditionally popular forms of writing were raised stylistically as the reading public 
became increasingly restricted. Consequently, even as times improved, a rather high 
chronographic style prevailed, so that Micha é l Psell ó s, for example, was able to call 
his highly literary biographical memoirs of the emperors and empresses from 976 to 
1078 a  Chronograph í a  (perhaps in part because it lacked the distanced formality of 
the Thucydidean tradition). But connected historical narratives dealing with speciﬁ c 
periods were again attempted from the time of the patriarch Nikeph ó ros (served 
806 – 15), with a true revival of historiography in the 10th century under the patronage 
of Konstant í nos VII (e.g. the  History of the Emperors  by Ios é ph Gen é sios, covering 
the years 813 – 86, or the anonymous continuation of Theoph á nes ’ chronicle to 961). 
Historical writing in the classical tradition, however, resumed in earnest with Micha é l 
Attalei á tes (c.1028 – c.1085), and, as noted, such work continued into the age of the 
Palaiol ó goi. 
 The early Byzantine chronicles reﬂ ect an emerging interpretation of history as the 
working out of God ’ s plan for mankind, in which the emperor is seen as the instru-
ment of divine will, and the empire as an earthly reﬂ ection of the divine kingdom (a 

224 Byzantium
Hellenistic conceit ﬁ rst adapted to the Christian/Roman context by Eusebius). There 
is no good reason to think, as was often supposed in the past, that they were typically 
compiled by poorly educated provincial monks in an effort to present a Christian view 
of world history to the rural masses (cf. Beck ( 1965 : 188 – 97), Mango ( 1980 : 189 – 200) 
for discussion of this important point). Though they may sometimes seem naive and 
uncritical to a modern reader (Nicol ( 1991 : 77)), many were put together by high -
 ranking ofﬁ cials (some of whom were also, or later became, monks), and they reﬂ ect, 
in the context of a conceptual framework of considerable sophistication and complex-
ity, the same intellectual preconceptions and preoccupations as seen in contemporary 
histories (see, for example, the papers in Jeffreys et al.  (1990) ). As practical works of 
reference, however, they reﬂ ect, at least in the earlier periods, a range of unpretentious 
styles directly related to the diverse sources from which the material was typically 
excerpted, particularly those of day - to - day administration and the popular Christian 
tradition. 
 Important examples from the early and middle Byzantine periods include the work 
of the 6th - century Syrian Io á nnes Mal á las, dealing with the period from the creation 
to 565 ( malal is Syriac for 
  [ ‘ ritor]  ‘ orator/sophist ’ , i.e. someone with a good 
education); the anonymous 7th - century  Paschal Chronicle , designed to provide 
an accurate framework for calculating the dates of Easter and other Christian festivals 
by setting out events from the creation down to 629; the continuation of the work 
of Ge ó rgios S ý nkellos (monk and secretary to the patriarch), compiled by the 
Constantinopolitan aristocrat (later monk) Theoph á nes in the early 9th century, and 
covering the period 284 – 81; the mid 9th - century  Chronicle of Ge ó rgios Monach ó s 
( ‘ Monk ’ ), covering the creation down to 842 (later extended to 948); the various 
versions of the 10th - century work most frequently attributed to Syme ó n Logoth é tes 
( ‘ Chancellor ’ , conceivably the same man who transposed the saints ’ lives into  ‘ better ’ 
Greek), which provide a further extension down to 948 of an earlier chronicle 
that had originally covered the period from Adam to 714, but had already been 
extended to 842 (Scott ( 1990 : 46 – 7)); and ﬁ nally, in the 11th century, the chronicle/
history of Io á nnes Skyl í tzes, covering the years 811 – 1057 (later extended to 1079), 
and the chronicle of Ge ó rgios Kedren ó s, dealing with the period from the creation 
to 1057. 
 As expected, the linguistic register of such work rose as the literate population 
contracted, and the chronographic style, originally quite closely related to the language 
of day - to - day administration (as seen most clearly in Mal á las, for example), begins to 
merge with that of academic discourse from the 10th century onwards. Theoph á nes, 
working in the ﬁ nal years of Iconoclasm, is an important transitional ﬁ gure in this 
development. In the later Byzantine period, therefore, we have the rather scholarly 
work of Io á nnes Zonar á s, a 12th - century court ofﬁ cial, who again became a monk in 
later life. This covers the years from the creation to 1118, and uses many sources that 
are now lost. There is also the less impressive, though very popular, verse chronicle 
entitled  S ý nopsis Istorik é by the government ofﬁ cial Konstant í nos Manass é s (who was 
also the author of one of the  ‘ learned ’ verse romances mentioned above), dealing with 
the same period, but presumably intended to entertain as much as to inform the 
growing reading public of the period. Both suggest an elaborated middle style, in line 
with the conventions of the period, though Zonar á s also reﬂ ects the more Atticized 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 225
style of some of his sources (e.g. in his paraphrase of Cassius Dio in books 7 – 9, dealing 
with the period from the landing of Aeneas in Italy to 146  bc ). 
 Subsequent chronographic work, however, suffered a marked decline in quality, a 
process that can perhaps be explained by the strong revival of  ‘ literary ’ historiography 
in the Palaiologan period, as represented by the works of writers such as Ge ó rgios 
Akropol í tes (1217 – 82), Nikeph ó ros Gregor á s (1290 – 1360), Io á nnes VI Kantakouzen ó s 
(died 1382), ?Micha é l Do ú kas (c.1400 – c.1470) and Micha é l Krit ó boulos (c.1400 – post 
1467). None the less, chronicles continued to be written after the fall of Constantinople, 
and such works supplied the basic  ‘ historical ’ reading matter for the bulk of the Greek 
people until the beginnings of the modern era. Their still essentially medieval world 
view was severely limited by the superﬁ ciality of much of the ancient research on which 
the tradition was based, but they did help to foster an attitude of unquestioning piety 
that was actively promoted by the church in the Ottoman period (Mango ( 1980 : 
199 – 200)). 
 8.5.6   Christian  e xegetical  l iterature and  h agiography 
 The linguistic precedent provided by the Septuagint and the New Testament, backed 
up by the works of the early church fathers, offered a continuing validation for the-
matically related compositions in a basic style aimed at the still quite extensive reading 
public of late antiquity and the early middle ages. 
 Some of this popular Christian work was strictly exegetical in character, and was 
often originally delivered in the form of sermons composed to explain the mysteries 
to the masses who had begun to ﬂ ock to the churches with the establishment of 
Christianity as the ofﬁ cial religion of the Roman state. Leading ﬁ gures such as Cyril 
of Jerusalem and John Chrysostom played a central role in this enterprise, and collec-
tions of their works were circulated widely in a style which, while retaining a biblical 
feel, was clearly designed to be accessible. An important example of work in this tradi-
tion from the Iconoclastic period is the  Ecclesiastical History and Mystical Contemplation 
of St German ó s, patriarch of Constantinople from 715 to 730 (Meyendorff  (1984) ), 
which offers an allegorical account of the Orthodox liturgy which soon assumed near -
 deﬁ nitive status. Its language remains close to that of the scriptures, and indeed the 
author quotes widely from them, though it has been updated in a number of minor 
details and displays evidence of the author ’ s considerable learning (see  10.3.2 ). 
 Hagiographic works (cf.  10.3.1 ) also continued to be composed in a basic written 
style, and it should be noted that many were still being written by leading members 
of the church hierarchy in the early Byzantine period. A major example is provided by 
the  Life of St John the Almsgiver, patriarch of Alexandria, composed by his friend and 
fellow - Cypriot Le ó ntios, bishop of Ne á polis (c.590 – c.650). This presents an attractive 
picture of the ﬂ amboyant churchman on his daily rounds, protecting refugees from the 
Persian invasion of Syria against unscrupulous predators and founding hospitals and 
poor - houses for their long - term safety. 
 Other works of this kind were written by educated monks, including the collection 
of edifying tales in the  Leim ó n ( Spiritual Meadow ) of Io á nnes M ó schos (c.550 – 619), 
and the lives of the Palestinian saints by K ý rillos of Skyth ó polis (c.524 – c.558). Once 
again, it should not be assumed that the use of a more popular form of Greek at this 

226 Byzantium
time reﬂ ects anything other than a desire to communicate widely. M ó schos, for 
example, travelled with Sophr ó nios, later patriarch of Jerusalem, before his death in 
Rome in 619, while many other  ‘ monkish ’ writers in the genre were in fact employed 
in the church administration or had enjoyed high - ranking civil - service careers before 
their retirement from the world. 
 During the middle Byzantine period, as noted, many lives were transposed into a 
higher style in order to bring them into line with the expectations of the now small 
and exclusively well - educated reading public that survived in the cities. Thereafter, the 
Greek of this tradition tends to merge with that of the previously more elaborated 
ecclesiastical style to form a single spectrum (cf. the similar approximation of the 
chronographic and academic varieties in the same period). 
 The hagiographic tradition continued into the 11th century, when a steep decline 
set in reﬂ ecting the greater sophistication of an age in which secular scholarship was 
reviving strongly. The exegetical tradition, however, underwent something of a revival 
from the latter half of the 15th century, when the ﬁ rst examples of homiletic in a truly 
modern vernacular style, composed by the clergyman Nathana é l (or Ne í los) B é rtos, 
make their appearance in lands still ruled by western powers, 5 where the successful 
use of contemporary Romance by Catholic priests had doubtless made a powerful 
impression on their Orthodox counterparts (see Panayiot á kis ( 1993 : 255 – 6), Schartau 
( 1974 : 11 – 85, 1976: 70 – 5)). 
 8.5.7   A  n ew  w ritten  s tandard in the  l ater  e mpire 
 Taking a general overview of the evolving Koine of the later middle ages, it is perhaps 
best to think in terms of the steady evolution, from heterogeneous sources, of a single 
 ‘ standard language ’ for educated discourse. This employed classical morphology 
overall, but had eliminated certain classical categories, and could be stylistically varied 
by the adoption or avoidance of particular sets of differential  ‘ markers ’  (mainly lexical 
and phraseological). Increasingly, we see in such middle - register writing the crystalliza-
tion of a common syntactic framework, deﬁ ned more and more for such fundamental 
properties as word order and pronoun placement by the norms of the modern lan-
guage, but still requiring the mechanical addition and/or substitution of learned voca-
bulary items, and the use, in varying degrees, of traditionally or generically established 
realizations of particular construction types. 
 In this connection, we should note especially the regular use of the dative to mark 
the indirect object and the instrument, the occasional appearance of optatives in hypo-
thetical conditionals and other prospective subordinate clauses, the use of the accusa-
tive and inﬁ nitive construction and especially the articular inﬁ nitive after prepositions, 
and the retention of the full array of inﬂ ected participles, though even these, when not 
nominalized, appear mainly in the nominative (subject - orientated adjuncts) or the 
genitive (the traditional absolute construction). Only the highest literary varieties 
deviate markedly from this norm through a more thoroughgoing adherence to classical 
diction and rules of syntax, thus falling outside the boundaries of the late medieval 
Koine. 
 From the Komnenian period onwards, therefore, between the extremes of Atticized 
belles lettres and vernacular experimentation, a partially homogenized middle range 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 227
of written styles, drawing on both secular and religious traditions, continued to be 
used whenever communication was felt to be more important than a show of learning 
(cf. Browning  (1978) ). Many important writers of the period, including The ó doros 
Pr ó dromos, Micha é l Glyk á s, Konstant í nos Manass é s and Io á nnes Tz é tzes, used both 
high and middle styles (and in some cases also the vernacular) in their literary and 
scholarly output, the choice determined in part by their attitude and intended audience, 
in part by their subject matter. 
 The standard character of this register is reﬂ ected directly in the continued practice 
of transposition, seen previously in the work of Syme ó n Metaphrast é s, who applied 
the practice  ‘ upwards ’  to the traditionally low - brow language of saints ’ lives, appar-
ently aiming for a minimally Atticized but still non - vernacular variety with mainly 
classical morphology but simpliﬁ ed (albeit archaizing) syntax and non - recherch é  (if 
also traditional) vocabulary. In the Palaiologan period, however, we also ﬁ nd examples 
of transposition  ‘ down ’  from classicizing Greek, as (probably) in the moralizing poem 
 Span é as , of which there is also a truly vernacular version (cf. Spadaro  (1982 – 3) ), and 
in the metaphrases of literary histories, in which the transposers seem to have aimed 
for the educated idiom of the urban middle class, a style which, unsurprisingly, has 
much in common with the language of the chronographic tradition in its later mani-
festations (see  10.5 ). 
 8.6   The Balkan  Sprachbund : Future Formations 
 No discussion of Greek in the middle ages would be complete without mentioning the 
convergence phenomena that are exhibited by the languages of the Balkans and whose 
origins go back to the Byzantine political and cultural domination of the region from 
the 9th century onwards. 
 Such convergence occurs naturally when bi - or multi - lingualism is widespread in a 
given region, and if that contact is prolonged, and the social networks that bind the 
speakers of the different languages are sufﬁ ciently tight, a set of characteristic areal 
phenomena may eventually emerge, irrespective of genetic relationships. The Balkans 
provide one of the most famous examples of this phenomenon, and the discipline of 
Balkan linguistics has been developed to try to address the problems raised (see e.g. 
Schaller  (1975) , Solta  (1980) , Joseph  (1983) , Friedman  (2000) , Tomi č   (2006) ). 
 The languages centrally involved in the Balkan  Sprachbund are Greek, Albanian, 
Romanian, Serbian, Bulgarian and Macedonian (i.e. the Slavic language closely related 
to Bulgarian which is spoken in the northern part of ancient Macedonia, formerly a 
republic within Yugoslavia). All are spoken in lands which were either once adminis-
tered by Constantinople or at least adjacent to former Byzantine territory, and their 
speakers were all under long - term Byzantine cultural inﬂ uence, particularly that of the 
Orthodox church. It is no accident that Croatian, despite its near identity with Serbian 
in most other respects, is excluded from the group, since the bulk of Croatia beyond 
southern Dalmatia (Ragusa/Dubrovnik) was never a Byzantine possession. 
 Sandfeld  (1930) argued on the basis of the spatial extension of these features and 
their relative order of acquisition that Greek was the ultimate source of most of the 
innovations, though this conclusion has not commanded universal assent. The obvious 

228 Byzantium
setting for the beginning of the process is the middle Byzantine period, after the loss 
of North Africa and the Middle East, when relations with the re - emerging west were 
tentative and sometimes hostile, and the main thrust of Byzantine foreign policy and 
missionary activity was redirected northwards through the Balkans, towards the Black 
Sea and to Russia. And as with many such cultural inﬂ uences, it appears to have con-
tinued for many centuries, even after the collapse of Byzantine power and the fall of 
Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks. Accordingly, local varieties of Turkish appear 
to be involved in some of the later developments. 
 Among the syntactic features typically discussed are two which exclude Greek and 
show that Sandfeld ’ s thesis cannot be the whole story: 
 (1)  (a)  Postposed deﬁ niteness marking (including sufﬁ xation), though with each 
language using an indigenous morpheme/ending.  
 (b)  The numerals 11 to 19 formed to the pattern  ‘ one - upon - ten ’ , etc.  
 The ﬁ rst is a feature of Albanian, Bulgarian/Macedonian (the other Slavic languages 
lack an article) and Romanian. Its source remains disputed, though the sufﬁ xation of 
a deﬁ niteness marker to object nominals in Turkish is advocated by some and the 
postposed article of Romanian by others. 6 The second unites the Slavic languages, 
Albanian and Romanian, but since the formation is shared by Russian outside the 
Balkan area (but not, for example, by extra - Balkan Romance) a Slavic source seems 
most likely. 
 There are, however, other characteristics which support the view that Greek played 
a central role in the convergence process. The most important of these is the tendency 
for inﬁ nitival complements to control verbs to be replaced by ﬁ nite clauses with subjunc-
tive verb forms. This had its origins in the Hellenistic Koine, as we have seen, and con-
tinued to spread thereafter (cf. chapter  11 for the Byzantine developments), to the point 
where the inﬁ nitive now survives only vestigially in the perfect system. The phenomenon 
also spread through Macedonian and Bulgarian, but it peters out in areas more remote 
from Greek - speaking populations. The southern dialects of Albanian, for example, use 
the ﬁ nite construction, but the northern dialects have kept their inﬁ nitives. Similarly, 
Serbian follows the areal pattern, but Croatian, like the rest of Slavonic outside the 
Balkans, continues to use inﬁ nitives. Romanian is interesting in that, though the spoken 
language also follows the areal pattern, the more conservative written form of the lan-
guage retains the usual inﬁ nitival constructions of Romance. It has been objected that 
non - Balkan Romance and much of Germanic also employ such ﬁ nite complements with 
control verbs when the subjects of the main and subordinate clauses are referentially 
distinct. But the key innovation is the use of ﬁ nite complements when the subjects are 
identical, and this is a peculiarly Balkan feature for the periods under investigation. 
 A particularly important example of inﬁ nitival replacement is provided by the con-
structions used to express futurity. Beginning in the 11th century, 
 [ ' θ elo]  ‘ I wish ’ 
began to replace 
  [ ' exo], lit.  ‘ I have ’ , as the regular future auxiliary with an inﬁ ni-
tival complement. This periphrasis, however, also retained its volitional use, and in 
the middle Byzantine period was used alongside both 
 [ ' θ elo na]   +  subjunctive 
to mean  ‘ wish ’ and bare 
 [na] (
   [ ' ina]  ‘ that ’ )   +  subjunctive to mean  ‘ will ’ . Starting 
in the 14th century, however, at least some present - tense forms of 
 [ ' θ elo] 

Greek in the Byzantine Empire 229
underwent an optional phonological reduction in the volitional construction, with 3sg 
 [ θ e] eventually being generalized to all persons and numbers (thus effectively becom-
ing an uninﬂ ected volitional particle; see Joseph ( 1990 : chs. 5, 9), Pappas  (1999) , 
Pappas and Joseph  (2001) , Joseph and Pappas  (2002) , and Mark ó poulos  (2009)  for 
a range of views about the origins of    [ θ e] and the development of future periphrases). 
Both the full - form 
 [ ' θ elo na] and the reduced 
 [ θ e na] constructions then 
began to be used also as futures, and in the case of the latter this use eventually became 
the dominant one. It is already widespread in this function, alongside the inﬁ nitival 
construction, in Cretan Renaissance literature (see Holton  (1993) ; variants such as 
 [ θ ena], 
 [ θ ana] and even 
 [ θ ela] are also attested dialectally and in folk 
songs). 
 [ θ e na] was eventually simpliﬁ ed to 
 [ θ a], 7 and this is already estab-
lished as one form of the future in Cretan Renaissance comedy (though not yet in more 
 ‘ serious ’  genres), where it outnumbers examples of both 
 [ ' θ elo]   +  inﬁ nitive and 
 [ ' θ e na]   +  subjunctive. The distinction between the full - form and the reduced -
 form construction was ﬁ nally polarized to distinguish the volitional from the future, 
and 
 [ θ a] is now the standard marker of futurity in modern Greek (cf.  11.3 – 4). 
 Signiﬁ cantly, while non - Balkan Romance and northern Albanian dialects form 
futures with  ‘ have ’ , just like post - classical and early medieval Greek and Latin, 
Romanian, the southern Albanian dialects, Macedonian and Bulgarian all form their 
futures with a reduced and uninﬂ ected auxiliary element derived from the verb  ‘ wish ’ , 
exactly like Greek in the later medieval and modern periods. This is partly true also 
of Serbian, but with the difference that the auxiliary is inﬂ ected for person. There is 
some reason, then, to believe that Greek may have been the source of this key areal 
characteristic on both chronological and geographical grounds, since the emergence of 
such an uninﬂ ected clitic auxiliary in the later middle ages (from the 14th century 
onwards) is unique to Greek within the Balkan territories of the former Byzantine 
empire. 
 8.7   Conclusion 
 In the Byzantine period the higher written forms of Greek, comprising both classicizing 
and more practical styles, were the only varieties to achieve  ‘ standard ’ status, because 
they were the only varieties associated with high culture, education and the ofﬁ cial 
functions of the state and its institutions. For the most part, naturally acquired varieties 
of the spoken language, even those used by the elite, were not considered worth cul-
tivating as literary or ofﬁ cial media. 
 But Greek speakers who were at all literate were also necessarily diglossic in some 
degree, because literacy could only be acquired through the study of learned written 
forms distinct from the vernacular. And since the norms and conventions of written 
Greek were primarily rooted in tradition and not in native linguistic competence, it 
was inevitable that all forms of writing, even those based on some form of the spoken 
language, would show evidence of inconsistency and variation. First and foremost, the 
spoken language necessarily interfered with composition in even the highest styles of 
writing, and even the best - educated had to work hard to maintain the various norms 
associated with speciﬁ c genres in speciﬁ c periods (which in any case were themselves 

230 Byzantium
the hybrid creations of a long tradition). But writing in  ‘ vernacular ’  Greek was cor-
respondingly affected by the acquisition of literacy, through interference with the 
linguistic and textual conventions associated with  ‘ higher ’ genres; and in this case the 
tendency to variation was massively reinforced by the fact that there was no prior 
tradition to conform to. 
 It is therefore imperative to keep in mind that  ‘ Greek ’ in the middle ages represents 
a broad continuum between two extremes ( ‘ classicizing/literary ’  and  ‘ popular/spoken ’ ), 
a situation reﬂ ected directly in the many different written registers that are attested, 
and which remain our only source of information, even for spoken Greek. Lack of 
consistency in writing at all levels is a natural by - product of such diglossia, and it 
remains a characteristic feature of the medieval Koine even as this begins to develop 
into a more uniform, multi - purpose variety in the later Byzantine period. It also 
remains characteristic of vernacular writing in post - Byzantine times, as we shall see, 
at least until such time as the non - linguistic attributes of a standard language came to 
be associated with written forms linked to natively acquired spoken varieties. See 
Manol é ssou  (2008) and Toufex í s  (2008)  for full discussion of these important issues 
and their implications.  
 Notes 
1  Treadgold ( 1997 : 427 – 8) argues for re - Hellenization through forced migration from Asia 
Minor in the early 9th century, though the reality of the situation is far from clear.  
2  We may note here a mention of  ‘ Digenen ’ in a Dutch text of the 13th century (M. Janssen, 
personal communication), which conﬁ rms that at least some version of this story had by 
then been widely disseminated.  
3  There is a distinct possibility that the three non - literary letters are forgeries, however, given 
the contrast between Bessar í on ’ s high level of learning and the rather clumsy form of Greek 
employed in these documents.  
4  Most of these were in fact commissioned rather than written by him and embrace a range 
of source material and styles (see  Š ev č enko  (1992) ). 
5  B é rtos lived in both Crete and Rhodes.  
6  In Turkish the sufﬁ x in question is in fact an object marker for deﬁ nite nouns, and so hardly 
qualiﬁ es as an article. Romanian may be the better option in that Latin allowed the demon-
strative  ille (the principal source of the Romance article) to precede or follow modiﬁ ed nouns, 
with proto - Romanian apparently generalizing the latter.  
7  Presumably via assimilation    >  [ θ a na] and apocope of the second [a] before verb forms 
beginning with a vowel, followed by generalization of [ θ a(n)] and loss of ﬁ nal [n]. 
 

9
 Byzantine Belles Lettres  
 
 9.1   Introduction 
 Throughout the Byzantine era educated writers were imbued with a classicizing spirit, 
and though the standard for ofﬁ cial documents and scholarly discourse remained a 
high Koine, literary writers were always eager to display their ancient learning in more 
ﬂ amboyant ways when circumstances permitted. This retrospection was fostered in the 
middle period by a developing pride in the continuity of their culture, which in turn 
promoted a sense of otherness vis - à - vis  ‘ barbarian ’ peoples and lent to the language 
of the writers, scholars and saints in the unbroken chain linking the ancient to the 
medieval world a near - sacred authority. 
 The most obvious consequence of this continuing commitment to classical ideals is 
that the language of the historian Prok ó pios, writing in the reign of Ioustinian ó s in 
the 6th century, can in some respects be hard to distinguish from that of Micha é l 
Krit ó boulos, writing of the sack of Constantinople in the 15th. We should not, 
however, overlook the very considerable shift of outlook between the sophistication 
of late antiquity and the rather narrow piety of the early medieval period, or forget 
that, despite the re - emergence of a more inquisitive scholarly outlook in the 11th 
century, much of the literary composition of the later part of the middle Byzantine 
period was less strictly  ‘ classical ’ in style (despite its liberal use of Attic phraseology) 
than that of the Palaiologan period. This resurgence of classical learning eventually 
(and thanks in part to the input of Byzantine refugees) led to the Renaissance in Italy, 
but it was never carried through to its conclusion in Byzantine lands, despite the 
remarkable artistic achievements of the Palaiologan period, because of the empire ’ s 
desperately reduced circumstances after 1204 and the subsequent loss of the little that 
remained to the Ottoman Turks. 
 In the sections below, the literary styles of authors belonging to the three major 
periods of Byzantine history are exempliﬁ ed and analysed.  
 9.2   The Early Period: Prok ó pios (First Half of the 6th Century) 
 Prok ó pios was a staff ofﬁ cer to Ioustinian ó s ’ general Belis á rios, and his history of the 
wars of reconquest is a vivid eye - witness account modelled largely on Thucydides 
(speeches and all), but with many features of Herodotean style and vocabulary. He 
was also a ﬁ ne practical linguist, with a working knowledge of Latin, Syriac, Gothic, 
Armenian and Persian, and his account of the peoples of the empire and their enemies 

232 Byzantium
constitutes a uniquely important source for the history of the period. Though he also 
wrote a monograph about the buildings which Ioustinian ó s had constructed through-
out the empire, including the new Hag í a Soph í a, he is perhaps best known for his 
 Secret History,  which ﬂ atly contradicts his public view of Ioustinian ó s, and contains 
much vicious invective against the emperor ’ s wife Theod ó ra. See Haury  (1905 – 13) , 
Hunger ( 1978 : I, 291 – 300), Cameron  (1985) , Treadgold  (2007)  for further back-
ground to the man and his work. 
 The piece that follows comes from the  History,  and explains how the secret of silk 
production, a major source of future Byzantine prosperity, was ﬁ rst brought to 
Constantinople: 1 
 (1)  

Byzantine Belles Lettres 233
 ‘ Around this time some of the monks came from India ( in fact Sogdiana, where Nestorian 
missionaries were active )  … and, having presented themselves before the emperor, prom-
ised to manage the silk business so that the Romans need no longer purchase this com-
modity from their enemies the Persians, or from any other race  … When the emperor 
interrogated them persistently and inquired whether their story was true, the monks 
replied that certain worms were the makers of silk  … but that it was impossible to bring 
them there alive;  … the offspring of these worms, however, were eggs produced by each 
in countless numbers  … After they had spoken in this way the emperor promised to reward 
the men with great beneﬁ ts and urged them to conﬁ rm their story in practice  … They then 
 … brought the eggs to Constantinople, and having effected their transformation  … into 
worms, fed them on mulberry leaves and thus established the production of silk in Roman 
lands for the future. ’ 
 Apart from the typically Herodotean word order in 
 [ ' ton dines 
mona ' xon]  ‘ some of the monks ’ and similar phrases in which a pronoun is sandwiched, 
the language is very largely based on the thousand - year - old literary Greek of classical 
Athens, with even the Thucydidean 
 [es] for 
 [is]  ‘ (in)to ’ . The contrast with contem-
porary private papyrus letters reﬂ ecting the basic spoken language of Egypt could not be 
starker. Over and above the wholly classical lexicon and morphology, we may note the 
frequent use of verb - ﬁ nal word order; the free use of participles and inﬁ nitives in all their 
classical functions, including the accusative and inﬁ nitive to mark the reported speech 
after 
 [ ' efaskon]  ‘ they said ’ ; the routine, non - emphatic preposing of possessive 
genitives; the appearance of a neuter plural adjective (
 [a ' mixana]  ‘ impossible ’ ) 
in impersonal constructions where logically the singular would be expected (a favourite 
Thucydidean trait); and the use of the optative 
 [ ' ii] in the past - time context of the 
indirect question after 
 [anapyn θ ano ' meno]  ‘ inquiring ’ . 
 9.3  The Middle Period: Micha é l Psell ó s (1018 – 78 or 1096) 
 Micha é l Psell ó s served the empire both as an administrative ofﬁ cer and as a minister, 
and was also appointed professor of philosophy in the imperial university, a post that 
was re - established at his instigation. 
 Among his voluminous writings the  Chronograph í a , in which he recounts the 
history of his time in the form of vivid memoirs and character sketches, is perhaps the 
most famous (see Renauld  (1926 – 8) , Sewter  (1966) , Hunger ( 1978 : I, 372 – 81), Wilson 
( 1983 : 156 – 66), Pietsch  (2005) ). This work represents one of the high points of 
Byzantine prose writing, and the author ’ s personal involvement in the events described 
imparts an unusual degree of vitality to the narrative. In line with what was said above 
( (8.4.2) his Atticized high style comprises not only strictly classical forms and construc-
tions but also many elements of Hellenistic or Roman origin beside the tangled 
Byzantine word orders and over - complex phrases encouraged by the rhetorical bias of 
the higher education system. 
 Though he generally sticks to classical rules of morphology and syntax, including 
a particular liking for the dual, his work also displays evidence of development in the 
formation and use of some elements of classical Greek that had long been abandoned 
in the spoken language. The irregular athematic verbs with 1sg present indicative in 

234 Byzantium
 - m i [ - mi], for example, show a markedly reduced and simpliﬁ ed paradigm, while the 
perfect is often employed as a simple substitute for the aorist, and the pluperfect, widely 
replaced by periphrases with  ‘ be ’  +  aorist participle by the 6th century, normally lacks 
its classical augment (if the tradition is to be trusted). He also employs a number of 
characteristic Byzantinisms that were well established through classroom teaching, 
such as the free use of the optative as a  ‘ marked ’  variant of the subjunctive even in 
non - past contexts (much as  ‘ may ’  and  ‘ might ’ are now used almost interchangeably 
by most speakers of English; see also  10.4.1 ). An example occurs at the beginning of 
chapter 66 of the  Chronograph í a,  where Psell ó s describes how the empress Zo é made 
a  ‘ living ’  icon of Christ: 2 
 (2)  
 
 ‘ Certainly, having given a more accurate shape to  “ her ” Jesus, so to speak, and embel-
lished it with brighter materials, she made the icon almost breathe. ’ 
 Since the optative appears in an authorial parenthesis, it cannot be justiﬁ ed by the rules 
of classical syntax. Indeed, the normal classical construction uses an inﬁ nitive (
 
[os i ' pin]  ‘ so to - say ’ ), so the construction has apparently been inﬂ uenced by contempo-
rary spoken usage, in which the subjunctive had already replaced the inﬁ nitive in many 
functions, but with the choice of the optative giving a more  ‘ learned ’ gloss. 
 The following extract, describing the uprising against the emperor Micha é l V 
Kalaph á tes ( ‘ Caulker ’ , his father ’ s trade), gives a typical sample of Psell ó s ’ writing. 
Micha é l had been adopted by the empress Zo é (cf. above), who was the widow of his 
predecessor, but when, having come to the throne in 1041, he tried to have her shut 
away in a convent, the people deposed him: 
 (3) 
 

Byzantine Belles Lettres 235
 ‘ As if sharing in some greater inspiration, they seemed no longer to be in their former 
state of mind; their running was more frantic and their hands stronger, their glances 
ﬁ ery and impassioned, and their sinews more powerful. Not one of the whole mass of 
people (?would have) wished in any way to revert to more digniﬁ ed behaviour or to 
depart from his intentions, nor would any have been on the side of a man who so advised 
them. 
 Having resolved ﬁ rst to march against the emperor ’ s family and to tear down their 
grand and over - sized houses, they stuck to their task and made a general attack. Everything 
was razed to the ground, some parts of buildings becoming covered with debris, others 
exposed to the heavens; thus roofs falling to the ground were covered over, basements 
erupting from the earth were exposed, as if the soil were unloading the burden of them 
and casting away the foundations. ’ 
 Most of the vocabulary here is familiar from classical Attic writers, and 
 
[ ' ksimbas]  ‘ all ’ and 
  [ ' kriton]  ‘ greater ’ , are speciﬁ cally Attic forms (with  x - [ks - ] 
for regular  s - [s - ] and  - t t -  [ - tt - ] for regular  - s s - [ - ss - ] respectively). But faithful copying 
of the style of any one ancient model was not the objective, as shown most clearly by 
the density of unusual vocabulary (e.g. in the ﬁ rst paragraph, the use of the passive 
  [o ' rome]  ‘ I am seen ’ , in the sense  ‘ seem ’ ; 
 [ero ' menos]  ‘ healthy, vigor-
ous ’ ; 
  [roma ' leos]  ‘ strong of body ’ ; 
 

236 Byzantium
 ‘ I reform/am reformed ’ ), the co - presence of  x u n - [ksin - ] and  s u n - [sin - ] in different 
compounds, and the use of poetic phraseology as pure embellishment, rather in the 
manner of the  ‘ shiny materials ’ used to decorate the empress ’ s icon in (2). 
 , for example, lit.  ‘ blows of the eyes ’ , i.e.  ‘ glances ’ , 
occurs only in Homer and tragedy, while 
  ‘ from the ground ’ is exclusively 
tragic: but the archaic ablatival sufﬁ x  - θ e n 
 , restricted to a handful of words in 
normal Greek of the classical period, regained a wider use in post - classical prose 
writers, who borrowed freely from the poets and provided a model for Byzantine 
writers. By contrast, 
 [apofor ' tizome]  ‘ I unload ’ makes its ﬁ rst appear-
ance in non - literary prose writers of the Hellenistic and Roman periods (in passages 
dealing, for example, with the unloading of cargoes, or the contents of the stomach!) 
and was perhaps just an item of ordinary vocabulary for Psell ó s. Despite the striving 
for effect in certain phrases, there is no systematic effort to avoid the many normal 
words whose appearance justiﬁ es Psell ó s ’ own description of the language of the 
 Chronograph í a  as  ‘ the Koine ’ . 
 None the less, the overall impression is broadly traditional, and few constructions 
are entirely unprecedented in ancient writers, even if the result is not a consistent style 
by classical standards. Here, for example, Psell ó s follows the Ionic practice seen in 
Herodotus of using the imperfect as an  ‘ eye - witness ’ tense, its imperfective aspect 
seemingly involving readers directly in a situation being replayed before them. But 
occasionally he aims for apparently contrived special effects, such as the  ‘ interwoven ’ 
word order of the initial clause of the ﬁ rst paragraph, and the odd construction at the 
end (assuming the text is sound), which combines  ‘ be ’ with the genitive of a substan-
tivized participle, apparently in the sense  ‘ be (on the side) of - the( - one) advising ’ , and 
there are a number of non - classical grammatical features, such as the absence of aug-
ments in the pluperfects of the second paragraph (a common morphological property 
in Byzantine writing): cf. 
+
 [epi/ana   +  (e - )ce - ' kalipto],  ‘ became 
covered/ uncovered ’ . This may be due to the belief that reduplication was functionally 
a marked equivalent to the augment, a consequence of the functional overlap and 
eventual merger of the reduplicated perfect and augmented aorist as simple past tenses 
in post - classical Greek. 
 An important feature of Medieval Greek is the modal use of the imperfect, as appar-
ently in the ﬁ nal sentence of the ﬁ rst paragraph. This development is discussed further 
in 9.4 and 11.8.3 (cf. Horrocks  (1995) for a full treatment). Here we may simply note 
that interpretation of 
 [in] as a true past tense (i.e.  ‘ was on the side of those who 
so advised ’ ) is precluded by the sense of the preceding clause, which asserts that no 
one  ‘ wished ’ (or, taking the imperfect 
  [e ' vuleto] as modal too,  ‘ would 
have wished ’ ) to change his plans, so that the possibility of there being a party present 
that actually advised such a course of action is ruled out. The required meaning is 
clearly counterfactual:  ‘ if any one had so advised, no one would have agreed with 
them ’ . In classical Greek, modal uses of past indicatives required the support of the 
apodotic particle 
 [an] (marking a hypothetical consequence), but this became con-
fused, after the loss of distinctive vowel length, with one of the words for  ‘ if ’ , namely 
 , originally [a:n], and gradually disappeared from conditional apodoses where 
its apparent sense rendered it inappropriate. Consider the example in (4) from the New 
Testament: 

Byzantine Belles Lettres 237
 (4)  
 With the disappearance of modal 
 [an] the bare imperfect takes over as the universal 
marker of potentiality in all such hypothetical clauses, regardless of time reference. This 
development requires careful explanation, and is therefore considered separately in 9.4.  
 9.4   The Modal Imperfect 
 Unlike real events, hypothetical situations are not inherently located in time. But the 
past - tense forms of classical Greek could double as hypotheticals in conditional protases 
because the occurrence of the  ‘ event ’ described logically (rather than strictly temporally) 
precedes the consequence expressed in the apodosis: cf. the two readings of  if (ever) she 
came,  I would go. 3 The choice between aorist and imperfect here was purely aspectual, 
with the aorist normally taking a past - time reading because of the incompatibility of 
perfective aspect with present time reference, and the imperfect generally favouring, but 
by no means requiring, a present reading because of the association of the present 
moment with progressiveness (one meaning of the imperfective aspect). This atemporal 
modal use of the imperfect was also compatible with future interpretations, and the 
imperfect eventually came to be used in future - referring conditionals in place of the 
moribund optative (cf. again the two readings of  if (ever) she came,  … ). We therefore 
move into a situation in which imperfect indicatives in the protases of hypothetical con-
ditionals could have past, present or future time reference, promoting a reinterpretation 
of the imperfect, in this context, as a general marker of hypothetical/counterfactual 
modality, rather as if a clause such as  if she came could mean not only  ‘ if she were to 
come ’ , but also  ‘ if she were coming ’ and  ‘ if she had come ’ . 
 But the imperfect was also used  inter alia  to denote indeﬁ nite frequency in the past, and 
this notion overlaps with that of hypothetical consequentiality in apodoses; compare 
again the two readings of  (if she came,)   I would go.  Thus when 
 [an], the classical 
marker of hypothetical consequentiality, disappeared, it was again the atemporal modal 
imperfect that replaced the optatives (future), imperfects and aorists (present/past) that 
had previously been used there in combination with it. We move, therefore, from a 
pseudo - temporal system, which marked logical precedence in protases and hypothetical 
consequence in apodoses with a  ‘ past ’ followed by a  ‘ future of a past ’ (imperfect/aorist   +   
[an]), to a system in which the imperfect alone marked the hypothetical character of the 
two situations through the modal reinterpretation of its imperfectivity. The perfective 
aorist therefore quickly disappeared, ﬁ rst from apodoses and then from protases. 
 Consider the following example from Callinicus ’  Life of Hypatius  (5th/6th century): 
 (5)  
 
 ‘ For if you had appealed to us, we too would have comforted you ’ 

238 Byzantium
 Classical usage would demand the aorist   +   [an] in the apodosis in order to express 
the intended perfectiveness (and indirectly the pastness) of the hypothetical conse-
quence, but this option was no longer available to an author of the late antique period 
writing in more popular forms of the Koine. There was, however, some risk of ambi-
guity in the absence of overt modality marking in such cases and this soon led to the 
reintroduction of a pseudo - temporal system of marking hypothetical consequentiality 
involving a  ‘ conditional ’  periphrasis (=  ‘ would X ’ ) consisting of the imperfect of the 
future auxiliaries 
 [ ' melo] or 
  [ ' exo]   +  inﬁ nitive. These were then used in 
hypothetical apodoses, alongside bare modal imperfects, from late antiquity onwards. 
For other developments, including the emergence of the modern pluperfect from this 
periphrasis, see  11.8.3 . This  ‘ low - brow ’ periphrastic option was not, of course, avail-
able to Psell ó s, but since the modal imperfect remained in use throughout the middle 
ages (perhaps even in educated speech), the sentence in the extract above can reason-
ably be assumed to contain an example of such usage, as the sense demands.  
 9.5   The Late Period: Anna Komnen é (1083 – c.1153) 
 Anna Komnen é was the eldest daughter of Al é xios I Komnen ó s and Eir é ne Do ú kaina. 
When her father died in 1118, she attempted unsuccessfully to prevent her younger 
brother Io á nnes II from coming to the throne in the hope that her husband Nikeph ó ros 
Bry é nnios, the son of an earlier pretender, might succeed. She was then forced to retire 
to a convent, but maintained social contacts, not only founding a philosophical discus-
sion group but compiling the material for her dramatic account of how her father 
saved the empire from its enemies in both the east (the Seljuks and Petcheneks) and 
the west (the Normans and the knights of the ﬁ rst crusade). Her unashamedly enco-
miastic narrative provides an invaluable insight into the contemporary medieval world 
in a language that is more consistently classical than that of Psell ó s, and replete with 
learned quotations and allusions (see Buckler  (1929) , Leib  (1937 – 45) , Sewter  (1969) , 
Hunger ( 1978 : I, 400 – 9), Gouma - Peterson  (2000) ). 
 The following extract describes the impact of the announcement of the Norman 
invasion led by Bohemond, son of Robert Guiscard, who had sailed from Bari to 
Avlona, south of Dyrr á chion (modern Durr ë s), in 1107: 
 (6) 
 

Byzantine Belles Lettres 239
 ‘ When the emperor, who was still in the imperial city, learned of Bohemond ’ s crossing 
from the letters of the duke ( military commander ) of Dyrr á chion, he hastened his depar-
ture. For the duke had been vigilant, having altogether denied sleep to his eyes, and at 
the moment when he learned that Bohemond had sailed over beside the plain of Illyricum, 
disembarked, and set up camp thereabouts, he sent for a Scythian  “ with wings ” , as the 
saying goes, and informed the emperor of the man ’ s crossing. The messenger found the 
emperor returning from his hunting party, and, entering at a run and bowing his head to 
the ground, shouted in a clear voice that Bohemond had crossed over. All those present 
at the time were rooted to the spot, exactly where they were, stupeﬁ ed at even the mere 
mention of Bohemond. But the emperor, full of spirit and courage, untied the strap of his 
shoe and said,  “ For the present let us turn to our lunch; and as for Bohemond, we shall 
review the matter later. ”  ’ 
 Classically rare and/or  ‘ poetic ’ vocabulary is certainly not avoided here (e.g. 
 
[tra ' nis]  ‘ clear ’ ), and, as often in Byzantine historiography, there is an Ionic colouring 
due to the inﬂ uence of Herodotus, so some of the words that seem poetic from a strictly 
Attic perspective occur in Ionic prose and in later classicizing writers (e.g. the feminine 

240 Byzantium
adjective 
 [pe ð j ' as]  ‘ of the plain ’ ,  sc. 
 [ji]  ‘ land ’ , and 
  [i ' popteros] 
 ‘ winged ’  are both used by Herodotus, 4 while the form of 
 
 ‘ having sailed across ’ , and the word 
  ‘ dash to the ground ’ , are 
of Ionic origin). There are also words of post - classical origin that belong to the main-
stream Byzantine tradition (e.g. 
  ‘ military governor ’ ; 
 [e ' kselefsis] 
 ‘ departure ’ ; 
  ‘ crossing ’ ; 
  [a ' nistaktos]  ‘ vigilant ’ ; 
(
)  [aponar ' ko]  ‘ be stupid ’ ). Clearly Anna, using the  ‘ living ’ literary 
language of educated Byzantines, no more intended to copy the style of the ancients 
than did Psell ó s, but the overall effect of her language is considerably more  ‘ natural ’ 
than that of Psell ó s from a classical point of view, especially in its avoidance of dense 
accumulations of recherch é vocabulary. 
 But in matters of grammar Anna is very much a purist, showing an excellent 
control of classical morphology (though 
  [ni ' os]  ‘ of - ship ’ , for Attic 
 [ne ' os], 
is perhaps a back - formation to dative 
 [ni ' i] rather than a deliberate Hom-
erism), and carefully employing such ancient syntactic rules as that requiring an 
accu sative and participle complement after verbs of knowledge and perception, 
cf. 
 , 
lit.  ‘ s/he - found - out having - crossed Bohemond ’ . Overall, the attention to classical detail 
and the avoidance of contorted word orders and overelaborated constructions makes 
her Greek somewhat easier to read than that of Psell ó s for those trained only in the clas-
sical language. She does, however, follow established Byzantine practice in her free use 
of optatives as  ‘ marked ’ subjunctives in subordinate clauses, and we may also note in the 
passage above the presumably accidental use of 
 [is]   +  accusative (originally =  ‘ (in)to ’ ) 
as a substitute for 
 [en]   +  dative in the locative sense of  ‘ in ’ (always asssuming that this 
is not simply a scribal error). This was already an established feature of the New 
Testament and the popular Greek of personal papyri, so it seems that interference from 
contemporary speech led to occasional lapses in even the most learned compositions. 
There is also some functional confusion of future indicatives with aorist subjunctives. 
The subjunctive and the future indicative in Al é xios ’ dismissive remarks have been 
translated as such, but they could well have been intended to be equivalent, since there 
are many other passages in which they are used side by side in contexts where the clas-
sical language would demand one to the exclusion of the other. This functional overlap, 
based on formal collapse caused by sound change and analogical levelling in late antiq-
uity, was a major feature of Medieval Greek in its middle and popular registers too (cf. 
 11.8.3 ,  11.8.6  (a) for the details), and though the two paradigms were kept formally 
distinct in the learned written language, contemporary perceptions of their functional 
equivalence, reinforced by the dual use of 
 [na] - constructions as both subjunctives and 
futures in the spoken language  (11.8.3) , are often apparent in the writing of even the 
most learned of Byzantine writers, with optatives also introduced as occasional variants 
for both (cf. the discussion of (2) above).  
 9.6   After the Fall: Micha é l Krit ó boulos (15th Century) 
 Krit ó boulos belonged to an aristocratic family from the island of Imbros at the mouth 
of the Dardanelles, and was permitted by the Turks to rule the island after 1456. His 

Byzantine Belles Lettres 241
history of the period 1451 – 67 is dedicated to Sultan Mehmet II (the Conqueror), and 
is a pro - Turkish account of the fall of Byzantium and the transition to Ottoman rule. 
He clearly had access to Greek and Turkish sources, and his work provides an indis-
pensable survey of this most critical period of Greek history (see Riggs  (1954) , Reinsch 
 (1983) ). 
 In the following extract, Krit ó boulos describes how the Ottoman army, after 50 
days ’ bombardment of the land walls, stormed into Constantinople in the early morning 
of 29 May 1453: 
 (7) 
 
 ‘ The heavily armed soldiers were already pouring through the postern to attack the city, 
while others also burst in through the great wall where it had been torn down; and the 
rest of the army, following  en masse , pushing and forcing its way, streamed in trium-
phantly and spread throughout the city. The emperor stood before the great wall, where 

242 Byzantium
the royal standard and the signal - ﬂ ag were raised, and surveyed what was happening; for 
day was now just beginning to dawn. There then followed the wholesale slaughter of those 
the Turks encountered, some in the streets (for a number of people were already leaving 
their houses and, running towards the shouting, fell unprepared on the swords of the 
soldiers), others in their own homes  … , others turning to defend themselves, others taking 
refuge at the churches and begging for mercy, men, women and children, the whole popu-
lation in short, since there was no restraint. ’ 
 Overall, both vocabulary and grammar are natural from the perspective of historiog-
raphy of the classical period, though the phrase 
 [ese ' ç eondo 
 … e ' pi tim  ' bolin]  ‘ they - streamed - in  … against the city ’ is almost certainly meant to 
recall the Homeric 
 [es é k h ynto es p ó lin]  ‘ they - streamed - in into city ’ 
( Iliad 21. 610), since this verb is otherwise rare and exclusively poetic. The noun 
  
[al ' ci]  ‘ strength, defence, battle ’ is also chieﬂ y poetic from the point of view of 
mainstream Attic, though the phrase 
  ‘ to 
defence to - turn ’ occurs in Herodotus (3. 78), and is also used by Thucydides (2. 84), 
though with 
 [es] for 
  [pros] as here. This narrative is very much in the tradition 
of work from the Palaiologan period, but if we set Krit ó boulos beside Prok ó pios from 
the time of Ioustinian ó s, there could hardly be a more graphic illustration of the cen-
trality of the ancient Greek literary tradition in high Byzantine culture at both the 
highest and lowest points in the empire ’ s fortunes.  
 9.7   Conclusion 
 As with the Atticists of old, the temptation to parade learning and to incorporate rare 
and unusual usage can lead to effects that may seem harsh and forced to those with a 
classical training. But these were an expected and enjoyable feature of high - style 
writing for the Byzantines, and once the modern reader has grown accustomed to them, 
the overall impression given by the best medieval historians is of a tastefully embel-
lished Thucydidean style. But few had the educational background necessary to read, 
still less the talent to write, such virtuoso compositions, and even if we allow that the 
formal spoken language of the court remained highly conservative, as suggested by the 
conversation reported by the 13th - century historian and statesman Ge ó rgios Akropol í tes 
( History ch. 39) or Filelfo ’ s letter of 1451 describing the seclusion of aristocratic 
Byzantine women (1478 edition, p. 183), more routine forms of writing could scarcely 
avoid the inﬂ uence of developments in the normal spoken language, and it is to these 
middle varieties that we must now turn our attention in chapter  10 . 
 Notes 
1  There is no evidence that commitment to classical standards in writing ever entailed a parallel 
commitment to the preservation of ancient pronunciation, as even the most conservative 
varieties progressively fell into line with the changes that had affected ordinary spoken Greek 
in Hellenistic and Roman imperial times. It is therefore assumed, perhaps prematurely, that 
the standard pronunciation of the 6th century was that summarized at the end of chapter 

Byzantine Belles Lettres 243
 6 , i.e. the Modern Greek system except that /y/ (written  u and  o  i ) still survived in educated 
usage. In this connection, Browning ( 1983 : 56 – 7) notes that even in the 10th century trans-
literations of Greek names into Georgian consistently represent  u and  o  i with a different 
letter from that used to transcribe  i ,  h ,  e i (i.e. /i/), and that the metropolitan elite could still 
make fun of a visiting church dignitary at that time because of his failure to discriminate 
between /i/ and /y/. It is also assumed that ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] was regularly pronounced in educated 
varieties, subject to some assimilation, despite the evidence for its sporadic loss in the popular 
language of many private papyri.  
2  It is assumed in the transcriptions that /y/ had by now merged with /i/, but that ﬁ nal [n] was 
still retained in formal educated speech.  
3  The overlap is between indeﬁ niteness of occurrence in real past time and the inherent tem-
poral indeﬁ niteness of hypothetical events which, in protases, logically precede (i.e. are in 
some sense  ‘ past ’ in relation to) the hypothetical consequences of apodoses.  
4  The whole expression seems to have been proverbial, however.  

10
 The Written Koine 
in Byzantium 
 
 10.1   Introduction 
 The early Byzantine period, as we have seen, was important for the production of 
chronicles and religious works in simpler forms of Greek that tolerated greater com-
promise with developments in the spoken language. In the middle period, once Egypt 
had been lost and the administrative practice of setting up inscriptions had been largely 
abandoned, it is mainly from texts of this kind, despite a general raising of the linguistic 
level, that we obtain indirect knowledge of the development of more colloquial 
varieties of Greek ( 10.2 ,  10.3 ). 
 There are, however, a number of secular works in related styles, including (in part) 
the private work commissioned by the emperor Konstant í nos VII Porphyrog é nnetos 
( 10.4.1 ) and the  Strategik ó n of Kekaum é nos ( 10.4.2 ). A later version of this middle 
style is represented below by an extract from the metaphrase of the  Alexiad of Anna 
Komnen é ( 10.5 ). Konstant í nos ’  writings also employed a more elaborated non - literary 
style ( 10.4.1 ), akin to the language of academic discourse employed by scholars 
throughout the middle and later periods. This continued the philosophical and scien-
tiﬁ c Koine of antiquity, and is represented here by an extract from the writings of the 
13th - century scholar M á ximos Plano ú des ( 10.6 ). 
 For the later Byzantine period there is a considerable volume of  ‘ ofﬁ cial ’  administra-
tive material, both imperial and ecclesiastical ( 10.7 ). Much of this belongs to the higher 
end of the linguistic spectrum, and may sometimes be strikingly archaic in usage. 
 Overall, the development of the middle ranges of written Greek in the later part of 
the Byzantine period (i.e. after the 10th century) involves a gradual coming together 
of the different forms of writing inherited from antiquity. The process was initially 
facilitated by the collapse of literacy in the 7th and 8th centuries, which greatly reduced 
the audience for compositions in the most basic styles and led to the generalization of 
higher registers across the board. Thereafter, the revival of secular learning, the essen-
tial unity of the political, academic and theological establishments, and the eventual 
re - emergence of an urban bourgeoisie all worked together to promote the development 
of a common, practical written language to meet the varied and expanding needs of 
the educated classes, the whole process taking place under the inﬂ uence of higher 
registers of the naturally evolving spoken language. The later medieval Koine therefore 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 245
continues the tradition of somewhat more elaborated Koine composition in earlier 
periods rather than that of chronography and hagiography, though from the 12th 
century onwards, this vacuum at the lower end of the spectrum was progressively 
ﬁ lled by the revival of writing in the vernacular (albeit in very different genres, see 
chapter  12 ). 
 10.2   Chronicles in the Early and Middle Periods 
 10.2.1   Mal á las (c. 491 – c.578):  g enerics 
 The chronicle by the Syrian Io á nnes Mal á las, covering the  ‘ period ’ from the creation 
to the reign of Ioustinian ó s, is the earliest surviving example of the genre, and graphi-
cally illustrates the impact of the newly emerging conception of the Roman empire on 
the typical Byzantine ’ s interpretation of the past. The contemporary state, seen as a 
stable reﬂ ection on earth of the heavenly harmony embodied by Christ, becomes a 
universal model, so that heads of state from the beginning of time are referred to as 
 basile î s ( ‘ emperors ’ ), who,  inter alia,  summon  conventus ( ‘ assemblies ’ ) and defend the 
 limites ( ‘ borders ’ ) of their empires. 
 This chronicle profoundly inﬂ uenced later work in the genre, not only in Greek but 
also in Latin, Syriac, Georgian, Old Church Slavonic and Ethiopic. Unfortunately, only 
one surviving Greek manuscript covers the whole period of the original composition, 
and this is in part an abbreviation, presenting major textual difﬁ culties, including a 
number of serious lacunae. The standard edition is now Thurn  (2000) ; see also Helms 
 (1971/2) , Jeffreys et al.  (1986) , and Jeffreys et al. ( 1990 : esp. ch. 8 on language, with 
contributions by A. James, M. Jeffreys, and E. and M. Jeffreys). 
 It is immediately clear from a comparison with contemporary papyri that, while 
Mal á las ’ Greek is a great deal closer to the spoken language than that of his contem-
porary Prok ó pios, it is still very much a written style. In particular, he employs current 
technical terminology and bureaucratic clich é s incessantly alongside more traditional 
features of the ofﬁ cial Koine (such as the articular inﬁ nitive with prepositions), and, 
in a period of transition from Latin to Greek governmental terminology, still uses the 
established Latin loanwords alongside their Greek replacements. In view of his appar-
ently  ‘ administrative ’ take on history, it is now widely believed that he was employed 
in the middle - to - upper echelons of the imperial civil service in Antioch before moving 
to Constantinople, perhaps after the Persian sack of the Syrian capital in 540. 
 This basic administrative style is characterized syntactically by familar markers such 
as parataxis and co - ordination in place of subordination; the use of 
  [ ' ina] - clauses 
alongside inﬁ nitives to complement control verbs, with the latter sometimes strength-
ened by 
 [ ' oste]  ‘ so that ’ , or the pleonastic genitive article 
  [tu] ( 4.6.2 – 3,  6.5.1 ); 
confusion between ﬁ nal and consecutive clauses, evidenced by 
 [ ' ina]
 [ ' oste] 
overlaps; the functional merger of perfect and aorist, involving many hybrid forma-
tions, and the use of  ‘ be ’  +  aorist participle to convey the sense of the  ‘ true ’ perfect/
pluperfect (cf.  6.5.2 ); and the virtual abandonment of the optative (cf.  4.9 ). 
 Particularly important is the evidence for a shift in the use of inﬂ ected participles 
in middle - to - low registers of written Greek at this time. Though neuter singulars 

246 Byzantium
occasionally show the default forms in  - o  n t a / - a n t a / - e n t a [ - onda/ - anda/ - enda] in place 
of the paradigmatically isolated, and by now exclusively learned, 3rd - declension suf-
ﬁ xes  - o  n / - a n / - e n [ - on/ - an/en] (cf.  6.5.3 ), the more interesting developments are in fact 
syntactic. Mal á las ’ sentences typically consist of a nucleus containing a single ﬁ nite 
verb, surrounded by a set of loosely attached participial adjuncts: a standard pattern 
is  ‘ having - W - ed, having - X - ed s/he - Yed, having - Z - ed ’ . The genitive absolute is fre-
quently mishandled by classical standards, being used where the participle might agree 
with a noun phrase in the main clause, and nominative absolutes are not infrequent, 
sometimes giving the impression that participles are being used in a variety of clause 
types as a substitute for ﬁ nite verbs (Weierholt ( 1963 : 69 – 78)). The following is a good 
example: 
 (1) 
 
 ‘ And the emperor having sent him three  magistri militum  ( commanders )  … , and these 
having joined battle,  … many fell. ’ 
 On the face of it, this practice suggests a growing unfamiliarity with traditional forms 
of participial subordination in the contemporary spoken language, and might also 
imply that the target style was beyond the author ’ s capabilities. But it is in fact a 
characteristic hallmark not only of Mal á las but of the form of writing used quite 
generally in chronography (and, we may assume, in many of the archival sources from 
which material was excerpted); similar phenomena recur, for example, in the work of 
the well - educated Theoph á nes (see  10.2.2 ), who we know was capable of reading and 
paraphrasing the learned histories of Prok ó pios and Theoph ý laktos Simok á ttes. 
 The monotonous cumulative use of participial adjuncts seems, then, to be a marker 
of the note - like style of administration, deemed appropriate also for the listing of events 
in chronography, and it apparently reﬂ ects the more restricted range of participial 
syntax associated with the breakdown of purely formal long - distance agreement 1 in 
contemporary Greek: thus autonomous nominative expressions, often with subjects, 
often replace syntactically integrated oblique case forms in anticipation of the emer-
gence of the indeclinable subject - orientated gerund in  - o  n t a ( " ) [ - onda(s)] (cf.  6.5.3 , 
 11.8.2 ), while the genitive, once the case of absolute adjuncts, can be used for any 
adjunct in apparent free variation, regardless of whether agreement is in principle 
possible. 
 In the area of nominal syntax, the dative is still routinely and correctly used in both 
grammatical and adverbial functions, though there is a general advance of the accusa-
tive against both the dative and the genitive as the primary prepositional case (cf. 
 6.5.4 ), and locative/allative  ‘ confusion ’ between 
 [en]   +  dative and 
 [is]  +  accusa-
tive is common. The use of 
  [is] to introduce locative as well as goal expressions is 
already familiar from antiquity, and is standard in Modern Greek. Both this and its 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 247
converse, the allative use of 
 [en], derive from a natural indeterminacy in the 
interpretation of prepositional phrases with verbs expressing spatial transition. Such 
phrases may be seen as denoting either the location reached after movement ( ‘ come to 
be at ’ , cf.  arrive at ) or the goal of the movement itself ( ‘ come to ’ ). The dual use of 
locative and allative prepositions in late antique and early Medieval Greek follows 
directly, though 
  [is] ﬁ nally ousted its rival because of the independent decline of 
the dative. 
 We also ﬁ nd the legal(istic) expression 
 [o af ' tos], and its equivalent 
 
[o  ' iQ ios], lit.  ‘ the same ’ , endlessly repeated in discourse deictic function (=  ‘ the afore-
mentioned ’ ), though 
 [af ' tos] is also frequently used before the deﬁ nite article, 
just as in Modern Greek, in recognition of its shift towards full demonstrative, i.e. 
truly deictic, status: cf. the pattern of 
 X [ ' utos o X], lit.  ‘ this the X ’ , 
 
X [e ' cinos o X], lit.  ‘ that the X ’ . These and other formulaic clich é s (emperors are 
routinely 
 [ ' θ ios]  ‘ sacred ’ , and writers 
 [so ' fos]  ‘ learned ’ , for example, while 
proper names are endlessly qualiﬁ ed by 
  ‘ called ’ or 
 
[o ' nomati]  ‘ by name ’ ), reﬂ ect the combination of pedantic verbiage and hyper - precision 
characteristic of ofﬁ cial and legal documents throughout history. 
 There are several other respects in which Mal á las appears to follow the written 
practice of the administrative/ofﬁ cial Koine rather than that of the vernacular. For 
example, despite the widespread use of  ‘ weak ’ aorists in  - a [ - a] in place of classical 
 ‘ strong ’  aorists in  - o  n [ - on] in popular compositions from Hellenistic times onwards 
(cf.  4.9 ,  5.8 ), there is a clear preponderance of the traditional forms in the chronicle. 
There are also many examples of the use of regular  ‘ perfect ’ active forms in place of 
both irregular classical aorist actives, e.g. 
 for 
  ‘ I got 
to know ’ , and, to a lesser extent, of strong aorist middles that had not already 
been replaced by aorist passives, e.g. 
 for 
 [eje ' nomin]  ‘ I 
became ’ . Innovative  ‘ perfect ’ participles are similarly used on occasion in place of 
strong aorists with the apparently anomalous  ‘ present ’ ending  - w n [ - on], e.g. 
 for 
  ‘ having 
come ’ . Forms of this kind also recur in more elaborated styles. 
 Mal á las also makes regular use of the classical forms of conditional and temporal 
conjunctions rather than their popular counterparts. In the classical period the clitic 
particle 
 [an]  ‘ - ever ’ , used to supplement the subjunctive in timeless/future - referring 
conditional and temporal clauses (e.g.  if (ever)/when(ever) s/he comes ), became for-
mally attached to the preceding conjunction: cf. 
 [e á :n]    <  
 [e:  á :n]  ‘ if ever ’ ; 
 [h ó tan]   <  
 [h ó te an]  ‘ whenever ’ , etc. From Hellenistic times onwards, the 
subjunctive was often replaced by the present indicative, with the generic sense trans-
ferred to the compound conjunction alone, and we soon start to ﬁ nd imperfects used 
to denote indeﬁ niteness in the past in a parallel way (replacing the classical optative): 
cf. 
  [ ó tan  … et h e ' orun]  ‘ whenever  … they - saw ’ , Mark 3. 11. Eventually, 
however, a generic sense came to be seen as a matter of purely contextual interpreta-
tion, with the imperfective aspect of the present or imperfect indicative taken to indi-
cate either repetition/indeﬁ niteness or progressiveness. At this point the compound 
conjunctions could be used interchangeably with the simple forms, and with all tenses, 
ﬁ nally superseding their rivals in the spoken language because of their greater phono-
logical bulk. 

248 Byzantium
 In the case of free relative clauses, however, Mal á las favours the popular construc-
tion of his time. Originally there was a choice between 
 [ ' ostis]  +  present indicative 
(strictly speaking indeﬁ nite,  ‘ anyone who ’ ) and 
  [ ' os an]   +  subjunctive (strictly 
speaking generic,  ‘ whoever ’ ) in the sense  ‘ whoever (does X) ’ . But the former came 
increasingly to be used as a simple relative in late antiquity, as the classical relative 
 [os, i, o] (masc, fem, neut) was prone to loss through contraction with the 
initial/ﬁ nal vowels of adjacent words. This practice is widespread in Mal á las, who 
therefore employs the alternative construction in indeﬁ nite/generic relatives. In this case 
  [os] and 
 [an] had remained discrete, perhaps because of the inﬂ ecting pronoun, 
while the conjunction 
 [e ' an]  ‘ if ’ had begun to replace the increasingly anomalous 
free - standing use of the particle in the late Hellenistic period. This curious - seeming 
development was based in part on the merger of the generic particle, following the loss 
of distinctive vowel length, with the contracted form of the conditional conjunction 
 , originally [a:n]. But it also depends on conﬂ ation of the functionally equivalent con-
structions  if anyone knows  … and  whoever knows  … Consider Matthew 11. 27: 2 
 (2) 
  
 ‘ No one knows the father except the son and whoever the son is willing to reveal him to. ’ 
 Here, the conditional clause of  if the son is willing to reveal him   to anyone, that person 
knows  has been substituted (minus its indirect object) for the clause following the rela-
tive in  anyone to - whom  [ the son is willing to reveal him ]  knows, in order to give 
 anyone to - whom  [ if the son is willing to reveal him ]  knows. The conditional conjunc-
tion was then quickly reinterpreted as an indeﬁ niteness marker attached to a relative 
or other pronoun (cf. 
 [i tis ean]  ‘ if someone - ever  … ’ , as used by the Greens 
in their dialogue with Ioustinian ó s ’ herald, recorded in Theoph á nes ’ chronicle ( am 
6024, de Boor ( 1963 : 181)). This type of generic construction remained a characteristic 
of the popular Koine into the Byzantine era, and is routine in Mal á las, though it was 
eventually superseded in the later middle ages by the use of the indeﬁ nite relative 
 
[ ' opjos] (cf.  11.7.8  (c)). 
 In general, the impression created by Mal á las ’ style is one of simplicity, reﬂ ecting 
a desire for the straightforward communication of information in the language of 
everyday business. There is therefore a large stock of Latin loanwords, originating with 
the imposition of Roman rule in the east but long established in popular use (K ö rting 
 (1879) ), though many other words have modern meanings unfamiliar from classical 
literature or inscriptions. Examples of the latter include (cf. Festugi è re  (1978) ): 
 
[ ' zonimi]  =   ‘ appoint ’  not  ‘ gird ’ ; 
  =   ‘ riot ’ not  ‘ live in a democ-
racy ’ (the classical verb is used only in the middle); 
 [ ' lipsanon]  =   ‘ corpse ’  not 
 ‘ remnant ’ ; 
 [fane ' ros]  =   ‘ a certain/some ’ not  ‘ evident ’ , etc. 
 The following passage, which deals with the prelude to the famous Nika riot, pro-
vides a typical example of Mal á las ’ language, which, it is important to re - emphasize, 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 249
closely reﬂ ects contemporary norms for the conduct and recording of day - to - day 
business: 
 (3) 
   
 ‘ And in this year of the tenth indiction (  ad 531 – 2 ) there happened to occur through the 
agency of certain avenging demons a pretext for a riot in Byzantium. Euda í mon was city 
prefect ( governor ) and holding criminals from both factions in custody. Having examined 
various people, he found seven individuals from among them to be guilty of murder, 

250 Byzantium
sentencing four of them to be beheaded and three to be impaled. After they had been 
paraded through the whole city and crossed over ( the Golden Horn ), and some had been 
hanged, two fell from the wooden scaffold as it broke, one a Blue the other a Green. The 
people standing around saw the occurrence and acclaimed the emperor. But the monks 
near St K ó non ’ s, hearing this and coming out, found two of those who had been hanged 
still alive lying on the ground. And bringing them down to the sea shore and putting them 
on a boat they sent them to St Laur é ntios ’  to places of sanctuary. ’ 
 Dating at this time was by  ‘ indictions ’ , i.e. 15 - year cycles originally introduced for 
taxation purposes, and Mal á las retains the Latin term, even though shortly afterwards 
he uses the Greek 
 [ ' eparxos] in place of the Latin  praefectus. We may ﬁ rst 
note here the demonstrative use of 
 [af ' tos]  ‘ this ’ and 
 [ ' xronos] used in 
its modern sense of  ‘ year ’  rather than  ‘ time ’ . The words 
 [anaskolopiz ' mos] 
 ‘ impaling ’ and 
 [perivo ' mizome], lit.  ‘ be paraded around the altars ’ , i.e. 
be publicly displayed in a ritualized way, are both ﬁ rst attested in Mal á las, the former 
showing the productivity in the Koine of the sufﬁ x 
 [ - iz ' mos] in the derivation 
of action nouns from verbs in 
 [ - ' izo/ - ' izome], the latter the productivity of 
this verbal sufﬁ x itself (cf.  11.8.5  (c)). The use of 
 [o ' nomata], lit.  ‘ names ’ , in 
the sense of  ‘ individuals ’  probably derives ultimately from legal practice, involving the 
identiﬁ cation of those charged or making complaints with the names on the list of 
cases to be tried. 
 The most striking feature of the grammar of this piece, however, is its participial 
syntax, so that Euda í mon, for example, having initially served as the subject of a series 
of genitive absolute constructions, suddenly becomes the subject of a ﬁ nite verb (
 
[ ' evren]), whereupon the last participle (
 [psiﬁ  ' samenos]), which we might 
ordinarily have expected to be a ﬁ nite verb, appears in the nominative. We should 
also note the almost complete absence of the discourse particles and connectives so char-
acteristic of the ancient language, and the regularity with which object and other pro-
nouns are used in contexts where zero - anaphora might have been more usual in earlier 
periods. 
 Though the use of the accusative and inﬁ nitive had in general been a marker of 
higher - register writing for many centuries, the construction was still used in the 
popular written tradition to complement impersonal verbs meaning  ‘ it happened ’ , as 
here with 
 [syn ' evi] (cf.  5.11.3 ). The old perfect forms of certain verbs are 
sometimes used interchangeably with, or indeed instead of, their aorists (this is par-
ticularly true of the  - m i [ - mi] verbs, where 
 , for example, is used regu-
larly in the sense  ‘ s/he gave ’ , cf.  6.5.2 ). The perfect participles in this extract (
 
[eora ' kos]  ‘ having seen ’ , 
 [aciko ' otes]  ‘ having heard ’ ), also seem to be used 
in this way rather than to emphasize any resultant state of new awareness. 
 We may also note here: 
 (4)  (a)  The regular positioning of  ‘ weak ’ /clitic 3rd - person pronouns in second 
position after their governing verbs, which stand initially (ignoring con-
junctions) in their respective clauses (cf.  4.8 ,  6.5.1 ,  11.4 ). 
 (b)  The use of 
  +  accusative in a locative phrase (
 
 
 
 
 
  ‘ on the ground ’ ) and 
  +  dative in an allative expression 
(
 [en do a ' jio lavren ' dio],  ‘ to St Laur é ntios ’ ). 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 251
 (c)  3pl aorist 
 [eks - ' epes - an]  ‘ they fell from ’ , showing the  ‘ weak ’ 
ending  - a n [ - an] for the original  - o  n [ - on], beside the classically correct 
ending of 
 [ ' evr - on]  ‘ they found ’ (the augment having been dropped 
from this word in this basic form of the written language much earlier).  
 10.2.2   Theoph á nes the Confessor (c.760 – 818) 
 Theoph á nes was born during the Iconoclastic period into a wealthy metropolitan 
family with well - concealed iconophile sentiments. After he was orphaned, the arch -
 iconoclast emperor Konstant í nos V oversaw his education and upbringing, and he was 
brieﬂ y married, despite his inclination towards the cenobitic life, in order to circumvent 
the government ’ s hostility to monasticism. When the movement lost momentum with 
the death of L é on IV, Theoph á nes founded a monastery on the Asian shore of the Sea 
of Marmara, where he lived until 815 or 816. His refusal to sanction the destruction 
of images at the time of the revival of iconoclasm under L é on V ( ‘ the Armenian ’ ) led 
to his exile on Samothrace, where he died in 818. There is an engaging  Life by the 
patriarch Meth ó dios (died 847; see Spiridinov  (1913) ). 
 The chronicle which he compiled continues that of Ge ó rgios S ý nkellos ( ‘ private 
secretary ’ ), beginning with the accession of Diocletian (284) and ending with that of 
L é on V (813). Its popularity is attested not only by the numerous surviving manu-
scripts, the earliest of which dates to the 9th century, but also by the fact that it was 
translated into Latin by the pope ’ s librarian Anastasius in 837 – 5. The standard edition 
is that of de Boor  (1963) ; see also Hunger ( 1978 : I, 334 – 43), Turtledove  (1982) . 
 It seeems that Theoph á nes largely paraphrased, or sometimes simply copied from, 
his very diverse source material, and the resulting work was aimed at what was by 
now a smaller and more educated audience. The chronicle itself reintroduces a range 
of themes and a level of detail not seen since the work of writers such as Eusebius in 
the 3rd/4th century, drawing also on techniques from ancient biography in its portrayal 
of leading characters. The result is something of a blend between history, biography 
and chronography, and this important work marks the beginnings of the harmoniza-
tion of the formerly more popular language of chronography with the more learned 
language traditionally associated with the other two genres. But even though the lan-
guage of Theoph á nes ’ chronicle is probably more classically correct overall than that 
of Mal á las, it still reﬂ ects many of the same stylistic traits, ample conﬁ rmation of the 
entrenched nature of the conventions for drafting records and of their continued 
acceptability in chronography. 
 Each year ’ s events are prefaced by an  annus mundi  ( ‘ year of the world ’ since the 
creation), calculated according to the Alexandrian system that placed this event on 1 
September 5493  bc (the Byzantine year began on 1 September). Theoph á nes sometimes 
also provides his own dates  ad , which are 7/8 years earlier than ours, together with 
the regnal year of the reigning emperor, the ruler of Persia (ﬁ rst the Sassanid king, 
later the Arab caliph) and the patriarch of Constantinople, and sometimes adds details 
of the other four patriarchs (of Rome, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem), though 
the Arab conquests and the Slavic invasions of the Balkans eventually led to gaps and 
inaccuracies from the 7th century onwards. All of this is combined with the traditional 
system of reference to the indiction cycle, though there are real difﬁ culties in reconcil-

252 Byzantium
ing this method with the  annus mundi  for the periods 609/10 – 714/15 and 725/6 – 772 - 3 
(Ostrogorsky  (1928/9) ). 
 The following extract deals with the emperor Her á kleios ’ triumphal return from his 
Persian campaigns: 
 (5) 
  
 ‘ In this year, with the advent of peace between the Persians and the Romans, the emperor 
sent his own brother The ó doros with letters and men of Sir ó es the Persian king, so that 
they might send home to Persia in peace the Persians in Edessa, Palestine, Jerusalem and 
the other cities of the Romans, and these might cross the land of the Romans unharmed. 
The emperor, having crushed Persia by war in six years, enforced a peace in the seventh 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 253
and returned to Constantinople, performing a mystical celebration in this year. For God, 
having made all creation in six days, called the seventh day that of rest; so he too, having 
completed many labours in six years, rested, having returned to the city with peace and 
joy in the seventh. ’ 
 As noted, the material is put together in a somewhat more  ‘ classical ’  manner than in 
Mal á las, and more learned features of vocabulary and syntax are apparent, partly 
deriving from the sources, which included non - excerpted versions of historical texts. 
The accusative and inﬁ nitive construction is used quite freely, for example, verb - ﬁ nal 
orders are not unusual, and even that literary favourite hyperbaton, typically involving 
the insertion of a verb in penultimate position between the component parts of its 
direct object, is occasionally encountered. In the passage above, the verbal and nominal 
morphology is consistently classical, the bare dative is regularly used to mark time 
 ‘ at which ’ , and the extreme separation of article and noun in the description of the 
Persians in Roman lands is pure ofﬁ cial Koine. 
 Though the concord of participial adjuncts in (5) conforms to the classical rules, 
the chronicle also has examples of the nominative absolute construction (e.g. 
 , [kli ' θ en to  ' Q endron prose ' cynisen ato], lit. 
 ‘ having - been - bent the tree (nom), he worshipped it (dat) ’ ,  am 5854, de Boor ( 1963 : 49)), 
while the generic convention of accumulating subject - orientated participles around a 
single indicative verb is very much in evidence in the passage above. There are also cases 
of such non - classical usages as that of 
 [en]   +  dative to mark both time  ‘ during which ’ 
(instead of the bare genitive) and the  ‘ goal ’ of a movement (in place of an allative preposi-
tion  +  accusative). Similarly, the conjoined verbs in the  ‘ literary ’  
 [ ' opos] - clause of 
the ﬁ rst sentence are still subjunctive rather than optative, despite the fact that the main 
verb refers to the past (the most usual form of ﬁ nal clause in this kind of writing is still 
an allative preposition   +  articular inﬁ nitive). The 3pl aorist subjunctive 
 
[apo ' strepsosin], incidentally, appears in two manuscripts as future indicative 
 [apo ' strepsusin], which may reﬂ ect the fact that the two paradigms had 
long been indistinguishable in the spoken language (cf.  11.8.3 ,  11.8.6 (a)), or even reveal 
the inﬂ uence of the high - style use of the future with predicates of  ‘ taking precaution ’ . 
 In general, then, Theoph á nes ’ chronicle reﬂ ects many characteristic features that 
derive partly from the sources (including earlier chronicles) but which remained equally 
at home in the chronographic genre itself. None the less, its language overall is already 
moving in a more learned direction as different varieties of the medieval Koine start 
to shape themselves into a stylistically more coherent form of written language for the 
educated classes.  
 10.3  Hagiography and Exegetical Works 
 10.3.1   Io á nnes  M ó schos (c.550 – 619) 
 M ó schos was a monk in the monastery of St Theod ó sios near Jerusalem, but travelled 
with Sophr ó nios, later to become patriarch of Jerusalem, around Egypt, the Middle 
East and Cyprus, ﬁ nally coming to Rome in 614, where he died. His  Spiritual Meadow , 
a collection of engaging moral tales about the exploits of monks, hermits and ordinary 

254 Byzantium
folk in the eastern Mediterranean, provides a vivid picture of the social conditions of 
the time. It was enormously popular, and survives in several recensions, as well as in 
Latin, Old Church Slavonic and Arabic translations. The critical edition being prepared 
by P. Pattenden is still awaited. In the meantime the text has to be read in Migne ’ s 
 Patrologia Graeca  (87, part 3). See also Hesseling  (1931) , Baynes  (1955) , Beck ( 1959 : 
412 – 13). 
 The continued inﬂ uence of the  ‘ popular ’ literary tradition deriving from the 
Septuagint and New Testament is always apparent, but this work also represents an 
important source for the development of Greek in the early Byzantine period, especially 
in the passages of direct speech, which often display a more contemporary colloquial 
style. The following extract tells what happens after the author and Sophr ó nios, tem-
porarily at a loose end in Alexandria, have made their way to a colonnade in the centre 
of the city and found a group of blind men: 
 (6) 
  

The Written Koine in Byzantium 255
 ‘ The blind men were talking among themselves and one said to another,  “ On your word, 
how did you go blind? ” And he replied,  “ I was a sailor as a young man, and we were 
sailing off Africa when I caught an eye infection at sea, and having no means of ﬁ nding 
a cure, I got cataracts on my eyes and went blind. ” He then asked the other,  “ How did 
you go blind? ” And he replied,  “ I was a glassmaker by trade, and both my eyes got a 
splash from the ﬁ re and I was blinded. ” And then they asked the third,  “ How did you go 
blind? ” And he replied,  “ I will tell you honestly. When I was a young man, I really hated 
work; I became completely dissolute. And since I had no way to get food  – well, I used 
to steal. So, one day, after I had done many wicked things, I was standing by the market 
when I saw a body being taken for burial, very well - dressed. I followed behind the funeral 
procession to see where they were going to bury him  … Then I  … went into the tomb 
and stripped him of everything he was wearing  … And as I was taking off his underwear 
 … , the corpse sat up in front of me and, reaching out for me with its two hands, it 
scratched my face with its ﬁ ngers and pulled out my two eyes  … ” 
 While there is nothing here that could be directly attributed to the inﬂ uence of the 
literary tradition, gross errors of morphology and syntax, as seen in some personal 
correspondence from Egypt from the same period, are completely absent. This is the 
simple narrative style of educated speakers of the period, modelled on that of the only 
vernacular - based literary tradition and including features that were almost certainly in 
decline in the popular speech of M ó schos ’ own time: 
 (7)  (a)  The standard use of the dative in its core grammatical (indirect object) 
and adverbial (instrumental) functions, even in passages of dialogue.  
 (b)  The classical use of inﬂ ected participles in certain functions (e.g. circum-
stantial and temporal adjuncts, and complements to verbs of perception), 
and the use of the articular inﬁ nitive after 
  [meta] as a temporal 
clause. 
 Other features, however, reﬂ ect the later evolution of the language of the popular 
Christian tradition under the impact of spoken Greek. We may note, for example: 

256 Byzantium
 (8)  (a)  The standard use of 
   ‘ two ’  with natural pairs, where Attic 
would have employed the dual number. 
 (b)  The substitution of 
 [ ' itis]/
 [ ' iti], lit.  ‘ if anyone ’ / ‘ if anything ’ , 
for the indeﬁ nite/generic relatives 
 [ ' ostis]  ‘ whoever ’ and 
 [ ' osos] 
 ‘ everyone who ’ (cf. the functional parallelism of indeﬁ nite/generic and 
conditional expressions in  whoever/everyone who does X; if anyone does 
X ); this is analogous to the substitution of a conditional conjunction 
in indeﬁ nite relative clauses introduced by 
  [ ' os an]  ‘ whoever ’ 
(cf.  10.2.1 ). 
 (c)  The absence of OV orders, and the associated positioning of clitic pro-
nouns in second position in their clauses, immediately after their govern-
ing verbs, which stand initially to provide the standard head – clitic order 
seen also in NPs with dependent possessive pronouns. The  ‘ displacement ’ 
of possessives into this sentential slot (cf. 
 [ ' ekse ' sem 
mu tin  ' opsin]  ‘ he - scratched of - me the face ’ ) again illustrates one of the 
bases for the replacement of the dative with the genitive, though this 
further development has not yet affected the style used here.  
 (d)  The use of the inﬁ nitival future periphrasis with 
 [ ' melo]  ‘ be about 
to ’ . Elsewhere M ó schos also uses the more popular periphrasis with 
 
[ ' exo], and occasionally a periphrasis with the future of  ‘ be ’  +  present 
participle. But the regular expression of futurity, particularly in overtly 
future contexts, is the present indicative, already a marked possibility in 
classical Greek, and now supported by the merger of the present indicative 
with the present subjunctive in the spoken language; aorist subjunctives 
are also used as futures, following the parallel merger of this paradigm 
with that of the future indicative, cf.  11.8.3 ,  11.8.5 (a).  
 (e)  The generalization of 
 [mi] as the negative for non - ﬁ nite verb forms 
regardless of their function (cf. 
 [mi  ' exon]  ‘ not having ’ ); this 
began in Hellenistic times and became standard during the early centuries 
 ad . In general terms, classical Greek negated factual statements with 
 
[u(k)], and used 
 [mi] for clauses with a modal interpretation.  
 (f) 
 Middle forms of the verb  ‘ be ’ (cf. 
 [ ' imin]), as often in papyri and 
earlier Christian texts (cf.  5.11.1 ,  11.8.5 (a)); note also the use of 
 
[ ' otan] as a simple ( ‘ when ’ ) rather than a generic ( ‘ whenever ’ ) conjunction 
( 10.2.1 ). 
 (g)  Avoidance of the aorist middle, cf.  ‘ perfect ’ 
 for 
 
[eje ' nomin]  ‘ I became ’ , aorist  ‘ passive ’ 
 [ape ' kri θ in] for 
 [apekri ' namin]  ‘ I replied ’ ; such replacement originated in 
Hellenistic and Roman imperial times, with the aorist passive generally 
favoured, though an existing perfect sometimes predominated (following 
perfect – aorist merger, cf.  6.5.2 ). 
 10.3.2   St German ó s (c.640 – 733) 
 German ó s ’ father was a relative of the emperor Her á kleios, but having become impli-
cated in the assassination of Her á kleios ’ successor K ó nstas, he was put to death by 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 257
the latter ’ s son, Konstant í nos IV. Though allowed to keep his inheritance, German ó s 
was castrated because of his disastrous family connections and sought a career in the 
church, eventually becoming patriarch of Constantinople in 715 just before the ﬁ rst 
iconoclastic crisis. When L é on III ordered the destruction of images in 725, German ó s 
refused, and in 730 he was deposed in favour of the iconoclast Anast á sios. 
 German ó s wrote a major historical work on the six ecumenical councils that had 
then been held ( On Heresies and Synods ), and a large collection of sermons, letters 
and poems survive in manuscript form, though it is far from certain that all of these 
were written by him. He is best known for his commentary on the Orthodox liturgy 
( Ecclesiastical History and Mystical Contemplation ), a radical and inﬂ uential synthesis 
of Alexandrian and Antiochene interpretations belonging to the tradition of exegetical 
writing. It was aimed at a general reading public, and composed in a traditional but 
accessible middle style, somewhere between the popular - biblical and more learned 
ecclesiastical registers (cf.  8.5.2 ,  8.5.6 ). 
 The standard text is that of Borgia  (1912) ; see also Meyendorff  (1984)  for further 
background, bibliography and translation. The following extract, in which the absence 
of the kind of colloquial features seen in M ó schos is immediately apparent, explains 
the practice of praying towards the east: 
 (9) 
   

258 Byzantium
 ‘ Praying towards the east is traditional, like all the other practices of the holy apostles. It 
is so because the intelligible sun of righteousness, Christ our God, appeared on earth in 
the places where the perceptible sun rises, according to the prophet who says,  “ East is his 
name, ” and again,  “ Worship the Lord all the earth, who came to the heaven of heaven 
in the east, ” and,  “ Let us worship in the place where his feet stood, ” and again,  “ The 
feet of the Lord shall stand upon the mount of olives in the east. ” The prophets also say 
these things because we wait eagerly to receive again the paradise in Eden that is in the 
east and, since they are bound together, the rising of the dawn of the second coming of 
our Christ and God. ’ 
 Evidently a biblical sort of style (as in the quotations) is the target, with 
 [is] and 
 [e ' pi]  +  accusative used locatively, genitive pronouns employed consistently instead 
of the possessive adjectives of classical Greek, 
 [proscy ' no]  ‘ I worship ’ used 
with the dative rather than the classical accusative, etc. But the author ’ s learned back-
ground and the inﬂ uence of ecclesiastical ofﬁ cialdom and theological debate are 
revealed in the continued use of verb - ﬁ nal orders, and in the extended hyperbaton and 
complex complementation of nominalized inﬁ nitivals used after prepositions. 
 10.4   Paraenetic Literature of the Middle Period 
 10.4.1   Konstant í nos  VII  Porphyrog é nnetos (905 – 59) 
 Konstant í nos VII Porphyrog é nnetos ( ‘ Born in the purple ’ ) succeeded to the throne at 
the age of seven, but had no power until 944 when the regent/emperor Roman ó s I 
Lakapen ó s was deposed by his own sons, who resented his preference for Konstant í nos, 
the true heir of the Macedonian dynasty. The coup backﬁ red, since public opinion 
was strongly in favour of Konstant í nos, and the perpetrators were promptly exiled. 
He proved to be an effective emperor, whose reign saw the conversion of the Russian 
princess Olga of Kiev, and the safe defence of the northern and eastern frontiers against 
the Bulgarians and Arabs. 
 During the regency, however, he had devoted himself to the study of the history of 
Byzantine institutions, and promoted a renaissance of scholarship and creative writing, 
including a continuation of Theoph á nes ’ chronicle and the compilation of anthologies 
and encyclopaedias. He himself wrote a history of his grandfather Bas í leios I, but is 
now best known for the treatises he commissioned on the administration of the empire, 
court ceremonial and the military districts ( ‘ themes ’ ) of the provinces (see Reiske 
 (1829, 1830) , Vogt  (1935 – 40) , Jenkins and Moravcsik  (1967) , Pertusi  (1952) , Toynbee 
 (1973) ,  Š ev č enko  (1992) ). Much of this work was originally conﬁ dential, and circu-
lated only among the members of the royal family and its closest advisers.  On the 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 259
Administration of the Empire,  for example, an advisory document addressed to his 
son Roman ó s (who almost inevitably turned out to be a hedonistic waster), contains 
a great deal of classiﬁ ed information about foreign policy which, as a basis for extor-
tion, would have been literally worth its weight in gold to enemies such as the 
Petcheneks. 
 A classicizing style was manifestly unsuitable for the straightforward recording and 
transmission of information, and the prefaces to the works on administration and 
ceremonial both contain conventional apologies for the form of writing to follow. The 
piece in (10), from  On the Administration of the Empire , is composed in precisely the 
literary style that is subsequently avoided, but it is a revealing statement of Byzantine 
attitudes: 3 
 (10)    
 ‘ And do not be at all surprised, my son, that I have used clear and well - worn diction 
and something approaching simple free - ﬂ owing prose for the presentation of my 
subject. For I have not endeavoured to make a display of ﬁ ne writing or Atticized phra-
seology, swelling with the sublime and lofty, but rather have striven to teach you the 
things of which I think you should not be ignorant through a common vernacular 
exposition. ’ 
 Following this we ﬁ nd a mix of styles ranging from something close to the language 
of scholarship down to the simple language of record - keeping and chronography, and 
reﬂ ecting the heterogeneous character of the different sources used (including imperial 
archives and earlier chronicles). Consider ﬁ rst the extract in (11), which illustrates a 
somewhat more elaborated variety: 
 (11)    

260 Byzantium
 ‘ (It is noted) that the Russians too are anxious to keep the peace with the Petcheneks. For 
they buy cattle, horses and sheep from them  … Moreover, the Russians are altogether 
unable to set out for wars across their borders unless they are at peace with the Petcheneks, 
because (while they are away from their households) these people may attack, and destroy 
and vandalize their property. So the Russians make ever greater efforts (both to avoid 
being harmed by them and because this nation is strong) to retain their alliance with them 
and to have their support, so that they may both be freed from their hatred and enjoy the 
beneﬁ t of their help. ’ 
 This is well below the style of the introduction, but above that of passages consisting 
mainly of lists of facts (for these, and the use of initial 
 [ ' oti], see (12)). Thus even 
though the participial adjuncts are nearly all subject - orientated, and despite the fact 
that the vocabulary is of a routine character (including 
 [(o) af ' tos], originally 
 ‘ self/same ’ , and 
 [(o) ti ' utos], originally  ‘ such ’ , in discourse - deictic func-
tion), we should also note the subordinating syntax and learned markers such as the 
use of 
  [ ' exo]  ‘ have ’  +  adverbial in the sense of  ‘ be ’  +  adjective, the complex nomi-
nalized inﬁ nitivals with accusative subjects, the verb - ﬁ nal order in subordinate clauses 
without emphasis on the preceding complements, and, in characteristically high 
Byzantine fashion, the use of 
  [ ' os an] as a ﬁ nal conjunction with subjunctive 
and optative in free variation (cf.  9.3 ,  9.5 ). 
 The next passage, describing two of the cities of Dalmatia, is in a more basic 
style: 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 261
 (12)    
 ‘ ( It is noted ) that the city of Asp á lathon ( Split ), which means  “ little palace ” , was founded 
by the emperor Diocletian. He had it as his private domus, building both a court and 
palaces inside it, most of which have been destroyed. But a few things are preserved to 
this day, among which are the city ’ s bishop ’ s palace and the church of St Domnus, which 
was the resting - place of the aforementioned Diocletian and in which the same St Domnus 
lies. Beneath are arching vaults, which used to be prison cells, in which he cruelly conﬁ ned 
the saints who were being tortured by him  … 

262 Byzantium
 ( It is noted ) that the city of Tetrango ú rin ( Sveti Stefan in Montenegro ) is a small island 
in the sea, but with a very narrow neck reaching to the land like a bridge, over which the 
inhabitants cross to this city. It is called Tetrango ú rin because it is long like a cucumber 
( ango ú rion ). In the same city lies the holy martyr Laur é ntios, the archdeacon. ’ 
 A number of features here are familiar from chronography, most obviously the ana-
phoric use of 
 [o af ' tos]  ‘ the same ’ . Note too the avoidance of complex subor-
dination other than that involving relative clauses and participles, and the relatively 
loose syntax of the latter (including elsewhere  ‘ misused ’  genitive absolutes and syntacti-
cally unconnected nominatives). The use of 
 [en]   +  dative to denote an instrument 
or path (common in the New Testament), the nominalized inﬁ nitives governed by 
prepositions (with limited complementation), the deﬁ nite comparative adjective used 
as a superlative (
 [ta  ' pliona], lit.  ‘ the more ’ ), the use of 
 [ ' osper] and 
  [ ' ostis] as simple relatives to replace monosyllabic forms lacking prepositional 
support, and the use of initial 
 [ ' oti]  ‘ that ’ , marking excerpts or entries in a ledger, 
are also characteristic of this basic style, as is the semantically neutral use of neuter 
diminutives: 
 [ni ' sion]  ‘ island ’  for 
 [ ' nisos], 
  [je ' ﬁ rion]  ‘ bridge ’ for 
  [ ' jeﬁ ra], and, with loss of the o - vowel, 
 (cf.  6.5.2 ). 
These had become established in popular speech and subliterary writing in Hellenistic 
and Roman imperial times, but took longer to penetrate the middle registers of the 
written language. 
 The widespread use of adverbs and adverbial case forms as preposition substitutes 
with the genitive (e.g. 
 [ipo ' kato]  ‘ down - under ’ , and elsewhere 
 [e ' pano] 
 ‘ up - on ’ , 
 [ ' ciklo]  ‘ in - circle (of) ’ , i.e.  ‘ around ’ ) reﬂ ects the beginnings of the disap-
pearance of many of the classical prepositions from ordinary spoken Greek during the 
middle ages (cf.  11.7.1 ). Accusative 
  ‘ after - manner (of)/like ’ is similarly 
used in (12). In spoken Greek only 
 [is (se)]  ‘ at/on/in ’ , 
 [apo]  ‘ from/by ’ ,  g i a 
[ja] (
 )  ‘ for/about ’ , and 
  [me] (
 [meta])  ‘ with ’  eventually remained 
in general use, and many spatial and other functions came to be expressed instead by 
adverbials such as those above. These retained the old genitive syntax when they gov-
erned a clitic pronoun, but were otherwise complemented by a prepositional phrase 
headed by one of the four  ‘ survivors ’ , e.g. 
 [ ' pano sto vu ' no] 
 ‘ up(on) on - the mountain ’ , etc. 
 Taking (10), (11) and (12) together, we can begin properly to appreciate the skill 
required to write appropriately in a language that offered such a plethora of stylistic 
options, and it is a tribute to the efﬁ cacy of Byzantine education that the best learned 
writers were able to compose more or less successfully, and more or less consistently, 
at a number of different levels deﬁ ned by different, but overlapping, sets of 
parameters. 
 10.4.2   Kekaum é nos (11th  c entury) 
 Kekaum é nos, like many landowners in northern Greece, belonged to a family that 
came originally from Armenia. The  Strategik ó n,  probably written in the decade after 
the battle of Manzikert (1071), provides guidance for his son on public and private 
conduct. The author ’ s suspicious and devious character provides a sad comment on 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 263
life in an era when the empire, threatened on all fronts, was being run as a military 
dictatorship, and people had to endure not only crippling taxation (sections 50, 68) 
but the threat of being  ‘ reported ’ if they dared to complain. His sentiments are some-
times reminiscent of those of Hesiod and Theognis, who wrote in similarly difﬁ cult 
times some eighteen centuries earlier. 
 He tells us, perhaps disingenuously, that as a mere provincial aristocrat he did not 
receive a literary education (section 191), but since the work was intended for distribu-
tion within his own family, the vocabulary and syntax of the  Strategik ó n  naturally reﬂ ect 
aspects of contemporary usage quite directly. 
 , for example, means 
 ‘ serve/work (for) ’ , not  ‘ be a slave/subject to ’ , and 
 means  ‘ speak ’ rather 
than  ‘ associate with ’ , while the former ﬁ nal conjunction 
 [ ' ina] (+ subjunctive) is now 
widely used to replace complement and adjunct inﬁ nitivals (complements to modal/
aspectual auxiliaries and to  ‘ subject control ’ verbs being the major survivors). The 
overall impression is of an updated version of the kind of writing seen in M ó schos. The 
standard edition of the sole manuscript is Wassiliewsky and Jernstedt  (1896) ; see also 
Moravcsik ( 1983 : 350 – 2). The extract in (13) is typical in style and content: 
 (13)    

264 Byzantium
 ‘ Stop talking to scum, and be careful even when talking to friends, or anyone else. And 
if a conversation starts up about the emperor and our mistress, just don ’ t reply and walk 
away, because I ’ ve seen a lot of people get into trouble like this. A fool speaks as if in 
jest, and then cunningly turns round and pretends it was you who said it. And even if he 
spoke honestly, some other swine will run and tell, and you will be blamed because you 
were there. And though they will despise the speaker, it is you they will pin the blame on. 
My son, be careful of things that seem insigniﬁ cant; great dangers follow from them. There 
are a lot of people I ’ ve seen get into trouble like this. ’ 
 The regular placing of verbs initially in clauses, unless displaced by a topicalized 
subject, focalized element, complementizer or semantic operator (e.g. conditional con-
junction, negative particle or interrogative), is surely a characteristic of the contempo-
rary educated vernacular. Correspondingly, clitic pronouns, including non - emphatic 
 [(a)ton]/
 [tuton]  ‘ him ’ / ‘ this - one ’  appear in second position within the 
phrases that contain them, following their governing head when this is initial, or 
immediately preceding it when some other item occurs initially (cf.  4.8 and  6.5.1 for 
earlier periods). Other features of this simple style include: the overlap of  [en]   +  dative 
and 
   [is]   +  accusative in both spatial and instrumental functions and the related use 
of once allative adverbs in a locative sense (
 [e ' cise]  =   ‘ there ’ , not  ‘ to there ’ ); the 
generic use of 
 [o ' potan]  ‘ when(ever) ’  with a present indicative rather than a 
subjunctive; the use of 
 [pare ' tume] to mean  ‘ stop ’ , rather than  ‘ avert (by 
entreaty) ’ , and of 
  +  accusative to mean  ‘ about ’ , rather than  ‘ because of ’ . 
 Note, however, that the morphology is classically correct throughout, that 
 ‘ popular ’  future periphrases are avoided, and that datives are still used routinely to 
mark the indirect object with no genitive/accusative overlaps: e.g. 
 
 
  ‘ the (things)  … to - you seeming ’ (cf. 
 
 
 
 
  ‘ if and you - work for - the - emperor ’ (section 3), 
  
  
  
    ‘ write to - the emperor ’ (section 50), among many other exam-
ples). Inﬂ ected participles are also still in use, though in a restricted range of functions 
as expected. Kekaum é nos may or may not have had a literary education, but he clearly 
wrote a polished contemporary Koine that was far from  ‘ vulgar ’ . For evidence of the 
vernacular in this period, we must look elsewhere (see chapters  11 and  12 ). 
 10.5   The Metaphrases of the Palaiologan Period 
 The middle - register works compiled on the orders of Konstant í nos VII provide some 
of the best - known evidence for the simpler forms of written Greek in the middle ages, 
but there are also important examples from the later empire of the transposition of 
literary Greek into a lower register. The works involved are by Nik é tas Choni á tes, 
Ge ó rgios Pachym é res, Nikeph ó ros Blemmydes ( Andr í as ) and Anna Komnen é (from 
the middle of book XI of the  Alexiad to the end of XIII), and the large number of 
manuscripts points to the return of a reading public whose education was not sufﬁ cient 
to allow them to cope easily with the Atticizing high style (see especially Van Dieten 
 (1979)  on Nik é tas Choni á tes, and Hunger  (1981)  on the  Alexiad ). Despite limited 
stylistic variation, this register represents a variant of the emerging standard that 
inherited its deﬁ ning features from the tradition of practical writing represented in 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 265
texts such as Konstant í nos VII ’ s private works, Manass é s ’   Synopsis Istorik é and, at a 
slightly higher level, the scholarship of the later Byzantine period (for which see  10.6 ). 
 The example below is taken from the  Alexiad, where the emperor is wrestling with 
the problems caused by the arrival of the ﬁ rst crusade. His ally Raymond of Provence 
(count of St Gilles), having besieged Tripolis in the Lebanon, had contracted a fatal 
illness and sent for his nephew Guillaume - Jordan (count of Cerdagne) to succeed him. 
But while the emperor Al é xios I tries to win Guillaume over to his side, the news breaks 
that Tancred, nephew of Robert Guiscard, has occupied Antioch and other cities of 
the region in contravention of the Normans ’ oath of allegiance. Al é xios therefore writes 
to the commander of the Norman force, Robert ’ s son Bohemond, to express his dis-
pleasure. The original text is given ﬁ rst, followed by the metaphrase: 
 (14)    

266 Byzantium
 ‘ Accordingly, when the emperor learned of his ( St Gilles ’ ) death, he at once informed the 
duke of Cyprus by letter, in order that he might send Nik é tas Chal í ntzes to Guillaume 
with plenty of money in an effort both to win him over and to induce him to swear to 
the emperor to maintain a sure allegiance towards him of the sort that his dead uncle 
St Gilles had observed until his death. 
 Subsequently, the emperor learned of the occupation of Laodicea by Tancred and set out 
a letter to Bohemond with the following content:  “ You are aware of the oaths and prom-
ises which not only you yourself but everyone made to the emperor of the Romans. Now 
you are the ﬁ rst to break your word, occupying Antioch and deviously winning over 
certain other fortiﬁ ed towns, including Laodicea itself. Act justly then, withdraw from the 
city of Antioch and all the other places, and do not keep seeking to provoke further wars 
and battles against yourself. ”  ’ 

The Written Koine in Byzantium 267
 ‘ Having learned of St Gilles ’ death, the emperor wrote to the duke of Cyprus in order 
that he might send Nik é tas Chal í tzes to Guillaume with money to meet his expenses, so 
that he would swear to keep unchanged his pledge of allegiance to the emperor, just as 
his uncle had. 
 But when the emperor learned that Tancred had also seized Laodicea, he wrote the fol-
lowing to Bohemond:  “ You are aware of the oaths and the promises which not only you 
but all the counts made to the king. But now you have perjured yourself ﬁ rst by taking 
Antioch, as well as other fortiﬁ ed towns including Laodicea itself. So for the sake of justice, 
leave the city of Antioch and all the other places, and do not seek to stir up wars and 
battles against yourself. ”  ’ 
 Anna ’ s piece displays the usual mix of (predominantly) classical morphology with 
Atticisms and high - style Byzantinisms, and it is, of course, precisely these literary fea-
tures of the original that have been adapted or removed in the metaphrase, which is 
also more explicit and even interpolates clariﬁ catory material, e.g. the substitution of 
  for 
 [ ' tutu] at the beginning of the piece, or the 
addition of 
 [i  ' komites] to 
  [( ' a)]pandes] in Al é xios ’ letter. Thus 
the free use of perfects as aorists, so typical of high - style writing, is now avoided 
(cf. the substitution of the aorist participle 
  in place of perfect 
 ), and the functional range of participial usage is more 
restricted, with the surviving forms serving as subject - orientated adjuncts (nominative) 
or in absolute constructions (genitive), as expected; the initial participle in the ﬁ rst 
sentence of the second paragraph of the original has, however, been replaced by a 
ﬁ nite clause, while the neuter accusative plural 
  [peri ' exonda] modifying a 
direct object has been quietly dropped. The metaphrast has also been obliged to replace 
the relative clause introduced by 
 [o ' pian], originally  ‘ such as ’ , with an adverbial 
clause, because these forms were already used in the spoken and middle - range written 
languages as simple relatives (cf.  11.7.8 (c)). 
 There is also some reduction in inﬁ nitival usage; note in particular the use of a 
subjunctive clause introduced by 
 [ ' ina] after the control verb 
 [o ' mosi]  ‘ swear ’ 
(i.e. meaning  [X swear [that X keep]]  in place of  [X swear [to keep]] , though the use 
of inﬁ nitives with control verbs is also maintained in parallel, as probably still in the 
spoken language). The metaphrast, perhaps uncertain about the traditional use of 
inﬁ nitives in such contexts, has also misread Anna ’ s phrase 
 
[ ' pistin ve ' vean ﬁ  ' lakse] as predicative (i.e.   =   ‘ to keep (his) faith sure ’ rather than  ‘ to 
keep (a) sure faith ’ ), and translated accordingly, as if Guillaume had already sworn 
such an oath. Certain other long - abandoned categories and formations are also avoided, 
along with some of the classical vocabulary of the original. Thus non - lexicalized 
middle verb forms are replaced by active equivalents or simply dropped, 
so that 
  
 ‘ letter sets - forth thus containing ’ , for example, is replaced by the prosaic 

268 Byzantium
  ‘ writes these - things ’ . Note also 
 [ji ' nosko] for 
  ‘ I know ’ , 
 for 
 
[a ' ﬁ stame/a ' pestin]  ‘ I withdraw ’ , and 
 for 
  ‘ I 
provoke/arouse ’ . 
 None the less, the fundamentally non - vernacular quality of this register is immedi-
ately apparent in the classical morphology of the categories and paradigms still in use: 
only the genitive 
 , with  - h [ - i] for  - o  u [ - u], has a modern look (cf. 
 11.7.3 ), and even this has ancient precedent in the case of proper names. The favourite 
Byzantine ﬁ nal conjunction 
  [ ' os an] is also in evidence, verb - ﬁ nal order is still 
a freely available option, especially in subordinate clauses, while 
  [af ' tos] retains 
its classical use as an emphatic pronominal (i.e.   =   ‘ self ’ rather than modern  ‘ this ’ ). We 
should be in no doubt that this simpliﬁ ed style still belongs ﬁ rmly within the range of 
the educated written Koine of its period.  
 10.6   Academic Greek in the Late Period:  M á ximos Plano ú des 
(c.1255 – c.1305) 
 Manou é l Plano ú des took the name M á ximos when he became a monk. He ran a school 
in the capital, and served as secretary to the emperor Andr ó nikos II Palaiol ó gos 
(reigned 1282 – 1328), for whom he went on an embassy to Venice. He is best known, 
however, as a scholar of prodigious range and learning, and as one of the ﬁ rst 
Byzantine academics to master Latin (see Wilson ( 1983 : 230 – 41)). The following 
extract is taken from a pamphlet on Arabic numerals (which he writes in their Persian 
rather than western form): 
 (15)   

The Written Koine in Byzantium 269
 ‘ Since the set of numbers is inﬁ nite and there can be no knowledge of inﬁ nity, the wisest 
of the astronomers invented certain symbols and a framework of interpretation for 
them so that the properties of the numbers in actual use might be understood at a glance 
more readily and more accurately. The symbols are only nine in number, as follows: 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. They also use another symbol which they call  “ cipher ” , meaning 
 “ nothing ” among the Indians; as for the nine symbols, these too are Indian; the cipher is 
written 0. 
 When each of these nine symbols is used by itself, then, if we begin with the ﬁ rst column 
on the right, 1 means  “ one ” , 2 means  “ two ” ,  … In the second column 1 means  “ ten ” , 2 
means  “ twenty ”   … In the third column 1 means  “ a hundred ” , 2 means  “ two hundred ” , 
 … And the same conventions apply in the remaining columns. ’ 
 It is nice to see an educated Byzantine writing naturally about something that obviously 
interested him. The language is clearly less rhetorically elaborated than that of literary 
composition, though the treatment of academic subjects required an extensive technical 
vocabulary which, along with certain stylistic preferences, was taken over from the 
relevant scholarship of antiquity wherever possible. Superﬁ cially, therefore, Plano ú des ’ 
usage is more archaizing than that of the last extract, especially in morphology and 
lexicon, though even in syntax possessive genitives and other dependents may still be 
sandwiched between article and noun, while the option of using verb - ﬁ nal order neu-
trally in subordinate clauses remains (especially in clauses containing learned uses of 
participles and inﬁ nitives). Ancient government and agreement requirements are also 
strictly maintained, as, for example, the use of a 3sg verb (
 [katano ' ite], 
governed by the favourite 
 [ ' os an]) with a neuter plural subject. 
 But in main clauses at least, the regular preverbal constituents are now topic - like 
subjects or preposed constituents functioning formally as sentence topics or emphatic/
contrastive foci, as in Modern Greek. There are other contemporary details too, includ-
ing the use of a comparative adjective with the article in superlative sense (
 
[ﬁ loso ' foteri]); the use of 
 [Q ja] to mean  ‘ for ’ (albeit with classical genitive rather 
than accusative); the topicalization in the penultimate clause of the ﬁ rst paragraph, 

270 Byzantium
where 
 [af ' ta] is used as a resumptive pronoun meaning  ‘ these ’ rather than 
emphatic  ‘ themselves ’ ; and the nominative absolute at the beginning of the second 
paragraph, where the sense, but not strictly the grammar, links the adjunct to the set 
of subjects that follow. Participles are also chieﬂ y subject - orientated and function as 
circumstantial adjuncts, and this too probably reﬂ ects the syntactic practice of 
contemporary educated speech (even though the full set of forms was probably no 
longer in spoken use).  
 10.7   Ofﬁ cial Greek of the Later Empire 
 It remains to complete this chapter with a brief examination of the high style of the 
imperial and ecclesiastical bureaucracy. The extract below comes from a decree of 
December 1326 issued by the emperor Andr ó nikos III Palaiol ó gos (co - emperor with 
his grandfather from 1325, sole ruler 1328 – 41), conﬁ rming that the monastery of St 
John the Evangelist on Patmos has sole ownership of various properties on Lemnos, 
Leros and Cos against the claims of the archbishop of the last - named island: 
 (16)   

The Written Koine in Byzantium 271
 ‘ Whereas the monks of my majesty ’ s venerable monastery located on the island of Patmos, 
honoured in the name of the holy, illustrious, all - praiseworthy apostle and evangelist John 
the Divine, have asked and implored my majesty in the matter of the possessions, com-
munes and remaining buildings belonging to them, which they occupy by virtue both of 
divers chrysobulls and ordinances, but also of duly registered restitutions and other judge-
ments, that they may obtain a further chrysobull of my majesty to the effect that, just as 
they have occupied these until now, so too they may occupy them in the future wholly 
free of public burdens and taxation, speciﬁ cally the commune on the island of Lemnos, 
called St George Myroblytes and located in the locality of St Irene, together with all the 
vineyards and ﬁ elds belonging to it  … ’ 
 Anyone who has ever had to read a formal legal document will instantly recognize the 
archaizing verbosity on display here. Since church and state were inextricably bound 
together in Byzantium, the elaborate appellations and technical vocabulary above come 
not only from the law but also from the equally obscurantist ecclesiastical tradition. 
Such writing belongs to a long tradition of high ofﬁ cialdom, but it is important to note 
that most of the technical vocabulary in this extract is not attested in classical Greek, 
and that even the items that are now have different meanings. 
 Beneath the traditional surface, however, the ofﬁ cial Koine of late antiquity has 
been signiﬁ cantly updated. Thus even though the structural complexity of noun phrases 
involving the insertion of modiﬁ ers between article and noun has generated new levels 
of opacity, all speciﬁ cally possessive genitives now follow the nouns that govern them, 
and regularly do so without a repeated article, just as in Modern Greek (i.e. we have 
 [the X of - Y] rather than the classical structures  [the of - Y X]  or  [the X the of - Y] ). Note 
too the avoidance of possessive adjectives in favour of genitive clitic pronouns, the 
invariant positioning of direct objects after the verbs that govern them (i.e. there are 
no pragmatically neutral verb - ﬁ nal clauses), and the modern use of 
 [ ' ina] - clauses 
with control verbs of  ‘ asking/imploring ’  in place of classical inﬁ nitives, even when the 
same subject is involved in both clauses. In some respects, therefore, this is structurally 
more modern than the academic style of the previous section, and we should be in no 
doubt it is yet another  ‘ antiqued ’  version of the late - medieval Koine rather than a 
half - hearted imitation of some ancient predecessor.  
 10.8  Conclusion 
 Sufﬁ cient evidence has now been presented to show that the range of middle - register 
writing in Byzantium was never the product of incompetent archaizing but reﬂ ected a 

272 Byzantium
continuously evolving tradition that was subject to well - understood conventions con-
trolling the mix of ancient and modern according to period, register and style. It did 
not occur to educated Byzantines to write in the educated vernacular of their time, but 
they did write in what were for them living forms of Greek, varieties reﬂ ecting both 
the conventions of a written tradition and the rules of spoken Greek in a process of 
continuous evolution and compromise. 
 Looking at the patterns of usage revealed above, it would seem fair to say that, by 
the later Byzantine period, the basic principles of sentence structure for middle - style 
compositions were fairly constant, being essentially those of educated speech, while 
the principal archaizing deviations were comparatively superﬁ cial (and so readily 
taught and learned), involving genre - conditioned lexical and phraseological substitu-
tions, the strict deployment of classical morphology in the paradigms retained in use, 
and adherence to ancient rules governing the realization of the relationship between 
heads and their local dependents (involving, for example, government and agreement 
patterns, parochial word - order requirements, or the choice of inﬁ nitival complements). 
There was, in other words, an emerging common written style with an essentially 
modern syntax that was archaized in various ways in accordance with the conventions 
of different genres. 
 It was, broadly speaking, this variably archaized but increasingly unitary style that 
eventually developed, under various external pressures, into the standard written lan-
guage of the Greek intelligentsia of the 17th and 18th centuries (see Part III, chapter 
 15 ), with only the most ambitious forms of composition, aiming for a truly classical 
style, still requiring detailed mastery of the rules and stylistic conventions of Ancient 
Greek at a more profound level.  
 Notes 
1  That is, agreement beyond the domain of a phrase (normally a noun phrase) containing the 
controlling head noun.  
2  The transcription is intended to reﬂ ect natural 1st/2nd - century speech.  
3  It is assumed that /y/ and /i/ had by now merged in even the most educated varieties.  

11
 Spoken Greek in the 
Byzantine Empire: The 
Principal Developments  
 
 11.1   Introduction 
 Because so little vernacular material has been preserved from the period before the 
12th century, there are many phenomena that cannot be dated with precision. Some 
developments carried through in the early and middle Byzantine periods had already 
begun in late antiquity (cf. chapters  5 and  6 ). Others, attested for the ﬁ rst time in the 
latter part of the Byzantine period, almost certainly began some centuries earlier, when 
the political and military circumstances of the 7th and 8th centuries and the prevailing 
cultural attitudes of the middle period worked decisively against the production and 
preservation of the kind of texts that might otherwise have given us a clearer picture 
of change in progress. 
 What follows, however, is an attempt not only to summarize the evidence for the later 
period, but also to reconstruct, in the light of the available materials, the contents of the 
500 - year  ‘ gap ’ between the latest colloquial texts from antiquity and the earliest medi-
eval vernacular literature. The work of Gignac  (1976, 1981)  is an indispensable guide in 
discriminating between those developments which began in the spoken Greek of the 
ancient world and innovations which belong to the medieval period proper. 
 In the course of this investigation it will quickly become clear that change in popular 
spoken Greek was more rapid than change in educated varieties, and we shall see in 
Part III that some developments already well attested in medieval vernacular texts are 
still only partially reﬂ ected in the grammar of educated spoken Greek composed by 
the Corﬁ ot Nik ó laos Soﬁ an ó s in the 16th century ( 14.2.2 ). We should also bear in 
mind that there were considerable differences of development according to region, and 
that a study of the archaisms and innovations of the rural dialects of Modern Greek 
(before they were subjected to the inﬂ uence of the standard language) can be a helpful 
supplement to our understanding of medieval dialect diversity. Such  ‘ backwoods ’ varie-
ties already seemed barbarous to the educated classes of the middle ages, as is clear 
from the complaints of Mikha é l Choni á tes, the elder brother of the historian Nik é tas, 
who was appointed bishop of Athens at the end of the 12th century. In several of his 
letters (cf. L á mbros  (1879, 1880) ) he laments the absence of intellectual life in this 

274 Byzantium
now miserable town, and confesses that after three years he had still not been 
able to master the local patois (deliberately misquoting Euripides ’  Orestes  485: 
 [vevar'varome 'xronios on en a ' θ ines], lit. 
 ‘ I - have - been - barbarized so - long being in Athens ’ ). Relevant phenomena are noted, as 
appropriate, below, and there is further discussion of the modern dialects in Part III 
( 14.2 ). 
 11.2   The Completion of Sound Changes Beginning 
in Antiquity 
 (1)  The shift of /y/    >  /i/, already apparent in some substandard varieties in the 
ancient world, was probably completed for all speakers of mainstream dialects by 
the 10th/11th century (see Macharadze  (1980)  for the evidence of Georgian loans, 
and cf. Browning ( 1983 : 56 – 7)). 
 The major exception is provided by Tsakonian and the Old Athenian group of modern 
dialects, comprising the traditional speech of Athens (i.e. before it became the capital 
of modern Greece in the 19th century), together with Megarian (which survives among 
the oldest inhabitants), Euboean (still spoken by the older generation in and around 
Kymi), Old Aeginetan (which survived until perhaps the middle of the 20th century), 
and the dialect of the Mani in the south of the Peloponnese. This group presumably 
represents the remnants of a once quite homogeneous dialect type spoken across much 
of south - eastern Greece away from the major political centres, which also inﬂ uenced 
in part the development of the otherwise isolated Tsakonian. Here the marked /y/ of 
the Koine shifted back to /u/ rather than to standard /i/; in the absence of strong struc-
tural support from the phonological system (e.g. with lip - rounding functioning con-
trastively along the whole of the front axis: /i/ ∼ /y/, /e/ ∼ / ø /, 
 ), such vowels are 
prone to change towards one or other norm, i.e. [+front +spread] or [+back +rounded].
 (2)  The simpliﬁ cation of double consonants (degemination), again sporadically 
attested in popular papyri, spread widely and eventually became quite general, 
though again with important dialectal exceptions, including South Italian (cut off 
from the Byzantine mainstream after 1071), the contemporary south - eastern group 
(i.e. Cypriot, Dodecanesian and Chian), and probably the neighbouring dialects of 
western and southern Asia Minor in earlier times.  
 (3)  The loss of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] was a sporadic and apparently random feature of many 
popular varieties of Greek from ancient times (Gignac  1976 : 111 – 16), though 
Cypriot is a major exception, with some evidence of early analogical spread of  - n 
[ - n] (cf. Consani  (1986, 1990) , Brixhe ( 1988b : 177 – 8)). This loss now became more 
widespread, though the south - eastern dialects are excluded, as expected, together 
with (in part) South Italian, Pontic and Cappadocian (the latter pair increasingly 
isolated by the Seljuk invasions after 1071).  
 The process was apparently inhibited in higher registers by the inﬂ uence of literacy, 
but it ceased to be random where it did occur, and speciﬁ cally manifested itself ﬁ rst 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 275
in assimilation to a following fricative or continuant (as still attested in Cypriot), 
followed by degemination in those dialects that underwent this change. 
 Subsequently, the retention of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] before vowels and plosives gradually 
became restricted, mainly for reasons of grammatical disambiguation, to a small set 
of word forms, especially when these were closely linked syntactically to an adjacent 
item, e.g. clitic pronouns within verb phrases, or articles and certain forms of adjectives 
(the latter only prevocalically) within noun phrases. In standard Modern Greek ﬁ nal 
nasals are now preserved before vowels and plosives (and occasionally elsewhere, as 
noted in (4)) in the following: 
 (4)  (a)   The masc/fem acc sg of the deﬁ nite article, plus the masc acc sg of the 
indeﬁ nite article: 
 [ton, tin,  ' enan]. 
 (b)  Genitive plural forms of the deﬁ nite article, nouns and adjectives in  - w n 
[ - on] (also before fricatives and continuants, to distinguish these from 
masc acc sg forms).  
 (c)  The masc/fem accusative singular of 3rd - person clitic pronouns: 
 
[ton, tin] (in the former also before fricatives/continuants, to avoid confu-
sion with the neuter 
 [to]).  
 (d)  (Sometimes) 1 the acc sg masc of pronominal/demonstrative forms such as 
 [ ' toson]  ‘ so much ’ , 
 [ ' alon]  ‘ other ’ , 
 [af ' ton]  ‘ this ’ , 
 
[e ' cinon]  ‘ that ’ , and, rarely, of adjectives (once widespread, this is now a 
residual feature).  
 (e)  The negative particles 
 , and the conjunctions 
 
[san]  ‘ when(ever) ’ , 
 [an]  ‘ if ’ , 
 [prin]  ‘ before ’ (in the latter pair also 
before fricatives/continuants).  
 (f) 
 Relevant 3pl verb forms, e.g. in the present active  - o  u n [ - un] and imperfect 
middle/passive  - o  n t a n [ - ondan], which have replaced ancient  - o  u s i [ - usi] 
and  - o  n t o  [ - ondo]), and in the 1/2/3 sg forms of the imperfect middle/
passive 
 [ - ' omun,  - ' osun,  - ' otan], which have replaced 
 [ - ' omin],  - o  u [ - u],  - e t o  [ - eto] (in both cases also before fricatives/
continuants). See (35) below for the innovatory terminations.  
 (5)  The deletion of nasals before fricatives, a process already in place in classical 
Greek before [s] and [z] (cf. 
  ‘ system ’ , 
 ), 
was given greater scope with the shift of the voiceless aspirated plosives to fricatives. 
Voiced plosives, however, which in general also became fricatives, were retained 
after nasals in popular Greek (cf.  6.4 (19)), as sometimes reﬂ ected subsequently in 
the orthography, e.g. 
 [ ' andras] for original 
  ‘ man ’ . Thus the renewed 
onset of nasal deletion was effectively restricted to the context of a following voice-
less fricative: e.g. 
 [ ' niﬁ ]  ‘ bride ’ , 
 [ ' nimﬁ ], etc. 
 But among educated speakers the rule requiring the retention of voiced plosives 
after nasals was undermined, just as that deleting nasals before voiceless fricatives 
was inhibited, by interference from the orthography of the written language, which 
spawned a great many spelling pronunciations that contravened the rules of popular 

276 Byzantium
spoken Greek in its  ‘ pure ’ form. Thus  ‘ popular ’ words like 
  ‘ tree ’ 
(traditionally spelled 
 ), and 
  ‘ father - in - law ’  ( < ancient 
 [pent h er ó s]), now sit side by side in the modern language with  ‘ learned ’ forms 
like 
  ‘ conjunction ’  and 
 [ ' penthos]  ‘ mourning ’ .
 (6)  Other than in learned words with a spelling pronunciation of the ancient form 
(whether retained through continuous use in the written tradition or subsequently 
reintroduced), a voiceless plosive followed by a voiced plosive was subject to voicing 
assimilation; and since voiced plosives were ultimately permitted only after nasals, 
any voiced plosives in such clusters became fricatives (cf.  6.4 ). 
 This principally affected the preposition 
 [ek] in composition, where the voicing 
assimilation began in ancient times and the shift to obligatory sequences of voiced 
fricatives was completed by the early Byzantine period at the latest. Thus classical 
  ‘ I undress ’ , for example, ﬁ rst became 
 , then 
 ; 
cf. 
 [ ' vjeno]  ‘ I go out ’ ,    <  classical 
 [ekba í no:], but with metathesis of 
 . 
The process, however, was again inhibited by interference from written Greek, so that, 
for example, 
 and 
  ‘ excursion ’  are both standard in 
the modern language.
 (7)  Synizesis ([ - iV]/[ - eV - ]   >  [ - jV - ]) was standardized in much non - learned vocabu-
lary, with a shift of the accent to the following vowel if [i/e] was originally accented: 
  ‘ children ’ etc. (cf. the metrical appendix in 
Maas and Tryp á nis ( 1963 : 514ff) for evidence of such shifts in the hymns of 
Roman ó s). The inﬂ uence of written Greek again inhibited the process in educated 
speech, and in Modern Greek many learned forms have been reintroduced (e.g. 
 for 
 [lefter ' ja]  ‘ freedom ’ etc.). There is some evidence 
for random synizesis from Hellenistic times onwards in many popular varieties, but 
its relative absence in the conservative dialects of southern Italy, Pontus and the 
Old Athenian group (cf. Newton ( 1972 : 14 – 17)) shows that its eventual standardi-
zation was not a general phenomenon.  
 (8)  Many forms affected by aphaeresis (i.e. the loss of unstressed initial vowels in 
hiatus, the inverse of the elision of ﬁ nal vowels) were standardized in this period. 
This is rare in classical Greek, but moderately frequent in the Ptolemaic papyri and 
very frequent in Roman/early Byzantine documents (Gignac ( 1976 : 319ff). Once 
again Pontic is a major exception to the trend.  
 In the early medieval period aphaeresis seems to have been particularly common when 
like vowels were involved, e.g. 
 [to  ' spitin]  ‘ the house ’ , 
 [i  ' mera] 
 ‘ the day ’ , 
 [ ' tote  ' rapsame]  ‘ then we - wrote ’ , 
 
 ‘ I wrote it ’ (with the pronoun derived from the familiar reduced form of 
 [af ' to]) 
etc. From cases such as these, many forms lacking their original initial vowel eventually 
became the norm in popular speech, though again with much uncertainty deriving 
from the inﬂ uence of the written language and the co - existence of related forms with 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 277
an accented initial vowel (e.g. in the case of the syllabic augment, 
 
 ‘ I wrote ’ , beside 
  ‘ we wrote ’ , etc.).  
 11.3   Grammatical Consequences of Aphaeresis 
 Apart from the vast number of individual words affected by aphaeresis, the following 
general phenomena should be noted (cf. Browning ( 1983 : 58)): 
 (9)  (a)  The weak (clitic) third - person pronouns increasingly take the form 
 [ton/tin/to]  ‘ him, her, it ’ . 
 (b)  The syllabic augment, after a long period of uncertainty, eventually disap-
peared unless accented, with exceptions in Pontus (still) and western Asia 
Minor (formerly), the Dodecanese, Chios, many of the Cyclades, and 
some parts of the Peloponnese, Crete and the Ionian islands.  
 (c)  The preposition 
 [is] combines with a following deﬁ nite article: 
 [ston/stin/sto], a pronunciation later recognized ortho-
graphically in forms such as 
 [ston] etc.  
 (d)  Verbs compounded with 
 [eks]  ‘ off/out of ’ , through misanalysis of the 
augment in past - tense forms, give rise to a new  ‘ vernacular ’  preﬁ x  x e - 
[kse - ]: e.g. 
 [ks - ' ekopsa]  ‘ I cut off ’   >  
 [ ' kse - kopsa], from 
which a new present 
 [kse ' kovo] was formed in place of ancient 
 [e ' kopto] (for the innovative imperfective stem, see (34d) below).  
 Uncertainties about word division arising from the spread of aphaeresis also led to 
misanalyses within closely knit syntactic phrases, so that 
 [an don 
e ' lisame(n)]  ‘ if him we - had - freed ’ , for example, was thought of as representing 
 [an done  ' lisame(n)] etc. From examples such as this came the wide-
spread practice of adding a  ‘ protective ’  ﬁ nal  - e [ - e] to pronouns and other forms ending 
in  - n [ - n] if the loss of this consonant threatened to create an ambiguity. A good 
example is provided by 3pl aorist indicatives in  - ( s ) a n [ - san], where loss of  - n [ - n] 
produced forms homophonous with those of the 1sg, e.g. 
 =  ‘ I/they 
wrote ’ . This addition was independently promoted by a levelling process that locally 
affected the plural of all active paradigms: a set of 1/2/3pl forms with columnar stress, 
e.g. 
 , was clearly more 
 ‘ regular ’ than the corresponding paradigm with original 3pl 
 . 
 11.4   Old and New Patterns of Subordination: 
Clitic Pronouns and VSO Order 
 Aphaeresis also affected an important class of particles and conjunctions, including 
the negative particle 
 (originally =  ‘ nothing ’ ,  ‘ not at all ’ , but from the 
6th century onwards increasingly used in place of the ancient 
 [u(k)]  ‘ not ’ ), the 
conditional conjunction 
 [an] (in so far as this did not simply continue the ancient 
contracted form 
 [an]), the subjunctive marker 
 [(i)na] (formerly a fully ﬂ edged 

278 Byzantium
subordinating conjunction in ﬁ nal, consecutive and control clauses), and the comple-
mentizers 
 [(o)pos]  ‘ that ’ (neutral as to the factual status of the following clause) 
and 
 [(o)pu]  ‘ that ’ (used ﬁ rst in relative clauses, 2 and in the early modern period 
also as a factive complementizer); of these, the former originally meant  ‘ how ’ , the latter 
 ‘ where ’ , in which sense it has retained its full form in Modern Greek. 
 In the case of the last three conjunctions, the loss of the initial vowel was preceded 
by an apparent shift of the accent to the ﬁ nal syllable. Since, however, all such gram-
matical words were typically proclitic in connected speech from ancient times, they 
had in effect already lost their lexical accent and were vulnerable to aphaeresis as 
soon as the process began. In some contexts, however, a secondary  ‘ phrasal ’  accent 
seems to have been acquired. For 
 [ ' ina] there is clear evidence of this in the 
accentual metres of the hymns of Roman ó s the Melode, the greatest Byzantine hym-
nographer, dating from the ﬁ rst half of the 6th century (see Tryp á nis  (1960) , Maas 
and Tryp á nis  (1963, 1970) ). The change seems to have involved the generalization 
of a rhythmical readjustment associated with the role of the conjunction as host for 
a following enclitic pronoun, i.e. 
  ‘ that it I - may - learn ’ 
 , a form in which it would again naturally succumb to 
aphaeresis. In the case of 
 [(o)pos] and 
 [(o)pu], however, the inﬂ uence of 
the corresponding interrogatives 
   [pos]  ‘ how? ’ and 
 [pu]  ‘ where? ’ is also a pos-
sible factor, in that relatives and interrogatives overlap in the complement structures 
of verbs such as  ‘ know ’  (cf.  I know where you are/how you did that , where there is 
inherent vagueness between a true indirect question and a relative ( ‘ the place/way in 
which ’ )). 
 The word order associated with these modern complementizers and conjunctions 
was different from that used with their traditional counterparts, and both orders are 
reﬂ ected in medieval vernacular texts which, in typical fashion, continued to use both 
systems side by side. In classical Greek, there was a large set of enclitic sentence con-
nectives and particles which appeared in second position in the clause (the so - called 
Wackernagel position). Enclitic pronouns were at ﬁ rst regularly attracted to this slot, 
away from their governing verbs, though the verb could optionally be drawn to 
the clitic, and appear initially if there was no complementizer (giving the order 
[verb  +  clitic(s)   +  subject]), or immediately to the right of the clitic if there was a 
complementizer, giving the order [conjunction   +  clitic(s)   +  verb  +  subject]. With the 
passage of time, however, a counter - tendency developed for such pronouns to become 
more head - dependent, and to appear immediately to the right of their verbs within the 
verb phrase, giving the order [conjunction   +  subject  +  [verb  +  clitic(s)]]. At this stage, 
the tension between the two options was partly resolved by the optional preposing 
of the verb and its dependent clitics together, giving the order [(conjunction +) 
[verb  +  clitic(s)]   +  subject], contrary to earlier usage (see  4.8 and Horrocks  (1990) ). 
 The spoken forms of post - classical and Medieval Greek eventually standardized a 
solution which placed clitic pronouns in second position, and preposed the verb to 
initial position (if available) or post - clitic position (if the initial position was ﬁ lled) in 
order to meet the requirement of clitic – head adjacency (cf. the situation described for 
the Hellenistic and Roman papyri ( 4.8 ,  6.5.1 )). The modern conjunctions were natu-
rally associated with this living syntactic framework, and in Medieval Greek this posi-
tion of the verb was generalized even in the absence of motivating clitics, thus promoting 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 279
the order [(modern) conjunction   +  V  +  S] in subordinate clauses unless some item had 
been preposed before the conjunction as sentential topic or focus. Eventually VS 
became a basic order in main clauses too, though the inherent pragmatic prominence 
of (prototypical) subjects naturally favoured their positioning in initial position; any 
other constituent could, however, be preposed as topic or focus instead, or in addition, 
in the latter case with topic preceding focus (see Mackridge  (1993a, 2000) , Horrocks 
 (1983, 1990, 1994) ). 
 By contrast, the use of the traditional complementizers and conjunctions 
 [oti] 
 ‘ that ’ , 
  ‘ because ’ and  [i]  ‘ if ’  continued to be associated with the rules of 
Ancient Greek, not only in learned writing but even in vernacular work. In this system 
clitics still regularly followed the verb, and in subordinate clauses the verb itself could 
stand either after the subject within the verb phrase, giving the order [conjunc-
tion  +  subject  +  [verb (+clitic(s))]], or in second position before the subject, giving 
[conjunction   +  [verb  +  (clitic(s))]   +  subject]. In main clauses without an overt conjunc-
tion, the preposing option naturally placed the V+Cl complex in initial position. There 
was, however, considerable interference between the two systems, and the uncertainty 
still persists in Modern Greek, where complementizer – subject – verb order frequently 
occurs in written styles under the inﬂ uence of the learned tradition, cf. Mackridge 
( 1985 : 237). 
 The medieval situation is summarized diagrammatically in (10), where CP = the 
phrase headed by a complementizer or conjunction, ConP = the traditional position 
for many sentence connectives, to which clitic pronouns were often attracted (cf. 
already the Mycenaean clause  da - mo - de - mi pa - si  … [d â :mos de min pha:si]  ‘ the - village 
and to - her says  … ’ , PY Ep 704.5), ClP = clitic phrase (the post - classical development 
of ConP, where clitic pronouns now stood obligatorily in the vernacular), S = sentence, 
NP = noun phrase (subject), and VP = verb phrase. (10a) represents the case of tradi-
tional conjunctions, (10b) that of their modern replacements: 
 (10)  
CP
CP
(a)
(b)
(C)
(C)
ConP
CIP
(CI)
S
S
(Con)
NP
subject
subject
[V+CI] ...
V ...
VP
NP
VP
 etc.)
(
[oti]
 etc.)
(
[pos]
 
 In (10a), the verb and its clitics could be fronted to C (if this was empty, as in main 
clauses) or to Con (otherwise), though neither movement was required, and both SV 
and VS remained available in both main and subordinate clauses. In (10b), however, 
the verb was obligatorily shifted if there were clitics in ClP, either to C (if empty) or 
to Cl otherwise (in the order Cl+V), and such movement later became the preferred 

280 Byzantium
option even when there were no clitic pronouns present. Subjects then followed the 
verb, unless preposed to function as topics or foci. 
 Note that the presence of a preposed interrogative or topical focal phrase within 
CP had the same effect as the presence of an overt complementizer in C, i.e. to force 
the verb to appear after the clitic pronouns in ClP. Preposed topics, however, were 
sometimes placed outside the clause structure proper (being adjoined to CP), so that 
the true clause - initial position remained free to accept V, thereby effecting the normal 
main - clause order (i.e. V+Cl) in these cases. (See Mackridge  (1993a, 2000)  for a 
ground - breaking analysis of clitic pronoun placement in vernacular Medieval Greek, 
originally motivated by the need to make metrical sense of the E version of  Digenis 
Akritis ). 
 The complementizer 
 [na], however, ultimately came to function as a subjunctive 
marker, and in this reduced role formed (along with negative particles and clitic pro-
nouns) part of a word - like complex with the verb. Thus 
 ([oti na - V], 
lit.  ‘ that will - V ’ ), for example, became a regular combination in the subordinate clauses 
of popular Medieval Greek. This more complex clausal structure can be represented 
as in (11), where MP = modality phrase and NegP = negative phrase. (Cf. Philipp á ki -
 Warburton  (1990, 1998)  for a detailed exposition of the structure of the verb complex 
as it has evolved in Modern Greek): 
 (11)  
CP
CIP
(CI)
NP
V ...
VP
S
MP
NegP
 etc.)
(
[pos]
)
(
[na]
)
(
[ðen/mi(n)]
 
 Here the verb raises obligatorily to Cl, as before (giving clitic  +  V). But the option of 
raising further to C (if empty) is excluded if either, or both, of MP and NegP are 
present, since the particles heading these phrases, as modiﬁ ers of the verb, must appear 
before it, and any verb movement to a higher position would leave these elements 
ungrammatically stranded. 
 Clitic – verb order was now obligatory in both negative and subjunctive clauses (main 
and subordinate) and, even in the absence of 
 [na] or negation, in any  ‘ modern ’  syn-
tactic structure in which the head or speciﬁ er of CP was ﬁ lled. Though the pronouns in 
all these structures were originally enclitic on the material to their left, it was natural that 
the emergence of the verb complex as a structural unit should lead to a reinterpretation 
of all the elements involved in it as verb - dependent and proclitic. Only simple, i.e. non -
 interrogative, non - modal and non - negative, main clauses therefore retained the option 
of verb raising to C, giving verb – clitic order and traditional pronominal enclisis. 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 281
 This mixed treatment of clitic pronouns remained the norm in Medieval Greek, 
and it has been retained in a number of modern dialects, most notably Cretan, 
many Cycladic varieties, Cypriot and the south - eastern group in general. In Pontic, 
however, the post - verbal (enclitic) position was generalized, pointing to an early diver-
gence, while in standard Modern Greek the preverbal (proclitic) position of clitic 
pronouns has now been adopted for all ﬁ nite verb forms, even in the absence of ele-
ments preceding the verb complex; weak pronouns are therefore enclitic on the verb 
only in the case of imperatives and gerunds, and these remain the only verb forms 
still subject to the rule of verb preposing to C in standard speech (cf. Rivero and Terzi 
 (1995) ). 
 11.5   Dialect Diversity in Medieval Greek 
 As we have seen, the process of dialect differentiation in the spoken Koine had begun 
on a regional basis even in antiquity, and it is therefore particularly unfortunate that 
the dearth of written evidence for the early Byzantine period makes it impossible to 
follow the continuation of this process into the middle ages. Many characteristic dia-
lectal distinctions of spoken Modern Greek must have begun to emerge at this time, 
and been subsequently strengthened with the progressive loss of Byzantine control over 
its imperial territories, but we have virtually no concrete evidence to support this. 
Though there is once again a signiﬁ cant body of low - level/vernacular documentary 
material from many areas from the 12th century onwards, the inﬂ uence of the estab-
lished forms of written Greek in those territories that remained under Byzantine control 
consistently minimized the appearance of distinctively local dialect features in such 
texts. It is therefore extremely difﬁ cult to date many of the crucial innovations. With 
the breakdown of Byzantine rule, however, especially in lands ruled by western powers, 
elements of local speech sometimes start to inﬁ ltrate these documents, and in some 
cases the local dialect even became the primary basis for both ofﬁ cial writing and liter-
ary production. The early development of Cretan and Cypriot as written media is 
discussed in 12.4, and both these and a number of other dialects are considered in 
more general terms in Part III (chapter  14 ). 
 11.6   Later Phonetic and Phonological Developments 
 The most important of these are summarized in (12 – 15) below (the ﬁ rst of which, 
the rule of manner dissimilation in voiceless obstruent clusters, has already been 
mentioned): 
 (12)   Other than in  ‘ learned ’ words, voiceless obstruent clusters consisting of 
[stop  +  stop] or [fricative   +  fricative] all took the form [fricative   +  stop]. 
 There are, however, two exceptions:  
 (a)   If the second member is /s/, we get stop   +  /s/. 
 (b)   The cluster /sf/ remained unchanged (except in Pontic).  

282 Byzantium
 The ﬁ rst may have begun during the early/middle Byzantine period (giving e.g. 
 
[ ' epapsa] for 
 [ ' epafsa] as the aorist of 
 [ ' pavo]  ‘ I stop ’ , cf.  12.1.2 ), and 
would be therefore a distinct phenomenon not only in its effects but also in its chro-
nology. Examples involving [s] followed by  f ,  q ,  c 
 are also in origin distinct, 
in that the Egyptian papyri provide good evidence for a colloquial development to [sp, 
st, sk] at the stage when the latter still represented the aspirated plosives [p h , t h , k h ]. 
Indeed, in the speciﬁ c case of  s q , the development to [st] was a particular characteristic 
of north - west Greek from the earliest times, and many ancient dialects show at least 
sporadic  s t - spellings in their later periods (see  1.4 ). It seems, then, that the pairs [sp]/
[sf], 
 , [sk]/[sx] began as alternative (i.e. popular vs. learned) descendants of 
earlier [sp h ], [st h ], [sk h ], and that [st] progressively superseded its rival in popular 
spoken Greek during the early Byzantine period, with [sk] eventually following; [sf], 
however, was preferred to [sp] except in Pontic, the sibilant apparently inhibiting 
fricativization of a homorganic stop (i.e. one involving a tongue articulation), but 
generally failing to do so in the case of non - homorganic [p h ]. The more or less con-
temporaneous shift of [au/eu] to [af/ef] added greatly to the frequency of clusters 
involving a voiceless fricative followed by a voiceless plosive (cf. 
 [af ' tos] etc.), 
and it was presumably the increasing dominance of this pattern that led to the assimi-
lation of other voiceless fricative combinations (involving two of 
   <  [p h , t h , k h ], 
always assuming the second element underwent this shift rather than simply being 
de - aspirated) and then of plosive   +  plosive clusters to what had by then become the 
phonotactic norm. Note, however, that only the last two steps of this series of devel-
opments strictly involve the change of a voiceless fricative to a voiceless plosive or that 
of a voiceless plosive to a voiceless fricative, and it is these changes alone that fall 
properly under (12) above.
 (13)   Other than in learned words, voiced fricatives were deleted before a nasal 
(except that /z/ before /m/ was universally retained).  
 Taking (12) and (13) together, words such as 
 [ ' ktizo]  ‘ I build ’ , and 
 (the aorist passive of 
 [ ' trivo]  ‘ I rub ’ ) became 
 [ ' xtizo] 
and 
 [(e) ' trifti - ka] respectively (see (35b) below for the ending of the last), 
while 
 [ ' revma]  ‘ torrent/river bed ’ became 
 [ ' rema], as 
 
 ‘ thing ’  became 
 [ ' prama]. 3 But just as with some of the earlier changes, there was 
signiﬁ cant interference from written Greek, leading to uncertainty and inconsistency, 
and a feeling among the educated that the innovative forms were  ‘ vulgar ’ . Consequently, 
those who had learned to write continued in general to spell (and presumably in part 
to pronounce) words in the traditional way long after the changes in (12) and (13) 
had set in; adapted spellings of other than the most everyday items are therefore quite 
rare even in vernacular written texts until the modern period. 
 There is clearly no prospect now that these partial changes will ever be completed, 
and in Modern Greek many doublets survive, some clearly distinguished semanti-
cally, e.g. 
 [le ' pta]  ‘ minutes ’ beside 
 [lef ' ta]  ‘ money ’ , 
 [ ' revma] 
‘ current ’ (including electrical), beside 
  ‘ torrent/river bed ’ ), others partially so, as 
  ‘ thing ’  beside 
 [ ' prama]  ‘ thing/genitals ’ . Furthermore, many 
learned variants have now been fully assimilated, so that 
 , for 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 283
example, is now standard in place of earlier, and popular, 
 [lefte ' rja], while 
 [sxo ' lio]  ‘ school ’  seems never to have been seriously challenged in the standard 
by colloquial 
 . 4 
 (14)   In popular speech a sequence of two like vowels was simpliﬁ ed (though once 
again many exceptions persisted under the inﬂ uence of the written language). The 
accentuation of some resulting forms was then affected by analogical factors. For 
example, 
 [e ' piika]  ‘ I made/did ’ (a  ‘ new ’ aorist built on the old perfect stem, 
see (29)) developed to both the expected 
 [(e) ' pika] and 
 [ ' epika] on 
the model of 
  ‘ I gave ’ . 5 
 (15)   In some areas the palatalization of velar phonemes before high front vowels 
and [j] became more marked, e.g. the Old Athenian group and many insular dialects 
(though not universally in the Ionian islands), where ultimately [c] (/k/)    >  
 or 
[ts], and [ ç ] (/x/)    >   or [s]; in Cretan [j] 
 also    >  
 . Dental palatalization also 
took place quite widely (so [n, l, s, z]  >  
 ), and this was especially important 
in the northern dialects (see  14.2.6 ), where the loss of unstressed [i] led to minimal 
pairs involving new phonemic contrasts between /s/ and 
 , /z/ and 
 . 
 Certain popular diminutive formations containing palatalized velars/palatals, including 
many names and appellatives, were particularly subject to further palatalization. Thus 
 [ ' - aci(o)n] and 
 [ - ' aci(o)s] developed both to [ - ' aci(n)]/[ - ' acis] (without 
further palatalization) and to [ - ' atsi(n)]/ [ - ' atsis], the latter with feminine [ - ' atsa]. This 
type is the source of surnames such as 
 [vasi ' lacis] and 
 [xor ' tatsis] 
and of many hypocoristics. Similar developments affected 
 [ - ' ici(o)n]/
 
[ - ' ici(o)s], and 
 [ ' uci(o)n]/
 [ - ' uci(o)s], to give [ - ' ici(n)]/[ - ' icis] (fem [ - ' ika]) 
alongside [ - ' itsi(n)]/[ - ' itsis] (fem [ - ' itsa]), and [ - ' uci(n)]/[ - ' ucis] alongside [ - ' utsi(n)]/
[ - ' utsis] (fem [ - ' utsa]). This last often acquired an adjectival termination to give diminu-
tive 
 [ - ' utsikos]. 
 The position of dental affricates in the system was presumably reinforced by the 
Hellenization of Armenian names containing alveolar and palatal affricates (voiceless, 
voiced and aspirated in the original), and later by parallel formations in Slavic and 
Italian (cf. the Slav sufﬁ x 
 , Italian  - izzi ,  - ucci etc., and see Yeorgak á s  (1982) , 
Symeon í dis  (1987) for a discussion of the origins and development of such formations). 
Properly,  t s should be used to represent the voiceless affricate [ts] and  t z to represent 
the voiced [dz] (the latter occurring chieﬂ y in Italian, Turkish and other loanwords), 
but the distinction was not made systematically until modern times. 
 In the light of what has been said about the phonological developments of the 
medieval period as a whole, it should by now be clear that any attempt to explain the 
emergence of standard Modern Greek exclusively in terms of the development of the 
popular spoken Greek of the middle ages is doomed to failure. The fact (until recently 
highly problematical for Greek language theorists of all persuasions, see Part III) is 
that educated spoken usage of the late Byzantine and Ottoman periods, and much 
vernacular writing based on it, consistently involved a blend of learned/written and 
popular/spoken variants (cf.  8.7 ). Indeed, contemporary Modern Greek remains very 
much a mixed language, with a strongly vernacular base but with many elements 

284 Byzantium
derived from the learned tradition, a process that seems, ironically, to be accelerating 
with the ﬁ nal abandonment of the learned  kathar é vousa and the progressive loss of 
the traditionally polarized/politicized perception of the  ‘ language question ’ . These 
observations are strongly reinforced when we turn to examine the major morphological 
and syntactic developments of the middle ages.  
 11.7   Nominal Morphology and Syntax 
 11.7.1   The  d ative  c ase,  p repositional  p hrases 
 (16)   The dative case came to occupy an ever more tenuous position in the nominal 
morphology of the vernacular. Though it remained a ﬁ xture of the written Koine 
throughout the Byzantine period and beyond, the continued use of this case in 
spoken Greek had become restricted, during the course of the middle period, to the 
most formal speech of the educated population in the major urban centres, and its 
functions, both adverbial and grammatical, were therefore steadily transferred (cf. 
Humbert  (1930) , Trapp  (1965) ): 
 (a)   to the bare accusative: for indirect objects (both full noun phrases and 
clitic pronouns), and temporal expressions of time  ‘ when ’ . Subsequently, full 
noun phrase indirect objects increasingly required prepositional support, 
cf. (c).  
 (b)  to the genitive: for indirect objects (both clitic pronouns and full noun 
phrases). 
 In the later middle ages there is still much ﬂ uctuation of usage in vernacular literary 
texts, often within a single text, especially with regard to the case of clitic pronouns. 
It used to be assumed, therefore, that the ﬁ nal choice between genitive and accusative 
for indirect object pronouns belonged to the early modern period, with northern dia-
lects, along with Pontic and Cappadocian, eventually favouring the accusative, and 
other varieties opting for the genitive. However, a more careful study of the manu-
scripts of the relevant texts has shown that many in fact display clear preferences, 6 
while detailed analysis of corpora of original documentary material of the period 
(material not subject to the vagaries of manuscript transmission) has conﬁ rmed that 
this variation is largely illusory (see the pioneering contribution of Lend á ri and 
Manol é ssou  (2003) ). The evidence overall points rather towards a clear north/south 
choice by no later than the 15th century, and probably much earlier if the strong 
preferences of regionally speciﬁ c material from earlier times (e.g. the  ‘ northern ’ 
Protobulgarian inscriptions of the 9th century, see  12.1.2 ) are to be reconciled with 
the picture provided by the later material.  
 (c)  
  Dative functions were also transferred to prepositional phrases: e.g. 
 [is] 
 ‘ to ’  +  accusative for full noun phrase indirect objects; instrumental expressions 
formed with 
  ‘ through ’ , and 
 [meta], subsequently 
 [me],  ‘ with ’ 
(through simpliﬁ cation in the context of a neuter plural article, 
 
[me(ta) ta X] and generalization of the reduced form).  

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 285
 The accusative had eventually emerged as the sole prepositional case in popular 
spoken varieties by the beginning of the later Byzantine period at the latest, and the 
array of prepositions in common use was reduced to: 
 
 [is]  ‘ at/in/on/to/into/onto ’ , subsequently 
 [se], the product of resegmentation of 
sequences like 
 [is e ' me(na)] as 
 [ise  ' mena], followed by aphaer-
esis, was regularized, though this was reduced to [s] before the deﬁ nite article (now 
written 
 [sto] etc.) and often also before words beginning with a vowel (now 
written  s ' [s]).  
 
 [a ' po]  ‘ from/since (time)/by (agent) ’ ; with frequent deletion of the ﬁ nal vowel 
before the deﬁ nite article and words beginning with [o] or [a]; in vernacular texts 
we also ﬁ nd 
 [ape] with epenthesis, especially before the article.  
 
    ‘ for/about ’ ; later simpliﬁ ed to 
 [ja].  
  [me]  ‘ with ’ . 
 
 [xo ' ris]  ‘ without ’ . 
  [os]  ‘ up to/until ’ . 
 The ﬁ rst four of these, however, could be optionally speciﬁ ed by an adverbial element 
to give further precision, e.g. 
 [ ' mesa se], lit.  ‘ within at ’ , i.e. inside ’ ; 
 
[(e) ' pano apo], lit.  ‘ above from ’ , i.e.  ‘ over ’ etc. Other prepositions, though belonging 
properly to the written tradition, were sometimes exploited even in popular forms of 
writing by educated authors: e.g. 
 [an ' di]  ‘ instead of ’ , now often followed by 
 
[ja]; 
 [ka ' ta]  ‘ according to/about (time)/during ’ ; 
 [me ' ta]  ‘ after ’ ; 
 [meta ' ksi] 
 ‘ among/between ’ ; 
 [ ' mexri]  ‘ until ’ ; 
 [pa ' ra]  ‘ against/despite ’ ; 
 [pros] 
 ‘ towards/in respect of/for the purpose of ’ etc. All of these are still used in standard 
Modern Greek, though others, such as 
 [en]  ‘ in ’ and 
 [ek]  ‘ out of ’ , have survived 
only in ﬁ xed expressions: e.g. 
 [en ' daksi]  ‘ in order/all right ’ ; 
 [em  ' meri] 
 ‘ in part ’ ; 
 [en a ' na gi]  ‘ in need/if need be ’ ; 
 [ek tom bro ' teron], 
lit.  ‘ from the former ’ , i.e.  ‘ in advance/ a priori ’ ; 
 [ek  ' neu], lit.  ‘ from new ’ , i.e. 
 ‘ afresh ’  etc. Other learned prepositional usages (e.g. 
 [a ' na]  ‘ per ’ ; 
 [e ' pi]  +  accusa-
tive  ‘ for the duration of ’ ,  +  genitive  ‘ in the time of ’ ; 
 [kata]   +  genitive  ‘ against ’ ; 
 [i ' per]  ‘ on behalf of ’ ) have been reintroduced more recently from  kathar é vousa.  
 11.7.2   Feminine  n ouns of the 1st  d eclension:  p aradigm  s tandardization 
 (17)   In classical Greek, 1st - declension (a - stem) feminine nouns followed one of 
four declensional subpatterns: 
 
 
 After the loss of vowel - length distinctions, analogical levelling produced a simpliﬁ ed 
two - way system, in which genitives consistently followed their nominatives in choice 
of vowel: 

286 Byzantium
 (a – c)    nom  - a [ - a]  +  gen  - a " [ - as] 
 (d) 
  nom  - h [ - i]  +  gen  - h " [ - is] 
 Interference between types (b) and (c), and to a lesser extent between types (a) and 
(b), had begun to affect more popular varieties in late antiquity (Gignac  1981 : 3 – 11, 
213), but the more radical simpliﬁ cation belongs to the middle ages.  
 11.7.3   Masculine  n ouns of the 1st  d eclension:  p aradigm  s tandardization 
 (18)   Masculine nouns of the ﬁ rst declension in  - a " [ - as] and  - h " [ - is], both origi-
nally with gen  - o u [ - u], replaced their classical genitives with  - a [ - a] and  - h [ - i] 
respectively. 
 Such  ‘ regularized ’ declensional patterns, i.e. with the vowel of the genitive following 
that of the nominative, were already used for many personal names in classical Greek 
(especially in Ionic inscriptions and in Great Attic texts from Ionic - speaking territories), 
but from the ﬁ rst century AD onwards examples involving common nouns start to 
appear in the papyri (cf.  6.5.2 ). 
 11.7.4   Interplay  b etween the 1st and 3rd  d eclensions: 
 i mparisyllabic  p aradigms 
 (19)   The elimination of the class of masculine and feminine consonant - stem nouns 
of the third declension proceeded quite quickly in popular speech. Some were 
replaced early by neuter diminutives in  - i [ - i]. Otherwise, the development proceeded 
from the addition of an analogical  - n [ - n] to the original acc sg in  - a [ - a], beginning 
in Roman times (Gignac ( 1981 : 45 – 6), cf.  4.11.3 ). The consequential parallelism 
with ﬁ rst - declension accusatives in  - a ( n ) [ - a(n)] led to interference between the two 
paradigms and ultimately to their merger. Thus new nominatives in  - a (fem) and 
 - a " (masc) were built to the accusative in  - a ( n ) [ - a(n)], and genitives in  - a " [ - as] 
(fem) and  - a [ - a] (masc) followed, producing paradigms of the type: 
 
 
 With the ﬁ nal elimination of  - n [ - n] in the accusative singular forms, we therefore move 
to the modern system of a - stem nouns (i.e. comprising both original a - stems and origi-
nal consonant - stems), in which feminine nouns have a common nom/acc sg in  - a / - h 
[ - a/ - i], gen  - a " / - h " [ - as/ - is], and masculine nouns have nom sg in  - a " / - h " [ - as/ - is], with 
a common acc/gen sg in  - a / - h [ - a/ - i]. 
 In the plural it was the 3rd - declension consonant - stem pattern of nom  - e " [ - es], acc 
 - a " [ - as], that inﬂ uenced the corresponding 1st - declension forms  - a i [ - e] and  - a " [ - as]: 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 287
thus 
 [ ' xore]  ‘ countries ’ , for example, became [ ' xore - s], eventually spelled 
 . 
The partial falling together of nom and acc forms in the consonant stems, already 
noted in the Roman period ( 4.11.1 ,  6.5.2 ), gradually became the norm for the new 
mixed paradigm, with nom  - e " [ - es]/acc  - e " [ - es] increasingly replacing nom  - e " [ - es]/
acc  - a " [ - as] (though with exceptions in Pontic, and sometimes in Chian and Rhodian). 
Only in the gen pl did the paradigms remain partially distinct, since original 1st -
 declension nouns retained their accented sufﬁ x 
 [ - ' on], while former consonant - stem 
nouns, which originally carried the accent on the penultimate syllable, kept it there, 
e.g. 
  ‘ of - hopes ’ etc. There was, however, a reduction in the use of 
the genitive plural in spoken Greek up until the modern era and the advent of universal 
education (cf. for example Thumb ( 1912 : 31) on the vernacular of the late 19th 
century). Subsequently, the case has enjoyed a revival and is now once again routinely 
employed in the full range of modern genitive functions (albeit with competition from 
 [apo]  ‘ from ’  +  acc in partitive constructions). 
 This set of developments brought with them the major advantage of eliminating 
allomorphy between the nom sg and the rest of the consonant - stem paradigm 
(compare 
 beside 
 [el ' pis]/
 ), 
but the process was again inhibited by knowledge of the written language (including 
passive knowledge, e.g. through exposure to the liturgy), and the original morphology 
is still used for learned written forms of particular vocabulary items (cf. 
  ‘ Bank of - the Greece ’ etc). Genitives in 
accented 
 [ - ' os] also persist in some local varieties, especially in the Ionian islands 
(where there has even been some extension to the original a - stem paradigm, giving not 
only 
 [tu pa ' tros]  ‘ of - the father ’ but also 
 [tis por ' tos]  ‘ of - the 
door ’ , from 
 [ ' porta]).
 (20)   This partial conﬂ ation of 1st and 3rd (consonant - stem) declensions led to 
further remodellings. Thus the consonant - stem type nom sg 
  ‘ exile ’ , 
with nom pl 
 , led ﬁ rst to the modiﬁ cation of the ancient  ‘ con-
tracted ’ 1st - declension type, with accented nom sg in 
 [ - ' as] (
*
 [ - ' eas]), with 
gen sg in  [ - ' a], and nom pl in 
 [ - ' e]. In origin these were mainly pet - names, but 
the type was widely extended in popular speech to denote professions and bodily 
peculiarities ( ‘ big - head ’ ,  ‘ thick - lip ’ etc). The partial transfer of these to the conso-
nant - stem paradigm is already apparent in texts of Hellenistic and Roman times, 
but in the medieval period the consonant - stem forms were standardly adopted in 
the plural: thus 
 [a ' vas]  ‘ abbot ’ , with old gen sg 
 [a ' va], but nom pl 
 etc.  
 From this type the pattern was further extended to most nouns ending in accented 
vowel  +   - " [ - s], e.g. 
 [pa ' pus]  ‘ grandfather ’ , plural 
 ; 
subsequently many loanwords from Turkish entered this paradigm. 7 All these types 
have retained their imparisyllabic inﬂ ection in modern Greek. 
 The pattern also attracted the modiﬁ ed forms of the old 3rd - declension type in 
 
[ - ' efs], e.g. 
 [vasi ' lefs]  ‘ king/emperor ’ . Here the accusative 
 [vasi ' lea] 
spawned a new nominative 
 [vasi ' leas], which developed to 
 
by synizesis. From this base we then get a new paradigm with plural 
 

288 Byzantium
(also retained in Modern Greek). The sufﬁ x 
 was also sometimes extended 
to ordinary 1st - declension masculines and feminines: 
  ‘ pupil ’ , 
for example, may have plural 
 or 
 , while 
  ‘ sister ’ may have plural 
 or 
 
etc. 8 In the case of masculines, if the accent fell originally on the root, there is 
also often a by - form in  - h d e " 
 , e.g. 
 [ ' raftis]  ‘ tailor ’ , with plurals 
 and 
 alongside the regular 
 [ ' raftes]. 
There are even examples of extension to the o - stem (2nd - declension) paradigm. The 
longer forms of this type sometimes still occur dialectally, but are not used in standard 
Modern Greek.
 (21)   This period also saw the beginnings of the assimilation of the 3rd - declension 
i - stem type in  - i " [ - is], e.g. 
  ‘ memory ’ , to the 1st - declension para-
digm. Some early examples also involve transfer to the type in 
 [ - ' is]/
 , 
whence a new accusative in 
 and the rebuilding of the paradigm in 
the familiar way. But in general the process was based on the existing phonetic 
overlap in the acc sg, e.g. 3rd - declension 
 /1st - declension 
 
[ ' nik - i(n)]  ‘ victory ’ . This led to a nom sg 
 (or 
 , though such 
forms were not written till later), and gen sg 
 (or 
 ), and 
even nom/acc pl 
 . 
 Again, however, the process was slow and partial, with the ancient gen sg as in 
 
[ ' poleos]  ‘ city ’ and the old plural paradigm in general showing particular resistance to 
assimilation in all but the most popular/local varieties because of the inﬂ uence of 
written/liturgical Greek. In the modern standard the new nom/acc sg has now been 
adopted (spelled with  - h ), but both gen sg forms remain acceptable, while in the plural 
the ancient paradigm has been standardized: nom/acc 
 [ ' polis], gen 
 
[ ' poleon]. 
 11.7.5   Neuters 
 (22)   Since neuters generally ended in vowel  +   n [n] (cf. the two principal 2nd -
 declension paradigms illustrated by 
 [ ' ksilo(n)]  ‘ wood ’ and 
 
 ‘ child ’ , see  6.5.2  for the latter), it was natural that the 3rd - declension type in  - m a [ - ma], 
gen sg  - m a t o  " [ - matos], should fall into line. Forms such as 
 
 ‘ thing, deed ’ are therefore quite standard by the time vernacular literature starts to 
appear in the 12th century.  
 There is also a tendency to substitute the 2nd - declension genitive ending, to 
give 
 beside learned 
 , on the 
assumption that forms such as nom/acc pl 
 and gen pl 
 were of 2nd - declension type; the opposite confusion is 
attested in forms like 
 [pro ' sopata]  ‘ faces ’ , with 3rd - declension  - t a [ - ta] 
added to the 2nd - declension plural form 
 [ ' prosopa]. In standard Modern 
Greek the ancient form of the gen sg has been adopted. 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 289
 The 3rd - declension s - stem type in  - o  " [ - os] (e.g. 
  ‘ forest ’ ), with gen 
 - o  u " [ - us] and nom/acc pl  - h [i], also survived and even attracted some 2nd - declension 
neuters in  - o ( n ) [ - o(n)], so that we ﬁ nd plurals such as 
 [ ' kastri]  ‘ forts ’ , 
  ‘ trees ’ , beside the expected 
 [ ' kastra], 
 .
 (23)   From the 5th/6th century onwards the new deverbative sufﬁ x  - s i m o  n 
[ - simo(n)], used to denote actions and associated meanings of a more concrete 
nature, begins to make an appearance, in part to replace old feminine abstracts in 
 - s i " [ - sis] (now disfavoured because of their declensional irregularity), 9 in part to 
replace the nominalized inﬁ nitive which, in popular speech, was increasingly 
restricted to use as a temporal adverbial adjunct: thus 
 , lit.  ‘ the 
to - see ’ , is used to mean  ‘ when/after s/he had seen  … ’ in vernacular texts of the later 
middle ages.  
 Forms such as 
  ‘ writing ’ (also  ‘ handwriting ’ or  ‘ something 
written ’ ) seem to involve the addition of an anomalous neuter sufﬁ x  - m o  n [ - mo(n)] to 
the stem of the old action - noun formations in  - s i - [ - si - ], but otherwise decline like the 
3rd - declension type in  - m a [ - ma], with gen sg  - m a t o  " [ - matos] (or 
 [ ' - matu]), 
nom/acc pl  - m a t a [ - mata]. These formations therefore probably belonged originally to 
the 3rd - declension type, but a singular such as 
 would have been 
quickly reinterpreted as a neuter plural of the second declension. This then gave birth 
to forms such as nom/acc sg  - s i m o  n [ - simo(n)] and gen sg/pl 
 [ - ' simu]/
 
[ - ' simo(n)], but the innovation became standard only in the nom/acc sg, and by the 
9th/10th century the remainder of the paradigm employed only the original 3rd -
 declension endings, as in standard Modern Greek.  
 11.7.6   The  d eﬁ nite  a rticle 
 (24)   The i - vowel of the innovative fem nom pl (the form later spelled  [i]) prob-
ably owes its origin to the prevocalic synizesis of original 
 [e] as 
 and then [j], 
e.g. 
 , with later reanalysis of [j] as deriving from  ‘ full - form ’  [i], 
a process perhaps supported by the i - vowel of fem sg forms  [i], 
 [ti(n)], 
 
[tis]. In the modern period, acc pl  t i  " [tis] is the result of the remodelling of standard 
medieval 
 [tes] (replacing 
 [tas]) to the nominative form.  
 Such innovative forms were not written for a long time, and when they did begin to 
appear in texts, there was much uncertainty about orthography. Nom pl  [e] survived 
in the South Italian dialects (with generalization to the masculine paradigm in some 
areas), while acc pl 
 [tas] was still used until recently in some island dialects (e.g. 
on Chios and Rhodes); 
 [tes] is still in use on Cyprus.  
 11.7.7   Adjectives 
 (25)  (a)  In the adjectival paradigms, there was a strong tendency to provide all 
surviving types with three distinct terminations (masc, fem and neut) 

290 Byzantium
according to the model of the most common type with 2nd - declension 
masc/neut in  - o  " [ - os]/ - o ( n ) [ - o(n)], and 1st - declension fem in  - a [ - a] or 
 - h [ - i]. Thus compound adjectives of 2nd - declension type, which had 
lacked a distinct feminine in classical Greek, were supplied with a 1st -
 declension feminine to bring them into line.  
 (b)  Adjectives with forms belonging to 3rd - declension paradigms, just like 
nouns and participles, were increasingly disfavoured, and frequently 
subject to reformation or loss. The major survivor was the class of 
u - stem adjectives, which had always had a distinct 1st - declension femi-
nine form (cf. 
 [va ' ris] (masc), 
 [va ' ria] (fem), 
 [va ' ri] 
(neut)  ‘ heavy ’ ), though this too was subject to considerable reformation 
(see below). By contrast, the consonant - stem types had only two termi-
nations and were largely abandoned in favour of more regular replace-
ments. The s - stems, however (e.g. 
 [evje ' nis] (masc/fem), 
 
[evje ' nes] (neut)  ‘ noble ’ ), though also subject to replacement, were some-
times retained in an adapted form. 
 The principal changes, most of which belong to the later middle ages, are summarized 
in (26 – 8).
 (26)   The u - stem masc/neut paradigm (sg 
 [ - ' is]/  [ - ' i], pl 
 [ - ' is]/
 [ - ' ea]) 
was partially incorporated into the 1st and 2nd declensions through the homophony 
of its masc sg with that of 1st - declension masc nouns in 
 [ - ' is] and that of its 
neut sg with that of 2nd - declension neuter nouns in 
 [ - ' i]. Thus masc 
 
[va ' ris]  ‘ heavy ’ was given gen sg 
 [va ' ri], though nom pl [var ' ji] took the 2nd -
 declension sufﬁ x to distinguish it from the fem pl; fem 
 [va ' ria] developed by 
synizesis to [var ' ja], with pl [var ' jes]); neut [va ' ri] has gen [var ' ju], and pl [var ' ja]. 
The neut gen sg was also used for the masc because of the identity of the two forms 
in the regular 2nd - declension paradigm. The development was further supported by 
the existence of 2nd - declension forms in the masc pl, and the oddity of apparent 
masculine adjectives of the 1st declension. 
 Such forms were originally exclusive to spoken Greek and there was much uncertainty 
about orthography when they were ﬁ nally written. Forms without a learned history 
were in general written as if they belonged to the 1st or 2nd declension as appropriate: 
e.g. masc 
 [stax ' tis] (gen 
 [stax ' ti] or 
 [stax ' tju], pl 
 
[stax ' tji]); fem 
 [stax ' tja]; neuter 
 [stax ' ti]  ‘ ashen ’ . But in other cases 
there was interference from the written language; thus in the case of 
 [va ' ris]/
 
[var ' i]  ‘ heavy ’ , the modern orthography has kept the original  u in the masc/neut nom/
acc singular, but otherwise uses spellings with  - i - , so 
 [va ' ris]/
 [va ' ri] but 
 
[va ' rja]/
 [va ' rji]. As a result, the masc and neut sg have ceased to belong to any 
living paradigm and lack an acceptable genitive inﬂ ection. Earlier, however, forms in 
( )
 [ - ' i] and 
 [ - ' ju] were used freely, and the paradigm was sufﬁ ciently productive 
to attract some regular adjectives in 
 [ - ' os] (some of which then became  ‘ standard ’ , 
most notably 
 [ma ' kris]  ‘ long ’  for ancient 
 [ma ' kros]). 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 291
 Occasionally, however, the levelling seems to have been carried through more 
systematically for accidental phonetic reasons. Thus masc and fem nom plurals 
 (replacing ancient 
 ) and 
 ( < ancient 
 )  ‘ sweet ’ were reinterpreted as 
 and 
 with 
regular velar palatalization before the sufﬁ xes [ - i/ - e]. On this basis, a 2nd - declension 
neut pl 
 was constructed with root - ﬁ nal velar, and the masc/neut pl forms 
then led to corresponding 2nd - declension singulars, 
 and 
 , 
in place of ancient 
 and 
 . The fem sg, however, remains 
 ( < ancient 
 ), thus blocking the full regularization of the 
paradigm. Examples of this type also led to 
 [ - ' ja] feminines in regular 2nd/1st -
 declension adjectives when the stem ended in a velar. 
 Alongside these partial, and rather confused, attempts to integrate members of a 
dying paradigm into living alternatives in the popular language, there are also words 
taken directly from the written language which have now been incorporated into 
standard Modern Greek with their ancient paradigm intact. A good example is 
 
[e ' vris]  ‘ broad ’  (with genitive 
 [e ' vreos], pl 
 [e ' vris]).
 (27)    The ancient n - stem type in masc/fem  - w n [ - on], neut  - o  n [ - on], was almost com-
pletely lost apart from rare imports from the learned language. There are also a few 
ancient participles of the  - w n [ - on]/gen  - o  n t o  " [ - ondos] type in common use as adjec-
tives, again with a complete ancient paradigm, e.g. masc 
 , 
fem 
 , neut 
  ‘ interesting ’ .  
 (28)   Adjectives of the s - stem type in masc/fem 
 [ - ' is], neut 
 [ - ' es], were vari-
ously replaced by existing alternatives or remodelled using more regular sufﬁ xes 
(not all of which have survived into Modern Greek): e.g. 
 [akri ' vis] 
 ‘ accurate ’   >  
 [akri ' vos]; 
  ‘ true ’   >  
 ; 
  ‘ ignorant ’    >  
 and 
 ; 
 
[evje ' nis]  ‘ noble ’    >  
 [evje ' nos] and 
 [evjeni ' kos]; 
 [i ' jis] 
 ‘ healthy ’   >  
 [iji ' ros]/
 [je ' ros] and 
 [iji ' nos]. In many cases, 
however, the ancient form survived in the written language and has since been 
reincorporated into standard modern Greek with its ancient paradigm intact. In 
cases where both forms have been retained side by side, there is often semantic dif-
ferentiation (e.g. 
 [akri ' vis]  ‘ accurate ’ , 
 [akri ' vos]  ‘ expensive ’ ; 
 
[i ' jis]  ‘ healthy ’ , 
 [iji ' nos]  ‘ hygienic ’ ). 
 Others, however, were taken to belong to the type of 1st - declension substantives, 
such as 
  ‘ related ’   >   ‘ a relative ’ , with gen 
 and pl 
 , and supplied with feminine counterparts in  - i s s a [ - isa] (e.g. 
 ). Though both forms were nouns, they could be used in apposi-
tion to other nouns and acquire adjective - like status, leading to completion of the 
paradigm by the addition of neuters in 
 [ - i ' ko] taken from regular adjectival para-
digms, as 
 . This sufﬁ x was sometimes then generalized to the 
masculine and feminine to produce a normal adjectival paradigm in 
 [ - i ' kos]/
 
[ - i ' ci]/
 [ - i ' ko] (cf. 
 [evjeni ' kos]  ‘ noble/polite ’ ). Thus the modern adjective 

292 Byzantium
is 
 , while the ancient 
 , together with its 
classical paradigm, has been reincorporated into the language as a noun meaning  ‘ (a) 
relative ’ . 
 Many neologisms ending in 
   [ - ' atis], 
 [ - ' itis] and 
 [ - ' otis] were later 
added to this class, despite the difference in accent, to give  ' - h " [ - is]/  ' - i s s a [ - isa]/  ' - i k o  
[ - iko]. From this arose a set of popular adjectives in  ' - i k o  " [ ' - ikos], e.g. 
 
[xo ' rjatis]  ‘ peasant/villager ’ , 
 [xor ' jatikos]  ‘ of the peasantry, rustic ’ . 
Masculine nouns of this type have now largely been assimilated into the regular 1st -
 declension paradigm with plural in  -  e " [ - es]. 
 Similarly innovative forms in 
 [ - ' aris], 
 [ - ' eris] and later 
 [ - ' elis] (e.g. 
in Turkish loans like 
 [tem ' belis]  ‘ lazy ’ ) were treated in a parallel fashion, 
though these were felt to be adjectival from the start and the feminine therefore ended 
in  - a [ - a] rather than nominal  - i s s a [ - isa]. There was, however, some overlap and 
uncertainty between the two types (e.g. 
 [xo ' rjata]/
 [xo ' rjatisa] 
 ‘ female villager ’ ). In general, these have survived into Modern Greek as adjectives 
with their popular paradigm intact: e.g. 
 , 
 , 
  ‘ jealous ’ . 
 11.7.8   Pronouns 
 (29)   Pronominal morphology underwent extensive remodelling during the middle 
ages. This complex area is summarized under the following subheadings:  
 (a)   Indeﬁ nite pronouns. 
 (b)   Interrogative pronouns.  
 (c)  
  Relative pronouns.  
 (d)   Demonstrative pronouns.  
 (e)  
  Personal pronouns.  
 ( a )  Indeﬁ nite  p ronouns 
 The indeﬁ nite pronoun/adjective  t i " [tis]  ‘ someone/some, anyone/any ’ was increasingly 
replaced in its incipient use as an indeﬁ nite article by the numeral 
 [is], later 
 
[ ' enas], lit.  ‘ one ’ (as already sporadically from Hellenistic times). In its strictly pro-
nominal uses, however, ( ‘ someone/anyone ’ ), it was remodelled as 
 [tinas], though 
this in turn was eventually replaced, as explained immediately below. 
 The particle 
 [ka(n)], originally a combination of 
 [ce]  ‘ even ’ with modal 
 
[an], was already used as a free - standing intensiﬁ er even in classical Greek. In combi-
nation with 
 [is] this gradually passed from the sense  ‘ even/at least one ’ to become 
a new indeﬁ nite pronoun meaning  ‘ anyone ’ . A transitional example might be 
 Apophthegmata Patrum  (c.  ad 500), Migne vol. 45, 261 B: 
 (i)  
 
 
 
 ‘ Does any one of these things please him? ’ 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 293
 The syllabiﬁ cation of 
 , as in [ka ' nis], encouraged formal resegmentation as 
[ka - ' nis], and the element  k a - [ka - ] was then compounded with other ancient indeﬁ -
nite pronouns and adverbs to form one set of modern indeﬁ nites, e.g. 
 [ ' kati] 
 ‘ something ’ , 
 [ ' kapjos]  ‘ someone ’ (the second element originally meant  ‘ some 
kind of ’ but assumed a parallel pronominal function to replace  t i " [tis] in this sense), 
 [ ' kapote]  ‘ sometimes ’ , 
 [ ' kapu]  ‘ somewhere ’  etc. The original ﬁ nal nasal 
was retained only in 
 [ ' kambosos], lit.  ‘ some - many ’ , i.e.  ‘ (quite) a few ’ . For 
medieval variants of these with preﬁ xed 
 [o - ] (
 [o ' kati], 
 [o ' kapjos] 
etc.), see  12.3.3 . 
 But unlike the ancient indeﬁ nites, which meant both  ‘ any X ’ and  ‘ some X ’ , the new 
forms were divided into negative - polarity ( ‘ any/no ’ ) and afﬁ rmative ( ‘ some ’ ) subtypes 
(see  12.3.2  for further discussion). Thus alongside the afﬁ rmative forms just listed, 
 [ka ' nis] and 
 [ka ' nenas] (the latter used both pronominally and adjec-
tivally) appear only in negative, interrogative and generic contexts with the sense 
 ‘ anyone ’ , and can also be used absolutely with the negative sense of  ‘ no one ’ . A number 
of other indeﬁ nite forms were assimilated to this model to complete the set: e.g. 
 
[ ' tipote]  ‘ anything/nothing ’  (i.e.  t i [ti]  ‘ something/anything ’   +  
 [pote]  ‘ ever ’ , later 
 [ ' tipota]); 
 [po ' te]  ‘ ever/never ’ ; 
  ‘ anywhere/nowhere ’  (i.e. 
  ‘ (from) anywhere/somewhere ’ remodelled to 
 [pu]  ‘ anywhere/some-
where ’ and given the intensive sufﬁ x 
 [ - ' a] also used in demonstratives).  
 (b)   Interrogative  p ronouns 
 Just as the (afﬁ rmative) indeﬁ nite  t i " [tis]  ‘ some(one) ’ was replaced by 
 [ ' kapjos], 
so interrogative 
 ; [tis]  ‘ who? ’ was replaced by 
 ; [ ' pios] (originally  ‘ which?/what 
kind of? ’ but again extended from adjectival to pronominal function). The substitution 
was promoted by the demise of 3rd - declension masc/fem forms, and the fact that the 
majority of interrogative elements began with  p -  [p - ], cf. 
 ; [pu]  ‘ where? ’ , 
 ; 
[ ' pote]  ‘ when? ’ etc. The accent was shifted to the ﬁ nal syllable with synizesis to give 
 ; [pjos]  ‘ who? ’ . 
 However, the neuter 
 ; [ti]  ‘ what? ’ , just like the second element of indeﬁ nite 
 
[ ' kati]  ‘ something ’ , was retained, and in some dialects (e.g. the Old Athenian and 
south - eastern groups, Cretan, and many Cycladic varieties) used so habitually in the 
phrase 
 ; [ ' ti n do/da], lit.  ‘ what is - it/are - they that? ’ (cf. French  qu ' est - ce 
que ?), that this eventually developed (through dissimilation) into the fused pronominal 
interrogative 
 ; [ ' inda]  ‘ what? ’ . 
 (c)  Relative  p ronouns 
 The ancient forms 
 [os]/  [i]/  [o], invariably beginning, and often also ending, in 
a vowel, were prone to merger and loss. Beginning in classical times, they were fre-
quently replaced by stronger forms in popular speech. 
 The regular substitutes in the early - to - middle period are forms of the article begin-
ning with  t -  [t - ] (as already in classical Ionic, where the once protective initial /h/ of 
the true relative was lost prehistorically), and, especially in cases where the article also 
began with a vowel, the formerly indeﬁ nite 
 [ ' ostis] and emphatic 
 [ ' osper]. 
The interrogative 
 ; [tis] is also sometimes used as a relative; this originated in overlap 

294 Byzantium
with 
 [ ' ostis] in indirect questions/free relatives (cf.  I know what(ever) she knows ), 
whence it acquired ﬁ rst a free - relative and then a simple - relative use parallel to 
 
[ostis]. 
 Replacement of these options by 
 [( ' o)pu]  ‘ that ’  apparently became general 
only in the latter part of the period under review, despite a few early examples (see 
below). It is traditionally assumed that this originally locative adverb ( ‘ where ’ ) ﬁ rst 
acquired the wider range of functions carried by the locative prepositions 
 [en]/
 
[is], (i.e. not only  ‘ where - at ’ , but also  ‘ where - to ’  (goal) and  ‘ where - with ’  (instrumental/
comitative), and was then used, by simple extension, as an indirect object relative (cf. 
 ‘ X where - with/where - to I spoke ’ ). Reinterpreted in this role as a substitute also for 
 ‘ bare ’ genitive and accusative elements functioning as indirect objects, it was then 
further extended to cover other genitive and accusative uses, including that of direct 
object. At this stage the ﬁ nal generalization to the role of subject, as a nominative 
substitute, would have been straightforward. 
 But convincing cases of relative 
 [ ' opu] are hard to ﬁ nd in the Egyptian papyri 
(cf. Gignac ( 1981 : 179)), and all the examples from low - brow Christian writing (from 
around the 5th century) are nominative substitutes (Bakker ( 1974 : 71 – 2)): 
 (i)  
 
 
 
 Since the proposed development must have taken some time, it would follow that it 
must have begun in late antiquity, making the absence of good examples from Egypt 
all the more mysterious. Furthermore, it is usually the case cross - linguistically that the 
use of an indeclinable relative complementizer  begins with the role of subject, and then 
works its way down the grammatical hierarchy of direct and indirect object to other 
adjunct/adverbial functions (see, for example, Maxwell  (1982) ). If this was the case 
in Greek, as the few available data suggest, an alternative account is clearly required 
(cf. Manol é ssou  (2003b) ). One possibility is that colloquial free relatives like 
 , lit.  ‘ not there - is (any case/any means) in - which/by -
 which  … ’ , i.e.  ‘ it is impossible that  … ’ , 10 where there was already some development 
from the spatial sense, eventually provided a source for the extension of a semantically 
bleached 
 [opu] (=  ‘ that ’ ) to relative clauses with heads (starting with the subject 
role in line with the evidence). 
 We also start to ﬁ nd examples of the relative use of classical 
 [o ' pios] (origi-
nally =  ‘ of such a kind as ’ ) in place of 
 [ ' ostis]. This conformed with both the 
general preference for  p - forms over  t - forms, and the general pattern of redeploying 
free - relative adjectivals as relative pronouns. Overlap of use in indirect questions again 
led to confusion with the corresponding interrogative 
 [ ' pios]  ‘ who? ’ , which in 
turn created confusion about the status of  [o - ] in the longer form: was this 
 
[o ' pios], 
 [o  ' pios] (article   +  interrogative used as a relative) or 
 [o 
 ' pios] (the article followed by the longer form reduced by aphaeresis)? We therefore 
start to ﬁ nd the  ‘ corrected ’ form of the last of these, namely 
 [o o ' pios], the 
use of which was reinforced under the inﬂ uence of Romance after the capture of 
Constantinople by the fourth crusade in 1204 and the subsequent division of the 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 295
empire amongst the conquering Latin powers (cf. French  le quel , Italian  il quale  etc). 
In the non - classicizing literature of late Byzantium we therefore ﬁ nd 
 
[o ' pios/ ' opjos] (for the accent of the second cf. the functionally equivalent 
 [ ' ostis] 
and the accentuation in citation form of all the related adverbials in 
 [ ' op - ]), 
 
[o o ' pios], and (with aphaeresis and/or conﬂ ation of interrogative and relative) 
 [o  ' pios/o pjos], all in use alongside indeclinable 
 [( ' o)pu]. 
 
 [o ' pios], like its predecessor 
 [ ' ostis], was also employed as an indeﬁ -
nite/generic pronoun in free relatives, but in this case, the accent was standardized on 
the ﬁ rst syllable to give 
 [ ' opjos], reﬂ ecting the continuing inﬂ uence of the clas-
sical neuter 
 [ ' oti]  ‘ whatever ’ , which was retained alongside 
 [ ' kati]  ‘ something ’ , 
and  ; [ti]  ‘ what? ’ . This duality naturally led to 
 [ ' opu] and its variants also being 
used, at least for a time, in free relatives. 
 In Modern Greek, however, 
 [pu] and 
 [o o ' pios] are used only as simple 
relatives (the latter with a slightly learned feel), 
 [ ' opjos] only as an indeﬁ nite/
generic pronoun in free relatives, though there was much uncertainty in the later middle 
ages before this stable pattern ﬁ nally emerged. 
 (d)   Demonstrative  p ronouns 
 As already noted, 
 [af ' tos] became a true demonstrative (=  ‘ this ’ ) in late antiquity 
or the early Byzantine period, replacing ancient 
 . A local variant, which still 
survives in some contemporary spoken dialects, was 
 [e ' (f)tos], with 
 [e - ] by 
analogy with 
 [e ' cinos]  ‘ that ’ . 
 Ancient 
 [ ' utos]/
 [ ' afti]/
 [ ' tuto]  ‘ this ’ also survived, but with regulari-
zation of the paradigm through generalization of the stem  t o  u t - [tut - ], as seen in the 
neut sg and the oblique cases of masc/neut in both sg and pl, so as to give 
 
[ ' tutos]/
 [ ' tuti]/
 [ ' tuto] (sometimes with initial  [e - ], again on the analogy 
of 
 [e ' cinos]  ‘ that ’ , 
  ‘ I ’ , 
 [e ' si]  ‘ you ’ ). 
 There was also interference between 
 [af ' tos] and 
 [ ' utos] based on their 
respective feminine forms, 
 [af ' ti] and 
 [ ' afti]. The latter spawned a rival para-
digm with masculine 
 [ ' aftos] and neuter 
 [ ' afto], 
forms which provide useful metrical variants to 
 [af ' tos] etc., and occur quite 
frequently in the vernacular poetry of the 12th century and beyond as true demonstra-
tives and strong (i.e. non - clitic) 3rd - person pronouns. This development also led to the 
formation of 
 [ ' eftos/ ' etos] beside 
 [e ' (f)tos]. 
 This last form may then provide the explanation for the modern manner adverbial 
 [ ' etsi]  ‘ thus ’ . The phrase 
 ; [ti lo ' jis], lit.  ‘ what of - kind/manner? ’ (i.e.  ‘ what 
sort (of)? ’ ), consisting of the now indeclinable neuter interrogative plus the fossilized 
genitive of the feminine noun 
 [lo ' ji], is only used today with a following noun. 
But in Medieval Greek it could apparently also be used absolutely to mean  ‘ (in) what 
manner/how? ’ , to which a possible answer was the elliptical use of the feminine geni-
tive singular 
 [ ' etis]  ‘ (in) this (manner) ’ , agreeing with 
 [lo ' jis]. From this, the 
general adverbial use (=  ‘ so/thus ’ ) developed directly. At this stage, the termination, 
being no longer associated speciﬁ cally with the feminine genitive singular, gave rise to 
respellings such as 
 (see the following paragraph for the preﬁ x) and 
 [ ' itis] (with assimilation of the initial vowel). The form 
 [ ' etsi] involves 

296 Byzantium
syncope of the unaccented vowel of 
 [ ' etis] followed by anaptyxis, while early 
Cypriot 
 [ ' itsu] is perhaps a related derivative of 
 [ ' itis] (in which the ﬁ nal 
vowel, however, remains unexplained). 
 At least some forms of 
 [e ' cinos] and 
 [(e) ' tutos] could be augmented 
by an intensifying sufﬁ x  [ - ' a] (sometimes  [ - ' e]), or preﬁ xed by 
 
 ‘ look ’ . The strengthened form 
 [af ' tonos] has a double inﬂ ection outside the 
nom sg masc (e.g. gen sg 
 [af ' tunu/aftu ' nu], fem sg 
 [af ' tini] 
etc.), and appears to have been built to 
 [e ' cinos], but with the continuing inﬂ u-
ence of the simplex 
 [af ’ tos] leading to the more complex declensional pattern. 
See Manol é ssou  (2001) for a full survey of these developments.  
 (e)  Personal  p ronouns 
 The development of a set of reduced clitic forms for the 3rd - person pronouns has 
already been dealt with. The beginnings of the reconstruction of the system of 1st/2nd -
 person pronouns were already apparent in some of the later papyri (cf.  6.5.4 , (38c)). 
In this period the changes were completed. 
 The form of the nom sg of the 1st - person pronoun (
 ), together with the 
existence of parallel strong and weak oblique forms (e.g. acc 
 [e ' me]/
 [me]), led 
to analogous 2nd - person formations: 
 [e ' si] (replacing classical 
 [si]), with strong 
acc 
 [e ' se] alongside weak 
 [se] etc. 
 Since the 1/2 plural forms had become homophonous (
 [i ' mis]), new pl 
paradigms were built in the early/middle Byzantine period to the stem forms of the sg: 
nom 
 [e ' mis]/
 [e ' sis], acc 
 [e ' mas]
 [e ' sas], beside weak 
 [mas]/
 [sas] etc. For the use of the acc pl forms of 1/2/3 - person pronouns in genitive as 
well as normal accusative functions, see  12.3.3 (15g). 
 From the early 2nd century, the acc sg forms acquired a characteristic ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] 
(
 [e ' me(n)]/
 [e ' se(n)]), and by the 4th century the ﬁ rst - person pronoun had 
been formally adapted to the 3rd declension (perhaps on the analogy of 
 [ ' ena] 
 ‘ one/a(n) ’ and 
 [tina]  ‘ some(one)/a(n) ’ ) through the addition of ﬁ nal  - a [a]. This 
form naturally received its own analogical  - n [ - n] along with other 3rd - declension 
nominals, with 
 [e ' mena(n)] already attested in papyri of the late 4th century. 
The parallel evolution of the 2nd - person form (
 [e ' sena(n)]) belongs to the early/
middle Byzantine period. 
 Since these types were then reinterpreted as belonging to the ﬁ rst declension, they 
were given the appropriate genitives (following the masculine declensional pattern), i.e. 
 [e ' mena]/
 [e ' sena]. With the loss of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n], these then served also as 
accusative - genitives in the usual way. (See Dressler  (1966) , Gignac ( 1981 : 161 – 5).)  
 11.8  Verb Morphology and Syntax 
 11.8.1   The  i nﬁ nitive 
 (30)   The aorist inﬁ nitive was reformed in the later middle ages to the model 
of the present (imperfective) inﬁ nitive, i.e.  - ( s ) a i [ - (s)e]    >   - ( s ) e i ( n ) [ - (s)i(n)] on the 
basis of  - e i n [ - i(n)]. 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 297
 In popular spoken usage inﬁ nitives were progressively conﬁ ned to the complements of 
control verbs (i.e.  ‘ want ’ ,  ‘ try ’ , etc., with an understood coreferential subject in the 
inﬁ nitival clause:  I want to go  =  ‘ I want [that I go] ’ ), and of auxiliaries expressing 
modal and aspectual notions (i.e.  ‘ will ’ ,  ‘ can ’ ,  ‘ have ’ ,  ‘ start ’ ,  ‘ stop ’ etc). 
 In the later middle ages 
 [na]   +  subjunctive largely replaced the inﬁ nitive in the 
former category, while the inﬁ nitive when used with appropriate verbs of the second 
type was sometimes strengthened with the article to form a nominalized direct object 
(e.g.  I start [to talk]   - >  I start [the talking] ). A number of Modern Greek neuter nouns 
originated as inﬁ nitives used in this way, e.g. 
 [ﬁ  ' li]  ‘ kiss ’ ,    <  
 [ﬁ  ' li(n)]  ‘ to 
love/kiss ’ ; 
 [fa ' i]  ‘ food ’   <  
 [fa ' ji(n)]  ‘ to eat ’ etc. 
 Eventually, even inﬁ nitivals after modal/aspectual verbs were replaced by 
 [na] -
 clauses, with the sole exception of those following 
 [ ' ixa]  ‘ I would (have) ’ (usually 
aorist). This construction, through its use in the protases of counterfactual condition-
als, passed in the later part of this period from the sense of  ‘ would (have) ’ to hypo-
thetical  ‘ had ’ , and then to that of a true pluperfect ( if X would have Y - ed  - >  if X had 
Y - ed  - >  X had Y - ed ). Ultimately, a new perfect with 
 [ ' exo]  ‘ I have ’ was built to 
this pluperfect, though this development belongs to the modern period, by which time 
the future was consistently formed in ways other than with this auxiliary (see  11.8.3 
for perfects/pluperfects, futures and conditionals). 
 The articular inﬁ nitive also survived into the late middle ages as a subject - orientated 
adjunct, functionally equivalent to a temporal or circumstantial clause. In this use it 
no longer appeared after prepositions, was always placed immediately after the article 
 [to], and never took an independent accusative subject (i.e. its interpretation was 
necessarily controlled by the subject of the main verb). Since it now effectively dupli-
cated the function of the indeclinable participle/gerund, it gradually fell out of use. 
(See Joseph  (1983)  for a comprehensive survey, in the context of the Balkan  Sprachbund, 
of the issues involved in the demise of the inﬁ nitive.) 
 11.8.2   Participles 
 (31)   The imperfective (present) and perfect medio - passive participles in 
 
[ - ' omenos] and 
 [ - ' menos], which belonged to the  ‘ regular ’  2nd/1st - declension 
paradigms, both survived strongly in the early Byzantine period.  
 Subsequently, the present forms, which, like their active counterparts, were used 
almost exclusively as subject - orientated adjuncts, began to disappear in a linguistic 
context in which the active forms had become indeclinable (see immediately 
below). 
 Perfect passive participles, by contrast, were used only adjectivally, both attribu-
tively and predicatively (in stative periphrases with  ‘ be ’ ), in contexts where agreement 
was routine. Eventually, under Romance inﬂ uence after 1204, these also began once 
again to be used with  ‘ have ’ to form a perfect active periphrasis, sometimes agreeing 
with the direct object (though with a counter - tendency for an indeclinable neuter plural 
to be used instead): e.g.  I have the letter (in a) written (state)  etc. With the past tense 
 [ ' ixa],  ‘ I had ’ , these then formed a rival to the pluperfect formed with 
 
[ ' ixa]  +  aorist inﬁ nitive. Different areas eventually selected one or the other as the 

298 Byzantium
principal exponent of this tense, with the inﬁ nitival forms emerging as the norm in 
standard Modern Greek. 
 The remaining participles, with complex 3rd - declension paradigms, progressively 
disappeared amid growing confusion of gender and number (see  6.5.3 for the early 
stages), eventually leaving only an indeclinable active neuter form in  - o  n t a [ - onda]. 
Whether in origin this represents the old plural or a recharacterized singular is difﬁ cult 
to say in view of the general confusion, but it could be formed from both imperfective 
(present) and perfective (aorist) stems, the latter eventually showing  - ( s ) o  n t a [ - (s)onda] 
in place of  - ( s ) a n t a [ - (s)anda] on the model of imperfective  - o  n t a [ - onda] (cf. the 
parallel remodelling of the aorist inﬁ nitive). Subsequent interference from Romance 
gerunds in  - ante/ - ant etc., used only to denote contemporaneous manner or circum-
stance, contributed to the eventual demise of the aorist forms. Similarly, though the 
Greek forms were earlier used both circumstantially and predicatively (in the case of 
the aorist, as a pluperfect active substitute with the past of  ‘ be ’ ), their sole surviving 
function in Modern Greek is as subject - orientated adjuncts expressing manner/
circumstance. 
 The addition of ﬁ nal  - " [ - s], as in Modern Greek, also seems to have begun in the 
later Byzantine period; this element, regular in the principal class of adverbs in  - w " 
[ - os], perhaps reﬂ ected the feeling that they served a related adverbial function (cf. the 
addition of  - " [ - s] to 
 [ ' totes]  ‘ then ’ , 
 ; [ ' potes]  ‘ when? ’ etc.). 
 There is, however, no reason to think that the formal usage of the educated aris-
tocracy was affected by these developments until quite late in the Byzantine period. If 
we consider the usage, not always obviously parodic, of the  ‘ vernacular ’   Poems of 
Poor Pr ó dromos  ( 12.2.2 ), for example, it would seem that the urban elite continued 
to use a fairly full array of inﬂ ected participles, albeit in a greatly reduced range of 
functions reﬂ ecting the restriction in more popular registers to subject - orientated, 
circumstantial meanings. (Cf. Mirambel  (1961) , Manol é ssou  (2005a) , for discussion 
of the retreat of the participle.) 
 11.8.3   Futures and  c onditionals,  p luperfects and  p erfects 
 (32)   The principal exponents of futurity in the early Byzantine period were 
 
[ ' exo] or 
 [ ' melo]   +  inﬁ nitive, the present indicative (now indistinguishable 
from the present subjunctive, which may have supported its use in future function), 
and the aorist subjunctive (with which the future indicative had merged in regular 
paradigms), cf.  8.6 ,  11.8.6  (a); in irregular/suppletive paradigms it was the aorist 
subjunctive rather than the future forms that survived, albeit with analogically 
levelled indicative endings, because of the centrality to the verb system of the con-
trast between imperfective and perfective subjunctives.  
 In the later Byzantine period the auxiliaries in these various periphrases began to be 
replaced by 
  ‘ will ’ (originally  ‘ wish ’ , a meaning that it retained in parallel), 
while bare subjunctives, both present and aorist, had begun as early as late antiquity 
to be strengthened by 
 [ ' ina]
 [na], the products functioning not only modally but 
also as futures: 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 299
 (i)  
 
 
 
 ‘ for if I ﬁ nd out, I shall talk to him ’ 
 Correspondingly, the  ‘ conditional ’  (=  ‘ would (have) ’ , i.e. the  ‘ past ’ of the future in infer-
ential/hypothetical contexts) was expressed by a bare imperfect (i.e. the past of the 
present used as a future), and by the past - tense forms of the inﬁ nitival periphrases, i.e. 
 [ ' ixa], 
 [ ' emela]
 [ ' imela], and eventually 
 ,  +  inﬁ nitive: 
 (ii)    
 
 
 
 ‘ And the barbarians would also have burned our ships, if night had not come on. ’ 
 In the later middle ages, however, the bare modal imperfect was regularly strengthened, 
in a development modelled on the established use of 
 [na] to mark a present as future/
subjunctive in force: 
 (iii)  
 
 
 
 ‘ I would have worked as a porter the whole day long ’ 
 This formal remodalization of the imperfect also led to a temporary revival of 
 
[na]  +  the aorist indicative in counterfactual apodoses, corresponding to the use of 
 
[na] with both present and aorist subjunctive in future/modal function. 
 In some later medieval texts, however, most notably in the principal manuscript of 
the  Chronicle of the Morea  (H), but also sporadically elsewhere (e.g. l. 33 of  The Tale 
of the Right - Honourable Old Soak P é tros Zyth ó moustos (Z ó ras ( 1956 : 132 – 4)), 
and ll. 57 and 63 of Man ó lis Skl á vos ’  The Disaster of Crete  (dealing with the great 
earthquake of 1508, Bouboul í dis  (1955) ), we also ﬁ nd the particle 
 [na] combined 
with the 
 [ ' exo] or 
 periphrases to form a complex subjunctive 
  +  inﬁ nitive. This was presumably a function of the familiar 
future/subjunctive overlap, representing an attempt to mark speciﬁ cally modal uses of 
the inﬁ nitival periphrases. Sometimes in the  Chronicle of the Morea  (though again only 
in H), this new subjunctive combines with 
 in volitive constructions, e.g. 
6773 
 , lit.  ‘ I - want that to - you I - will/may 
tell ’ , i.e.  ‘ I want to tell you ’ . Such developments presumably reﬂ ect the ﬂ uid situation in 
the later middle ages with respect to the expression of modality and futurity, but these 
particular forms had a local and/or substandard character, and none survived for long. 

300 Byzantium
 The general replacement of 
 [ ' exo]/
 [ ' ixa] by 
 in 
the inﬁ nitival periphrasis was motivated by the beginnings of the shift of 
 
[ ' ixa]  +  inﬁ nitive towards true pluperfect status. This exempliﬁ es a process commonly 
seen in the history of counterfactual constructions whereby the two clauses, being 
equally modal in character, are formally equated through the generalization of the 
overtly modal verb form of the apodosis to the protasis (the latter traditionally con-
taining bare imperfects or aorists): e.g.  if s/he came, I would leave   - >  if she (woul)d 
come, I (woul)d leave , or  if s/he (ha)d come, I (woul)d have left   - >  if s/he (woul)d have 
come, I (woul)d have left  (though Greek made no formal distinction between past and 
non - past hypotheticals, using 
 [ ' ixa]   +  inﬁ nitive or (
 [na] +) imperfect 
(rarely aorist) in both types of apodosis, cf.  9.4 ). 
 As one option, therefore, we ﬁ nd the 
 [na]   +  imperfect construction in protases 
in place of 
 [an]   +  imperfect. But the inﬁ nitival construction was also transferred 
into 
 [an] - clauses, and this eventually became isolated in protases as the (
 [na] +) 
imperfect construction became dominant in apodoses: 
 (iv)    
 
 
 
 ‘ If those men would have/had found you, you would not have seen Syria (again) ’ 
 In this position the inﬁ nitival periphrasis gradually came to be interpreted as a hypo-
thetical pluperfect (=  ‘ had X - ed ’ ) rather than a true modal (=  ‘ would have X - ed ’ ), 
through the assumption that it represented a hypothetical past - of - past, i.e. something 
that had to happen before the hypothetical consequence could follow; and since the 
latter was represented by a modal past tense (imperfect), the prior condition was felt 
to be marked as  ‘ more past ’ . 
 From here it was only a matter of time before the 
 [ ' ixa] - periphrasis began to 
be used in real - time past - of - past contexts as a true pluperfect; the earliest examples 
come from the  Chronicle of the Morea  (cf. Chatzid á kis ( 1905 : 585 – 609), Aerts  (1965) , 
Moser  (1988) , Horrocks  (1995) ): 
 (v)  
 
 
 
 ‘ they put that king on the royal throne that he had lost ’ 
 The corresponding perfect, using 
 [ ' exo]   +  aorist inﬁ nitive, is now standard in 
Modern Greek. This was formed to the new pluperfect, but the earliest examples 
belong to the modern period ( pace Browning ( 1983 : 80) whose example from the 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 301
 Chronicle of the Morea  is not well - supported by the manuscript tradition or by the 
sense required in the relevant context). Thus Soﬁ an ó s ’ early 16th - century grammar of 
the vernacular, for example, makes no mention of such a perfect (see Part III,  14.2.2 ), 
while Thumb ( 1912 : 161 – 2) notes that such forms were still rare in the vernacular of 
the 19th century, and were at that time only beginning to acquire wider popularity 
through their use by literary writers. 
 The only true perfect forms available in the medieval period, therefore, were peri-
phrases using the perfect passive participle in combination ﬁ rst with  ‘ be ’ (in a stative/
passive sense), and later with  ‘ have ’ (in an active sense) following the impact of 
Romance on western - dominated Greek lands. A stative pluperfect passive was analo-
gously formed with the past of  ‘ be ’ throughout the Byzantine period, while the later 
pluperfect active formations using  ‘ had ’ (whether   +  aorist inﬁ nitive or perfect passive 
participle) steadily replaced earlier active periphrases, formed with the past tense of 
 ‘ be ’  +  aorist participle, during the course of the late Byzantine/early Ottoman periods. 
 As far as the expression of futurity is concerned, the 
 [na]   +  subjunctive construc-
tion started to fall out of favour in the later middle ages, becoming increasingly special-
ized as a  ‘ pure ’ subjunctive (with a range of modal uses). The inﬁ nitive with 
 
in its volitional use had, however, started to be replaced by a 
 [na] - clause in the early 
middle ages, and from the 14th century onwards the inﬁ nitival periphrasis was increas-
ingly specialized as a future, becoming fully distinct from volitional 
 
[na] and continuing strongly in this function into the modern period. 
 could 
also be complemented by bare inﬂ ected subjunctives in future/modal function, a con-
struction characteristic of the Ionian islands in the modern period but with a continuous 
history from antiquity, the restriction to future/modal use occurring in the 11th/12th 
centuries. The example in (vi) is the last in a series of future - referring conditions in 
which the notion of volition is clearly absent (Mark ó poulos ( 2009 : 166)): 
 (vi)    
 
 
 
 ‘ And if all ( the fortiﬁ ed towns ) around (will) rebel. ’ 
 During the 14th century, volitional 
 starts to appear optionally with 
reduced forms of the main verb; 2sg 
 and 3sg 
 are actually attested, see 
Markopoulos ( 2009 : 186 – 208). 
 was then quickly generalized to all persons and 
numbers, becoming in effect an uninﬂ ected volitional particle. Soon afterwards both 
full - form 
 and reduced 
 start to be used also as futures, 
and in the early modern period the future use of the latter became dominant, the former 
being polarized once again as volitional. 11 The earliest instances of future 
 
probably date from the 14th century, and the construction is well - established in literate 
Cretan compositions from at least the beginning of the16th century: 
 (vii)    
 

302 Byzantium
 
 
 ‘ We concluded that it will bury us ’ 
 This construction began to gain in popularity over the inﬁ nitival periphrasis 
in the modern period and eventually, via assimilation and elision/apocope 
(
 ), the modern future particle 
 was 
derived. Many of the earliest examples occur in Cretan literature from the later 16th 
and 17th centuries, chieﬂ y in lower - level genres such as comedy, a situation suggesting 
that it was at ﬁ rst a popular/allegro form. Signiﬁ cantly earlier attestations are probably 
misleading, and due to later copyists. 
 In Modern Greek 
 combines with present and aorist subjunctives (the former 
identical to the present indicative) to form an imperfective and perfective future, with 
the aorist indicative in epistemic use ( ‘ must have ’ in the sense of  ‘ probably ’ ), and with 
the imperfect indicative to form a temporally and aspectually neutral  ‘ conditional ’ 
(which, like English  would,  may sometimes double as a past habitual =  ‘ used to ’ ). See 
Joseph ( 1990 : chs. 5 and 9), Holton  (1993) , Pappas  (2001) , Pappas and Joseph  (2001) , 
Joseph and Pappas  (2002) , and especially Mark ó poulos  (2009) , for detailed studies of 
the development of the future in Medieval and early Modern Greek. 
 11.8.4   The  s pread of  k - a orists: the  a orist  p assive 
 (33)   The functional merger of perfect and aorist forms (cf.  6.5.2 ) was completed 
early. In general, forms with reduplication were abandoned, though the model of 
common irregular verbs such as aor 
  ‘ I put ’ /perf 
  ‘ I 
have put/I put ’ , or aor 
  ‘ I gave ’ /perf 
  ‘ I have given/I 
gave ’ , led to the use of certain other perfects (with augment substituted for reduplica-
tion) in preference to irregular inherited aorists: e.g. perf 
 [ ' estika]  ‘ I have 
stood/I stood ’ , misunderstood as beginning with an augment, replaced aor 
 
[ ' estin]; perf 
 [ ' evrika]  ‘ I have found/I found ’ , similarly assumed to begin with 
an augment, replaced aor 
 [ ' evron]; perf 
 [ ' evika]  ‘ I have gone/I went ’ (for 
classical 
 [ ' vevika]) replaced aor 
 [ ' evin], especially in compounds; perf 
  ‘ I have known/I knew ’ replaced aor 
 etc. 
 This led in turn to the pattern being partly generalized to all verbs with an aorist or 
perfect containing [i] or [o] before the sufﬁ x: thus perf 
 [e ' piika] (classical 
 [pe ' piika]), later reduced to 
 [ ' epika]/
 [(e) ' pika],  ‘ I have made/I 
made ’ , came to compete with aor 
 [e ' piisa] etc. Some mainland dialects (prin-
cipally the Old Athenian group, many Peloponnesian varieties and the dialect of 
Epirus) eventually generalized the  k - forms. 
 We should note, however, that there was a countervailing force at work in many 
irregular aorist paradigms, based on the general competition of  k - and  s - forms, which 
led to the construction of a new  s - aorist to original futures (now reinterpreted as aorist 
subjunctives) in  - s w [ - so], e.g. 
  ‘ I shall know ’ , 
  ‘ I shall give ’ , 
and to the original 3pl aorist forms in  - s a n [ - san], e.g. 
  ‘ they knew ’ , 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 303
  ‘ they gave ’ . Thus 
  ‘ I knew ’ , 
 
 /
  ‘ I gave ’ , came to compete fairly freely as aorists. In modern 
Greek the  s - forms have sometimes prevailed (as with 
 
 ). 
 In the aorist passive, the analogical addition of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] to 3sg forms (following 
the past - tense 3rd sg active forms, which had allowed such an addition optionally since 
classical times and now favoured it routinely) led to the homophony of 1sg and 3sg, 
with both ending in  - h n [ - in]. The subsequent loss of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] did nothing to remedy 
the problem, and during the middle Byzantine period 1sg  - h ( n ) [ - i(n)] was replaced by 
 - h k a [ - ika], following the now familar model of 
 [ ' evin]/
 [ ' evika] etc. This 
innovation then spread gradually through the paradigm, affecting popular varieties 
before it was ﬁ nally adopted in educated speech. In Modern Greek the aorist passive 
paradigm with stem in  - h k - [ - ik - ] is now standard in all but a handful of learned verbs 
adopted from the written language (most notably 
  ‘ I was 
arrested ’ ). 
 11.8.5   Imperfective  s tem  f ormation 
 (34)   During the early and middle periods there was a great reduction in the variety 
of imperfective formations, a process principally involving extensive remodellings 
on the basis of the aorist stem and other related forms. By the later Byzantine period 
most of the changes discussed below are well attested in vernacular texts such as 
the  Chronicle of the Morea.  (See Egea  (1988)  for a full treatment of the phonologi-
cal and grammatical structure of the Greek of this poem.)  
 The most important issues can be summarized under the following subheadings, each 
of which will be discussed in turn below: 
 (a)   The fate of the  - m i [ - mi] verbs.  
 (b)   The spread of nasal sufﬁ xes and their relationship with other verb classes.  
 (c)  
  The sufﬁ xes 
 [ - ' azo] and 
 [ - ' izo]: 
 (i) 
 interaction of 
 [ - ' azo] with nasal formations and contract verbs  
 (ii) 
 links between 
 and 
 [ - ' azo/ - ' ao], 
 and 
 [ - ' izo/ - ' eo], and 
confusion with stems in velars  
 (iii)  the  ‘ reduced ’ paradigms of certain verbs with velar and vowel stems.  
 (d)  The sufﬁ x 
 [ - ' evo] and its impact on other imperfective classes (especially 
verbs in  - p t w [ - pto]). 
 (e)  
 The development of the contract verbs.  
 (a)  The  f ate of the  -   [ - mi]  v erbs 
 During the early middle ages, the last traces of the old athematic inﬂ ections of the 
ancient verbs in  - m i [ - mi] (which were in any case conﬁ ned to the imperfective stem) 
ﬁ nally disappeared from popular speech. 
 The case of 
 [i ' mi]  ‘ I am ’ has already partly been dealt with (cf.  5.11.1 , ((23d)). 
This verb alone assumed a middle paradigm, beginning with the past tense, which 

304 Byzantium
already had the look of an aorist middle/passive in the Koine: cf. 
 [in], 
 [is] (for 
earlier 
 ),  [i], 
 [ ' imen], 
 [ ' ite], 
 [ ' isan], all homophonous with 
the regular aorist middle/passive endings. Since its sense was imperfective, however, 
it was given a new imperfect middle/passive paradigm (1sg 
 [ ' imin], already in 
Ptolemaic papyri, with the corresponding 1pl appearing a little later, 
 [ ' i - so], 
 
[ ' i - to] etc.), and this in turn spawned a new present (
 [ ' ime], 
 [ ' ise] etc., 
based on the form of the root seen in the original present 
 [i ' mi]). 
 In the 3sg and 3pl present, however, the locative adverb 
 [ ' eni]  ‘ there ’ , which had 
been reanalysed as a verb and was used widely in place of 
 [e ' sti/i ' si], strongly 
resisted replacement. It was, however, phonologically adapted over time to the rest of 
the new paradigm (cf. 1/2sg 
 [ ' ime], 
 [ ' ise]), ﬁ rst to 
 [ ' ene], and ﬁ nally to 
 [ ' ine]. Similarly, the original 3pl past 
 [ ' isan] also survived strongly, but this 
was eventually subject to inﬂ uence from the new 3sg 
 [ ' ito] to give 
 [ ' itan]. 
 In the case of 
 [ ' istimi]  ‘ I stand ’ (trans)/
 [ ' istame]  ‘ I stand ’ (intrans), 
a new intransitive present 
 [ ' stiko] was formed to the old intransitive perfect, 
now turned aorist, 
 [ ' e - stik - a], while the transitive form was replaced by 
 
[i ' sto] (already in Herodotus, following the 
 [ - ' ao] type of contract verb) and then 
by 
 [i ' stano] and 
 [ ' stino] (on which see (b) below). 
 Since 
 [ ' e - stik - a], by virtue of its sufﬁ x, was readily misunderstood as an 
aorist middle/passive, we also start to ﬁ nd a present middle/passive 
 [ ' stikome] 
(a process supported by middle/passive 
 [ ' istame]  ‘ I stand ’ and 
 
 ‘ I sit ’ ). Transitive 
 [i ' stano] was also remodelled as 
 [(i) ' steno] (cf. 
below), and though this form eventually disappeared in isolation (surviving only in 
compounds), its characteristic e - vowel inﬂ uenced intransitive 
 [ ' stiko]
 
[ ' stikome] to give 
 [ ' steko]/
 [ ' stekome], as in Modern Greek. The ancient 
middle 
 [ ' istame] is, however, retained still in learned compounds. 
 Similar developments took place for the other  - m i [ - mi] verbs, so that 
 , 
 ‘ I put ’ was partially replaced by 
 (following the 
 [ - ' eo] type of contract 
verb, as already in Ionic), and then by 
 , built to the form of the root seen 
in 
  ‘ one who places, adoptive father ’ and 
  ‘ ﬁ t for placing, 
disputable, positive ’ . When the original aorist 
 and the functionally 
equivalent perfect 
 were reinterpreted as aorist passives (the latter is 
the aorist passive in Modern Greek), this new present acquired an aorist active 
 based on the original 3pl 
 (which also had the [ - e - ] of 
 etc.). Similarly, 
  ‘ I give ’ ﬁ rst became 
 (fol-
lowing the 
 [ - ' oo] type of contract verb on the basis of a number of overlapping 
forms), and then 
 (built to the original 1pl 
 where the 
o - vowel, properly part of the root, was taken to be thematic), or 
 (for this 
replacement, see (b) below). 
 Most of the large class of verbs in  - ( n ) n u m i [ - nimi] had already been partly replaced 
by regular thematic formations in late antiquity, and this process was now completed: 
thus 
  ‘ I open ’   >  
 ; 
 
[a ' polimi] ( < 
 [ - ' ol - nimi])  ‘ I perish ’   >  
 [apo ' lio]; 
 
 ‘ I yoke ’   >  
 ; 
 [ ' zonimi]  ‘ I gird ’   >  
 
[zo ' nio]/
 [ ' zono]; 
 [kre ' manimi]  ‘ I hang ’   >  
 [krema ' nio]
 
[kre ' mo]/
 [kre ' mazo]; 
 [ ' omnimi]  ‘ I swear ’  >  
 [om ' nio]
 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 305
[o ' mono]; 
 [pe ' tanimi]  ‘ I spread out ’  >  
 [peta ' nio]/
 [pe ' to]/
  [pe ' tazo] etc. 
 Clearly various different processes were at work here, some of which will be taken up 
below, but the most regular initial development in this class was from  - ( n ) n u m i [ - nimi]   >  
 [ - ' nio]. In the frequently occurring 2/3sg, however, the sufﬁ xes 
 
[ -  ' niis/ -  ' nii] became [ - nis/ - ni] through the regular simpliﬁ cation of pairs of like vowels (fol-
lowed by regression of the accent based on the analogy of verbs like 
 [ ' krino]  ‘ I judge ’ 
etc., cf. (14)). This led to a 1sg [ - no] and eventually to a full corresponding paradigm: e.g. 
 . 
 The last stage of the process, however, was inhibited whenever 
 preceded [n], 
since regular sound change would have led to the deletion of the characteristic 
stem - ﬁ nal consonant. In some cases, however, more regular by - forms had existed 
even in antiquity, as with 
 , built to future/aorist subjunctive 
 
[a ' nikso] (cf. later aorist 
 [ ' iniksa] for original 
 [a ' neoksa]), beside 
 . This provided a convenient model for the 
other cases too, so that 
 (future 
 [ ' zefkso], 
aorist 
 [ ' ezefksa])    >  
 . The other major exception concerns verbs 
in 
 [ - ' animi]/ - a ' nio], which are dealt with in (c)(i) below. 
 This brief discussion of the  - ( n ) n u m i [ - nimi] verbs brings us directly to the question 
of the greatly increased productivity of nasal sufﬁ xes in the early middle ages.  
 (b)   Nasal  s ufﬁ xes 
 When the preceding vowel of forms resulting from the changes described in the last section 
was [ - o - ], as in 
 [ ' zono]  ‘ I gird ’ , the pattern of present [ - ' ono]/aorist [ - ' osa] (e.g. 
 
[ ' ezosa]  ‘ I girded ’ ), led to most of the old contract verbs in 
 [ - ' o]   <  
 [ - ' oo], which also 
had aorists in  - w s a [ - osa], acquiring parallel presents in 
 [ - ' ono]: thus 
 [  i'lono] 
replaced 
  ‘ I reveal ’ etc. This therefore eliminated a morphologically difﬁ cult 
class of verbs with a large number of anomalous forms resulting from contraction. 
 The parallel form of 
 [ ' omosa], the aorist of 
 [om ' nio]  ‘ I swear ’ , led to 
replacement in the present, giving 
 [o ' mono] (the conventional orthography is 
irrelevant to developments in the spoken language), while 
 , helped by 
Latin  dono , began to compete with 
  ‘ I give ’ on the basis of aorist 
 , the form which eventually replaced 
 (cf. above). Modern 
 represents a compromise between 
 and 
 . 
 This new principle of substituting imperfective [ - n - ] for aorist [ - s - ] then spread, so 
that [ ' zveno]   <  
 [sve ' nio]  ‘ I extinguish ’ became 
 [ ' zvino] on the basis of 
aorist 
 [ ' ezvisa] (the latter replacing classical 
 [ ' ezvesa] on the analogy of 
the original perfect 
 [ ' ezvika]). We may also compare 
 [ ' ç ino] for 
 [ ' ç eo] 
 ‘ I pour ’ on the basis of aorist 
   [ ' e ç isa] (itself a replacement for earlier 
 
[ ' e ç eva], built to the many forms with stem  c u - [ ç i - ]); 
 [a ' ﬁ no] for 
 
[a ' ﬁ imi]  ‘ I let go ’ on the basis of aorist 
 [ ' aﬁ sa] (itself an alternative to 
 [ ' aﬁ ka], cf. the model of 
 above); 
 for 
  ‘ I bind ’ on the basis of aorist 
 ; 
 [ ' lino] for 
 [ ' lio]  ‘ I 
free ’ on the basis of aorist 
 [ ' elisa]; 
 [ ' stino]  ‘ I stand ’ for 
 [ ' istimi], 
on the basis of the old transitive aorist 
 [ ' estisa] etc. 

306 Byzantium
 This  ‘ intrusive ’   - n - [ - n - ] subsequently spread to verbs with stems ending in a liquid, 
where the present indicative and aorist subjunctive had often become homophonous: e.g. 
 [ ' fero]  ‘ I carry ’ /aorist subjunctive 
 [ ' fero] (replacing earlier 
 ); 
 [ ' valo]  ‘ I throw, I put ’ /aorist subjunctive 
 [ ' valo]. The relevant presents were 
therefore recharacterized with the productive  - n w [ - no], either added to the existing 
stem, as with 
 [ ' ferno], or with  - n - [ - n - ] deleting the original consonant, as with 
 [ ' vano] (this last, preserved dialectally, was eventually replaced in standard 
Modern Greek by 
 [ ' vazo], perhaps from 
 [(vi) ' vavzo]  ‘ I cause to go (up), 
I put ’ , though there are other examples of interchange between 
 [ - ' ano] and 
 
[ - ' azo], cf. below). 
 The general spread of the nasal element in the imperfective system led to a situation 
in which, even if the present indicative and aorist subjunctive remained distinct in verbs 
with stems ending in a liquid, as in the case of 
 [(e) ' pero]  ‘ I lift, I take ’ /aorist 
subjunctive 
 [(e) ' paro], or 
 [ ' stelo]  ‘ I send ’ /aorist subjunctive 
 
[ ' stilo], the feeling that  - r w / - l w [ - ro/ - lo] were properly aorist subjunctive endings led 
to the emergence of 
 [ ' perno], 
 [ ' stelno] etc. Since the dominant stem 
vowel in all these present stems was [ - e - ], a number of verbs were recharacterized 
rather more radically, so that 
 [ ' siro]  ‘ I drag along,  ‘ I pull ’ , for example, became 
 [ ' serno], and 
 [ ' spiro]  ‘ I sow ’ became 
 [ ' sperno]. Often, however, 
the learned and popular forms continued to co - exist, and have passed as doublets 
into modern Greek. Finally, we should note the eventual spread of the nasal element 
to contract verbs with a liquid before the termination 
 [ - ' o]. Thus 
 [pe ' ro] 
 ‘ I pass (through), I cross ’  >  
 [per ' no]; 
 [xa ' lo]  ‘ I loosen, I spoil ’  >  
 
[xal ' no] etc. 
 On the analogy of the reduction of 
 [ - o ' nii] to 
 [ - ' oni] and the develop-
ment of new paradigms in 
 [ - ' ono], we might have expected the parallel emergence 
of forms such as 
 [pe ' tano] from 
 [peta ' nio]  ‘ I spread out ’ . In general, 
however, this class of verbs underwent a different pattern of development (see (c)(i) 
for the details) because of the unsatisfactory nature of 
 [ - ' ano] as a present indica-
tive sufﬁ x (as explained immediately below). The general replacement of 
 [ - ' o] 
 
[ - ' oo] with 
 [ - ' ono], however, did lead to sporadic replacement of 
 [ - ' o]    <  
 
[ - ' ao] with 
 [ - ' ano]. 
 [i ' stano]  ‘ I stand ’ , beside 
 [i ' sto], is an example, 
but these verbs, just like those which had this sufﬁ x originally (e.g. 
 
‘ I learn ’ , 
  ‘ I happen ’ , 
 [lam ' vano]  ‘ I take ’ ), were again felt 
to be problematical, and most were replaced by formations in 
 [ - ' eno]. 
 The principal reason for the avoidance and eventual abandonment of 
 [ - ' ano] 
was the co - existence of a large class of verbs with the sufﬁ x 
 [ - ' eno] in the imper-
fective stem: e.g. 
    ‘ I sweeten ’ , 
  ‘ I gain ’ , 
 
[mi ' eno]  ‘ I pollute ’ , 
 [pe ' reno]  ‘ I accomplish ’ , 
 [si ' meno]  ‘ I signify ’ , 
 [i ' jeno]  ‘ I am healthy ’ , all of which had aorists in  - a n a [ - ana] (some replacing 
earlier forms in  - h n a [ - ina], e.g. 
 ). This sufﬁ x had the advantage 
of containing the e - vowel characteristic of most other nasal presents, both original 
and innovative (cf. 
 [ ' meno]  ‘ I stay ’ , 
 [ ' veno]  ‘ I go ’ , 
 [ ' ferno]  ‘ I carry ’ , 
 [ ' perno]  ‘ I take ’ , 
 [per ' no]  ‘ I pass, I cross ’ , 
  ‘ I announce ’ , 
 [ ' stelno]  ‘ I send ’ etc.). Since the aorist subjunctives corresponding to 
 
[ - ' eno] ended in 
 [ - ' ano], this last quickly came to be felt as a proper marker of 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 307
that function. Many present indicatives in 
 [ - ' ano] were therefore rebuilt with the 
more  ‘ regular ’  present ending 
 [ -  ' eno]. Thus 
 [i ' stano]  ‘ I stand ’   >  
 
[(i) ' steno] etc. None the less, 
 [i ' sto], 
 [i ' stano] 
 [ ' steno] and 
 
[ ' stino] (cf. above) all survive in Modern Greek (the ﬁ rst three only residually 
in compounds), a perfect illustration of the mixed character of the contemporary 
language. 
 The major exceptions to the replacement of 
 [ - ' ano] with 
 [ - ' eno] were 
monosyllabic roots such as 
 [ ' ftano]  ‘ I arrive ’ ( < classical 
 , origi-
nally  ‘ I anticipate ’ , but already shifting its sense in the popular Koine of the Roman 
period), and 
 [ ' kano]  ‘ I do ’ ( < classical 
 [ ' kamno]  ‘ I toil ’ ). These tenacious 
survivors even attracted a few verbs which had originally ended in 
 [ - ' azo], e.g. 
 [ ' ftjano]  ‘ I ﬁ x ’   <  
 [(e)fti ' azo], 
 [ ' pjano]  ‘ I catch ’   <  
 
[pi ' ezo/pi ' azo] (originally  ‘ I press hard ’ , but already with the modern sense in the 
Hellenistic Koine); see (c) below for other 
 [ - ' ano]/
 [ - ' azo] transfers. 
 In the class of verbs originally ending in 
 [ - ' ano], however, the regular loss 
of nasals before voiceless fricatives (e.g. 
  ‘ I learn ’   >  
 , 
  ‘ I obtain by lot ’   >  [la ' xano], 
  ‘ I happen ’   >  [ti ' xano]) 
gave the impression that the new presents in 
 [ - ' eno] were formed to the aorist 
stem: e.g. 
 /aorist 
 , 
 [la ' ç eno]/aorist 
 
[ ' elaxa] etc. This led to 
 [ - ' eno] being used quite productively to create new 
presents to aorist stems, e.g. 
 [la ' veno]  ‘ I take ’ to aorist 
 [ ' elava], 
as a replacement for 
 [lam ' vano] (a learned pronunciation), even though 
the combination  - m b - , pronounced [ - mb - ], was permissible by the rules of spoken 
Greek. 
 A good example of such an extension is provided by the case of 
 
 ‘ I go ’ . Originally, the aorist of this verb was 
 , but the clumsy 
root reduplication was dropped in popular speech to give 
 (modern 
 ), with subjunctive 
 (modern 
 [ ' pao]). Since this 
last was homophonous with the present indicative, a new present 
 
[(i)pa ' jeno] was built to the stem 
 , and subsequently this was remod-
elled on the basis of the aorist indicative 
 , to give modern 
 
[pi ' jeno]. A similar remodelling was involved in 
  ‘ I suffer ’ (for clas-
sical 
 [ ' pasxo]), on the basis of aorist 
 , and 
  ‘ I 
die ’ (for 
 ), on the basis of aorist 
 , while 
many other verbs originally ending in 
 [ - ' ino], e.g. 
 [ ' plino]  ‘ I wash ’ , 
 
[apa ' lino]  ‘ I soften ’ and 
 [pa ' ç ino]  ‘ I fatten/get fat ’ , were likewise remodelled 
with the now highly productive 
(or
) [ - ' eno], though the learned and popular 
forms frequently survive together in Modern Greek.  
 (c)  The  s ufﬁ xes 
 [ - ' azo]/
 [ - ' izo] 
 (i)  Interaction of 
 [ - ' azo] with  n asal  f ormations and  c ontract  v erbs 
 As noted, the development of verbs in 
 [ - a ' nio] (earlier 
 [ - ' animi]) took 
a different turn from the otherwise expected reduction to 
 [ - ' ano]. Since the aorist 
of 
 [peta ' nio] was 
 [e ' petasa], the alternative model of verbs in 
 

308 Byzantium
[ - ' azo] (e.g. 
 , with aorist 
  ‘ I decide/judge ’ ) sug-
gested itself, and 
 [pe ' tazo] arose in the Byzantine period alongside the con-
tracted 
 [pe ' to]. This last was originally the (irregular) future, but began even in 
antiquity to serve as a present in competition with 
 [pe ' tanimi], on the 
analogy of the subset of verbs with presents in 
 [ - ' o]    <  
 [ - ' ao] and aorists in  - a s a 
[ - asa], e.g. 
 [je ' lo], aorist 
 [(e) ' jelasa]  ‘ I laugh ’ , 
 [xa ' lo], aorist 
 
[(e) ' xalasa]  ‘ I loosen ’ . The eventual result was a situation in which a number of verbs 
once ending in 
 [ - ' animi] came to exhibit sets of alternative present - tense forma-
tions in 
 [ - a ' nio], 
 [ - ' o] (
 [ - ' ao]), and 
 [ - ' azo] (the ﬁ rst disappearing 
quite early).  
 (ii)  Links  b etween 
 [ - ' azo] and 
 [ - ' ao], 
 [ - ' izo] and 
 [ - ' eo];  
c onfusion with  v erbs with  v elar  s tems 
 Some verbs ending in  - z w [ - zo] were derived prehistorically by palatalization from 
roots in voiced dentals and velars, e.g.  f r a d - 
  ‘ understanding ’  - > 
 [ ' frazo] 
( <  
 )  ‘ I inform, I tell ’ , and 
  ‘ hope ’  - > 
 [el ' pizo] (
*
j  ) 
 ‘ I hope ’ , beside 
  ‘ robbery, rape ’  - > 
 [ar ' pazo] (
*
j  )  ‘ I 
seize/plunder ’ , and  s t h r i g - 
  ‘ support ’  - > 
 [sti ' rizo] ( *
j  )  ‘ I 
support ’ . But the  ‘ sufﬁ xes ’ 
 [ - ' azo] and 
 [ - ' izo] were soon detached and used 
to form verbs from many other roots: thus 
  ‘ market ’  - > 
 
 ‘ I attend market/buy ’ , and 
  ‘ justice ’  - > 
  ‘ I judge ’ , beside 
  ‘ beginning ’   - > 
  ‘ I begin ’ , and 
 [ ' nomos]  ‘ custom, 
law ’  - >  
 [no ' mizo]  ‘ I own by custom/law, I adopt a custom/belief, I believe/
think ’ . 
 The 
 [ - ' azo] type was chieﬂ y associated with a - stem nouns (as above), so that 
these verbs often occupied a place in the lexicon that might well have been ﬁ lled by 
true a - stem denominatives in 
 [ - ' o] (formed from 
 [a]   +   - w [o]). A similar relation-
ship held between many 2nd - declension (e/o - stem) nouns and verbs in 
 [ - ' izo]: we 
may note, beside 
 [ ' nomos]/
 [no ' mizo], examples like 
 [ka ' pnos] 
 ‘ smoke ’ /
 [ka ' pnizo]  ‘ I (make) smoke ’ , 
  ‘ reason, word ’ /
 
[lo ' jizomai]  ‘ I reckon ’ . Thus a signiﬁ cant number of verbs of this type similarly occu-
pied slots that might well have been ﬁ lled by true e/o - stem denominatives in 
 [ - ' o] 
(formed from 
 [ - ' e - ]  +   - w [o]). 
 In late antique and early Medieval Greek, there was a great deal of levelling. Many 
verbs in 
 [ - ' o]   <  
 [ - ' ao] acquired innovative partners in 
 [ - ' azo], and many 
verbs in 
 [ - ' azo] acquired partners in 
 [ - ' o] (
 [ - ' ao] type). At the same time, 
one or two a - stem nouns were supplied with a corresponding 
 [ - ' azo] verb even 
when their classical partners did not end in the expected 
 [ - ' ao]: e.g. 
 
[fo ' nazo] for 
 [fo ' no] (
 [ - ' eo])  ‘ I call, I shout ’ (cf. 
 [fo ' ni]  ‘ voice, cry ’ ). 
In a similar fashion, many verbs in 
 [ - ' o]    <  
 [ - ' eo] were paired with novel forms 
in 
 [ - ' izo], and others in 
 [ - ' izo] were paired with new forms in 
 [ - ' o] (
 
[ - ' eo] type), a process supported by their  ‘ common ’ aorists in [ - isa] (i.e.  - h s a for the 
 [ - ' eo] type, and 
 for the 
 [ - ' izo] type). In addition, a number of the contract 
verbs in 
 [ - ' o]   <  
 [ - ' oo], originally a distinct subclass of 2nd - declension denomina-
tives, were also attracted to this pattern, even though most were replaced by 
 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 309
[ - ' ono] formations (see (b) above): e.g. 
 [cen ' drizo]  ‘ I sting ’ , beside 
 
[cen ' drono]  ‘ I sting, I graft ’ . 
 We should note ﬁ nally that established forms like 
  ‘ I grow a 
beard ’ , 
  ‘ I burn incense ’ , 
 [or ' j - azo]  ‘ I celebrate (rites) ’ , 
derived originally from 2nd - declension neuters in  - ( e ) i - o  n [ - ion], led to the general 
substitution of 
 [ - ' azo] whenever the stem ended in [i/j]: e.g. 
 [pla ' jazo] 
 ‘ I lay down ’ (for 
 [plaji ' o]   <  
 [ - ' oo], cf. 
 [ ' plajos]  ‘ sideways ’ /
 
[ ' plaji(n)]  ‘ side ’ ); 
 [lo ' jazo]  ‘ I reckon, I think (of) ’ (cf. 
 [ ' loji(n)]  ‘ word, 
saying, reason ’ ); 
 [(o) ' mjazo]  ‘ liken, be like ’ (for 
 [omi ' o]    <  
 [ - ' oo], 
cf. 
 [ ' omjos]  ‘ like ’ ). 
 Though only the verbs in  - z w [ - zo] from velar stems originally had aorists in  - x a 
[ - ksa] (as opposed to  - s a [ - sa] for the dental stems), the aorists of non - velar  - z w [ - zo] 
verbs had begun to adopt  - x a [ - ksa] dialectally even in classical Greek (principally in 
West Greek, and then Thessalian, Boeotian and Arcado - Cypriot). This interference 
became much more widespread in the early middle ages in the case of the verbs in 
 
[ - ' o] (
 [ - ' ao])/
 [ - ' azo], so that 
 [fo ' nazo]  ‘ I cry, I shout ’ , for example, 
shows only the aorist 
 [(e) ' fonaksa]. We may compare 
 [va ' sto] (innova-
tive)/
 [va ' stazo]  ‘ I lift ’ with aorist 
 [(e) ' vastaksa] for earlier 
 
[e ' vastasa]; 
 [pe ' to]/
 [pe ' tazo] (innovative)  ‘ I spread out ’ (later confused 
with 
 [ ' petome]/
 [ ' iptame]  ‘ I ﬂ y ’ ) with aorist 
 [(e) ' petaksa] for 
earlier 
 [e ' petasa]; and 
 [ﬁ  ' so]/
 [ﬁ  ' sazo] (innovative)  ‘ I blow ’ with 
aorist 
 [(e) ' ﬁ siksa] for earlier 
 [e ' ﬁ sisa]. Though in many such cases 
it was the contract variant which ﬁ nally prevailed, it was often the  - x a [ - ksa] aorist, 
originally associated with the longer form, that remained in use alongside it (though 
note 
 [ ' spa(z)o]/
 [ ' espasa]  ‘ I break ’ , 
 [ ' ska(z)o]/
 [ ' eskasa]  ‘ I 
burst ’ ). 
 Still further confusion arose from the fact that in classical Greek verbs derived from 
roots ending in voiceless velars had presents in  - s s w [ - so] (Attic  - t t w [ - to]) and aorists 
in  - x a [ - ksa], e.g.  f u l a k - [ﬁ lak - ]  ‘ guard ’  - >  f u l av s s w [ﬁ  ' la - so]  ‘ I guard ’ , aorist 
 
[(e) ' ﬁ laksa]. Since the ending [ - so] was the principal mark of the aorist subjunctive (cf. 
 [a a ' po]  ‘ I love ’ /aorist subjunctive 
 ; 
  ‘ I write ’ /
aorist subjunctive 
 ; 
 [el ' pizo]  ‘ I hope ’ /aorist subjunctive 
 
[el ' pi - so]; 
  ‘ I buy ’ /aorist subjunctive 
 , and so 
on for most verb classes), verbs with present indicative in  - s s w [ - so] were widely 
transferred to the velar subtype of 
 verbs, following the model of 
 [ar ' pazo]/
 [ ' arpaksa]  ‘ I snatch, I seize ’ etc. Thus 
 [ ' tazo] replaced 
 [ ' taso]  ‘ I 
arrange, I ﬁ x ’ (though with new and old forms now semantically differentiated, 
 
[ ' tazo] =  ‘ I promise ’ ), 
 [a ' lazo] replaced 
 [a ' laso]  ‘ I change ’ , and 
 
[ta ' razo] replaced 
 [ta ' raso]  ‘ I disturb ’ etc. 
 A few verbs in 
 [ - ' aso], however, most notably 
 [ﬁ  ' laso]  ‘ I guard ’ , 
acquired partners of the 
 [ - ' ao] type on the model of the type seen in 
 [pe ' to] 
(rather than 
 [pe ' tazo]). But by the time this happened, the more common 
contract verbs of the 
 [ - ' ao] type had begun to add characteristic person/number 
endings to the  ‘ opaque ’ contracted sufﬁ x of the 3sg (see (e) below for a fuller account 
of this development and its ramiﬁ cations). Thus 3sg 
 [pe ' ta], for example, often 
became 
 [pe ' ta - i], with the addition of the regular 3sg ending. Subsequently, 1sg 

310 Byzantium
 [pe ' to], as the sole form in the singular paradigm lacking the [ - a - ] element, was 
replaced by 
 [pe ' tao], and the result was a mixed paradigm containing both 
contracted and apparently decontracted forms (the latter occurring before the vocalic 
endings): thus 
 [pe ' tao], 
 [pe ' tas], 
 [pe ' tai]. In the plural, however, 
the original endings of the ﬁ rst - and third - person forms, namely 
 [ - ' omen] and 
 [ - ' osi], were widely replaced from Roman times onwards by the more frequent 
 [ - ' ume(n)] and 
 [ - ' usi] (again see (e) below), though in popular speech 
many common verbs generalized the a - vowel of the singular and 2pl (
 [pe ' tate]) 
to give: 
 [pe ' tame], 
 [pe ' tate], 
 [pe ' tasi/pe ' tan(e)] (for 
the alternative 3pl endings, see  11.8.6 , (35), below). This version of the paradigm is 
now compulsory for 
 [ ' spao]  ‘ I break ’ and 
 [ ' skao]  ‘ I burst ’ , and is still very 
commonly used with verbs that lack learned associations. 
 It was natural that a palatal glide [ - j - ] began to appear in this type between [ - a - ] and 
the new 3sg ending to give [ - ' a(j)i], and the corresponding velar 
 was then inserted 
optionally between [ - a - ] and the 1sg ending to give 
 . This led to considerable 
interference between the 
 [ - ' ao] contract verbs and verb forms in 
 with 
an original velar in the stem (see immediately below), and eventually to general confu-
sion as to whether intervocalic 
 was serving as an optional hiatus blocker or 
represented the ﬁ nal consonant of a verb with a velar in the root/stem. 
 The inﬂ uence of written Greek eventually led to the elimination of the by - forms of 
the present tense containing epenthetic 
 , though they sometimes survive dialec-
tally, and, quite exceptionally, the variants 
  ‘ I guard ’ are 
both still available in standard Modern Greek. But the earlier presence of intervocalic 
 in the present paradigm led, on the misunderstanding that this was a part of 
the root/stem, to the formation of a parallel imperfect in  - a g - a 
 , though the 
development was also promoted by the generalization of the glides that arose in the 
distended (recharacterized) forms of the 3sg imperfect, just as in the corresponding 3sg 
presents: i.e.  ‘ opaque ’  contracted 3sg  - a  +   ‘ regular ’   - e   >   - a ( g ) e [ - a(j)e]. This variant of 
the imperfect, characteristic of southern areas, is still common in colloquial speech, 
with the velar/palatal element retained throughout the paradigm, though the grammar 
books routinely recommend the alternative form in 
 [ - ' usa] (on which, see (e) 
below). In the case of 
 , however, along with 
 [ ' skao]  ‘ I burst ’ and 
 [ ' spao]  ‘ I break ’ , the imperfect in 
 is in fact the only option, and in 
this respect these verbs pattern with those discussed in (iii).  
 (iii)  The  ‘ r educed ’  p aradigm of  c ertain  v erbs with  v elar and  v owel  s tems 
 These same developments also affected a small number of verb forms ending originally 
in 
 , e.g. 1sg present/1sg aorist subjunctive 
  ‘ I go/I may go ’ , 
1sg aorist subjunctive 
  ‘ I may eat ’ , and then spread to other verbs with 
roots ending in vowel 
 , such as 
  ‘ I say ’ . Since it seemed that the 
velar/palatal glides could be added or omitted freely in the 1/3sg forms of the large 
 class, we also begin to ﬁ nd 
 [ ' pao], 
 [ ' fao] and 
 [ ' leo], as if 
the velar here were also merely epenthetic. The ﬁ rst member of each pair naturally 
shows  ‘ reduced ’ forms of 2sg and 1/2/3pl, as if these too were contract verbs. Thus 
on the model of the paradigm of: 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 311
 
 
 we also get: 
 
 
 
 then followed the established pattern, with the endings similarly added 
directly to an apparent vowel - stem: 
 
 
 In the 3sg we also ﬁ nd 
 [pa] and 
 [le], on the analogy of the original 3sg 
 
[pe ' ta], in which the  ‘ ending ’ appeared to be simply the ﬁ nal stem vowel, though 
the latter has now disappeared from standard Modern Greek while the former is 
showing characteristic signs of grammaticalization (=  ‘ be going to ’ with  n a [na], Tsak á li 
 (2003) ). 
 Exceptionally, the verb 
  ‘ I wish ’ also developed some short 
forms, namely 2sg 
 , 3sg 
 , 1pl 
 , 2pl 
 , 3pl 
 , of which only the 2nd - person forms are now widely used. 
One might speculate that in areas characterized by palatalization of liquids the result-
ing palatal lateral 
 in 3sg 
 sounded sufﬁ ciently like [j] for this form to 
be partly assimilated to the model of 3sg 
 [ ' leji], which had the alternants 
 
[ ' lei] and 
 [le], so that once 3sg 
 had emerged, a (partial) short - form paradigm 
could be built to this base. 
 Eventually, this type of paradigm was further extended to a number of verbs whose 
root originally ended in a vowel, so that 
 [a ' kuo]  ‘ I hear ’ , for example, came to 
be conjugated: 
 [a ' kus], 
 [a ' kui], 
 [a ' kume(n)], 
 [a ' kute], 
 [a ' kusi/a ' kun(e)], the process in this case being aided by the regular 
deletion of one of the like vowels in the 3pl in popular speech (
 
[a ' kuusi]    >  [a ' kusi]). Reduced paradigms of 
 [a ' kuo]  ‘ I hear ’ , 
 [ ' ceo]  ‘ I burn ’ , 
 [ ' kleo]  ‘ I weep ’ , 
  ‘ I say ’ , 
 [ ' fteo]  ‘ I am to blame ’ and 
  ‘ I eat ’ are now standard in Modern Greek. 
 On the model of 
 etc., these verbs were also subject to 
optional velar/palatal epenthesis in 1/3sg of the imperfective stem, giving 
 
beside 
 [a ' kuo], 
  ‘ I burn ’ , beside 
 [ ' ceo], though the process 
was supported, as before, by the glides that arose spontaneously in forms such as 3sg 
present 
 [ ' kle(j)i] or 3sg imperfect 
 [ ' ekle(j)e]. The secondary character 
of these glides is shown by the retention of the original aorists in  - s a [ - sa] (e.g. 
 
[ ' akusa]  ‘ I heard ’ ), though they were generalized through the imperfective paradigm 

312 Byzantium
other than the present indicative in the now familiar way (cf. 
  ‘ I 
was hearing/listening, I used to hear/listen ’ , 
  ‘ hearing/listening ’ 
etc.). 
 (d)   The  s ufﬁ x 
 [ - ' evo] and  i ts  i nﬂ uence:  v erbs in  -    [ - pto] 
 A few words also need to be said about the highly productive class of verbs with the 
sufﬁ x 
 [ - ' evo]. Already a growing class in Ancient Greek, this continued to add 
new members throughout the middle ages. But the shift in pronunciation from classical 
[ - e ú (w)o:], aorist  - e u s a [ - eusa], to [ - ' evo], aorist  - e y a [ - epsa] (cf. (12a) above), had 
profound consequences in that the now very frequent pattern of present in accented 
vowel  +  [ - vo] with aorist in [ - psa] (earlier conﬁ ned to a handful of verbs such as 
 
[ ' trivo]/
 [ ' etripsa]  ‘ rub ’ ) led quickly to the formation of analogous innovative 
presents to virtually all  - y a [ - psa] aorists: e.g. 
 [ ' klevo]  ‘ I steal ’ (for 
 
[ ' klepto]) to aorist 
 [ ' eklepsa]; 
 [ ' kovo]  ‘ I cut ’ (for 
 [ ' kopto]) to aorist 
 [ ' ekopsa]; 
 [ ' krivo]  ‘ I hide ’ (for 
 [ ' kripto]) to aorist 
 [ ' ekripsa]; 
 [ ' nivo]  ‘ I wash ’ (for 
 [ ' nipto]) to aorist 
 [ ' enipsa]; 
 [ ' ravo]  ‘ I sew ’ 
(for 
 [ ' rapto]) to aorist 
 [ ' erapsa]; 
 [ ' skavo]  ‘ I dig ’ (for 
 
[ ' skapto]) to aorist 
 [ ' eskapsa] etc. This last type was further supported by the 
natural evolution of verbs ending originally in 
 [ - ' avo], aorist  - a y a [ - apsa], such 
as 
 [ ' pavo]  ‘ I stop ’ . 
 Occasionally, however, other considerations produced a different outcome, so 
that 
 [ ' vafo]  ‘ I dip, I dye ’ , for example, replaced 
 [ ' vapto], partly on the 
analogy of 
  ‘ I write ’ , partly to avoid the vaguely ridiculous 
 [ ' vavo]. 
We should also note the existence of by - forms displaying the expected phonetic 
outcome  - f t w [ - fto], which were once widespread, and in later times particularly 
characteristic of Cyprus, the northern dialects and the speech of Constantinople. In 
some cases these have also prevailed in the standard language over the analogical  - b w 
[ - vo] type (e.g. 
 [ ' vlafto]  ‘ I damage ’ ), and it is not unusual for the original form 
in  - p t w [ - pto] also to have been reintroduced as a variant from the learned tradition 
(sometimes completely superseding the alternatives, as with 
 [ka ' lipto]  ‘ I 
cover ’ ). 
 In the south - eastern dialects, Cretan and the Old Athenian group, 
 [ - ' evo] regu-
larly takes the form 
 , and the epenthesis is sometimes extended to [ - ' avo]. 
The phenomenon is still poorly understood (cf. Krumbacher  (1886) , Chatzidakis 
 (1892) , Kretschmer  (1905) for a variety of competing theories), though some of the 
earliest attested examples, if the manuscript readings can be trusted, apparently date 
from around the 8th century (cf. Jannaris  (1897 : 220)). It is probably simplest to 
assume that 
 was pronounced uniformly as [ - e ú (w)o:] in the classical period, and 
that the subsequent shift of [eu]    >  [ew]   >  
 produced standard late antique [ - ' evo], 
with automatic simpliﬁ cation of the geminate in the intermediate [ - ' ew(w)o]. In some 
areas, however, geminates were retained. Thus even though the phenomenon is residual 
in the remnants of the Old Athenian group, it remains standard in the south - eastern 
area, and may once have been characteristic of early medieval Cretan too. In these 
dialects we may assume that [ - ' ewwo]   >  
 , the second member of the cluster 
resulting from assimilatory fricativization, and representing the still characteristically 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 313
Greek pronunciation of English /w/ in words such as  woman 
 . This would 
then develop naturally into the attested 
 . 
 (e)  The  c ontract  v erbs 
 Since these classes have already been partly discussed above, it is sufﬁ cient here to list 
the principal points concerning the 
 [ - ' ao] and 
 [ - ' eo] types (the 
 [ - ' oo] class 
having been eliminated in the early middle ages, as noted). 
 In the vast majority of cases the aorist systems of the 
 [ - ' ao] and 
 [ ' eo] types 
were already identical in classical Greek (i.e. with stem in  - h - [ - i - ]), and only a handful 
of irregular verbs retained the [ - a - ] or [ - e - ] of the imperfective. The major developments 
in post - classical and Medieval Greek therefore concern the imperfective system, where 
much reciprocal interference is already apparent in both the New Testament and the 
Egyptian papyri from the early centuries AD onwards. The vast majority of such cases 
involve the substitution of 
 [ - ' u - ] (
 [ - ' eo - ]) for 
 [ - ' o - ] (
 [ - ' ao - ]) in 
the 1sg imperfect, the 1/3pl present and imperfect, and the participles of the 
 [ - ' ao] 
class, a development probably due to the greater frequency of the former, which 
occurred not only in the 
 [ - ' eo] type, but even more widely in the 
 [ - ' oo] class 
(prior to its recharacterization in 
 [ - ' ono]); indeed, most imperfective forms of this 
subtype were already homophonous with those of the 
 [ - ' eo] class, and even those 
that remained distinct in principle (e.g. the inﬁ nitive, 2pl present and 2sg/pl imperfect, 
all with 
 [ - ' u - ] 
 [ - ' oe - ] rather than 
 [ - ' i - ] 
 [ - ' ee - ]) were often levelled 
to it in practice, albeit with many anomalous spellings, particularly  - o  i - for  - e i - [ - i - ]. 
 Though many common 
 [ - ' ao] verbs eventually generalized [ - a - ] (giving present 
 , imperfect 
 , as noted), the forms of the present and imperfect 
most often used in the later middle ages were as follows: 12 
 (i) 
 
 
 (ii)  
 
 But since verbs of the 
 [ - ' ao] class were by now more numerous in popular speech 
than those of the 
 [ - ' eo] type (many of which had a learned character), the mixed 
paradigms in (i) and (ii) gradually attracted the majority of verbs of the latter class 
that still remained in common use, principally on the basis of the subset of already 
shared forms containing  - o  u - [ - u - ]. Thus the present endings 2sg 
 [ - ' is], 3sg 
 [ - ' i] 
and 2pl 
 [ - ' ite] were eventually replaced by 
 [ - ' as], 
 [ - ' a] and 
 [ - ' ate] (with 
the a - vowel optionally generalized throughout the paradigm in the modern period). 
The imperfect endings 2sg  - e i " [ - is], 3sg  - e i [ - i] and 2pl 
 [ - ' ite] similarly began to 
be replaced by  - a " [ - as],  - a [ - a] and 
 [ - ' ate], though here the original forms were 
retained in parallel use for longer, and so subject to further developments in their own 
right (see below). 

314 Byzantium
 The conﬂ ation process can be seen in progress in the vernacular texts of the 14th 
and 15th centuries, but its completion belongs to the early modern period. The remain-
ing 
   [ - ' eo] verbs, along with their traditional paradigm, were progressively conﬁ ned 
to the learned language and the formal speech of the educated minority (for the rela-
tively few exceptions, see below), though many such verbs have since been reintroduced 
into standard Modern Greek from the learned tradition. 
 Paradigmatic interference naturally extended also to the medio - passive paradigm, 
where a similar substitution of 
 [ - ' u - ] for 
 [ - ' o - ] took place in the 
 [ - ' ao] 
subtype: thus 1sg present 
 [ - ' ume] replaced 
 [ - ' ome], and 1/3pl present 
 [ - ' unde] replaced 
 [ - ' onde]. This 
paradigm, which retained 2/3sg 
 [ - ' ase]
 [ - ' ate] and 2pl 
 , then 
attracted the commonly used  ‘ deponent ’  (i.e. middle only) verbs of the 
 [ - ' eo] class, 
such as 
 [fo ' vume]  ‘ I am afraid ’ , 
  ‘ I remember ’ and 
 [li ' pume]  ‘ I regret ’ . These verbs have retained their mixed paradigm in 
Modern Greek, but with the addition of 1sg 
 [ - ' ame], increasingly now standard-
ized, and one or two more recent changes to the endings, cf.  11.8.6 (35d). 
 The medio - passive paradigm of the great majority of 
 [ - ' ao] verbs, however, 
began to be remodelled in the later middle ages on the basis of earlier developments 
in the 
 [ - ' eo] class. These began in the imperfect active, where they were eventually 
superseded, but also spread to the passive voice, where they predominated. Thus while 
the changes in (ii) above were still in progress, an alternative development began to 
affect the original 3sg imperfect of 
 [ - ' eo] - verbs, namely  - e i [ - i] ( <  - e  +   e [ - ee]). Since 
this was homophonous with the regular ending of the 3sg present, it was widely 
recharacterized (like the corresponding  - a [ - a] of the 
 [ - ' ao] class) by the addition 
of the normal 3sg imperfect termination, to give  - e i - e ( n ) [ - (i)je(n)], e.g. 
 
[(e) ' kratje(n)]  ‘ s/he used to hold ’ . This development also led to the change of 2sg 
 [(e) ' kratis] to 
   [(e) ' kratjes] (and perhaps of 2pl 
 
[(e)kra ' tite] to 
 [(e)kra ' tjete]); in some varieties the singular was then fully 
regularized, giving 1sg 
 [(e) ' kratja]. In the case of 
 [ - ' eo] verbs still in 
regular use, these new forms began to supersede not only those of the original paradigm 
but also the  ‘ interpolated ’ 
 [ - ' ao] forms of (ii). 
 In the plural of the imperfect, however, a different set of innovations began to take 
place in the late middle ages. The changes involved started in the mixed paradigm of 
(i) above and gradually spread to the singular, the new paradigm eventually replacing 
all other options apart from  - a g a 
 (i.e. not only (ii), but also the innovative 
 
[ - ' eo] forms just described). Since the old 3pl imperfect  - o  u n [ - un] was homophonous 
with both the 1sg form and the regular 3pl present of non - contract verbs, it was widely 
replaced by 
 [ - ' usan] (with the accented syllable following that of 1/2pl) through 
the incorporation of aorist  - s a n [ - san] as a formally distinctive  ‘ 3pl past - tense ’ sufﬁ x. 
Examples already occur in the  Chronicle of the Morea.  (A similar development 
in non - contract verbs was seen in ancient Koine forms such as 3pl imperfect 
  ‘ they used to write/were writing ’ etc., as discussed in Part I 
(cf.  5.8 ).) 
 Subsequently, the element 
 [ - ' us - ] was extended to 1pl, where the instability of 
the syllabic augment had led to frequent homophony between present and imperfect: 
thus 
 [je ' lume(n)]  ‘ we laugh ’ /
 [(e)je ' lume(n)]  ‘ we were laughing ’ 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 315
 - > 
 [je ' lume(n)]/
 [(e)je ' lusame(n)]. Then, during the early 
modern period, a full imperfect paradigm in 
 [ - ' usa], 
 [ - ' uses], 
 [ - ' use(n)] 
etc. was gradually constructed to this model, the process being completed ﬁ rst in 
northern dialects, including that of Constantinople. Earlier, however, plural forms of 
this type were combined with elements taken from the other competing paradigms. In 
standard Modern Greek (perhaps as a direct result of the inﬂ ux of speakers from the 
Ottoman capital during the 19th century), the 
 [ - ' usa] forms are now regarded 
as the norm for contract verbs, especially in learned verbs of the 
 [ - ' eo] class, though 
more  ‘ popular ’  verbs of the 
 [ - ' ao] type (e.g. 
 [kra ' to/kra ' tao]  ‘ I hold ’ 
etc.) still retain  - a g a 
 in the colloquial speech of many Greeks, especially in the 
south. 
 But before these changes took place, the substitution of  - e i e -  [ - je - ] for  - e i - [ - i - ] in 
the imperfect active of popular verbs of the 
 [ - ' eo] type (cf. 3sg 
 [(e) ' kratje] 
etc.) had led to a parallel substitution in the 3sg and 2pl of the imperfect medio - passive 
(i.e. 
 [ - ' ito(n)]   >  
 [ - ' jeto(n)], and 
 [ - ' jeste]). Since 
this tense was little used in popular speech in the middle ages, we have only a limited 
picture of the conjugation of both contract and non - contract verbs from the small 
number of attested examples and the evidence of dialect variants in the popular speech 
of the 19th century (cf. Thumb ( 1912 : 156, 171 – 2, 175), and see (35e) below for 
details). From the imperfect, the innovation spread to the present middle/passive, 
affecting 2/3sg (
 [ - ' ise]/
 [ - ' ite]), and 2pl (
 ), so as to give the 
paradigm in (iii): 13 
 (iii)  
 
 Subsequently, the  - o  u - [ - u - ] element of 1sg and 1/3pl was adapted to the other forms, 
giving  - e  i o  u - [ - ju - ]: 
 (iv)  
 
 And ﬁ nally, though these changes belong properly to the modern period, the 
 [ - ' je - ] 
formant was generalized to 1sg, while 
 [ - ' jo - ] was substituted for 
 [ - ' ju - ] on 
the basis of the regular 
 [ - ' omaste] of non - contract verbs (see (35d) for details); 
this formant was then sometimes extended to 2pl (giving 
 [ - ' joste]). 
 This emerged as the dominant medio - passive paradigm for all contract verbs, and 
the forms of the 
 [ - ' ao] class (other than deponents) were progressively incorporated 
into it from the later middle ages onwards. Contemporary Greek therefore uses 
  ‘ I am loved ’ , alongside 
 [kra ' tjeme]  ‘ I am held ’ etc. 
(the spelling now standardized with  - i - ). But the classical paradigms of both 
 [ - ' ao] 
and 
 [ - ' eo - ] types were retained in the learned language, and a number of verbs of 
learned origin still employ the classical endings given in (v) (though often updated in 
1/2pl to 
 [ - ' o/ ' u - maste] and 
 [ - ' a/ ' i - ste]): 

316 Byzantium
 (v) 
  
 
 
 
 It was noted earlier that most commonly used verbs of the 
 [ - ' eo] class were 
incorporated into the combined contract - verb paradigms given in (i) and (iii)/(iv). But 
even in the popular spoken language, a number of such verbs survived into the later 
middle ages and beyond with their classical paradigms intact, or at least in partial use. 
Obvious examples include 
 [efxari ' sto]  ‘ I thank ’ , 
 [paraka ' lo]  ‘ I 
appeal to/(if you) please ’ , 
 [la ' lo]  ‘ I speak ’ , 
 [kra ' to]  ‘ I hold/keep ’ , 
  ‘ I consider ’ . There was, however, some uncertainty even in these cases, 
and a number have now been partly or wholly absorbed into the combined paradigms 
(e.g. 
 [kra ' to] in its entirety, 
 [la ' lo] in the middle/passive, the active of 
 [paraka ' lo] optionally and its passive obligatorily etc.). 
 Despite occasional dialectal variants of the 
 [ - ' ao] type, one verb that generally 
remained strongly in the 
 [ - ' eo] camp was 
 [bo ' ro],  ‘ I am able ’ , which gradu-
ally replaced classical 
 in the spoken language. This derived from 
the classical compound 
 [efpo ' ro], properly  ‘ I am well off/I have resources ’ , but 
was already used colloquially in its modern sense in Ancient Greek. Its aorist was 
 [ef ' poresa] or later 
 [if ' poresa] (both with post - classical replacement 
of  - r h s a [ - risa] on the model of 
   [ - ' rao] verbs where the imperfective stem vowel 
was regularly preserved in the aorist). The ﬁ rst of these was early reinterpreted as 
consisting of augment [e - ]  +  [ - ' fporesa], which, in conjunction with the effects of 
aphaeresis, quickly led to a present [(f)po ' ro] beside aorist [(f) ' poresa], whose phono-
tactically difﬁ cult initial clusters were simpliﬁ ed to [p - ]. When such forms followed 
negative 
 or conditional 
 [an], as happened particularly frequently 
with a verb of this meaning, the initial plosive was voiced in accordance with the rules 
of spoken Greek to give, for example, 
 . This pronunciation then became 
so habitual through constant repetition in such contexts that it came to be used inde-
pendently of them. The present thus became 
 , with a parallel aorist 
 
[(e) ' boresa] replacing 
 [ef ' poresa]. But since this new form had the appearance 
of a compound with 
 [en - ], it also resulted in the formation of the  ‘ corrected ’  present 
   [embo ' ro], which sometimes appears in later medieval texts. 
 The alternative (originally post - classical, but still ancient) aorist 
 [if ' poresa] 
was naturally adapted to the innovatory 
 [e ' boresa], to give 
 
[i ' boresa], but at this point, the pattern of 
 [embo ' ro]/
 [e ' boresa] led 
to the formation of a new present 
 [imbo ' ro] to partner 
 [i ' boresa]. 
This variant is also commonly used in vernacular texts of the later middle ages.  
 11.8.6   Personal  e ndings 
 (35)   Many of the changes in the personal endings of verbs have already been 
referred to in connection with other developments above. Here the principal devel-
opments will be summarized under the following subheadings:  

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 317
 (a)   Indicative and subjunctive  
 (b)   Past - tense morphology: active and aorist middle/passive; the augment  
 (c)  
  The active paradigm: present tense  
 (d)   The middle/passive paradigm: present tense  
 (e)  
  The middle/passive paradigm: the imperfect  
 (a)  Indicative and  s ubjunctive 
 In late antiquity, as noted earlier, the regular endings of the imperfective (without  - s - 
[ - s - ]) and aorist (with  - s - [ - s - ]) subjunctive:
 Sg   - ( s ) w [ - (s)o] 
  - ( s  ) " [ - (s)is] 
  - ( s )  [ - (s)i] 
 Pl 
 - ( s ) w m e n [ - (s)omen]    - ( s ) h t e [ - (s)ite]    - ( s ) w s i ( n ) [ - (s)osi(n)] 
 merged respectively with those of the present (without  - s - [ - s - ]) and future (with  - s - 
[ - s]) indicative:
 Sg  - ( s ) w [ - (s)o] 
  - ( s ) e i " [ - (s)is] 
  - ( s ) e i [ - (s)i] 
 Pl 
 - ( s ) o  m e n [ - (s)omen]    - ( s ) e t e [ - (s)ete]   - ( s ) o  u s i ( n ) [ - (s)usi(n)] 
 through a combination of sound change (i.e. classical  w [o:] and  o  [o]    >  [o], classical 
 e i [e:] and 
   >  [i]) and analogical levelling (i.e. 2/3pl  - ( s ) h t e [ - (s)ite]/ - ( s ) w s i ( n ) 
[ - (s)osi(n)]   >   - ( s ) e t e [ - (s)ete]/ - ( s ) o  u s i ( n ) [ - (s)usi(n)]). The destabilization of the future 
indicative led to the widespread use of what, from a classical perspective, look like 
present indicatives (imperfective) and aorist subjunctives (perfective) in future function 
(with the stem of the latter often surviving in preference to that of the future in sup-
pletive paradigms). Eventually the future was formally renewed through the use of 
various inﬁ nitival periphrases and constructions with 
 [na], as discussed in  11.8.3 . 
 Similar levelling took place in the imperfective medio - passive paradigm between 
the present indicative (e.g. 
 [ ' liome]) and present subjunctive (e.g. 
 
[ ' liome]). The future middle (e.g. 
 [ ' lisome]) and aorist middle subjunctive 
(e.g. 
 [ ' lisome]) might well have fallen together in the same way, but the demise 
of the aorist middle as a separate paradigm led to the early loss of this whole set 
of forms. The passive system was, however, distinctive, in that the future in 
 was related to, but formally distinct from, the aorist passive 
(soon medio - passive) in  - ( q ) h n 
 , with its subjunctive in 
 . Lacking 
independent support in a developing system where futures were in any case threatened, 
the future passive was the ﬁ rst future paradigm to disappear (being widely replaced 
by inﬁ nitival periphrases in late antiquity). The aorist passive indicative and subjunc-
tive, however, survived as expected, the latter acquiring future uses like other aorist 
subjunctives (and subject to the same later developments with 
 [na], 
 
etc.). Since, however, its active - type terminations were accented, the forms 
involved were levelled to those of the partially homophonous present indicative/sub-
junctive active paradigm of 
 [ - ' eo] verbs, to give (as still in Modern Greek): 
 
 

318 Byzantium
 The continued written use of graphically distinct subjunctive endings in the middle 
ages was largely a feature of the learned tradition, though at least formal educated 
speech probably continued to distinguish those subjunctives whose  ‘ correct ’  written 
form justiﬁ ed a pronunciation distinct from that of corresponding indicatives.  
 ( b )   Past - t ense  m orphology:  a ctive and  a orist  m iddle/passive; the  a ugment 
 As noted ( 5.8 ,  6.5.2 ), a common set of past - tense endings evolved in late antique and 
early Medieval Greek out of the old imperfect, aorist and perfect active paradigms. 
Thus the imperfect:
 (i) 
  Sg  - o  n [ - on] 
  - e " [ - es] 
  - e ( n ) [ - e(n)] 
 
  Pl 
 - o  m e n [ - omen]   - e t e [ - ete]    - o  n [ - on] 
 aorist:
 (ii) 
  Sg  - ( s ) a [ - (s)a]  
  - ( s ) a " [ - (s)as]  
  - ( s ) e ( n ) [ - (s)e(n)] 
 Pl 
 - ( s ) a m e n [ - (s)amen]   - ( s ) a t e [ - (s)ate]    - ( s ) a n [ - (s)an] 
 and perfect endings:  
 (iii)   Sg  - ( k ) a [ - (k)a] 
  - ( k ) a " [ - (k)as]  
  - ( k ) e ( n ) [ - (k)e(n)] 
 Pl 
 - ( k ) a m e n [ - (k)amen]    - ( k ) a t e [ - (k)ate]    - ( k ) a s i ( n ) [ - (k)asi(n)] 
 were all combined into the single system in (iv) (with variants in 2pl and 3pl; early 
forms of the imperfect of contract verbs are ignored here):  
 (iv)   Sg  - a [ - a] 
  - e " [ - es] 
  - e ( n ) [ - e(n)] 
 Pl 
 - a m e n [ - amen]    - a t e [ - ate]   - a n ( e ) [ - an(e)] 
 
  
 - e t e [ - ete]  
  - a s i ( n ) [ - asi(n)] 
 The characteristic aorist/perfect markers  - s - [s]/ - k - [k] were preﬁ xed, as appropriate. 
 The  k - version of the aorist/perfect paradigm was gradually adopted in the aorist 
middle/passive ( - ( q ) h - k a 
 etc.), as we have seen, a process completed in popular 
spoken Greek by the later Byzantine period (the true aorist middle, with a few high -
 frequency exceptions such as 
 [ir ' ksamin]  ‘ I began ’ , having been very largely 
abandoned in late antiquity). 
 In standard Modern Greek 2/3pl  - a t e [ - ate] and  - a n [ - an] are now normal, but the 
alternatives still occur dialectally, 3pl  - a s i [ - asi] being particularly characteristic of the 
south - eastern group and the speech of the Mani, though it also occurs in some South 
Italian and Cretan varieties. In medieval vernacular poetry, however, which remains a 
major source of information about the spoken Greek of the period, there is ﬂ uctuation 
in the use of the two 3pl forms, much of it metrically motivated. But since even early 
prose pieces show parallel uncertainty, and Soﬁ an ó s ’ grammar (see Part III,  14.2.2 ) 
allows both forms in many instances, it seems that the variants were in parallel use in 
the later middle ages and into the modern period. Some of this may be due to the 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 319
contamination of texts in the process of copying and transmission, and the possibility 
remains that in the  ‘ real ’ vernacular (i.e. in forms of the language not subject to metri-
cal constraints) the variants were already being specialized in different grammatical or 
phonological contexts. But in general the distribution in Modern Greek dialects that 
still permit such variation appears quite random, or at best associated with factors 
such as age and education (Men á rdos ( 1925 : 40), Newton  (1972) , Min á s  (1987) ). 
 In classical Greek all past tenses carried an augment, which involved either the 
preﬁ xation of the syllable 
 [e - ] (occasionally 
 [i - ], see below) to forms beginning 
with a consonant, or the lengthening of the initial segment of forms beginning with a 
vowel or diphthong. The latter (the so - called  ‘ temporal augment ’ ) fell quickly out of 
favour because of its variable form and the destruction of the relevant notion of 
lengthening by sound change. In some areas the syllabic augment was used in place of 
the initial vowel, but in standard Modern Greek the past tenses now simply have the 
same initial vowel as the non - past forms (learned survivals with stressed augment 
excepted). 
 The syllabic augment naturally survived more strongly, but its role too was partially 
undermined by sound change, speciﬁ cally aphaeresis. In standard Modern Greek it 
therefore survives only when accented, though in some dialects it is still retained across 
the board. It is also worth noting that, on the basis of frequently occurring verb forms 
augmented at least optionally in [ ' i - ], some inherited from antiquity (e.g. 
 
 ‘ I wanted ’ , 
 [ ' imela]  ‘ I was about to ’ , 
 [ ' ipa]  ‘ I said ’ , 
  ‘ I saw ’ ), 
others arising through various analogies in the middle ages (e.g. 
 [ ' ipja] for 
 
[ ' epja]  ‘ I drank ’ , or 
  ‘ I used to say ’ after 
 [ ' ipa]  ‘ I said ’ ), a number of 
dialects eventually generalized 
 [ ' i - ] as the basic form of the syllabic augment. This 
is particularly characteristic of much of the south - eastern area, many Cycladic varieties, 
and the speech of eastern Crete. Where the unaccented augment is retained, some of 
these dialects substitute 
 [e - ], while others keep 
 [i - ] throughout. 
 From late antiquity onwards, the practice of using an  ‘ internal ’ augment with com-
pound verbs (e.g. 
 [pros ' evalon]  ‘ they attacked ’ ) was steadily abandoned 
in favour of a regular  ‘ external ’ augment (e.g. 
 [e ' prozvalan]), or no 
augment at all if the initial element began with a vowel. This was inevitable, given that 
word formation using the classical prepositions had ceased to be productive and many 
compound verbs survived only as lexicalized fossils. The true nature of such composi-
tion was therefore steadily lost sight of.  
 (c)  The  a ctive  p aradigm:  p resent  t ense 
 The parallel existence of past - tense 3pl  - a n ( e ) [ - an(e)] and  - a s i ( n ) [ - asi(n)] very quickly 
generated a present - tense (and subjunctive) 3pl  - o  u n ( e ) [ - un(e)] to partner the inherited 
 - o  u s i ( n ) [ - usi(n)]. The earliest examples of the innovative form date from the late 
antique/early Byzantine period, and the variants alternate freely, exactly like their past -
 tense analogues, in popular writing of the later middle ages. The dialectal distribution 
of the variants in Modern Greek is the same as for the past - tense forms. 
 In the modern period  - o  u n ( e ) [ - un(e)] inﬂ uenced the 1pl ending  - o  m e ( n ) [ - ome(n)] to 
give  - o  u m e [ - ume]. This is now the preferred option in standard Modern Greek, though 
both forms remain in use, the traditional form being mainly regional or viewed as stilted.  

320 Byzantium
 (d)   The  m iddle/passive  p aradigm:  p resent  t ense 
 The ancient set of endings in the regular thematic paradigm (i.e. with verb stem in 
 - e - / - o - ) was as follows:
 Sg  - o  - m a i [ - ome]  
  - e i [ - i] 
  - e - t a i [ - ete] 
 Pl 
  
  - e - s q e 
   - o  - n t a i [ - onde] 
 This was partially remodelled: 
 (i)  2sg  - e i (earlier  -  /) [ - i], which derived from an original  * - e s a i [ - esai] through 
prehistoric loss of intervocalic [s] and contraction, was analogically restored, begin-
ning in the Hellenistic period, on the basis of the perfect middle/passive in  - s a i [ - se] 
and common athematic verb forms such as 
 [ '  inase]  ‘ you can ’ , 
 
[ ' istase]  ‘ you stand ’ etc.  
 (ii)  2pl  - e s q e 
 became  - e s t e [ - este] by regular phonetic development 
(cf. (12) above). The 2pl ending also inﬂ uenced 1pl 
 , to give 
ﬁ rst 
 [ - ' omesta], and then 
 
[ - ' omeste], the latter widely attested in later medieval texts. Subsequently, the imper-
fect 1pl and 2pl endings 
 [ - ' omaste] and 
 [ - ' osaste] (on which, see 
(d) below) often replaced these forms (in the case of 1pl standardly in Modern 
Greek), perhaps on the basis of the historic lack of distinctiveness between present 
and past terminations (i.e.  - o  m e q a 
 and  - e s q e 
 in both paradigms).  
 (iii)  In the early medieval period, 3pl  - o  n t a i [ - onde] was inﬂ uenced by the new 
active ending  - o  u n [ - un] to give  - o  u n t a i [ - unde], and the  - o  u - [ - u - ] element then 
spread dialectally to the other forms with the thematic vowel [ - o - ] (in northern 
varieties often automatically, through mid - vowel raising). Both sets of variants 
continued in use, however, though now the [ - o - ] forms have prevailed in standard 
Modern Greek, doubtless in part under the inﬂ uence of the written language.  
 (e)  The  m iddle/passive  p aradigm: the  i mperfect 
 The classical thematic paradigm:  
 Sg   
 [ - omin] 
 - o  u [ - u] 
  - e - t o  [ - eto] 
 Pl 
  
  - e - s q e 
   - o  - n t o  [ - ondo] 
 was also widely remodelled, but its relative rarity led to a wider range of 
innovations: 
 (i)  The 3pl sufﬁ x was widely affected by the corresponding active past - tense ending 
 - a n ( e ) [ - an(e)] to give  - o  n t a n [ - onda(n)]/
 [ - ' ondane], and then a number of 
extended variants gradually emerged: e.g. 
 [ - ' ondisa(n)], used in the 
 Chronicle of the Morea  and modelled on 
 [ ' isan], the traditional 3pl imperfect 
of the verb  ‘ to be ’ (cf. (34a)), and much later 
 [ - ' ondusa(n)], a form now 
typical of Peloponnesian varieties and Athenian colloquial, in which  - o  u s a n [ - usan] 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 321
has apparently been borrowed from the  ‘ regular ’  3pl active imperfect of contract 
verbs (cf. (34e) above, and see (iv) below for a similar development in 1sg). The 
basis for this otherwise unlikely link was apparently provided by the similar use of 
active contract - verb endings in the subjunctive of the aorist passive (cf. (34a)).  
 (ii)  3sg  - e t o ( n ) [ - eto(n)], with analogical ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] on the basis of 3sg active 
forms, was partly remodelled under the inﬂ uence of the new 3pl  - o  n t a n [ - onda(n)]/
 [ - ' ondane], to give  - o  t o  n [ - oto(n)]/
 [ - ' otone] (as in the  Chronicle of the 
Morea ) and then  - o  t a n [ - ota(n)]/
 [ - ' otane]. This last development also led to 
the recharacterization of 3sg 
 [ ' ito(n)]  ‘ s/he was ’ as 
 [ ' itan(e)], which 
was homophonous with the innovative version of the 3pl of the same verb (cf. 
(34a)). On this model, the properly 3pl endings  - o  n t a n [ - onda(n)]/
 [ - ' ondane] 
were sometimes used also as 3sg terminations, a usage now characteristic of the 
northern dialects, including the speech of Thessaloniki.  
 (iii)  As in the present paradigm, 1pl 
 was remodelled to the 2pl 
form. But in this case, beginning in Roman times, and in line with other develop-
ments of that period (cf. 3pl imperfect active  - o  n [ - on]    >   - o  - s a n [ - osan] etc.), the 2pl 
aorist - middle sufﬁ x  - s a s q e 
 had replaced the original termination  - ( e ) - s q e 
 in popular speech, the substitution being motivated by the formal distinc-
tiveness of this termination vis - à - vis the corresponding present. The starting point 
was the new 2pl imperfect 
 (for classical 
 [ ' ite]/
 [ ' iste])  ‘ you 
were ’ ), built in part to 3pl 
 [ ' isan], but using the middle endings characteristic 
of the remainder of the remodelled paradigm of this verb (see (34a)). Via an exten-
sion of the thematic vowel of 1pl 
 , we get the innovative 2pl 
 (later 
 [ - ' osaste]) in place of  - e s q e 
 , to which the 
1pl form was itself remodelled, giving 
 [ - ' omaste]. 14 
 The new 1pl endings of the present and imperfect paradigms were, however, 
widely interchanged, while the 2pl imperfect was also commonly substituted for the 
2pl present. In some areas, and especially in northern dialects, the imperfect 1pl and 
2pl endings were given the a - vowel of 3pl  - o  n t a n [ - ondan]/
 [ - ' ondane], 
to produce  - 
 [ - ' omastan]/
 [ - ' osastan]. In standard Modern Greek 
 [ - ' omaste] can also be used as imperfect 1pl, and 
 [ - ' osaste], 
the regular 2pl imperfect, doubles optionally as a present ending alongside  - e s t e 
[ - este]. 
 (iv)  The 1sg imperfect middle/passive 
 [ - ' omin] had a termination that ceased 
to be associated with passive 1sg past - tense forms after the replacement of the 
majority of 1sg aorists in  - h n [ - in] by  - h k a [ - ika]. The 2sg ending  - o  u [ - u], which 
derived prehistorically from  * - e - s o  [ - e - so] through loss of intervocalic [s] and con-
traction (cf. 2sg present  - e i [ - i]   <   *  - e - s a i [ - e - sai]), was even more opaque and ripe 
for replacement. 
 Since the aoristic  - k a [ - ka] was unsuitable as a substitute in the 1sg imperfect, it 
seems that  - o  u n [ - un], the active 1sg imperfect ending of the contract verbs, was 
substituted for  - h n [ - in], just as their 3pl  - o  u s a n [ - usan] replaced  - h s a n [ - isan] in the 
extended 3pl middle/passive formations discussed in (i) above. This produced 
 [ - ' omun], which immediately provided a model for a new 2sg 
 

322 Byzantium
[ - ' osun], where [s] replaced [m] as in the present forms  - m a i [ - me]/ - s a i [ - se], and 
the thematic o - vowel paralleled the developments in the 2pl termination.  
 The overall result of these various developments was a paradigm in which the thematic 
vowel [o] was generalized and normally bore the accent:
 Singular  
  Plural 
 
  [ - ' omun(a/e)]  
  
 
  [ - ' omaste] 
 
   [ - ' osun(a/e)] 
  
 
  [ - ' osaste] 
 
 
 [ - ' otan(e)]/ - o  t a n [ ' - otan] 
 
  [ - ' ondan(e)]/ - o  n t a n [ ' - ondan] 
 The 1sg and 2sg endings naturally acquired an optional ﬁ nal vowel to protect the 
weak  - n [ - n]. This was either the expected  - e [ - e] in both forms, or the 1sg  ‘ past - tense ’ 
sufﬁ x  - a [ - a], generalized to the formally parallel 2sg. The a - option was originally 
characteristic of the northern dialects, including the speech of Constantinople, and 
perhaps again passed into the standard through the inﬂ uence of the many speakers 
who came from there in the early 19th century. The forms of 1/2/3sg and 3pl without 
a ﬁ nal vowel are now regarded as more correct in the contemporary standard 
language. 
 In these short forms, the accent now remains ﬁ xed in 3sg 
 [ - ' otan], following 
the model of 1/2sg, but it may still be thrown back to the last syllable of the verb root 
in the case of 3pl, to give either 
 [ - ' ondan] or 
 [ - ' ondan]. Some dialects, 
however, generalized the accent associated with the original short - form 3sg/3pl endings, 
to give a paradigm 
 [ - ' omun], 
 [ - ' osun], 
 [ - ' otan] etc. 
 Finally, we should note that, on the basis of 3pl present  - o  u n t a i [ - unde] (itself mod-
elled on the innovative 3pl active  - o  u n [ - un]), an alternative 3pl imperfect ending  - o  u n t o  
[ - undo] inevitably appeared (later  - o  u n t a n [ - unda(n)]/
 [ - ' undane]). The  - o  u - 
[ - u - ] element spread naturally in some dialects to replace thematic  - o  - [o] (accented or 
not according to area) throughout the paradigm, though in northern or Asia Minor 
dialects in which the accent fell on the syllable before the thematic vowel, the regular 
mid - vowel raising produced  - o  u - [ - u - ] independently. This thematic  - o  u - [ - u - ] was 
certainly a feature of the speech of many in the capital during the later middle ages, 
and it is well reﬂ ected in the  Poems of Poor Pr ó dromos (cf.  12.2.2 ). But, as noted 
above in the discussion of the present endings, it has now been all but eliminated from 
the middle/passive paradigm of standard Modern Greek, with the exception of the 
imperfect passive of learned verbs of the 
 [ - ' eo] class (e.g. 
 [ste ' rume]  ‘ I 
lack ’ ), where it has been generalized, on the basis of the inherited 
 [ - ' u - ] of many 
of the forms in the classical paradigm, to give: 
 [ - ' umun], 
 [ - ' usun], 
   [ - ' undan], 
 [ - ' umaste], 
 [ - ' usaste], 
 [ - ' undan]. But this 
largely artiﬁ cial construct of demoticist grammarians is not universally accepted, and 
in the 3rd - person forms especially many speakers prefer the learned 
 [ - ' ito] and 
 [ - ' undo]. 
 As with other cases of change in progress, a variety of imperfect middle/passive 
forms is attested in vernacular literature after the 12th century, and it seems that a 
number of these developing variants were not only passively understood but also in 

Spoken Greek in the Byzantine Empire 323
active use in the last few centuries before the empire ’ s ﬁ nal fall. Though particular 
forms may originally have been characteristic of particular regions, mobility seems to 
have created a situation in which dialect mixture and free variation were the norm 
amongst city - dwellers of all classes.  
 11.9   Conclusion 
 Though it is clear that spoken Greek changed very considerably during the middle 
ages, with a signiﬁ cant increase in regional heterogeneity among illiterate speakers at 
the lower levels of society, the continued existence of the Byzantine state and its insti-
tutions (primarily the education system, the bureaucracy, and the Orthodox church) 
guaranteed that the evolution of the spoken language overall was constrained by 
knowledge of, or widespread exposure to, the learned language in its various forms 
(most importantly, because of its universal impact, the language of the liturgy). Even 
the wholly illiterate could not escape the passive inﬂ uence of ecclesiastical Greek or 
the levelling effects of military service in the imperial army, while the upper classes, 
concentrated in the major urban centres, continued not only to maintain mutual 
contact across the empire through travel and the performance of professional duties, 
but also to learn, and actively to employ, traditional forms of written Greek, a process 
which necessarily inﬂ uenced their speech and inhibited the development of regional 
differentiation in educated varieties at other than the phonological level. 
 Thus early Medieval Greek, unlike Latin, did not fragment into regional dialects 
that later acquired ofﬁ cial status and evolved as separate languages within independent 
states. Only with the advent of Norman rule in southern Italy and the Seljuk domina-
tion of eastern and central Asia Minor did the increasingly isolated dialects of these 
peripheral territories start to develop along radically independent lines. 
 After 1204, however, in the context of widespread western rule and the political 
fragmentation of the former empire, similar developments began to take effect even in 
the spoken dialects of areas closer to the centre. Crucially, these changes now affected 
all levels of society, since there was no longer a Byzantine state of any signiﬁ cance, 
and the educated classes slowly integrated with their Romance - speaking rulers. Some 
local dialects thus acquired ofﬁ cial, and even literary, status at the expense of archaic 
written Greek, particularly where Byzantine rule had been interrupted and where 
western rule survived longest (e.g. in Cyprus, Crete and the Ionian islands). These and 
other issues will be taken up in more detail in chapter  12 . 
 Notes 
1  If the element in question is used as a determiner rather than a pronoun, or if the referent 
is non - human,  - n [ - n] is less likely to be present in these words.  
2  Examples in this function are attested from the 5th – 6th centuries (Bakker ( 1974 : 87 – 94), 
Gignac ( 1981 : 179), Nicholas ( 1999 : 200 – 11), Manol é ssou  (2003b) ), but then resurface 
only in vernacular literature after the 12th century.  
3  Since there is good reason to think that 
 was pronounced 
 in antiquity 
(Allen ( 1987a : 35)), the popular form is clearly a direct descendant of this through assimila-

324 Byzantium
tion of the nasals and simpliﬁ cation of the geminate; the learned form (as often) must 
involve a spelling pronunciation of the traditional orthographic form.  
4  Beginning in the 17th century a great deal of terminology was created from Ancient Greek 
sources or calqued on the neologisms of other European languages using Ancient Greek 
formants. Since a great deal of lexical innovation in these languages involved Ancient 
Greek roots anyway, many such words were absorbed into Modern Greek without signiﬁ -
cant change (see  15.2  and  17.4 ). 
5  For this kind of regression, cf. also popular 
  ‘ I ﬁ nished ’  (beside learned 
 [te ' liosa]   <  ancient 
 [etel é :o:sa]) on the model of the common 
class of aorists seen in 
  ‘ I showed ’ , supported by parallel presents 
 and 
 ). 
6  In general, the richer the tradition, the greater the ﬂ uctuation, as expected, since copies 
were made in many different areas.  
7  The form varies according to whether they end in a consonant or a vowel: thus 
 
[ ' pustis]   <   pu ş t  ‘ sodomite/bugger ’ but 
   <   araba  ‘ cart ’ . 
8  
 is also attested. In general, the demise of Byzantine educational 
institutions coupled with the absence of any interest in regularizing the vernacular produced 
large - scale variation in both derivational and inﬂ ectional morphology. 
9  The words of this class that survived in the vernacular tended to have more concrete mean-
ings and to be assimilated to the 1st declension, as noted.  
10  There are already many classical examples, e.g. Sophocles  OT 448, Euripides  HF 186.  
11  
 [na] in its future use parallels the impersonal use of other modal auxiliaries 
taking a 
 [na] - clause: cf. for example, 
 [ ' meli]  ‘ it will be (that) ’ (chieﬂ y in early 
Cypriot texts, e.g. Machair á s ’  Chronicle  I, 1); 
 [ ' prepi]  ‘ it is necessary (that) ’ (e.g. 
 Chronicle of the Morea  1342; lines 2 and 4 of the fragment entitled  Sinner ’ s Prayer,  origi-
nally composed in the 12th or 13th century and edited by Legrand ( 1880 : I, 17)); 
 
[la '  ç eni]  ‘ it chances (that) ’ (e.g.  Chronicle of the Morea  2524); 
  
‘ it is possible/permitted ’ (e.g.  Assizes passim , a 14th - century translation into Cypriot 
Greek of a French legal text, cf. S á thas ( 1872 – 94 : IV, 24 ff). This does not, however, 
guarantee that 
 too was originally an impersonal verb in the future construction. 
Since it had previously been generalized to all other persons/numbers in the volitional 
construction (replacing 2sg 
 , and perhaps other reduced forms also, viz. 1/2/3pl 
 , cf.  11.8.5  (c)(iii)), it was already thought of as an 
uninﬂ ected particle by the time the 
 [na] - periphrasis started to be used as a 
future. The absence of convincing examples of impersonal 
 is therefore 
explained. 
12   For innovations in the endings themselves, see (35b – c) below.  
13  For the changes in the endings themselves, see (35d).  
14  The relative chronology of these developments remains uncertain because  ‘ vernacular ’  2pl 
forms are very rare in the relevant literary and documentary corpora.  

12
Texts in the  ‘ Vernacular ’ 
 
 12.1   The Early and Middle Periods 
 12.1.1   Introduction 
 We have a unique collection of 9th - century inscriptions, written at a more basic level 
than any of the texts discussed in chapter  10 , set up at the instigation of the Turkic 
Bulgars, who had established themselves during the 7th century as the rulers of the 
Slavic peoples in much of the territory of modern Bulgaria. Though a few of these are 
in Bulgar (using the Greek alphabet), most are in Greek, the former administrative 
language and lingua franca of at least the southern parts of the region. Whether they 
were composed under orders by Greek - speaking inhabitants of the conquered towns 
or by Slavs and/or Bulgars who had learned Greek remains unclear, but they reveal a 
contemporary vernacular style that shows little or no inﬂ uence from ofﬁ cial varieties 
of the written language used in the Byzantine empire (cf.  10.7 ). 
 For the early and middle periods, we also have a small collection of the rhythmical 
acclamations with which the Hippodrome factions (the Blues and Greens) used to 
greet/harangue emperors, members of the imperial household and other public ﬁ gures 
on formal occasions and in response to major incidents in the political life of the 
capital. The majority are preserved in the manuscript traditions of historians and 
chroniclers, but many have suffered corruption in the course of their transmission. 
Though some convey approval, albeit often in an ironic or satirical way, others express 
outright contempt in strongly abusive language. Those composed for orchestrated 
chanting on ofﬁ cial occasions reveal a mixture of popular and more formal character-
istics, but some of the hostile pieces have a more consistently vernacular character, 
and provide an important, if limited, source of information for the spoken Greek of 
the urban masses in a period for which there is otherwise a serious lack of evidence.  
 12.1.2   The Protobulgarian  i nscriptions 
 Despite their privileged position as evidence for the vernacular of the 9th century, these 
documents must be interpreted with caution in that some at least may have been 

326 Byzantium
composed by non - native speakers, and in the absence of comparable material from 
other locations, we risk giving undue emphasis to what may be parochial or substrate 
phenomena. See Be š evliev  (1963)  for a critical edition of the documents, and discussion 
of their historical and cultural signiﬁ cance. 
 The following inscription describes the destruction of a Byzantine army by the 
Bulgars in 813, and belongs to a period quite close to the events which it 
commemorates: 
 (1) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ … and his brother did not desert him, but went out, and God granted it to him to destroy 
the following places and fortiﬁ ed towns: Serdike, Debeltos, Constantia, Bersinicia, 
Adrianople. These were the fortiﬁ ed townships that he took. But God put fear into 
the remaining towns, and they ( i.e. the Byzantines ) surrendered them and ﬂ ed, and 
the land of the south ( i.e. Byzantium ) completely abandoned this place, where the 
aged emperor himself, the bald one, had gone out with his whole army and seized every-
thing, forgetting his oaths, and our leader Krum had gone out against him to make 
war  … ’ 
 This is the ﬁ rst time since we left the Egyptian papyri that spelling directly reﬂ ecting 
the sound changes of late antiquity and the early middle ages has been encountered. 
Note  i ,  e i ,  h  =  [i];  e ,  a i  =  (e);  o ,  w  =  [o];  u and  o  i , however, both still   =  [y], and there 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 327
are very few overlaps with the letters representing [i] (with occasional exceptions in 
other documents, cf.  11.2 (1)). The manner dissimilation of [fs]   >  [ps] is also apparent 
in 
   [ ' ekapse] for 
 [ ' ekafse] (assuming the supplement is correct), suggesting 
that the distinctive treatment of groups of voiceless fricatives containing [s] as their 
second component may have begun earlier than that involving other such clusters (cf. 
 11.6  (12)), though there is no compelling evidence for this change until much later. 
 In morphology, note that the augment is still used routinely in past - tense verb forms 
whether or not it bears the accent, and that ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] has been standardized in all 
past - tense 3sg verb forms (including, elsewhere, 3sg middle/passive  - e t o  n [ - eton]). The 
expected  ‘ past - tense ’ paradigm (11.8.6 (35b)) is also well - attested in the regular 3pl 
forms in  - a n [ - an] (e.g. 
 ). Note, however, that 
 [ ' aﬁ kan] still 
displays the ancient k - aorist (generalized from the singular), and that the innovative 
s - form 
  [ ' aﬁ sa] (built to future/aorist subjunctive 
  [a ' ﬁ so] and the base for 
modern 
  [a ' ﬁ no],  11.8.5  (34b)) has yet to make its appearance (cf. also 
  ). Assuming that the ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] of 
 [eri ' mose] was written 
in error (perhaps because of the past - tense 3sg verb forms preceding), it seems the use 
of an inﬁ nitive to complement control verbs is still in regular use, as is the articular 
inﬁ nitive after prepositions (here expressing purpose after 
 [pros]  ‘ towards ’ , cf. 
 11.8.1  (30)), a major characteristic of the medieval Koine. 
 The form 
 [ ' tuta] for 
 [ ' tafta] shows that the levelling of the anomalous 
forms of this demonstrative to the majority containing  - o  u - [ - u - ] was already under 
way ( 11.7.8  (29d)). Substitution of regular 2nd/1st - declension 
 [ ' olos], originally 
meaning  ‘ whole/entire ’ , for irregular 3rd/1st - declension 
 [pas]  ‘ all ’ , has taken place, 
in line with the general weakness of 3rd - declension morphology in popular spoken 
Greek: cf. 
  [e ' piren  ' ola]  ‘ he took everything ’ (where 
 
[(e) ' pero/ ' perno] has its modern meaning  ‘ take ’    <   ‘ lift ’ ). The bare accusative of both 
enclitic third - person pronouns and full noun phrases is used to mark the indirect object 
after  ‘ give ’ (perhaps a northern characteristic already in place, cf.  11.7.1 (16)). 
 In terms of vocabulary, we should note the common medieval use of 
 [la ' os] to 
mean  ‘ army ’ , and the verbs 
  ‘ be lethargic (about)/give up on/abandon ’ , 
and 
 [lizmo ' no]  ‘ forget ’ , both of which are innovations built to otherwise 
rarely attested nominal/adjectival formations; evidently the vernacular tradition 
exploited many items that had been eliminated from literary productions on stylistic 
grounds. 
 12.1.3   Acclamations:  o rigins of the  ‘ p olitical ’   v erse  f orm 
 These fragments of a more everyday language are unfortunately neither common nor 
extensive (a reﬂ ection of Byzantine attitudes), but they serve to conﬁ rm, as the latest 
low - level papyri from Egypt suggest, that popular spoken Greek in the early and middle 
Byzantine periods was developing strongly in the direction of the modern language in 
terms of grammar and lexicon. (See Maas  (1912) , B á denas  (1985)  for collections and 
commentary.) 
 Among the more famous of these texts, deriving from the early period, is the 
extended exchange between the circus fans and Ioustinian ó s ’ herald on the occasion 
of the Nika riot, as preserved by Theoph á nes ( am 6024,  ad 532; de Boor ( 1963 : 

328 Byzantium
180 – 4)). A little later, we also have a piece directed against the emperor Maur í kios 
( am 6093,  ad 602; de Boor ( 1963 : 283)). The text as transmitted is as follows: 
 (2) 
 
 
 
 Jeffreys  (1974)  has argued that the origins of the 15 - syllable  ‘ political ’  verse form, 1 
which is the standard accentual metre of folk songs, medieval and early modern ver-
nacular poetry, and much learned Byzantine writing in the ceremonial and exegetical 
traditions (H ö randner  (1974)) go back to the acclamations employed to greet trium-
phant generals in Republican Rome. According to this account, the metre would then 
have evolved orally into its familiar form over the course of the following millennium. 
Though others such as Pol í tis  (1970)  and Koder  (1972, 1983)  have argued instead for 
a learned origin of some kind (and we may readily concede that the ﬁ nal shaping of 
the metre after the 10th/11th centuries took place at least partly through the interven-
tion of learned/literate poets), pieces such as (2), as well as (4) below, actually provide 
good evidence in support of Jeffreys ’ thesis of a popular origin (if not necessarily in 
Republican Rome), a position now reinforced by Lauxtermann  (1999) . 
 The mature political verse comprises two hemistichs, with 8 syllables in the ﬁ rst 
before a strong caesura, and 7 syllables in the second. Canonically, there are two major 
stresses in each half, usually on the 2nd or 4th, 6th or 8th, 10th or 12th, and 14th 
syllables (the last obligatory), giving an iambic rhythm overall, though stress on the 
1st or 3rd and 9th or 11th syllables is not uncommon, introducing a trochaic (or 
anapaestic) counterpoint. But there is good evidence that oral accentual verse based 
on paired cola of 8 and 7 syllables with mixed trochaic/iambic rhythms was already 
in use from at least late antiquity. Lauxtermann  (1999)  has therefore argued that such 
versiﬁ cation was turned into a formalized metre between the 6th and 8th centuries 
(perhaps in Asia Minor), and that the resulting verse form was introduced into the 
written tradition (low - brow registers only) during the 9th. Thus a piece such as (2) 
can, with minor emendation, readily be rewritten to make paired cola of 8 and 7
syllables respectively, with a predominantly trochaic rhythm. From such a basis, it is 
not difﬁ cult to imagine the evolution of the fully developed metre: 
 (3) 
 
 
 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 329
 ‘ He found his heifer tender and soft, and he fucked her like the proverbial young cock, 
and fathered children like chips off the block. Now no one dares speak; he ’ s muzzled us 
all. My holy Lord, my holy Lord, fearful and mighty, let him have it on the head to stop 
his conceit, and I ’ ll bring you the great bull in thanksgiving. ’ 
 Maur í kios (ruled 582 – 602) was a competent administrator and soldier, but he had 
inherited a bankrupt state, a situation which, in the context of continual warfare 
against the Persians in the east and the Avars and Slavs to the north, forced him to 
adopt unpopular austerity measures. These were needlessly exacerbated by lack of 
sensitivity to what the army and the people could reasonably be expected to tolerate 
and, despite an impressive record (including the creation of the exarchates of Ravenna 
and Carthage out of the residue of Ioustinian ó s ’ conquests), he was regularly faced by 
popular unrest. This came to a head when he ordered the army on the Danube frontier 
to remain on station over the winter of 602 – 3 instead of allowing it home in accord-
ance with convention. The army revolted, proclaiming an ofﬁ cer named Phok á s as its 
leader, and marched on the capital. Though Maur í kios turned to the Blues and Greens, 
only the former proved loyal, and on the night of 22 November 602 a mob assembled 
outside the palace baying for blood. The imperial family managed to escape to Asia 
Minor, whereupon the Greens overtly threw in their lot with Phok á s, who was duly 
crowned emperor. Once installed, he sent troops to arrest Maur í kios, and the emperor 
and his sons were put to death. 
 In the same year, however, some time before this disaster, the emperor and his eldest 
son had again escaped from a riotous mob. On this occasion, the crowd, frustrated in 
its ambition, had found someone who looked like Maur í kios and strapped him to the 
back of an ass, chanting the words in (2)/(3) (to understand which we need to know 
only that the emperor and his wife Konstant í na had ﬁ ve sons and three daughters). A 
number of linguistic features are worth noting, in particular that the metre ordinarily 
requires the absence of synizesis (cf. 
 ), like - vowel simpliﬁ cation (cf. 
 [e ' piise]), elision of ﬁ nal vowels, and aphaeresis (the sole exceptions being the 
connectives 
 ) [c(e)] and 
 [al(a)], and perhaps the subjunctive marker 
 

330 Byzantium
[(i)na]). Apparently, none of these popular features had yet become standard in the 
speech of the capital. 
 In verb morphology the old perfect 
 [ ' evrice]  ‘ s/he found ’ is used as an aorist, 
while 
 , lit.  ‘ on - jumped ’ , shows a true k - aorist with 
augment rather than reduplication (cf.  11.8.4 (33)), provided that we accept the metri-
cally motivated restoration. An inﬁ nitive is again used freely to complement the control 
verb 
 [tol ' mo], but the ending of subjunctive 
 [yper ' erete] is that of 
the indicative, as expected, while the former aorist subjunctive 
 
is used as a future indicative, as often (see  11.8.6 (35a)). 
 The verbs 
 [ﬁ  ' mo] (or perhaps 
  [ﬁ  ' mono]  ‘ silence, muzzle ’ , cf.  11.8 (34b)) 
and 
 [yper ' erome]  ‘ be puffed up ’ are both used in the New Testament with 
these senses; 
 [ﬁ  ' mo] seems to have belonged consistently to a non - literary register 
(it is used in classical Greek only by Aristophanes), while 
 [yper ' ero] appears 
in earlier texts only in the literal sense of  ‘ raise up ’ . 
 In nominal morphology, the most striking feature is perhaps the continued use of 
dative pronouns (
  [ ' tafti] and  s o  i [sy]), though we should not forget that 
Constantinople was in origin a Dorian colony, and that it had retained a majority of 
Greek native speakers throughout its expansion in the later Roman and early Byzantine 
periods. As the capital of an empire in which Greek was the dominant language, and 
the sole language of education and scholarship, a certain conservatism, manifested not 
only in the absence of synizesis etc., but also in the continued use of dative pronouns 
or 
 [ka ' ta]  +  genitive  =   ‘ (down) against ’ (cf.  11.7.1 (16)), is to be expected, even 
in the speech of its urban masses. Recall that Humbert  (1930)  argues that the ﬁ nal 
loss of the dative for native speakers belongs to the 10th century. 
 Note, however, the transfer of 
 from the i - stem to the consonant -
 stem declension (apparently with accent shift, 
 , cf.  11.7.4 (21)). The 
neuter 
 [ale ' ktorin], a diminutive of the Koine form 
 [a ' lektor] rather 
than Attic 
 [alek ' trion], shows the expected reduction of  - i ( o ) n [ - i(o)n], while 
   ‘ wood - chip/chip off the block ’ exempliﬁ es the free com-
pounding characteristic of the medieval vernacular (the 2nd element also   =   ‘ fruit - stone, 
pip, seed, spot, hailstone ’ ). The replacement of 
 [pas] with 
 [ ' olos] has already 
been dealt with in the previous section. 
 The overall impression here is of a natural continuation of the spoken Koine of late 
antiquity, a language more conservative than that of the most vulgar documents from 
Egypt, but reﬂ ecting well the developments of its time. This same metropolitan ver-
nacular appears in a somewhat more advanced form in the following piece, directed 
against the empress Theophan ó in  ad 970: 
 (4) 
 
 
 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 331
 
 
 ‘  “ The blacksmith strikes his anvil, and he strikes his neighbours too ” ; the matchmaker 
and the princeling are standing at the door. Theophan ó wanted her cake but the beauty 
ate it. He who wore the coronation robe now donned a leather hide, and if wintry weather 
comes upon him, he will wear his fur coat too; men with shrivelled cocks and ﬁ st - drilled 
arseholes now parade the murdering adulteress on the saddle of a mule. ’ 
 Unlike most acclamations, this piece has been preserved in its own right, though the 
orthography of the original manuscript is very poor, and the text has been seriously 
corrupted in several places, always assuming (as above) that it represents seven 15 - 
syllable lines with predominantly trochaic rhythms. Much remains quite uncertain; 
Morgan  (1954) is the indispensable foundation for any attempt to establish a coherent 
text and interpretation. 
 The background is as follows. Theophan ó had married Roman ó s II, son of 
Konstant í nos VII Porphyrog é nnetos, against his father ’ s wishes. The young man suc-
ceeded to the throne in 959, but died in 963. By this time Theophan ó had given birth 
to two sons and a daughter, and found herself in a vulnerable position as the guardian 
of the heirs of the Macedonian dynasty. Nikeph ó ros Phok á s, the victor in a series of 
successful campaigns against the Arabs, had already been proclaimed emperor by his 
troops, and when the austere and ugly general, already well over 50, returned to the 
capital, the 22 - year - old Theophan ó persuaded him to marry her, and to act as co -
 emperor with her children. She quickly took a lover, Nikeph ó ros ’  ﬂ amboyant nephew 
Io á nnes Tzimisk é s, and they together plotted to murder the emperor, who was killed 
in December 969. But the plan that they should marry and rule together was foiled 
by the aged patriarch Pol ý euktos, who had already objected on the basis of canon law 
to Theophan ó ’ s second marriage, and now refused outright to sanction a third, espe-
cially in the wake of a murder. The ambitious Tzimisk é s now betrayed his accomplice 
and agreed to the patriarch ’ s conditions for his own coronation, including the banish-
ment of Theophan ó . Once Tzimisk é s had become emperor, the wily  parakoim ó menos 
( ‘ chamberlain ’ ) Bas í leios, who as the bastard son of Roman ó s I Lekapen ó s (regent for 
Konstant í nos VII till 944) had been castrated for his own protection, arranged 
Tzimisk é s ’  marriage to Konstant í nos ’  daughter Theod ó ra. Bas í leios ’ motives were in 

332 Byzantium
part personal, since he had been dismissed from his post by Theophan ó ’ s ﬁ rst husband 
Roman ó s II, and had recovered his position only with the accession of Nikeph ó ros 
Phok á s. 
 The ﬁ rst line in (4) is clearly proverbial (i.e.  ‘ avoid the blacksmith if you do not 
want a hammering ’ / ‘ bad company brings bad consequences ’ ), and in line 2 we may 
take the  ‘ matchmaker ’ to be Bas í leios the  parakoim ó menos and the  ‘ princeling ’ to be 
Io á nnes Tzimisk é s, both of whom turned out to be  ‘ bad company ’ for Theophan ó . 
  [si ' naptis] and 
 (possibly    <  
 , 
i.e.  princeps  +  diminutive sufﬁ x) may conceal allegorical personiﬁ cations of 
 
[si ' napi(n)]  ‘ mustard ’  and 
 , some other caustic herb/spice (cf. the 
later political allegories personifying fruit, ﬁ sh, birds and quadrupeds,  8.4.4 ). The 
 ‘ beauty ’ of line 3 is Theod ó ra, while lines 4 and 5 imply that Tzimisk é s had a thick 
skin, and would add further layers if the going got tougher. Finally, given that elderly 
unmarried churchmen and eunuchs were assumed to play the passive role in homo-
sexual relationships, the men in line 6 with  ‘ shrivelled cocks and ﬁ st - drilled arseholes ’ 
are presumably Pol ý euktos (an ex - monk) and Bas í leios the  parakoim ó menos. 
 Phonologically, the piece is more advanced in its development than the last, with 
aphaeresis of unaccented vowels (e.g. in the clitic pronouns 
 [tin]/ t o  u [tu], and the 
imperfect 
 [ ' fori(n)]  ‘ she wore ’ ) and synizesis (e.g. 
 ) both 
in evidence. Note too the ﬁ nal vowels in 
 (line 5) and 
 [ise  ' selan] (line 7), arising from the generalization of forms resulting from 
resegmentation (cf.  11.3 ,  11.7.1  (16)). There is, however, no evidence for the manner 
dissimilation of voiceless obstruents characteristic of the later vernacular (cf. 
 
[si ' naptis] etc.). 
 In verb morphology, 
 [va ' ro]  ‘ I press/strike ’ had already replaced Attic 
 
[va ' rino] in the Koine of the Roman period, but the present 
 [ ' stiko]  ‘ I stand ’ , 
built to aorist (formerly perfect) 
 [ ' estika], is a medieval innovation (see  11.8.5 
(34a)). Note that the old 3pl present indicative ending  - o  u s i n [ - usi(n)] and the new 
 - o  u n [ - u(n)] are both in use (cf.  11.8.6  (35c)), assuming the correctness of the metrically 
motivated emendation in line 7, but that there is no evidence for any erosion of the 
paradigm of 
 [ - ' eo] verbs under the inﬂ uence of the 
 [ - ' ao] class (cf.  11.8.5 (34e)); 
thus imperfect 3sg 
 [fori(n)] retain the inherited  - e i [ - i]    <   - e  +   e 
[ - ee] (ﬁ nal  - n [ - n], originally an option with the 3sg past - tense ending  - e ( n ) [ - e(n)], was 
generalized to all past - tense 3sg endings in the early/middle Byzantine periods). 
 In the area of nominal morphology, note once again the liking for newly 
coined compounds in popular verse (and presumably in popular speech). Thus 
 
[kukurovuci ' natores] 
combines 
the 
colloquial/dialectal 
 [ ' kukuros]  ‘ parched ’ with the Latin loan 
 [vuci ' nator], while 
 [fuktokolotri ' patos] combines 
 [ ' fukta]  ‘ palm/handful ’ 
(later 
 [ ' fuxta/ ' xufta]) with 
 [ ' kolos]  +  
 [ ' tripa]  ‘ arse ’   +   ‘ hole ’ , 
the whole being turned into an adjective by means of the now domesticated Latin 
perfect passive participle sufﬁ x 
 [ - ' atos]. The third example, 
 
[ka ' fxoktonos], combines the root of 
 [ka ' fxome]  ‘ boast ’ with  - k t o  n o  " 
[ - ktonos] from the root  ‘ kill ’ . When this appears accented in compounds (
 
[ - ' ktonos]), it bears the sense  ‘ killer ’ . Here, however, the accent falls on the ﬁ rst 
element, and we are dealing either with a compound adjective meaning  ‘ boasting of 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 333
murder ’  (cf. the type 
 [ﬁ l ' oponos], lit.  ‘ loving - labour ’ ), or with a copulative 
nominal compound (the derivatives 
 [ ' kafxos/ ' kafxa] were used to mean 
 ‘ adulterer ’ /adulteress ’ :  ‘ a boast ’   >   ‘ a conquest/lover ’   >   ‘ an adulterer/ - ess ’ ). The ﬁ rst 
option involves a learned formation, while copulative compounds were common in 
the medieval vernacular, so the second interpretation is more likely to be the correct 
one in a text of this type. 
 Other points worth noting include: the now regular reduction of the neuter sufﬁ x 
 - i o  n  [ - ion]   >   - i ( n ) [ - i(n)]; the retention of the acc pl sufﬁ x in 
 [ ' jitonas] ( 11.7.4 
(19)); the use of 
 [is/ise]   +  accusative in a locative sense ( 11.7.1 (16)); the rela-
tive use of 
 [ ' opu] with a deﬁ nite head at least implied ( 11.7.8 (29c)); the form 
 [ ' tora]  ‘ now ’    <  
 [t(i)  ' ora], lit.  ‘ at - the time ’ ; the addition of an analogical 
 - n [ - n] to neuters of the type exempliﬁ ed by 
 ( 11.7.5 (22)); the preverbal 
positioning of clitic pronouns when clause - initial position is ﬁ lled by a contras-
tive focus (
 [ i ka ' li tin  ' efajen]) or a modern conjunction 
(
 ), cf.  11.4 ; and the use of 
 [is/ ' enas]  ‘ one ’ as 
an indeﬁ nite article (
 [ ' mias  ' mulas]). 
 12.2   Vernacular Literature of the 12th Century 
 12.2.1   The  e pic of  Digen é s Akr í tes 
 What is probably our earliest extended text in vernacular Greek is the cycle of poems 
preserved in a 15th - century manuscript (E) now in the Escorial monastery near Madrid. 
They tell of the exploits of the legendary Bas í leios Digen é s Akr í tes ( ‘ Basil Two - Race 
Borderer ’ ), the son of an Arab emir from Syria who married the daughter of a Roman 
general. Though the boy had blood from two races, he grew up to serve the Byzantine 
emperor as a frontier guard (
 [a ' kritis]), protecting  Roman í a  from Arab incur-
sions and banditry. 
 The ultimate origin of these poems, and the relationship between the text of E and 
ﬁ ve other surviving versions, especially the fuller and less episodic middle - register 
version contained in a manuscript (G) in the Grottaferrata monastery outside Rome, 
remain the subject of much dispute (see  8.4.3 for some discussion). Standard editions 
are Alex í ou  (1985)  and Jeffreys  (1998) . Ricks  (1990)  provides a text and translation 
with introduction and notes, treating the work as a collection of ﬁ ve separate but 
related poems, a helpful reconstruction that is accepted here. The papers in Beaton 
and Ricks  (1993) survey some of the central questions. 
 Given that E alone preserves a variety of Syrian place names, antique military 
terms and references to events of the 9th and 10th centuries, it is not implausible to 
regard it as the best surviving reﬂ ection of a possible 12th - century original, composed 
in the context of nostalgia for the  ‘ akritic hero ’ following the defeat at Manzikert in 
1071 (Ricks ( 1990 : 6ff)). If so, the prototype  Digen é s would have been a ground -
 breaking transformation of folkloric material and oral lays into the ﬁ rst  ‘ literary ’ 
vernacular poetry (cf. Beaton  (1996)) . Whatever the truth of the matter, the blending 
of oral/vernacular and literary/learned elements in E merits consideration. The absence 
of sustained learned language, the fundamentally hypotactic style, and the overall 

334 Byzantium
correspondence of sense units with individual lines of verse all point to poetry with 
its roots in an oral tradition, though only the language of the second poem (ll. 610 – 
701, dealing with Digen é s ’ ﬁ rst encounter with raiders), and to some extent that 
of the fourth (ll. 1100 – 605, a ﬁ rst - person account of subsequent exploits), approach 
the mechanically formulaic quality of genuine oral poetry. The otherwise restrained 
use of formulaic phraseology, and the frequent subtlety of contextual nuance (Ricks 
( 1990 : 16)), may well indicate that we are dealing with a literate adaptation of 
traditional language in the direction of the contemporary vernacular together with a 
redeployment of inherited thematic material in a manner shaped by a literary 
sensibility. 
 Literary (or at least literate) reworking, whether for aesthetic reasons or to impose 
greater coherence on the collection, is also indicated by other considerations. There is, 
for example, a higher than usual density of learned forms in the introductory and 
linking passages (though the ﬁ nal poem (ll. 1606 – 967) has a more learned quality 
throughout). Unlike obvious interpolations, these help to smooth over the breaks and 
 ‘ position ’  each story within a wider context. In poem three (ll. 702 – 1088), for example, 
the proem (ll. 702 – 22) warns of the power of love, but also links the story of how 
Digen é s carries off his bride (for love, and with her consent) with the contemporary 
revival of romance in the capital ’ s literary circles. There are also passages of a religious 
or moralizing character composed in something approaching a middle register. These 
sit poorly with traditional akritic heroics but contribute to the romanticized reconstruc-
tion of the akritic world presented in poems one (ll. 1 – 609), three (ll. 702 – 1088) and 
ﬁ ve (ll. 1606 – 967). The most important example comes in poem ﬁ ve, dealing with the 
retirement and death of Digen é s. Lines 1794 – 967 expound a Christian take on the 
vanity of heroism, and the learned language of this passage, including datives and 
inﬂ ected participles, suggests the inﬂ uence of both ecclesiastical and pagan models, 
including the death of Alexander as portrayed in the  Alexander Romance. 
 Summarizing, the language of the poems seems to combine, in varying proportions, 
a foundation from the folk tradition with supplements from the contemporary spoken 
vernacular and elements taken from literate/literary compositions, though we should 
be careful not to exaggerate the last in so far as Byzantine oral poetry undoubtedly 
preserved its own archaisms in the manner of all oral traditions. This amalgam may 
plausibly be seen as an early attempt to develop a literary language out of a body of 
traditional oral - vernacular material that was both linguistically and thematically 
limited, a task that could only be carried out by recourse to the language and conven-
tions of existing genres in higher registers. The result, though poorly homogenized, 
would have provided an important precedent for the further development of vernac-
ular - based poetry in the later Byzantine empire (cf.  8.4.3 – 5). 
 The following extract is taken from the ﬁ rst of the poems in E, which tells how 
Digen é s ’ father, an Arab emir, sacks a Roman province and carries off the daughter 
of a nobleman. Pursued by the girl ’ s brothers, he eventually agrees to become a 
Christian, marry her, and live in Roman í a, but when this provokes accusations of 
treachery from his family, he returns to Syria, and persuades his mother to come back 
with him, thus effecting a reconciliation between the two families. Here the emir has 
agreed to apostatize, and has taken the girl ’ s ﬁ ve brothers to the tent where she has 
been kept: 3 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 335
 (5) 
 
  
 
 
 
 ‘ And when her brothers saw the girl withered, the ﬁ ve groaned together, and spoke as 
follows:  “ Arise, lissom one, our sweet sister; we had you for dead, but you were protected 

336 Byzantium
by God for your beautiful looks. Through our love for you, we fear no battles. ” The ﬁ ve 
kissed her fervently and collapsed; some kissed her lips, the others her eyes. The ﬁ ve 
brothers sat down and so did that emir; they gave a joint decision to accept him as their 
brother - in - law. And at once the emir gave orders; he kept with him the wonderful lads 
that he had at his command; the others he dismissed and they went to Syria. And the emir 
returned together with the girl and his wife ’ s brothers; they went to Romania. ’ 
 The metre is the fully formed 15 - syllable political verse, henceforth the standard metre 
of Greek poetry, now with predominantly iambic rhythm. The high incidence of 
elision, aphaeresis, crasis and synizesis, metrically guaranteed and reﬂ ected in the 
transcription, is characteristic of popular speech and poetry based on it. 
 Most obviously in evidence here is the parallel use of functionally equivalent mor-
phology; e.g. 3pl non - past  - o  u n [ - un]/ -  o  u s i ( n ) [ - usi(n)], 3pl past  - a n [ - an]/ -  a s i ( n ) [ - asi(n)], 
as well as analogous variants in the  ‘ reduced ’  paradigm of 
 , namely 
 [i ' pasi(n)], see  11.8.5 (34c), (35b) and (35c). Similar variation 
occurs (though not in (5)) in the choice of thematic vowel in present and imperfect 
passives (e.g. 3pl  - o  u n t a i / - o  u n t a ( n ) [ - unde/ - unda(n)] vs.  - o  n t a i / - o  n t a ( n ) [ - onde/
 - onda(n)], cf.  11.8.6  (35d) and (35e)), and in the aorist passive, e.g. 3sg  - q h ( n ) 
 / - q h k e ( n ) 
 , cf.  11.8.4  (33). 
 Possible explanations are many and varied, and by no means mutually exclusive. 
Many dialects retained the classical endings  - o  u s i ( n ) [ - usi(n)] etc., and these were used 
alongside their rivals in many oral songs and lays (the variation being metrically 
useful), as well as remaining standard in the written language. In vernacular verse, it 
is tempting to think in terms of source materials in different dialects (e.g. Probon á s 
 (1985) , Trapp  (1971)) and/or interference from the dialects of later copyists (e.g. 
Alex í ou ( 1985 : viii, xvii)). But since even early prose texts show similar inconsistencies, 
and in the absence of a codiﬁ ed vernacular standard, it is probably best to accept that 
free variation was typical of educated spoken and vernacular written styles, even if the 
options were exploited more freely in poetry. 
 Note in line 6 the negative 
 [u] rather than modern 
 and the possessive 
adjective 
 [si(n)] in place of the genitive pronoun  s o  u [su] (in passive sense), along 
with the phrase 
 [i men]  ‘ some ’  in line 8, all learned features that recur elsewhere. 
But vernacular features massively predominate; for example: abandonment of redupli-
cation in the perfect passive participle (
 [mara ' meni(n)]); 
 [an ' dama] 
 ‘ together ’   <  
 [en d(o)  ' ama] (added by Alex í ou, but not out of place in E); 
analogical  - n [ - n] in the neuter adjective 
 ; the acc pl forms of clitic 
pronouns used not only in direct and indirect object functions but also as possessives, 
to the exclusion of the old genitive (cf. 
 , cf.  12.3.3 (15g)); 
3pl aorist subjunctive 
 [ ' parun]  ‘ they (may) take ’ , with aphaeresis regularized, 
cf. classical 
 [e ' parosi(n)], from 
 [e ' pero]  ‘ lift ’ ; the form 
 
[ ' afto(n)], built to the feminine demonstrative 
 [ ' afti]  ‘ this ’ , but used as a simple 
pronoun like 
 [af ' to(n)], cf.  11.7.8 (29d); 
  ‘ lad ’   <  
 [ ' aoros] 
(modern 
  ‘ boy ’   <  diminutive 
 [a ' orion]); use of the article as a rela-
tive pronoun (cf. 
 [tus  ' i ç e], probably a traditional feature of oral poetry, 
though by no means exclusive to it); 
 [me] with the accusative   =   ‘ with ’ , and the 
frequent reduction of 
 [is] to [s], cf.  11.7.1 (16); the 
 [na] - clause after  ‘ take a 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 337
decision ’  in l. 10, where a control inﬁ nitive might have been expected (inﬁ nitives are 
increasingly restricted to the complements of verbs expressing aspectual (e.g. l. 66: 
 [ ' irksando  ' palin  ' klein]  ‘ they - began again to - weep ’ ) or modal 
notions (e.g. l. 142: 
 [an s  ' ixan e ' vri]  ‘ if you they - had/would(have) 
to - ﬁ nd (i.e. found) ’ ), cf.  11.8.1  (30). 
 Though there are no relevant contexts in (5), one of the most important 
features in this early vernacular literature is the near total absence of the dative 
case other than in clearly literary passages. The accusative (e.g. l. 499: 
  ' to - the lads (acc) of - him he - spoke ’ ) 
and genitive (e.g. l. 390: 
  ' to - the 
brothers (gen.) of - her she - spoke ’ ) alternate freely in indirect object function, though 
the use of the genitive is preferred when there is also a preceding direct object (e.g. 
l. 53: 
  ' ﬁ nger to - him (gen) he - shows ’ (as a 
gesture of peace)), see  11.7.1  for further discussion of the variation.  
 12.2.2   Ptochopr ó dromos 
 In the 12th century, the Komnenian court provided new impetus to creative writing, 
ushering in a period of literary experimentation under imperial patronage against the 
background of changes associated with the revival of learning and the return of a pros-
perous middle class. Lucian ’ s satirical dialogues on the underworld (cf.  5.5 ), for 
example, provided the inspiration for the anonymous  Timar í on, a humorous critique 
of 12th - century society (Alex í ou (1982/3)), in which the eponymous hero dies after 
attending a fair in Thessaloniki and is brought to trial before the judges of Hades. We 
also have learned revivals of the Hellenistic romance, initiated (c.1143 – 9) by the 
appearance of  Rhod á nthe and Dosikl é s  by The ó doros Pr ó dromos, the proliﬁ c court 
poet of Eir é ne Do ú kaina, wife of Al é xios I Komnen ó s, who was later employed by her 
son and grandson, Io á nnes II and Manou é l I (see Kazhdan and Franklin ( 1984 : ch.  3 )). 
But most important in the present context is the small corpus of didactic and satirical 
verse composed in a more everyday language. This comprises the poem addressed to 
Manou é l I from his prison cell by the intellectual Micha é l Glyk á s, the didactic/advisory 
poem with the mysterious title  Span é as (cf.  8.4.5 ), and the four  ' begging ’ poems known 
as the  Poems of Poor Pr ó dromos  ( Ptochoprodromik á ) after the persona of the narrator 
( ' Ptochopr ó dromos ’ ) of two of them. These are very similar in character to the tongue -
 in - cheek appeal for employment which The ó doros Pr ó dromos, having fallen out of 
favour at court, addressed to the emperor Manou é l I in 1149 (see Majuri  (1919)) . The 
arresting use of everyday language here is explained by reference to the author ’ s plight 
and the indifference of the intermediary through whom previous appeals had been 
made in the learned language. Scholars are now increasingly inclined to accept that 
Pr ó dromos is the author of at least some of the other four poems too. 
 Characterized by wry Byzantine humour, these take the form of  ' autobiographical ’ 
narratives, punctuated by petitions to the emperor or members of the imperial family, 
in which the author complains in turn of: (1) the pain of coping with a nagging wife 
who regrets her marriage to an educated pauper, (2) the impossibility of keeping body 
and soul together on the meagre patronage he receives, (3) the distress of the educated 
man of letters in the face of the impoverishment which his learning has brought him, 

338 Byzantium
and (4) the arrogance and corruption of his superiors in the monastery where he lives 
as a young monk (the order follows Eideneier  (1991)) . The ﬁ rst, and perhaps the second, 
antedate the appeal to Manou é l, and belong to the last years of the reign of Io á nnes II; 
the third and fourth are addressed to Manou é l. The use of the vernacular is justiﬁ ed in 
a variety of ways ranging from the expression of a pious hope that the combination of 
linguistic playfulness with serious intent will be  ‘ properly appreciated ’ (Eideneier 1), to 
an invitation to contrast the author ’ s erudition with the language of the street, in which, 
in his desperation, he is reduced to begging for favours (Eideneier 3). 
 The  ‘ autobiographies ’ of the personae involved should not, of course, be taken liter-
ally, though we may note that the conservative Pr ó dromos was not born into the 
aristocracy, that he did fall from grace in the early years of Manou é l ’ s reign, and that, 
failing to regain his position at court, he remained at the church of the Holy Apostles, 
ultimately in monastic retreat, until his death (c.1165 – 70). It was a painful sign of the 
times that an interest in literature had begun to spread  ' down ’ from its aristocratic 
preserve, and that wealth had been increasingly appropriated by merchants and crafts-
men, who could easily become richer than those, like himself, who were dependent on 
the generosity of the court. The  Ptochoprodromik á therefore exploit  ‘ topoi ’  familiar 
from other satirical writing in a straightforward assault, rooted in envy and contempt, 
on the materialism of an age in which the privileges of court dependants was being 
undermined by  ‘ new money ’ . We may reasonably assume that the language of the 
poems is based predominantly on the speech of the educated aristocracy, a variety 
which is sometimes deliberately distorted in the mouths of the would - be upwardly 
mobile, and supplemented for comic effect with items of everyday vocabulary and 
urban slang or the very formal language of the court. There is also reason to believe 
that it reﬂ ects speciﬁ cally Constantinopolitan varieties in its marked preference for 
accusative indirect object pronouns, and its tendency to favour the extension of the-
matic  - o  u - [ - u - ] in many innovative verb forms (e.g. 1sg imperfect middle/passive in 
 [ - ' umun], cf.  11.8.6  (35), and Part III,  17.4 ). 
 The standard editions are Hesseling and Pernot  (1910)  and Eideneier  (1991)  (see 
Alex í ou  (1994) for a critical review of the latter). The following extract, bemoaning 
the failure of education to deliver the promised life of leisured ease, is taken from poem 
3 in Eideneier ’ s edition (number 4 in Hesseling and Pernot). The range of variant 
readings is considerable, and for the sake of simplicity the text here largely follows 
that of Eideneier ( 1991 : 119 – 20), apart from a few minor changes of orthography and 
punctuation, and the substitution of one or two alternative readings in keeping with 
the style of the passages in question (see below for discussion): 
 (6) 
 
 
 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 339
 
 

340 Byzantium
 
 
 ‘ Ever since I was small, my old father used to say to me,  “ My child, learn your letters, 
and  ‘ it ’ s praise be to you ’ ( i.e. you ’ re all right, Jack ). You see so - and - so, he used to go 
about on foot, but now he ’ s wearing a double breast - plate and riding a fat mule. When 
he was a student, he didn ’ t have shoes, but now, just look at him, he is wearing his  ‘ long -
 toes ’ . When he was a student, he hadn ’ t seen the threshold of the bath house at all, but 
now he is taking his third bath this week. His lap used to heave with lice the size of 
almonds, but now it ’ s full of coins stamped with Manou é l ’ s head. He had rags of tow, a 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 341
ﬁ lthy overcoat that he wore without changing, winter and summer, but now, you see, he ’ s 
become splendid in his armour, thick - necked, with tight silk drawers. When he was a 
student, he ’ d never combed his hair in his life, but now he ’ s well - groomed with a bouffant 
style. Just obey your old father ’ s words and learn your letters too, and then  ‘ it ’ s praise be 
to you ’ . For if you follow my advice and my instructions, you will be greatly valued and 
enjoy much good fortune, while I your father, even at the end of my life, will be nursed 
by you in my misery and looked after in my old age. ” When I heard my old father, master 
(for holy scripture says one should obey one ’ s parents), I learned to read and write  – but 
what an effort! And ever since I too became an expert in letters, I ’ ve been longing for 
bread and even a crumb of bread, so in my great hunger and distress I curse literacy and 
say with tears,  “ Damn letters, Christ, and all who want them, and damn the time and the 
day when they handed me over to the school to learn my letters, as if I could live on 
them. ”  ’ 
 Though the poems can be given a more colloquial or more conservative look according 
to the morphological choices made from the variant readings, the overall impression 
is of modern syntax: cf. for example, the standard medieval - vernacular positioning of 
clitic pronouns; 
 [ ' e ç i] in the sense  ‘ there is ’ (2/18, though this is a quoted collo-
quialism (Eideneier ( 1964 : 336)); the use of the modern conjunctions 
 (i.e. 
 ) 
[a ' fu] (26) and 
 [ ' otan]  +  indicative (5, 15) in temporal clauses; the idiomatic use 
of 
 [po ' te]  +  genitive pronoun (15); 
 [na]   +  subjunctive in a future sense (20, 
22); 
  +  accusative instead of genitive (27); the relative use of 
 
[opu] (30); the substitution of a 
 [na] - clause for the traditional inﬁ nitive in the 
nominalized clause after 
 [pros] (33); the modern idiomatic use of 
 [ ' taxa 
na] to mean  ‘ as though ’ (33); and 
 [a ' po]   +  accusative (33)). 
 By contrast, the morphology remains quite traditional, subject only to the usual 
variations in verb endings (e.g. 3pl present in  - o  u n [ - un]/ - o  u s i [ - usi], past in  - a n [ - an]/
 - a s i [ - asi] etc.) and the incorporation of modern inﬂ ections for necessarily, or delib-
erately selected, colloquial forms (e.g. synizesis in the genitive of 
 [pso ' min] (27, 
cf. ancient 
 [pso ' mos/pso ' mion]  ‘ crumb, morsel ’ ), or the addition of ﬁ nal 
 - n [ - n] to neuter 
 in (30, 31)). Thus the 3rd - declension conso-
nant - stems, for example, generally retain their classical paradigm, and the adaptations, 
typically involving accusative singular in  - n [ - n], might be restored to their original 
form except where popular expressions are pointedly employed in a particular context 
or quoted, as with the phrase containing 
 [e ' senan] in lines 2 and 18. As already 
noted (cf.  10.8 ), this blend of learned morphology and more contemporary syntax was 
characteristic of educated usage in the period, though the updating has of course been 
taken much further here than in middle - register compositions. 
 In general, the narrative parts of the poems blend an overtly contemporary approach 
to sentence structure with a still conservative local morpho - syntax that continues many 
of the features of the basic Koine, including a general preference for the negative 
 
[u(k)] over 
 (except when the latter is emphatic,   =   ‘ not at all ’ ), the use 
of 
 [ ' jegona] rather than innovations such as 
 [ ' ejina], the preference for 
strong aorist forms in  - o  n [ - on] rather than their replacements in  - a [ - a], the retention 
of some aorist middles, the use of both inﬂ ected participles (all cases) and inﬁ nitival 
complements to control verbs, and the retention of many ancient government require-
ments, such as the use of the genitive, and even the dative, after certain prepositions. 

342 Byzantium
There seems no reason to doubt that this represents a somewhat elaborated version of 
the contemporary vernacular of the upper classes in Constantinople, fashionably 
adapted in the direction of other vernacular poetry of the period. 
 This style is also sometimes carried over into passages of direct speech, but here the 
concentration of modern forms increases in line with the relatively lowly social status 
of the speaker and/or the passion with which s/he is speaking. Consider, for example, 
the last four lines of (6), where the language of the speaker ’ s heated sentiments is 
deliberately contrasted with the learned written language that has been so painfully 
and uselessly acquired. We therefore ﬁ nd neuter 
 with analogical 
 - n [ - n], relative 
 [opu] (deaccented), 3pl aorist 
 with 
external augment (at least as one variant), 
 [to] plus a 
 [na] - clause, the colloquial 
expression 
 [ ' taxa na], and 
 [apo]   +  accusative. In the passages addressed 
to the emperor, by contrast, the writing is archaizing; note the genitive after 
 
[a ' kuo] (23), the ancient verb 
 [ﬁ  ' mi] (24) with its inﬁ nitival complement (24), the 
dative after the middle 
 (24), and the avoidance of synizesis in 
 [stenoxo ' rian] (28). 
 Occasionally, however, the more learned and more popular styles are amusingly 
combined, as in the father ’ s speech, where, especially in the peroration, the old man 
attempts to practise what he preaches. Thus the learned 
 [ ' teknon] (2, 3), the 
internal augment of 
 [perie ' pati] (3), and the  ‘ sandwiched ’ genitive of line 
7 introduce a deliberately incongruous note in the context of the popular syntax, 
phraseology and vocabulary, including the characteristically over - the - top compounds, 
used throughout lines 2 – 16. Thereafter, a more learned style predominates, with the 
appearance of an aorist passive imperative (17), an adverb in  - w " [ - os] rather than  - a 
[ - a] (20), the contrastive particles 
 [men] and 
 (20, 21), and dative comple-
ments after 
 (17, 19) and 
 [en] (21). But note too the solecistic 
use of the 2nd - person pronoun in line 17, where strictly speaking a 1st - person form 
is required in so far as the element in question modiﬁ es the head noun 
 [ ' lojis] 
( ‘ my words ’ ) rather than the adjective 
 [patri ' cis] ( ‘ belonging to  your father ’ ), 
and the repeated quotation of the colloquial phrase meaning  ‘ you ’ re all right, Jack ’ 
(18). The language of the  Ptochoprodromik á is certainly mixed, but it is a wickedly 
contrived mixture (whose impact is somewhat undermined by the textual uncertainty 
and variation) that reﬂ ects perfectly, and often amusingly, the problems associated 
with the diglossia of their time.  
 12.3  The 14th and 15th Centuries: The Palaiologan Court 
and Frankish Rule 
 12.3.1   The  o riginal  r omances of the Palaiologan  p eriod 
 Though the type of experimentation seen in the  Ptochoprodromik á  ceased some time 
before the capture of the Byzantine capital in 1204, Constantinople was also the context 
for the ﬁ rst romances to exploit the vernacular in the Palaiologan period, and it is clear 
once again that these original compositions were associated with the patronage of the 
imperial court. Though the  Tale of Achilles  has sometimes been seen to mark a transi-
tion from the slightly awkward blend of heroic and romantic themes seen in  Digen é s 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 343
Akr í tes , it is probably later (mid - 14th century) than the fully ﬂ edged literary romances 
 L í bistros and Rod á mne, Kall í machos and Chrysorr ó e and  B é lthandros and Chrys á ntza . 
There is an overall generic afﬁ liation with the contemporary romances of chivalry famil-
iar in the west, but the roots of these works lie in the Hellenistic, Roman and Byzantine 
traditions, including the learned and vernacular romantic writings of the 12th century. 
 The following extract is taken from  Kall í machos and Chrysorr ó e, composed perhaps 
between 1310 and 1340 by Andr ó nikos Palaiol ó gos, nephew of Micha é l VIII 
Palaiol ó gos, the ﬁ rst emperor of the dynasty that took control after the recovery of 
Constantinople from its western rulers. The standard edition is Pichard  (1956) ; see 
also Kriar á s ( 1955 : 17 – 83), Apostol ó poulos  (1984) : 
 (7) 
 
  
 
 
 

344 Byzantium
 ‘ But the wall was high, there was no entrance; no man passed by, nor any kind of beast, 
nor fowl, nor even a sparrow; the place was grim. They ran up and down and looked for 
the entrance; for there were high towers and walls rising to heaven. They found its splendid 
priceless gates, they saw the snakes, they shuddered at those gatekeepers. But as for this 
fearful and amazing township, they did not discover who owned the splendid castle, nor 
who its master was. For they just turned and shrank back, in case they became food for 
those gatekeepers; they saw, they were astonished, and they ﬂ ed. ’ 
 Andr ó nikos Palaiol ó gos may well have been the  ‘ inventor ’ of the medieval Greek 
romance in its mature form, though he drew on both the ancient romances and the 
learned works of the 12th - century revival, as well as on the story of  Digen é s and 
perhaps other material from the popular tradition. The tale is set in a folkloric land 
of marvels in which a king, unable to decide which of his three sons should succeed 
him, sends them off to prove themselves. Kall í machos, the youngest, leads his brothers 
up a mountain to an ogre ’ s castle guarded by snakes and dragons. The older brothers, 
after ﬁ rst giving Kall í machos a magic ring, beat a hasty retreat, but he vaults the wall 
and wrests the beautiful Chrysorr ó e from the ogre who is holding her prisoner. After 
a series of thrilling adventures, the pair ﬁ nally live happily together as lord and lady 
of the castle. 
 The learned background of the writer is apparent here not only in the conservative 
morphology and lexicon (note especially the particle combination 
 
in line 10), but also in his metrical practice, which permits occasional line - end enjambe-
ment (not illustrated) and over - running of the mid - line caesura (e.g. line 6), and his 
not - infrequent use of complex rhetorical periods, especially in the  ekphr á seis  and the 
speeches made at moments of high drama, where the inﬂ uence of the ancient/learned 
romantic tradition is greatest. 
 In the passage above, for example, only 
 [is ' elefsis], 
 [ ' porta], 
 [ ' kastron] and 
 are non - classical, though the ﬁ rst belongs 
to the higher registers of Byzantine writing and the last occurs in the Septuagint and 
the New Testament. Correspondingly, the small number of popular derivational for-
mations seem often to be used for their  ‘ affective ’  content in context rather than as 
simple variants of learned forms. This is particularly true of marked diminutives (i.e. 
those with sufﬁ xes other than  - i n [ - in]): cf., for example, 
 
 ‘ little tree ’ (1751), and 
  ‘ little ring ’ (1769), in a 
passage where Chrysorr ó e, thinking Kall í machos to be dead, ﬁ nds her hero ’ s magic 
ring hanging in a tree. 
 Similarly in inﬂ ectional morphology, only the sufﬁ x used in 
 and 
 (for classical  - o  n [ - on], and doubtless motivated by a desire for 
homoeteleuton in this line), together with the accentuation of the latter (given the rule 
that the penultimate syllable of the decapentesyllabic line must be stressed) reveal 
vernacular inﬂ uence. The restricted use of such popular variants seems often to be 
metrically motivated: e.g. 
 [ ' iton] for 
 [in]  ‘ was ’ , or aorist passives in  - h k a [ - ika] 
for  - h n  [ - in], because of their extra syllable (177, 1877); 
 [af ' tos] for 
 [ ' utos] 
 ‘ this ’ , because of its different accent (188); the use of accusative for genitive after 
certain prepositions with nouns lacking columnar stress, or with an imparisyllabic 
declensional pattern (e.g. 
 [ek to  ' kratiman] (1769), for 
 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 345
[ek tu kra ' timatos]); the substitution of 3pl  - o  u n [ - un] for  - o  u s i [ - usi] etc., of 
 
[me]   +  acc,  ‘ with ’ , for 
 [me ' ta]  +  gen (1771), or of  t o  u [tu]/ t h " [tis]  ‘ his/her ’  etc. 
for 
 [ ' tutu]/
 [ ' taftis] etc. (1771), in order to reduce the number of 
syllables. 
 Where the epic of  Digen é s Akr í tes seems to be built on a vernacular base with a 
learned overlay, this poem seems to be rooted in the written tradition with concessions 
to the vernacular. The basis for including it among the vernacular compositions of the 
period lies primarily in the simplicity of its syntactic structure, which, elaborated pas-
sages and inﬂ ected participles 4 notwithstanding, reﬂ ects the paratactic conventions of 
popular compositions using the political verse form, and builds lines using the same 
metrical/rhetorical cola. Note too the standard medieval positioning of clitic pronouns 
(cf.  11.8  (9) and (10)), the regular use of the accusative to mark the indirect object (a 
Constantinopolitan feature), the frequent use of adverbially modiﬁ ed prepositional 
phrases headed by 
 [is] and 
 [apo] (e.g. 
 [ ' meson] (275), 
 [e ' pano] 
(1765)), the use of 
 [na] - clauses in place of inﬁ nitives (except after control and modal 
verbs, and occasionally in nominalized clauses (e.g. 286)), and the use of non - 
sandwiched adnominal genitives (e.g. 275, 1760) alongside their sandwiched counter-
parts, all of which point to a predominantly vernacular syntactic base. 
 The blending of materials and conventions from both branches of romantic 
ﬁ ction points the way towards the romances of the later middle ages (cf.  8.4.3 – 5). 
Since this task was ﬁ rst carried out in court circles, we should not be surprised that 
the balance (at least in morphology and lexicon) was tilted in favour of the learned 
tradition. The mixed romantic  Dichtersprache  became steadily more  ‘ popular ’ in 
character with the passage of time and the loss of Byzantine control in many 
Greek - speaking areas after 1204. We must, however, be cautious in that the text of 
 Kall í machos has come down to us in a single manuscript dating from around 1520, 
though it is likely to be a fairly close copy of the original because the concentration 
of learned language goes against the prevailing trend in manuscript copying of that 
period. On this basis, it is tempting to infer that a morphologically conservative ver-
nacular was used for all the original 14th - century romances, and that the greater 
frequency of more popular forms in  B é lthandros  and  L í bistros  is due in part to adap-
tation on the part of later copyists in western - dominated areas, including Crete and 
the Dodecanese.  
 12.3.2   Greek – Romance  c ontact:  p erfects/ p luperfects, 
 n egative  p olarity,  c litics 
 The most obvious linguistic consequence of the Latin conquest of 1204 was a massive 
inﬂ ux of Romance loanwords into Greek, especially from Italian (Venetian and 
Genoese) and French, though Italian trading communities had been established in the 
empire long before the Latin conquest and Italian words had begun to enter Greek 
from the 11th century onwards. The grammatical impact of Romance, however, was 
probably less profound, and we may note in this connection that a number of striking 
syntactic parallelisms between Greek and Romance, which might be attributed to 
contact from the beginning of the 13th century onwards, turn out to have independent 
roots. 5 As in the Roman imperial period (5.3), the most that one can argue for in many 

346 Byzantium
such cases is the mutual consolidation of changes already under way. A number of 
examples may brieﬂ y be considered here. 
 The ﬁ rst of these is one of the stronger cases for Romance inﬂ uence on the develop-
ment of later Medieval Greek: 
 (8) 
 The local reintroduction, e.g. in Crete, parts of the Peloponnese and Roumeli, 
of the perfect active periphrasis involving  ‘ have ’  +  perfect passive participle agreeing 
(at least optionally) with the object.  
 This construction appeared sporadically in the literary register of the Koine in the 
Roman period, but is virtually unknown in Medieval Greek before the period of 
Frankish domination, when the aorist doubled functionally as a perfect, and the only 
perfect - like formation was the stative periphrasis consisting of  ‘ be ’  +  perfect passive 
participle agreeing with the subject. There was, however, a pluperfect active periphra-
sis, involving the past of  ‘ be ’  +  aorist active participle, at least for as long as the latter 
survived. 
 Nevertheless, there are isolated examples from the pre - Frankish period of the type 
in (9): 
 (9) 
  
 
 
 
 ‘ He held his ﬁ st at rest against his cheek ’ 
 Though the near - literal sense of  ‘ have ’ and the stative meaning of the participle are 
clearly apparent, it must be assumed that it was this comparatively rare native con-
struction that lent itself to local grammaticalization as a true pluperfect/perfect active 
under the impact of Romance. 
 A similar type of development may have been involved in the case of the shift of 
the hypothetical pluperfect (or conditional), involving 
 [ ' ixa]   +  inﬁ nitive in coun-
terfactual conditional protases (e.g.  Digen é s  141, 1538), into a true pluperfect (past -
 of - past) that could be used independently in main clauses (as, for example, in the 
 Chronicle of the Morea ). The regular Romance use of the pluperfect in clauses denot-
ing past - time indeﬁ nite frequency ( if/when(ever) s/he   had X - ed, s/he used to/would   Y ) 
perhaps led in some areas to an extended interpretation of the formally parallel Greek 
structures, where the  ‘ pluperfect ’ and imperfect of the protasis and apodosis were 
originally strictly modal/hypothetical in character ( if - ever s/he would (have) X( - ed)/had 
X - ed, s/he would (have) Y( - ed) ). Such a shift would have been readily accomplished, 
given an appropriate prompt, in the context of the familiar overlap between hypotheti-
cality and past - time indeﬁ nite frequency as reﬂ ected in the dual functions of English 
 would  or the Medieval Greek imperfect. But this alternative pluperfect, to which a 
parallel perfect was eventually formed, did not emerge in important centres such as 
Venetian Crete, and its early distribution, including the parts of the Peloponnese ruled 
by the de Villehardouin family, perhaps points speciﬁ cally to French inﬂ uence: cf. the 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 347
observation of the Catalan writer Ramon Muntaner that there   ‘ parlauen axi bell 
Frances com dins el Paris ’ (ch. CCLXI). 
 In other cases, however, the relevant constructions are well - developed in Greek 
before any Romance inﬂ uence can plausibly be invoked. In Ancient Greek, for example, 
there was a pronominal/adverbial system comprising strongly negative items on the 
one hand (meaning  ‘ no - X ’ , and requiring no independent verb negation when used 
preverbally), and indeﬁ nite items (formally related to interrogatives) on the other. The 
latter meant  ‘ some - X ’ in assertive contexts, but  ‘ any - X ’  in negative, interrogative and 
conditional ones, though the strongly negative items could also be used after a negative 
particle to impart a more emphatic negative force (i.e. in this order the cumulated 
negatives were reinforcing). Compare (10a) and (10b): 
 (10)   (a)   
 
 
 
 ‘ You would  not  say that  anyone had completely accurate knowledge ’ 
 (b)   
 
 
 
 ‘ Of the forms then  nothing is known ’ 
 During the medieval period, however, the indeﬁ nite system underwent a process of 
formal renewal whereby the assertive ( ‘ some - X ’ ) and negative - polarity ( ‘ any - X ’ ) vari-
ants were progressively distinguished, to give, for example, 
 [ ' kapjos]  ‘ some(one) ’ 
and 
 [ka ' nenas]  ‘ any(one) ’ in place of  t i " [tis]  ‘ some - /any - (one) ’  or 
 [ ' kati] 
 ‘ some(thing) ’ , and 
 [ ' tipote]  ‘ any(thing) ’  in place of  t i [ti]  ‘ some - /any - (thing) ’ 
(see  11.7.8 (29a)). The negative - polarity forms could, however, be pronounced not 
only neutrally, and used in a manner parallel to that seen in (10a), but also emphati-
cally (almost all involve formal strengthening vis - à - vis the original indeﬁ nites), being 
used in this case like the strong negatives exempliﬁ ed in (10b). In the latter case, of 
course, they acquired a correspondingly negative sense (though again reinforcing the 
negative particle rather than cancelling it), and as such could be preposed as negative 
foci, thus assuming the full range of positions/functions of the strong negative elements 
(see Giannak í dou  (1997) for a detailed study of negative - polarity items in Modern 
Greek). Over time, therefore, the strong negatives inherited from classical Greek disap-
peared in favour of the generalized use of emphatically stressed negative - polarity items, 
but since these, unlike the original forms, presupposed a negative (or interrogative/
modal) licensing context, the conditioning negative particle was retained even when 
they appeared before it. Compare (11a), where no independent sentence negation is 
required, with the negative concord of (11b): 

348 Byzantium
 (11)   (a)   
 
 
 
 ‘ You will undervalue  none of them ’ 
 (b)   
 
 
 
 ‘ He thinks of  nothing ’ 
 The dual use of negative - polarity items is very similar to that familiar from Romance 
(cf., for example, French  rien  =   ‘ nothing/anything ’  etc.), but the usage was in fact well -
 established in vernacular Greek by the 12th century (not only in  Digen é s but also in 
the  Ptochoprodromik á ,  as well as in the original romances composed later in the 
Byzantine capital), and the only extension that might reﬂ ect subsequent Romance 
interference is the independent use of these items in a negative sense in elliptical replies 
(e.g.  Have you seen anything? Nothing ). But it remains equally possible that popular 
Greek had already taken this natural extra step independently despite the absence of 
examples in the small corpus of relevant texts. 
 Similar observations apply to the emergence of apparently related restrictions on 
the order and combination of object clitic pronouns: i.e. if there are two such pronouns 
with a given verb, the ﬁ rst must denote the indirect object and the second the direct 
object, while the latter has also to be third - person (Mackridge ( 1985 : 222 – 3)). Yet 
once again, all the examples involving two pronouns in the E  Digen é s Akr í tes (64, 
130, 475, 664, 668, 951, 1729) and the lay of  Armo ú res  (47, 133) already conform 
to this rule, in a period in which Romance inﬂ uence can safely be discounted. Note 
too that, though all the relevant examples in these two texts happen to involve pre-
verbal clitics, the regular post - verbal order after gerunds and imperatives remains 
IO  +  DO (e.g. 
  ‘ give to - me it ’ ), which contrasts with 
Romance practice (cf.  donnez - le - moi ). It is also signiﬁ cant that in the modern Asia 
Minor dialects and many insular varieties, which have retained more of the medieval 
distribution of these elements (in some cases extending and generalizing post - verbal 
position), the same [verb   +  IO   +  DO] order applies even in simple declarative sentences 
with ﬁ nite verb forms (cf. Mirambel  (1963)) . The placing of IO before DO, then, seems 
to have been a native characteristic of vernacular Medieval Greek, and any partial 
correspondence with later Romance must be seen as essentially accidental, even if there 
was a mutual reinforcement of trends. The basis for any common ground between 
Greek and Romance must be sought in parallel treatments of a common Indo - European 
inheritance ( ‘ Wackernagel ’ clitics, cf. Wackernagel  (1892) , Watkins  (1964)) , shaped 
by general pragmatic or syntactic considerations. 
 That said, the effects of Latin rule on attitudes to language were in some respects 
liberating. In the vast Greek - speaking areas under western control, where the old 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 349
capital was no longer the principal focus of political and cultural life, a knowledge of 
learned written Greek, even where this could still be obtained, gradually ceased to be 
the prerequisite for a successful career, and traditional values began to be eroded. With 
the return of more settled conditions after c.1300, Greek vernacular writing, encour-
aged by the widespread use of contemporary Romance for literary and ofﬁ cial pur-
poses, received a boost in the Latin - dominated west, a development eventually 
culminating in the emergence of Cretan dialect literature of outstanding quality during 
the late 16th and 17th centuries ( 14.2.4 ). 
 12.3.3   The  Chronicle of the Morea 
 The occupation of Greek - speaking lands led to the writing of a number of vernacular 
chronicles celebrating the exploits of western dynasties (cf. 8.4.4), including the famous 
 Chronicle of the Morea,  the ﬁ rst such composition in verse. Following a lengthy pro-
logue (1 – 1338), covering the ﬁ rst and fourth crusades, the capture of Constantinople 
and the establishment of the Latin empire, the anonymous narrator turns speciﬁ cally 
to the conquest of the Peloponnese by Guillaume de Champlitte and members of the 
de Villehardouin family (Geoffroi I, Geoffroi II and Guillaume II), and its subsequent 
transformation, apart from a few Venetian strongholds in the west, into the principality 
of the Morea. After an account of the conﬂ ict with the empire of Nicaea, which 
culminated in the Frankish defeat at the battle of Pelagonia (1259) and the re - 
establishment of a Byzantine base in the Peloponnese (the beginnings of the despotate 
of the Morea), the poem turns ﬁ nally to the period of decline which set in with the 
death of Guillaume II, ending with the events of 1292. 
 The oldest and fullest surviving version of this poem (H, in Copenhagen) comprises 
9,219 lines, but the ﬁ rst pages of the codex, containing 104 lines, are missing. This 
and other, comparatively minor, lacunae may often be ﬁ lled by reference to the shorter 
P (Paris) version, though this has omissions of its own, and seems to represent a later 
adaptation of the original in both language/metre and content (especially in the mod-
eration or deletion of the more extreme expressions of anti - Greek and anti - Orthodox 
sentiment in H). 
 The work is customarily dated to the beginning of the 14th century, and since the 
story is told unashamedly from the conqueror ’ s point of view, it is usually attributed 
to a Greek - speaking Frank (see now Shawcross  (2009)  for the wider background). The 
versiﬁ cation is often poor, and the language almost wholly vernacular, with extensive 
use of Romance vocabulary and idiom. There are also French, Italian and Aragonese 
versions (none in verse, the last two dealing with slightly longer periods), and it is still 
a matter of dispute whether the Greek text is an original composition or a translation, 
although in recent years some scholars have argued strongly for the primacy of the 
Greek version (see, for example, Jeffreys  (1975)) . The standard editions are those of 
Schmitt  (1904)  and Kalon á ros  (1940) , and there is a useful analysis of the language 
of the  Chronicle in Egea  (1988) . See also Beck ( 1971 : 157 – 9), and the lexicon of Aerts 
and Hokwerda  (2002) . 
 The special signiﬁ cance of this work for the historian of Greek derives from the fact 
that the  ‘ poet ’ clearly had little contact with, or interest in, the classicizing tradition 
of serious Greek literature, and wrote in a style reﬂ ecting his natural speech, subject 

350 Byzantium
only to the observations that (a) literacy at any level involved contact with non - 
vernacular forms, and (b) the use of the political verse form, however poorly handled, 
presupposed some familiarity with the conventions of Greek vernacular poetry (includ-
ing its archaisms). The language of the  Chronicle therefore exhibits the usual high level 
of morphological and syntactic variation, though in this case there are clear misunder-
standings in the use of certain non - vernacular forms (see below), while extremely high 
concentrations of truly popular, even vulgar, features are strongly in evidence. These 
include: 
 (12)  (a)  The appearance of many innovative present - stem formations, with a 
large number of competing doublets ( 11.8 (34)).  
 (b)  The use of much innovative verb morphology, including aorist passive 
 ( 11.8  (33)), imperfect passive 
 [ - omun] ( 11.8 .(35e): 
e.g. 6104), and reduced forms of the present of verbs such as 
 
[a ' kuo] ( 11.8 (34e): e.g. 606, 2818, 4251).  
 (c)  Some confusion of 
 [ - ' eo] and 
 [ - ' ao] contract verbs ( 11.8.5 (34e)), 
with innovative present passive in 
 [ - ' jome]/
 [ - ' jete] (e.g. 
845, 5801, 8290) and 3pl imperfect active in 
 [ - ' usan] (e.g. 117, 
120, 2629) both in evidence.  
 (d)  The absolute restriction of the dative to a set of ﬁ xed phrases. 
 (e)  The limited use of feminine nouns in  - i " [ - is]/pl  - e i " [ - is], and neuters in 
 - o  " [ - os]/pl  - h [ - i], and the frequent assimilation of 3rd - declension con-
sonant - stems, i - stems and eu - stems to the 1st declension ( 11.7.3 – 4 
(18 – 21)). 
 (f) 
 Regularization of nominative plural  - e " [ - es] in the 1st declension, as 
well as in consonant - and i - stem  ‘ transfers ’  ( 11.7.4 (19) and (21)).  
 (g)  The appearance of heteroclitic declensional patterns, including impari-
syllabic a - stem plurals in 
 ( 11.7.4 (20): e.g. 4390, 6056), 
with some doublets of this type used even in o - stems (e.g. 5471).  
 (h)  A tendency to regularize the accent in proparoxytone nouns and adjec-
tives, so as to give 
 /genitive 
 , 
in place of 
 (e.g. 6844).  
 (i) 
 The partial adaptation of 3rd/1st - declension adjectives to regular 2nd/1st -
 declension patterns ( 11.7.7 (25 – 8): e.g. 2042).  
 (j) 
 The regular use of many innovative pronominal forms ( 11.7.8 
(29)). 
 A particular feature of the syntax of the poem, over and above the usual vernacular 
variants, is the destabilization of the future periphrasis consisting of 
 [ ' exo]   +  inﬁ ni-
tive occasioned by the development of the corresponding conditional into a true plu-
perfect (cf.  11.8.3  (32): the only potentially modal examples of 
 [ ' ixa]   +  inﬁ nitive 
occur in the protases of counterfactual conditionals, where they in fact function as 
hypothetical pluperfects). The standard forms of the future/conditional, as already in 
the  Ptochoprodromik á ,  include 
  +  inﬁ nitive  ‘ I will/would ’ , 
and the use of 
 [na]   +  subjunctive/past indicative. But we also ﬁ nd a modally 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 351
strengthened form of the 
 [ ' exo] - periphrasis involving the preﬁ xation of 
 [na] (it 
is important to note that there are no examples of 
 [ ' exo]   +  inﬁ nitive used as a 
perfect). Just as plain 
 [na]   +  subjunctive served as both subjunctive and future 
indicative, so too did the more complex periphrasis consisting of 
 [na 
 ' exo]  +  inﬁ nitive, though subjunctive uses are predominant. This rather clumsy tran-
sitional form is also found sporadically in other works of roughly the same period (e.g. 
the  War of Troy ), but it did not ﬁ nd favour (lines containing it are regularly rephrased 
or omitted in P, for example), and it quickly disappeared. 
 In the category of straightforward errors involving learned forms, we may note in 
particular the frequent use of classical 3rd - declension nominative singulars denoting 
relatives by blood or marriage as accusatives (Browning ( 1983 : 7 – 8)). Examples 
include 
 [ji ' ni]  ‘ woman/wife ’  (e.g 7424), 
 [a ' nir]  ‘ man/husband ’ (e.g. 2519), 
 [pa ' tir]  ‘ father ’ (e.g. 454), 
 [ ' mitir]  ‘ mother ’ (e.g. 1323), and 
 
 ‘ daughter ’ (e.g. 2477), as illustrated in (13): 
 (13)   
 
 
 
 ‘ and he greets the daughter of that king ’ 
 This usage apparently follows the model of corresponding feminine vernacular forms 
where, after the general loss of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n], nominative and accusative became identical 
(e.g. 
 ), with analogical extension to the formally related masculines 
(where nom and acc vernacular forms were distinct). The metrical usefulness of the 
shorter forms is self - evident, and it seems that the author was simply ignorant of the 
classical paradigm. 
 The following extract (based on H) describes how the brothers Louis and Guillaume 
de Champlitte came to an agreement that the former should stay in France to manage 
the family estate while the latter sought his fortune in the east: 
 (14)  
 
 

352 Byzantium
 
 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 353
 ‘ And when they heard and learned that those Franks who were on their way to Syria by 
the will of the pope had abandoned their journey and gone to the City ( Constantinople ) 
and won Romania and become masters, the two full brothers together adopted a plan, 
that one of them should stay there on the family estate, and the other should go to 
Romania to win a place. Now, as the talents of men are a matter of fate, and the brothers 
were not alike in looks or talent, it was the younger of the two full brothers who was in 
some degree the more skilled and wiser of them. So the two brothers agreed that the ﬁ rst 
should stay behind there in that county of his in Champagne, and that the second of the 
two, Sir Guillaume mark you, and he also had a surname on his own account, he was 
called de Salute ( the chronographer is confused, since the individual concerned is Guillaume 
de Champlitte ), should ﬁ nd as large an army as he could to take with him, and should 
go to Romania to conquer some castles and estates to have as his patrimony. So the count 
gave him all the money he had, and said to him:  ‘ My dear younger brother, since I am 
staying behind as lord in our castles and our family estate, take our money and all our 
common goods, and go with my blessing and our father ’ s likewise, and by the mercy of 
God I hope that you will have good fortune. ’ 
 Perhaps the most striking feature here is the mismatch between the colloquial pronun-
ciation required to meet the demands of the metre (as reﬂ ected in the transcription) 
and the conservative orthography which, if taken seriously, would produce many 
unmetrical lines. The principal difﬁ culties arise when hiatus is naturally resolved in 
speech by elision, aphaeresis or crasis, while the archaizing conventions for writing 
Greek (the only ones available) generally ignore such junctural phenomena as well as 
word - internal synizesis, and require the uniform presence of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n], at least in 
native vocabulary with a learned provenance: note how line 15, for example, can be 
made to scan correctly only if the  - n [ - n] of 
 [e ' pikli] is ignored and the exposed 
ﬁ nal vowel run into the initial vowel of the following word. Such problems have been 
encountered before (most obviously in  Digen é s Akr í tes ), but not on this scale, and the 
situation in (14) provides the clearest testimony to the vernacular character of the 
diction of this poem. It is signiﬁ cant that in the P version some of the more striking 
metrical difﬁ culties have been smoothed away by rephrasings that conform more 
closely to standard poetic conventions. 
 As noted earlier, Romance loanwords are used freely in the poem: cf. here 
 
[ ' kondos] ( comte ), 
 [kon ' dato] (calqued on  comt - é  ), 
 [mi ' sir] ( monsieur ), 
 ( conqueste/conqu ê te ); 
 [fu ' sato(n)] ( ‘ army ’   <  fossa-
tum ,  ‘ ditched place/encampment ’ ) and 
 [ ' kastro(n)] ( ‘ fort ’ , a singular built to 
neut pl  castra   ‘ fortiﬁ ed camp/stronghold ’ ), however, are earlier borrowings from Latin, 

354 Byzantium
though note here the heteroclitic plural 
 [ ' kastri], as if this were an s - stem neuter 
of the type 
  ‘ error ’ . 
 Both morphology and syntax are consistently vernacular in character, and many of 
the relevant features have already been listed in general terms above, but note here: 
 (15)  (a)  The spread of the productive 
 [ - ' azo] sufﬁ x ( 11.8.5  (34c)), cf. 
 
[(o) ' mjazo] (9), though this appears already in the New Testament (Mark 
14. 70), and 
 [i ' sjazome] (12), where the initial element is an 
adjectival stem built to nominal uses of 
 [ ' isos]  ‘ equal ’ (e.g. 
 
[to  ' iso(n)]  ‘ equality/fairness/level ground ’ ), on the model of 
 
(noun)/
 [ ' lojos] (adjective) etc., to give 
 [ ' isjos]. 
 (b)  The verb 
 [imbo ' ro]  ‘ be able ’ , in place of the anomalous athe-
matic 
 (16), cf.  11.8.5 (34e).  
 (c)  The present stem 
 [(i)pa ' jen - ] for earlier 
 (2), cf. 
 11.8.5  (34b), and the aorist  ‘ passive ’ 
 [e ' jini(n)/ - ika] (4), 
built to 
 [ ' jinome] on the model of 
 , aorist 
 , in place of earlier 
 
(itself a replacement for original 
 [eje ' nomin]). Modern 
 
[ ' ejina] is a formally related replacement for 
 , the alter-
native popular substitute for 
 [eje ' nomin]. 
 (d)  Growing confusion about the character and function of unstressed initial 
vowels, illustrated in 
 [a ' pirasin] (5) (P has 
 [e ' pirasin]), 
alongside 
 [e ' pari] (16) and 
 [ ' epare] (22). This originated in 
frequent aphaeresis and misanalysis of word boundaries in combinations 
such as 
 [ta  ' pirasin]  ‘ them they - took ’ etc. (cf.  11.2 ,  11.3 ), but 
provided a major source of dialect variation across word forms in the later 
middle ages. Note too the prothetic vowel in 
 (6), 
and the loss of unstressed [ - i - ] in 
 [ister(i) ' nos] (10), a novel for-
mation built to the root of 
 [ ' isteros], cf. modern 
 [ster ' nos]. 
 (e)  The imperatives 
 [ ' ako] (14) and 
 [ ' ame] (23). The ﬁ rst belongs 
to the reduced paradigm of 
 [a ' kuo]  ‘ hear ’ ( 11.8.5 (34c)), in 
which the thematic vowel is omitted (so here 
 [ ' akue]    >  
 
[ ' aku/ - o], as 2pl 
 [a ' kuete]    >  
 [a ' kute]), while the second 
derives from intransitive use of 
  ‘ let ’ s go ’ (  >  
 
[ ' aome]    >  
 [ ' ame]; cf. 
 [ ' ai/ ' ade]    <  
 [ ' aje/ ' ajete]). 
The full form is also attested (e.g. 3787), but both came to be used col-
loquially as 2nd - person imperatives in contexts where an exhortation 
that grammatically includes the speaker is pragmatically intended for the 
hearer only (cf. English  let ’ s be having you ). 
 (f) 
 The frequent reduction of 
 [is] to [s], and its conﬂ ation with a follow-
ing deﬁ nite article. 
 (g)  The use of accusative plural clitic pronouns as genitives (3, 6 etc.), 
perhaps because of the unsatisfactory nature of gen pl 
 
[mo(n)/so(n)/to(n)], which had the sound either of neuter singular pos-
sessive adjectives related to the 1/2 singular pronouns (cf. 
 
[(e) ' mon]  ‘ my ’ , 
 [(e) ' son]  ‘ your ’ (sg)), or the masculine accusa-

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 355
tive singular of the deﬁ nite article (cf. 
 [to(n)]). In some dialects 
we ﬁ nd a compromise 3pl  t w " [tos]. The general process of replacement 
must in any case have been aided by the use of sg 
 [e ' mena/
e ' sena] as both acc and gen, and by routine genitive/accusative overlaps 
in indirect object and related functions.  
 (h)  Many other popular or innovative pronominal forms ( 11.7.8 (29)), 
including: relative 
 [ ' opu] (2); 
 [ ' enas] for 
 [is] (6); afﬁ rmative 
 [o ' kati] for  t i [ti], used adverbially   =   ‘ in some respect ’ (11) (the 
initial 
 [o - ], extended from free - relative pronouns, is a regular feature 
in this period of forms expressing indeﬁ niteness), beside negative - polar-
ity 
 [ ' tipote] for  t i [ti], used adverbially   =   ‘ at all ’ in a non - refer-
ential, generic context (18), cf.  11.7.8 (a).  
 (i) 
 Popular derivational formations involving diminutive sufﬁ xes affected 
by palatalization (20, 23), a process perhaps partly supported by parallel 
Romance formations (Italian  - ucci ,  - izza etc.); it is probably not acciden-
tal that some of the earliest examples come from southern Italy and 
Lusignan Cyprus.  
 In syntax, the modern use of 
 [(o) ' san] in line 1 to mean  ‘ when/as soon as ’ , rather 
than  ‘ as if ’ , is noteworthy, the formation in this case being built to 
 [os] on the model 
of 
 [ ' ote]/
 [ ' otan]  ‘ when ’ , rather than continuing the ancient 
 directly; cf. 
 [a ' fon] (20),    <  the prepositional phrase 
 , lit.  ‘ from which ’ , used here causally 
rather than temporally as in classical Greek (where the singular relative is usual, 
 
[af u]). Outside such lexicalized combinations, however, prepositions are generally used 
with the accusative (with only occasional genitives after 
 [a ' po], and certain ﬁ xed 
expressions with the dative, such as 
 [en ' duto], lit.  ‘ in this ’ , i.e.  ‘ meanwhile ’ ). 
 The nominalization of  ‘ interrogative ’ complement clauses (1) is also a common 
vernacular feature of the period, reﬂ ecting their interpretation in certain contexts as 
direct - object free relatives (cf.  I asked [what he knew]/i.e. what did he know?  vs.  I 
discovered [what he knew]/i.e. the thing(s) that he knew ). We should note that this 
type of example, involving main verbs of knowledge and perception, explains the basis 
for the shift between interrogative 
 [pos]  ‘ how? ’ /
 [pu]  ‘ where? ’  and the modern 
complementizers 
 [pos]/
 [pu]  ‘ that ’ . 
 There is a good example of the 
 [na]   +  
 [ ' exo]   +  inﬁ nitive construction in line 
17, used here in a ﬁ nal sense and supported by the pleonastic genitive article 
 [tu] 
in continuation of the ﬁ nal inﬁ nitive structure common in the ancient Koine. In general, 
however, simple 
 [na]   +  subjunctive is used both in true modal functions (6, 7 etc.) 
and as a future (24). Indeed, this construction is used routinely wherever Ancient Greek 
would have employed either a future - referring inﬁ nitival complement (with or without 
an overt subject) or a ﬁ nal conjunction, though in the latter case it may optionally be 
strengthened by 
  ‘ for ’ , e.g. (7). In fact the inﬁ nitive here, unlike in the more 
reﬁ ned Greek of the romances, where it was also retained as an option after control 
verbs (occasionally), 
 [ ' arxome]  ‘ begin ’ , and in indirect questions (e.g.  we don ’ t 
know what to do ), is restricted to the complements of modal auxiliaries and to nomi-
nalized subject - orientated adjuncts of the type 
 [to a ' kusi], 
lit.  ‘ the to - see/the to - hear  … ’ , i.e.  ‘ on seeing, hearing  … ’ (e.g. 555, 631). These were 

356 Byzantium
functionally very close to aorist gerunds like 
 [a ' kusonda] (e.g. 351), or their 
learned partners such as 
 [a ' kuson] 6 (e.g. 378), and so enjoyed a relatively brief 
period of popularity before their demise. 
 New senses of ancient words, or of new derivations from ancient words, are also 
much in evidence. Note, for example: 
  =   ‘ money ’ rather than  ‘ pif-
ﬂ ing speech ’ , and associated now with the verb 
  ‘ calculate ’ 
(especially of bills); and 
  =   ‘ expedition/journey ’ , an extension of 
the ancient use of 
 [ ' taksis] in the sense of  ‘ company of soldiers ’ . Of special inter-
est, however, is the locution 
  ‘ himself ’ (emphatic, as in  he did 
it himself ) in line 15. We should ﬁ rst note the use of prepositional expressions such as 
 (e.g. 1395, 3460), lit.  ‘ on his account ’ , 
phrases perhaps originating in the learned world of book - keeping (note the genitive). 
As these came to be used idiomatically with the sense of emphatic  ‘ self ’ , the preposi-
tion was sometimes dropped, and we start to ﬁ nd the indeclinable phrase 
 (but with free choice of possessive) used as an emphatic 
pronoun. 7 We also ﬁ nd substitution of the true reﬂ exive pronoun for 
 , 
to give 
 [ap tu (e)af ' tu tu], lit.  ‘ from the self of - him ’ , whence began, 
via the abstraction of the complement of the preposition, the replacement of the forms 
of the simple reﬂ exive, such as (
 [(e)af ' ton]  ‘ himself ’ , with 
 
[ton (e)af ' to tu]  ‘ the self of - him ’ , where  ‘ self ’ is inﬂ ected as a masculine noun and only 
the possessive varies (the sole form of the reﬂ exive in Modern Greek). Since other 
expressions of emphatic  ‘ self ’ (e.g. 
 ) could be used freely in the nomina-
tive, we also eventually get the apparent  ‘ nominative reﬂ exive ’ 
 [o eaf ' tos 
tu], and the parallel appearance of the article with 
 (even though this 
combination was already used to mean  ‘ the same ’ ). But in the transitional period when 
the simple reﬂ exive remained in use, expressions such as 
 [af eaf ' tu], lit. 
 ‘ from/by himself ’ , led also to parallel use of 
 without the 
article. From this, 
 was abstracted as an  ‘ emphatic pronoun ’ (inde-
clinable  +  free choice of possessive), which could then be substituted into the frame of 
 , to give 
 , as in 
line 15. This last variant has not survived into the modern language, though the form 
without the article is still sometimes heard (if this is not simply a reduction of 
 ). 
 Conversely, we also ﬁ nd, on the assumption that an emphatic pronominal should 
agree with the item it modiﬁ es, the substitution of a fully inﬂ ected 
 [(e)af ' tos] 
for the genitives 
 [(e)af ' tu] or 
 in prepositional phrases like 
 , to form the rather odd - looking 
expression 
 [apa ' (f)tos], which, in view of the obviously non - prepositional 
force of the preposition, is perhaps best written as a single word, 
 . On the appar-
ent model of 
 (or 
 [af ' tos tu], properly a reduction of 
 [(w)
af ' tos tu], see above; this could then combine with a possessive to give 
 
[apa ' (f)tos tu] (e.g. 5827). Such expressions enjoyed a lively later history in the spoken 
dialects of Modern Greek, but they are no longer a feature of the contemporary stand-
ard. In early Cypriot (see  12.4.3 ), there are also phrases like 
 [apo ks 
af ' tis tu], lit.  ‘ from/by out - of self of - him ’ , e.g. in Machair á s ’  Chronicle (paras. 23, 71). 
Here 
 [apo] is a true preposition with a local or agentive sense, but it takes as its 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 357
complement a fossilized phrase 
 [(e)ksaf ' tis], treated once again as an indeclin-
able reﬂ exive/emphatic pronominal (with free choice of possessive), in which a femi-
nine  ‘ self ’ had earlier been substituted for the feminine head noun of phrases such as 
  ‘ from part/side of - him ’ 
(local variants of the more usual 
 [ek  ' merus tu]  ‘ from part/side of - him ’ , 
 ‘ on his behalf ’ ). Subsequently, we also ﬁ nd a modernized version in which 
 [a ' po] 
governs an accusative masculine  ‘ pronoun ’ 
 [ksaf ' ton], treated as equivalent to 
 [(e)af ' ton] (cf.  12.4.2 ). 
 If we abstract away from the metrical conventions and archaisms associated with 
the tradition of vernacular verse, we may fairly conclude that the  Chronicle of the 
Morea sustains a more comprehensively vernacular style than almost any other text 
of the period, and to that extent offers uniquely valuable insights into the development 
and chronology of many of the innovations presented in chapter  11 . 
 12.3.4   The  t ranslated  r omances 
 Though the language of the romances translated or adapted from western originals is 
certainly more literary than that of the  Chronicle of the Morea,  it still belongs more 
centrally to the vernacular tradition than that of the original romances composed in 
the Byzantine capital. The translation of  Phl ó rios and Pl á tzia - Phl ó re,  for example (a 
late 14th/early 15th - century version of a Tuscan adaptation of a French original, sur-
viving in two manuscripts), was probably completed in the Frankish - dominated 
Peloponnese. The translator, who perhaps belonged to the Catholic ruling class, clearly 
knew the  Span é as poem and (probably) the  Chronicle of the Morea,  but was generally 
unconcerned to demonstrate any knowledge of Greek literature written in the learned 
language. By contrast, the use of innovative and often extravagant descriptive com-
pounds, the verbal echoes of folk poetry, the avoidance of complex sentence structures 
and rhetorical periods, and the low incidence of learned forms (many of which may 
have been preserved in the oral folk tradition and vernacular writing deriving from it) 
are all familiar features of original compositions using popular forms of Greek. 
 The action of  Phl ó rios  takes place in Spain and Cairo, where Pl á tzia - Phl ó re is sold 
into slavery. The heroine ’ s father is a knight of Rome (the original, not the  ‘ new Rome ’ 
of Byzantium), the hero a prince of Moorish Spain. After the usual adventures, the 
story closes with the reuniﬁ cation of the lovers, the conversion of the Spanish Muslims, 
and the election of Phl ó rios ’  father as king of Rome (this is a romance after all  … ). In 
the following extract Pl á tzia - Phl ó re laments her misfortune on being sold to slavers 
(see Kriar á s ( 1955 : 131 – 96)): 
 (16)  
 
 

358 Byzantium
 
 
 ‘ At ﬁ rst they tried only to part my soul from my body through the calamity of the pyre, 
by the burning of the ﬁ re, but now they part me from my beloved to live a life of pain, 
forever grievous, to weep by night and suffer, to grieve by day, that what I eat may be a 
source of sorrow, what I drink a source of pain, that food may be my misfortune, that 
my agony may slay me, that I may never have respite, but only great bitterness. My desire, 
my true love, my soul, my inspiration, object of my longing, Phl ó rios, my heart, source 
of my life, consolation of my sufferings, avenger of my torments, dangers have come once 
more to deprive me altogether of your desire and your attention. I did not know of the 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 359
sale and it was not my wish; they did it treacherously, may God be their judge! They are 
taking me, they are exiling me, and you will see me no more. ’ 
 The impression here is of a poem in a stylized version of contemporary speech, a 
polished form of language assimilated to the conventions of folk poetry and literate 
composition in the popular style. Synizesis is usually guaranteed by the metre, aphaer-
esis is often recognized (along with the assimilation of voiced obstruents in 
   <  
  ‘ revenge ’ ), the ﬁ nal vowel of 
 [a ' po] is usually 
elided before the article (once, in line 1, with anaptyctic  - e [e]), and 
 [ ' ftano]  ‘ I 
arrive ’ is consistently spelled 
 rather than  f q - . We may therefore resasonably 
suppose, despite the orthography, that several other changes characteristic of popular 
Greek in the later medieval period had also gone through in the speech of the transla-
tor, including loss of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] other than in speciﬁ ed environments (cf.  11.2 (3)), 
and perhaps the shift of [fs] to [ps] in words such as 
 [ ' kapsi] ( 11.6 (12)). 
 Note too the modern morphology of nominative plurals of a - stem nouns, e.g. 
 
[i ' meres] in line 5, cf.  11.7.4 ; of 3sg forms of the verb  ‘ be ’ , 
 [ ' ene], 
 [ ' ito(n)], 
cf.  11.8.5 (a) (
 [ ' eni] in line 6 perhaps represents the prevocalic pronunciation of 
 - a i as [ - j], cf. 
 [ce/c]  ‘ and ’ ); and of the 3pl aorist 
 [ ' pikasi(n)], cf.  11.6 
(14),  11.8.4 . The usual metrical convenience of allowing 3pl alternations in  - o  u n [ - un]/
 - o  u s i ( n ) [ - usi(n)] and  - a n [ - an]/ - a s i ( n ) [ - asi(n)] is, of course, in evidence. There are also 
new formations such as 
 [i ' kse(v)ro]  ‘ I know ’ in line 14, built to aorist 
 [e ' ksevra/i ' ksevra] (then 
 [ ' iksevra])  ‘ I knew ’ , originally  ‘ I found 
out ’ , as a replacement for 
 [ji ' nosko]/aorist 
 . In line 16, 
 [kse ' nono]  ‘ I exile ’ , for ancient 
 [kse ' noo/kse ' no], and 
 
[(e) ' perno]  ‘ I take ’ , for ancient 
 [e ' pero], both show the intrusive  - n - [ - n - ] char-
acteristic of many innovative imperfective stems, cf.  11.8.5 (b). We may also mention 
the regular use of the accusative with prepositions that require the genitive in the clas-
sical language (e.g. 
 [a ' po] and 
   [ek] in the passage above), and the use of the 
genitive (mainly with pronouns, e.g. 491) or the accusative (mainly with full noun 
phrases, e.g. 986) to mark the indirect object. 
 By contrast, learned features such as the use of 3rd - declension inﬂ ected participles 
(e.g. in a causal sense after 
 [os], 144), complement datives (e.g. 465, 480), and 
non - control inﬁ nitives (e.g. 480) are quite rare, and may be suspect if they confer no 
obvious metrical advantage or stylistic nuance. 8 In (16) itself, the only archaic/learned 
features worthy of note are the use of the possessive adjective in line 3, the rather free 
use of 3rd - declension nouns in  - s i " [ - sis] (in comparison, say, with the  Chronicle of 
the Morea ), and the retention of the old two - termination declensional system for 
compound adjectives of classical origin (distinguishing only a joint masc/fem and a 
neuter form): contrast 
  ‘ life  … of - pain ’ , in line 
4, with 
 [ ' kupa(n)  … o ' loxrisin]  ‘ cup  … all - gold ’ , in 984, where 
the adjective, as a vernacular formation modifying a vernacular noun, has a distinct 
feminine paradigm ( 11.7.7  (25)). 
 This  ‘ progressive ’ form of the vernacular  Dichtersprache  constituted the norm for 
much of the ﬁ ctional poetry of the 14th and 15th centuries, and crucially provided the 
foundation for much of the emerging dialectal literature of Crete, as discussed below 
(see also Part III,  14.2.4 ). 

360 Byzantium
 12.4  The First Dialect Literature: Cyprus and Crete 
 12.4.1   Introduction 
 Cypriot is the ﬁ rst modern Greek dialect to appear in its distinctive regional guise, our 
earliest example being a 14th - century legal text ( The Assizes ) translated into Greek 
from a French original. The early ofﬁ cial and literary use of local dialect in Cyprus 
was undoubtedly connected with the fact that the island was partially insulated from 
the inﬂ uence of the capital in the middle Byzantine period when, from the middle of 
the 7th century till the campaigns of Nikeph ó ros Phok á s in 965, it was under Arab 
or joint Arab – Byzantine rule. It was then reoccupied barely two hundred years later 
by the knights of the third crusade, and sold ﬁ rst to the Order of the Templars of 
Jerusalem and then to the French Lusignan dynasty (1192). French government con-
tinued until 1489, when the island passed to the Venetians, who were forced to 
abandon it to the Turks in 1571. The long period of western rule therefore continued 
an established tradition of semi - detached development in which the local vernacular 
had acquired a status generally denied to it in areas under continuous Byzantine rule. 
 The situation on Crete was superﬁ cially similar, in that Crete also had a period of 
Arab occupation (827 – 961), and was later administered by western rulers, in this case 
the Venetians (1211 to 1669), who had paid 1,000 marks to Boniface of Montserrat 
for the privilege. But the language of the vernacular literature which began to appear 
there from the late 14th century onwards is not very different from that used elsewhere 
in the Greek - speaking world, and though speciﬁ cally Cretan dialect words and forms 
can certainly be found, the thoroughgoing use of what we now think of as Cretan 
dialect did not become established in literary composition until the second half of the 
16th century. This difference merits examination. 
 In Cyprus, the early weakening of the traditions of Byzantium is conﬁ rmed by the 
writings of the aristocratic Le ó ntios Machair á s, who composed his  Recital Concerning 
the Sweet Land of Cyprus  in the ﬁ rst half of the 15th century. In this work the author 
describes a world in which the Greek elite had long been integrated, and was subject 
to only residual inﬂ uence from the higher forms of Byzantine culture. Even though he 
remained an Orthodox Christian who acknowledged the injustices his people had 
suffered at the hands of the Latin hierarchy (27, 29, 101) and lamented the inﬂ ux of 
French loanwords into the speech of the island (158), Machair á s also shows great 
respect for the feudal government and instinctively supports its suppression of revolt, 
whether by noble knights (259) or the Greek peasants whom he despises (697). His 
compositional technique, correspondingly, owes much to the practice of contemporary 
French writers, and his written Greek, as far as we can tell, already reﬂ ects the devel-
oped Cypriot dialect of the period quite closely. Learned language is almost entirely 
conﬁ ned to scriptural quotation, and the fact that he sometimes misquotes the canon-
ized text is a further indication that he lacked a conventional Greek education (e.g. in 
paragraph (1) he substitutes 
 [ ' psemata tom bze ' maton], lit.  ‘ lies 
of lies ’ , for 
 [mate ' otis tom mateo ' titon],  ‘ vanity of 
vanities ’ ). 
 In Crete, by contrast, where the Arab occupation was comparatively short, Byzantine 
cultural traditions remained more ﬁ rmly in place, a situation later reinforced by 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 361
reaction to the economic, political and religious oppression that marked the ﬁ rst two 
centuries of Venetian rule. Classical Greek could still be studied in the mid - 14th 
century, classical and Byzantine learned texts continued to be copied (Holton ( 1991a : 
3)), and even the vernacular literature which began to be composed in the latter part 
of the 14th century often looked back to Byzantine models, even if some poets were 
also beginning to show an interest in their own folk traditions and contemporary 
Italian work. This situation was, of course, reinforced by the inﬂ ux of scholarly 
Byzantine refugees before and after 1453, and by the establishment of Venice as the 
most important printing centre in Europe, an industry in which Greeks, including many 
Cretans, played a prominent role. 
 Nevertheless, the fully ﬂ edged Cretan dialect of late 16th - and 17th - century litera-
ture did not emerge overnight, and the local speech, as with other dialects in the middle 
ages, must have evolved over a considerable period before a reﬁ ned and expanded 
written version came to be used in literary composition. We should note in this con-
nection that Venetian administrative documents, composed in, or relating to, Crete 
during the 13th and early 14th centuries, employ Greek styles ranging from a mildly 
modernized standard - ofﬁ cial in decrees of the state (e.g. Miklosich and M ü ller (( 1860 –
 90 : vol. VI, no. XC, 220 – 2)) to near - vernacular ofﬁ cialese in documents of a more 
local character (e.g. Miklosich and M ü ller ( 1860 – 90 : vol. VI, no. CII, 238 – 9)). But 
even the worst - spelled texts of the latter type, which presumably reﬂ ect the  ‘ civil -
 service ’ Greek learned  in situ  by minor ofﬁ cials, display few clearly dialectal elements: 
possible examples include regular 3pl  - o  u s i [ - usi] in documents from the west ( - o  u ( n e ) 
[ - u(ne)] was preferred in the east), and the occasional use of 
 [af ' tonos] for 
 [af ' tos]  ‘ this ’ (cf.  11.7.8  (d)). Even the agreement of 1299 between the rebellious 
Cretan aristocrat Al é xios Kall é rges and the Venetian authorities (M é rtzios ( 1949 : 
264 – 74)), which Panayiot á kis  (1993) presents as one of the earliest documents in 
vernacular prose, looks relatively  ‘ standard ’ . It seems, then, that the period in which 
Cretan developed most strongly in the direction of its modern form, at least for the 
educated/literate classes, began during the 14th century, a little before vernacular 
literature started to be produced on the island. 
 The relative rarity of dialectal features in earlier Cretan poetry would then reﬂ ect 
the continuing inﬂ uence of the learned and vernacular Byzantine written traditions and 
the still - emerging character of the Cretan dialect among educated speakers in a period 
when many  ‘ common ’ vernacular features remained in use alongside the  ‘ popular ’ local 
variants that eventually replaced them. The key period of linguistic development prob-
ably coincided with important social changes that help explain the spread and accept-
ance of dialect forms. Even though the condition of the peasants remained wretched 
throughout the Venetian period, the Cretan and Venetian aristocracies eventually 
embarked on a process of symbiosis and integration (cf. Malt é zou  (1991)) , and it was 
against this background of intermarriage and extended cultural cross - fertilization that 
the hold of the Byzantine tradition began to wane and Cretan dialect emerged as the 
common language of the island. Even the Venetian colonists began to abandon Italian 
(which was increasingly restricted to high - level administration and culture), and by the 
mid - 16th century the greatly enhanced status of the local vernacular ﬁ nally overcame 
any residual reluctance to its adoption as the basis for a literary language. This innova-
tion was undoubtedly supported by the contemporary Italian movements to elevate 

362 Byzantium
the more prestigious local dialects, including Venetian, into written languages (Cochrane 
( 1988 : 19 – 23)), and an elaborated, somewhat stylized form of Cretan soon became 
the vehicle for dramatic and poetic works of a quality that has since led to the period 
c.1580 – 1669 becoming known as the  ‘ Cretan Renaissance ’ . 
 Since the major early works in Cypriot dialect belong to the 14th and 15th centuries, 
and since there is a natural break in the Cretan vernacular tradition that corresponds 
roughly with the end of the period covered by this chapter, the discussion of Cypriot 
and Cretan literature is conveniently divided into two parts. The earlier period is 
therefore discussed below, and the works of the 16th and (for Crete) 17th centuries 
are presented and analysed in chapter  14 . 
 12.4.2   Early  d ialect  l iterature in Cyprus: Machair á s ’  c hronicle 
 This 15th - century work is one of the earliest examples of extended vernacular writing 
in prose, and is one of the most important documents for the study of the popular 
Greek of its period. It has survived in three manuscripts, all of the 16th century, in 
Ravenna (R), Venice (V, containing also the later chronicle of Ge ó rgios Boustr ó nios), 
and Oxford (O, with serious lacunae and a more colloquial/dialectal style, including 
a larger set of French loans). These versions are sometimes strikingly different, and 
even the internal linguistic variation is noteworthy, with both vernacular/non - regional 
and learned variants in use alongside speciﬁ cally Cypriot forms. In general it seems 
that educated Cypriot tolerated a fair measure of free variation between older vernacu-
lar and innovative local forms, and that this variety, like educated speech everywhere, 
had also assimilated elements from written Greek that remained in use in higher spoken 
and written functions independently of speciﬁ c learned sources. The standard edition, 
based on V (taken to be the most reliable guide to the original), is that of Dawkins 
 (1932) ; see also Pier í s and Nikol á ou - K ó nnari  (2003) . 
 Modern Cypriot is markedly different from standard Modern Greek (see e.g. 
Newton  (1970) , Kondos ó poulos  (2001) , Chatziio á nnou  (1999)) , and a number of its 
more prominent characteristics are already in evidence, directly or indirectly, in 
Machair á s ’ work. The following phonological developments serve to illustrate the 
point (Dawkins ( 1932 : 31 – 40)). 
 (17)  There are many instances of assimilation of a vowel to that of a following 
syllable: 
 [je ' neka] for 
 [ji ' neka]  ‘ woman ’ ; 
 [parpa ' to] for 
 [perpa ' to]  ‘ walk ’ ; 
 [lutu ' rjia] for 
 [litu ' rjia]  ‘ service ’ 
etc.). While some, such as those just mentioned, are attested only as alternants to 
the common forms, others are fully regular (e.g. 
 (
 [ - ' ao]) [polo ' mo]  ‘ I do ’ 
(a developed sense    <   ‘ I ﬁ ght/strive (for)/accomplish ’ ), distinguished from 
 
[pole ' mizo]  ‘ I make war ’ ). 
 (18)  In contemporary Cypriot intervocalic voiced fricatives are often lost, and we 
already ﬁ nd occasional examples in Machair á s ’  Chronicle such as 
 [o  ' rias] 
for 
  ‘ the king ’ and 
 [sa ' nia] for 
  ‘ a dish ’ . 
 (19)  Palatalization of voiceless velar fricatives before [i (j)] and [e] has led to 
 
(as opposed to common 
 ) in modern Cypriot, and there is an identical palatal 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 363
articulation of  s (originally [s]) before [j], and sometimes before [i]. Spelling 
confusions reﬂ ecting these developments are already found in Machair á s: e.g. 
 for 
  ‘ ﬁ ve hundred ’ and 
 
for 
  ‘ spiritual ’ . 
 (20)  A most important modern characteristic of Cypriot is the retention of 
word - ﬁ nal [n], and its assimilation to a following word - initial consonant 9 (which 
may represent a stage through which all dialects passed). The Cypriot situation 
is occasionally reﬂ ected in variant spellings of word - ﬁ nal [n] before words 
beginning with certain fricatives and nasals. Thus alongside  - n  s - / f - / n - , we also ﬁ nd 
examples where  - n is dropped (e.g. 
 [ ' pasa(f) fo ' ran]  ‘ every time ’ , 
  ‘ they - ask that they - be ’ ), together with variants 
involving  - n "  s - (e.g. 
 [is aftos su]  ‘ to self of - you ’ ) 10 and  - "  s - (e.g. 
  ‘ if I to - you explain ’ , assuming that the ﬁ rst word is 
indeed 
 [an]  ‘ if ’ , rather than 
 [as]    <  
 [ ' ease]  ‘ let ’ , which is often used equiva-
lently in Medieval Greek.  
 (21)  In contemporary Cypriot (and south - eastern dialects generally) the double 
consonants of the ancient language are preserved, and many other words have 
acquired secondary double - consonant articulations. This latter development, curi-
ously reminiscent of the analogical doubling of liquids and nasals in the ancient 
Aeolic dialects, is well attested in Machair á s ’  Chronicle , though whether there are 
any precisely formulable  ‘ rules ’ controlling its operation is unclear. The potential 
targets are initial and intervocalic liquids, nasals, voiceless plosives (pronounced 
[pp h , tt h , kk h ] in modern Cypriot), and fricatives, though the effect is sometimes 
restricted to speciﬁ c grammatical morphemes (e.g. already in Machair á s the com-
parative in 
 [ - tt h eros] and the perfect passive participle in 
 [ - m ' menos]), 
sometimes apparently a feature of speciﬁ c words (e.g. in the text of Machair á s 
  ‘ yes ’ , 
    ‘ I opened ’ ; 
 [ ' esso]  ‘ within ’ ; 
 
 ‘ island ’ ; 
 [ ' epp h esa]  ‘ I fell ’ ; 
  ‘ much ’ ; 
 [pot ' t h e]  ‘ (n)ever ’ 
etc.). 
 A major issue, however, is variation, and a few instances will sufﬁ ce to illustrate 
the nature of the problem (references are to the paragraphs of Dawkins ’ text). 
For example, virtually the full set of possible feminine plural variants, apart from 
articular nom pl 
 [e], is in apparently free use (cf.  11.7.2 – 4 (17 – 21),  11.7.6 
(24)); thus nominative 
 [i  ' mere]  ‘ the days ’ , with classical nominal ending, 
occurs beside 
 [i  ' meres], with vernacular nominal sufﬁ x (1); and the 
wholly classical accusative 
 [tas pale ' as isto ' rias]  ‘ the old histo-
ries ’ is used alongside the mixed 
 [tas pale ' as isto ' ries] (2) and 
the wholly vernacular 
 [tez ji ' nekes] (26)  ‘ the women ’ . Similarly, though 
the assimilation of i - stems to the a - stems, orthography notwithstanding, is generally 
well - advanced in Machair á s (cf. nom sg 
 [i  ' taksi]  ‘ order ’  (14); acc sg 
 
[tin  ' daksin] (13, 28); gen sg 
 [tis  ' taksis] (13); nom/acc plurals in  - e " 
[ - es], e.g. 
 [tes  ' xrises]  ‘ the needs ’ (25), 
 [ ' pirekses]  ‘ fevers ’  (33), 
and 
 [tez  ' jases]  ‘ the cures ’ (33)), learned forms are not uncommon, and 
are sometimes used side by side with their popular equivalents. Thus nom sg such 

364 Byzantium
as 
  ‘ the crossing ’ (10), 
 [i  ' taksis]  ‘ the class/order ’ (15), 
and 
 [ ' xrisis]  ‘ need ’ (50) occur with some regularity, even though gen sg 
forms such as 
  ‘ revelation (of God) ’ (35) 
and 
  ‘ (patriarch) 
of Constantinople ’ (40) (alongside vernacular 
 [ko(n)standi ' nopolis] 
(22)) seem to be reserved mainly for religious contexts, in which the traditional 
language of the church has inﬂ uenced the choice of form. 
 Other examples include the preposition meaning  ‘ from ’ , the classical form of which 
(
 [a ' po]) appears freely alongside dialectal 
 [a ' pu] without any apparent shift 
of register. The general vernacular 
 [ap] is used before words begining with a vowel, 
but 
 [ape] with anaptyxis is used regularly before forms of the deﬁ nite article begin-
ning with [t - ] (and sometimes other words with the same initial consonant). Similarly, 
the aorist of  ‘ come ’ is inﬂ ected according to both a traditional paradigm, e.g. 3pl 
 (48), and a vernacular/dialect one, e.g. 3pl 
 [ ' irtan] (48). 11 We may 
compare the aorist of  ‘ die ’ , which has 3sg 
 (19) beside 3pl 
 (31), and (classical) 3sg 
 (21) alongside 
3sg 
 (41), revealing all kinds of uncertainty about the role and 
position of the augment in compound verbs (as well as motivating innovative presents 
 , cf.  11.8.5 (b),  11.8.6 (b)). 
 Some of this inconsistency is presumably due partly to later scribal practice, but 
Machair á s himself may well have used learned and educated vernacular forms along-
side more popular local variants. In any case, as a pioneer in the adaptation of the 
vernacular for literary prose, he would necessarily have fallen back on the conventions 
of traditional writing, particularly those of prose chronicles (see below). Nor should 
we discount the possibility that some of the purely orthographic variation conceals a 
more consistent pronunciation in an era when the only standardized orthography was 
that of the traditional written language. 
 The following brief extract, dealing with the aftermath of the Templars ’ sale of 
Cyprus to Guy de Lusignan of Jerusalem, provides a typical sample of the language 
(the transcription attempts to represent a speciﬁ cally Cypriot pronunciation): 
 (22)  
 
 
 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 365
 ‘ And when the aforementioned king Guy bought Cyprus from the Templars and the 
Lombards, learning of the vexation that they ( the Greeks ) had caused them and the 
slaughter in the land, he was greatly concerned and began to consider how he could 
arrange for them not to have trouble in Cyprus, because the whole place was full of 
Greeks, and he would say to himself,  “ Whenever they want to rebel against me, they can 
do it, and they will have the support of the king of Constantinople, and they can take the 
kingdom from my hands by force. ”  ’ 
 Some of the features here have already been mentioned. Note, however, 
 [ ' ondan] 
 ‘ when ’ , a by - form of 
 [ ' otan] widely used in vernacular Greek (dialectal 
 
[ ' andan] also occurs), and the aorist 
 from 
  ‘ I 
buy ’ , involving the typically south - eastern extension of the syllabic augment to verbs 
with an initial vowel (as also in Pontic, cf.  11.8.6 (b)). The clitic doubling construction 
of the ﬁ rst sentence too is characteristic of popular Greek (the effect being to topical-
ize/background the doubled noun). But it is also important to observe the continued 
inﬂ uence of chronographic conventions (cf.  10.2 ), for example in the discourse deictic 
use of 
 [o af ' tos]  ‘ the same ’ , and the participial syntax of the second subordinate 
clause (albeit with the modern indeclinable gerund 
 ). 
Machair á s was clearly familiar with at least this traditional form of writing. 
 Vernacular assimilation of the voiced fricative 
 before a nasal is seen in 
 [sfam ' mos]    <  
  ‘ slaughter ’ (cf. forms such as 
 
[ ' pramman]   <  
  ‘ thing ’ for the geminate), and in 
 
 <  
 [ ' ek - nia]  ‘ worry/concern ’  (lit.  ‘ out - of - mind - ness ’ , earlier 
 ‘ madness ’ ); in most dialects the fricative was deleted (or the geminate resulting from 
fricative assimilation was simpliﬁ ed). 
 The nominative after 
 [je ' matos]  ‘ full (of) ’ is rather surprising, but the form 
 , which superﬁ cially seems to involve the equally surprising transfer 
of the contract verb 
 [la ' lo] to the non - contract paradigm, in fact conceals the 
popular recharacterized formation 
 ( 11.8.5 (e)), where palataliza-
tion has proceeded to the point where the [j] of earlier [e ' laljen] has been fully 
absorbed. The generalization of the 1st - person (rather than the 3rd - person) reﬂ exive 
as the head noun in 
 [ton emaf ' ton du] is not uncommon in vernacular 
texts; the crucial thing is that the owner of the  ‘ self ’ is marked by the genitive pronoun, 
the use of the 1st - person form being no more illogical than that of the 3rd. Note ﬁ nally 
that the semantic contrast between 
 [na] and inﬁ nitival complements to 
 

366 Byzantium
is well illustrated in Guy ’ s speech to himself, the former meaning  ‘ want ’ , the latter 
marking future  ‘ will ’ . The 
  +   [na] construction underlying the standard 
Modern Greek future is not attested in early Cypriot, but the synonymous 
 
[ ' melli na]   +  subjunctive  ‘ it will (be) that ’ is already a regular variant (e.g. in para. 1). 
 Vocabulary items worth noting here include the loans 
  ‘ rebel ’ 
and 
  ‘ kingdom ’ , in which Latin/Romance roots have been equipped 
with Greek sufﬁ xes, and 
 [si ' kono]  ‘ lift ’  or, as here,  ‘ take ’   <  ancient 
 
[si ' koo]. This last originally meant  ‘ weigh in a balance ’ , but the upward movement of 
items as weights were added to the other side of the balance led to the extended sense 
of  ‘ raise/lift ’ , as in Modern Greek.  
 12.4.3   Early  v ernacular  l iterature in Crete 
 The ﬁ rst known Cretan poet, St é phanos Sachl í kes (late 14th century), belonged to the 
bourgeoisie of K á stro (modern Ir á klio), but dissipated most of his inheritance on 
whoring and gambling, and ended up in jail on the accusations of a woman. After a 
period of retirement in the country, living on his sole remaining ﬁ ef, he ﬁ nally enjoyed 
a characteristically ﬂ awed career as an advocate back in K á stro (cf. van Gemert ( 1991 : 
51 – 6)). 
 Using the techniques and language of the songs of the Cretan oral tradition, his 
early surviving work, much of it written (?as if) from his cell, consists of satirical poems 
of a personal kind composed in the 15 - syllable metre and clearly designed to be recited. 
These include  Praise of Pothotsoutsouni á ( ‘ Lust - for - Cock ’ ), a pseudo - heroic work in 
which the heroine boasts of her sexual prowess to a group of visiting madams, a series 
of four  ‘ didactic ’ poems on the loyalty (or otherwise) of friends, the jail, the prison 
warders, and his own warder, and  The Council of the Whores , which in fact consists 
of three separate pieces composed for the ﬁ rst time in rhymed blocks (typically consist-
ing of four lines). Later work is composed in rhyming couplets, an innovation which 
became standard in the Cretan tradition, and led to the rhyming of a number of earlier 
heroic and romantic classics in Venetian printed editions. These poems were clearly 
designed to be read, and comprise  Advice to Phrantzisk é s  (the son of a friend) 
and  The Remarkable Story of the Humble Sachl í kes (his less - than - objective 
 ‘ autobiography ’ ). 
 Sachl í kes is remarkable for his early use of elements of folk song and local dialect, 
and his vividly realistic treatments, inspired in part by the contemporary work of 
Francesco di Vannozzo, mark a break with the stylizing and distancing traditions of 
the Greek - speaking world. The contrast with Lin á rdos Dellap ó rtas (early 15th century) 
could hardly be greater. Like Sachl í kes, Dellap ó rtas was born into the bourgeoisie of 
K á stro, and at one point found himself in jail through the accusations of a woman. 
But there the similarity ends, since he spent his youth abroad in the service of Venice, 
returning in 1389 to be appointed as an advocate, and ended his life as director of the 
hospital of St Lazarus (cf. van Gemert ( 1991 : 56 – 8)). Even though most of his work 
has still to be published, it is at once apparent that he rejected dialectal language and 
rhyme, and persisted with the traditions of written Greek. Four poems survive, of 
which the most important ( Dialogue between an Unfortunate Man and Truth ) draws 

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 367
heavily on the Bible and various Byzantine works, the whole being characterized by 
dull didacticism. 
 The aristocratic Mar í nos Fali é ros (15th century) was the second son of the Cretan 
branch of the Venetian family of Falier, and one of the greatest landowners in the 
eastern half of the island (cf. van Gemert ( 1991 : 58 – 62)). His surviving work, which 
takes much of its inspiration from Italian literature, especially the work of the Venetian 
poet Leonardo Giustinian, comprises a love - dream entitled  Story and Dream  (with 
perhaps also a second love - dream and one other erotic poem) and three religious -
 didactic poems,  Lamentation of the Virgin on the Passion and Cruciﬁ xion, Poem of 
Comfort (addressed to a friend who had lost his wife, children and property) and 
 Advice of a Father to his Son , all in rhyming couplets and without obvious inﬂ uence 
from the Byzantine tradition. There is a marked preference for dramatic treatments 
and dialogue form. It is important, however, to note the natural use of Greek and the 
15 - syllable metre on the part of a Venetian nobleman, conﬁ rming that by the 15th 
century many of the colonists not only spoke and understood Greek but also used it 
for writing. His Greek, like that of Sachl í kes, has a mildly dialectal feel, reﬂ ected in 
features such as a tendency to generalize  [i - ] as the accented augment (an east Cretan 
characteristic, cf.  11.8.6  (b)), the appearance of the intrusive  - g - 
 in the sufﬁ x 
 (cf.  11.8.5  (d)), and the occasional use of weak forms of the deﬁ nite 
article ending in  - " [ - s], e.g.  t " [ts] for fem gen sg 
 [tis]. See Part III,  14.2.4 , for 
further discussion of characteristic Cretan innovations. 
 The most important work of this period, however, is undoubtedly the  Ap ó kopos 
( ‘ Exhausted ’ ) of Bergad é s (no ﬁ rst name is known), who was perhaps connected with 
the noble Bragadin/Bregadin family of R é thymno (cf. van Gemert ( 1991 : 62 – 5)). The 
poem, now dated to the beginning of the 15th century, takes its title from the opening 
words: 
 ,  ‘ once after toil 
I - felt - weary  … ’ , and apparently urges its readers to enjoy their life on earth because 
the dead are soon forgotten, a clearly anti - traditional line of argument. Interpretation 
remains controversial, however, as the original ending has been lost through later 
adaptation (perhaps in an effort to give the poem a more conventional moralizing 
character). In brief, the narrator has a dream in which, while hunting a deer, he sees 
a marvellous tree (symbolizing life). He climbs the tree to get honey from a beehive 
(life ’ s pleasures), but two rats, one black and one white (night and day), start to nibble 
the trunk, and the tree begins to topple. Suddenly it appears to be swaying over the 
edge of an abyss, and when it ﬁ nally slips over, the narrator falls into the open mouth 
of a serpent and enters the world of the dead. There he meets the shades of two young 
men who ask about the pleasures of the world above and whether they are still remem-
bered, in particular by their widows and mothers. The narrator replies that the dead 
are quickly forgotten, and the shades sing a dirge on the faithlessness of women. It 
transpires that they are brothers killed in a shipwreck while on their way to visit their 
pregnant sister, who in turn had a dream of the disaster, miscarried and died. Though 
reunited in Hell, the three have no recollection of when these events took place, because 
time has no meaning in the underworld. The terriﬁ ed narrator, desperate to escape 
from the darkness and surrounded by importunate shades who want him to take 
messages to the living, runs out towards the light. 

368 Byzantium
 It is clear that Bergad é s was familiar with a wide range of both written and oral 
literature, Greek and western, though the roles of the participants in many traditional 
episodes are reversed, possibly in reaction to more conventional underworld poems 
such as the  Mournful Rhyme  of Io á nnes Pik á toros of R é thymno. The language of the 
poem is a now familiar blend of standard medieval vernacular (including archaisms 
from ecclesiastical writing) with elements of the developing Cretan dialect such as 
 , accented augment 
 [ ' i - ], thoroughgoing palatalization of [ - s - / - r - ] 
before [j] arising from synizesis (giving e.g. 
 [me ' r j a] for 
 [mer ' ja]  ‘ side ’ ), and 
many local vocabulary items. It is notable, however, that ﬁ nal  - n [ - n], which was 
eventually lost even in 3pl verb forms and the gen pl of nouns/adjectives, is still pre-
served in writing (perhaps merely as a concession to the standard orthography).  
 12.5   Conclusion 
 It was noted at the end of Part I that most of the major phonological developments in 
the transition from Ancient to Modern Greek were completed by the late antique 
period. But though some of the major changes in morphology and syntax also have 
their roots in the same period, the completion of these changes, and the advent of 
many new ones, belongs properly to the medieval period. By the end of the 15th 
century the component parts of what would evolve into standard Modern Greek were 
largely in place, but the language itself remained fundamentally fragmented. Archaizing 
written Greek had variants of its own, while attempts at writing the vernacular 
remained unstable, involving a variable admixture of forms from written registers and 
educated speech into bases reﬂ ecting different oral traditions and regional develop-
ments. Only in the realm of romantic verse ﬁ ction did anything like a  ‘ standard ’ , non -
 regionally speciﬁ c, vernacular style develop as a model, and even this was undermined 
by the fragmentation of the empire as it fell under western and then Ottoman domina-
tion. The efforts made to forge a modern standard from the disparate elements of the 
medieval linguistic legacy are the major theme of Part III.  
 Notes 
1  The adjective 
 [politi ' kos] here seems to mean no more than  ‘ public/common ’ , cf. 
the later use of 
 [politi ' ci] to mean  ‘ prostitute ’ . 
2  In line 7 
 has been substituted for 
 for metrical reasons.  
3  The text is that of Jeffreys ( 1998 : 252) except that (i) the half - line following l. 10 is assumed 
to be an interpolated gloss, and (ii) the second half of l. 11 has been transposed from after 
l. 12. following Ricks  (1990) . 
4  Though these are almost always nominative and subject - orientated, in modern style.  
5  A possible exception is the parallel development of the use of reduced forms of the verb 
meaning  ‘ want/will ’  in Old Venetian, Proven ç al and Greek. Markopoulos ( 2009 : 186 – 208) 
argues that the original impetus towards the development of future 
 was 
therefore due to Greek – Romance contact.  
6  Note, incidentally, that these aorist gerunds have generalized the o - ending of the imperfec-
tive participle, and that even the learned variants are employed indeclinably  – another 
example of the misunderstanding of learned forms.  

Texts in the ‘Vernacular’ 369
7  Such expressions continue in colloquial use in Modern Greek, now often ironically/
humorously. 
8  Some introduce a metrical oddity: e.g. the rhythm of the ﬁ rst hemistich of 466, 
  ‘ to - the executioners she - spoke ’ , is greatly 
improved if the popular accusative, with columnar accent, is substituted, giving 
 . 
9  Other than voiceless plosives, of course.  
10  The orthographic nasal here is probably no more than a graphic device to show that the 
form is accusative.  
11  The [l]    >  [r] shift before fricatives, now standardized in some common words, is ﬁ rst attested 
sporadically in the Egyptian papyri of late antiquity.  


PART III
 Modern Greek 
 From the Ottoman 
Empire to the 
European Union 


13
 Ottoman Rule and the 
War of Independence  
 13.1   The Early Years 
 Since most of the former Byzantine empire had already been occupied by the Ottoman 
Turks, the capture of Constantinople in May 1453, though shocking, was largely 
symbolic. The remnants of Greek - speaking territory, including some of the lands for-
merly under western rule, were then progressively incorporated into the Ottoman state, 
Trebizond in 1461, Athens, the Peloponnese and much of the Aegean by the 1470s. 
Some islands, however, held out a while longer, Rhodes till 1522, Chios and Naxos 
till 1566, Cyprus till 1571, and Crete till 1669. Uniquely, the Ionian islands (Heptanese) 
remained under Venetian control, after a brief interlude of Ottoman rule, until 1797, 
when they were ﬁ rst ceded to France, and then became a British protectorate. 
 Though Greek continued to be spoken in Sicily and southern Italy, all the principal 
concentrations of Greek speakers, in mainland Greece, the archipelago, the Aegean 
coast of Asia Minor, Constantinople, the shores of the Sea of Marmara, the southern 
coastline of the Black Sea (Pontus) and central Anatolia (Cappadocia), therefore even-
tually fell under Ottoman rule, and the popular spoken dialects of the remoter regions, 
especially at the western and eastern peripheries, began to develop more independently, 
as communications became more difﬁ cult and cultural activity declined. 
 Many Greek - speaking Christians, recalling the treachery of 1204, initially claimed 
to prefer Ottoman rule to domination by the Catholic Venetians, but the Venetian 
connection at least had the merit of promoting Greek cultural life. In the ﬁ rst centuries 
of Ottoman rule the University of Padua began to draw large numbers of Greek 
students from both Venetian and Ottoman lands, and Venice itself, as noted earlier, 
became a major centre of Greek publishing. Even after the fall of Crete, the Ionian 
islands continued to provide an important channel for western inﬂ uence at a time when 
the majority were increasingly isolated from developments in the west. 
 After the fall of Constantinople, the Turks consolidated their grip on Serbia, Bosnia 
and Albania, and brought the Danubian states of Moldavia and Wallachia (the 
component parts of modern Romania and Moldova), together with much of Hungary, 
under their control. The various subject peoples were then organized into  milletler 

374 Modern Greek
( ‘ nations ’ ) on the basis not of language but of religious faith, and in return for guar-
anteeing the loyalty of the Orthodox population (comprising not only Greeks, but also 
Serbs, Bulgarians, Romanians and many Albanians), the patriarch of Constantinople 
was granted wide - ranging powers, including the administration of justice, the organiza-
tion of education and the raising of taxes. 
 But despite these concessions, the Christians of the empire remained disadvantaged; 
their evidence was not accepted against that of a Muslim, Christian men could not 
marry Muslim women, the wealthy were not permitted to retain their estates, and all 
were subject to a tax in lieu of military service. They were also obliged to deliver 
children to be brought up as Muslims and educated for imperial service. This janissary 
levy provided the empire with its military and administrative elite, and offered the 
children of poor families an opportunity of advancement to the highest ofﬁ ces, but 
was bitterly resented. Inevitably, some converted to Islam, especially in Asia Minor 
and later in Crete. It is important, however, to appreciate that language and religion 
were never in a simple one - to - one relationship. Some of those who kept their religion 
became Turkish speakers (e.g. the Karamanli Christians of Asia Minor and 
Constantinople), while the Cretan apostates typically remained Greek - speaking. This 
mismatch was to have serious consequences after the Greek defeat in Asia Minor in 
1922 (see chapter  16 ). 
 In these difﬁ cult years the ecumenical patriarchate provided a focal point for the 
empire ’ s Christians. Thanks to Turkish willingness to devolve authority, the church 
was able to sustain Orthodox values not only when Ottoman power was at its height 
but also as the empire began to crumble. Though in time these values began to seem 
unenlightened to many, and though the church itself eventually fell victim to Ottoman 
venality, the patriarchate ’ s policies were instrumental in the preservation of traditional 
Christian values and customs in an era when the chief preoccupation of the Greek -
 speaking population was the daily struggle for survival. The role of the church was 
also signiﬁ cant in the ﬁ eld of language, since the conservative practices of the ecclesi-
astical intelligentsia dominated education at all levels, and continued a written stand-
ard that helped both to sustain an educated spoken norm and in part to constrain the 
regional diversiﬁ cation of popular Greek, at least in less marginal areas. The cultural 
and linguistic foundations for a Greek national movement were therefore largely in 
place when the Ottoman empire began its long and painful decline.  
 13.2   Ottoman Decline 
 In Europe, decay set in quite quickly. Military weakness spawned internal corruption, 
and in a context of failing central authority, provincial governments began to operate 
semi - autonomously. Though revolutionaries sought periodically to exploit Turkish 
difﬁ culties by risking armed resistance, as after the defeat of the Ottoman navy by 
Spain, Venice and the papacy at Lepanto (N á fpaktos) in 1571, or during the Veneto -
 Ottoman war of 1645 – 69 (when Crete was lost to the Turks and the Peloponnese 
temporarily occupied by Venice), the most persistent form of resistance came from 
 kl é ftes , bandits who had ﬂ ed to the mountains to avoid taxation and/or Turkish juris-
diction. Though they cheerfully robbed anyone with money, their assaults on Ottoman 

Ottoman Rule and the War of Independence 375
ofﬁ cials earned them a Robin Hood reputation and spawned a magniﬁ cent collection 
of  ‘ kleftic ’  ballads (see  14.3 ). In response, the authorities recruited local irregulars 
called  armatol í , though in practice the distinction between these and the klefts they 
were supposedly ﬁ ghting was a ﬁ ne one, with frequent defections in both directions, 
determined largely by the rate and regularity of government pay. Such bands became 
increasingly powerful as central authority waned, and provided much of the military 
muscle in the struggle for independence that began in the 1820s. 
 By the end of the 18th century large areas of the empire had fallen under the control 
of local dynasties whose deﬁ ance, along with that of the klefts, provided an education 
in the possibilities of independent action. The Turks also began to encounter external 
difﬁ culties, as Russia ’ s territorial ambitions combined, during the reign of Peter the 
Great (1682 – 1725), with a growing political interest in the fate of their fellow Orthodox 
Christians under Ottoman rule. Russian propaganda began to be distributed and fresh 
uprisings were encouraged (e.g. in 1770 the unsuccessful attempt by Orlov, under 
Catherine the Great, to foment a revolt in the Peloponnese). 
 These changes coincided with a number of shifts in the higher levels of Greek -
 speaking Orthodox society. As the Ottoman empire declined, it was obliged to 
negotiate with the European powers, and here the Turks relied on Greek - speaking 
 ‘ interpreters ’ , who thereby acquired great inﬂ uence over foreign policy. The members 
of this new elite, which had grown up around the institution of the ecumenical patri-
archate, were known as the  Phanari ó tes (Phanariots), after the  Phan á ri ( ‘ beacon/
lighthouse ’ ) district along the Golden Horn to which the patriarchate had moved in 
1601. Individuals from the very small number of families involved soon came to be 
appointed as governors of the Aegean islands and eventually as  ‘ princes ’  ( hospodars ) 
of the semi - autonomous Danubian principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia, where 
their courts, accessible to western inﬂ uence from Vienna via the Danube, promoted 
cultural life and provided vital political experience for a future Greek ruling class. 
 The ambition of the Phanariots was reﬂ ected  inter alia  in an expansion of the edu-
cation system, which, by the end of the 17th century, was staffed largely by western -
 educated graduates and included not only the long - established patriarchal academy 
in Constantinople but newly founded academies in the cities of Jassy (the capital of 
Moldavia) and Bucharest (the capital of Wallachia). During the 18th century, other 
 ‘ advanced ’ schools were founded in Chios, Smyrna and Ayvalik, and the emphasis in 
the curriculum began to shift to the ancient classics, mathematics and the natural 
sciences under the inﬂ uence of the French Enlightenment. 
 Just as important for the emergence of a Greek national movement was the rise of 
a business class, both inside and outside the empire, during the 18th century. The 
Greek - speaking population of Constantinople, Smyrna (Izmir) and Thessaloniki grew 
rapidly, commercial colonies were established in Italy, the south of France, central 
Europe and Russia ’ s Black Sea ports, and the Greek merchant navy soon became a 
major force. It has sometimes been argued that the new bourgeoisie, intolerant of 
Ottoman incompetence, eventually threw its inﬂ uence behind the struggle for inde-
pendence in the hope of establishing a stable and more proﬁ table business climate. But 
the merchants ’ overall reluctance to rock the boat is well - documented, though many 
contributed ﬁ nancially to the educational and consciousness - raising programmes that 
took place in the period before independence, partly from patriotic motives, but chieﬂ y 

376 Modern Greek
in response to the growing demand for educated Greek speakers to help run their 
companies. 
 One consequence of these developments was the increased secularization of edu-
cated Greek - speaking society, which combined with a growing awareness that the 
culture and achievements of the ancient Greeks were greatly admired in the west. This 
bred a new conﬁ dence among the intelligentsia, who increasingly saw themselves as 
the heirs of the ancients. It also led to a depressingly predictable debate about the 
future development of a Greek national language, which proved to be both ferocious 
and protracted. One group argued for the purging of all foreign loans and the re -
 establishment of the classical tongue; diametrically opposed were the  ‘ demoticists ’ , 
who advocated the contemporary spoken vernacular(s) as the basis for a modern 
national standard, spoken and written; others still urged a pragmatic compromise, in 
recognition of the linguistic realities of the time (see chapters  15 and  17 for a full 
discussion of this central issue). 
 As yet, however, such considerations were the exclusive concern of a small minority 
of intellectuals, many of whom lived outside the Ottoman empire. The vast majority 
of Greek speakers remained illiterate, with their culture centred on folk song and 
religion, and their ignorance reinforced by the clergy, who, steadfastly opposed to the 
western ideas they felt to be undermining their authority, now presented the Ottoman 
empire as a divinely ordained protector from the heresy of Catholicism. With the 
example of the French Revolution before them, many intellectuals came to despise the 
church, and sought vigorously to promote secular education among their less fortunate 
compatriots. These efforts were not without success, and large numbers of ordinary 
Greeks, while retaining their faith, came also to blame the clergy for their stiﬂ ing of 
national aspirations. 
 In the context of European Romanticism and its notions of national genius, and set 
against a background of increasing frustration with Ottoman brutality and incompe-
tence, the scene was now set for the assertion of a distinctively Greek identity and even 
a struggle for independence. The chief obstacle was that many of the best - educated 
and most enterprising, who might in principle have provided effective leadership, lived 
outside the empire, while the elite within (the Phanariots, the church hierarchy and at 
least some of the mercantile class) had a vested interest in preserving the status quo, 
from which they were currently deriving considerable advantage. At this juncture, the 
aftermath of the French Revolution proved to be catalytic. 
 Alarmed by the ceding of the Ionian islands to France in 1797 and Bonaparte ’ s 
invasion of Ottoman Egypt in 1798, the Turks concluded a hasty alliance with Russia 
and sought to repel the French. After a turbulent period, the Ionian islands became 
a British protectorate in 1814. This  ‘ independence ’ , however notional, provided an 
important example, and the islands offered a safe haven for mainland klefts and an 
opportunity to learn how large - scale warfare was conducted by a professional army. 
At least one leading ﬁ gure in the war of independence, the kleftic  kapet á nios The ó doros 
Kolokotr ó nis, served at this time with the British forces. 
 Another important development was the foundation of the Friendly Society 
(
 [i ﬁ li ' ci ete ' ria]) in Odessa in 1814. While other organizations had 
promoted educational and cultural projects, this one sought national liberation by 
armed insurrection. Its initiators and chief supporters were mainly members of the 

Ottoman Rule and the War of Independence 377
lower middle class, and an important factor in its success was the ﬁ ction, never denied, 
that it had the ofﬁ cial support of the Russians, seen by many as future liberators. This 
ﬁ ction was sustained through the society ’ s attempts to forge connections with impor-
tant expatriate Greeks such as Count Io á nnis Kapod í strias, joint foreign minister of 
Tsar Alexander I, and the tsar ’ s aide - de - camp Prince Al é xandros Ypsil á ndis, who 
eventually became the society ’ s leader in 1820.  
 13.3   Revolution and Independence 
 In the summer of that year, as the Ottoman government was attempting to restrain 
Ali Pasha, the maverick ruler of mainland Greece, Ypsil á ndis saw his opportunity. 
While large numbers of Ottoman troops were engaged in Greece, an invasion of the 
Danubian principalities was planned for the spring of 1821 in the hope that Russia 
might be drawn into the struggle. Though this assault proved disastrous, it provided 
a useful distraction from the uprisings which took place in the Peloponnese almost 
simultaneously, perhaps as part of a co - ordinated strategy. The revolt spread quickly 
to parts of mainland Greece north of the isthmus, and to the islands of Hydra, Sp é tses 
and Psar á , the home of a now powerful Greek navy that guaranteed Greek control of 
the seas and proved to be a major factor in their eventual success. 
 In the short term, however, the Greeks had little hope of victory without western 
support, and although the execution of the patriarch Greg ó rios V for his failure to 
guarantee the loyalty of the sultan ’ s Orthodox subjects provoked widespread outrage, 
the European powers maintained a neutral position until 1823. Nevertheless, news of 
the Greek revolt won support from enlightened opinion throughout Europe, and led 
to the establishment of philhellenic societies dedicated to fundraising and the recruit-
ment of volunteers, including Lord Byron, whose death from fever at Mesol ó ngi in 
1824 promoted wider international awareness of the struggle. 
 In 1824 and 1825 the war began to turn in favour of the Ottoman forces, but the 
Greek effort in sustaining the ﬁ ght brought about a change of attitude among the 
western powers, and Britain now joined with Russia in proposing an autonomous 
Greek state, undertaking, with France, to impose mediation on the warring parties. 
Though the Greeks endorsed the terms proposed, the Ottoman government refused to 
suspend hostilities, whereupon its ﬂ eet was destroyed at the battle of Navar í no (Pylos) 
by combined British, Russian and French forces on 20 October 1827. 
 Some form of Greek independence was now assured, and Kapod í strias, who had 
been elected president  in absentia , arrived in Greece in January 1828. He immediately 
alienated all shades of opinion with his autocratic style, and was eventually assassi-
nated in October 1831, but in the meantime, the conference convened to consider the 
frontier question recommended a boundary running from Arta to V ó los as a basis for 
negotiation with the Ottoman government. Thereupon the search began for a king (the 
great powers having decided in their wisdom that Greece should be a monarchy), and 
some reforms were attempted, including the setting up of a national army, an admin-
istrative bureaucracy and an education system. 
 But the war had led to internal confrontation between ﬁ ghting men like the former 
kleftic leader The ó doros Kolokotr ó nis, and elements of the traditional elite of land-

378 Modern Greek
owners, naval captains and Phanariot politicians. The former thought mainly in terms 
of a religious struggle against Turkish/Islamic oppression, and hoped to impose their 
own oligarchy in the event of a successful outcome, with the church retaining its tra-
ditional role; the latter conceived of the revolution in overtly nationalist terms, and 
planned for a modern, secular state on western lines. Though the westernizers were a 
minority, their education and external connections, combined with the need to retain 
European backing, allowed them to force through their vision of the future. But their 
superimposition of western - style government on a conservative and still rather oriental 
rural society created tensions which had a profound effect on Greek politics for much 
of the country ’ s subsequent history. 
 Despite these problems, and the temporary anarchy following the murder of 
Kapod í strias, the hereditary sovereignty of Greece was ﬁ nally offered in 1832 to Prince 
Frederick Otto, second son of King Ludwig of Bavaria. A country called  ‘ Greece ’ , 
against all earlier expectation, had achieved its formal independence from the Ottoman 
empire, with its provisional capital at N á fplion in the Peloponnese. The young king 
duly arrived there on a British warship in February 1833, to be greeted by an ecstatic 
crowd, though this early enthusiasm proved to be short - lived (see chapter  16 ). But 
before considering subsequent developments, not least the challenge of creating a 
uniﬁ ed  ‘ modern Greek ’ identity from a ragbag of ancient myths, Byzantine traditions 
and heterogeneous contemporary  realia , we must ﬁ rst examine the impact on the 
Greek language of nearly 400 years of Ottoman rule. See Clogg  (1973, 1976, 2002)  
for further background to the struggle for independence.  

14
 Spoken Greek in the 
Ottoman Period 
 14.1   The Impact of Turkish 
 The Greek of the areas under Ottoman control, including eventually the dialects of 
Cyprus and Crete, naturally began to adopt Turkish vocabulary. Where Greek remained 
the dominant language and bilingualism was limited, the loans were typically nouns 
(and to a lesser extent, adjectives) borrowed to describe new social, political, cultural 
and religious objects and institutions. In general, these words were adapted to Greek 
phonology in fairly predictable ways. The chief correspondences are as follows: 
 (1)  (a)  ç 
  and c 
  >  t s [ts] and  t z [dz]  
 (b)  
  >  s / " [s]  
 (c)  ğ   >  g 
  (originally denoting a voiced velar/palatal fricative, this merely 
marks a preceding vowel as long in modern Turkish)  
 (d)  ö [ œ ]  >  e / o  [e/o]  
 (e)  ü [y]  >  o  u [u]  
 (f) 
 ı [  ]  >  i [i]  
 Nouns and adjectives were also morphologically assimilated to established 
paradigms: 1 
 (2)  (a)  In the case of nouns ending in a vowel denoting inanimate objects, some 
of those in   - a , such as  boya [boja]  ‘ paint ’ , were taken over directly as 
feminines, 
 [bo ' ja] (cf. the native type 
 [ja ' ja]  ‘ grandmother ’ ); 
others, such as  yaka [jaka]  ‘ collar ’ ,  teneke  
  ‘ tin ’ , acquired a ﬁ nal 
 - " [ - s] and appear as masculines, 
 [ja ' kas], 
 (cf. (2b)).  
 (b)  Nouns ending in a vowel denoting males, like  baba [baba]  ‘ dad ’ , also 
added a ﬁ nal  - " [ - s], 
 [ba ' bas] (cf. the native type 
 [pso ' mas] 
 ‘ baker ’ ). 
 (c)  Nouns in   - i or   - ı that denote objects, such as  cami 
  ‘ mosque ’  and 
 rak ı [rak  ]  ‘ raki ’  naturally appeared as neuters in  [ - ' i], 
 [dza ' mi]/
 [ra ' ci] (cf. the native type 
 [pe ' i]  ‘ child ’ ). 

380 Modern Greek
 (d)  In the case of nouns ending in a consonant, those denoting objects, like 
 sokak  [sokak]  ‘ street ’ , typically added  - i [ - i] and appear as neuters, 
 
[so ' kaci] (cf. the native type 
 [ ' ç eri]  ‘ hand ’ ), though there are excep-
tions such as  cep 
  ‘ pocket ’  > feminine 
 [ ' tsepi]; 2 those denoting 
people, such as  bakkal  [bakkal]  ‘ grocer ’ , added  - h " [ - is] (cf. the type of 
agent nouns like 
 [ ' naftis]  ‘ sailor ’ ) to give 
 [ba ' kalis] etc.  
 (e)  Turkish agent nouns in   - ci 
 , or, given that Turkish sufﬁ xes are 
subject to vowel harmony determined by the quality of the vowels in the 
root words to which they are attached,   - c ı ,  - cu and   - c ü 
 
 
 , were standardized with the sufﬁ x 
 [ - ' dzis]. Examples include 
 [boja ' dzis]  ‘ painter ’  <  boya - c ı 
 , 
 
  ‘ tinsmith ’   <  teneke - ci 
 , and 
 [paputsis] 
 ‘ shoemaker ’   <  papu ç - ç u 
 , where the voiceless ﬁ nal consonant of 
the root has devoiced the initial consonant of the sufﬁ x. There are also 
many examples of more recent formation, in which the sufﬁ x is added 
to a non - Turkish element, such as 
 [violi ' dzis]  ‘ violinist ’ and 
 [taksi ' dzis]  ‘ taxi - driver ’ . 3 
 (f) 
 Adjectives ending in a consonant often acquired the sufﬁ x  - h " [ - is], e.g. 
 tembel [tembel]  ‘ lazy ’  > 
 [te ' (m)belis]. The feminine of this type 
was in  - a [ - a]; the neuter in  - i k o  [ - iko] was borrowed from the regular 
paradigm in  - i k o  " [ - ikos], which was also exploited, e.g.  bol [bol] 
 ‘ abundant ’   > 
 [ ' bolikos] (cf.  11.7.7 ). 
 (g)  Adjectives ending in  -  i (or its vowel - harmonic equivalents) usually 
appeared in Greek with the accented sufﬁ x 
 [ -' is] (cf. the type 
 
[ura ' nis]  ‘ sky - blue ’ ), e.g. 
 [adza ' mis]  ‘ unskilled, clumsy ’  <  acemi 
 , with feminine in 
 [ ' ja], neuter in  [ - ' i], phonetically analo-
gous to 
 [ ' ja]/( < 
 [ - ' i]  ‘ sweet ’ . 
 For the most part verbs were not borrowed. Those that were were standardly formed 
by the addition of the productive 
 [ - ' izo] to the Turkish past - tense stem 
formed with the sufﬁ x / - di - / (with vowel harmony): e.g.  kavur - mak [ka(v)urmak], 
 ‘ to roast ’ , past - tense stem  kavur - du - , producing Greek 
 
 . 
 Particularly interesting is the large number of set phrases and idiomatic or ﬁ gura-
tive usages which Greek and Turkish came to share through loan translation. To 
mention just a few of the more obvious examples, the standard greetings 
 and  ho ş geldiniz 
 , lit.  ‘ well 
you - came ’ , and the standard replies 
 [ka ' los sas vrikame] and  ho ş 
bulduk 
 , lit.  ‘ well (you) we - found ’ , correspond almost exactly morph for 
morph. Similarly, the varied uses of 
 [o ' riste] and  buyurun [buirun] (used to 
invite someone to enter, to ask someone what they want, or to repeat or accept some-
thing, etc.) are very largely parallel, and both forms are originally imperatives of verbs 
meaning  ‘ command ’ . Other common phrases of politeness include 
 
[perasti ' ka [sas]]/
 , lit.  ‘ passing (for you) ’ / ‘ past let - it be ’ , 
said to someone who is ill, and 
 [ja sta  ' ç erja su]/
 [eline 
sa:l  k], lit.  ‘ health to - the hands of - you ’ / ‘ hand - your - to health ’ , said to a cook who has 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 381
prepared a delicious meal. Though some of these seem to be the product of Turkish 
inﬂ uence on Greek, we must be wary of assuming that the process was entirely one 
way. The phrase 
 [ka ' los imas  ' evromen]  ' well you we - found ’ , for 
example, is used by Konstant í nos Porphyrog é nnetos, while 
 [ka ' los ' ilθes] is 
a routine greeting in vernacular texts like the  Chronicle of the Morea  (e.g. l. 4101) long 
before any major Turkish inﬂ uence on mainstream Greek can plausibly be assumed. 
 Though a large number of words and phrases of Turkish origin remain in common 
use today, equally large numbers have disappeared, either because the circumstances 
conditioning their use have themselves passed into history or as a direct result of lan-
guage planning and lexical replacement in the years following independence (see chapter 
 17 ). One of the difﬁ culties involved in reading folk songs composed in the later Ottoman 
period and for some time after (see  14.3 ), or even prose written in the colloquial Greek 
of the period of the war of independence, is the large number of Turkish loans that have 
since fallen out of use or become restricted to the most colloquial registers. 
 The most important such prose work is the memoirs of General Makriy á nnis, one of 
the great commanders of the war, who taught himself to write, employing an idiosyn-
cratic phonetic spelling system, in order to record his achievements and his ambitions 
for his country. These were ﬁ nally published in a conventional orthography (obliterat-
ing much phonetic detail) at the beginning of this century, revealing a simple and vigor-
ous popular Greek of the period c.1830, and a style that displays the natural drive and 
rhetorical skill of a born leader. Apart from its inherent interest, Makriy á nnis ’ work 
stands as a virtually unique example of  ‘ demotic ’ prose from an era otherwise domi-
nated by the learned conventions of the literary/bureaucratic tradition. Some apparently 
unselfconscious examples of Turkish vocabulary now defunct or employed with deroga-
tory/colloquial meanings include: 
  ‘ army ’  (now  ‘ rabble ’ ); 
 
[za ' pitis]  ‘ policeman ’ ; 
  ‘ belt ’ ; 
  ‘ steward ’ ; 
 
[tsa ' sitis]  ‘ spy ’ ; 
 [xoz ' meti]  ‘ service ’ ; 
 [tsira ' klici]   ‘ apprenticeship ’ ; 
  ‘ cowardly ’  (colloquial); 
 [kazan ' dizo]  ‘ win/gain ’ (now  ‘ make a 
pile ’ ). 
 In most areas where large Greek communities survived, the inﬂ uence of Turkish 
was conﬁ ned to such lexical borrowings. But in eastern and central Anatolia, where 
Turkish inﬂ uence began earlier and apostasy and bilingualism were more routine, the 
spoken dialects of the increasingly beleaguered Greek villages eventually began to show 
phonological and grammatical convergence with the dominant language (see  14.2.5 ). 
 14.2   The Spoken Dialects of Modern Greek 
 14.2.1   Introduction:  d iversiﬁ cation, and the  b asis 
for a  m odern  s poken  s tandard 
 As communications became more difﬁ cult with the breakdown of central authority 
and the advent of kleftic bands, the mass of people in the provinces of the empire came 
to lead rather circumscribed lives, and though the standard speech of the educated 
continued (alongside archaizing written Greek) to form a relatively stable conservative 
core, the popular regional dialects began to diverge quite rapidly, especially at the 
periphery. 

382 Modern Greek
 The geographically remote varieties of Pontus and Cappadocia had already started 
to develop idiosyncratically when the ties with Byzantium were weakened by the Seljuk 
invasions of the 11th century. Similar observations apply to the South Italian dialects, 
which were detached from the Byzantine mainstream by the Norman conquests in the 
same period, and we have already seen that the southern dialects of Cyprus and Crete 
had begun to take on their characteristically local forms as a result of disrupted 
Byzantine administration and the subsequent advent of Latin government  (12.4) . Even 
rural parts of Greece itself had acquired many local idiosyncracies during the middle 
ages, partly through the dislocating effects of Slavic and then Albanian immigration 
(the latter reaching a climax in the 14th century), partly through the impact of Latin 
rule. We may take as early illustrations the problems experienced by Micha é l Choni á tes 
with the Athenian patois ( 11.1 ,  11.2 ), and the evidence for major sound change in the 
vowel systems of northern dialects during the 12th century (see  14.2.6 below). 
 The continuation of such regional developments during the Ottoman period, in 
conjunction with various population movements (some major), led to the creation and 
consolidation of the principal dialect divisions of modern Greek, as summarized in (3) 
(cf. Newton  (1972) , Browning ( 1983 : 119 – 37), Christ í dis  (1999, 2000) , Tzitzil í s 
(2000), Kondos ó poulos  (2001) , Trudgill  (2003) ): 
 (3)  (a)  Pontic, still spoken in mainland Greece and in the region of Trebizond, 
with offshoots in Georgia, Abkhazia and areas of the Caucasus south of 
Rostov (see Oikonom í dis  (1958) , Drettas  (1995, 1999, 2000) , Mackridge 
 (1999) , Pappo ú - Zour á vliova  (1999) ); and Cappadocian, together with 
the dialects of Ph á rasa and S í lli (see Dawkins  (1916) , Janse (in press)). 
Pontic is now residual, Cappadocian on the brink of extinction.  
 (b)  South - eastern, spoken on Chios, in the Dodecanese and in Cyprus. (See 
Pernot  (1907b) , Tsopan á kis  (1940) , Newton  (1970) , Chatziio á nnou 
(1999), Karyol é mou  (2000) .) 
 (c)  Cretan - Cycladic. (See Thumb  (1897) , Anagnost ó poulos  (1926) , P á ngalos 
 (1955) , Kondos ó poulos  (1970) ,  Í mellos  (1963) .) 
 (d)  Peloponnesian - Heptanesian, including other offshore islands; this region 
provided the principal vernacular input to the formation of standard 
modern Greek, on which see below. (See Pantel í dis  (2001) .) 
 (e)  Tsakonian, surviving residually in remote villages on the eastern slopes of 
Mt Parnon in the Peloponnese, but also once spoken by colonists on the 
southern shore of the Sea of Marmara. The ancient Laconian dialect of 
the eastern Peloponnese was only partly assimilated to the ancient Koine 
(cf.  4.4.3 ), and though subject to further inﬂ uence from the mainstream 
in the middle ages and subsequently, some archaisms still persist. (See 
Pernot  (1934) , Kost á kis  (1951, 1980) , Charalamb ó poulos  (1980) ). 
 (f) 
 Old Athenian, surviving residually in Megara, central Euboea and, if this 
is properly to be included here, the Mani. (See F á vis  (1911) , Chatzid á kis 
 (1915/16) , Mirambel  (1929) , Karatz á s  (1944) , Alexandr í s  (1958) .) 
 (g)  Northern, spoken widely in the mainland north of Attica and in the 
northern Aegean, though see below on the impact of the standard. (See 
Papad ó poulos  (1927) , Andri ó tis  (1933, 1943/4) , Symp ó sio  (1977) .) 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 383
 (h)  South Italian, surviving residually in isolated villages of Apulia and 
Calabria, apparently with many archaisms preserved from the ancient 
speech of Magna Graecia, despite Byzantine overlays. (See Rohlfs  (1924, 
1930, 1933, 1950, 1962) , Karatz á s  (1958) , Prof í li (1999a, 1999b), 
Katsoy á nnou  (1999) , Manol é ssou  (2005b) .) 
 In the later Byzantine and Turkish periods, however, the Peloponnesian area was 
unique within Greece in a number of respects. Once it had been recovered after the 
Slavic invasions of the early middle ages, it remained a Byzantine possession until the 
arrival of the Franks in the 13th century. But large areas were then restored to 
Byzantine rule, and by the middle of the 14th century towns such as Mystr á s had again 
become major centres of Byzantine culture. Even under Ottoman rule after 1461 the 
Peloponnese retained a large class of powerful Greek landowners, who eventually 
began to engage in trade in line with the upsurge of Greek commercial activity in the 
18th century. The resulting development of the Peloponnesian towns and ports revived 
contacts with the great centres of Greek population both inside and outside the empire, 
while the Ionian islands, though themselves outside the empire, provided a major 
gateway between Italy and Ottoman Greece. 
 Much of this region had therefore remained closely linked with Constantinople and 
the Greek mainstream from the middle Byzantine period through into the declining 
years of the Ottoman empire. The Byzantine heritage was well sustained, and in the 
years before independence, the educated speech of Constantinople, Smyrna, the 
Danubian courts and the major expatriate communities was widely in use in its com-
mercial and cultural centres. Such long - term links inevitably had a constraining effect 
on the spoken varieties of this core region, which neither developed the radical innova-
tions nor retained the more striking archaisms that came to characterize more periph-
eral regions. 
 The fact that the war of independence was initially carried to a successful conclusion 
in this area inevitably led to its dialects becoming the principal  ‘ popular ’ component 
in the evolution of a new spoken standard in the independent kingdom. These were 
easily subsumed beneath elite spoken varieties, whose impact was reinforced by the 
aristocratic and middle - class immigrants who ﬂ ooded into Greece to take up positions 
of power and responsibility. The creation of state institutions, and the eventual building 
of a new capital in Athens, soon provided the social, cultural and political focus neces-
sary for the forging of a new spoken norm from these components. This continued to 
be inﬂ uenced in its higher forms by the traditional written language, however, and 
eventually by the impact of the increasingly acrimonious debate about the form this 
should take in the future (see chapter  17 ). 
 With a few residual differences, an evolved version of this form of Modern Greek 
has now replaced the former local varieties in most of southern and central Greece, 
including Athens and many neighbouring areas once dominated by Albanians, in 
Thessaloniki and areas of the north previously occupied by Slavs, Vlachs, Albanians 
and Turks, and in many of the smaller Aegean islands. Indeed, with the partial excep-
tion of Cyprus, dialect speech everywhere is succumbing to the standardizing effects 
of universal education, access to mass media, the ﬂ ight of the young to the cities, and 
the advent of easy mobility. 

384 Modern Greek
 The development of the various spoken dialects in the period before independence 
is a highly complex and specialized subject, and it cannot be examined in detail here. 
Some of the most important issues will, however, be taken up brieﬂ y in the following 
sections. 
 14.2.2   Local  v ernaculars in the  c entral  r egion; Soﬁ an ó s ’   g rammar and 
the  e ducated  s tandard 
 Within the core Greek - speaking area comprising mainland Greece, Constantinople 
and the western coast of Asia Minor, including most of the immediately offshore 
islands (cf. Karatz á s ( 1958 : 26 – 39) for the notions of  ‘ core ’ and  ‘ periphery ’ ), the 
Ottoman period probably saw the completion of the ﬁ nal stages of the characteristi-
cally  ‘ northern ’ sound changes discussed in 14.2.6, producing forms such as [put ' kos] 
(Thasos)  < 
 [po(n)di ' kos]  ‘ mouse ’ , and 
 (Ay á ssos on Lesbos)  < 
  ‘ feel sympathy for ’ . Similar but probably independent develop-
ments also took place in the popular speech of rural areas in Asia Minor, including 
those further to the east. 
 The regularization of either the genitive or the accusative of clitic pronouns to mark 
the indirect object had probably been settled well before the Turkish period (see 
Lend á ri and Manol é ssou  (2003) ), with the genitive favoured in the south, and the 
accusative in the north, including in this case the dialects of Constantinople and most 
of Asia Minor. But the selection of partially distinct sets of endings in the north and 
south for those parts of the verb paradigm still in ﬂ ux in the Byzantine era clearly 
belongs to this period; an obvious example is the imperfect medio - passive (cf.  11.8.6 
(e)). Indeed, much of the variation inherited from the middle ages now started to be 
settled region by region. The choice between  - s a [sa] and  - k a [ka] as the regular aorist 
of vowel - stem verbs, for example, was standardly resolved in favour of the former, 
with the latter prevailing only in Epirus and a geographically more or less coherent 
area comprising parts of the Peloponnese (excluding the Mani) and the region of Old 
Athenian speech. Many of the archaic oddities of the latter had begun as a result of 
the city ’ s greatly reduced importance in the middle Byzantine period, but the tendency 
to autonomous development was reinforced by later Albanian immigration, which, by 
Ottoman times, had turned Megara, Aegina, Athens and Kyme (in Euboea) into Greek 
enclaves. 
 Though some northern grammatical characteristics still persist as variants in Modern 
Greek (e.g. the use of accusative indirect object pronouns), it was, as noted, develop-
ments in the Peloponnesian - Heptanesian vernaculars that chieﬂ y predominated, as 
shaped by features of the more or less common educated speech of the core region, 
and we must therefore consider now the evidence provided by the ﬁ rst grammar of 
the vernacular of the Greek intelligentsia in the Ottoman period, written during the 
ﬁ rst half of the 16th century by the Corﬁ ot Nik ó laos Soﬁ an ó s. 
 The Ionian islands had come under Venetian rule after the fourth crusade (whence 
their commonly used Italian names, e.g. Corfu for K é rkyra, Zante for Z á kynthos), and 
remained so until ceded ﬁ rst to France and then to Britain (cf. chapter  13 ). From the 
16th century we have a collection of poetry in a literary version of the spoken language 
of the times, and though the Heptanesian aristocracy became increasingly Italianized, 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 385
the Greek vernacular tradition survived in the oral songs and poetry of country areas, 
and was later reinforced by the advent of Cretan refugees after the fall of the island 
to the Turks in 1669. In the present context, however, the most important document 
of the period is Soﬁ an ó s ’  grammar (Legrand  (1874) ), the motivation for which derived 
from contemporary Italian movements to elevate certain varieties of the spoken lan-
guage to written status. Though not published until the 19th century, it is an important 
reminder that there were already in the 16th century people who believed that a sys-
tematic account could be given of  ‘ common/vulgar ’  Greek, and that the production of 
such a grammar was a worthwhile exercise. This work was followed in the 17th 
century by the grammatical writings of Girolamo Germano (Pernot  (1907a) ), Simon 
Portius (Meyer - L ü bke  (1889) ) and Roman ó s Nikef ó ros (unpublished, but cf. Legrand 
( 1874 : 14 – 19)), and in the 18th century by a lexicon of spoken Greek compiled by 
Father Alexis de Sommevoir (Alessio de Somavera  (1709) , cf. Legrand et al.  (1918, 
1928) ), though it is probably no accident that three of these linguistic pioneers were 
foreigners. 
 Soﬁ an ó s himself was educated in Rome, where he worked for a time copying Greek 
manuscripts and publishing drawings of ancient sites in Greece. He then moved to 
Venice where he resolved to address the problem of the lack of modern teaching mate-
rials by planning a series of introductory works in and about the contemporary lan-
guage, and by translating Ancient Greek classics. In the dedication to Book One of his 
Grammar he informs the reader of his motives: 
 (4)  Cum viderem plerasque nationes  … hac nostra tempestate suas certatim linguas 
exornare, non solum scribendo res scitu dignas  … verum ad regulas Grammatices dili-
genter eas dirigendo, coepi etiam ipse cogitare an operae pretium facturus essem, si 
linguam nostram, qua vulgo Graeci utimur, ad methodum et canonas revocarem, et putavi 
me non inanem laborem suscepturum, ut hi qui graecae linguae studio tenentur non solum 
veterem illum Graecorum sermonem, sed recentiorem et hunc percipere possent; tum etiam 
ut qui vellent in Graecia et ﬁ nitimis illi regionibus Turcarum imperio subjectis versari 
facile sibi commercium pararent. Dum igitur hanc nostram, quam vocant vulgarem, 
linguam cum illa antiquorum confero  … reperi multis in rebus hanc nostram vetere illa 
minime inferiorem esse.   (Legrand ( 1874 : 25))  
 ‘ When I saw that most nations  … in our time honour their ( spoken ) languages with 
enthusiasm not only by writing things worthy of note in them  … but by diligently reduc-
ing them to the rules of Grammar, I myself began to wonder whether it would be worth 
my while if I brought our language, which we Greeks use for everyday purposes, back to 
order and rule, and I thought it would not be a waste of effort that those engaged in the 
study of Greek should be able to understand not only the ancient language of the Greeks 
but also the more recent, and further that those who wanted to travel in Greece and the 
adjacent territories subject to the Turkish empire might readily communicate. So while I 
was comparing this language of ours, which they call  “ vulgar ” , with that of the ancients 
 … I found that in many respects ours was very little inferior to the ancient one. ’ 
 A grammar in three parts is promised (morphology, orthography and syntax), together 
with a lexicon, but the surviving manuscripts, one in the Biblioth è que Nationale in 
Paris and one in the Vatican, contain only the ﬁ rst part, comprising a list of the parts 

386 Modern Greek
of speech and a set of illustrative morphological paradigms, of which he observes in 
his closing remarks: 
 (5)  
 
 
 ‘ And let no one grumble if he now sees in such a common form of language that even 
women may pretty well understand it, those items ( i.e. paradigms etc. ) that are learned 
under duress over long years and periods with great labour and good teachers ( i.e. in the 
traditional education system based on Ancient Greek ), because  … in this way young men 
will abandon their reluctance to study in their Greek classes. ’ 
 Though this reveals all too clearly the position of women at the time, Soﬁ an ó s ’ imple-
mentation of the proposal to make the contemporary language an object of study by 
providing a grammar gives us an insider ’ s account of the contemporary spoken lan-
guage of the privileged elite (i.e. those who could afford to send their children to 
school). As expected, we ﬁ nd a version of Greek morphology considerably removed 
from the conventions of the standard written language, but it is striking how conserva-
tive it still is by comparison with developments seen in the vernacular literature of the 
14th and 15th centuries. Certain features may simply be graphic conventions carried 
over from the standard orthography (ﬁ nal  - n (n), for example, is consistently noted, 
and synizesis is not represented by a shift of the written accent), but the following are 
revealing: 
 (6)  (a)  The syllabic augment is used uniformly in all past tenses.  
 (b)  The extension of the  k a - paradigm to the aorist passive is restricted to 1sg.  
 (c)  (i) 
 The 
 [ - ' eo] class of contract verbs shows little sign of collapse 
with the 
 [ - ' ao] type, and retains its ancient present paradigm. It 
does, however, show a mixed imperfect combining ancient forms 
(e.g. 1sg 
 [e ' kratun]  ‘ I was keeping ’ , 2pl 
 [ekra ' tite]) 
with different types of innovation (e.g. 2/3sg 
 [e ' kratjes]/
 [e ' kratje], 1pl 
 [ekra ' tuman] and 3pl 
 
[ekra ' tusan]). Subsequently, many dialects, including the modern 
standard, generalized  - o  u s - [ - us - ] throughout, but in some Aegean 
and Heptanesian varieties a split system developed, with  - e i - [ - j - ] in 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 387
the singular and  - o  u s - [ - us - ] in the plural. The origins of this can be 
seen plainly here.  
 (ii) 
 The present passive is similarly mixed (retaining ancient 
 [ - ' u - ], 
but substituting 
 [ - ' je - ] for 
 [ - ' i - ]), and the imperfect passive 
has been reworked (retaining only 1pl 
 , 
but as yet without a coherent overall pattern of innovation).  
 (d)  The 
 [ - ' ao] type, however, shows the expected substitution of 
 [ - ' u - ] 
for 
 [ - ' o - ] except in 3pl present passive and 1/3pl imperfect passive 
(which is odd in other respects). In the imperfect active the innovative 
 
[ - ' us - ] formant has been generalized from 3pl to 1pl (though the sufﬁ x 
remains  - m e n [ - men] rather than following the 
 [ - ' eo] type in having  ‘ past -
 tense ’  - m a n [ - man] (there are many such minor inconsistencies across para-
digms). The extension of the 
 [ - ' je - ] formant to the passive paradigm 
of this class (as in the  Chronicle of the Morea ) is not in evidence.  
 (e)  Though 3rd - declension consonant stems normally have modern nom sg 
in  - a [ - a]/ - a " [ - as] (except in feminines ending in  - t h " [ - tis] such as 
 
[ka ' kotis]  ‘ wickedness ’ ), and modern acc pl in [ - es] (usually written  - a i " ), 
the acc sg and gen sg still end in  - a [ - a] and  - o  " [ - os]; the latter has even 
been extended to a few 1st - declension nouns like 
 [ko ' pela]/gen 
 [kope ' los]  ‘ girl ’ (on the model of 
 /gen 
 [θiγa ' tros]   ‘ daughter ’ ), a characteristic Heptanesian feature.  
 (f) 
 The traditional i - stem paradigm is retained except, oddly, in nom/acc pl, 
where the common form  - e " [ - es] is given.  
 (g)  The old eu - stem paradigm is retained except once again in the nom. sg. 
(e.g. 
 [vasi ' leas]  ‘ king ’ ). 
 What we seem to have, then, is a snapshot of a language in transition, an elite version 
of the vernacular that contains many innovative morphological features familiar from 
late Byzantine texts, but which also shows evidence of retarded development vis - à - vis 
more popular varieties. Thus Soﬁ an ó s offers only 
 + inﬁ nitive as the future 
tense. Since we know that  q e  n a 
 / q a  n a 
 + subjunctive was already widely 
used in the 16th century, it seems that these have been censored as too colloquial. On 
the other hand, the pluperfect is given in two forms, 
 [ ' ixa] + perfect passive par-
ticiple and 
 + aorist inﬁ nitive, while the corresponding perfect with 
 [ ' exo] is 
represented only by the participial construction. Clearly the inﬁ nitival perfect had yet 
to be formed to the model of the pluperfect, and given the absence of this innovation 
in even the most vernacular texts of the late Byzantine period, we may be conﬁ dent 
that the gap was not exclusive to educated varieties (cf. also Thumb ’ s assertion about 
the continued rarity of the inﬁ nitival perfect in the popular spoken Greek of the 19th 
century (1912: 162 – 3)). 
 Nevertheless, a number of issues are decisively settled. The spoken language of the 
educated classes in the 16th century did not include the dative case, inﬂ ected partici-
ples, or the inﬁ nitive (other than as a fossilized complement to 
  ‘ I will ’ and 
 [ ' exo]  ‘ I have ’ ), even if such elements retained a place in the most formal speech 
and the traditional written language. Though Soﬁ an ó s continues to recognize the full 
set of traditional grammatical categories as abstract entities, presumably in line with 

388 Modern Greek
his intention to show that Modern Greek has all the resources of its predecessor, he 
does not hesitate to list genitive forms as instantiations of the  ‘ dative ’  or to give  n a 
[na] + subjunctive as the form of the  ‘ inﬁ nitive ’ . Similarly, though the spellings 
reveal the inﬂ uence of ancient optative forms, the  ‘ optative ’  itself appears as 
a periphrasis (e.g. 
  ‘ I - wish that s/he - may - write ’ , 
  ‘ I - wish that s/he - had written ’ ). It is 
signiﬁ cant, however, that such ancient - style spellings are used only where the 
pronunciation of the modern form is unaffected (cf. 2/3sg aorist subjunctive 
 , but 3pl 
 ). 
 There are also a number of oddities that defy explanation, most notably the inclu-
sion of a so - called  ‘ second aorist ’ , which consists of 
 [ ' ixa]  ‘ I had ’ + the imperfective 
inﬁ nitive, otherwise attested only in hypothetical conditionals meaning  ‘ would (have) ’ . 
The fact that 3pl present  - o  u n [ - un]/ - o  u s i [ - usi] and past  - a n [ - an]/ - a s i [ - asi] are 
given as free variants with indicative forms, while in  ‘ optatives ’  and  ‘ inﬁ nitives ’ after 
 n a [na] we have only  - o  u n [ - un], and in  ‘ subjunctives ’ after 
 [ean] only  - o  u s i [ - usi], 
is equally intriguing, but again lacks obvious corroboration in documentation of the 
period. 
 14.2.3   Greek in the west: the South Italian  d ialects 
 Magna Graecia had become a major centre of Greek civilization in the ancient world 
with the establishment of many important cities of predominantly Doric speech in the 
8th and 7th centuries BC. Hellenization of the area seems to have been quite compre-
hensive; the whole of Sicily, for example, was Greek - speaking by the 1st century BC, 
though communities of Sikels, Sikans and Elymians doubtless survived in the remoter 
districts of the east and the interior. The expansion of Rome, and with it the use of 
Latin, eventually restricted the role of Greek, though a reading of Petronius ’  Satyricon 
(1st century AD) reveals a southern Italian world in which Greeks and Greek remained 
prominent, while the historian Tacitus in the same period refers to Naples (a Greek 
foundation: 
 [ne ' apolis] =  ‘ Newtown ’ ) as  urbs quasi Graeca ,  ‘ a quasi - 
Greek city ’ . 
 Though there is debate about the continuity of Greek from antiquity into the 
Byzantine period, 4 there was certainly an inﬂ ux of Greek speakers following 
Ioustinian ó s ’  reconquest, and we should therefore not be surprised to learn that Greek 
was still spoken widely as a native language in north - western Sicily, Calabria and 
Apulia at the beginning of the second millennium ad, a situation supported by a con-
tinuous tradition of Greek Orthodoxy and intermittent Byzantine rule (punctuated by 
Lombard and Arab invasions) that was only terminated by the Norman conquest at 
the end of the 11th century. Refugees from the Slav and Avar invasions of the 
Peloponnese in the 6th/7th centuries, clerics ﬂ eeing the Iconoclast controversy of the 
8th century, and settlers from other areas during the period of territorial gains from 
the Arabs in the late 9th and 10th centuries all helped to sustain the area ’ s close links 
with the culture and traditions of Byzantium, and even after 1071 the Norman kings 
and the Hohenstaufens cultivated learning in Greek, Latin and Arabic, thus allowing 
the region to hold on to its Byzantine heritage until at least the 14th century. 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 389
 The koineization process of the Hellenistic and Roman periods proceeded much as 
in other areas where West Greek was long - established, and produced spoken varieties 
with a considerable dialect residue. Subsequently, the presence of Byzantine administra-
tors, together with the arrival of monks, refugees and settlers from other parts of the 
empire, reinforced the use in educated society of traditional forms of written Greek 5 
and the spoken standard, both of which served to keep local vernaculars in touch with 
the mainstream of medieval Greek development. None the less, the severing of the 
political connection with the empire after 1071, combined with a steady inﬂ ux of 
Italians and the spread of Catholicism, led to a gradual decline of Greek language and 
culture, and to autonomous dialectal development as areas of Greek speech were 
reduced to isolated enclaves. But we should be careful not to exaggerate the speed of 
the process: Petrarch in the 14th century could still advise someone who wished to 
learn Greek to go to Calabria, and the Orthodox church retained adherents in both 
Calabria and Apulia into the early 17th century. 
 Eventually, however, Greek disappeared completely from Sicily, and the number of 
Greek - speaking villages in southern Italy began to decline sharply during the 18th and 
19th centuries. Thus the fourteen Greek - speaking settlements in each of Calabria and 
Apulia in the early 19th century had fallen to six and eight respectively by the middle 
of the 20th. None the less, Greek still remains in use in two remote and geographically 
separated areas, the mountainous Aspromonte region at the tip of Calabria, and the 
fertile Otranto peninsula south of Lecce in Puglia. The dialect groups concerned are 
often referred to as Bov é zika (after the village of Bova, where Greek is now extinct) 
and Otrand í nika (after the Terra d ’ Otranto). Here Greek is a  ‘ domestic ’ language, and 
bilingualism has produced a situation in which it has partly converged in lexicon and 
grammar with the dominant language. The position of Greek in Calabria is now peril-
ous (c.500 native speakers in the traditional villages, all elderly, though there are 
Greek - speaking communities of migrants in Reggio); in Puglia, by contrast,  ‘ Grico ’ 
survives more strongly (c.20,000 speakers) and there are even efforts at revival. 
 The principal interest of these varieties, apart from providing observable examples 
of the process of  ‘ language death ’ , is that they have preserved a number of archaic 
features, including elements which were once widespread in medieval Greek before 
falling out of mainstream use. Since the same is true of the Asia Minor dialects, any 
points of agreement between the western and eastern peripheries are likely to be of 
signiﬁ cance for the reconstruction of the medieval vernacular. Of particular interest in 
this connection is the retention of inﬁ nitives in both South Italian and the Pontic dia-
lects of the Muslim communities on the Black Sea Coast in the region of Trebizond 
(see Mackridge  (1993b, 1999) , from whom the data below are taken). 6 In the Italian 
dialects, the range of verbs that can optionally be complemented by an inﬁ nitive (per-
fective only) is still quite wide, and includes control verbs (cf. Rohlfs  (1950) ): 
 (7)  
 

390 Modern Greek
 Deffner  (1877) lists parallel uses for Pontic, though these have not been conﬁ rmed by 
Mackridge  (1993) . It seems, however, that this is a fairly recent loss rather than erro-
neous observation, since his ﬁ ndings are conﬁ rmed by Thumb  (1912) , who lists a 
similar range of usage. None the less, the dialects of the region of Oﬁ s east of Trebizond 
residually retain inﬁ nitival complementation with  ‘ want ’  when this is aorist and nega-
tive (the examples here and subsequently come from Sar á kho): 
 (8)  
 
 Note that this dialect retains descendants of the ancient, apparently Ionic, negative 
 [u(k)/u ' ki], generally  ki, but  u or 
 in the Oﬁ s region. 
 Verbs meaning  ‘ be able ’ also take inﬁ nitives, both in South Italian (where a 
 [na] -
 clause alternative is apparently lacking) and Oﬁ tic, though in the latter again only 
when the verb is negative and aorist: 
 (9)  
 
 In addition, the South Italian dialects use inﬁ nitives in indirect questions, a retention 
supported by the corresponding Italian construction (cf.  non ho dove andare/cosa fare ): 
 (10)  
 
 These have no surviving correlates in Pontic, though the construction is common in 
medieval vernacular literature (e.g.  Digen é s Akr í tes (E) 869: 
 [uk 
 ' exo ti pi ' isi], lit.  ‘ not I - have what to - do ’ ;  Chron. Mor.  5830: 
 
[to ti la ' lisi uk  ' i ç en], lit.  ‘ the what to - say not he - had ’ ) and is still in use in Cretan 
Renaissance literature (cf.  14.2.4 ). 
 The abandonment of the inﬁ nitival complementation of control verbs and the 
gradual restriction of the occurrence of the inﬁ nitive to embedded interrogatives and 
future/conditional or potential auxiliaries (the former often generic, the latter almost 
always negative) can be seen clearly in medieval vernacular texts. For example, with 
only one exception (109), the inﬁ nitives in the poem  Span é as are used in prospective/
generic clauses after 
  ‘ will ’ (e.g.  ‘ if anyone does X, s/he will Y ’ ), and in 
potential contexts with negative/interrogative 
 [efpo ' ro]  ‘ can ’ 
(e.g.  ‘ should anyone do X, s/he cannot Y/how can s/he Y? ’ Similarly, in the romances 
of the 14th/15th centuries, both 
 and negated verbs of  ‘ capability ’  may 
routinely take an inﬁ nitive, though inﬁ nitival complementation is already rare with 
both true control verbs and aspectual verbs like  ‘ begin ’ (a reduction accelerated in the 
case of the latter by semantic incompatibility with the increasingly dominant perfective 
inﬁ nitive). Given that the process of reduction never really began in the ordinary Greek 
of the Italian west, and was severely retarded in the east of the Greek - speaking area, 
we may be conﬁ dent that the limited inﬁ nitival usage of later medieval vernacular 
literature is not a learned/archaic feature but in fact offers a fair picture of the spoken 
norm of the period in the central regions (cf. Joseph ( 1983 : 77)). The unique survival 
of 
 [ ' exo]/
 [ ' ixa] + aorist inﬁ nitive in standard modern Greek must then be 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 391
attributed to the isolation of this construction caused by the radical shift from future/
conditional to perfect/pluperfect use. 
 Other archaisms shared by South Italian and Pontic include the avoidance of syn-
izesis and the retention of the ancient aorist imperative in  - s o ( n ) [ - so(n)] (replaced 
elsewhere with  - s e [ - se] modelled on imperfective  - e [ - e]). The ancient aorist participle 
also survives in South Italian (in the modiﬁ ed and uninﬂ ected form   - sonda familiar 
from medieval texts like the  Chronicle of the Morea ), though many other features are 
peculiar to the region, e.g. the use of  t í spo  ‘ anyone ’  < 
 [ ' tispote], lit.  ‘ anyone 
ever ’ , parallel to the standard neuter 
 [ ' tipote]  ‘ anything/nothing ’ . This alterna-
tive to 
 [ka ' nis] once again emphasizes the early independence of this dialect 
group from the mainstream.  
 14.2.4   Greek in the  s outh and  s outh - e ast: the Dodecanese, 
Cyprus and Crete 
 Popular literature continued to be produced in these areas for as long as they remained 
free of Ottoman control. From the Dodecanese, for example, we have a collection of 
love songs and a number of poems by Emmanou í l Yeoryill á s (early 16th century), though 
the cultural life of the islands declined after the Turkish conquest of 1522. Something 
has already been said about the dialect of Cyprus  (12.4.2)  and the extent to which its 
modern characteristics can be traced in the earliest documents. From the 16th century 
we have a collection of love poems (sonnets), composed in the Petrarchan manner, the 
style and quality of which can be seen in the following extract from poem 22: 
 (11)  
 
 
 

392 Modern Greek
 ‘ The hour and the time approach, my lady, when I shall leave you, but now I leave my 
whole self at your command, my angel. And do not be perplexed, my goddess, if, in 
leaving, I am able to leave myself to you; I am leaving, but when I go, as yours, my spirit 
stays with you. ’ 
 The phonetic transcription assumes that written double consonants (including those 
of secondary origin, as in 
 [a ' ﬁ nno]  ‘ I leave behind ’ ) were pronounced double 
as in the modern dialect, and that certain characteristically Cypriot changes, not noted 
in the orthography, had already gone through, e.g. the development of [k, x]  > 
 
before [i] and [e] (now typical of many  ‘ southern ’ dialects, including that of Crete). 
Another south - eastern/Cretan phenomenon is the appearance of  - g - 
 between 
original root - ﬁ nal [a/ev] and a verb ending, as in 
 [kon ' dev - j - i],  ‘ approaches ’ 
(cf.  11.8.5  (d); this verb is derived from 
 [kon ' dos]  ‘ short ’ , ﬁ rst attested in 
Byzantine writers). The retention of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] (with assimilation to a following 
consonant, sometimes noted, sometimes not) is also a south - eastern characteristic, 
while the selection of 3pl present endings in  - o  u s i [ - usi] rather than  - o  u n [ - un], cf. 
 [ ' menusi]  ‘ they remain ’ , is typical not only of Cyprus and the Dodecanese but 
also (in part) of Chios and Crete. 
 A number of individual words and constructions are also worthy of note, over and 
above the various forms of the reﬂ exive/emphatic pronoun (see  12.3.3 ). The particle 
 [am ' m(e)]  ‘ but ’ , for example (elsewhere usually 
 [a ' mi]), derives from  a n 
 m h [am mi]  ‘ if not/unless ’ , while 
 [jon]  ‘ as ’ / ‘ like ’ continues ancient 
 [ ' ion]  ‘ such 
as ’ , and is a regular feature of Cypriot texts. Interestingly, the accusative of the 1sg/2sg 
personal pronouns shows the addition of the recharacterizing ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] familiar from 
the Egyptian papyri of late antiquity, but not the further addition of  - a ( n ) [ - a(n)], a 
striking archaism perhaps in part motivated by the resilience of ﬁ nal nasals in this 
dialect. 
  ‘ I leave ’ is a medieval neologism combining the sufﬁ x 
 with a lexical root borrowed from the Latin perfect passive participle  miss - us 
 ‘ having been sent ’ (from  mittere   ‘ to send ’ ). In the second line, the aorist subjunctive 
of this verb (
 [mi ' sepso], with shift of [fs] to [ps]) forms part of a future periph-
rasis with impersonal 
 [ ' meli na]  ‘ it - will - be that ’ , a medieval Cypriot variant 
of the usual  q e  n a 
 (cf. modern Cypriot 
 [en ' na]  < 
 ). 
 After the Turkish conquest of Cyprus in 1571, the ﬂ ourishing literary culture of the 
island collapsed, and survived only as an oral tradition of folk poetry. Thereafter, the 
most important cultural centre of the Greek - speaking world was the island of Crete, 
where a more integrated urban society had emerged with the decline of the feudal 
system, and intellectual life was stimulated not only by its western connections but 
also by the arrival of scholars and artists from the capital after 1453. 
 In contrast with the earliest Cretan vernacular literature (see  12.4.3 ), the magniﬁ cent 
collection of dramatic and narrative texts dating from the later 16th century onwards 
is composed in a reﬁ ned, and more or less consistent, form of Cretan dialect. The Cretan 
Renaissance, and in particular the revival of drama (which had withered in Byzantium), 
owed much to the inﬂ uence of Italian models. One of its leading ﬁ gures was Ye ó ryios 
Chort á tsis, a contemporary of Shakespeare and El Greco (the Cretan Dom í nikos 
Theotok ó poulos), who wrote the tragedy  Erof í li , the comedy  Katzo ú rbos and the pas-
toral drama  Pan ó ria , a play from each of the genres of contemporary Italian theatre. 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 393
Although Chort á tsis employs the popular 15 - syllable line, his use of it, involving rhyme 
and extensive enjambement, is far removed from the usual practice of folk song (on 
which see  14.3 ). He also uses 11 - syllable lines with  terza rima  in the choruses of  Erof í li. 
 The other surviving plays of this period are the tragedies  King Rodol í nos by Io á nnis 
Andr é as Tr ó ilos, and  Z í non  (possibly composed in the Ionian islands by a refugee after 
the fall of Crete), together with the comedies  St á this (possibly by Chort á tsis and sur-
viving only in a late abridgement) and  Fortoun á tos by M á rkos And ó nios F ó skolos. 
We also have the important biblical drama  The Sacriﬁ ce of Abraham , which is often 
attributed on stylistic grounds to Vits é ntzos Korn á ros, the author of the romantic epic 
 Erot ó kritos  (see below). Dealing with the familiar story of God ’ s command to Abraham 
to sacriﬁ ce his son, the play is a reworking of  Lo Isach  by the Italian playwright Luigi 
Grotto. The play is unique in ignoring the conventional unities, and in having no divi-
sion into acts or scenes. Its versiﬁ cation and language are quite simple, and in some 
ways reminiscent of the folk tradition, but see below on  Erot ó kritos  for important 
qualiﬁ cations that also apply here. For bibliography and further background to Cretan 
drama, see the articles in Holton  (1991a) . 
 The pinnacle of Cretan Renaissance literature, however, is the long romantic poem 
 Erot ó kritos , written in the late 16th/early 17th century by Vits é ntzos Korn á ros in the 
tradition of the Hellenistic romances and their medieval successors (in this case, 
modelled on the French tale of  Paris et Vienne , see Holton  (1991a, 1991c) ). It is a tale 
in ﬁ ve books (comprising some 10,000 lines) about Areto ú sa, daughter of the king of 
Athens, and Rot ó kritos (as his name appears in the text), son of the king ’ s counsellor. 
Rot ó kritos falls in love with Areto ú sa and serenades her without revealing his identity. 
She in turn begins to fall in love with her unknown admirer, but Rot ó kritos, convinced 
of the hopelessness of his passion, goes abroad. In his absence Areto ú sa discovers 
Rot ó kritos ’ secret, and when he returns, he discovers to his surprise that his feelings 
are reciprocated. Presently, the king arranges a tournament in order to ﬁ nd a husband 
for Areto ú sa, in which, after Herculean struggles, Rot ó kritos emerges the victor, and 
asks his father to appeal to the king for permission to marry his daughter. The king, 
however, regards the prospect of a morganatic marriage with horror and banishes 
Rot ó kritos with a view to marrying Areto ú sa off to the king of Byzantium. She refuses 
and is thrown into a dungeon. Three years later Rot ó kritos discovers that Athens is 
under siege by the Vlachs and returning in disguise saves the kingdom. In gratitude 
the king offers his unknown saviour his realm, but Rot ó kritos asks only to marry 
Areto ú sa. Not recognizing him, she at ﬁ rst refuses, but then, when he reveals himself 
to her after further testing her ﬁ delity, she consents to the marriage and the pair reign 
happily together. 
 It was once routine to compare the language and the versiﬁ cation of the poem with 
those of popular song, but more recent scholarship has revised this view in a number 
of important respects (cf. Holton  (1991b, 1991c) . The decapentesyllable was the metre 
not only of oral poetry but also of literate personal, narrative and dramatic poetry, a 
major characteristic of which, from the 14th century onwards, was the use of rhyming 
couplets taken over from western models. Traditional folk poetry, by contrast, was 
unrhymed, and those branches that eventually adopted rhyme did so under the inﬂ u-
ence of written compositions. Other characteristics of folk poetry that distinguish it 
from the more sophisticated techniques of  Erot ó kritos  include: 

394 Modern Greek
 (12)  (a)  Apart from occasional stress on the ﬁ rst syllable, departure from the 
natural iambic rhythm of the line is quite rare.  
 (b)  Lines of verse coincide with syntactic boundaries/sense units.  
 (c)  There are formulaic building blocks of the type that has formed the basis 
of the oral poet ’ s compositional technique from the earliest times, and 
there is considerable verbal redundancy and repetition of the type that 
often characterizes an oral style.  
 (d)  The popular line normally falls into two balancing halves (and the ﬁ rst 
may be divided in turn).  
 The couplet in (13), taken from a song on the theme of exile, illustrates these basic 
points, together with the co - ordinative syntactic structure of folk compositions that 
often requires the listener to supply the necessary connections: 
 (13)  
 
 
 
 ‘ Mother, you tell me off too much and I want to leave, to go, to emigrate, to return 
to foreign lands. ’ 
 While the familiarity of such  ‘ folksy ’ patterns is sometimes exploited in  Erot ó kritos , 
Korn á ros employs complex subordination, extensive enjambement, and a great variety 
of rhythm and phrasing (including trochaic rhythms with stresses on odd - numbered 
syllables). Hiatus is also avoided, but synizesis across word boundaries (i.e. the running 
together of word - ﬁ nal and word - initial vowels) and elision/prodelision are common 
and often highlight the narrative. In (14), for example, Areto ú sa ’ s feelings are accentu-
ated by the unusual effect of the multiple synizesis: 
 (14)  
 
 
 
 ‘ Today I remained without fear; I no longer know what to hope for. ’ 
 The language of the poem is based on the dialect of eastern Crete (Korn á ros was 
from Sit í a). Note in particular the following: 
 (15)  (a)  The characteristic absorption of [j] after [s] and sometimes [r] in words 
such as 
 [ ' aks j os] for 
 [ ' aksios]  ‘ worthy ’ and 
 [ma ' kr j a] 
for 
 [ma ' krja]  ‘ far ’ . 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 395
 (b)  The use of 3pl verb forms in  - o  u ( n e ) [ - u(ne)] rather than west Cretan 
 [ - usi]. 
 (c)  The stressed syllabic augment 
 [ ' i - ], e.g. 
 [ ' ifera]  ‘ I was 
bringing ’ . 
 (d)  The use of 3pl clitic possessive  t w " [tos] (or  n t w " [dos], with the initial 
consonant deriving from misanalysis after words ending in  - n [ - n]), 
rather than west Cretan  t w n e / n t w n e [ ' tone/ ' done]  ‘ their ’ . 
 (e)  Sg aorist passive in  - q h  k a 
 ,  - q h k e " 
 ,  - q h k e 
 , rather 
than the west Cretan  - q  h 
 ,  - q h " 
 ,  - q h ( n ) 
 (the extended 
forms are regular in the plural).  
 The west Cretan variants are also admitted, however, particularly when these are 
metrically different and offer the poet advantages in composition (i.e. by having a dif-
ferent number of syllables, as 3pl  - o  u s i [usi] beside  - o  u ( n ) [u(n)]), while other features, 
some typical of all the southern insular dialects, are general Cretan, including the pala-
talization of /k/ to 
 or the softening of [ ç ]/[j] to 
 before [i/e] (made clear in 
the Latin alphabet used in a number of manuscripts) and a number of other 
characteristics: 
 (16)  (a)  Loss of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] (even in gen pl  - w ( n ) [ - o(n)] and 3pl verb forms in 
 - o  u n [ - u(n)]) except where a word forms part of an intonational phrase 
with a following word beginning with a vowel or voiceless plosive (i.e. 
retention is not conﬁ ned to phrases involving articles and pronouns), e.g. 
I.10 
  ‘ in a pure love ’ ). 
 (b)  Partial generalization of clitic possessives with initial  n t - [d - ] (e.g.  n t o  u 
[du]  ‘ his/its ’ ) from contexts after a word ending in  - n [ - n]. 
 (c)  Loss of medial  - n - [ - n - ] before a fricative: e.g. 
  ‘ man ’ 
for 
 . 
 (d)  The gen fem sg of the article and clitic pronoun is not only  t h " [tis] but 
also  t s h [tsi] or  t " [ts], while the masculine and feminine acc pl, beside 
their standard forms, also appear as  t s i [tsi] and  t s ' [ts]. The spellings 
of these variants are conventional, and all derive from syncope of an 
unstressed vowel and the addition of a ﬁ nal [ - i] to aid pronunciation 
when the next word began with a consonant.  
 (e)  (i) 
 
  ‘ anyone ’ /no - one ’  is used for 
 [ka ' nis], both 
 < 
 (i.e. 
 ) + 
 [k(j)an is]  ‘ even one ’ . 
 (ii) 
 
  ‘ everyone ’ beside 
 , both  < 
  ‘ each one ’ . 
 (iii)  
 [af ' tonos] and 
 [af ' tinos] are sometimes used 
for 
 [af ' tos]  ‘ this ’ , with sufﬁ xes modelled on that of 
  ‘ that ’ . In the case of 
 [af ' tonos], 
this is added to the stem in nom sg, but otherwise to the inﬂ ected 
form of the standard equivalent (thus gen sg masc 
 
[aftu ' nu] etc.). This same sufﬁ x is also used as a genitive for 
 [e ' tutos], giving 
 [etu ' nu], and sometimes with 
other pronouns.  

396 Modern Greek
 (iv)  forms of the article beginning with  t - [t - ],  t o ( n )/ t h ( n )/ t o  [to(n)/ 
ti(n)/to] etc., are used as relative pronouns alongside 
 [opu]/
 [apu]  ‘ that ’ . 
 (v) 
 
 [ ' inda]  ‘ what? ’  < 
 [ ' ti n da]  ‘ what are - they 
which? ’ , is used for 
 [ti].  
 (f) 
 Perfects and pluperfects are formed on the Romance model, with perfect 
passive participles and the verb 
 [ ' eco]  ‘ have ’ . The participle usually 
agrees with a pronominal or lexical direct object, though it may also 
have an invariant neuter plural form if the sense is generic, as in a free 
relative clause: 
 (i) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ they had given her ’ 
 (ii) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ everything you have said ’ 
 (g) 
 The future is formed with 
 [ ' θelo] + aorist inﬁ nitive, or with  q e  n a 
 + subjunctive; the conditional uses either 
 or 
 
[ ' ixa] + aorist inﬁ nitive. These may be used, in combination with an 
imperfect, in either the protasis or the apodosis of a hypothetical condi-
tional, and they also express past habituality in temporal clauses; the 
latter, however, is never used as a true (real - time) pluperfect: 
 (i)  
 
 
 
 ‘ one who trembled whenever he saw you ’ 
 (h) 
 Object pronouns are regularly placed after the verb that governs 
them unless the verb is part of a clause that includes a subordinating 
conjunction or sentential operator (negative, modal, interrogative 
or focal) to which the verb has been attracted (i.e. the normal 
pattern of Medieval Greek is preserved). Thus the pronoun ordinarily 
follows: 
 (i)  
 
 
 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 397
 But where there is a negative/focal element etc., it precedes:  
 (ii)  
 
 
 
 (i) 
 Much of the vocabulary of the poem is dialectal, e.g. 
 
  ‘ treachery ’ , 
  ‘ red ’ , 
  ‘ why ’ , 
  ‘ a little ’ , 
 [e ' pa]  ‘ now ’ / ‘ here ’ , 
 [ ' zalo] 
 ‘ footstep ’ etc., while familiar - looking words such as 
 , 
 [vole ' tos], 
 , 
 [ ' krino] and 
 [fti ' nos] 
mean not  ‘ leave/permission ’ ,  ‘ convenient ’ ,  ‘ wily ’ ,  ‘ I judge ’ and  ‘ cheap ’ , 
but rather  ‘ space/opportunity ’ ,  ‘ feasible ’ ,  ‘ poor/wretched ’ ,  ‘ I think ’ and 
 ‘ generous ’ . 
 But the language of the poem is not a straightforward representation of any dialect 
then spoken on the island (still less that of Cretan folk poetry). Close inspection 
reveals a conscious reﬁ nement immediately apparent from comparison with the 
language of comedy or day - to - day documents of the period, a process involving 
the exclusion of Italian vocabulary characteristic of the island vernacular 
and the use of  ‘ poetic ’ phraseology alien to the folk - song tradition, such as 
  
 
  ‘ tasty singing ’ or 
  
‘ lustreless cloud ’ . Korn á ros also employs many words of learned origin, e.g. 
 
[ ' vrefos]  ‘ infant ’ , 
 [ev ' lavja]  ‘ awe ’ , 
  ‘ namely ’ , 
 [ ' kalos] 
 ‘ beauty ’ , 
  ‘ stone ’ , 
  ‘ pain ’ , 
  ‘ confer ’ , 
 [ ' tekno]  ‘ child ’  and 
 [ ' ipsos]  ‘ height ’ . We must always bear in mind, however, 
that the modern standard developed from a different dialect base and has been greatly 
inﬂ uenced by the learned tradition (see chapter  17 ), so that even the most serious Cretan 
poetry may quite wrongly seem to have a rustic/archaic feel from a contemporary 
point of view. 
 The following extract (from the edition of Alex í ou  (1980) ) illustrates 
many of these phenomena. Here Rot ó kritos, in disguise, is about to test Areto ú sa ’ s 
ﬁ delity by telling her that he is dead, and the narrator pleads with him to 
reconsider: 
 (17)  
 

398 Modern Greek
 
 
 ‘ It is wrong to do this, Rot ó kritos, beware in case you kill her with these wrongs. You 
see the state she is in, but still you do not believe; what other, greater tokens do you seek 
from her? She has refused wealth and nobility for you, her lips are always bitter, her eyes 
full of tears; she lives with misfortunes, she is nourished on pain, and has now been inside 
her vile prison for ﬁ ve years. ’ 
 14.2.5   Greek in the  e ast: Pontus and Cappadocia 
 The dialects of the eastern frontier districts were subject to foreign inﬁ ltration and 
inﬂ uence even in Byzantine times, and though Trebizond always remained in touch 
with Constantinople and contacts were maintained more generally through trade, ties 
with the remote regions away from the Black Sea and Mediterranean coasts had been 
loosened with the Byzantine defeat at Manzikert in 1071. 
 Cappadocia fell immediately under Seljuk control and, with the growth of bilingual-
ism and conversion to Islam, its dialects began to show signs of Turkish inﬂ uence and 
later of convergence with the dominant language. After the Greek military disaster of 
1922 – 3 and the deportation of the Christian population to settlements in central and 
northern Greece (see  16.1 ), the central and eastern Anatolian varieties fell into what 
till recently was believed to be terminal decline. In 2005, however, it was discovered 
that there were descendants of Cappadocian refugees in central and northern Greece 
who still spoke their traditional language ﬂ uently. The position of Cappadocian remains 
precarious, but it is certainly not yet extinct (see Janse (in press)). 
 By contrast, Pontus, never properly occupied by the Seljuks, was incorporated into 
the Ottoman empire only after the fall of Trebizond in 1461. Thereafter, the large and 
stable Greek - speaking population of this important region, stretching along the south-
ern coast of the Black Sea from In é polis (Inebolu) to Oﬁ s (Of) with major centres at 
Aryiro ú polis (G ü m ü ş hane) and Trebizond (Trabzon), preserved its distinctive identity 
and its language with some success. Even after the deportations of 1923, the authori-
ties in Trebizond were obliged to employ interpreters to work with the remaining 
Muslim Pontic speakers in the law courts, and the language is still spoken in some 
villages of the region centred on Of (see Mackridge  1987, 1999 ). Although Turkish is 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 399
now the sole medium of education, and the inhabitants of these villages regard them-
selves as Turks, the adherence to Greek is remarkably strong, and only very recently 
have some parents come to the view that a knowledge of Pontic may be an impediment 
to their offspring ’ s prospects in the wider world. Thus even though a degree of bilin-
gualism is now routine, some women remain ﬂ uent only in Greek (known as  rom é ika ), 
and even the youngest still speak the language well. Though the Pontic dialects of refu-
gees and their descendants spoken in Greece have been subject to convergence with 
the standard language, and had already been affected prior to 1923 by church attend-
ance and the language policies of the Greek state implemented through local schools, 
the varieties still  in situ , with their Muslim speakers cut off from such standardizing 
inﬂ uences, have remained in a more  ‘ natural ’  state, growing Turkish inﬂ uence notwith-
standing. The overall result is a family of dialects which, in contrast with those of 
Cappadocia, still present a rather conservative aspect. 
 Quite apart from the stock of antique vocabulary, there are a number of phonologi-
cal and grammatical archaisms that continue the medieval speech of the region: 
 (18)  (a)  Retention of many unstressed initial vowels, including the syllabic 
augment, where standard dialects have undergone aphaeresis (e.g.  osp í tin 
for 
 [ ' spiti]  ‘ house ’ , from Latin  hospitium ); note too the absence of 
synizesis in 
 [ - ' ia] etc.  
 (b)  Survival of some ancient pronominal forms: e.g. possessive clitic  emon 
 < ancient gen pl 
 [(h) ε :m ô :n]  ‘ of us ’ in place of standard  m a " [mas], 
and ancient possessive adjectives, e.g.  tem ó n   < 
 [t ò em ó n], lit. 
 ‘ the my ’ , in emphatic possessive/predicative use in place of standard 
 , lit.  ‘ the own of - me ’ ; this latter is also a 
feature of Cappadocian. 
 (c)  Many ancient/medieval verb forms and system characteristics, 
including: 
 (i) 
 2sg imperatives in   - son continuing ancient aorist forms, where 
other dialects have  - s e [ - se]. 
 (ii) 
 the absence of the /k - / element in aorist passives (also in 
Cappadocian), thus 3sg 
  < ancient 
 
for standard 
  ‘ s/he was afraid ’ . 
 (iii)  retention of some archaic suppletions such as  f é ro:  é nga continuing 
ancient 
 ,  ‘ I bring/I brought ’ , instead 
of standard 
 ). 
 (iv)  loss of the ancient perfect system has not been made good by 
either of the periphrastic types familiar from other dialects 
(
) , suppor-
ting the conclusion that spoken Greek of the early/middle Byzantine 
periods, prior to contact with Romance, lacked a formal expres-
sion of this category.  
 (v) 
 use of the ancient passive in 
 [ - ' ume] of verbs originally in 
 [ - ó o:]; these have been replaced by formations in 
 [ - ' ono] 
in all modern dialects, but only Pontic (and Cappadocian) have 
failed to generalize the new stem form to the passive.  

400 Modern Greek
 (vi)  residual retention of the inﬁ nitive (perfective only), though appar-
ently only in dialects still spoken in Pontus, and sometimes in 
modiﬁ ed forms (e.g. with the addition of personal endings).  
 The features in (i), (ii), (iv) and (vi) correlate with mainstream Medieval Greek ver-
nacular literature and provide an important control for discriminating between living 
forms and learned borrowings. 
 One further feature of Pontic (shared also by Cappadocian) that is standardly 
presented as an archaism is the pronunciation in certain contexts of etymological 
 - h - as [e] rather than standard [i] (as in 3sg aorist passive 
  < ancient 
 ). But closer inspection gives pause for thought. The most obvious 
difﬁ culty with this theory, apart from the inherent implausibility of an explanation 
that requires us to believe that the speech of this important part of the Roman empire 
was unaffected by a sound change completed everywhere else, is that the [i] - vowel of 
standard speech is often represented by Pontic [e] even where the source of [i] is spelled 
 i ,  e i ,  o  i and  u , i.e. never represented the sound [ ε :] even in Ancient Greek. Thus 
alongside 
  ‘ well ’ (standard 
 ), 
 [ ' kleftes]  ‘ robber ’ 
(standard 
 [ ' kleftis]), 
 [ ' nife]  ‘ bride ’ (standard 
 [ ' niﬁ ]) etc., we also ﬁ nd 
 [ ' emorfesa]  ‘ beautiful (fem) ’ (the standard sufﬁ x, though not used in these 
adjectives, is  - i s s a [ - issa]), 
 [ ' oneron]  ‘ dream ’  (standard 
 [ ' oniro]), 
  ‘ mistress of the house ’ (standard 
 ), 
 [lex ' nari]  ‘ oil lamp ’ (standard 
 [lix ' nari]) etc. (Oikonom í dis  (1958) ). 
 It seems more likely, therefore, that this is another manifestation of the vowel -
 weakening processes that also result (especially in immediately post - tonic syllables) in 
the loss of unstressed [i] and [u]. Thus similar developments appear to have affected 
[o] in 
  ‘ horse ’ (standard 
 ), and 
 [ ' onema]  ‘ name ’ 
(standard 
 [ ' onoma]). It is characteristic of such weakenings that they do not 
conform to ﬁ xed rules and are subject to both variable local phonetic conditioning 
and extensive analogical levelling. One consequence of the latter is the secondary 
appearance of  ‘ weakened ’ vowels in stressed syllables, e.g. fem 
 [psi ' lesa] to 
masc 
 [psi ' los]  ‘ high ’ / ‘ tall ’ , on the model of the large numbers of adjectives where 
the sufﬁ x was unaccented (e.g. fem 
 [ ' emorfessa]  ‘ beautiful ’ ). We may 
compare the situation in many verb paradigms, e.g. 
 [mae ' revo]  ‘ I cook ’ (stand-
ard 
 [maji ' revo]) alongside imperfect 
 [ema ' ereva] (standard 
 [ma ' jireva] etc.). Furthermore, the absence of the phenomenon in many 
varieties where the [i] - vowel is stressed appears to conﬁ rm the essentially unpredictable 
character of these developments (cf. 
  ‘ buyer/shopper ’ , 
  
[a∫ci ' tis]  ‘ hermit ’ , beside 
 [ ' kleftes]  ‘ robber ’ , 
 [ ' pseftes]  ‘ liar ’ ), though 
many of the former class may be of relatively recent learned origin and so unaffected 
by earlier developments. 
 The main effect of detachment from the mainstream, however, was independent 
development, and there are many striking innovations: 
 (19)  (a)  The changes of unstressed [ia/ea]  > [ æ ] and unstressed [io/eo]  > [ œ ], 
vowels unknown in the standard.  
 (b)  Weakening and/or deletion of many unstressed vowels, reminiscent of 
the northern dialects (see below) except that in Pontic the effects are 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 401
more variable and loss is predominantly conﬁ ned to post - tonic syllables 
(in Cappadocian to ﬁ nal syllables). 
 (c)  ‘ Columnar ’ stress in adjectives and verbs, even where this breaks the 
standard rule that the accent must fall on one of the last three 
syllables; thus 
  ‘ I loved ’ / ‘ we loved ’ beside standard 
 . 
 (d)  Loss of the imperfective/perfective opposition outside the indicative in 
most varieties, with exclusively imperfective forms used in  ‘ subjunctive ’ 
clauses. 
 (e)  Uniform post - verbal positioning of clitic pronouns, even where the verb 
complex involves negatives, mood markers and other sentential opera-
tors; the accusative also replaces the ancient dative to mark the indirect 
object as in the northern dialects. This uniform ordering distinguishes 
Pontic from other conservative dialects such as Cypriot, Cretan and 
Cappadocian, which have similarly favoured post - verbal position after 
ﬁ nite verbs but have also retained preverbal position in the context of 
negatives etc. (in the medieval fashion).  
 (f) 
 The beginnings of the breakdown of the gender system, involving a 
distinction into 
 [ ' embzixa] and 
 [ ' apsixa], effectively a 
distinction between  ‘ human ’  and  ‘ non - human ’ . Modiﬁ ers of the former 
in the plural tend to adopt masculine forms, while modiﬁ ers of the latter 
(with the partial exception of immediately preceding deﬁ nite articles) 
take neuter forms across the board. Feminine 
 [ ' embzixa] them-
selves sometimes have masculine forms in the plural (at least as variants), 
while plural 
 [ ' apsixa], if not already neuter, show parallel signs 
of assimilating to neuter declensional patterns (i.e. with accusative forms 
serving also as nominative, and sometimes with substitution of actual 
neuter endings). Consider the examples below: 
 (i) 
 
 i 
 kal í 
 i 
 
 
 the (masc 
nom pl)  
 good (masc 
nom pl)  
 the (masc 
nom pl)  
 women (fem 
nom pl)  
 (ii)  
 
 
 to 
 k ó cinon 
 i 
 kos á ra 
 the (neut nom/
acc sg)  
 red (neut nom/
acc sg)  
 the (fem 
nom sg)  
 hen (fem 
nom sg)  
 (iii)
  
 ta 
 pal é a 
 ta 
 
 
 the (neut nom/
acc pl)  
 old (neut nom/
acc pl)  
 the (neut nom/
acc pl)  
 times (masc nom/
acc pl)  
 This fundamental split in the declensional system, shared also by Cappadocian, was 
perhaps initiated by the local transfer in antiquity of large numbers of masculine and 
feminine inanimates of the 3rd declension to the neuter paradigm in 
 [ - in], and 
subsequently accelerated by universal use of neuter possessive adjectives (prompted 
by the gender - invariant form of corresponding genitive pronominal possessives: 
e.g.  tem ó n/tem é teron i n í fe  ‘ the - my/our the daughter - in - law ’ ), a development which 
then provided a model for other adjectival usage (at least for 
 [ ' apsixa]). 

402 Modern Greek
The correspondence with Cappadocian, despite differences of detail due in part to later 
Turkish inﬂ uence on the latter, points strongly to an earlier period when the two 
groups formed a single dialect area. The initial development of the gender system along 
these lines clearly had nothing to do with Turkish, which has no grammatical distinc-
tions based on animacy. 
 Another oddity of Pontic is that masculine nouns of the 2nd declension (the type 
in [ - os]) show the  ‘ accusative ’ ending [ - o(n)] (some dialects retain ﬁ nal [ - n], others do 
not) in subject as well as object function when the noun in question is deﬁ nite, and 
employ the  ‘ standard ’ nominative form in [ - os] only when a subject is indeﬁ nite: thus 
 o f í lo(n)/( í nas) f í los   ‘ the friend ’ / ‘ (a) friend ’ , as opposed to standard 
 
[o  ' ﬁ los/( ' enas]  ' ﬁ los]. In Cappadocian, the regular use of the accusative ending was 
latterly conﬁ ned to deﬁ nite direct objects, with an associated generalization of the 
nominative form to indeﬁ nite objects (a clear case of Turkish inﬂ uence, since this lan-
guage has only a deﬁ nite object marker). But there were also residual examples of the 
use of the accusative to mark deﬁ nite subjects, which again points to an early common 
origin (Dawkins ( 1916 : 94)). The original basis for this development seems to have 
been an attempt to re - mark the deﬁ niteness of subjects involving human - denoting 
nouns in a dialect area where the deﬁ nite article with nominative forms of this class 
was increasingly dropped (with some spread to masculine and feminine 
 [ ' apsixa] 
if they retained their masc/fem articles), a development presumably connected with the 
phonological weakness of  o / h / o  i [o/i/i] (recall that 
 [ ' apsixa] tended to acquire 
neuter determiners and modiﬁ ers), which were prone to crasis or loss when in contact 
with words beginning or ending in a vowel. If Thumb ’ s attempt to link the change 
with the parallel use of the accusative for the nominative in second - declension nouns 
in a number of 3rd - century inscriptions from Cyprus is well - founded (Thumb ( 1906 : 
258)), the phenomenon may once have characterized the whole of the eastern Koine. 
Whatever the original motivation, the change engendered paradigm interference from 
both 3rd - declension masculines in  - w  n [ - on]/gen  - o  n o  " [ - onos] and neuters in  - o  n [ - on], 
which often followed the model of the neuters in 
 [ - ' in] where the gen 
 [ - ' iu] 
(without synizesis) had developed to  [ - ' i] through loss of unstressed ﬁ nal [u]. Thus 
we ﬁ nd 
 [(o)  ' likon]  ‘ wolf ’ with gen 
 [ ' likonos], or 
 
  ‘ man ’ with gen 
 [arθo ' pi] , etc. 
 The tenacity of Greek in Pontus, reﬂ ecting its status as a majority language in much 
of the region for more than 2,000 years, effectively limited the impact of Turkish to 
the lexicon and phraseology, but the scale of such borrowing far exceeds that seen 
elsewhere (other than in Cappadocia). Not only nouns and adjectives but also verbs 
have been widely borrowed (the last involving the addition of 
 [ - ' evo] to the 
Turkish present stem: e.g. 
  ‘ to speak ’ , present stem 
 , 
giving 
  ‘ I speak ’ ). The erosion of the Greek lexicon is particularly marked in 
the varieties still spoken in Turkey, where Turkish phraseology is even beginning to 
introduce Turkish syntactic structures. For example, the expressions  resim  ç ekmek 
[resim  ç ek j mek j ], lit.  ‘ photograph to - draw/pull ’ , and  telefon etmek  [telefon etmek j ], lit. 
 ‘ telephone to - make ’ , have been adopted with morphological adaptation of the noun 
and substitution of the corresponding Greek verb, but the Turkish verb - ﬁ nal order has 
also been retained:  resm í n  é sires?  ‘ picture did - you - draw/pull? ’ , and  telef ó nin p í site 
 ‘ telephone make - 2pl (imp) ’ (Mackridge ( 1987 : 135)). The dialects of the Of region 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 403
show other signs of Turkish inﬂ uence in the postposing of locative and directional 
adverbs in the manner of the agglutinative sufﬁ xes of Turkish (Mackridge ( 1987 : 133)): 
 (20)  
 
 ‘ Let ’ s go up to Shekersu ’ 
 This latter - day assimilation of the Pontic dialects still spoken in Pontus must be very 
similar to what had long been happening to the dialects spoken in central Anatolia 
before 1922/3, where the early decline of Greek, despite this having once been a fully 
integrated part of the Byzantine empire, is already revealed in a document dated 1437: 7 
 (21)  … in multis partibus Turcie reperiuntur clerici  … qui portant vestimenta 
inﬁ delium et locuntur linguam ipsorum et nihil aliud sciunt in Greco proferre nisi 
missam cantare et evangelium et epistolas.    (N é os Ellinomn í mon  VII (1910: 366)) 
 ‘ … in many parts of Turkey ( meaning Anatolia ) clerics are to be found  … who wear the 
dress of inﬁ dels and speak their language and know how to pronounce nothing in Greek 
beyond singing the mass and reciting the gospel and the letters. ’ 
 None the less, at the beginning of the 20th century, Greek still had a strong presence 
in Silli north - west of Konya (ancient Ik ó nion), in Ph á rasa and other villages in the 
region drained by the Yenice river (some 100   km south of Kayseri, ancient Caesarea), 
and in Cappadocia proper, at Arabis ó n (Arapsu/G ü l ş ehir) north - west of Nev ş ehir 
(ancient Nyssa), and in the large region south of Nev ş ehir as far down as Ni gˇ de and 
Bor (close to ancient Tyana). This whole area, as the home of St Basil the Great 
(329 – 79), his brother St Gregory of Nyssa (335 – 94) and his friend St Gregory of 
Nazianzos (330 – 89), was of great importance in the early history of Christianity, but 
is perhaps most famous today for the extraordinary landscape of eroded volcanic tufa 
in the valleys of G ö reme, Ihlara and So gˇ anl ı , and for the churches and houses carved 
into the  ‘ fairy chimneys ’ to serve the Christian population in the middle ages. Many 
of the rock churches, which range in date from the 6th to the 13th centuries, contain 
magniﬁ cent frescos. Away from the valleys, some of the villages have vast underground 
complexes containing houses, cellars, stables, refectories, cemeteries and churches, 
affording protection from marauding Arabs in the days when the Byzantine empire 
extended to the Euphrates, and serving later as places of refuge from hostile Turkish 
raiders. The most famous of these are at Kaymakl ı and Derinkuyu, formerly the Greek 
villages of Anak ú (Inegi) and Malakop í (Melegob), where the chambers extend down 
over several levels to depths of up to 85 metres. 
 By the time of Dawkins ’ monumental study (1916), the speech of the major villages 
of Cappadocia (e.g. Sinas ó s 
 ) had already been inﬂ uenced by the teach-
ing of  ‘ standard ’ Greek in local schools (including  kathar é vousa , see chapter  16 ), while 
that of many others (e.g. in Fert é ki (Fertek)) showed considerable Turkish inﬂ uence in 
the form of vowel harmony and the adoption of Turkish syntactic structures. A good 
example is provided by phrases of the type  kan í s kokus ú (from 
 , lit.  ‘ someone 
smell - his ’ , where a morphologically unmarked possessor precedes rather than follows 
the head (as in Turkish) and the head itself (a Turkish word) is marked as possessed 
in the Turkish way with the sufﬁ x   - (s)i  (complete with vowel harmony). Another 

404 Modern Greek
version of this construction involves the addition of Greek   - t  (a truncation of the 3rd -
 person possessive  t o  u [tu] used without gender discrimination) in place of Turkish 
 - (s)i , e.g. 
 (from Flo ï t á ), lit.  ‘ butcher betrothed - his 
the clothes ’ , where this combines with the Greek genitive ending   - j ú  , originally the 
neuter 
 , but now used agglutinatively for all genders in the Turkish fashion. Other 
features, such as the use of the 2nd - declension masculine accusative ending  - o ( n ) [ - o(n)] 
for deﬁ nite objects (with nominative  - o  " [ - os] extended to mark indeﬁ nite objects), 
similarly follow the Turkish pattern, while the treatment of adjectives, with neuter 
paradigms fully generalized, conﬁ rms the massive impact of genderless Turkish on an 
already destabilized system. Only the speech of the remotest areas (e.g. Ax ó s (Hasak ö y) 
and Ph á rasa further east), where schools were few or non - existent and Turks rarely 
ventured, proved to be relatively well preserved. 
 Abstracting away from obvious Turkisms, Dawkins concluded ( 1916 : 205 – 6) that 
northern and eastern Anatolia must once have formed a single linguistic area, united 
by such  ‘ early ’ innovations as the development of a gender/declensional system based 
on the distinction between 
 [ ' embzixa] and 
 [ ' apsixa] and use of the 
accusative of 2nd - declension nouns as a  ‘ deﬁ nite nominative ’ . He also drew attention 
to the shared retention of archaisms like post - verbal positioning of clitic pronouns, 
ancient possessive adjectives, an aorist passive paradigm without  - k a [ - ka], and the old 
contracted passive in 
 [ - ' ume] of verbs originally in 
 [ - ó o:]. 8 The fact that 
these shared characteristics are, or once were, also attested in insular dialects adjacent 
to the southern coast of Asia Minor is seen as evidence for a wider eastern Koine in 
the early middle ages. Possibly signiﬁ cant features shared with Cypriot include the 
continued use of the article as a relative pronoun, the option of postposing clitic pro-
nouns, and a large stock of vocabulary, some of it ancient, that is not in use elsewhere. 
We should recall, however, that shared retention of archaisms is not a compelling basis 
for linking dialects genetically (cf.  1.3 ), and that the innovations linking Cypriot with 
other south - eastern dialects are in general stronger. This does not, however, automati-
cally invalidate Dawkins ’ hypothesis, since any links with the Asia Minor dialects must 
have been early, and Cypriot may well have developed independently once detached 
from the putative eastern Koine area by the effects of occupation.  
 14.2.6   The  n orthern  d ialects 
 There is a fundamental distinction between the contemporary  ‘ northern ’ and  ‘ southern ’ 
dialects, whereby the former but not the latter exhibit (rather variably instantiated) 
high - vowel deletion and mid - vowel raising: i.e. unstressed  ‘ standard ’ /i/ and /u/  >  Ø , 
and unstressed  ‘ standard ’  /e/ and /o/  > /i/ and /u/. 9 Such varieties are still spoken, subject 
to the growing impact of the standard, throughout the mainland north of Attica, as 
well as on Thasos, Lesbos, Lemnos and Imbros (which now belongs to Turkey), and 
on Samos (in the southern area, but repopulated from the north in the 15th century), 
cf. Newton ( 1972 : ch.  7 ), Trudgill  (2003) ). 
 A key issue is the dating of the onset of these changes (see Andri ó tis  (1933) , and 
the papers in Symp ó sio  (1977) ). Linkage to similar developments in Thessalian dialect 
in the 3rd century  bc is difﬁ cult to substantiate while the interpretation of relevant 
forms remains uncertain. Thus even though there is potential evidence of vowel weak-
ening and syncope associated with the shift from a pitch to a stress accent (see  1.4.4 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 405
(b) and cf. Chadwick  (1993) ), it is far from clear that the set of affected vowels and 
diphthongs or the range of attested outcomes correlates convincingly with the familiar 
 ‘ northern ’  phenomena. 
 Against this interpretation we may note that consonants palatalized before original 
/i/ are retained as such after high - vowel deletion, but that there is no corresponding 
palatization before the secondary /i/ ( < /e/) in dialects that did not also palatalize con-
sonants before /e/. This points to a considerable delay in the onset of high - vowel 
raising vis - à - vis palatalization, since otherwise the latter would have applied equally 
to the relevant consonants before the new /i/. The relative lateness of high - vowel 
raising is conﬁ rmed when we examine other interacting phenomena. Thus the manner 
dissimilation of voiceless obstruents (i.e. [stop + stop] or [fricative + fricative]  > [frica-
tive + stop], cf.  11.6 (12) for details) is almost unknown in the secondary consonant 
clusters arising from high - vowel deletion. Similarly, although the originally voiceless 
plosives that ﬁ nd themselves adjacent to voiced fricatives are voiced, they do not 
themselves normally become fricatives (contrast  11.2 (5)). Thus 
 [ku ' ti]  ‘ box ’ 
typically becomes [kti] rather than [xti], and 
  ‘ well ’ becomes 
 
rather than 
 . These differences distinguish the products of high - vowel deletion 
very clearly from original clusters, and show that deletion must have post - dated the 
application of the rules of manner assimilation/dissimilation. Since we already know 
that high - vowel deletion preceded mid - vowel raising (otherwise secondary /i/ and /u/ 
would also have disappeared), it follows that the manner dissimilation of voiceless 
obstruents and the manner assimilation of voiced obstruents preceded both of these 
processes. We have examples of various consonant assimilations and dissimilations in 
the late antique papyri (cf. Gignac ( 1976 : 86 – 98, 165 – 77)), and we know that the 
obligatory manner assimilation of voiced plosives to voiced fricatives belongs, at the 
latest, to the early Byzantine period (see  11.2 (5)). But there are no examples of 
manner dissimilation in voiceless obstruent clusters, inevitably in the case of the frica-
tives 
 , given their late development from aspirated plosives (cf.  6.4 ). 10 The 
modern treatment of voiceless clusters is therefore a product of the medieval period, 
and since the developments in the South Italian dialects are aberrant vis - à - vis the 
standard pattern ([pt], 
 , [kt], 
 and 
 all  > [st] in Bov é zika, for example), it 
seems the completion of the relevant changes took place after this part of the Greek -
 speaking world had become detached from the Byzantine mainstream by the Norman 
conquests. They are therefore conventionally placed in the later middle ages (cf. 
Browning ( 1983 : 76)). 
 Putting these various observations together, we obtain the following chronology: 
 
(22)
  
 ↓ 
 Manner assimilation of voiced obstruents  
  (early Byzantine)  
 Manner dissimilation of voiceless obstruents  
  (post - 11th century)  
 High - vowel deletion  
  
 Mid - vowel raising  
  
 Time  
 
 
 with the diagnostic features of the northern dialects of Modern Greek placed ﬁ rmly in 
the period after c. ad 1100. This ties in well with the evidence of the body of un affected 
loanwords in the language of Vlach migrants, who settled in Epirus and the Pindus 
between the 8th and 10th centuries (Andri ó tis  (1933) ). 

406 Modern Greek
 As noted above, similar changes in the realization of vowels also characterized the 
dialects of Silli, Cappadocia and, at least in part, Pontus. But in the ﬁ rst there was 
only raising (chieﬂ y in inﬂ ectional endings), in Cappadocian raising and deletion 
occurred overwhelmingly in ﬁ nal syllables, and in Pontic the processes were restricted 
to immediately post - tonic syllables. These rather varied restrictions strongly suggest 
that we are dealing with independent developments of relatively recent origin in the 
Asia Minor Koine rather than with a single process directly linked to the northern 
developments (cf. Dawkins ( 1916 : 192 – 3)). 
 14.3   Popular Culture in the Turkish Period: The Folk Songs 
 Though the production of vernacular literature soon came to an end in Ottoman Greek 
lands, the oral tradition of folk song did not. Such poems, however, were not uniquely 
characteristic of Ottoman lands, and there are important collections from the whole 
of the Greek - speaking world that bear witness to the vigour and relative homogeneity 
of popular culture in the centuries before independence. 
 The earliest accounts of Greek folk songs in the west came from 18th - and 19th - 
century travellers, who reported the existence of a thriving oral tradition. But the 
conditions prevailing before and during the war of independence inhibited serious 
study, while many intellectuals, preoccupied with the  ‘ language question ’ (see chapter 
 17 ), saw little merit in this manifestation of popular culture. Nevertheless, there were 
those who believed a national language could be built upon the foundations of the 
spoken language of the people, and for them the folk songs were an important source 
for the study and development of  ‘ demotic ’  Greek. The Heptanese in particular had 
remained a major centre of artistic and intellectual endeavour, and Greece ’ s national 
poet, Dion ý sios Solom ó s, who was born in Z á kynthos (Zante) and later resided in 
K é rkyra (Corfu), was among the advocates of this solution to the language question. 
As we shall see  (17.2) , Solom ó s made careful use of aspects of the folk - song tradition 
in his efforts to redeﬁ ne the spirit of the Greek revival in a modern European way. 
 Nineteenth - century nationalism and the search for a modern Greek identity provided 
fresh impetus to the study of folklore by encouraging research into the folk songs as 
evidence for an unbroken link between the modern Greek world and its Byzantine and 
classical heritage. Though much of the debate in this and subsequent periods was viti-
ated by considerations of race (e.g. Fallmerayer ’ s  (1830, 1835, 1836)   ‘ demonstration ’ 
that modern Greeks were of Slav and Albanian stock), the collection of material that 
began at this time preserved a great deal of oral poetry from oblivion. N.G. Pol í tis was 
the dominant ﬁ gure in this movement, which in 1909 acquired its own journal 
 ( ‘ Folklore ’ ). Pol í tis ’ collection was eventually published in 
1914 (with many subsequent reprintings) and this remains the principal source, though 
the rapid urbanization of Greece and the consequent disappearance of many rural tradi-
tions in the period after the Second World War and the Greek civil war (see chapter  15 ) 
prompted a further revival of interest, and eventually led to the publication of new col-
lections (e.g. Io á nnou  (1986) , A. Pol í tis  (1981) , Saunier  (1983) , Papad ó poulos  (1975) ). 
 Although 20th - century advocates of demotic made much of the linguistic unity of 
these poems in an effort to defend their position against accusations from linguistic 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 407
purists that there was no single spoken language to provide the foundation for a written 
standard, their assertion of the pre - existence of a common popular style was based on 
citations from work such as that of Pol í tis which had standardized the orthography 
and in part the grammar of the collected material. Much detailed evidence about dialect 
diversity in the late medieval and early modern periods was therefore lost in the inter-
ests of the demotic cause, though the songs still provide a useful supplementary source 
of information about developmental trends in popular spoken Greek. 
 There can be no doubt that elements of the folk - song tradition go far back into the 
Byzantine era, and the existence of an  ‘ akritic cycle ’ , thematically related to, and pre-
sumably the inspiration for, the epic of  Digen é s Akr í tes , has already been discussed 
(cf.  8.4.3 ,  12.2.1 ). These and a number of other short lays of the Byzantine period 
(e.g.  The Son(s) of Andr ó nikos ) have passed, in modiﬁ ed form, into the modern folk 
tradition. One such poem, however, the lay of  Armo ú res , has come down to us in 
manuscript (two copies, the earlier dating from 1461), while the Escorial version of 
 Digen é s Akr í tes itself may constitute an adapted compilation of ﬁ ve such lays (Ricks 
 (1990) ). Clearly we must be wary of supposing, despite traditional views to the con-
trary (e.g. Kakrid í s  (1979) ), that the folk tradition represents an independent channel 
of transmission (see Beaton  (1980) ). Some songs were written down and reworked by 
literate poets in the middle ages, and these versions then provided fresh inspiration for 
oral poets. The Cypriot song of  Azgour é s , for example (which preserves much of the 
plot and style of the written  Armo ú res ), and Cretan songs based on Chort á tsis ’ tragedy 
 Erof í li  show that oral poems could spring from written ones, and that there was a 
complex interaction between the two forms of poetic production. It is not impossible 
that some of the akritic songs represent oral developments of poems that once existed 
in manuscript form, just as many of these may represent literary reﬁ nements of earlier 
oral material. Such interaction is wholly expected given a poetic sensibility shaped by 
the common use of the political verse form from the 12th century. 
 The tradition also includes songs dealing with historical events, e.g. the fall of 
Adrianople in 1361, the last mass in Ay í a Soph í a in 1453, or with particular periods, 
e.g. the kleftic ballads of the 18th and early 19th centuries, songs of low life in the 
towns of Asia Minor brought to Greece by refugees after 1923 ( reb é tika ), songs of the 
Greek resistance during the Second World War ( and á rtika ), and songs of the National 
Organization of Cypriot Fighters (EOKA) of the period 1955 – 60 (see chapter  16 ). The 
majority, however, are timeless accompaniments to the central events of human life, 
dealing  inter alia  with work, feasts, customs, emigration, love, marriage, birth, child-
hood and death. Some longer works are perhaps better described as ballads, with 
stories of human relationships ( paraloy é s ) that exhibit a more elaborate narrative form 
presupposing a poetic tradition of some maturity. Rhyme is not ordinarily employed, 
despite its obvious potential usefulness for the oral poet as an aide - m é moire, though 
there are branches of the tradition that did use it, most notably those of the Cretan 
 rimad ó ri  and Cypriot  pyit á rides , under the inﬂ uence of written poetry exposed to 
western inﬂ uences. 
 The songs share many formal characteristics, including the predictable absence of 
learned Greek and, despite editorial standardization, the continued presence of dialec-
tal features. The formulaic diction and standard themes/motifs are typical of an oral 
tradition, as is the  ‘ action - orientated ’ style which eschews descriptive elaboration. 

408 Modern Greek
Enjambement is normally avoided, and lines are typically divided into two (8 syllables 
+ 7 syllables) or three parts (4 syllables + 4 syllables + 7 syllables) with much repeti-
tion (or contrasting) of words and parallelism of rhythm. The lullaby in (23) illustrates 
these features very clearly: 
 (23)  
 
 
 
 ‘ Sleep little star, sleep dawn, sleep new moon, 
 sleep so that the young man who will marry you may delight in you. ’ 
 Musically, the songs are monophonic, and many types are traditionally danced to, 
with the leader dragging the other performers in a line. The rhythms (5/8, 7/8 and 9/8) 
and scales (making use of intervals greater and smaller than a semitone) give a rather 
oriental feel to the music, though we should beware of attributing this to Turkish 
inﬂ uence; many elements from ancient Greek and early Byzantine secular music were 
adapted by the Arabs, taken up by the Turks, and then reintroduced into Greek -
 speaking lands during the Ottoman period. 
 Despite the often homely themes, the treatment of the subject matter, particularly 
in the longer ballads, may be decidedly  ‘ other - worldly ’ . Birds talk and serve as mes-
sengers, the dead go not to the Christian heaven or hell but to the grim underworld 
of antiquity ruled by Ch á ros (the ancient Charon who ferried souls across the Styx), 
supernatural intervention is commonplace, and many apparently ordinary objects are 
endowed with mystic or symbolic signiﬁ cance. All of this has a powerful distancing 
effect vis - à - vis the real world, and invests the stories with something of the character 
of the ancient Greek myths by creating a framework that makes possible the treatment 
of otherwise taboo subjects. 
 The song in (24) comes from Ar á chova near Delphi and is entitled  Ch á ros and the 
Shepherd ([o  ' xaros c o tso ' panis]). Though ﬁ rst published in 1860, its origins clearly 
go back into the Ottoman period: 
 (24)    
 

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 409
 
 

410 Modern Greek
 
 ‘ Do you see that great high mountain, with a storm - cloud at its summit and heat - haze at 
its base? From there a bold young man came down; he wore his fez at an angle and his 
cloak twisted back. But Charos kept watch for him and met him in a narrow lane.  “ Good 
day, Charos. ”  “ Welcome, young man. Young man, where are you coming from; young 
man, where are you going? ”  “ I am coming from my sheep, I am going home; I am going 
to eat my bread and then return. ”  “ Young man, God sent me to take your soul. ”  “ I will 
not surrender my soul without illness or good cause. Just come out to wrestle on the 
marble threshing - ﬂ oor, and if you beat me, Ch á ros, you may take my soul, and if I beat 
you, Ch á ros, I will take your soul. ” They came to blows and wrestled for two nights 
and three days, and then on the third day, quite close to mid - day, the young man landed 
a blow; Charos grew angry, grabbed him by the hair and slammed him to the ground; 
and they heard the young man groan and sigh aloud:  “ Grant me, Charos, grant me 
three days and three nights; the two that I may eat and drink, the one that I may make 
a journey, that I may go to see my friends, to see my family. I have a young wife who 
does not deserve widowhood, I have young children who do not deserve an orphan ’ s lot, 
I have sheep unshorn and cheese in the tub. ” And then close to evening Charos cast him 
down. ’ 
 This is a fully ﬂ edged modern text but such are the changes between the popular Greek 
of the past and the standard language of the 20th and 21st centuries (see chapter  17 ) 
that certain elements, independently of generic conventions, now contribute to an air 
of rustic  ‘ old - world charm ’ that would not have been perceptible in earlier times. Note 
the regular co - ordination/parataxis (e.g. in line 20 
 [a ' kun]  ‘ they hear ’ is followed 
by  k a i 
 ,  ‘ and ’ ), the old - fashioned and often affective vocabulary (including diminu-

Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Period 411
tives like 
 [anda ' rula] (l. 2)  ‘ little storm ’ and 
 [mi ' krutsika] (l. 
25),  ‘ little ones ’ ), and dialectal forms and characteristics such as columnar stress in 
plural verb paradigms (3pl 
 [pja ' stikan] (l. 16) for standard 
 [ ' pjas-
tikan]), 
 [pa ' jeno] (ll. 8, 9) for standard 
 [pi ' jeno], and  d i w 
 (l. 23) 
for  ‘ standard ’  d w 
 . Note too such apparent archaisms as neuter sg 
 (l. 
1),  ‘ great ’ , instead of 
 , 11 which in fact survived as a regional variant 
into the early 20th century (Thumb ( 1912 : 69)). Similarly, the 3sg aorist passive 
 [kako ' fani] (l. 18) lacks the expected  - k e 
 formant, but we should note 
that Makriy á nnis (see  14.1 ) also avoids this extension in 3sg forms, conﬁ rming that 
the short forms remained in use locally (cf. (15e) above for Cretan), and that the ﬁ nal 
standardization of the long forms, despite their ﬁ rst appearance in medieval vernacular 
texts, belongs to the late 19th/20th centuries. 
 There are no Turkish elements in early classics like  The Last Mass in Ay í a Soph í a 
or  The Bridge of Arta , but no oral tradition can remain creative without periodically 
absorbing elements from contemporary speech. A striking feature of this song, there-
fore, is the large number of Turkish loans: 
 [tso ' panis]  ‘ shepherd ’   <   ç oban 
 ; 
 [de ' li(s)]  ‘ brave ’ (to the point of foolhardiness)  <  deli 
 (an early 
borrowing, as the modern sense in both languages is  ‘ insane ’ ); 
 [le ' vendis]  ‘ ﬁ ne 
young man ’  <  levend 
 (now obsolete in Turkish, again pointing to an early 
loan); 
 [ ' fesi]  ‘ fez ’  <  fes [fes]; and 
  ‘ (back - )street ’   <  sokak [sokak]. 
 In general, however, key characteristics of the  ‘ demotic ’ foundation of standard 
Modern Greek are well - represented. The orthography, for example, reﬂ ects normal 
pronunciation in its treatment of elision/crasis, ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] and synizesis, clitic pro-
nouns are ﬁ xed in position before ﬁ nite verb forms even in main clauses (ll. 1, 6, 11, 
etc.), and 
 [na] + subjunctive has replaced any lingering complement inﬁ nitives (l. 
10). 12 In similar vein, the prepositional repertoire has been reduced, with the survivors 
governing the accusative and subject to adverbial speciﬁ cation, while the complemen-
tizer 
 [pu] now provides the sole method for introducing a relative clause (ll. 2, 24, 
25, 26). 
 The existence of a literary tradition partly reﬂ ecting the development of demotic 
Greek was an important source of inspiration for those who sought, during the 18th 
and 19th centuries, to develop a written standard on the basis of contemporary spoken 
Greek. The fact that the standard language of today, spoken and written, has become 
quite distanced from this demotic tradition is due to the inﬂ uence of traditional written 
forms of Greek and above all of  kathar é vousa . The background to the  ‘ language ques-
tion ’ in the later years of the Turkish period is therefore considered in chapter  15 , and 
its subsequent development and ﬁ nal resolution are presented in chapter  17 , following 
a brief historical introduction to modern Greece (chapter  16 ). 
 Notes 
1  Since we are now dealing indisputably with modern Greek, the contemporary monotonic 
system of accentuation (actually adopted in 1982) will be employed henceforth.  
2  The voiceless affricate in Greek is due to the misapprehension that the voicing in phrases 
like 
 [stin  ' dzepi]  ‘ in - the pocket ’ was due to the ﬁ nal nasal of the preceding 
article rather than an inherent property of the original word.  

412 Modern Greek
3  In Turkish the normally voiced affricate is devoiced after a voiceless consonant, and bor-
rowings and new formations in Greek reﬂ ect this (e.g. 
 [buzux ' tsis]  ‘ bouzouki 
player ’ etc.).  
4  Some of the best evidence for continuity is the small number (c.25) of possible  ‘ Doric ’ 
survivals, e.g.   á samo  ‘ unmarked ’ ,  lan ó   ‘ trough/vat ’ ,  nas í da   ‘ island ’ , all with [ - a - ] where 
Attic - Ionic had [ - ε : - ] ( > Koine [ - i - ]).  
5  The scribes of this area were well - known for the quality of their copies of the ancient tragic 
poets, and it is now generally agreed that the Grottaferrata manuscript of  Digen é s Akr í tes 
was copied in the Terra d ’ Otranto. 
6  Tomba í dis ’  (1977)  arguments that the Pontic inﬁ nitive is a ﬁ ction appear not to apply at 
least to the speech of this area.  
7  The absence of Italian loanwords (apart from those that entered via Turkish or much later 
through the teaching of standard Greek) conﬁ rm the isolation of the region after the 12th 
century. 
8  We should note, however, that the dialects of Pontus and the Ph á rasa region are sometimes 
linked together to the exclusion of Cappadocian proper (e.g. only the former pair lack 
synizesis and use negatives derived from ancient 
 [u(k)]).  
9  There are also some areas of the northern mainland where the spoken dialects (so - called 
semi - northern varieties) do not display the full range of unstressed vowel raising and dele-
tion, while the Greek spoken in southern Albania is apparently of southern type in its 
vocalism. 
10  Note in this connection that the widely attested early loss of aspiration in  f ,  q ,  c [p h , t h , 
k h ] after [s], which partly mimics/anticipates the effects of the more general process of 
manner dissimilation, is in origin a distinct phenomenon (see  11.6 (12)).  
11  Formed by regularization of the ancient paradigm, which lacked the extended root in  - l  o  - 
[ - lo - ] in masculine and neuter nom/acc sg.  
12  This construction also retains its ﬁ nal function (ll. 11, 22, 23), and its subjunctive and 
future uses in main clauses (ll. 14, 15). This last is a clear marker of the genre, with its 
roots in the usage of the middle ages. It has long been superseded by  q a 
 in the modern 
standard. 

15
 Written Greek in 
the Turkish Period  
 
 15.1   Continuity 
 As we have seen, the use of the developing local dialects for writing became routine 
in areas that remained for a time under western control. Though the use of vernacular -
 based and more traditional varieties of written Greek usually continued side by side, 
the latter became restricted to learned debate and ecclesiastical administration as the 
prestige and range of the vernacular increased. 
 Within the devastated Greek - speaking communities of the Ottoman empire, however, 
there was little room for the kind of satirical and romantic vernacular literature pro-
duced in the Komnenian and Palaiologan periods, and the surviving forms of writing 
continued to employ archaizing styles as before, a situation reinforced by the belief of 
the intelligentsia and the clergy that fate had cast them in the role of guardians of the 
national heritage. 
 None the less, the more privileged Greek speakers both inside and outside the empire 
continued to travel, at ﬁ rst mainly for educational purposes (to the west to study and 
to Ottoman lands to teach) but later also on business, as the empire began to trade 
with the expanding economies of Russia and western Europe. As noted in chapter  14 , 
semi - normalized educated varieties of both spoken and written Greek continued to be 
used, and the tendency towards greater regional differentiation did not greatly affect 
the higher forms of the language in at least the core Greek - speaking regions. 
 Day - to - day administration generally employed middle rather than strictly classiciz-
ing styles, continuing the Byzantine practice of blending a restricted set of ancient 
morphological characteristics into a comparatively simple syntactic structure reﬂ ecting 
the contemporary norms of word order and incorporating many contemporary con-
structional realizations (cf.  10.8 ). This form of the written language continued to 
serve as a standard for most practical purposes, and it was sometimes convenient 
even for the Ottoman sultan (as for the Venetians) to employ it as a diplomatic 
language. The following early example is an extract from a treaty of 1450 between 
Mehmet II (the Conqueror to be) and the Grand Master of the Knights of St John 
on Rhodes: 

414 Modern Greek
 (1) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ I the great lord and great emir Sultan Mehmet Bey  … swear by the God of heaven and 
earth, and by our great prophet Mohammed, and by the seven musaﬁ a ( copies of the 
Koran ) that we Muslims hold and profess our faith on, and by the hundred and twenty -
 four thousand prophets of God, and by my life, and by the life of my children,  … and I 
swear by the oaths written above that I shall have affectionate relations with my (maj-
esty ’ s) father, the Grand Master of Rhodes, and that I shall never do him any harm  … ’ 
 The syntax is basically that of Modern Greek, and distinct in its simplicity from the 
elaborate patterns of belletristic writing, replete with archaic categories and construc-
tions. Note in particular the two   n a [na] - futures (regular then, though now chieﬂ y a 
marker of the demotic/folk tradition), the negative polarity items, and the fully devel-
oped character of the verbal complex (modality   +  negation   +  clitic  +  verb), alongside 
the use of contemporary vocabulary, including Romance and Turkish loans. 
 None the less, the orthography and morphology of words with an ancient pedigree 
still reﬂ ect the conventions of the written Koine: ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] is consistently noted and 
synizesis is not represented (though conservative pronunciations may still have been 
current in the educated spoken language), while the genitive of 1st - declension mascu-
lines is in  - o u [ - u] not  - h [ - i] (
 ), and 3rd - declension consonant - stems 
have genitives in  - o " [ - os] (
 [pa ' tros], though see below). Note too 
 
[om ' nio] rather than popular 
 [o ' mono], gen 
 [i ' mon] rather than 
 
[e ' mon] (or acc 
 [e ' mas]), the relative pronoun  t a [ta] rather than 
 [ ' opu/
(o)pu], 
 [me ' ta]  +  gen rather than  m e [me]   +  acc, and the formulaic/learned 

Written Greek in the Turkish Period  415
exp ression 
 , 
complete with its archaic adverb in  - q  e n 
 and reduplicated perfect passive parti-
ciple (at the end of the document there is a similarly formulaic use of  e n  e t e i [en  ' eti] 
 ‘ in the year ’ , with archaic  e n [en]   +  obsolete dat). 
 The bilingual writer is, however, prone to occasional lapses; e.g. 
 
for 
 [ikosi ' tesaris], a form which also shows modern  - e i " [ - is] for clas-
sical  - e " [ - es] under the inﬂ uence of 
 [tris]  ‘ three ’ . The appearance in a later part 
of the text of innovative 1st - declension nominatives (
 [pa ' teras]  ‘ father ’ , 
 [ma ' istoras]  ‘ master ’ ) is a similar concession to the spoken language, and 
this may well indicate that the genitive in  - o " [ - os] (
 , locally preserved 
in some modern dialects) was still a feature of the dialect of the writer; it is signiﬁ cant 
that such forms are the only ones given in Soﬁ an ó s ’ grammar (see  14.2.2 ). Items such 
as 
 [pole ' mo]  ‘ do ’  (rather than  ‘ ﬁ ght ’ , cf. Machair á s ’ chronicle,  12.4.2 ), 
  ‘ give ’ (cf.  11.8.5  (a)), and the extended demonstrative 
 [afto ' non] 
 ‘ of these ’ (cf.  11.7.8  (d)) also appear in later parts of the document. 
 The admixture of vernacular morphology perhaps reﬂ ects the educational level of 
the writer as much as the practical character of the document, but from examples of 
this kind we can observe the way in which the written Koine evolved through a process 
of retarded compromise with the spoken language. Once a given grammatical or lexical 
innovation had entered educated speech, it also began to inﬁ ltrate the more basic 
written styles, and if it then became fully established in the higher spoken registers, it 
might eventually compete with, and replace, its conservative equivalent in all but the 
highest ofﬁ cial and literary styles. 
 A related middle style continued to be used for ofﬁ cial purposes throughout the 
Ottoman period. Consider, for example, the following piece of legislation from Moldavia, 
dated 1788. In the interests of communicative efﬁ ciency, the dative is avoided and 
inﬂ ected participles are used only adjectivally (and then rarely), while established and 
familiar loanwords (from Turkish, Italian and Romanian) again appear freely: 
 (2) 
   

416 Modern Greek
 
 
 ‘ Concerning the Ruling Council. The Ruling Council shall take place three times per week, 
that is on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays; on Mondays and Wednesdays the dis-
putes will be considered of those who were judged in their regional courts or before the 
Guardians, and were not satisﬁ ed with decisions of these bodies and sought by means of 
appeal to appear before the Council, or the disputes which we would order to be consid-
ered before our Council without their being settled in another court, while on Saturdays 
criminal cases will be considered, together with the sentences and decisions concerning 
these. ’ 
 Traditional endings are generally retained, as expected, though note that 3pl  - o u n [ - un] 
is preferred except in contract verbs and the aorist passive subjunctive (a tendency also 
apparent in Byzantine middle - low - style writing). Similarly, where lexical items have a 
modern meaning, the modern endings are also used, as with 
 [fo ' ra], plural 
 
[fo ' res], in the sense of  ‘ time/occasion ’ rather than  ‘ a bringing forth/product/burden ’ , 
a development from the phrase 
 [kata fo ' ran]  ‘ in a movement/in one go ’ . 
 But uncompromisingly classical forms of Greek also continued to be used for higher 
scholarship and learned correspondence, particularly by the ecclesiastical elite of 
Constantinople. Thus when Martin Crusius, professor of Greek and Latin at the 
University of T ü bingen in the late 16th century, wrote to the patriarchate for informa-
tion about modern Greek, he received the following reply from Sime ó n Kav á silas, 
composed in (a fair imitation of) the classical language: 1 
 (3) 
 
 

Written Greek in the Turkish Period  417
 
 
 ‘ Concerning the dialects, what can I say, given that they are so many and diverse, over 
seventy in number? And the worst of them all is that of the Athenians.  … besides, among 
our uneducated people one will ﬁ nd some speaking Doric, others Attic, others Aeolic, 
others Ionic, and in addition to these, people speaking the Koine.  … But he who has 
learned only one dialect, the one that we have learned, will know all dialects well. ’ 
 The belief that the contemporary dialects somehow continued those of Ancient Greek 
(with the Koine treated in the traditional fashion as an addition to the classical array) 
is of course false, but it is indicative of Kav á silas ’  indifference. Many other educated 
people of the time also dismissed regional varieties as uninteresting, taking their het-
erogeneity vis - à - vis the language of the elite as evidence of decay. The 16th - century 
monk and scholar Pach ó mios Rous á nos, for example, pointing to the local retention 
of archaisms as evidence of former unity, argued that all Greeks must learn the 
 ‘ common language ’ of the educated to prevent the loss of the true word of God as 
embodied in the gospels (Vasilik ó s ( 1908 : 55ff)). 
 A similar linguistic conservatism was characteristic of the social milieu of the 
Phanariots, who also employed classicizing styles for scholarly and literary work (see, 
for example, Triandafyll í dis ( 1938 : 319 – 22) for extracts from the 17th/18th - century 
writings of The ó ﬁ los Korydal é fs, director of the Patriarchal Academy, or the intel-
lectual churchman Evy é nios Vo ú lgaris). Al é xandros Mavrokord á tos (1636 – 1708), 
progenitor of the greatest of the Phanariot families, was involved not only in diplomacy 
but also in running the Academy in Constantinople, while his son Nik ó laos was the 
ﬁ rst Greek  hospodar  in the Danubian principalities. The extract below from a letter 
of Al é xandros to his son illustrates the high style of the political/intellectual establish-
ment, though the views expressed show a refreshingly realistic grasp of the problems 
involved in using such language  ‘ naturally ’ : 
 (4) 
 
 
 
 

418 Modern Greek
 ‘ And be sure always to keep in mind those instructions of mine that I explained in the 
letter I mentioned before. As for poetic and unusual words, by all means know them, but 
avoid their use completely, and do not present me with the testimony of writers of old; 
for how should we, who come so long after them, imitate what they, who wrote so very 
much, used only once or twice? ’ 
 This  ‘ living ’  use of a learned language continues the highest Byzantine tradition, and 
its artiﬁ ciality is perhaps best appreciated by comparing the word order of the original 
with that of the English translation; whereas Modern Greek and English generally 
show a very similar sequencing of phrases and clauses, the major differences here, 
though natural enough in the classical language, present the translator with something 
of a challenge. 
 Nevertheless, in his  Memoirs of 1682, Mavrokord á tos felt free to use a more 
relaxed, semi - vernacular style, full of Turkish loans reﬂ ecting the Ottoman institutional 
context in which he worked. The curious blend of contemporary and conservative 
forms (the latter including inﬂ ected active participles, full - form pronouns instead of 
clitics, datives, and perfect passive participles with reduplication) must reﬂ ect a deliber-
ate choice of style on his part, one ultimately based upon the everyday speech of the 
aristocracy: 
 (5) 
 
 
 
 

Written Greek in the Turkish Period  419
 ‘ After the meal and the coffee the steward took Nureddin ( the foreign minister ) and went 
to the tent which had been pitched beside the pavilion of the ambassador for the sovereign, 
and the ambassador and the sovereign, sitting alone, spoke together again at some length. 
Then the sovereign went to the previously prepared tent and the ambassador remained 
behind; he undertook his ablutions and performed the mid - day prayer. Then the steward 
and the foreign minister went and brought the sovereign back to the ambassador, who 
came to meet him at an appropriate distance. ’ 
 The word order and syntactic structure of this piece are natural to the modern idiom, 
and (with the exceptions already mentioned) the morphology too is broadly  ‘ demotic ’ 
if we ignore the systematic use of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] and the absence of synizesis (both perhaps 
purely orthographic, though elite usage must have been conservative). In so far as such 
a  ‘ vernacular ’  prose style was already in use in even the highest society, the objections 
that were soon to be raised against the use of spoken Greek as the basis for a national 
language were clearly more ideological than practical (cf. chapter  17 ). 
 15.2   The Impact of the Enlightenment 
 A great many writers came to use a similarly demoticizing style during the 17th and 18th 
centuries in recognition of the growing readership and increasingly diverse needs of a 
more enlightened and prosperous era. Typical text - types include Bible anthologies and 
religious tracts (including a  ‘ translation ’ of the New Testament in 1638, quickly sup-
pressed in the face of ecclesiastical opposition), histories, chronicles, and technical 
treatises on a wide variety of modern subjects. The growing body of western - educated 
intellectuals had now begun to appreciate the value of a modernized language for edu-
cational purposes, and the publication in Venice and elsewhere of such texts bears 
witness to a more progressive outlook based on the conviction, adumbrated in the work 
of Soﬁ an ó s, that an extension of education was the key to the revival of the Greek nation. 
 Many of these works make explicit reference to  ‘ the common dialect (of the 
Greeks) ’ 2 in their titles or prefaces. For example, the  Salvation of Sinners  (published 
in Venice in 1664) by the Cretan monk Ag á pios contains the following preface: 
 (6) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ An excellent book called  “ the Salvation of Sinners ” , composed with the greatest care in 
the common dialect of the Greeks by the Cretan monk Agapios (who practised the ascetic 
life on the Holy Mountain of Athos) and now recently corrected with care. ’ 

420 Modern Greek
 Though this preface is composed in Ancient Greek according to tradition, the language 
of the text itself is very clearly distanced from that of learned literature. But it is not 
written in Cretan vernacular either, despite its author ’ s origins. The  ‘ common lan-
guage ’ referred to is a basic written style familiar even to the moderately educated 
throughout the Greek - speaking areas, a variety that reﬂ ected many of the changes in 
spoken Greek in a dialectally neutral way by avoiding regionalisms, and retaining a 
conservative orthographic aspect: 
 (7) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ Do not waste the precious time that God has given you to spend on good deeds in order 
for you to gain the kingdom of heaven. Such a waste (of time, I mean) is more serious 
than that of material things, because you will ﬁ nd all the material things you want, but 
not the time. ’ 
 The publication of such work reveals a growing appreciation within the generally 
conservative Orthodox church of the need for accessible religious literature, not only 
to edify but also to  ‘ protect ’ the faithful against conversion, whether to Islam, 
Catholicism or Protestantism. Once again, it is clear that the foundations for a national 
written language, reﬂ ecting the norms of educated speech if not the popular vernacu-
lars, were already in place long before the language question entered its acute phase 
in the period after independence. Writers such as Il í as Mini á tis (1669 – 1714), who 
came from Kefaloni á , but worked at different times in the Ionian islands, Venice, 
Constantinople and the Peloponnese, were able to develop a highly sophisticated 
religious - educational programme in just such a popularized form of Greek, by skilfully 
redeploying rhetorical techniques adopted from Italian models by the Catholic 
Frang í skos Sko ú fos (1644 – 97, a refugee from Chani á in Crete, who studied in Rome 
and then worked in Italy and the Ionian islands). The piece in (8) provides a typical 
sample: 
 (8) 
 
 

Written Greek in the Turkish Period  421
 
 
 ‘ I follow the example of the great teacher of the pagans, the blessed Paul, who says:  “ I 
am debtor both to the wise and to the unwise ( Romans 1. 14 ). ”  As far as I am able I 
teach simply, so that all may understand me. But today especially I shall speak more simply 
than on all other occasions because I want both men and women, both the important and 
the ordinary, both old and young to understand my words, since the matter of the 
Confession also touches us all. ’ 
 The advance of intellectual curiosity and economic development during the 18th 
century also led to the appearance of secular writing in ﬁ elds as diverse as geography, 
politics and science, subjects that necessitated a considerable expansion of the lexicon. 
This was achieved principally through calques and loan translations from French and 
English, which themselves had often used classical Greek elements for the same purpose. 
Many such works were written in the  ‘ demoticizing ’ language related to the spoken 
standard of the upper classes, and these were published not only in western Europe, 
but also in the Ottoman principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia, where a number of 
linguistically progressive ﬁ gures had begun to speak out (see Henderson  (1971) , 
Kondos ó poulos  (1978) ). Prominent among these were Ios í pos Moisi ó dax (c.1730 – 90), 
sometime principal of both the Jassy and Bucharest academies, and Dim í trios Katartz í s 
(c.1720 – 1807), a high court judge in Bucharest of Constantinopolitan birth, who urged 
the general use of a  ‘ modern ’  written language for education, and composed a grammar 
to provide a basis for his programme (unpublished until 1970). Katartz í s also advo-
cated a written standard based upon  ‘ the domestic style of Constantinople ’ (i.e. the 
domestic style of his class), and on this platform entered into a vigorous and polemical 
correspondence with L á mbros Photi á dis, the arch - archaist headmaster of the Bucharest 
academy (see Triandafyll í dis ( 1938 : 435 – 8) for extracts). He was followed by Dani í l 
Philipp í dis and Dim í trios Konstand á s, whose  Geography of 1791 is often taken to 
provide a good reﬂ ection of contemporary educated speech (cf. Beaton ( 1994 : 331)). 
If so, this apparently still employed,  inter alia , 3rd - declension genitives in  - o " [ - os], 
accusative plurals in  - a " [ - as], and present passive participles. Moisi ó dax, however, 
though approving the view that a simple style was adequate for the expression of 
scientiﬁ c subject matter, conceived of this as requiring the  ‘ correction ’ of common 
usage through the introduction of appropriate elements from the ancient language, a 
programme that anticipated the later development of  kathar é vousa (cf. (9) below, and 
see chapter  17 ). 

422 Modern Greek
 It is important to note, however, that almost all the contributors to the language 
debate at this time, whatever the thrust of their proposals, instinctively employed the 
written norms of academic debate for putting forward and defending their views, since 
even those who sought to establish a more vernacular medium in the longer term felt 
obliged to engage with the opposition within the established framework if they wished 
to be taken seriously. Take, for example, the following extract from the preface of 
Moisi ó dax ’ s  Theory of Geography  (1781). The writer has justiﬁ ed his use of the 
 ‘ simple style ’ in the main body of the work, and now explains the basis on which he 
has  ‘ improved ’ it: 
 (9) 
 
 
 
 
 ‘ For the reasons I adduce, I judged it right to compose the present work in the simple 
style, while always retaining the established terminology that was in use among the 
ancients and always adapting the simple style in a more digniﬁ ed direction or at least in 
a direction more ﬁ tting for the subject matter in hand. ’ 
 The following archaisms are typical of the common rhetorical style employed by the 
18th - century intelligentsia: 
 (10)  (a)  The systematic retention of ancient nominal and verbal morphology, 
including: 
 (i) 
 ‘ contracted ’ 2nd - declension and traditional 3rd - declension forms 
(cf. 
 [a ' plun]   <  
 [a ' ploon] for modern 
 
[a ' plo], and the ancient 3rd - declension accusative plural 
 
[ ' ç iras]). 
 (ii) 
 monolectic comparatives rather than  p i o [pjo]  ‘ more ’   +  simple 
adjective (e.g. 
 ). 
 (iii)  the dative case (e.g.  t h 
 ). 
 (iv)  the use of fully inﬂ ected participles, both active and present/aorist 
passive (e.g. 
 [ ' sozon], 
 ). 

Written Greek in the Turkish Period  423
 (v) 
 reduplication in perfects (cf. 
 ). 
 (vi)  retention of the syllabic augment, including internal augments in 
compounds (no example in the extract, but cf. 
  ‘ I reformed ’ , used later in the preface).  
 (b)  The use of ancient prepositions (e.g. 
 [a ' na],  e n [en], 
 [e ' pi], 
 
[pa ' ra] plus their ancient case requirements, including the dative (e.g. 
 [en do a ' plo  ' iﬁ ]). 
 (c)  The use of vocabulary items (and sometimes paradigms) alien to popular 
spoken registers (e.g. feminine 
 [ ç ir]) for neuter 
 [ ' ç eri], 
 [a ' i] 
for 
 [ ' panda], 
 [ ' itines] and 
 [tus o ' pius] instead 
of 
 [(o)pu], etc.  
 Most of the syntactic constructions, however, correspond to those of the contem-
porary language: e.g. 
 [na] - clauses (
 [ ' ekrina na eksi ' fano]) 
replace ancient inﬁ nitives, and genitives follow the items on which they depend 
(
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ) 
rather than being inserted between article and noun, or requiring a repeated article 
(i.e. [article   +  noun]   +  [article  +  [genitive phrase]]). The fundamentally contemporary 
quality of the language is particularly apparent in the word order; heads precede their 
complements throughout, and the sequence of phrases within clauses, and of clauses 
with respect to one another, presents the content of propositions in a straightforward 
way quite alien to the classically inspired high style. In other words, the  ‘ archaic ’ ele-
ments have in general been inserted into structural slots determined by contemporary 
rules of syntax in the time - honoured fashion inherited from Byzantium (always allow-
ing for knock - on effects in terms of complement selection and case assignment; for 
example, archaizing 
  ‘ more ﬁ tting ’   +  dative in place of 
e.g. 
 [pjo  ' prosforo(n)]   +  prepositional phrase etc.).  
 15.3   Contemporary  ‘ Demotic ’ 
 All of the written styles discussed so far contrast more or less sharply with the  ‘ language 
of the people ’ , which we know only through documents dictated to others in ignorance 
of written norms by people with only rudimentary education. A typical example is 
provided by the passage in (11), taken from the will of Dim í trios Char í tis, dated 1708. 
Char í tis ’ family originally lived in Ro ú meli but had ﬂ ed to Z á kynthos when a Turkish 
force arrived in the region to drive out a Venetian raiding party: 
 (11) 
 
 

424 Modern Greek
 
 
 ‘ I leave the very little I have to my brother Y ó ryis, and I want him to bury me without 
expense or a funeral procession. Let him leave me only my trousers and my black shirt 
and nothing else, and let him throw me in a grave. And if all - merciful and all - pitying God 
grants this, and it turns out that our unhappy race is freed from the terrible and merciless 
anti - Christ the Muslim, let him disinter my bones and the bones of my late brother 
Fil ó theos, which I have hidden in a sack in the cave which he knows, and let him bury 
them together next to the bones of our parents in the church of our homeland. ’ 
 Features of demotic phonology represented here include: 
 (12)  (a)  Final  - n [ - n] of accusative singulars is regularly found only in the article 
and in pronouns, and in contexts where the contemporary language 
would also retain it. Note, however:  
 (i) 
 where morphologically signiﬁ cant, as in genitive plurals and espe-
cially in 3pl verb forms, it is often protected by the addition of ﬁ nal 
 - e [e] (e.g. in gen pl 
 [ ' xronone]  ‘ of years ’ , 3pl aorist 
subjunctive 
 [ ' parune]  ‘ they - take ’ , used elsewhere in the 
document). 
 (ii)  its occasional appearance where the popular spoken language 
would almost certainly have excluded it (e.g. in the article before 
fricatives, or in nouns, cf. 
 ) may 
perhaps be attributed to the minimal schooling the author had 
received. 
 (b)  Synizesis is represented graphically (e.g. 
 , 
 ), though we do ﬁ nd both 
 and 
 [ka ' mia]/
[kam ' mia], where the form of the latter is presumably due to its emphatic 
character in this context. While the assumption of such pronunciations 
seems entirely plausible, the associated positioning of written accents 
may well reﬂ ect editorial ideology more than the original manuscript 
(caution is appropriate also in the case of (c)).  

Written Greek in the Turkish Period  425
 (c)  The accent is retained on the antepenultimate syllable of 2nd - declension 
genitives such as 
 (cf. nominative 
 ), 
where learned styles would require a shift to the penultimate.  
 (d)  The preposition  e i " [is] is often reduced to  ' " [s] before both deﬁ nite 
articles (with the two elements then sometimes graphically combined, as 
in 
 ) and items beginning with a vowel, 
while its variant  s e [se] appears before many items beginning with a 
consonant (e.g. 
 ). 
 (e)  The relative  p o u [pu] and the causal conjunction 
 [ja ' ti] (used else-
where in the text) have lost their original initial elements,  [o] and  d - 
 
respectively. 
 The morphological picture is also consistently demotic. Note, for example: 
 (13)  (a)  The noun 
 [e ' ksodefsi] and other 3rd - declension i - stem forms 
have lost their original ﬁ nal  - " [ - s] in the nominative singular (as well as 
the  - n [ - n] of the accusative, as here), suggesting that this paradigm, 
despite the conservative spelling, has gone some way to merging with 
the 1st - declension type in  - h [ - i]. 
 (b)  Although 3rd - declension consonant - stems seem to have been assimilated 
to the 1st - declension types in  - a [ - a] (feminine) or  - a " [ - as] (masculine) in 
the nominative and accusative, the genitive is still in  - o " [ - os] (cf. 
 ), with the old termination intact. Such forms are 
also given in Soﬁ an ó s ’  grammar and remained in use in the Ionian islands.  
 (c)  Large numbers of neuters in  [ - ' i] are used where the learned language 
would employ 3rd - declension masculines and feminines.  
 (d)  The verbal preﬁ x  x e - [kse - ] appears regularly in the sense of  ‘ undo X ’ ; 
this arose through misanalysis of augmented verb forms (e.g. 
 , leading to new present 
 etc.).  
 (e)  Only indeclinable participles are employed (e.g. 
 [ ' kanondas] 
 ‘ doing ’ , elsewhere in the text).  
 (f) 
 Subjunctive endings homophonous with their indicative counterparts are 
spelled with the traditional  ‘ long ’ vowels (e.g. 3sg aorist subjunctive 
 ), but where the classical ending differs phonetically from 
the corresponding indicative the spelling is that of the latter (e.g. 3pl 
aorist subjunctive 
 [ ' parune] cited earlier).  
 (g)  Aorist passives with the  - k - [k] sufﬁ x (e.g. 
  ‘ he 
was taken ’ , not in the extract) appear alongside forms without (e.g. 
  ‘ he was killed ’ , also elsewhere); this ﬂ uctuation 
reﬂ ects the still developing character of the paradigm (cf. the observa-
tions about Makriy á nnis ’ usage in  14.3 , discussion of example (24)).  
 (h)  The perfect active is formed with 
 [ ' exo]  ‘ have ’  +  perfect passive 
participle (
 [ta  ' exo kri ' mena]); the standard modern 
periphrasis with 
 [ ' exo] plus (fossilized) aorist inﬁ nitive is still a thing 
of the future.  

426 Modern Greek
 (i) 
 The syllabic augment is routine in past indicatives, even when unmoti-
vated by the need to provide a stress - bearing syllable (a conservative 
dialectal feature).  
 (j) 
 Much of the vocabulary is of everyday origin. Apart from items already 
mentioned, note in particular the Italian and Turkish loanwords reﬂ ect-
ing Char í tis ’ background in Turkish - occupied Ro ú meli and Italian -
 dominated Z á kynthos: 
 (i) 
 3sg subjunctive 
 [kapi ' tari] from  capitare  ‘ to happen ’ , 
plus other Italian examples from elsewhere in the will, including 
 [ ' stima] ( stima  ‘ esteem ’ ), and 
 [ospi ' tale] ( ospedale 
 ‘ hospital ’ ). 
 (ii)  Turkish loans used elsewhere in the text include 
 [ko ' laji] 
 ‘ ease ’ derived from  kolay  ‘ easy ’ , and 
  ‘ horde ’ from  ordu 
 ‘ army ’ . 
 (k)  Learned prepositions are wholly absent.  
 It is undeniable that Char í tis expresses himself effectively and that the simple everyday 
language is well suited to the contents of his will, but this was a register that had never 
been used for  ‘ higher ’  purposes. Conservative intellectuals, by focusing on the hetero-
geneity and limited range of such popular spoken varieties while disingenuously ignor-
ing the developing written styles based on the vernacular of the upper and middle 
classes, contemptuously dismissed the whole idea that  ‘ the vernacular ’ might, without 
ludicrous incongruity, incorporate the sort of lexical, structural and rhetorical resources 
required for the expression of complex, abstract and technical ideas. For them only 
the long - established forms of written Greek could ever have the necessary wherewithal 
to meet such needs.  
 15.4   The Roots of the  ‘ Language Question ’ 
 If we leave aside both virtuoso Atticizing and the vernacular - based language of private 
memoirs and educational texts, it was still the contemporary middle - range styles of 
administration and learned debate that deﬁ ned the range of normal prose writing 
among the intelligentsia in the decades before independence, and even those who 
sought to bring spoken and written usage more closely into line were obliged to resort 
to conventional written Greek in order to debate the issue. But though actual practice 
remained largely constant, the advent of a belief in progressive circles that a demoti-
cized written language was essential for the future marks the beginning of the break-
down of the tacit consensus, originating in Roman imperial times, that it was both 
natural and acceptable to have distinct spoken and written languages. 
 The diglossia of the period before the war of independence was a consequence of 
political and cultural circumstances that had consistently inhibited the evolution of a 
standard modern language along western European lines. Initially, the coherence of 
the Roman empire in the east prevented the diversiﬁ cation that had led to the emer-
gence of the Romance languages in the Latin - speaking provinces and to their eventual 
acceptance as a vehicle for higher written functions. The continuity of written Greek 

Written Greek in the Turkish Period  427
and its relatively close relationship to the elite vernacular meant there was little pres-
sure for change in a society where literacy was restricted and cultural perceptions 
dominated by the past. Then, as the empire crumbled and Ottoman rule was estab-
lished, the centrality of the Orthodox church, as the only major institution to survive 
from the past, entrenched conservative thinking and practice. Only in Cyprus Venetian 
Crete and the Ionian islands were conditions favourable to the kind of innovative 
developments seen in the west, but none of these outposts was in a position to deter-
mine the future course of language development for an emergent Greek nation as a 
whole. 
 When Greek intellectuals began to be exposed to modern European thought and 
sought to revitalize Greek education and science, they were therefore faced with a 
dilemma. Should a Greek revival belatedly follow the model of other European states, 
with a national language based on a spoken variety that had been elaborated, codiﬁ ed 
and ofﬁ cially promoted, or should a future national standard be based on the existing 
written language with its continuous tradition and inherent prestige? Opinion among 
the westernized Greeks was generally  ‘ progressive ’ , while the majority of  ‘ conserva-
tives ’ , some of whom were sufﬁ ciently encouraged by the revival of classical learning 
in Europe to plan the reintroduction of Ancient Greek, were concentrated in the 
Ottoman capital and its Danubian satellites (though there were naturally some con-
servatives in the diaspora and some progressives within the empire). 
 But the development of a written standard based on a contemporary spoken variety 
presupposes widespread acceptance of the limitations of real or potential rivals, as 
eventually happened with Latin in the west. It also requires the adoption by the politi-
cal and intellectual elite of a variety with sufﬁ cient prestige, of the kind derived from 
use in literary classics etc., to transcend local loyalties and overcome residual preju-
dices. In the period before independence there were no acknowledged vernacular clas-
sics, practical writing based on educated speech was in its infancy (and still 
controversial), and the elite as a whole, though sharply divided on questions of edu-
cational policy and language planning, still employed a written language that enjoyed 
the inestimable advantage of being linked, however indirectly, to the classical and 
Byzantine past. The eventual assumption of power by this same elite therefore dictated 
the immediate way forward. Despite protests from areas outside the new kingdom, 
especially the Ionian islands, it was inevitably the current form of the written standard 
that prevailed,  faute de mieux , as the ofﬁ cial language of independent Greece (see 
chapter  17 ). 
 Notes 
1  See Toufex í s  (2005)  for a study of Crusius and his interest in Modern Greek.  
2  The frequent use of the term 
  ‘ Greeks ’  in such works is a clear indication of 
the growth of national consciousness at this time. Cf. also the reference to  ‘ our race ’ in the 
will of the near - illiterate Dim í trios Char í tis quoted in (11) below.  

16
 The History of the 
Modern Greek State  
 16.1   Irredentism: Triumph and Disaster 
 The Bavarian - led administration of newly independent Greece quickly moved to 
Athens, and a new city was constructed in neo - classical style as part of its programme 
for giving the infant nation a distinctive identity through reconnection with the clas-
sical past. At the same time, great emphasis was placed on the teaching of classical 
Greek in schools and universities, while the traditional written language in its contem-
porary form became  de facto  the ofﬁ cial language of the state. 
 But the economic measures imposed by the great powers in their efforts to restore 
ﬁ nancial order caused widespread hardship, and King Otto, following the classic strat-
egy of leaders in domestic difﬁ culty, embraced the  ‘ Great Idea ’ , a vision of an extended 
Greece incorporating all the lands traditionally associated with Greek history and 
culture. The ﬁ rst manifestation of this new policy was an educational programme 
designed to re - Hellenize the Orthodox peasant populations still under Ottoman rule, 
many of whom spoke Turkish and had little awareness of their  ‘ Greek ’ nationality. 
Though the Ottoman authorities, with typical indifference, did little to oppose this 
initiative, it proved less successful than it might have been because of the centrality 
within its provisions of the ofﬁ cial written language, which was quite alien to the target 
audience. 
 Such efforts were scarcely needed in the great cities, however, where national con-
sciousness was already running high. But many of the Ottoman Greeks felt the empire 
could be successfully Hellenized from within, and pointed to the extent to which the 
Greek upper and middle classes had by then come to dominate its political and eco-
nomic life. The conﬂ ict between those who hoped for an aggressive expansionist policy 
from the Greek kingdom and those who felt that such a strategy could only do long -
 term damage was never resolved. But in Greece itself, the irredentists triumphed over 
those who, deeply conscious of Greece ’ s parlous economic and military situation, 
advocated a more cautious policy. Thus despite the acquisition of the Ionian islands 
in 1864, handed over by Britain in the hope that Greece might then moderate its 
demands, the government resolved to take advantage of Russia ’ s declaration of war 

The History of the Modern Greek State 429
on the Ottoman empire in 1877, and moved troops to the northern frontier. Subsequent 
pressure from the great powers then led to the Turks ’ ceding of Thessaly and the Arta 
region of southern Epirus to Greece in 1881, an apparent conﬁ rmation of the need for 
an irredentist foreign policy. 
 Over the next few years the Greek economy began to improve, but the reforms 
again entailed unpopular taxes, and great damage was done when a government came 
to power on a populist platform of reducing taxation and resuming the pursuit of 
 ‘ occupied ’ territory. A force was sent to help Cretan insurgents in 1897, but when 
hostilities also broke out in Thessaly, the Greek army was roundly defeated. Though 
a lenient peace settlement was secured, Greece had to agree to the external supervision 
of interest payments on its vast foreign debt, and the resultant economic difﬁ culties 
led to the ﬁ rst round of large - scale migration, especially to the USA. 
 By this time the political situation in Macedonia had deteriorated badly. The Greek 
National Society had for some time been working hard to Hellenize Macedonia and 
Epirus in the face of Bulgarian, Serbian and Romanian rivalry, and a vicious guerilla 
war soon broke out between Greek and Slavic groups. In the face of territorial and 
economic crisis, the government, under threat of military intervention, instigated the 
so - called  ‘ bourgeois revolution ’ by turning in 1910 to the Liberal Cretan statesman 
Elefth é rios Veniz é los. When revolt broke out among the Albanians, and the Slavic 
states of the Balkans sought to exploit Turkish weakness, Veniz é los determined to 
protect Greek interests in the north despite the very real risk of reprisals against the 
Asia Minor Greeks, who then still numbered nearly a million and a half. Greece, Serbia 
and Bulgaria together declared war on the Ottoman empire on 18 October 1912. 
Thessaloniki was taken by the Greek army on 9 November, just ahead of a Bulgarian 
force, while the Greek navy seized the islands of Chios, Lesbos and Samos. Early in 
1913 the Greeks also moved in the north - west, taking Ioannina and advancing into 
northern Epirus. 
 Though the Turks agreed to these territorial gains, a fresh dispute over Macedonia 
broke out almost immediately among the victors, and the Greek army now advanced 
further east, taking the towns of Drama, Serres and Kavala in a bloody campaign in 
which the Slavic population suffered greatly. As a result, the Bulgarians were obliged 
to agree to the division of most of Macedonia between Greece and Serbia, and there 
were consequent population exchanges between the three countries. (The independence 
of Slavic Macedonia, following the break - up of Yugoslavia, is therefore seen by both 
parties as constituting a major destabilization of the region.) At the same time, Greek 
sovereignty over Crete and the Aegean islands was recognized by the great powers, 
and only in northern Epirus were the government ’ s ambitions thwarted by the creation 
of an independent Albania (the treatment of the Greek minority there, together with 
the massive inﬂ ux of illegal Albanian immigrants into Greece, remains a source of 
friction at the present time). 
 Greek territory had now been increased by nearly 70 per cent since independence, 
and the prevailing euphoria even prompted talk of recovering Constantinople, but such 
hopes were quickly shattered by the First World War and its catastrophic aftermath. 
The king at this time, Konstand í nos I, aimed for a policy of neutrality, but Veniz é los 
supported Greece ’ s traditional allies (Britain, France and Russia), and when Turkey 
entered the war on the side of the Central Powers (Germany and Austria - Hungary), 

430 Modern Greek
his arguments inevitably prevailed. Troops were at once committed to the ill - fated 
Dardanelles campaign in the hope that Greece might obtain a share of the spoils, but 
the king quickly reconsidered his cautious conversion to the allied cause in the light 
of warnings from his chief of staff about the difﬁ culties of retaining territory in Asia 
Minor, and Veniz é los was forced to resign. This initiated the National Schism, which 
came to dominate Greek politics until the Second World War. 
 A pro - Veniz é los coup was staged in Thessaloniki on 30 August 1916, and a provi-
sional government was set up. When British and French troops despatched to Athens 
to pressurize the royalist government were forced to retreat and reprisals against 
Venizelists ensued, the allied powers recognized the provisional government and 
blockaded areas loyal to the king, forcing Konstand í nos into exile. Veniz é los then 
returned as prime minister and counter - reprisals against royalists promptly followed, 
thereby establishing the disastrous practice of tit - for - tat purges at each change of 
administration. 
 Veniz é los immediately committed the army to the Macedonian front to support the 
allied campaign in the Balkans, and following the armistice of November 1918, he 
attended the peace conference in Paris in the expectation that Greece would be 
rewarded for its loyalty. His immediate objective was the annexation of Smyrna (Izmir) 
and its hinterland, where the military situation was becoming critical. The Italians, in 
their belated search for a colonial empire, had already taken advantage of Ottoman 
weakness by seizing the Dodecanese in 1912. Now they had landed troops in Antalya, 
having been promised the region in return for supporting the allies, and it was reported 
that this force was moving westward. In the absence of any formal agreement about 
the dismemberment of the Ottoman empire, the allies agreed to the landing of Greek 
troops for  ‘ the protection of the local population ’ . Fighting between Greek and Turkish 
irregulars immediately followed, while in Ankara the circle around Mustafa Kemal 
(Atat ü rk), the victor in the ﬁ ghting at Gallipoli, declared independence from the gov-
ernment in Constantinople, making it clear they would not tolerate foreign occupation 
of the Turkish heartland. 
 It was eventually agreed that Smyrna should be administered by Greece for ﬁ ve 
years, followed by a plebiscite on the issue of union. But Veniz é los had underestimated 
domestic resentment caused by the over - zealousness of his supporters and the persist-
ence of Anglo - French interference in Greek affairs. He lost the elections of 1920, and 
the incoming royalist government arranged for Konstand í nos ’ return amid fresh purges 
of leading Venizelists and the tacit withdrawal of British support. Though the French 
and Italians now came to terms with Mustafa Kemal, the Greeks, under the impression 
that they retained British backing, launched an offensive in Asia Minor in March 1921. 
The campaign, against a background of centuries of Turkish domination, was moti-
vated for many, particularly among the Asia Minor Greeks, by a desire for revenge. 
Though the Greek advance was halted only some 50   km from Ankara, the Turks, 
believing the Greek military position had become untenable, insisted on unconditional 
evacuation. When this was refused, a crushing counter - offensive was launched on 26 
August 1922. The Greek army retreated in disarray, pursuing a scorched earth strategy, 
and was evacuated on 8 September. In the ensuing chaos, while western warships stood 
by, the Christian (mainly Greek and Armenian) population of Smyrna was massacred, 
and large areas of the city were devastated by ﬁ re. 

The History of the Modern Greek State 431
 The king immediately abdicated, to be succeeded by his son Ye ó ryios, and a revo-
lutionary committee formed from the survivors of the Asia Minor army took charge. 
By the terms of the treaty of Lausanne (July 1923) Greece forfeited the Smyrna enclave, 
eastern Thrace and the islands of Imvros and Tenedos (strategically placed at the 
entrance to the Dardanelles), and though already under pressure as a result of repatria-
tion from Russia in the aftermath of the revolution, the government was further obliged 
to agree to an exchange of populations with Turkey (excluding the Turks of western 
Thrace and the Greeks of Constantinople), with religion, not language, applied as the 
criterion of nationality. Nearly 400,000 Muslims and well over a million Christians 
were affected. Although land reform and the departure of Turkish communities allowed 
some of the refugees to be resettled in country areas, many of those with an urban 
background resorted to setting up shanty towns around Athens and Thessaloniki.  
 16.2   Dictatorship and War 
 The arrival of a sophisticated cosmopolitan bourgeoisie and the massive expansion of 
the urban working class had immediate political consequences, including in 1924 a 
vote for the abolition of the monarchy. A series of weak republican governments soon 
gave way, however, to military dictatorship under General P á ngalos in 1925, and 
though the return of Veniz é los in 1928 ushered in a period of relative stability, includ-
ing foreign policy successes in repairing relations with Bulgaria and Turkey, his posi-
tion was quickly undermined by the onset of the Great Depression. At this juncture, 
the election of a new royalist government and the king ’ s return produced only fresh 
instability, and bungled attempts at a military takeover by republican sympathizers led 
to renewed purges of Venizelists. Veniz é los himself died in exile in 1936. 
 In the elections of that year the vote was equally split between the Liberals (Veniz é los ’ 
old party) and the Populists (most of whom supported the monarchy), and both parties 
began secret negotiations with the communists, who held the balance of power. This 
provoked a warning from the army, and ﬁ nally, amid massive unrest at the continued 
hardships of the Depression and growing disillusionment with the antics of the politi-
cians, General Io á nnis Metax á s, having secured the king ’ s agreement to a  ‘ temporary ’ 
suspension of parliament, took control and set about creating a  ‘ strong Greece ’ in 
conscious imitation of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. 
 With the partial exception of the communists, Metax á s was soon able to suppress 
political opposition. He then established a  ‘ third Hellenic civilization ’ , which was 
supposed to herald a modern state that incorporated the best of ancient Greece and 
Byzantium. Though temperamentally attracted to fascism, Metax á s nevertheless main-
tained a policy of strict neutrality until Mussolini delivered an ultimatum on 28 
October 1940 which directly challenged Greek sovereignty. This was immediately 
rejected, and the Italians launched their threatened invasion. Within days, however, 
the reorganized Greek army under General Pap á gos had not only pushed the invaders 
back to the Albanian border but counter - attacked across it, capturing the principal 
towns of the region, many with large Greek populations, by the end of December. 
 Metax á s died in January 1941, amid growing evidence that Hitler intended to secure 
his Balkan ﬂ ank before attacking the Soviet Union. British troops were now despatched 

432 Modern Greek
to Greece, but due to a disastrous misunderstanding, the defensive action against the 
German invasion was unco - ordinated, and resistance quickly crumbled. The Greek 
and British armies were evacuated ﬁ rst to Crete, and then, following a successful 
German airborne attack, to Egypt, while the king and the Greek government estab-
lished themselves in London. 
 Though the government in exile discouraged acts of resistance out of a justiﬁ ed fear 
of reprisals (many villages were destroyed and their inhabitants summarily killed), 
resistance organizations quickly emerged, with the Communist Party (the KKE [ku ku 
 ' ε ]) playing a major role out of all proportion to its limited pre - war inﬂ uence. The 
National Liberation Front (EAM), dominated by the KKE, was formed in September 
1941, and began to organize strikes and relief work, most notably during the cata-
strophic famine of 1941 – 2 caused by German food requisitioning. EAM then founded 
a military wing, the National Popular Liberation Army (ELAS, an acronym non -
 coincidentally homophonous with the name of Greece), and other, non - communist, 
resistance organizations also emerged, most importantly the National Republican 
Greek League (EDES). 
 Throughout this period, Britain remained involved in Greece through the activities 
of the Special Operations Executive (SOE), which inﬁ ltrated sabotage teams and liaised 
with the resistance. Such contacts quickly revealed that, despite British support for the 
king, the feelings of the Greek people were overwhelmingly republican. By mid - 1943 
ELAS/EAM controlled large areas of the mainland, bringing much - needed educational 
and health facilities and attracting widespread support from a population exhausted 
by the occupation, and convinced of the inability of the old political class to address 
their needs. The failure of a conference in Cairo called to resolve the question of the 
country ’ s post - war future only reinforced EAM ’ s claims that the British were deter-
mined to re - establish the discredited pre - war constitutional arrangements, and ﬁ ghting 
soon broke out between ELAS and EDES, with EAM announcing the formation of the 
Political Committee of National Liberation (PEEA), a direct challenge to the govern-
ment in exile. 
 The immediate crisis was partly defused by the appointment as prime minister of 
the anti - communist, but also anti - royalist, Ye ó ryios Papandr é ou, who called a confer-
ence in Lebanon at which the communist representatives agreed to the placing of all 
guerilla forces under a future government of national unity. EAM/ELAS initially repu-
diated the agreement and was ready to take over in the wake of the German with-
drawal, but eventually accepted the terms of the agreement, almost certainly under 
orders from Stalin, who had agreed with Churchill to give the British a free hand. 
 When the Papandr é ou government arrived in Greece in October 1944, ELAS and 
EDES were supposed to disband apart from the small contributions they were to make 
to a new national army, but relations between the communists and Papandr é ou 
collapsed after the suppression of an EAM demonstration, and ELAS responded by 
attacking the capital ’ s police stations. The archbishop of Athens was then appointed 
regent pending a plebiscite on the monarchy, and the replacement of Papandr é ou, 
accompanied by the arrival of British reinforcements, led to a ceaseﬁ re in January 1945. 
ELAS again agreed to disband, and the government committed itself both to an 
amnesty for  ‘ political crimes ’ and to the purging of collaborators. But the government 
was unable to prevent a right - wing backlash after the discovery that a number of 

The History of the Modern Greek State 433
hostages taken by ELAS had been killed, and the left abstained in protest from the 
elections of March 1946. Subsequently, the restoration of the monarchy was approved 
in the plebiscite through a combination of ballot - rigging and the defection of former 
anti - monarchists who now saw the king as a bulwark against communism. Leftists 
were again persecuted, and attacks by communist forces, soon to form the Democratic 
Army, led on to full - scale civil war in the winter of 1946. Britain, no longer able to 
ﬁ nance the maintenance of government, passed the responsibility on to the Americans. 
 The aid supplied through Greece ’ s communist neighbours to the Democratic Army 
was soon surpassed by American support for the government so that, despite early 
successes, the odds gradually turned against the communists. By the summer of 1949 
the National Army had achieved military superiority and, after a series of ﬁ ercely 
fought battles, the Democratic Army, together with the communist leadership, retreated 
into Albania and exile. During the civil war 700,000 Greeks had been made homeless 
and 80,000 had been killed, with dreadful atrocities on both sides. In its aftermath, 
20,000 more were convicted of offences against the state, many being sentenced to 
death. Unsurprisingly, the resulting hatred and bitterness dominated the post - war 
political scene for decades to come. 
 16.3   Recovery, the Colonels and the Restoration of Democracy 
 Martial law ﬁ nally ended in February 1950, but subsequent elections produced a politi-
cal stalemate and a climate dominated by legislation which banned the Communist 
Party and generally harassed the left. The Americans, increasingly concerned, reduced 
their ﬁ nancial contribution pending changes in the electoral system, but the elections 
of 1952 at last produced a period of stability, under a right - wing government, that 
lasted until 1963. Despite the arrival of fresh refugees from Nasser ’ s revolution in 
Egypt, much desperately needed reconstruction work was now undertaken, and a 
return to ﬁ nancial orthodoxy helped to curb inﬂ ation just as tourism and migrants ’ 
remittances, especially from Germany, began to redress the chronic balance - of - 
payments problem. This was the period when the lure of well - paid employment in the 
cities and an understandable tendency to invest in the relative security of property 
combined to produce the ﬁ rst explosion of concrete ﬂ ats in the suburbs of the major 
cities. 
 Greece now became a member of NATO, though relations with its new  ‘ ally ’ Turkey 
were quickly soured by problems in British - ruled Cyprus, where violence had broken 
out in 1955 at the instigation of the National Organization of Cypriot Fighters 
(EOKA), who sought to exploit the growing desire of the Greek majority on the island 
(80 per cent of the total) to achieve union with Greece. With the tacit acquiescence of 
the British government (which had been angered by developments in its colony), tit -
 for - tat riots were organized in Istanbul (the ofﬁ cial name of Constantinople after 1930) 
against the 100,000 Greeks who still remained in the city. Many of those who survived 
now decided to cut their losses in the face of near - continuous persecution and emi-
grated to Greece. In the short term, however, Greece withdrew from NATO headquar-
ters in Izmir (Smyrna) in protest. Disenchantment with NATO and support for the left 
grew hand in hand, so that the new prime minister, Konstand í nos Karamanl í s, became 

434 Modern Greek
increasingly anxious for a settlement, not only to secure his vote but to appease the 
Americans, who were dismayed by the disarray on NATO ’ s southern ﬂ ank. The deal 
that emerged, however, involving Cypriot independence, was widely seen as a betrayal 
of Greek interests in favour of NATO and the Americans. To bind Greece further to 
its allies, Karamanl í s therefore began negotiations for associate status within the 
European Economic Community (EEC), as a result of which an agreement came into 
force in 1962, with full membership anticipated in 1984. 
 The conduct of the elections held in the previous year, however, involving fresh 
ballot - rigging and intimidation, had led to a growing resentment of the institutional-
ized repression of the left. Matters came to a head with the murder of the left - wing 
deputy Grig ó ris Lambr á kis in Thessaloniki in 1963. Karamanl í s resigned and departed 
for self - imposed exile in Paris, while new elections were called in which the centre 
parties, led by Papandr é ou, were victorious. Important educational reforms were now 
introduced, including for the ﬁ rst time the establishment of equal rights for  ‘ demotic ’ 
Greek, while reconciliation was sought through the relaxation of ﬁ scal policy, the 
release of political prisoners, and increased trade with the Eastern Bloc. 
 These moves, however, provoked alarm in business and military circles, and the 
new king, Konstand í nos II, secured Papandr é ou ’ s resignation by refusing to accede to 
the dismissal of army and intelligence ofﬁ cers manifestly working against the govern-
ment. Papandr é ou ’ s supporters now demanded new elections, while the army drew up 
secret contingency plans for intervention should Papandr é ou be successful. But to 
everyone ’ s surprise a triumvirate of junior army ofﬁ cers struck ﬁ rst. On 21 April 1967 
a successful  coup d ’ é tat was mounted. Martial law was immediately declared, political 
parties dissolved, and civil rights suspended. Left - wingers were then rounded up into 
camps, and a puppet civilian government established. 
 Despite claims that a communist takeover was imminent, it is clear that the coup 
was primarily motivated by fear of a purge of the far right in the event of a Papandr é ou 
victory. The king acquiesced in the dictatorship, and even accepted the  ‘ retirement ’ of 
royalist ofﬁ cers, but when surviving loyalists attempted an unsuccessful counter - coup, 
he went into exile in Rome and all pretence of civilian government was abandoned. 
Ye ó ryios Papad ó poulos, the regime ’ s strong man, now became prime minister, gradu-
ally assuming control of all areas of policy, and dismissing anyone whose loyalty 
was in doubt. Papandr é ou ’ s educational reforms were also reversed, and the regime 
ﬁ rmly re - established the teaching and use of  kathar é vousa . Glaring inequalities of 
income soon opened up, and in order to keep Greece ’ s foreign investors and over -
 mighty shipowners sweet, the Colonels agreed to a series of economically disastrous 
arrangements. 
 Resentment grew rapidly in response to the Colonels ’ manifest incompetence, 
though the secret police ruthlessly and successfully suppressed any efforts at organized 
resistance. But despite mounting allegations of torture and Greece ’ s enforced with-
drawal from the Council of Europe, the regime ’ s commitment to NATO ensured 
continued American military and ﬁ nancial support. The Colonels ’ prestige, however, 
suffered a mortal blow when some 10,000 troops, secretly inﬁ ltrated into Cyprus, had 
to be withdrawn under American pressure after a series of guerilla raids against 
Turkish villages. By 1973 the price was also being paid for the junta ’ s economic fail-
ings, with inﬂ ation running at 30 per cent and rising. Student protests, naval mutinies 

The History of the Modern Greek State 435
and other manifestations of discontent followed, to which Papad ó poulos responded 
by blaming the exiled king for rabble - rousing and appointing himself the president of 
a  ‘ parliamentary republic ’ . Despite the promise of fair elections in the future, there 
were increasingly violent clashes between students and the police, and university build-
ings were occupied in Athens and other major cities. Papad ó poulos replied by sending 
in the tanks, only to ﬁ nd himself deposed almost at once by a fresh coup mounted by 
ofﬁ cers fearful of his planned  ‘ electoral adventure ’ . Power now passed into the hands 
of Dim í trios Ioann í dis, the sinister commander of the military police. 
 Predictably, the new regime proved to be even more incompetent than its predecessor, 
and its demise was assured after a further Cyprus ﬁ asco. The Cypriot president, 
Archbishop Mak á rios, had accused the Greek government of seeking to destroy the state 
by supporting the activities of the recently revived EOKA. The Cyprus National Guard, 
led by ofﬁ cers from the mainland and clearly operating under orders from Athens, 
immediately launched a coup, abetted by the Greek army contingent on the island. 
Mak á rios escaped, and an EOKA thug was installed as president. Turkey responded by 
unilaterally exercising its right of intervention as one of the guarantors of the Cypriot 
state, and landed troops at Kyrenia. Ioann í dis ordered a Greek mobilization, but the 
army refused to obey, and the dictatorship collapsed when a powerful section of the 
army issued an ultimatum demanding a return to civilian government. Karamanl í s 
was then invited to return from exile to supervise the return to democracy. 
 He was at once plunged into a fresh crisis in Cyprus, where the breakdown of peace 
talks led to a Turkish advance and the seizing of some 40 per cent of the island. Many 
thousands of Greeks were forced to ﬂ ee south and anti - NATO feelings ran high, since 
the Americans, already widely seen as the prime backers of the junta, were now sus-
pected of favouring Turkey. Karamanl í s responded by withdrawing from the NATO 
command structure and threatening the future of the American bases in Greece. 
Though the resulting tension made it impossible to purge the army or deal decisively 
with those responsible for the coup, the ringleaders were at least banished to a remote 
island and their appointees sacked, while growing demands for  ‘ dejuntiﬁ cation ’  led to 
the release of political prisoners and the reinstatement of those unfairly dismissed from 
their jobs. 
 Karamanl í s now argued that the country ’ s economic, political and foreign - policy 
problems could only be tackled by a properly elected government, though his haste in 
calling elections was widely criticized, not least because it gave no time for opposition 
parties to reorganize and allowed him to capitalize on his own prestige as the restorer 
of democracy. At this time, the left favoured a non - aligned foreign policy and opposed 
the restoration of the monarchy, while the centre and right wanted stronger ties with 
Europe within the EEC and NATO; only the far right espoused the king ’ s return. The 
result was a massive victory for Karamanl í s, and in a subsequent referendum, a decisive 
69 per cent of the electorate opposed the king ’ s return. 
 Despite his achievements, no fewer than four attempted coups were foiled within 
the ﬁ rst six months of Karamanl í s ’ return, but he eventually succeeded in establishing 
his authority over the military. Trials of the leaders of the 1967 coup and of their army 
of torturers now began in earnest. Papad ó poulos and his co - conspirators were sen-
tenced to death, though the sentences were commuted to life imprisonment, while 
Ioann í dis and others also received life sentences. 

436 Modern Greek
 Constitutional changes also followed, designed to produce a stronger decision -
 making process that would reduce the likelihood of any repetition of the circumstances 
that had led to the 1967 coup. A return to ﬁ scal orthodoxy also did something to 
restore the country ’ s ﬁ nancial position, though the world - wide energy crisis of the early 
1970s and rising unemployment in Germany led to falls in both gross domestic product 
and overseas remittances. Greece ’ s shipowners were none the less constrained to make 
a more realistic contribution to the treasury, and some of the Colonels ’ more disastrous 
foreign investment schemes were renegotiated. 
 Though signiﬁ cant welfare reforms were also introduced, especially in education 
where state provision had long been perceived as inadequate, the country ’ s massive 
commitment to defence remained a major brake on government spending. This was 
justiﬁ ed not only by the festering Cyprus problem but also by other manifestations of 
Turkish hostility. By this time, for example, a further row had broken out over the 
question of whether the Greek islands off the Turkish coast fell within the continental 
shelf of the mainland, with the Turks accusing Greece of breaking the treaties under 
which its sovereignty had been granted by building up a military presence there, and 
Greece replying that it was merely responding to the Turkish formation of an Aegean 
army whose sole purpose was to threaten that sovereignty. Additional arguments ﬂ ared 
up over air - trafﬁ c control in the Aegean and the treatment of minorities (the Turks in 
Thrace, and the few Greeks who still remained in Istanbul), and suspicions about 
America ’ s role in these events were greatly reinforced when a defence co - operation 
agreement with Ankara was signed. 
 Karamanl í s ’  initial response to these difﬁ culties was to seek better relations with his 
Balkan neighbours, partly to build up support against Turkey but also (prophetically) 
out of concern about the future of Yugoslavia when the aged President Tito eventually 
died. But still more importantly, Karamanl í s sought to accelerate Greece ’ s accession 
to full membership of the European Community (EC). In the long term, this offered 
the prospect of a signiﬁ cant improvement in Greece ’ s economic fortunes, but in the 
shorter term it was hoped that membership would help to compensate for poor rela-
tions with the USA and difﬁ culties within NATO, while simultaneously cementing 
democracy in place by offering protection against fresh military intervention and the 
threat of Turkish attack. 
 Arguing once more that the issues facing the country required a fresh mandate, 
Karamanl í s called elections for November 1977. His conservative New Democracy 
party reiterated its commitment to the EC and NATO, and pointed to the success 
of its free enterprise policies and educational reforms, in particular the raising of the 
school leaving age and the ﬁ nal abandonment of  kathar é vousa as the ofﬁ cial language 
of the Greek state, a move that terminated the institutionalization of diglossia and 
opened the way for a ﬁ nal resolution of the language question that had bedevilled 
the cultural, political and educational development of the nation. By contrast Andr é as 
Papandr é ou ’ s socialist PASOK party advocated the decentralization of power, with-
drawal from NATO and rejection of the government ’ s drive for membership of the EC, 
organizations which PASOK saw as forcing Greece into the role of capitalist pawn. In 
the event, Karamanl í s retained a majority despite an impressive PASOK performance. 
 In 1980 Karamanl í s resigned as prime minister to become president, and the fol-
lowing year Greece became a full member of the EC (and subsequently of the EU), an 

The History of the Modern Greek State 437
event ironically followed immediately by the election of Papandr é ou as Greece ’ s ﬁ rst 
socialist prime minister. Happily, the army stayed in its bases, and Papandr é ou ’ s 
aggressive election rhetoric was quickly tempered by the realities of ofﬁ ce. In 1983 a 
ﬁ ve - year defence and economic co - operation agreement was signed with the United 
States, and EC membership brought signiﬁ cant beneﬁ ts for Greek agriculture and 
considerable investment in the country ’ s infrastructure, both of which did much to 
allay earlier fears and suspicions. Papandr é ou was accordingly re - elected in 1985, and 
steps were then taken to improve relations with Turkey, though these remained 
delicate. 
 But the initial optimism of the left that a PASOK government would bring integrity 
and reform was eventually superseded by a weary recognition that the power of gov-
ernments is limited (especially in a country where state institutions remain weak and 
a  ‘ black ’  economy ﬂ ourishes) and that the behaviour of even socialist ministers is 
subject to the frailties of human nature. The abandonment of tight ﬁ nancial policies 
had already led to renewed economic difﬁ culties, and accusations of bribery, corrup-
tion and illegal wiretapping proliferated. Growing disgust and disappointment led to 
Papandr é ou ’ s defeat in the elections of 1989, and various criminal charges followed. 
After a series of indecisive elections, New Democracy was returned to power under 
the veteran right - winger Konstand í nos Mitsot á kis, with a mandate to restore ﬁ nancial 
order and curb inﬂ ation. But the hardship created by New Democracy ’ s economic 
measures, together with disillusionment at the handling of the crisis following the 
break - up of Yugoslavia, led to the fall of Mitsot á kis ’ administration and the election 
in 1993 of a new PASOK government under the ageing Papandr é ou. 
 In January 1996, following a protracted illness, Papandr é ou ﬁ nally resigned and 
was replaced as prime minister by the former minister of trade and industry, K ó stas 
Sim í tis, who won elections in 1996 and 2000. When Sim í tis retired in 2004, he was 
succeeded by George Andr é as Papandr é ou, son of Andr é as, who lost the election of 
that year to New Democracy, led by K ó stas Karamanl í s, nephew of the former presi-
dent. The conservative government called early elections in September 2007 and New 
Democracy emerged once again as the majority party in Parliament, but with its 
authority increasingly questioned, following catastrophic summer wildﬁ res, assorted 
scandals, and growing social, economic and political unrest in the context of the global 
ﬁ nancial crisis of 2008 – 9. The party was duly defeated in snap elections called in 
October 2009, and Papandr é ou became the new prime minster with a host of serious 
domestic issues to face, not least the parlous state of the public ﬁ nances. The Cyprus 
question remains unresolved, dealings with (the Former Yugoslav Republic of) 
Macedonia are difﬁ cult and tetchy, and problems with Turkey continue in the Aegean 
despite some improvement in relations overall. (See Clogg  (2002)  for a full account of 
the key issues in modern Greek history.)  

17
 The  ‘ Language Question ’ 
and its Resolution    
 
 17.1   Kora í s 
 A key issue in the early 19th century was whether spoken Greek could in principle 
provide the basis for a written language of law, administration and education if and 
when power passed into Greek hands. As noted earlier, many who approached the 
problem from the perspective of the Ionian islands and the diaspora were optimistic; 
a demoticizing style reﬂ ecting educated speech was already in limited use, and this 
could readily be extended, while the popular spoken dialects, including the more 
autonomous varieties of outlying regions, would gradually be assimilated to the devel-
oping standard as the state expanded and education took its course. But for the more 
traditionally minded, who instead emphasized what they perceived to be the expressive 
limitations and fundamental disunity of the spoken dialects, it was unthinkable that a 
national language should fail to continue the tradition inherited from ancient Greece 
and Byzantium. See Mackridge  (2009) for a detailed treatment of the language ques-
tion and the role language issues have played in the construction of Greek national 
identity since the 18th century. 
 Both linguistic parties were amusingly satirized by D. K. Vyz á ndios in his play 
 Babel , published in 1836. The cast comprises an archaizing pedant, an Albanian with 
a limited command of Greek, and speakers of ﬁ ve different dialects (a Peloponnesian, 
a Chian, a Cretan, a Cypriot and a Greek from Asia Minor). This group, having met 
in N á fplio on the day when news arrives of the Turkish defeat at Navar í no (1827), 
attempts to celebrate the success of the Greek revolution, but mutual misunderstanding 
(including a series of largely unsuccessful attempts to order food, and an accusation 
of sheep stealing wrongly interpreted as an insult involving coprophagia) leads to a 
ﬁ ght, incarceration, and still further mishaps when the arrested parties are released. It 
is, of course, signiﬁ cant that the dialect speakers are barely literate, and come with 
only one exception from regions outside the kingdom, while the pedant is wholly 
uncompromising, and uses datives and inﬁ nitives in the best classical manner. Though 
often funny, the play, rather like the archaizers, exaggerates the difﬁ culties; the local 
dialects of the Peloponnese were not radically different from educated speech in pho-
nology and morphology, and normal written Greek was as yet very far from being an 
attempt to replicate the ancient language. 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 439
 The key ﬁ gure in the development of the language debate in the early 19th century 
was the expatriate doctor - cum - classicist Adam á ndios Kora í s (1748 – 1833), who was 
born in Smyrna, but spent much of his life in Paris, where he wrote extensively about 
education, language and nationhood. Despite discrepancies between statements made 
at different times in different contexts, Beaton ( 1994 : 301ff) has identiﬁ ed three key 
principles underlying Kora í s ’ thinking on the language issue: 
 (1)  (a)  That national self - determination depended on successfully reaccessing the 
treasures of the ancient language.  
 (b)  That a modern written language must comply in general terms with the 
grammar of the contemporary spoken language, which he regarded as an 
inalienable possession.  
 (c)  That these two proposals could be reconciled through a pragmatic pro-
gramme of  ‘ correcting ’ those elements in the spoken language which sepa-
rated it most conspicuously from its ancient source.  
 A major part of this process of correction was to involve the restoration of the orthog-
raphy and the replacement of foreign loans with Greek equivalents, but Kora í s also 
saw the need for enrichment of the lexicon, and advocated the reintroduction of ancient 
words, either by direct borrowing or through calquing, usually (given Kora í s ’ base in 
Paris) on the model of French. 
 Thus, unlike certain members of the learned elite in the Ottoman territories, such 
as Ne ó fytos Do ú kas (c.1760 – 1845) and Konstand í nos Oikon ó mos (1780 – 1857), 
Kora í s was not an out - and - out archaizer. He had no doubt that their ultra - conservative 
programme for a return to the  ‘ true ’ (i.e. ancient) Greek language, based on a view of 
the  ‘ corrupted ’ modern language as a symbol of national servitude and degradation, 
was hopelessly out of touch with reality. It is therefore deeply ironic that his essentially 
pragmatic proposals should have been overtaken by the zeal of later generations of 
archaizers, and that he himself came to be thought of as the founding father of 
 kathar é vousa (a term which he never used in his own writings). His ideas had much 
in common with those of the  ‘ progressive ’ Moisi ó dax, and his insistence on the identity 
of language and nation reveals an outlook shared by many later proponents of the 
demoticist movement. 
 The following extract from the beginning of Kora í s  Autobiography  gives an impres-
sion of the kind of  ‘ corrected ’ style which he had in mind: 
 (2) 
   
 

440 Modern Greek
 ‘ My mother received a more liberal upbringing because she was lucky enough to have as 
her father Adam á ndios Rysios, the most learned man of that era in Greek language and 
literature, who died (1747) one year before I was born. While still a young man he served 
as a teacher of Greek language and literature on Chios; after that he came to Smyrna 
where he married a widow from Ankara. But when he did not father a male child 
he consoled himself in his failure by his eager resolve to bring up his four daughters as 
sons  …  ’ 
 With the probable exceptions of the lengthy hyperbaton (
 [ton  …  ' andra]) 
and the inﬂ ected participles (
 [je ' nisas] and 
 ), the syn-
tactic structure mostly corresponds to that of the educated spoken Greek of its time, 
while the remaining discrepancies involve little more than item - for - item substitutions 
(e.g. 
 for 
 [ja ' ti], 
 [ ' ostis] for  p o u [pu],  p r o [pro] for 
 
[prin apo], 
 [ ' eti] for 
 [a ' koma] etc.). Kora í s avoids the reintroduction 
of archaisms like inﬁ nitives and datives, which had no place in the normal spoken 
language, and conﬁ ned his  ‘ corrections ’  to the reintroduction of ancient lexical 
items and the reinstatement of ancient orthography and morpho - syntax in forms 
and structures that were actually in use (e.g. his use of the  ‘ correct ’  genitive plural 
possessive  t w n [ton]  ‘ their ’ instead of  t o u " [tus] etc.). Thus noun and verb morphology 
is mostly ancient, but compound verbs still display their augment externally, 
because the relevant compositional process was not a part of the living language (cf. 
 ). Similarly, learned prepositions are substituted for the 
popular counterparts, and these are used with their ancient cases (e.g.  p r o [pro]   +  
genitive) except where this would involve an artiﬁ cial revival (thus  e i " [is]  +  accusative 
is preferred to ancient  e n [en]   +  dative, and  m e [me]   +  accusative is retained in prefer-
ence to the bare dative to mark the instrumental). 
 Kora í s ’ middle way provoked opposition both from traditionalists and from advo-
cates of the spoken language, each of whom, for different reasons, found his proposals 
to be  ‘ artiﬁ cial ’ . Among the former, the name of Ne ó fytos Do ú kas has already been 
mentioned as one who objected in principle to any elements of spoken Greek that 
Kora í s wished to retain. A less extreme case was made by the talented civil servant 
Panay ó tis Kodrik á s (1762 – 1827), who, like Kora í s himself, spent much of his life in 
Paris. Though he tacitly agreed with many of Kora í s ’ objectives, he felt unable to 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 441
 ‘ Language is the tool with which the soul ﬁ rst shapes in the mind, and then utters its 
thoughts. When the tool is blunt, rusty, or badly made, the work of the craftsman also 
necessarily remains imperfect. ’ 
 
 
support what he saw as arbitrary prescriptive interference in matters of language use, 
arguing that a better middle way already existed, at least for ofﬁ cial purposes, in the 
form of  ‘ the style of the Great Church ’ (Daskal á kis ( 1966 : 503)), i.e. a  ‘ higher ’ admin-
istrative style that continued its Byzantine predecessor (see  5.7 ,  5.9 ,  10.7 ). As an 
example of the often trivial differences involved, Browning ( 1983 : 102) notes that 
where Kora í s opted merely to  ‘ correct ’ 
 [ ' psari]  ‘ ﬁ sh ’ to 
 [o ' psarion], 
Kodrik á s advocated the substitution of ancient 
 [ix ' θ is]). 
 Obviously, this form of the language shared the artiﬁ ciality of being neither Ancient 
nor Modern Greek, though Kodrik á s could at least point in his defence to a body of 
existing writing that employed it. But it is again quite striking that, although Kora í s 
and Kodrik á s presented themselves as rivals, their natural styles, used when defending 
rather than exemplifying their respective positions, are all but indistinguishable 
(compare the similarly uniform use of the written language of educated discourse in 
the ﬁ rst linguistic disputes, 15.1). In reality, it seems that much of the hostility derived 
from the clash of political and cultural perspectives between the Orthodox/Ottoman 
establishment on the one hand and the liberal/republican diaspora on the other; see 
Beaton ( 1994 : 330 – 1), from whom the extracts in (3) are taken, the ﬁ rst published in 
1804, the second in 1818: 
 (3) 
   
 

442 Modern Greek
 ‘ Speech is to man the material instrument through which the insubstantial force of an 
utterance conceived in the mind composes a spoken utterance by assuming, as it were, a 
material existence, a shape and organic form; through this, man  … internally elucidates 
his ideas  …  ’ 
 The most one can say is that the second is a little more conservative in its archaizing 
substitutions than the ﬁ rst (note, for example, the modern adverb 
 [ka ' ka], or the 
relative (
 [(me) t(o) o ' pion]  ‘ (with) which ’ in (3a), versus the traditional 
adverb 
 and the ancient relative in ( d i ' ) o u 
  ‘ (through) 
which ’  in (3b)). Note in particular both authors ’ fondness for hyperbaton (cf. 
 [ton  … .  ' andra] in (2) with 
 [i ' postasin  … ili ' cin] in 
(3b)), a sure sign of rhetorical elaboration from antiquity onwards, and a ﬁ xture of 
the style of academic exposition and debate. 
 It was unfortunate for Kodrik á s ’ proposals that by the time of the revolution  ‘ the 
style of the Great Church ’ was ﬁ rmly identiﬁ ed with the reactionary political attitudes 
of the Constantinopolitan elite, many of whom were at best lukewarm about the 
prospect of Greek independence. In the context of the rampant nationalism and clas-
sical revivalism of the independent kingdom, therefore, his conservative compromise, 
and indeed the not radically distinct ofﬁ cial written language actually used in the early 
19th century, were soon overwhelmed by an upsurge of patriotic archaism that also 
engulfed the more progressive compromise proposed by Kora í s (see  17.3 ). 
 17.2   The Roots of Demoticism: Solom ó s and 
the Ionian Islands 
 Kora í s was also attacked from the other direction, and brief mention may be made 
here of the comedy  Korak í stika , published in Vienna in 1813 by I á kovos R í zos 
Neroul ó s (1778 – 1849). The title (literally  ‘ Ravens ’ Language ’ ) originally denoted a 
children ’ s argot involving the preﬁ xing of [ce] to each syllable, but has now come to 
mean simply  ‘ jargon ’ or  ‘ gibberish ’ . In this particular context, however, it also 
puns on the name Kora í s, and the work seeks to expose the supposedly preposterous 
results of taking his prescriptions for the written language (together with some 
fanciful extensions of the playwright ’ s own invention), and applying them to spoken 
Greek. Accordingly, we ﬁ nd amongst the dramatis personae an enthusiastic 
 ‘ correctionist ’ who is made to choke when he attempts to order a plate of coleslaw, 
ordinarily 
 [laxanosa ' lata], by uttering the absurb compound noun 
 . 
 The principal  ‘ popularizing ’  opposition to Kora í s, however, came from poets 
working outside the Phanariot sphere of inﬂ uence, who felt instinctively that artistic 
integrity and linguistic artiﬁ ciality were incompatible. This point of view appealed to 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 443
the Romantic spirit of the age, though one has only to think of the works of Callimachus, 
Apollonius and Theocritus in the Hellenistic period (cf.  4.7.4 ) to see that the argument 
depends not on artiﬁ ciality or archaism  per se , but on the unsuitability for creative 
writing of language varieties otherwise used primarily for administrative and technical 
discourse. 
 Given that education rather than ﬁ ction was still seen as the central task of prose 
writers, it was the poetic revival of the early 19th century which ﬁ rst sought to give 
Greece an identity in terms of its contemporary history and culture, and the emphasis 
now began to shift away from the idea of a practical written language based on edu-
cated speech (a variety that was in any case soon swallowed up by the archaizing trend) 
towards that of a literary/poetic language based on popular speech. This crucial devel-
opment, in the context of conservative determination to develop ever  ‘ purer ’  forms of 
ofﬁ cial Greek, marks the beginning of the polarization that quickly came to dominate 
the language debate. 
 An important pioneer in the demotic movement was the poet and writer Io á nnis 
Vilar á s (1771 – 1823), whose grammar, entitled  The Romaic Tongue , was based on the 
dialect of his native Epirus and published in 1814 in K é rkyra (Corfu). The outstanding 
contribution, however, came from Dion ý sios Solom ó s, now regarded as Greece ’ s 
national poet. Solom ó s was born in Z á kynthos, the child of an affair between his 
aristocratic father and a servant girl whom he married on his deathbed, thus allowing 
his son to inherit the title of count. His father ’ s family came originally from Crete and 
spoke Italian, the language in which Solom ó s himself was educated. He did, however, 
speak the local dialect of Greek with his mother, and later, when he had settled in 
K é rkyra, he was inspired by the Greek independence movement and became, with 
his compatriot Andr é as K á lvos (1792 – 1869), one of the founding fathers of modern 
Greek poetry. 
 But where K á lvos used a form of Greek based on Kora í s ’ prescriptions, and devel-
oped an idiosyncratic poetic medium that was remote from both ordinary speech and 
conventional writing, Solom ó s was a thoroughgoing demoticist. Because of his Italian 
cultural and educational background (which did, however, include the study of Ancient 
Greek), his knowledge of the modern language was initially conﬁ ned to the Zakynthian 
dialect, but he later familiarized himself with a range of literature composed in popular 
styles, including the Byzantine verse romances, the poetry of the Cretan Renaissance, 
and the work of Vilar á s. He was also greatly inﬂ uenced by the tradition of folk song, 
a major focus of contemporary Romantic interest, in which he found much inspiration 
for his efforts to forge a modern perspective on the Greek world. 
 For the most part, Solom ó s carefully avoided local dialect forms and Italian loans 
in his more serious poetry, since he wished to be read by the Greek people as a whole. 
But in so far as the spoken Heptanesian dialects were close to those of the Peloponnese, 
the principal vernacular foundation for the modern standard ( 14.2.1 ,  14.2.2 ), any 
 ‘ local ’ features which remain present few problems. The most notable involve verb 
morphology (Mackridge ( 1989 : 57 – 59); see  11.8 for details of the development of the 
various forms): 
 (4)  (a)  Imperfects of contract verbs such as 
 [e ' citaa] ( < earlier  - a - g a 
 ) for the 
 [ - ' ao] type, and 
 for 

444 Modern Greek
the 
 [ - ' eo] class (the latter involving the addition of past - tense  - a [ - a] 
to the ancient form), alongside what are now the standard formations. 
 (b)  3sg imperfect middle/passive in 
 [ ' otun(e)] (analogical to 1/2sg 
 [ ' omun/ ' osun]). 
 (c)  Imperfective passive imperatives (rare in standard Modern Greek) in  - o u 
[ - u]. 
 (d)  2pl middle/passive forms in 
 [ - ' ostene]. 
 (e)  Futures and conditionals formed with impersonal 
 
[ ' i θ ele]   +  subjunctive (alongside  q e  n a 
 and  q a 
 ). 
 There are also a few features which probably derive from earlier vernacular literature, 
such as the postposing of object clitics with simple ﬁ nite verbs (not a feature of the 
dialects of the Ionian islands), and some elements of learned Greek, which occur prin-
cipally in his earlier work, including the  Hymn to Liberty  (written in May 1823; 
Nik ó laos M á ntzaros later set the poem to music, and the ﬁ rst two verses were adopted 
as the Greek national anthem in 1865). Mackridge ( 1989 : 58) suggests that these may 
reﬂ ect Solom ó s ’ knowledge of Ancient Greek, or have been picked up through reading 
newspapers, but since no Greek papers were published in the Ionian islands until 1850 
(Beaton  1994 : 332), the former explanation is to be preferred. In general, these vari-
ants offer some metrical advantage, though the learned forms and phrases may have 
wider import in compositions with a  ‘ national ’  signiﬁ cance. 
 The following stanza from  O L á mbros (worked on between 1824 and 1826, but 
never ﬁ nished) is from a famous passage in which Solom ó s describes a beautiful Easter 
Day (
 [i  ' mera tis lam ' bris]) in terms that contrast sharply with 
the predicament of the brave but selﬁ sh warrior L á mbros, who, in his determination 
to be free, has steadfastly refused to marry Mar í a, the mother of his children. When 
Ali Pasha of Io á nnina executes Mar í a ’ s brother, L á mbros sets off to take his revenge. 
On his way, however, he meets and seduces a girl who turns out to be his own daugh-
ter, placed long ago in an orphanage. The girl commits suicide, and when L á mbros 
returns to confess to Mar í a, he ﬁ nds himself excluded from the Easter celebrations. 
The metre is  ottava rima , eight eleven - syllable iambic lines rhymed ABABABCC: 
 (5) 
  
 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 445
 ‘ The last cool star of dawn was heralding purest sun; in no quarter of the sky did cloud 
or mist pass over; and rising from there, the gentle breeze began to blow so sweetly in 
their faces that it was as if it were speaking into the leaves of their hearts:  “ life is sweet, 
and death is darkness ” . ’ 
 This is sophisticated writing of a high order, but almost wholly demotic in its 
language if we abstract away from the stylized/poetic word orders (note particularly 
the pre - head genitives and delayed subjects). A number of individual words also 
now have a specially poetic feel because of subsequent replacement by more traditional 
variants in standard Modern Greek: e.g. 
 (
 ), 
 (
 ), 
 (
 [per ' no], the prothesis 
arising from misanalysis of 
 [na per ' no] etc.). 
 [ka θ a ' rotaton] 
may well be a learned form, but monolectic superlatives, though rare, were not 
wholly alien to the 19th - century vernacular (Thumb  1912 : 73), and ﬁ nal  - n [ - n] was 
still widely used in 2nd - declension adjectives when the following word began with 
a vowel. 
 In the present context, however, the most important of Solom ó s ’ works is his unﬁ n-
ished  Dialogue , written in 1824 – 5 but not published till 1859 when the author had 
already been dead for two years. It constitutes one of the earliest defences of the use 
of the ordinary spoken language for writing and stands in sharp contrast to the views 
of both traditionalists and Kora í s. The dialogue in question (there is a short draft as 
well as a full - length version) is between  ‘ a poet ’ ,  ‘ a friend ’ and  ‘ a pedant ’ . The poet 
argues that  ‘ the common dialect ’ of the Phanariots is the language of those who served 
the Turks, and has no place in an independent Greece. Kora í s ’ proposals are also 
dismissed because the language they attempt to deﬁ ne is not anyone ’ s native tongue, 
and never could be. The poet instead appeals to the literary prestige of written ver-
naculars in the west, and though he fully accepts the need for lexical development, 
suggests that new terminology must evolve by natural analogical processes rather than 
by arbitrary selection from a dead language.  
 17.3   The Rise of  Kathar é vousa 
 In the short term, however, Solom ó s and his followers based in the Ionian islands 
remained outsiders. In the capital, the  ‘ Old Athenian School ’ , whose principal ﬁ gures 

446 Modern Greek
were Al é xandros (1803 – 63) and Panay ó tis (1806 – 68) So ú tsos and Al é xandros R í zos 
Rangav í s (1809 – 92), sought to boost the prestige of standard written Greek by trying 
to adapt it, not entirely successfully, to the needs of verse composition. The earliest 
ﬁ ctional prose was also widely composed in this style, though the Ionian islands, where 
Andr é as Laskar á tos wrote his satirical  Mysteries of Kefaloni á (1856) in demotic, were 
again the exception. 
 Since demotic also failed to ﬁ nd a place in the ofﬁ cial life of the country in the ﬁ rst 
sixty years of its existence, the principal disputes of the period were inevitably between 
different groups of archaizers. In 1853, Panay ó tis So ú tsos published a book condemn-
ing the  ‘ solecisms ’ in the work of other writers, and argued that the problems of laying 
down correct usage could only be resolved by making the written language conform 
more closely to the clearly established rules of Ancient Greek. In his view, the poor 
quality of much contemporary writing derived directly from the arbitrary mixtures 
of ancient and modern grammar that attempts to implement Kora í s ’  ‘ inadequate 
compromise ’  entailed. 
 This marked the beginning of what soon developed into a rapidly accelerating ﬂ ight 
from the living language. The poet Nik ó laos Konem é nos, as someone who spent time 
in both K é rkyra and Athens, was well placed to point out that the contemporary 
crystallization of rival positions would not provide a solution to the language issue, 
and argued that the successful forging of a modern Greek culture required the 
Greeks to  ‘ come out from the tombs ’ ( 1873 : 55). But the  Zeitgeist was against him. 
Dissatisfaction with Kora í s ’ proposals grew steadily, peaking ﬁ rst in the 1850s with 
So ú tsos ’  proposals, and again in the 1880s, by which time the terms  demotic  and 
 kathar é vousa were becoming established as the names for the  ‘ uncorrected ’ spoken 
language (including its use in writing) and the  ‘ embellished and corrected ’ written 
language respectively. Throughout this period progress towards resolving the perceived 
difﬁ culties was almost universally equated with the need for greater archaism, and by 
the early 1880s there were once again people like Konstand í nos K ó ndos who were 
prepared to argue for the  ‘ ideal ’ of ancient Greek perfection (cf. his  Linguistic 
Observations Concerning the Modern Greek Language  (1882) ). 
 The core problem was clear enough; for as long as the product of the correction 
process remained a contrived compromise between Ancient and spoken Modern Greek, 
the objections levelled against Kora í s ’ proposals could just as easily be levelled against 
any other proposals, however far they went. There could be no standard of correctness 
to which appeal might be made when the  ‘ rules ’  conformed neither to the linguistic 
intuitions of Greeks as native speakers nor to the practice of writers in any earlier 
period. The works of So ú tsos and K ó ndos therefore provoked fresh criticisms (ani-
mated as much by personal rivalry as by serious scholarly intent), and these served 
only to exacerbate the very linguistic uncertainty they sought to eliminate.  
 17.4   Reaction: Psych á ris and the Demoticist Programme 
 In 1884, Dim í trios Vernard á kis, professor of history and philology at the University 
of Athens, proposed a return to the more realistic framework of Kora í s, only to be 
forced to resign in the controversy that followed. Still more radically, the prose writer 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 447
and satirist Emanou í l Ro í dis (1836 – 1904), an accomplished stylist in  kathar é vousa , 
now used his skills in the archaizing language to press the cause of spoken Greek ( The 
Idols  (1893)). In this context of incipient doubt about the viability of  kathar é vousa , 
the publication in 1888 of  My Journey  by Jean Psych á ris (1824 – 1929) proved to be 
of critical importance. 1 
 The book is a novel - cum - travelogue recounting a journey made in 1886 from Paris 
to Constantinople, Chios and Athens, which exploits the author ’ s horriﬁ ed reaction 
to the prevailing linguistic climate of the Greek capital as a pretext for the inclusion 
of a passionate defence of the spoken language as a medium for writing Greek. The 
language used is a regularized demotic devised by Psych á ris himself, and the text 
introduces a new political dimension to the language question by adapting conservative 
rhetoric to the demoticist cause, and explicitly linking the issue to the survival and 
future prosperity of Greece. Just as the army was ﬁ ghting to extend the borders and 
free the Greeks still living under Ottoman domination, so demotic was to be the means 
of extending the intellectual frontiers of the nation by liberating its people from lin-
guistic oppression. 
 Particularly offensive to Psych á ris were the French - based calques (not only indi-
vidual words like 
  ‘ r é aliser ’ , and 
 [psixre ' mia] 
 ‘ sang - froid ’ , but also clich é d phraseology like 
 [eksas ' ko epiro ' in] 
 ‘ exercer une inﬂ uence ’ ) and the new but ancient - looking words created by analogy 
with attested formations that had ﬂ ooded into the purist language. Many such novel 
creations have survived, with some phonological and morphological adaptation, in 
standard Modern Greek: commonplace examples include 
 
 ‘ encyclopaedia ’ , 
  ‘ oxygen ’ , the names of new sciences and their 
practitioners (e.g. 
  ‘ linguistics/
linguist ’ ), 
 [panepi ' stimio(n)]  ‘ university ’ , 
 
 ‘ interest ’ etc. 
 Psych á ris ’ principal objection was not, of course, to neologism  per se , since he fol-
lowed much the same practice when words were lacking in demotic (though he natu-
rally modiﬁ ed the loans to conform to his rules). His real target was the systematic 
replacement of day - to - day vocabulary with pompous compounds whenever the words 
in question, many of which were loans from foreign languages, especially Turkish, 
displayed formal properties incompatible with the structure of  kathar é vousa. The more 
ludicrous of such items, satirized in Vyz á ndios ’  Babel by the example of 
 
[nifo - ko ' ko - zimon]  ‘ sober+berry+brew ’ for 
 [ka ' fes]  ‘ coffee ’ , have died a well -
 deserved death. Many others, however, have passed successfully into the standard 
modern language, sometimes with formal adaptation, and often as alternatives to 
the equivalent popular terminology, because they combine formal and semantic 
transparency, and have denotations compatible with their learned form. Examples 
include 
 , lit.  ‘ not+through - and - out+road ’ , i.e.  ‘ cul - de - sac/
blind alley ’ , for 
 [tiﬂ o - ' sokako], lit.  ‘ blind alley (a compound of Greek and 
Turkish elements, now obsolete), and 
 [xrimato - ci ' votion], lit. 
 ‘ money   +  chest ’ , i.e.  ‘ safe ’ , alongside 
 [ ' kasa], an Italian loanword. Where both 
terms survive, the element taken from  kathar é vousa often belongs to a more formal 
register, though in some cases it has acquired the status of the neutral term, with the 
popular equivalent being thought old - fashioned, colloquial or substandard (e.g. 

448 Modern Greek
 , lit.  ‘ through + go + instrument ’ , i.e.  ‘ passport ’ , versus 
 [pasa ' porti]). 
 But Psych á ris was ﬁ rst and foremost a linguist, and a novel perspective was now 
brought to bear on the language question through the application of the theoretical 
framework developed by the  Junggrammatiker  in Germany and taught in Paris, prior 
to his move to Geneva, by Ferdinand de Saussure (see Philipp á ki - Warburton  (1988) ). 
While the Neogrammarians are best known for formulating the principle that sound 
change is exceptionless, it is important to remember that this claim was put forward 
within a framework inﬂ uenced by Darwinian evolutionary theory that treated lan-
guages as quasi - biological entities that underwent change like  ‘ living ’ things and were 
governed in their development by discoverable  ‘ scientiﬁ c ’ principles (i.e. the sound laws 
and analogy). Such perspectives led to a growing understanding of synchronic structure 
and an emphasis on the internal coherence of languages, as reﬂ ected in Saussure ’ s 
early work on Indo - European  ‘ laryngeals ’  (see Clackson  (2007) ). By these criteria, 
 kathar é vousa was not a  ‘ real ’ language at all: its failure to change other than by arbi-
trary say - so was proof of its artiﬁ cial status, while its manifest lack of internal coher-
ence precluded scientiﬁ c analysis. Psych á ris therefore argued that the establishment of 
links with the ancient language could best be achieved by a demonstration that demotic 
was the natural descendant of classical Greek, the product of rule - governed change 
rather than decay, and the living embodiment of its ancient predecessor. 
 A further consequence of Psych á ris ’ approach was that it forced him to acknowledge 
that the phonological system of Greek had changed dramatically since ancient times. 
Throughout history, Greeks have pronounced earlier forms of Greek as they pronounce 
the contemporary form of the language, and this was of great help to the proponents 
of  kathar é vousa , since the issue of  ‘ correct pronunciation ’ could simply be ignored. 
But it was often phonetic change that had induced the grammatical innovations the 
purists wished to eliminate, and Psych á ris was able to expose the contradictions 
involved in adopting the grammar and vocabulary of Ancient Greek without the 
ancient pronunciation, though in practice the primary status of  kathar é vousa as a 
written medium overcame many of the potential difﬁ culties, since the orthography 
maintained distinctions long lost in pronunciation (cf. Mirambel ( 1964 : 416 – 17)). 
 The theoretical emphasis on internal consistency also led Psych á ris to  ‘ systematize ’ 
demotic for the purpose of writing, and to adapt elements he took from Ancient Greek 
so as to conform to the  ‘ rules ’ . Thus where the archaizers antiqued the modern, he 
modernized the antique, and many of his proposals were in reality as arbitrarily pre-
scriptive and artiﬁ cial as those of his opponents. It could therefore be fairly argued 
that written demotic employed forms that no one used, and this opening quickly 
spawned a whole new mythology of alleged hyperdemoticisms amongst the apologists 
of archaism. 
 The central plank of Psych á ris ’ demoticism was that the written language had to 
be based on the spoken varieties of Athens and Constantinople, the principal centres 
of Greek culture, as they had evolved during the 19th century. All Greeks could under-
stand these easily, and he had no doubt that it was for the Ionian islands, despite the 
major contribution of their writers to the demoticist cause, to compromise with the 
practice of the kingdom, and not vice versa. It is important to note, however, that 
changes were made between the ﬁ rst edition of  My Journey  in 1888 and the second 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 449
in 1905. Psych á ris took great pride in his Constantinopolitan connections, and the 
language of his youth at ﬁ rst took precedence in his writing, leading to the use of many 
now non - standard features in the ﬁ rst edition. By the time of the second edition, 
however, his conception of demotic had changed in the face of criticism of his usage 
(see Mackridge  (1988) , on which the following discussion depends). 
 Among the syntactic Constantinopolitanisms of the ﬁ rst edition we may note the 
following: 
 (6)  (a)   The use of the accusative rather than the genitive for the indirect 
object. 
 (b)  The use of  p o u [pu] as a complementizer (=  ‘ that ’ ) in contexts where the 
standard language would employ  p w " [pos] or 
 [ ' oti]; in standard 
Modern Greek  p o u [pu] is used only for  ‘ factive ’  complements (cf. 
Christ í dis  (1985) , Ro ú ssou  (1994) ). 
 (c)  The use of  s a n  p o u [sam bu] where standard Greek has 
 
(=  ‘ just as ’ ) to introduce clauses of comparison.  
 These characteristics alternate with standard usages and continue even in later 
works, though many examples of (a) and (b) were systematically removed from the 
second edition. 
 Constantinopolitanisms in the verb morphology of the ﬁ rst edition include: 
 (7)  (a)   Durative stems in  - f t - [ - ft - ] of verbs which in Ancient Greek had  - p t - 
[ - pt - ] but in standard Modern Greek have the remodelled  - b -  [ - v - ]: 
 
[ ' kofto]  ‘ cut ’ , 
 [ ' krifto]  ‘ hide ’ . 
 (b)  Durative stems in  - c t -  [ - xt - ] of verbs which in standard Modern Greek 
have  - c n - [ - xn - ]: 
  ‘ show ’ , 
 [ ' sproxto]  ‘ push ’ . 
 (c)  A wider use/retention of the ancient durative stem - forming sufﬁ x 
 
[ - ( ' i)sko] than in standard Modern Greek: 
 [ ' mnisko]  ‘ remind ’  (cf. 
ancient 
 [mi ' mnisko]), 
  ‘ die ’ (cf. ancient 
 ). 
 (d)  Aorist stems of contract verbs in  - a w [ - ' ao] in  - h x - [ - iks] rather 
than standard  - h " - [is]: 
 [ro ' tikso]  ‘ ask ’ , 
 [zi ' tikso]  ‘ seek ’ . 
This is probably an analogical extension of the model seen in verbs 
like 
  ‘ guard ’ , 
 
  
  ‘ carry/support ’ , 
  ‘ ﬂ y/throw ’ , 
where the  - x - [ks] in the aorist is original but the ancient present stem has 
been remodelled to look like a contract verb in 
 [ - ' ao] (cf.  11.8.5 (c)
(ii)). 
 (e)  More widespread use of aorists in  - x - [ks] to imperfectives in  - ζ - [z] than in 
standard Modern Greek: e.g. 
 [mi ' akso] to 
 [mi ' azo]  ‘ resem-
ble ’ , originating in confusion between dental - ﬁ nal and velar - ﬁ nal roots. 
 (f) 
 The use of  d i w 
 in place of  d w 
 as the aorist subjunctive of 
 
[ ' vlepo]  ‘ see ’ . Psych á ris justiﬁ ed this even in the second edition on the 
grounds that it was important to distinguish 
  ‘ bind! ’  from 
  ‘ look! ’ . 

450 Modern Greek
 The changes introduced in the second edition, however, chieﬂ y involve terminations, 
with much of the motivation deriving from Psych á ris ’  new commitment to the 
avoidance of ﬁ nal  - n [n] except in genitive plurals and masculine/feminine accusative 
singular articles and clitic pronouns (at least before vowels). The following points are 
worth noting: 
 (8)  (a)  In the ﬁ rst edition 3pl presents end in  - o u n e [ - une] if the next word 
begins with a continuant (which would require elision of ﬁ nal  - n [ - n]), 
otherwise in  - o u n [ - un]. In the second edition  - o u n e [ - une] is used without 
exception; similarly 3pl past tenses in  - a n [ - an]    >   - a n e [ - ane]. The endings 
with the ﬁ nal vowel are still a feature of the speech of many Greeks, and 
are often preferred when the following word begins with a consonant; 
they do, however, alternate quite freely with the shorter endings which 
are often felt to be more formal/correct. It seems then that the more 
natural usage of the ﬁ rst edition has been sacriﬁ ced in the interests of 
consistency. 
 (b)  The endings of the imperfective middle/passive were particularly diverse 
in the dialects, and Psych á ris ’  own usage chieﬂ y reﬂ ects Constantinopolitan 
practice, with thematic  - o u - [ - u - ] for  - o - [ - o - ] in 1sg and 1/3pl forms: 
 (i) 
 Constantinopolitan 1sg present in  - o u m a i [ - ume] (less common 
in standard Greek than  - o m a i [ - ome] and regarded today as more 
 ‘ colloquial ’ ) correlates with 1pl in 
 [ ' umaste] for standard 
 [ ' omaste]; cf. his preference for the 1pl active in  - o u m e 
[ - ume] instead of the older variant  - o m e [ - ome], which he avoids.  
 (ii) 
 Constantinopolitan 
 [ - ' jume] is selected in favour of the now 
normal 
 [ - ' jeme] in 1sg of contract verbs such as 
 
[silo ' jume]  ‘ think about ’ . 
 (iii)  Constantinopolitan 1sg imperfect  - o u m o u n [ - umun] is used instead 
of the now regular 
 [ - ' omun], e.g. 
  ‘ I 
was sitting ’ (cf. the  - o u - [u] - forms in the  Ptochoprodromik á  ). This 
last, however, was replaced in the second edition by 
 
[ - ' omune], allegedly the Athenian norm at the time, which avoids 
ﬁ nal  - n [ - n], but breaks the pattern.  
 (iv)  as in most northern dialects, 3sg and 3pl imperfect in the ﬁ rst 
edition shared the same ending, in this case the Constantinopolitan 
 [ - ' undane] before a word beginning with a continuant, and 
 - o u n t a n [undan] elsewhere. Standard Modern Greek has 3sg 
 
[ - ' otan(e)] and 3pl 
 [ - ondan/ - ' ondane], and in the 
second edition the forms with accented thematic 
 [ - ' o - ] and ﬁ nal 
 - e [ - e] were standardized, with sg and pl distinguished.  
 (v) 
 similarly, 1pl presents and imperfects in 
 [ - ' umaste] were 
subsequently distinguished by the substitution of 
 [ - ' omesta] 
for the latter. The changes in (iii) – (v) thus created a consistent 
imperfect paradigm, but one which used a different thematic vowel 
from other paradigms.  

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 451
 While the basis for Psych á ris ’ choices is often hard to determine because of 
our sketchy understanding of the developing dialectal situation in the late 19th/early 
20th centuries, it does seem that he shifted his original bias in favour of Constantinople 
quite considerably in the direction of the developing standard of the new Greek 
capital. He was, however, happy to select from the available options to secure greater 
regularity of formation, and in the process undoubtedly created paradigms that 
were not based on the usage of any one speech community, though a subsidiary objec-
tive of this eclecticism was to facilitate language learning by children (cf. Mackridge 
( 1988 : 44)). 
 In conformity with this general approach, Psych á ris adapted his loans from 
Ancient Greek/ kathar é vousa to conform to the phonotactic and morphological 
rules of his demotic (though some  ‘ uncorrected ’  forms slipped through the net: compare, 
for example, 
 [efti ç ia]  ‘ happiness ’  with 
 [fti ç iz ' menos]  ‘ happy ’ ). 
It is perhaps in this area above all that charges of artiﬁ ciality carried most weight, 
since the standard modern language has since proved to be extremely tolerant 
of archaic characteristics in elements drawn from the learned tradition. Indeed such 
tolerance is sometimes essential to distinguish items which would otherwise be 
homophonous (e.g. 
  ‘ slavery ’  beside 
  ‘ work ’ , 
 
[akri ' vos]  ‘ accurately ’ beside 
 [akri ' va]  ‘ expensively ’ etc., cf. Browning ( 1983 : 
115)). Accordingly,  ‘ corrected ’ words like 
  ‘ conditions ’ , 
 
[sceti ' kos]  ‘ relevant ’ , 
 [ar ' favito]  ‘ alphabet ’ , 
 [pomo ' ni]  ‘ patience ’  and 
 [ ' extasi]  ‘ extension ’ , adapted from 
 , 
 [s ç eti ' kos], 
 [al ' faviton], 
 [ipomo ' ni] and 
 [ ' ektasis], all seem rather 
odd today. 
 Similar remarks apply to many of Psych á ris ’  neologisms, and to his use of demotic 
endings on otherwise learned compounds. The failure of these and other proposals to 
catch on reﬂ ects the fact that many otherwise sympathetic Greeks felt compelled to 
rebel at what constituted an affront to a well - developed  Sprachgef ü hl that had been 
shaped in part by an education system committed to  kathar é vousa. The ideal of a 
common language created by an act of individual will was clearly as unattainable for 
him as it was for the theorists of archaism, and what has ﬁ nally emerged in the late 
20th century has come about through more natural processes of compromise between 
the two traditions. 
 The following extract from the second edition of  My Journey  gives something of 
the ﬂ avour of Psych á ris ’ demotic style: 
 (9) 
   
 

452 Modern Greek
 ‘ Sometimes I have the urge to shout out loud for everyone to hear  – do not, do not, do 
not, do not ruin the language! You are destroying the ancient and the modern tongue 
alike. Do you want a language to resemble the ancient one in reality, to be the same 
language? Take the language of the people. Do you want a foreign language? Take 
 kathar é vousa ; it will show everyone that the ancient tongue has been truly lost. Do you 
want to play games? Do you want some fun, a joke, a good laugh? Then write  kathar é vousa. 
Do you want science, hard graft and learning? Do you want to take on some serious 
work? Then write our national language. Your decision will show whether you are men 
or children. ’ 
 Since this piece contains no examples of residual Constantinopolitanisms or radical 
innovations, a standard Modern Greek version would not look very different apart 
from some minor orthographical changes and the use of more traditional forms of 
certain adverbs (i.e. 
 [ ' kapote], 
 [ ' tote], 
 [to ' ondi]). 
 To show how far written practice had become polarized in the latter part of the 
19th century, it will be useful at this point to compare the contemporary  kathar é vousa. 
The extract in (10) is taken from the introduction to K. Rangav í s ’  Julian the 
Transgressor , a  ‘ dramatic poem ’ published in 1877: 
 (10)   
 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 453
 ‘ We are convinced, now that the dative has become generally accepted, that the future, 
which is already in use among the better writers, will follow it, and that the inﬁ nitive, 
on the increase in many quarters, will follow this in turn, together with the negative 
particles, but that the optative on the other hand, with its meaningless ( particle )  an , will 
never be revived, and that the same applies to the perfect, apart from its participle, and 
the pluperfect  … The introduction now for the ﬁ rst time in modern Greek poetry of the 
inﬁ nitive alongside so many other innovations is a bold stroke, and a bold stroke of some 
magnitude, but we leave it to the public to decide whether we have been altogether 
successful. ’ 
 Apart from the technical terminology, someone trained in classical Greek would 
probably ﬁ nd this passage easier to read than the piece by Psych á ris. The 
contrast could hardly be sharper, and one might conjecture that Kora í s must by then 
have been turning in his grave. The sentiments expressed speak for themselves; 
all contact with the real world seems to have been lost. The author, of course, 
places himself among  ‘ the best writers ’ by his own use of the dative (e.g. 
 
[ ' kritosin], which also revives an obsolete comparative), the monolectic classical 
future (e.g. 
 , unfortunately homophonous with the aorist 
subjunctive, a major reason for its demise), and the full array of inﬁ nitives 
(e.g. 
 , an ancient  ‘ strong ’ aorist), together with a host of other 
long - departed forms and structures, among which the participial genitive absolute 
(
 ) and the revival of the ancient 
class of athematic verbs in  - m i [ - mi] (e.g.  ‘ classical ’ 
 ) stand 
out. 
 It should be emphasized, however, that while the literary vanguard was marching 
steadily backwards into the ancient world, less extreme versions of  kathar é vousa con-
tinued to be taught in schools and to be used for more practical purposes. None the 
less, the general drift of the age had its impact even here, with the result that what 
was taught in school became increasingly remote from what was spoken at home, and 
so received little reinforcement from the majority of parents, themselves often poorly 
educated, who had no real understanding of, or interest in, this increasingly alien 

454 Modern Greek
written language. What was natural to the old elite, or even to the growing middle 
class, was much harder to sell to the population as a whole. 
 A good example of the ofﬁ cial response to the collective apathy of the mass of 
schoolchildren is provided by the exhortations of an early 20th - century primer (written, 
it must be admitted, in a language that has more in common with the original propos-
als of Kora í s than with the ambitions of Rangav í s): 
 (11)   
 
 ‘ I no longer see you going to school with the determined resolve and shining face that I 
wished for  … Everyone learns to read and write these days  … Think of the countless 
children who are going to school all over the world at this very time  … Just think of the 
barbarism mankind would descend into if this movement were to stop. ’ 
 17.5   The Progress of Demoticism 
 In the circumstances, one can only marvel at even the limited success that the teaching 
of  kathar é vousa managed to achieve, and admire the fortitude and determination of 
those who actually learned to use it. In practice, of course, the efforts of many remained 
abysmal. Such written styles could not be reconciled with the developing norms of the 
living language, and Psych á ris ’ challenge seemed to many, especially in literary and 
educational circles, to be the harbinger of an inevitable shift in favour of demotic. 
 Interestingly, however, it was not the exclusiveness and elitism of the ofﬁ cial lan-
guage programme which initially provoked ideological opposition. Indeed, for the ﬁ rst 
offspring of peasant families to receive an education,  kathar é vousa was a hard - won 
badge of upward mobility, while the earliest advocates of demoticism, long before it 
became identiﬁ ed with the causes of the political left (see  17.6 below), came from 
backgrounds just as privileged as those of their rivals, and objected to  kathar é vousa 
principally on the grounds of its pretentiousness and vulgarity (Mackridge  1990 : 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 455
41). Their primary objective was not to enfranchise the mass of the people through 
linguistic reform but to appropriate the authority to construct a modern language to 
express a modern identity based on a vision of Greece as a progressive, liberal, 
European nation, speaking and writing the  ‘ natural ’ language that  ‘ expressed its soul ’ 
(Tzi ó vas  1985 : 272 – 5). 
 But change did not set in overnight, and Psych á ris ’  powerful advocacy of demotic 
met with equally vociferous opposition. One of the more reasoned responses came 
from Ye ó ryios Chatzid á kis (1848 – 1941), professor of linguistics at the university of 
Athens. Chatzid á kis is widely regarded as the founder of the scientiﬁ c study of the 
history of modern Greek, a reputation which rests on his demonstration that the 
varying proportion of old to new forms in the vernacular literature of the middle ages 
did not provide a straightforward basis for tracing the diachronic development of 
spoken Greek, as Psych á ris had maintained, but actually represented a blend of spoken 
and traditional written Greek that depended less on the date of composition than the 
genre of the piece, the educational level of its author and the target audience. Applying 
what he saw as the dispassionate perspective of the linguist, Chatzid á kis insisted 
that, since different forms of the Greek language had traditionally been felt to be 
appropriate for speaking and for writing, the demoticists ’ efforts to minimize this well - 
established difference were fundamentally misguided. For him  kathar é vousa represented 
the contemporary manifestation of the written tradition. If in later times the written 
language came increasingly to resemble the spoken, that too would be a historical fact 
which he would accept, but in the meantime, it was not for expatriates like Psych á ris 
to meddle with reality (Chatzid á kis ( 1901 : 296)). 
 The central problem, of course, was that no form of Greek existed to fulﬁ l all the 
ofﬁ cial, practical and literary functions of a written language in a modern state, but 
all theorists behaved as if this were a desirable objective. Ideally, the richness and 
diversity of the Greek tradition should have led to the emergence of an array of written 
registers, each stylistically adapted to its purpose, but all bound together by the devel-
oping spoken standard and a written norm linked to it. This, by and large, is what 
ﬁ nally happened, but the increasingly artiﬁ cial terms of the academic debate in the late 
19th century demanded exclusive choices and internal consistency, attributes as unat-
tainable as they were undesirable. 
 In the short term, therefore, as the ideology of archaism became more and more of 
a barrier for many writers and poets, Psych á ris ’  support for demotic proved very 
timely. Already widely accepted as the natural language of poetry (despite the often 
lacklustre efforts of the Old Athenian School), demotic now came to be adopted even 
in Athenian literary circles by a new generation of poets whose leading ﬁ gure was the 
proliﬁ c Kost í s Palam á s (1859 – 1943). In this same period serious research at last began 
into the popular literature of the middle ages and the tradition of Greek folk song, the 
latter associated especially with the name of Nik ó laos Pol í tis (1852 – 1921), and these 
developments contributed further to the growth of an alternative, but equally patriotic 
and nationalistic, conception of the roots of the modern Greek nation. By the 1890s, 
even writers of prose ﬁ ction were turning their backs on the archaizing ideal and using 
demotic, just as the rhetorical posturing of the archaizing movement was approaching 
its climax. For the ﬁ rst time the establishment began to feel threatened by the progress 
of demoticism. 

456 Modern Greek
 The obvious reason for the drift away from traditional written styles was that 
writers could not ignore the fundamental principle that communication is more impor-
tant than the achievement of a  ‘ perfect ’ (i.e. archaic) outward form. The idea that use 
of the ancient language would somehow bring about a rebirth of classical civilization 
was therefore rejected very early by the only groups who could even in principle have 
attempted to deliver such unrealistic cultural objectives, and in reality Psych á ris ’ 
writing served to controversialize an issue that was already quietly being addressed in 
practice. It is signiﬁ cant that the best of the older writers had not been limited by the 
ideology of archaism, and often exploited the full range of Greek in their search for 
stylistic variety. Beaton ( 1994 : 337 – 9) shows how Al é xandros Papadiam á ndis (1851 –
 1911), for example, was able to insert set - piece  ekphr á seis , reminiscent of their coun-
terparts in the Greek novels of antiquity and composed in a lushly rhetorical style 
replete with ancient syntax and vocabulary, into narratives written in a spare and 
polished  kathar é vousa , while at the same time enlivening the whole through the use 
of natural dialogue reﬂ ecting spoken norms or even, when appropriate, local dialect. 
The result is artistically organic and satisfying, and reveals what could be made of the 
resources available in the late 19th century by a master craftsman. 
 For a time, then, the actual practice of Greek writers reveals the co - existence of a 
range of styles determined as much by precedent and individual choice as by the tenets 
of any prescriptive programme. True diglossia in its modern sense (referring not so 
much to the age - old split between spoken and written Greek as to two rival written 
varieties used for different purposes in the same community) began only with the 
dramatically polarizing effects of the advent of demoticism as a coherent movement, 
and the increasingly frantic and violent reactions of the traditionalists to its growing 
success. Thereafter, writers found themselves in a cultural and political context which 
offered them a near - exclusive choice between competing languages. The result in the 
ﬁ rst half of the 20th century was a kind of linguistic schizophrenia among authors 
who combined their literary activity in demotic with a professional career (e.g. Palam á s, 
and the Nobel laureate Y ó rgos Sef é ris (real name Seferi á dis, 1900 – 71)). 
 17.6   The 20th Century: Crisis and Resolution 
 In 1901 the businessman Al é xandros P á llis published in the Athens newspaper 
 Akr ó polis  the ﬁ rst instalments of his translation of the Gospels into demotic. The 
capital ’ s university was a major institutional backer of linguistic archaism and the 
academic community was outraged by this perceived assault on the sanctity of 
the divine text and the position of the Orthodox church. Several days of violent protest 
by students and professors followed, including attacks on newspaper ofﬁ ces. Eventually, 
on the night of 8 November, the police opened ﬁ re in an effort to restore order and a 
number of demonstrators were killed. 
 Similar troubles attended the production of Aeschylus ’  Oresteia  in demotic at the 
Ir ó dio (or theatre of Ir ó dis Attik ó s (Herodes Atticus)) in 1903, and advocates of 
demotic now began to be accused not only of atheism but also of treason; translations 
of ancient masterpieces, it was alleged, drove a wedge between ancient and modern 
Greek culture (though it is hard to understand the charge in so far as an extremely 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 457
difﬁ cult classical text had been rendered accessible to a mass audience for the ﬁ rst 
time), thereby achieving in the ﬁ eld of language what the Bulgarians at that time were 
trying to accomplish on the ground in Macedonia, namely  ‘ the separation of Greece 
from its national heritage ’ . The campaign of denigration even descended to the level 
of name - calling, with demoticists often referred to as  malliar í ( ‘ hairies ’ ) because of 
their supposedly bohemian appearance and allegedly subversive political views as sup-
porters of a Slavic plot, backed by Russia, to divide the Greeks and render them easy 
prey to Bulgarian territorial ambition. Such charges gained ground rapidly with the 
later success of the Bolshevik revolution, which served further to identify the cause of 
demoticism in its opponents ’ eyes with treachery and the ambitions of the far left. 
 All of this ignored the fact that demoticism too had traditionally identiﬁ ed nation 
and language (cf. Psych á ris ’ dictum  ‘ language and country are the same ’ ( 1905 : 23)). 
Its adherents could also point to the hugely unsuccessful attempts then being made to 
teach  kathar é vousa and even Ancient Greek to the slavophone children of Macedonia 
who, having little or no competence in spoken Greek, had started to decamp to rival 
Bulgarian schools. The purists, it seems, would rather sacriﬁ ce the opportunity to make 
progress in the real world than abandon their view that the survival of the Greek state 
somehow depended on the preservation of its archaizing written language. 
 The increasing antagonism provided the background to the appearance of the 
periodical  Noum á s (ﬁ rst published in 1903), which was dedicated to the promotion 
of demotic and soon became the leading literary journal of its era. Shortly after, the 
National Language Society was founded (1905), which demanded the immediate 
introduction of demotic into the primary school curriculum in Greece and Macedonia 
(the only level of schooling then compulsory), and had as its ultimate objective the 
institution of the living language as the ofﬁ cial written language of the nation. 
 It was in the pages of  Noum á s that cautious reformers, under the leadership of 
Palam á s, ﬁ rst began to distance themselves from the over - schematic proposals of 
Psych á ris and his followers, and to seek to defend themselves against charges of  ‘ hairy-
ism ’  (with all that that entailed).  Noum á s was also the locus of the debate which 
followed the appearance of G. Sklir ó s ’ book  Our Social Question  (1907), in which it 
was explicitly argued for the ﬁ rst time that language reform and social reform should 
go hand in hand, and that the demoticist movement should be appealing directly to 
the people rather than engaging in futile debate with the establishment. 
 The overt linking of demoticism with socialism by one of its own supporters 
shifted the ground on which the language question had hitherto been debated. Despite 
the sometimes extreme rhetoric and the fundamental disagreement about means, 
both purists and demoticists had previously shared the same objective of developing 
a national language for a resurgent Greece. Now the demotic camp began to split 
into those who saw the cause as part of a wider political programme of social reform 
on the one hand, and more traditional nationalists on the other. As time went on, 
the latter took an increasingly narrow view of the language question, and eventually 
came to identify it with establishing control over the content of the primary 
school curriculum. 
 As a reﬂ ection of the practical progress of demoticism, the ﬁ rst public secondary 
school for girls was founded in 1908 in the town of V ó los by Al é xandros Delmo ú zos, 
who opted for demotic as the sole medium of instruction. The bishop of V ó los, raising 

458 Modern Greek
the spectre of the trial of Socrates in ancient Athens, immediately accused him of cor-
rupting the children of the town, and in 1911 he was obliged to close his school and 
defend himself in court (where, incidentally, the bishop in his accusation equated 
hairyism, anarchism, socialism, atheism and freemasonry: see Dimar á s ( 1974 : 106) 
and Mackridge ( 1990 : 33)). Happily, Delmo ú zos was acquitted, but the fact that this 
preposterous trial took place at all was an ominous sign of the growing ferocity of 
establishment reaction. 
 Despite this initial setback, a plan to open an  ‘ experimental school ’ in Athens led 
to the foundation of the Educational Society in 1910, with Delmo ú zos as a leading 
member. The Society ’ s central objective, as the organ of liberal demoticism, was the 
reform of primary education, but it sought to distance itself from Psych á ris by lobbying 
for a  ‘ practical ’ demotic which made concessions to normal educated usage as inﬂ u-
enced by  kathar é vousa.  Furthermore, following the recent split in the demotic camp, 
the Society was careful in its publications to avoid overt association with left - wing 
politics, despite the presence of a number of leading socialists among the membership. 
Nevertheless, the links, once introduced, proved hard to shake off, and conservative 
opponents were not slow to exploit the situation to their advantage. 
 Meanwhile, in the wake of political demands from the military backed up by the 
threat of intervention, the so - called bourgeois revolution of 1909 had brought Veniz é los 
to power for the ﬁ rst time and led to the framing of a new constitution in 1911. This 
now made explicit mention of an  ‘ ofﬁ cial language ’ : 
 (12)   
 
 ‘ The ofﬁ cial language of the State is that in which the polity and the statutes of Greek 
legislation are drawn up; any intervention directed towards the corruption of this language 
is forbidden. ’ 
 The language in which the constitution was written was, of course,  kathar é vousa , 
and by implication this was the language referred to in Article 107. The institutionali-
zation of diglossia represented a solid victory for the forces of reaction since, despite 
Veniz é los ’ efforts to take credit for the  ‘ sophistic ’ language which allegedly opened the 
way for demotic to become the ofﬁ cial language as soon as it was ﬁ rst used in legisla-
tion, an ampliﬁ ed version of Article 107 remained in force as late as the Colonels ’ 
constitution of 1968, and no attempt was made by anyone to draft legislation in 
demotic until 1977. 
 Nevertheless, the attitude of the Veniz é los government in practice was rather more 
liberal than Article 107 would suggest. Members of the Educational Society were 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 459
invited to write textbooks in demotic for use in primary schools, thus giving all children 
a grounding in their native language before having to deal with  kathar é vousa. At the 
same time leading members of the Society were appointed to key posts; Dim í tris Gl í nos 
became general secretary of the Ministry of Education, and Al é xandros Delmo ú zos 
and Man ó lis Triandafyll í dis, later professor of linguistics at the University of 
Thessalon í ki and author of the  ‘ standard ’ grammar of demotic (yet to be fully super-
seded), became chief supervisors of primary education, with the result that demotic 
ﬁ nally became the language of instruction in the ﬁ rst four grades (ages 7 – 12). 
 Despite heated opposition not only from supporters of  kathar é vousa but also 
from Psych á ris himself, who denounced the compromises that had secured this 
limited success, the Educational Society ’ s achievement in securing a place for demotic 
in the curriculum was never to be challenged seriously, despite periodic moves 
to reduce or increase its presence, until it ﬁ nally superseded  kathar é vousa as the 
ofﬁ cial language in 1976. Having been introduced under Veniz é los, however, it was 
inevitable that the Society ’ s reforms should come under pressure when he was voted 
out of power in 1920 by an electorate growing increasingly pessimistic about the 
country ’ s involvement in Asia Minor. And when, in the chaotic aftermath of the even-
tual disaster of 1922, a fascist dictatorship under the leadership of General P á ngalos 
was established (1925 – 6), and a national conference of religious and other conservative 
pressure groups called for action against the corrupters of  ‘ religion, language, family, 
property, morals, national consciousness and the fatherland ’ (Dimar á s ( 1974 : 143 – 4); 
Mackridge ( 1990 : 34)), it was all too clear who was going to be blamed for the nation ’ s 
misfortune. 
 Triandafyll í dis and Delmo ú zos were therefore hard pressed to show that these 
groups were not to be identiﬁ ed in principle or in practice, and their difﬁ culties were 
greatly exacerbated by Gl í nos ’  overt adoption of Marxism and subsequent takeover 
of the Educational Society, and by the formal adoption of demotic by the Communist 
Party of Greece in 1927. Although it might seem natural for the party of the people 
to address its constituency in the popular language, demoticism in the ﬁ rst quarter of 
the 20th century was regarded on the left as a bourgeois/liberal movement. Accordingly, 
between its foundation in 1918 (as the Socialist Labour Party) and the reform of 1927, 
the Communist Party followed the general practice of using  kathar é vousa as the only 
serious language available for political discourse. 
 The shift at this time was an almost inevitable response to the intensiﬁ ed politiciza-
tion of the language issue by the right, though one can also discern here the growing 
importance of the socialist wing of the demotic movement, reﬂ ected in Gl í nos ’ conver-
sion to the cause. In an age when mass education was becoming a reality, and writing 
was needed to meet a vast array of different needs as the country made its transition 
from a predominantly oral to a literate culture, the written styles of the early 20th 
century were just too remote from ordinary speech to be learned effectively by the 
majority. Yet knowledge of  kathar é vousa remained indispensable to economic advance-
ment, and it was the social divisiveness of diglossia which lay at the heart of the new 
attitude to the language question on the part of the left at this time. 
 Henceforth, until the ﬁ nal abolition of the ofﬁ cial status of  kathar é vousa in 1976, 
the written use of demotic was interpreted as a signal of left - wing sympathies, while 
the use of traditional styles was seen as a mark of conservatism, and even of support 

460 Modern Greek
for the hard right. This unfortunate development was accelerated after the appointment 
of Triandafyll í dis and Delmo ú zos to chairs at the University of Thessalon í ki (opened 
in 1926, with demotic used by many as the medium of instruction), when the liberal 
wing of the Educational Society, apparently believing its objectives to have been 
achieved, stopped campaigning. In the wake of the more ambitious political objectives 
of its new left - wing leadership the Society itself was wound up in 1929 and  Noum á s 
ceased publication two years later. 
 An indication of the growing strength of the links between demoticism and the left 
is provided by the efforts of the populist Metax á s dictatorship to break them, as 
reﬂ ected in the commissioning of Triandafyll í dis, who was equally anxious for quite 
different reasons to distance demotic from communism, to produce a  ‘ state ’ grammar 
of demotic as part of a programme of educational reform designed to  ‘ instil discipline ’ , 
including linguistic discipline, into the Greek people. It seemed logical that this could 
best be achieved through the use of spoken Greek, which was at last to be invested 
with the status of a  ‘ real ’ language through the publication of its own properly codiﬁ ed 
and ofﬁ cially backed rule book. Unfortunately the work was not completed until 1941, 
when the dictator was dead and the Greek population was otherwise preoccupied with 
the business of survival under the harsh conditions of German occupation. 
 It should be noted, however, that this work too was as much a normalization as a 
description of usage, involving the reduction of morphological variety (
 
[politi ' pia]) and the minimization of the learned features which had inﬁ ltrated educated 
speech. Where it appealed to precedent, it was to the usage of the folk songs (them-
selves dialectally homogenized in standard editions such as that of Pol í tis) and earlier 
demotic literature which preserved an already rustic - seeming  ‘ purity ’ that was fast 
becoming a thing of the past in the speech of ordinary urban Greeks. Nevertheless, as 
the work of the ﬁ nest Greek linguist of his generation, it represents a landmark achieve-
ment which served a vital purpose in promoting the demoticist cause. 
 In the short term, however, the traditionalists of the University of Athens seized 
their opportunity to reassert their traditional authority in matters of language. In the 
spring of 1942, when large numbers of Athenians were dying daily of starvation, 
Professor Io á nnis Kakrid í s was suspended from his duties for republishing in demotic 
(and employing a simpliﬁ ed system of accentuation) a lecture which he had originally 
delivered in Thessalon í ki in 1936. This apparently bizarre and irrelevant move becomes 
a little more comprehensible when one recalls that attempts to undermine the pre -
 eminence of  kathar é vousa had always been seen in establishment circles as attempts 
to undermine the will to achieve and sustain national sovereignty. The use of demotic 
under the occupation was therefore interpreted as treachery by people who now linked 
demoticism not only with the internationalism of the left but also with fascist dictator-
ship (cf. Metax á s ’ reforms) and Nazi oppression. 
 Even though both resistance organizations, the liberal EDES and the communist 
EAM/ELAS, declared their support for demotic (with EAM announcing in 1944 
that demotic was already in use in the areas under its control), it was therefore 
almost inevitable that the civil war should usher in a reversal into the entrenched 
positions of the previous generation. But adherence to these positions was fast becom-
ing a largely ideological issue, with the old dichotomy looking increasingly anachro-
nistic in the context of the linguistic situation that had begun to emerge in the pre - war 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 461
years and now continued to develop in the period of post - war reconstruction and 
economic revival. 
 Although for a time there was little academic interest in redeﬁ ning what was meant 
by demotic and  kathar é vousa , the debate eventually resumed in earnest. In 1963 the 
Liberal prime minister Ye ó ryios Papandr é ou declared a policy of equal rights for the 
two written varieties in the education system, while retaining ofﬁ cial status for 
 kathar é vousa as the language of the state. This reform led at last to the introduction 
of an abridged version of Triandafyll í dis ’ grammar into schools. But since this 
work failed to take into account the cumulative long - term impact of  kathar é vousa 
on the ordinary speech and writing of the educated classes, it inevitably prompted a 
fresh reaction, this time from the educationalist A.G. Tsopan á kis, who proposed a 
 ‘ compromise ’  between Triandafyll í dis ’  demotic and actual educated usage (yet another 
framework based neither on practice nor on precedent). 
 But in the context of this revived debate, the view at last began to be propounded 
that the language question was actually resolving itself (cf. L. Pol í tis  (1966) , Vl á chos 
 (1967) , and the grammar of  ‘ Common Modern Greek ’ by Babini ó tis and K ó ndos 
 (1967) ); all that was required, it was suggested, was enough time for the developing 
standardization already manifest in the speech of the educated classes to come to 
maturity in its own natural way. This solution had in fact already been quietly accepted 
by a number of literary ﬁ gures in the inter - war years, whose written practice had begun 
again to break down the supposed boundaries set up by the ofﬁ cially sanctioned diglos-
sia. The artiﬁ cial prescriptions of Psych á ris had been quickly abandoned even by 
enthusiastic demoticists like Palam á s and the prose writers Andr é as Karkav í tsas (1866 –
 1921) and Grig ó rios Xen ó poulos (1867 – 1951), who felt the need to acknowledge 
existing usage and literary precedent. By the 1930s, major writers of poetry and ﬁ ction 
had moved away from rural realism and country idioms (favoured by earlier demoti-
cists in their pursuit of the  ‘ honest simplicity ’ that  ‘ urban artiﬁ ce ’ was felt to have 
destroyed) in favour of a style which better reﬂ ected the evolving urban standard, with 
elements taken from educated spoken usage and even non - demotic literature. At the 
extreme, the deliberately anarchic language mix of the Surrealists (Andr é as Embir í kos 
(1901 – 75) and N í kos Engon ó poulos (1910 – 85)) represented an attempt to break down 
all the barriers and retrieve the full range of Greek for literary purposes. Thus the 
 ‘ pure ’ demotic de/prescribed in Triandafyll í dis ’ grammar and later in Tz á rtzanos ’ 
complementary  Syntax  (1946, 1963)  already had a rather dated feel by the time these 
works appeared (though Triandafyll í dis himself was well aware that normal usage was 
often distinct from the literary practice on which his description was primarily based, 
cf. Triandafyll í dis ( 1938 : 155 – 8, 607)). 
 Unfortunately, ofﬁ cial recognition of the way things had been developing both 
before and after the war was delayed for a decade by the military dictatorship of 
1967 – 74. In this unpleasant interlude even the language of primary school textbooks 
was given a  kathar é vousa gloss, and a pamphlet entitled  National Language , published 
in 1973 by the Armed Forces Headquarters, revived all the old arguments against 
demotic, linking it with communism, and reasserting the view that it was a debased 
and anarchic version of the true national language which alone enjoyed the backing 
of ancient Greek precedent. The poverty of the argument was as apparent as the bank-
ruptcy of the regime, and after its fall in 1974 Karamanl í s ’ conservative government 

462 Modern Greek
began to use demotic from the start. At the same time, the political dimension of the 
language question was ﬁ nally defused by the legalization of the Communist Party, 
while the education act of 1976 determined that the language of instruction in all 
classes should be  ‘ Modern Greek ’ , the latter being deﬁ ned as  ‘ the Demotic language 
shaped by the Greek people and classic national writers as a Panhellenic instrument 
of expression, codiﬁ ed, without local peculiarities and extremes ’ (cited in Landsman 
( 1989 : 171), Beaton ( 1994 : 326)). Interestingly, however, legal texts, including this 
very act, continued to be formulated in  kathar é vousa until 1985, and it was only in 
1986 that a  ‘ demotic ’ translation of the Constitution was ratiﬁ ed, and even then the 
original was deemed to retain precedence for purposes of interpretation (Mackridge 
( 1990 : 38)). 
 The trends of the post - war period were epitomized in K ó stas Tachts í s ’ comic novel 
 The Third Wedding  (1962), in which the speech of the principal characters, two 
middle - class women, is heavily larded with the clich é s and jargon of written ofﬁ cial-
dom in overt recognition of the extent to which these had passed into everyday spoken 
usage (Beaton ( 1994 : 346 – 7)). The practice of such writers overtly reﬂ ected the process 
of compromise that was taking place willy - nilly in the real world in sharp contrast 
with the binary opposition of the formal language debate. The acceptance of  ‘ Demotic ’ 
as the language of education and ofﬁ cial business was in reality not much more than 
a belated acceptance of the linguistic status quo, but the form of language involved 
was something rather different from Psych á ris ’  concept of demotic and even from the 
language of Triandafyll í dis ’  ofﬁ cial grammar. 
 Contemporary writers now exploit the potential of the language quite widely, with 
styles ranging from a traditional rural demotic (e.g. in Chr ó nis M í ssios ’  evocations 
of the oral tradition (1985)) to something not far removed from late 19th - century 
 kathar é vousa (e.g. in Embir í kos ’  posthumous  The Great Eastern  (1990 – 2)). But the 
language spoken by the averagely well - educated population of the major cities is now 
accepted as standard, and versions of this are employed for virtually all ofﬁ cial and 
practical purposes. It is, of course, a compromise, the product in part of natural devel-
opments in a social and educational context where elements of  kathar é vousa long 
found a natural place in both speech and writing, in part of the conscious efforts 
of creative writers to circumvent the inhibiting constraints of ofﬁ cial diglossia (see 
Mackridge  (1990, 2009) , Beaton  (1994) ). 
 17.7   Standard Modern Greek 
 The term  ‘ standard Modern Greek ’ (SMG) has now replaced the earlier  ‘ common 
Modern Greek ’ as the name of this variety (see Mackridge  (1985)  for a clear and 
comprehensive description). Unlike  ‘ pure ’ demotic, SMG readily allows the use of 
features previously thought of as  ‘ learned ’ . In nominal morphology, for example, we 
may note: 
 (13)  (a)  The reappearance of 2nd - declension feminines in  - o " [ - os]: e.g. 
  ‘ the street/road ’ (a subclass previously replaced in 
demotic by alternative words or eliminated by reassignment to different 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 463
declensions, cf. especially island names like  η 
 [i  ' samo]  ‘ Samos ’ , 
genitive 
 [tis  ' samos] etc.).  
 (b)  The restoration of the ancient paradigm of 3rd - declension s - stem and 
u - stem adjectives in 
   [ ' is] and 
 [ - ' is] (adapted in demotic to more 
regular 1st/2nd - declension paradigms); e.g. 
 [sine ' ç is]  ‘ continu-
ous ’ , 
 [e ' vris]  ‘ broad ’ . 
 (c)  The restoration of the gen sg and plural paradigm of i - stem nouns, e.g. 
  ‘ power(s) ’ . 
 (d)  The reintroduction of 3rd - declension neuters in  - o n /gen  - o n t o " 
[ - on/ - ondos],  - e n /gen  - e n t o " [ - en/ - endos], and 
 (or 
 ) 
[ - ' os/ - ' otos] from ancient participles: e.g. 
 [pa ' ron]  ‘ present (time) ’ , 
 [proi ' on]  ‘ product ’ , 
  ‘ interest ’ , 
 
[fo ' nien]  ‘ vowel ’ , 
  ‘ fact ’ , 
  ‘ regime, 
status quo ’ . 
 (e)  The introduction of 3rd - declension neuters in  - a n / - a n t o " [ - an/ - andos]: 
e.g. 
 [ ' simban]  ‘ universe ’ . 
 (f) 
 The full revival of the genitive plural in contrast to its previously more 
marginal status in earlier demotic (see, for example, the observations in 
Thumb ( 1912 : 31, 33).  
 In the verb system, the following should be mentioned: 
 (14)  (a)  The reintroduction of many contract verbs of the 
 [ - ' eo] type, 
together with large parts of their ancient paradigm (the majority of 
the survivors in demotic having merged with the 
 [ - ' ao] type); e.g. 
  ‘ I consider/I am supposed ’ . 
 (b)  The use of learned verbs of the 
 [ - ' ao] type, again with partial res-
toration of the ancient paradigm; e.g 
  ‘ I split ’ , 
 
[eksar ' tome]  ‘ I depend ’ . 
 (c)  The use of the middle/passive of certain verbs belonging to the ancient 
athematic paradigm; e.g. 
  ‘ I am put ’ and its com-
pounds, or compounds of 
 [ ' istame] like 
 [sin ' istame] 
 ‘ I consist (in/of) ’ . 
 (d)  The use in compound verbs of more ancient stem forms than in the cor-
responding simple verbs: e.g. 
 [mi ' lo]  ‘ I talk ’ (2sg 
 [mi ' las]), 
beside 
 [sinomi ' lo]  ‘ discuss ’  (2sg 
 [sinomi ' lis]); 
  ‘ kick out ’ , beside 
  ‘ aim to get ’ etc.  
 (e)  The reintroduction of such verbs from the learned tradition entails the 
reappearance of much learned morphology: e.g. the use of aorist  - e u s a 
[ - efsa] rather than  - e y a [ - epsa], as in 
 [si ' sorefsa]  ‘ I accumu-
lated ’ ; internal augments, as in aorist 
 [i ' sepraksa] from 
 [is ' prato]  ‘ I collect, levy ’ ; aorist passives in  - q h n / - q h " / - q h 
 in place of  - q h k a 
 etc., as in 
 
 ‘ I was arrested ’ from 
 [silam ' vano]; reduplicated perfect 
passive participles, as in 
 [ekteta ' menos]  ‘ extended ’ , from 
 [ek ' tino], and so on.  

464 Modern Greek
 (f) 
 The use of inﬂ ected present active ( - w n / - o  u " a / - o  n [ - on/ - usa/ - on]) 
and passive participles (
 [ - ' omenos/ - i/ - on]), and of aorist 
passive participles 
 , mainly in 
adjectival functions: e.g. 
 [o pro ' cipton  ' tokos] 
 ‘ the resulting interest ’ , o i 
 
 ‘ working women ’ , 
 [i pl ' ijises perio ' ç es]  ‘ the dev-
astated regions ’ , 
  ‘ lost property ’ . 
 (g)  Use of certain adverbs in  - w " [ - os] alongside the demotic type in  - a [ - a], 
e.g. 
  ‘ fortunately/unfortunately ’ , especially 
useful in the case of potential homonyms, e.g. 
 [akri ' vos]  ‘ exactly ’ 
(from 
 [akri ' vis]), beside 
 [akri ' va]  ‘ expensively ’ (from 
 [akri ' vos]). 
 There is also a large number of phrases, often involving genitive absolutes, datives 
and ancient prepositions, that express an idea neatly and have no  ‘ true ’ demotic 
equivalent: e.g. 
  ‘ God willing ’ ; 
 ( n a / g i a ) 
[proci ' menou [na/ja]]  ‘ if it ’ s a question of ’ ; 
 [simberilamvano ' menu] 
(+ gen noun)  ‘ including X ’ ;  t o i " 
 [tis eka ' ton]  ‘ per cent ’ ; 
 [i ' popsi] 
 ‘ in mind/view, for the attention of ’ ; 
  ‘ straight (on) ’ ; 
  ‘ as opposed to ’ ; and so on. A few may well rep-
resent fossilized survivals in the spoken tradition, but the great majority are clearly 
taken from  kathar é vousa. 
 Such widespread borrowing from the learned language has naturally introduced 
elements of learned phonology into SMG, and many of the phonotactic constraints of 
traditional demotic no longer apply systematically, producing some uncertainty in the 
pronunciation of particular words (the  kathar é vousa rules, it should be noted, are also 
often alien even to Ancient Greek, since a modern pronunciation is used for the ancient 
written forms). 2 All the following words, quite regular in SMG, violate demotic rules 
in one way or another: 
 [pii ' tis]  ‘ poet ’ ; 
  ‘ excursion ’ ; 
 
[sti ' ç io]  ‘ element ’ ; 
 [ ' ektasi]  ‘ extension ’ ; 
  ‘ enemy ’ ; 
 [ ' pafsi] 
 ‘ cessation ’ ; 
 [simfo ' no]  ‘ I agree ’ ; 
 [ ' revma]  ‘ current ’ . Cf.  11.2 and  11.6 , 
and see Mackridge  (1985 : 28 – 31)). 
 Just before the Second World War, the great French linguist Andr é Mirambel ana-
lysed the language situation then obtaining in Greece (Mirambel  (1937) , cf. Browning 
( 1983 : 111ff)). Although at that time there was in theory a state of diglossia, he natu-
rally found that actual practice was more subtly differentiated. At one extreme of the 
spectrum stood  kathar é vousa , and at the other, the more or less artiﬁ cial standardiza-
tions of demotic ( ‘ hairy ’  language) advocated by hard - core ideologists. Between these 
poles stood: 
 (15)  (a)  The normal language of scientiﬁ c discourse, political debate and serious 
news reporting, the so - called  ‘ mixed ’ variety (
 [mi ' kti]), which 
retained much of the basic structure of  kathar é vousa but borrowed key 
modern terms from demotic in unmodiﬁ ed form and avoided the extreme 
archaism, formulaic phraseology and more complex grammatical struc-
tures of pure  kathar é vousa. 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 465
 (b)  The everyday language of the urban middle class (
 
  ‘ colloquial (language) ’ ), used also for journalism and 
much non - ﬁ ctional writing; it was based on demotic structures supple-
mented with elements from the learned language, and, as the more or 
less natural product of institutionalized diglossia, retained popular and 
learned forms side by side according to context (e.g. 
 [si ' koti] = 
 ‘ liver ’ in a recipe, but 
 [ ' ipar] =  ‘ liver ’ in a medical context etc.).  
 (c)  The language of the mass of the population (
 ), still 
little inﬂ uenced by  kathar é vousa and differentiated by region; this was 
also, with some adaptation, the normal language of creative literature, 
though many authors were already moving towards (b) and beyond.  
 Today ’ s SMG in essence represents a continuation of (15b), with the spoken varieties 
of (15c) becoming increasingly assimilated to it. In its written form, it is the natural 
product of the extension of (15b) into areas previously dominated by (15a) and 
 kathar é vousa proper, and the resulting incorporation of elements from those sources 
has had its impact on speech as well (Kora í s would be pleased, even though the results 
are fairly random). A more or less homogeneous demotic, based on forms of the tra-
ditional spoken language unaffected by  kathar é vousa , has therefore become more of 
an ideal construct than ever, and it survives today chieﬂ y as the written language of 
creative writers with a traditional cast of mind. As such, it may perhaps best be seen 
as a specialized register of SMG. 
 By contrast,  kathar é vousa as a distinct written variety is now virtually extinct, 
though until very recently it retained a toe - hold in the most conservative quarters, 
particularly the law, the church and the armed forces (e.g.  ‘ demotic ’ was sanctioned 
as the language of the courts and legal documents only in 1985, and resistance is still 
in evidence among the older generation of lawyers). A passive ability to read it is still 
widespread among those exposed to it at school, but there is a real barrier between 
younger readers and worthwhile older texts (e.g. Papadiam á ndis ’ work). Its spirit, none 
the less, survives in the continued calquing of words and expressions for new inven-
tions and ideas, while those who know enough of its stylistic traits can still exploit its 
resources to deﬂ ate pomposity or silence a bore (though use of  kathar é vousa otherwise 
is likely to be seen as evidence that the speaker is himself irredeemably pompous and 
boring). More generally, for as long as there are people with the necessary background, 
it remains a source of stylistic variation within SMG. 
 This is not to say, however, that debate about the state of the language is over, or 
that all the problems created by diglossia have yet been fully overcome. Generations 
of training are not forgotten overnight, and the clich é d corpulence of  kathar é vousa , 
with its in - built emphasis on form at the expense of content, often resurfaces in ofﬁ cial 
forms of SMG. There are, furthermore, those who still lament the absence of a fully 
stable and standardized written form of Greek, and criticize writers for  ‘ demoticizing ’ 
learned forms or creating  ‘ neo - purist ’ varieties by using elements alien to the spirit of 
demotic (see, for example, Kriar á s  (1987) ); the old impatience for immediate, deﬁ nitive 
and consistent solutions lives on, hand in hand with a reluctance to accept any speciﬁ c 
solution that presents itself. Most recently there has been renewed concern about the 
detrimental effects of indeclinable foreign loans (chieﬂ y now from English), and a 
revival of the debate about the integrity of the language which has led on to fresh 

466 Modern Greek
consideration of the relationship between Ancient and Modern Greek and the place 
of the ancient language in the school curriculum. 
 All of this notwithstanding, the crucial fact remains that there is for the ﬁ rst time 
since the Hellenistic period a near - universal acceptance of one superordinate form of 
Greek, a variety that is coherent within well - deﬁ ned parameters (see Mackridge  (1985) , 
Holton et al.  (1997) ), and offers a choice of registers appropriate to all spoken and 
written purposes. People can use this language without political implications or per-
sonal risk, and the old embarrassment stemming from uncertainty about correct 
written usage is very largely a thing of the past. 
 Freed from the old ideologies, writers too can enjoy the freedom and pleasure of 
experimenting with their uniquely rich and diverse traditions. Any dissatisfaction in 
literary circles with the blander forms of the new Koine is as natural as that of the 
creative writers of Ptolemaic Alexandria with its ancient equivalent, and one looks 
forward optimistically to the day when there will be an equally universal acceptance 
of the fact that the only fully standardized languages are dead ones, and that experi-
mentation, diversity and change are a cause for celebration rather than concern. See 
Georgakopo ú lou and Silk  (2009) for up - to - date discussion, from several perspectives, 
of different standardizing ideologies in the development of Greek.  
 17.8   A Range of Styles 
 In written Greek a considerable gap between literary and non - literary composition still 
remains, though both the former, with its links to earlier demotic, and the latter, with 
its roots in the learned tradition of  kathar é vousa , have in their different ways moved 
towards the spoken educated norm, as noted. Ofﬁ cial and technical writing, for 
example, tends to have an impersonal, literal - minded and rather stodgy character, 
while creative ﬁ ction and poetry allow in principle for a crisper, more personal and 
inventive use of the resources of the language. News reporting tends to go more with 
the former, comment etc. more with the latter. Spoken Greek is equally varied accord-
ing to context, but colloquial speech has its own characteristic vocabulary (including 
slang, ﬁ llers, exclamations, ritualized greetings etc.) and a style distinguished by high 
levels of idiomaticity and large numbers of set phrases and expressions. 
 We may conclude this chapter with some short examples (see also Mackridge  (1985 : 
338ff)). The passages in (16) below are: (a) a famous poem, (b) an extract from a liter-
ary novel, (c) an extract from a crime novel, (d) a piece taken from the online news 
pages of a  ‘ serious ’  newspaper, and (e) some clauses from a piece of draft legislation. 
The language of the ﬁ rst is a model of reﬁ ned literary demotic, with no learned features 
(note especially the traditional demotic 
 [a ' jeras]  ‘ air/wind ’ , with intrusive glide, 
for standard 
 [a ' eras]). The selections from the two novels illustrate, respectively, 
a straightforward narrative style (albeit with idiosyncracies) and the colloquial lan-
guage of an exchange between a detective and his superior; the former is mainly 
demotic but naturally allows learned features in routine expressions (e.g. the present 
middle participle in 
 [epi ' cimenes eklo ' jes]  ‘ imminent elections ’ ), 
the latter pure urban vernacular. The fourth extract is a typical piece of factual 
journalism, a style in which a range of learned components is naturally embedded 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 467
(note, for example, the many abstract nouns with genitive dependents, the adverbs in 
 - w " [ - os], the consistent use of 
 [ o o ' pios] rather than  p o u [pu] in relative 
clauses, and once again the present middle participles). Finally, the draft legislation 
almost gives the impression of having been translated from  kathar é vousa , with tell - 
tale features and structures carried over; note in particular the hyperbaton, 
including an aorist passive participle, in 
 
 , lit.  ‘ the in - accordance - with 
authority of - law issued enactments ’ . No further commentary is provided, and there 
are no transcriptions. If this book has done its job, none will be needed.
 (16) 
 
 ‘ I am sorry for having let a broad river pass through my ﬁ ngers 
 without drinking a single drop. 
 Now I ’ m sinking into the stone. 
 A small pine - tree in the red soil 
 is all the company I have. 
 Whatever I loved vanished with the houses 
 that were new last summer 
 and collapsed in the autumn wind. ’ 
 Keeley and Sherrard ( 1967 : 47)  
 
 

468 Modern Greek
 ‘ Like every Thursday evening, they had a party. I tried to avoid them, I couldn ’ t stand 
even a  “ good evening ” , and I shut myself in my room. Their high spirits came across as 
half - hearted, though they were optimistic about the imminent election. But I couldn ’ t let 
go of Pavlos ’ weeping. I felt that I would never forget that gesture of his when we were 
parting, as if we were parting for ever. I pressed my face into the pillow and gave myself 
a hard time analysing it into ever smaller movements, deﬁ ning it with every meaning that 
it might conceal. ’ 
 
 ‘ He looks up and stares at me.  “ News about the Albanian? ” , he asks.  “ Nothing since we 
last spoke, sir. We ’ re still questioning him. ”  “ Incriminating evidence? ” Short questions, 
short answers, just what ’ s needed to show that he ’ s (a) up to his ears, (b) efﬁ cient and (c) 

The ‘Language Question’ and its Resolution 469
 ‘ The global economy in the last period has given some signs of a slowing rate of fall and 
has allowed the money markets to recover accordingly, in effect to rise a little from the 
depths of the black hole into which they had fallen with the collapse of so many banks 
last autumn. None the less, estimates of economic activity in the ﬁ rst three months of 
2009 are entirely contrary. Neither the IMF nor the OECD was able to report positive 
messages about the severity of the recession or the time and strength of the recovery. On 
the contrary, continual revisions indicate that the oncoming recession will be much deeper 
than expected. ’ 
 
to the point and speciﬁ c. American ploys, we called this.  “ No, but we have an eye - witness 
who recognized him, as I told you. ”  “ That ’ s not necessarily incriminating evidence. He 
saw him hanging around the house. He didn ’ t see him going in or out. Fingerprints? ” 
 “ Lots. Mainly the couple ’ s. But not the suspect ’ s. No murder weapon. ” He ’ s got me 
talking telegraphese too, the prick. ’ 
 

470 Modern Greek
 Draft Legislation (website of the Ministry of Education and Religious Affairs, April 2009)  
 ‘ Green Paper: Special Education and Learning to secure equal opportunities for individuals 
with disabilities and special educational needs.  
 Article 1: Meaning and Purpose.  
 1.   Disability forms a natural part of human existence and in no circumstance does it 
reduce the right of the individual to participate in or contribute to society.  
 2.   Special Education and Learning (SEL) constitutes the totality of special educational 
services provided for students with disabilities and certiﬁ ed special educational needs, 
that secure for them integrated education, equal opportunities fully to participate in 
and contribute to society, an independent lifestyle, economic self - sufﬁ ciency and 
personal autonomy.  
 3.   The term SEL replaces the term  “ Special Education ” in legislation and in enactments 
issued with the authority of law. ’ 
 Notes 
1  Though born in Odessa and educated in Constantinople, Psych á ris settled in Paris to pursue 
an academic career and claimed to feel comfortable only with the French version of his 
Christian name.  
2  E.g. a word like 
 was pronounced in Ancient Greek as 
 , but in Modern as 
  ‘ thing ’  (beside demotic 
 [ ' prama]). 

 Bibliography 
 Aerts ,  W.J. ( 1965 )  Periphrastica: an investigation into the use of 
 and 
 as auxiliaries 
or pseudo - auxiliaries in Greek from Homer up to the present day ,  Amsterdam . 
 Aerts ,  W.J. and   H.  Hokwerda ( 2002 )  Lexicon on the Chronicle of Morea ,  Groningen . 
 Ag á pios  ( 1664 )  
 
 
 
 
 ,  Venice . 
 Agapit ó s ,  P.A. ( 2006 )  
 
 
  
 ,  Athens . 
 Alexandr í s ,  A.K. ( 1958 )  
 
 
 
 
 , in  
 
 
  3 , 
 143 – 78 . 
 Allen ,  W.S. ( 1958 )  ‘ Some problems of palatalization in Greek  ’ , in  Lingua  7 ( 1957 – 8 ), 
 113 – 33 . 
 Allen ,  W.S. ( 1973 )  Accent and rhythm ,  Cambridge . 
 Allen ,  W.S. ( 1987a ) 3  Vox graeca ,  Cambridge . 
 Allen ,  W.S. ( 1987b )  ‘ The development of the Attic vowel system  ’ , in   J.T.   Killen ,   J.L.   Melena 
and   J. - P.  Olivier (eds.)  Studies in Mycenaean and classical Greek presented to John 
Chadwick ,  Salamanca ,  21 – 32 . 
 Alex í ou ,  M.  ( 1982/3 )  ‘ Literary subversion and the aristocracy in 12th century Byzantium: a 
stylistic analysis of the  Timar í on (ch. 6 – 10) ’ , in  Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies   8 , 
 29 – 45 . 
 Alex í ou ,  S. ( 1980 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ,  Athens (repr. 1986).  
 Alex í ou ,  S. ( 1985 )  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 ,  Athens . 
 Alex í ou ,  S. ( 1994 ) Review of H. Eideneier (1991)   Ptochoprodromos (Cologne) , in  
  42 , 
 396 – 402 . 
 Anagnost ó poulos ,  G.P. ( 1926 )  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , in  
  38 ,  139 – 93 . 
 Anderson ,  G. ( 1993 )  The Second Sophistic ,  London . 
 Andri ó tis ,  N.P. ( 1933 )  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 ’ , 
in  
  
 
 
 
  10 ,  340 – 52 . 
 Andri ó tis ,  N.P. ( 1943/4 )  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , in  
 
 
 
 
 
  10 ,  131 – 85 . 
 Angelou ,  A. (ed.) ( 1971 )  
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Angold ,  M. ( 1984 )  The Byzantine empire 1025 – 1204 ,  London . 

472 Bibliography
 Apostol ó poulos ,  P. ( 1984 )  La langue du roman byzantin Callimaque et Chrysorrho é ,  Athens . 
 Arena ,  R. ( 1994 )  Iscrizioni greche arcaiche di Sicilia e Magna Graecia II: iscrizioni delle colonie 
euboiche ,  Milan . 
 Arena ,  R. ( 1996 )  Iscrizioni greche arcaiche di Sicilia e Magna Graecia III: iscrizioni delle colonie 
achee ,  Milan . 
 Babini ó tis ,  G. and   P.  K ó ndos ( 1967 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 B á denas ,  P. ( 1985 )  ‘ Primeros textos altomedievales en griego vulgar  ’ , in  Erytheia   6.2 ,  163 – 83 . 
 Bakker ,  W. ( 1974 )  Pronomen abundans et conjunctum: a contribution to the history of the 
resumptive pronoun within the relative clause in Greek ,  Amsterdam . 
 Bakker ,  W. ( 1987 )  ‘ The transition from unrhymed to rhymed: the case of the 
 ’ , in 
 H.  Eideneier (ed.) ( 1987 )  Neograeca medii aevi: Text und Ausgabe. Akten zum Symposion 
K ö ln 1986 ,  Cologne ,  25 – 51 . 
 Bakker ,  W. and   A.  van  Gemert  ( 1988 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  ,  Thessaloniki . 
 Barton ě k ,  A. ( 1972 )  Classiﬁ cation of the West Greek dialects at the time about 350   bc ,  Prague . 
 Barton ě k ,  A. ( 2003 )  Handbuch des mykenischen Griechisch ,  Heidelberg . 
 Ba ü ml ,  F.H. ( 1984 )  ‘ Medieval texts and the two theories of oral - formulaic composition: a pro-
posal for a third theory  ’ , in  New Literary History   16.1 :  31 – 49 . 
 Baynes ,  N.H. ( 1955 )  ‘ The  Pratum Spirituale ’  in   N.H.   Baynes (ed.) ( 1955 )  Byzantine studies and 
other essays ,  London ,  261 – 70 . 
 Beaton ,  R. ( 1980 )  Folk poetry of modern Greece ,  Cambridge . 
 Beaton ,  R.  ( 1994 )  An introduction to modern Greek literature ,  Oxford . 
 Beaton ,  R.  ( 1996 ) 2  The medieval Greek romance ,  Cambridge . 
 Beaton ,  R.  and   D.  Ricks  (eds.) ( 1993 )  Digenes Akrites: new approaches to Byzantine heroic 
poetry ,  London . 
 Beck ,  H. - G. ( 1959 )  Kirche und theologische literatur im byzantinischen Reich ,  Munich . 
 Beck ,  H. - G.  ( 1965 )  ‘ Zur byzantinischen  “ M ö nchskronik ”  ’ , in  Speculum Historiale  I ,  188 – 97 . 
 Beck ,  H. - G. ( 1971 )  Geschichte der byzantinischen Volksliteratur  (Byzantinisches Handbuch)  , 
 Munich . 
 Bellocchi ,  M. ( 2008 )  ‘ Epicarmo e la commedia attica antica  ’ , in   A.C.   Cassio (ed.) ( 2008 )  Storia 
delle lingue letterarie greche ,  Florence ,  260 – 91 . 
 Bennet ,  Jr ,  E.L.  and   J. - P.  Olivier (eds.) ( 1973 ,  1976 )  The Pylos tablets transliterated  ( 2 vols.), 
 Rome . 
 Be š evliev ,  V. ( 1963 )  Die protobulgarischen Inschriften ,  Berlin . 
 Be š evliev ,  V. ( 1970 )  ‘ Les inscriptions protobulgares et leur port é e culturelle et historique  ’ , in 
 Byzantinoslavica   32 ,  35 – 57 . 
 Be š evliev ,  V.  ( 1981 )  Die protobulgarische Periode der bulgarischen Geschichte ,  Amsterdam . 
 BGU =   W.  Schubart ,   P.  Viereck  and   F.  Zucker (eds.) ( 1895 – )   Ä gyptische Urkunden aus den 
K ö niglichen (Staatlichen) Museen zu Berlin, Griechische Urkunden ,  Berlin . 
 Bile ,  M.   ( 2006 )  ‘ Le grec du nord - ouest:  é tat des lieux  ’ , in   C.  Brixhe and   G.   Vott é ro  (eds.) ( 2006 ) 
 Peuplements et gen è ses dialectales dans la Gr è ce antique ,  Nancy ,  71 – 98 . 
 Biville ,  F. ( 1992 )  ‘ Les interf é rences entre les lexiques grec et latin, et le dictionnaire  é tymologique 
de P. Chantraine  ’ , in  F.  L é toublon  (ed.) ( 1992 )  La langue et les textes en grec ancien (actes 
du colloque  ‘ Pierre Chantraine ’ ) ,  Amsterdam ,  227 – 40 . 
 Biville ,  F. ( 1993 )  ‘ Grec des romains ou latin des grecs? Ambigu ï t é  de quelques processus 
n é ologiques dans la koin é ’ , in   C.  Brixhe  (ed.) ( 1993a )  La koin é grecque antique I: une 
langue introuvable?   Nancy ,  129 – 40 . 
 Bj ö rck ,  G. ( 1950 )  Das Alpha impurum und die tragische Kunstsprache ,  Uppsala . 

Bibliography 473
 Blass ,  F.  ,   A.  Debrunner and   F.  Rehkopf  ( 1984 ) 16  Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Griechisch , 
 G ö ttingen . (See also Funk 1961.)  
 Bl ü mel ,  W. ( 1982 )  Die aiolischen Dialekte ,  G ö ttingen . 
 B ö hlig ,  G. ( 1956 )  Untersuchungen zum rhetorischen Sprachgebrauch der Byzantiner mit beson-
derer Ber ü cksichtigung der Schriften des Michael Psellos ,  Berlin . 
 Boor ,  C.  de  ( 1963 )  Theophanis chronographia  ( 2 vols.),  Hildesheim . 
 Borgia ,  N. ( 1912 )  Il commentario liturgico di S. Germano patriarca Constantinopolitano e 
versione latina di Anastasio bibliotecario ,  Grottaferrata . 
 Bouboul í dis ,  P. ( 1955 )  
 
  
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Bourguet ,  E.  ( 1927 )  Le dialecte laconien ,  Paris . 
 Bowie ,  A.M. ( 1981 )  The poetic dialect of Sappho and Alcaeus ,  New York . 
 Bowie ,  E.L. ( 1986 )  ‘ Early Greek elegy, symposium and public festival  ’ , in  Journal of Hellenic 
Studies   106 ,  13 – 35 . 
 Brixhe ,  C.  ( 1976 )  Le dialecte grec de Pamphylie: documents et grammaire ,  Paris . 
 Brixhe ,  C.  ( 1985 )  ‘ Bulletin de dialectologie grecque  ’ , in  Revue des  é tudes grecques   98 , 
 260 – 314 . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 1987 ) 2  Essai sur le grec anatolien au d é but de notre  è re ,  Nancy . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 1988a )  ‘ Bulletin de dialectologie grecque  ’ , in  Revue des  é tudes grecques   101 , 
 74 – 112 . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 1988b )  ‘ Dialects et koin é  à Kaﬁ zin ’ , in   J.   Karage ó rghis  and   O.   Masson (eds) ( 1988 ) 
 The history of the Greek language in Cyprus ,  Nicosia ,  167 – 78 . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 1990 )  ‘ Bulletin de dialectologie grecque  ’ , in  Revue des Etudes Grecques   103 , 
 201 – 30 . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 1991 )  ‘ La langue comme reﬂ et de l ' histoire ou les  é l é ments non - doriens du dialecte 
cr é tois ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.)  Sur la Cr è te antique: histoire,  é criture, langues ,  Nancy , 
 43 – 77 . 
 Brixhe ,  C. (ed.) ( 1993a )  La koin é grecque antique I: une langue introuvable?   Nancy . 
 Brixhe ,  C.  ( 1993b )  ‘ Le grec en Carie et Lycie au IVe si è cle ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.) ( 1993a )  La koin é 
grecque antique I: une langue introuvable?   Nancy ,  59 – 82 . 
 Brixhe ,  C.  (ed.) ( 1996 )  La koin é grecque antique II: la concurrence ,  Nancy . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 1997 )  ‘ Un  “ nouveau ”  champ de la dialectologie grecque: le mac é donien ’ , in   A.C. 
 Cassio (ed.)  Kat à di á lekton: atti del III colloquio internazionale di dialectologia greca 
 ( AION  19)  ,  Naples ,  41 – 77 . 
 Brixhe ,  C.  (ed.) ( 1998 )  La koin é grecque antique III: les contacts ,  Nancy . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 2002 )  ‘ Interactions between Greek and Phrygian under the Roman empire  ’ , in   J.N. 
 Adams ,   M.  Janse  and   S.  Swain (eds.)  Bilingualism in ancient society: language contact and 
the written word ,  Oxford ,  246 – 66 . 
 Brixhe ,  C. ( 2006 )  ‘ Situations, sp é ciﬁ cit é s et contraintes de la dialectologie grecque:  à propos de 
quelques questions soulev é es par la Gr è ce centrale  ’ , in   C.  Brixhe and  G.   Vott é ro  (eds.) 
 Peuplements et gen è ses dialectales dans la Gr è ce antique ,  Nancy ,  39 – 69 . 
 Brixhe  C.   and   R.  Hodot  ( 1993 )  ‘ A chacun sa koin é ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.) ( 1993a )  La koin é grecque 
antique I: une langue introuvable?   Nancy ,  7 – 21 . 
 Brixhe ,  C. and   A.  Panay ó tou  ( 1994 )  ‘ Le mac é donien ’ , in   F.  Bader (ed.) ( 1994 )  Langues indo -
 europ é ennes ,  Paris ,  205 – 20 . 
  Brixhe ,  C.  and   G.  Vott é ro (eds.) ( 2006 )  Peuplements et gen è ses dialectales dans la Gr è ce antique , 
 Nancy . 
 Brown ,  P. ( 1989 )  The world of late antiquity ,  London . 
 Brown ,  P.  ( 1997 )  Authority and the sacred: aspects of the Christianisation of the Roman world , 
 Cambridge . 

474 Bibliography
 Browning ,  R. ( 1978 )  ‘ The language of Byzantine literature  ’ , in   S.  Vry ó nis  (ed.)  
 
 
  ,  Malibu ,  103 – 33 . 
 Browning ,  R. ( 1983 ) 2  Medieval and modern Greek ,  Cambridge . 
 Bryer ,  A. ( 1981 )  ‘ The ﬁ rst encounter with the west, AD 1050 – 1204 ’ , in   P.  Whiting  (ed.) ( 1981 ) 
 Byzantium: an introduction ,  Oxford ,  83 – 110 . 
 Buben í k ,  V.  ( 1983 )  The phonological interpretation of Ancient Greek: a pandialectal analysis , 
 Toronto and London . 
 Buben í k ,  V. ( 1989 )  Hellenistic and Roman Greece as a sociolinguistic area  (Current Issues in 
Linguistic Theory 57)  ,  Amsterdam . 
 Buck ,  C.D. ( 1955 2 )  The Greek dialects ,  Chicago . 
 Buckler ,  G. ( 1929 )  Anna Comnene: a study ,  Oxford . 
 Cameron ,  A. ( 1985 )  Procopius and the sixth century ,  Berkeley and Los Angeles . 
 Cameron ,  A. ( 1993 )  The later Roman empire ,  London . 
 Cardona ,  G.R. ( 1990 )  ‘ Il concetto di koin é in linguistica  ’ , in   G.   Sanga (ed.) ( 1990 )  Koin è in 
Italia dalle origini al Cinquecento ,  Bergamo ,  25 – 34 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 1981 )  ‘ Attico  “ volgare ” e Ioni in Atene alla ﬁ ne del 5. secolo a.C . ’ , in  AION  3 , 
 79 – 101 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 1984 )  ‘ Il carattere dei dialetti greci e l ' opposizione dori – ioni ’ ,  AION  6 , 
 113 – 36 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 1986 )  ‘ Continuit à  e riprese arcaizzanti nell ' uso epigraﬁ co dei dialetti greci: il caso 
dell ' eolico d ' Asia  ’ , in  AION   8 ,  131 – 46 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 1989 )  ‘ Lo sviluppo della prosa dorica e le tradizioni occidentali della retorica 
greca ’ , in   D.  Musti and   A.C.  Cassio  (eds.) ( 1989 )  Sicilia e Magna Grecia  ( AION  11) , 
 Naples ,  137 – 57 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 1996 )  ‘ La prose ionienne postclassique et la culture de l ' Asie Mineure  à l ' é poque 
hell é nistique ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.) ( 1996 )  La Koin é grecque antique II: la concurrence ,  Nancy , 
 147 – 70 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 1997 )  ‘ Futuri dorici, dialetto di Siracusa e testo antico dei lirici greci  ’ , in   A.C. 
 Cassio (ed.)  Kat à di á lekton: atti del III colloquio internazionale di dialectologia greca 
 ( AION  19)  ,  Naples ,  187 – 214 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 2005 )  ‘ I dialetti eolici e la lingua della lirica corale  ’ , in   F.  Bertolini  and   F.  Gasti 
(eds.)  Dialetti e lingue letterarie nella Grecia arcaica ,  Pavia ,  13 – 44 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 2006 )  ‘ Homer, Hesiod and the mainland dialects ’ . J.H. Gray Lectures, University 
of Cambridge, May 2006. Unpublished. 
 Cassio ,  A.C. ( 2007 )  ‘ Alcman ’ s text, spoken Laconian and Greek study of Greek dialects  ’ , in   I. 
 Hajnal  (ed.) ( 2007 )  Die altgriechische Dialekte, Wesen und Werden  ( Innsbrucker Beitr ä ge 
zur Sprachwissenschaft  126)  ,  Innsbruck ,  29 – 45 . 
 Cassio ,  A.C. (ed.) ( 2008 )  Storia delle lingue letterarie greche ,  Florence . 
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1956 )  ‘ The Greek dialects and Greek prehistory  ’ , in  Greece and Rome  NS  3 , 
 38 – 50 . 
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1967 ) 2  The decipherment of Linear B ,  Cambridge . 
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1975 )  ‘ The prehistory of the Greek language  ’ , in  Cambridge Ancient History , 
Vol.  II , Part 2, ch. 39,  Cambridge . 
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1976a )  The Mycenaean world ,  Cambridge . 
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1976b )  ‘ Der Beitrag der Sprachwissenschaft zur Rekonstruktion des griechischen 
Fr ü hgeschichte ’ , in  Anzeiger der phil. - hist. Klasse der  Ö sterreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften  113.6 ,  183 – 204 . 
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1976c )  ‘ Who were the Dorians?  ’ in  Parola del Passato   31.166 ,  103 – 17 . 
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1987 )  Linear B and related scripts ,  London . 

Bibliography 475
 Chadwick ,  J. ( 1993 )  ‘ The Thessalian accent  ’ , in  Glotta   70 ,  2 – 14 . 
 Charalamb ó poulos ,  A. ( 1980 )  
  
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Chatzid á kis ,  G.N.  ( 1892 )  Einleitung in die neugriechische Grammatik ,  Leipzig . 
 Chatzid á kis ,  G.N.  ( 1901 )  
  
  ,  Athens . 
 Chatzid á kis ,  G.N.  ( 1905 )  
 
  
  
 ( 2 vols.),  Athens . 
 Chatzid á kis ,  G.N.  ( 1915 )  
 
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Chatzid á kis ,  G.N.  ( 1915/16 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 ’ , 
in  
 
 
 
  12 ,  1 – 27 . 
 Chatziio á nnou ,  K. ( 1999 )  
 
 
 
 
 ,  Nicosia . 
 Chr é stou ,  P.K. ( 1962, 1966, 1970 )  The works of Gregory Palam á s ( 3 vols.),  Thessaloniki . 
 Christ í dis ,  A. - F. ( 1985 )  ‘ Further remarks on modern Greek complementation  ’ , in  
 
 
  
 
 /Studies in Greek Linguistics   3 ,  47 – 72 . 
 Christ í dis ,  A. - F. (ed.) ( 1999 )  
 
 
  
 
 /Dialect enclaves of the 
Greek language ,  Thessaloniki . 
 Christ í dis ,  A. - F. (ed.) ( 2000 )   
  
 
  
 
 /La langue grecque et ses 
dialectes ,  Thessaloniki . 
 CID =   G.  Rougement (ed.) ( 1977 )  Corpus des inscriptions de Delphes I ,  Paris . 
 Clackson ,  J.P.T.  ( 2007 )  Indo - European linguistics: an introduction ,  Cambridge . 
 Clackson ,  J.P.T.  and   G.C.  Horrocks  ( 2007 )  The Blackwell history of the Latin language , 
 Oxford . 
 Clogg ,  R. (ed.) ( 1973 )  The struggle for Greek independence: essays to mark the 150th anniver-
sary of the Greek War of Independence ,  London . 
 Clogg ,  R. (ed.) ( 1976 )  The movement for Greek independence, 1770 – 1821: a collection of 
documents ,  London . 
 Clogg ,  R.   ( 1986 ) 2  A short history of modern Greece ,  Cambridge . 
 Clogg ,  R.   ( 2002 ) 2  A concise history of Greece ,  Cambridge . 
 Cochrane ,  E.  ( 1988 )  Italy 1530 – 1630  (ed.   J.   Kirshner ),  London and New York . 
 Coleman ,  R.G.G. ( 1963 )  ‘ The dialect geography of ancient Greece  ’ , in  Transactions of the 
Philological Society 1983 ,  58 – 126 . 
 Coleman ,  R.G.G. ( 1977 )  ‘ Greek inﬂ uence on Latin syntax  ’ , in  Transactions of the Philological 
Society 1975 ,  101 – 56 . 
 Colvin ,  S. ( 2004 )  ‘ Social dialect in Attica  ’ , in   J.W.H.   Penney (ed.) ( 2004 )  Indo - European per-
spectives: studies in honour of Anna Morpurgo Davies ,  Oxford ,  95 – 108 . 
 Colvin ,  S. ( 2007 )  A historical Greek reader ,  Oxford . 
 Consani ,  C.  ( 1986 )  Persistenza dialettale e diffusione della 
 a Cipro: il caso di Kaﬁ zin  ( Testi 
Linguistici  10)  ,  Pisa . 
 Consani ,  C.  ( 1990 )  ‘ Bilinguismo, diglossia e digraﬁ a nella Grecia antica III: le iscrizione digrafe 
cipriote ’ , in  Studi in memoria di E. Giammarco , Pisa,  63 – 79 . 
 Consani ,  C. ( 1991 )  
 : contributo alla storia del concetto de  ‘ dialetto ’   ( Testi Linguistici 
 18) ,  Pisa . 
 Consani ,  C. ( 1993 )  ‘ La koin é et les dialectes grecs dans la documentation linguistique et la 
r é ﬂ exion m é talinguistique des premiers si è cles de notre  è re ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.)  La koin é 
grecque antique I: une langue introuvable?   Nancy ,  23 – 39 . 
 Consani ,  C. ( 1996 )  ‘ Koinai et koin é dans la documentation  é pigraphique de l ’ Italie m é ridionale ’ , 
in   C.  Brixhe (ed.) ( 1996 )  La koin é grecque antique II: la concurrence ,  Nancy ,  113 – 32 . 
 Cornell ,  T. ( 1995 )  The beginnings of Rome: Italy and Rome from the Bronze Age to the Punic 
Wars  ( c. 1000 – 264  bc)  ,  London . 
 Cowgill ,  W. ( 1966 )  ‘ Ancient Greek dialectology in the light of Mycenaean  ’ , in   H.   Birnbaum and 
 J.  Puhvel (eds.) ( 1966 )  Ancient Indo - European dialects ,  Berkeley and Los Angeles ,  77 – 95 . 

476 Bibliography
 Crespo ,  E. ,   J. - L.   Garc í a - Ram ó n and   A.  Striano (eds.) ( 1993 )  Dialectologica graeca: actas del II 
coloquio internacional de dialectologica griega ,  Madrid . 
 Croke ,  B.  ( 1990 )  ‘ Byzantine chronicle writing I: the early development of Byzantine chronicles  ’ , 
in   E.  Jeffreys ,   B.   Croke and   R.  Scott  (eds.)  Studies in John Malalas ,  Sydney ,  27 – 38 . 
 Crossland ,  R.A. ( 1982 )  ‘ Linguistic problems of the Balkan area in the late prehistoric and early 
classical periods  ’ , in  Cambridge Ancient History , Vol.  III , Part I, ch. 20c,  Cambridge . 
 Crusius ,  M. ( 1584 )  Turcograeciae libri octo ,  Basel . 
 Cupane ,  C. ,  H.   Hunger   and   O.  Kresten  (eds.) ( 1995 )  ‘ Das Register des Patriarchats von 
Konstantinopel, I: Edition und  Ü bersetzung de Urkunden aus den Jahren 1331 – 1350 ,  Vienna . 
 Daskal á kis ,  A. ( 1966 )  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 Athens . 
 Dawkins ,  R.M. ( 1916 )  Modern Greek in Asia Minor ,  Cambridge . 
 Dawkins ,  R.M. ( 1932 )  Leontios Makhairas: recital concerning the sweet land of Cyprus entitled 
Chronicle ( 2 vols.),  Oxford . 
 Dawkins ,  R.M. ( 1953 )  ‘ The Greek language in the Byzantine period  ’ , in   N.H.   Baynes and   H. 
 Moss  (eds.) ( 1953 )  Byzantium: an introduction to east Roman civilization ,  Oxford , 
 252 – 67 . 
 Deffner ,  M. ( 1877 )  ‘ Die Inﬁ nitive in den Pontischen Dialekten  ’ , in  Monatsberichte der k ö niglich -
 preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1877) ,   191ff . 
 Denniston ,  J.D. ( 1952 )  Greek prose style ,  Oxford . 
 Devine ,  A.M. and   L.D.   Stephens ( 1994 )  The prosody of Greek speech ,  Oxford and New York . 
 Dienstbach ,  A. ( 1910 )  De titulorum Prienensium sonis ,  Marburg . 
 Dieten ,  J.L.  van ( 1979 )  ‘ Bemerkungen zur Sprache der sogenannten vulg ä rgriechischen 
Niketasparaphrase ’ , in  Byzantinische Forschungen   VI ,  37 – 77 . 
 Dimar á s ,  A. ( 1974 )   
 
 
 
 ( 2 vols.),  Athens . 
 Dindorf ,  L.  ( 1831 )  Ioannis Malalae chronographia ,  Bonn . 
 Dittenberger ,  W. ( 1903 )  Orientis graeci inscriptiones selectae ,  Berlin . 
 Dobias - Lalou ,  C. ( 2000 )  Le dialecte des inscriptions grecques de Cyr è ne ,  Paris . 
 Dover ,  K.J. ( 1960 )  Greek word order ,  Cambridge . 
 Dover ,  K.J. ( 1987 )  ‘ Language and character in Aristophanes  ’ , in   K.J.   Dover  ( 1987 )  Greek and 
the Greeks ,  Oxford ,  237 – 48 . 
 Dover ,  K.J. ( 1997 )  The evolution of Greek prose style ,  Oxford . 
 Dressler ,  W. ( 1966 )  ‘ Von altgriechischen zum neugriechischen System der Personalpronomina  ’ , 
in  Indogermanische Forschungen   71 ,  39 – 63 . 
 Drettas ,  G. ( 1995 )  Aspects pontiques ,  Paris . 
 Drettas ,  G. ( 1999 )  
  
  
 
 , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis  (ed.) ( 1999 ) 
 
 
  
  
  
 /Dialect enclaves of the Greek language , 
 Thessaloniki ,  15 – 24 (English translation, 91 – 100). 
 Drettas ,  G. ( 2000 )    
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 , in   A. - P.  Christ í dis (ed.) ( 2000 )   
 
 
  
 
 /La langue 
grecque et ses dialectes ,  Thessaloniki ,  35 – 42 (French translation, 103 – 10). 
 Drews ,  R. ( 1988 )  The coming of the Greeks: Indo - European conquests in the Aegean and the 
Near East ,  Princeton . 
 Dubois ,  L.  ( 1986 )  Recherches sur le dialect arcadien I – III ,  Louvain . 
 Dubois ,  L.  ( 1995 )  Inscriptions grecques dialectales de Grande Gr è ce II: colonies eub é ennes/
colonies ioniennes/emporia ,  Geneva .  
 Dubois ,  L.  ( 2002 )  Inscriptions grecques dialectales de Grande Gr è ce I: colonies ach é ennes , 
 Geneva . 
 Duhoux ,  Y. and   A. Morpurgo   Davies (eds.) ( 2008 )  A companion to Linear B: Mycenaean Greek 
texts and their world (I) ,  Louvain - la - Neuve . 

Bibliography 477
 Easterling ,  P.E. and   C.  Handley  (eds.) ( 2001 )  Greek scripts: an illustrated introduction ,  London . 
 Egea ,  J.M. ( 1988 )  Gram á tica de la Cr ó nica de Morea: un estudio sobre el griego medieval  (Veleia 
anejo 4),  Vitoria - Gasteiz . 
 Egea ,  J.M.  ( 1990 )  Documenta selecta ad historiam linguae graecae inlustrandam II (medioaevi) , 
 Vitoria - Gasteiz . 
 Eideneier ,  H. ( 1964 )  ‘ Zu den Ptochoprodromik á ’ , in  Byzantinische Zeitschrift   57 ,  329 – 37 . 
 Eideneier ,  H. ( 1982 )  ‘ Zum Stil der byzantinischen Tierdichtung  ’ , in  Jahrbuch der  Ö sterreichischen 
Byzantinistik  32.3 ,  301 – 6 . 
 Eideneier ,  H. ( 1982/3 )  ‘ Leser -  oder H ö rerkreis? Zur byzantinischen Dichtung in der Volkssprache  ’ , 
in  
  34 ,  119 – 50 . 
 Eideneier ,  H. ( 1987 )  ‘ Der  Ptochoprodromos in schriftlicher und m ü ndlicher  Ü berlieferung ’ , in 
 H.  Eideneier  (ed.) ( 1987 )  Neograeca medii aevi: Text und Ausgabe. Akten zum Symposion 
K ö ln 1986 ,  Cologne ,  101 – 19 . 
 Eideneier ,  H. ( 1991 )  Ptochoprodromos: Einf ü hrung, kritische Ausgabe, deutsche  Ü bersetzung, 
Glossar  (Neograeca medii aevi V),  Cologne . 
 Fabricius ,  C. ( 1962 )  Zu den Jugendschriften des Johannes Chrysostomos: Untersuchungen zum 
Klassizismus des vierten Jahrhunderts ,  Lund . 
 Fallmerayer ,  J.P.  ( 1830 )  Geschichte der Halbinsel Morea w ä hrend des Mittelalters.  Teil 1 : 
Untergang der peloponnesischen Hellenen und Wiederbev ö lkerung des leeren Bodens durch 
slavische Volksst ä mme ,  Stuttgart . 
 Fallmerayer ,  J.P. ( 1835 )  Welchen Einﬂ u β hatte die Besetzung Griechenlands durch die Slawen 
auf das Schicksal der Stadt Athen und der Landschaft Attika? Oder n ä here Begr ü ndung 
der im ersten Bande der  Geschichte der Halbinsel Morea w ä hrend des Mittelalters 
aufgestellten Lehre  ü ber die Enstehung der heutigen Griechen ,  Stuttgart . 
 Fallmerayer ,  J.P.  ( 1836 )  Geschichte der Halbinsel Morea w ä hrend des Mittelalters.  Teil 2 : 
Morea, durch innere Kriege zwischen Franken und Byzantinern verw ü stet und von alba-
nischen Colonisten  ü berschwemmt, wird endlich von den T ü rken erobert. Von 1250 – 1500 
nach Christus ,  T ü bingen . 
 F á vis ,  V.  ( 1911 )  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Ferguson ,  C.A. ( 1959 )  ‘ Diglossia ’ , in  Word   15 ,  325 – 40 . 
 Festugi è re ,  A. - J. ( 1978 )  ‘ Notabilia dans Malalas I  ’ , in  Revue de Philologie   52 ,  221 – 41 . 
 Finkelberg ,  M. ( 1994 )  ‘ The dialect continuum of ancient Greek  ’ , in  Harvard Studies in Classical 
Philology  96 ,  1 – 35 . 
 Foucault ,  J.A.  de ( 1972 )  Recherches sur la langue et le style de Polybe ,  Paris . 
 Friedman ,  V.  ( 2000 )  ‘ After 170 years of Balkan linguistics: whither the millennium?  ’ , in 
 Mediterranean Language Review  12 ,  1 – 15 . 
 Fr ö s é n ,  J.   ( 1974 )  ‘ Prolegomena to a study of the Greek language in the ﬁ rst centuries AD: the 
problem of Koin é and Atticism ’ , dissertation, Helsinki.  
 Funk ,  R.W.  ( 1961 )  A Greek grammar of the New Testament and other early Christian literature 
(trans. of Blass  et al.  1984),  Chicago and London . 
 Garbrah ,  K.A. ( 1978 )  A grammar of the Ionic inscriptions from Erythrae: phonology and mor-
phology ,  Meisenheim . 
 Garc í a Domingo ,  E.  ( 1979 )  Latinismos en la Koin é (en los documentos epigr á ﬁ cos desde el 212 
a. J.C. hasta el 14 d. J.C.) ,  Burgos . 
 Garc í a - Ram ó n ,  J.L. ( 1975 )  Les origines postmyc é niennes du group dialectal  é olien:  é tude lin-
guistique  (suppl. to  Minos 6),  Salamanca . 
  Garc í a - Ram ó n ,  J.L. ( 1987 )  ‘ Geograf í a intradialectal Tesalia: la fon é tica ’ , in  Verbum  10 , 
 101 – 51 . 

478 Bibliography
 Garrett ,  A. ( 1999 )  ‘ A new model of Indo - European sub - grouping and dispersal  ’ , in   S.  Chang , 
 L.  Liaw and   J.  Ruppenhofer (eds.) ( 1999 )  Proceedings of the 25th annual meeting of the 
Berkeley Linguistics Society ,  146 – 56 . 
 Garrett ,  A. ( 2006 )  ‘ Convergence in the formation of Indo - European subgroups: phylogeny and 
chronology ’ , in   P.  Forster  and   C.  Renfrew  (eds.) ( 2006 )  Phylogenetic methods and the 
prehistory of languages ,  Cambridge ,  139 – 51 . 
 GDI =   O.  Hoffmann  (ed.) ( 1891, 1893, 1898 )  Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt - Inschriften 
I – III ,  G ö ttingen . 
 Gemert ,  A.  van ( 1991 )  ‘ Literary antecedents  ’ , in   D.W.   Holton  (ed.) ( 1991a )  Literature and 
society in Renaissance Crete ,  Cambridge ,  49 – 78 . 
 Gemert ,  A.   van and  W.  Bakker ( 1981 )    
 
  
 
  
 in  
  29 , 
 82 – 97 . 
 Georgakopo ú lou ,  A. and   M.  Silk (eds.) ( 2009 )  Standard languages and language standards: 
Greek, past and present ,  Farnham . 
 George ,  C. ( 2005 )  Expressions of agency in ancient Greek ,  Cambridge . 
 Gerhardt ,  C.J. ( 1865 )  Das Rechenbuch des Maximos Planoudes ,  Halle . 
 Giannak í dou ,  A. ( 1997 )  ‘ The landscape of polarity items ’ , PhD dissertation, Groningen.  
 Gignac ,  F.T.  ( 1976 ,  1981 )   A grammar of the Greek papyri of the Roman and Byzantine periods . 
 Vol. I: Phonology, Vol. II: Morphology  ,  Milan . 
 Goodwin ,  W.W. ( 1889 )  Syntax of the moods and tenses of the Greek verb ,  London . 
 Gouma - Peterson ,  Th. (ed.) ( 2000 )  Anna Komnene and her times ,  New York . 
 Grenfell ,  B.P. and   A.S.  Hunt  (eds.) ( 1903 )  The Oxyrhynchus papyri , Vol. III, No. 413, 41.  
 Grenfell ,  B.P. ,   A.S.  Hunt  et al. (eds.) ( 1898 – 1994 )  The Oxyrhynchus papyri  ( 60 vols.), 
 London . 
 Hainsworth ,  B.  ( 1968 )  The ﬂ exibility of the Homeric formula ,  Oxford . 
 Hajnal ,  I. ( 1995 )  Studien zum mykenischen Kasussystem ,  Berlin . 
 Haug ,  D. ( 2002 )  Les phases de l ' é volution de la langue  é pique ,  G ö ttingen . 
 Haury ,  J. ( 1905 – 13 )  Procopii Caesariensis opera omnia ,  Leipzig .  
 Helms ,  P. ( 1971/2 )  ‘ Syntaktische Untersuchungen zu Ioannes Malalas und Georgios Sphrantzes  ’ , 
in  Helikon  11 – 12 ,  309 – 88 . 
 Henderson ,  G.P. ( 1971 )  The revival of Greek thought 1620 – 1830 ,  Edinburgh . 
 Hesseling ,  D.C. ( 1931 )  Jean Moschos ,  Paris . 
 Hesseling ,  D.C. and   H.  Pernot ( 1910 )  Po è mes prodromiques en grec vulgaire ,  Amsterdam . 
 HGI   see  Nachmanson.  
 Hiller von G ä rtringen ,  F. ( 1906 )  Inschriften von Priene ,  Berlin . 
 Hinterberger ,  M. ( 2006 )  ‘ How should we deﬁ ne vernacular literature?  ’   http://www.mml.cam.
ac.uk/greek/grammarofmedievalgreek/unlocking/Hinterberger.pdf 
 Hodot ,  R. ( 1990 )  Le dialecte  é olien d ’ Asie: la langue des inscriptions VII s. a. C. – IV s. p. C .  Paris . 
 Hoekstra ,  A. ( 1965 )  Homeric modiﬁ cations of formulaic prototypes: studies in the development 
of Greek epic diction ,  London . 
 Holton ,  D.W. ( 1983 ) Review of H. Hunger (1981)  Anonyme Metaphrase zu Anna Komnene, 
Alexias XI – XIII: ein Beitrag zur Erschliessung der byzantinischen Umgangssprache , in 
 Journal of Hellenic Studies   103 ,  232 – 3 . 
 Holton ,  D.W. ( 1991a )  Literature and society in Renaissance Crete ,  Cambridge . 
 Holton ,  D.W. ( 1991b )  ‘ Romance ’ , in   D.W.   Holton  (ed.) ( 1991a )  Literature and society in 
Renaissance Crete ,  Cambridge ,  205 – 37 . 
 Holton ,  D.W. ( 1991c )  Erotokritos ,  Bristol . 
 Holton ,  D.W. ( 1993 )  ‘ The formation of the future in modern Greek literary texts up to the 17th 
century ’ , in   N.M.   Panyiot á kis (ed.)  
 
 
 
 /Origini della let-
teratura neogreca ,  Venice ,  118 – 28 . 

Bibliography 479
 Holton ,  D.W. ,   P.  Mackridge  and   I.  Philipp á ki - Warburton  ( 1997 )  Greek: a comprehensive 
grammar of the modern language ,  London and New York . 
 Hooker ,  J.T.  ( 1980 )  Linear B: an introduction ,  Bristol . 
 H ö randner ,  W. ( 1974 )  Theodoros Prodromos: historische Gedichte  (Wiener Byzantinische 
Studien 11),  Vienna . 
 Horrocks ,  G.C. ( 1980 )  ‘ The antiquity of the Greek epic tradition: some new evidence  ’ , in 
 Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society   206 (NS  26 ),  1 – 11 . 
 Horrocks ,  G.C. ( 1983 )  ‘ The order of constituents in modern Greek  ’ , in   G.   Gazdar ,   E.  Klein and 
 G.K.  Pullum (eds) ( 1983 )  Order, concord and constituency ,  Dordrecht ,  95 – 112 . 
 Horrocks ,  G.C. ( 1987 )  ‘ The Ionian epic tradition: was there an Aeolic phase in its development?  ’ 
in   J.T.  Killen ,   J.L.  Melena and   J. - P.  Olivier (eds.) ( 1987 )  Studies in Mycenaean and Classical 
Greek presented to John Chadwick ,  Salamanca ,  269 – 94 . 
 Horrocks ,  G.C. ( 1990 )  ‘ Clitics in Greek: a diachronic review  ’ , in   M.  Roussou and   S.  Panteli 
(eds.) ( 1990 )  Greek outside Greece II ,  Athens ,  35 – 52 . 
 Horrocks ,  G.C. ( 1994 )  ‘ Subjects and conﬁ gurationality: modern Greek clause structure  ’ , in 
 Journal of Linguistics   30.1 ,  81 – 109 . 
 Horrocks ,  G.C. ( 1995 )  ‘ On condition: aspect and modality in the history of Greek  ’ , in  Proceedings 
of the Cambridge Philological Society   41 ,  153 – 73 . 
 Horrocks ,  G.C. ( 1997 )  ‘ Homer ’ s dialect  ’ , in   I.   Morris  and   B.  Powell  (eds.) ( 1997 )  A new com-
panion to Homer ,  Leiden ,  193 – 217 . 
 Hult ,  K. ( 1990 )  Syntactic variation in Greek of the 5th century AD  (Studia Graeca et Latina 
Gothoburgensia LII)  ,  G ö teborg . 
 Humbert ,  J. ( 1930 )  La disparition du datif en grec du 1er au Xe si è cle ,  Paris . 
 Hunger ,  H. ( 1978 )  Die hochsprachliche Literatur der Byzantiner  ( 2 vols.),  Munich . 
 Hunger ,  H. ( 1981 )  Anonyme Metaphrase zu Anna Komnene, Alexias XI – XIII: ein Beitrag zur 
Erschliessung der Byzantinischen Umgangssprache ,  Vienna . 
 Hunger ,  H. and   O.  Kresten  (eds.) ( 1981 )  Das Register des Patriarchats von Konstantinopel, I: 
Edition und  Ü bersetzung der Urkunden aus den Jahren 1315 – 1331 ,  Vienna . 
 Hunt ,  A.S. and   C.C.  Edgar ( 1932 )  Select papyri I: non - literary (private affairs)  (Loeb edn.), 
 Cambridge, MA, and London . 
 Hunt ,  A.S. and   C.C.  Edgar ( 1934 )  Select papyri II: non - literary (public documents)  (Loeb edn.), 
 Cambridge, MA, and London . 
 IErythr =   H.  Engelman and   R.  Merkelbach (eds) ( 1972 – 3 )  Die Inschriften von Erythrai und 
Klazomenai ,  Bonn . 
 IG =  Inscriptiones Graecae consilio et auctoritate Academiae litterarum regiae Borussicae editae 
( 1873 – ),  Berlin .  
 Í mellos ,  S.  ( 1963 )  
 
 
 
 ’ , in  
  67 ,  33 – 46 . 
 Io á nnou ,  P. ( 1986 )   
 
 
 ,  Nicosia . 
 James ,  P.  ( 2007 )  ‘ Retention and retreat: complementary participles and inﬁ nitives with verbs of 
perception and declaration in the Roman and Byzantine documentary papyri ’ , PhD disserta-
tion, University of Cambridge.  
 Janko ,  R.   ( 1982 )  Homer, Hesiod and the Hymns ,  Cambridge . 
 Jannaris ,  A.N. ( 1897 )  An historical Greek grammar, chieﬂ y of the Attic dialect ,  London  (repr. 
1987). 
 Janse ,  M. ( 1993 )  ‘ La position des pronoms personnels enclitiques en grec n é o - testamentaire  à 
la lumi è re des dialectes n é o - hell é niques ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.) ( 1993a )  La koin é grecque antique 
I: une langue introuvable?   Nancy ,  83  – 121 . 
 Janse ,  M. ( 2002 )  ‘ Aspects of bilingualism in the history of the Greek language  ’ , in   J.N.   Adams , 
 M.  Janse and   S.  Swain (eds.)  Bilingualism in ancient society: language contact and the 
written word ,  Oxford ,  332 – 90 . 

480 Bibliography
 Janse ,  M.  (in press)   
 
 , in   Ch.  Tzitzil í s  (ed.)  
 
 , 
 Thessaloniki . 
 Jeffery ,  L.H. ( 1990 2 rev. A.W. Johnston)  The local scripts of archaic Greece: a study of the 
origin of the Greek alphabet and its development from the eighth to the ﬁ fth centuries B.C. , 
 Oxford . 
 Jeffreys ,  E.  ( 1979 )  ‘ The popular Byzantine verse romances of chivalry; work since 1971  ’ , in 
 
  14 ,  20 – 34 . 
 Jeffreys ,  E.  ( 1981 )  ‘ The later Greek romances; a survey  ’ , in   E.  Jeffreys ,   M.  Jeffreys  and   A.   Moffatt 
(eds.) ( 1981 )  Byzantine papers  (Byzantina Australiensia 1),  Canberra ,  116 – 27 . 
 Jeffreys ,  E.  (ed.) ( 1998 )  Digenis Akritis: the Grottaferrata and Escorial versions ,  Cambridge . 
 Jeffreys ,  E.  and   M.  Jeffreys  ( 1979 )  ‘ The traditional style of early demotic Greek verse  ’ , in 
 Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies   5 ,  115 – 39 . 
 Jeffreys ,  E.  and   M.  Jeffreys  ( 1983 )  ‘ The style of Byzantine popular poetry: recent work  ’ , in 
 Okeanos: essays presented to I.  Š ev č enko ( Harvard Ukrainian Studies  7),  309 – 43 . 
 Jeffreys ,  E.  and  M.  Jeffreys  ( 1986 )  ‘ The oral background of Byzantine popular poetry  ’ , in  Oral 
Tradition   1.3 ,  504 – 47 . 
 Jeffreys ,  E. ,   M.  Jeffreys ,   R.  Scott  and   B.   Croke (eds.) ( 1986 )  The chronicle of John Malalas: a 
translation ,  Melbourne . 
 Jeffreys ,  E. ,   B.   Croke and   R.  Scott  (eds.) ( 1990 )  Studies in John Malalas ,  Sydney . 
 Jeffreys ,  E. ,   J.  Haldon  and   R.  Cormack  (eds.) ( 2008 )  The Oxford handbook of Byzantine studies , 
 Oxford . 
 Jeffreys ,  M. ( 1973 )  ‘ Formulas in the  Chronicle of the Morea ’ , in  Dumbarton Oaks Papers   27 , 
 165 – 95 . 
 Jeffreys ,  M. ( 1974 )  ‘ The nature and origins of the political verse  ’ , in  Dumbarton Oaks Papers 
 28 ,  141 – 95 . 
 Jeffreys ,  M. ( 1975 )  ‘ The  Chronicle of the Morea : the primacy of the Greek version  ’ , in 
 Byzantinische Zeitschrift   68 ,  304 – 50 . 
 Jeffreys ,  M. ( 1987 )   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 , in 
 H.  Eideneier (ed.) ( 1987 )  Neograeca medii aevi: Text und Ausgabe. Akten zum Symposion 
K ö ln 1986 ,  Cologne ,  139 – 63 . 
 Jeffreys ,  M. and   E.   Jeffreys  ( 1971 )  ‘ Imberios and Margarona:  the manuscripts, sources and 
edition of a Byzantine verse romance ’ , in  Byantion  41 ,  122 – 60 . 
 Jenkins ,  R.J.H. and   Gy.  Moravcsik  ( 1967 ) 2  Constantine Porphyrogenitus: de administrando 
imperio ,  Washington, DC . 
 Joseph ,  B.D.  ( 1983 )  The synchrony and diachrony of the Balkan inﬁ nitive: a study in areal, 
general and historical linguistics ,  Cambridge . 
 Joseph ,  B.D. ( 1990 )  Morphology and universals in syntactic change: evidence from medieval 
and modern Greek ,  New York and London . 
 Joseph ,  B.D. and   P.A.  Pappas ( 2002 )  ‘ On some recent views concerning the development of the 
Greek future system ’ , in  Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies   26 ,  247 – 73 . 
 Kaczko ,  S. ( 2008a )  ‘ Il giambo ’ , in   A.C.  Cassio  (ed.)  Storia delle lingue letterarie greche ,  Florence , 
 231 – 47 . 
 Kaczko ,  S. ( 2008b )  ‘ La tragedia  ’ , in   A.C.  Cassio  (ed.) ( 2008 )  Storia delle lingue letterarie greche , 
 Florence ,  248 – 59 . 
 Kaimio ,  J. ( 1979 )  The Romans and the Greek language  (Commentationes Humanarum 
Litterarum 64),  Helsinki . 
 Kakrid í s ,  I.T.  ( 1979 )  Homer revisited ,  Lund . 
 Kall é ris ,  J.N. ( 1954, 1976 )  Les anciens mac é doniens:  é tude linguistique et historique  (2 vols.), 
 Athens . 
 Kalon á ros ,  P.P. (ed.) ( 1940 )   
 
 
 ,  Athens . 

Bibliography 481
 Kapsom é nos ,  S.G. ( 1958 )  ‘ Die griechische Sprache zwischen Koine und Neugriechisch  ’ , in 
 Berichte zum XI. Internationalen Byzantinisten - Kongress ,  Munich . 
 Karatz á s ,  S. ( 1944 )  
 
 , in  Byzantinisch - neugriechische Jahrb ü cher  17 , 
 125 – 34 . 
 Karatz á s ,  S. ( 1958 )  L ' origine des dialectes n é o - grecs de l ' Italie m é ridionale  (Collection de 
l ' Institut d ' Etudes Byzantines et N é o - hell é niques de l ' Universit é  de Paris),  Paris . 
 Karyol é mou ,  M. ( 2000 )   
 
  
 ’ , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis  (ed.) ( 2000 )   
 
 
  
 
 /La langue grecque et ses dialectes ,  Thessaloniki ,  43 – 8 
(French translation, 111 – 16). 
 Kati č i č  R. ( 1976 )  Ancient languages of the Balkans ,  The Hague . 
 Katsoy á nnou ,  M. ( 1999 )  
  
 
 
 ’ , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis  (ed.) ( 1999 )  
 
 
  
 
 /Dialect enclaves of the Greek language ,  Thessaloniki ,  39 – 46 
(English translation, 113 – 20). 
 Kazhdan ,  A. and   S.  Franklin ( 1984 )  Studies in Byzantine literature of the 11th and 12th centu-
ries ,  Cambridge and Paris . 
 Keeley ,  E. and   P.  Sherrard  (eds.) ( 1967 )  George Seferis: collected poems ,  London . 
 Kern ,  O. ( 1900 )  Die Inschriften von Magnesia am M ä ander ,  Berlin . 
 Killen ,  J.T.  and   J. - P.  Olivier (eds.) ( 1989 )  The Knossos tablets: a transliteration  (suppl. to  Minos 
11),  Salamanca . 
 Klingenschmitt ,  G. ( 1994 )  ‘ Die Verwandschafts - verh ä ltnisse der indogermanischen Sprachen  ’ , 
in   J.E.   Rasmussen  (ed.)  In honorem Holger Pedersen ,  Wiesbaden ,  235 – 51 . 
 Koder ,  J. ( 1972 )  ‘ Der F ü nfzehnsilber am kaiserlichen Hof um das Jahr 900  ’ , in  Byzantinoslavica 
 33 ,  214 – 19 . 
 Koder ,  J. ( 1983 )  ‘ Kontakion und politischer Vers  ’ , in  Jahrbuch der  Ö sterreichischen Byzantinistik 
 33 ,  45 – 56 . 
 Koder ,  J.M.    Hinterberger  and  O.   Kresten  (eds.) ( 2001 )  Das Register des Patriarchats von 
Konstantinopel, I: Edition und  Ü bersetzung der Urkunden aus den Jahren 1350 – 1363 , 
 Vienna . 
 Koerner ,  R. ( 1981 )  ‘ Vier fr ü he Vertr ä ge zwischen Gemeinwesen und Privatleuten auf grie-
chischen Inschriften  ’ , in  Klio  63 ,  179  – 206 . 
 K ó ndos ,  K. ( 1882 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 Athens . 
 Kondos ó poulos ,  N.G.  ( 1970 )    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 ’ , in  
  
  22 ,  144 – 278 . 
 Kondos ó poulos ,  N.G.  ( 1978 )  L ’ inﬂ uence du fran ç ais sur le grec: emprunts lexicaux et calques 
phras é ologiques ,  Athens . 
 Kondos ó poulos ,  N.G.  ( 2001 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Konem é nos ,  N. ( 1873 )    
 
 
 ,  Corfu . 
 Kora í s ,  A. ( 1964 )  
 
 
  
 ( 4 vols. (A1, A2, B1, B2), ed.   G  Val é tas ),  Athens . 
 K ö rting ,  G. ( 1879 )  De vocibus latinis quae apud Ioannem Malalam chronographum Byzantinum 
inveniuntur ,  M ü nster . 
 Kost á kis ,  A. ( 1951 )  
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Kost á kis ,  A. ( 1980 )  
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Kretschmer ,  P. ( 1896 )  Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache ,  G ö ttingen  (repr. 
1970). 
 Kretschmer ,  P. ( 1905 )  Der heutige lesbische Dialekt, verglichen mit den  ü brigen nordgrie-
chischen Mundarten ,  Vienna . 
 Kretschmer ,  P. ( 1909 )  ‘ Zur Geschichte der griechischen Dialekte: I. Jonier und Ach ä er ’ , in  Glotta 
 1 ,  9 –  34 . 
 Kriar á s ,  E.  ( 1955 )  
 
  
 
  
 
 ,  Athens . 

482 Bibliography
 Kriar á s ,  E.  ( 1969 – )  
 
 
 
 
 ,  Thessaloniki . 
 Kriar á s ,  E.  ( 1987 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  ’ , in   E.  Kriar á s  (1987)  
 
 
 ,  Athens , 
 9 – 26 . 
 Krumbacher ,  K. ( 1886 )  ‘ Ein irrationaler Spirant im Neugriechischen  ’ , in  Sitzungsberichte der 
k ö niglichen bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften ,  359 – 44 . 
 L á mbros ,  S.P. ( 1879, 1880 )  Mikha é l Akomin á tos Khoni á tes: the surviving works  ( 2 vols.), 
 Athens . 
 L á mbros ,  S.P. ( 1908 )  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 ’ ,  
 
  5 ,  20 – 8 . 
 Landsman ,  D. ( 1989 )  ‘ The Greeks ’ sense of language and the 1976 linguistic reforms: illusions 
and disappointments  ’ , in  Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies   13 ,  159 – 82 . 
 Lauxtermann ,  M.D. ( 1999 )  The spring of rhythm: an essay on the political verse and other 
Byzantine metres ,  Vienna . 
 Legrand ,  E.  (ed.) ( 1874 )  Collection des monuments pour servir  à l ’ é tude da la langue n é oell é-
 nique (NS 2),  Paris . 
 Legrand ,  E.  (ed.) ( 1880 – 90 )  Biblioth è que grecque vulgaire  ( 5 vols.),  Paris . 
 Legrand ,  E.  (ed.) ( 1885 – 1906 )  Bibliographie hell é nique ou description raisonn é e des ouvrages 
publi é s en grec par des grecs aux XVe et XVIe si è cles  ( 4 vols.),  Paris . 
 Legrand ,  E.  ( 1891 )  ‘ Po é sies in é dites de Th é odore Prodrome  ’ , in  Revue des Etudes Grecques   4 , 
 70 – 3 . 
 Legrand ,  E.  ( 1894 – 1903 )  Bibliographie hell é nique ou description raisonn é e des ouvrages publi é s 
en grec par des grecs au XVIIe si è cle ,  Paris . 
 Legrand ,  E. ,   L.   Petit  and   H.  Pernot (eds.) ( 1918, 1928 )  Bibliographie hell é nique ou description 
raisonn é e des ouvrages publi é s en grec par des grecs au XVIIIe si è cle  ( 2 vols.),  Paris . 
 Leib ,  B. ( 1937 – 45 )  Anne Comn è ne: Alexiade ( 3 vols.),  Paris . 
 Lend á ri ,  T. ( 2007 )  
 
 
 
 (Livistros and Rodamne): the Vatican 
version ,  Athens . 
 Lend á ri ,  T. and   I.  Manol é ssou  ( 2003 )   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , in  
 
 
 
 
 /
Studies in Greek Linguistics   23 ,  394 – 405 . 
 Lenski ,  N.E.  (ed.) ( 2006 )  The Cambridge companion to the age of Constantine ,  Cambridge and 
New York . 
 L ó pez - Eire ,  A. ( 1986 )  ‘ Fundamentos socioling ü isticos del origen de la Koin é ’ , in  Estudios de 
ling ü istica, dialectolog í a e historia de la lengua griega ,  Salamanca ,  401 – 31 . 
 L ó pez - Eire ,  A. ( 1993 )  ‘ De l ’ Attique  à la Koin é ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.) ( 1993a )  La Koin é grecque 
antique I: une langue introuvable?   Nancy ,  41 – 57 . 
 L ó pez - Eire ,  A. ( 1997 )  ‘ Nouvelles donn é es  à propos de l ' histoire de l ' Attique ’ , in   A.C.   Cassio 
(ed.) ( 1997 )  Kat à di á lekton: atti del III colloquio internazionale di dialectologia greca 
 ( AION  19)  ,  Naples ,  73 – 107 . 
 Loprieno ,  A. ( 1995 )  Ancient Egyptian: a linguistic introduction ,  Cambridge . 
 L ü ddeckens ,  E.  ( 1980 )  ‘ Ä gypten ’ , in   G.  Neumann and   J.   Untermann (eds.) ( 1980 )  Die Sprachen 
im r ö mischen Reich der Kaiserzeit ,  Cologne ,  241 – 66 . 
 Maas ,  M.  (ed.) ( 2005 )  The Cambridge companion to the age of Justinian ,  Cambridge and New 
York . 
 Maas ,  P. ( 1912 )  ‘ Metrische Akklamationen der Byzantiner  ’ , in  Byzantinische Zeitschrift   21 , 
 28 – 51 . 
 Maas ,  P. and   C.A.  Tryp á nis  ( 1963 )  Sancti Romani Melodi cantica I: cantica genuina , 
 Oxford . 

Bibliography 483
 Maas ,  P.  and   C.A.  Tryp á nis  ( 1970 )  Sancti Romani Melodi cantica II: cantica dubia ,  Berlin . 
 MacGillivray ,  J.A. ( 2000 )  Minotaur: Sir Arthur Evans and the archaeology of the Minoan myth , 
 London . 
 Macharadze ,  N.A.  ( 1980 )  ‘ Zur Lautung der griechischen Sprache in der byzantinischen Zeit  ’ , 
in  Jahrbuch der  Ö sterreichischen Byzantinistik   29 ,  144 – 58 . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1985 )  The modern Greek language ,  Oxford . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1987 )  ‘ Greek - speaking Moslems of north - east Turkey: prolegomena to a study 
of the Ophitic sub - dialect of Pontus  ’ , in  Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies   11 , 
 115 – 37 . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1988 )   
 
 
 
 , in  
  28 ,  40 – 5 . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1989 )  Dionysios Solomos ,  Bristol . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1990 )  ‘ Katharevousa (c.1800 – 1974): an obituary for an ofﬁ cial language ’ , in   M. 
 Sar á ﬁ s  and   M.  Eve (eds.) ( 1990 )  Background to contemporary Greece I ,  London ,  25 – 51 . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1993a )  ‘ An editorial problem in medieval Greek texts: the position of the object 
clitic pronoun in the Escorial Digenes Akrites  ’ , in   N.M.   Panayiot á kis  (ed.)  
 
 
 
 /Origini della letteratura neogreca ,  Venice ,  325 – 42 . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1993b )  ‘ The medieval Greek inﬁ nitive (12th – 15th centuries) in the light of 
modern dialectal evidence ’ , MS, University of Oxford.  
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1997 )  ‘ The medieval Greek inﬁ nitive ’ , in   C.N.   Constantinides ,   M.  Panagiotakis , 
 E.  Jeffreys and   A.D.  Angelou (eds.)  Studies in Honour of Robert Browning ,  Venice , 
 191 – 204 . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 1999 )   
 
 
 
 
 
 , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis  (ed.) 
( 1999 )  
 
 
 
 
 /Dialect enclaves of the Greek language , 
 Thessaloniki ,  25 – 30 (English translation, 101 – 6). 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 2000 )  ‘ The position of the weak object pronoun in medieval and modern Greek  ’ , 
in  Yazyk i rechevaya deyatel ’ nost ’ (St Petersburg)   3 ,  133 – 51 . 
 Mackridge ,  P. ( 2009 )  Language and national identity in Greece, 1766 – 1976 ,  Oxford . 
 Macler ,  F. ( 1904 )  Histoire d ' H é raclius par l ' é v ê que S è beos ,  Paris . 
 Magdalino ,  P. ( 1991 )  Tradition and transformation in medieval Byzantium ,  Aldershot . 
 Magdalino ,  P. (ed.) ( 1992 )  The perception of the past in 12th - century Europe ,  London . 
  Magdalino ,  P. ( 1993 )  The empire of Manuel I Komnenos, 1143 – 1180 ,  Cambridge . 
 Majuri ,  A. ( 1919 )  ‘ Una nuova poesia de Teodoro Prodromo  ’ , in  Byzantinische Zeitschrift   23 , 
 397 – 407 . 
 Maloney ,  E.C.  ( 1981 )  Semitic interference in Marcan syntax ,  Chico, CA . 
 Malt é zou ,  K. ( 1991 )  ‘ The historical and social context  ’ , in   D.W.   Holton  (ed.) ( 1991a )  Literature 
and society in Renaissance Crete ,  Cambridge ,  17 – 47 . 
 Mango ,  C.  ( 1980 )  Byzantium: the empire of the New Rome ,  London . 
 Manol é ssou ,  I. ( 2001 )  ‘ The evolution of the demonstrative system in Greek  ’ , in  Journal of Greek 
Linguistics   2 ,  119 – 48 . 
 Manol é ssou ,  I. ( 2003a )   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , in  
 
  24 ,  61 – 88 . 
 Manol é ssou ,  I. ( 2003b )   
 
 
  
 
 
 , in 
 Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Greek linguistics (Rethymno) , e - book. 
 Manol é ssou ,  I. ( 2005a )  ‘ From participles to gerunds  ’ , in   M.  St á vrou and   A.   Terz í  (eds.) ( 2005 ) 
 Advances in Greek generative syntax ,  Amsterdam and Philadelphia ,  241 – 84 . 
 Manol é ssou ,  I. ( 2005b )  ‘ The Greek dialects of southern Italy: an overview  ’ , in  KAM P O Σ : 
Cambridge Papers in Modern Greek  13 ,  103 – 25 . 
 Manol é ssou ,  I. ( 2008 )  ‘ On historical linguistics, linguistic variation and medieval Greek  ’ , in 
 Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies   32.1 ,  63 – 79 . 

484 Bibliography
 Mark ó poulos ,  Th. ( 2009 )  The future in Greek: from ancient to medieval ,  Oxford . 
 Martinet ,  A. ( 1955 )  Economie des changements phon é tiques ,  Berne . 
 Masson ,  O. ( 1961 )  Les inscriptions chypriotes syllabiques ,  Paris . 
 Matthews ,  P.H. ( 1994 )  ‘ Greek and Latin linguistics  ’ , in   G.   Lepschy (ed.)  History of linguistics: 
classical and medieval linguistics ,  London ,  1 – 133 . 
 Maxwell ,  D. ( 1982 )  ‘ Implications of NP accessibility for diachronic syntax  ’ , in  Folia Linguistica 
Historica  3 ,  135 – 52 . 
 Mayser ,  E.  ( 1934 )  Grammatik der griechischen Papyri aus der ptolem ä er Zeit , Vol.  II ,  Berlin . 
 Mayser ,  E.  and   H.  Schmoll ( 1970 )  Grammatik der griechischen Papyri aus der ptolem ä er Zeit , 
Vol.  I ,  Berlin . 
 Meillet ,  A. ( 1965 ) 7  Aper ç u d ' une histoire de la langue grecque ,  Paris . 
 Meisterhans ,  C. ( 1900 )  Grammatik der attischen Inschriften ,  Berlin . 
 Melville - Jones ,  J.R. ( 1988 )  Eustathios of Thessaloniki: the capture of Thessaloniki ,  Canberra . 
 Men á rdos ,  S. ( 1925 )  
 
 
 , in  
  37 ,  35 – 79 . 
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 1985 )  Los dialectos dorios del noroeste ,  Salamanca . 
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 1988 )  ‘ La evoluci ó n del diptongo oi en beocio  ’ , in  Emerita   56 ,  25 – 35 . 
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 1989 )   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , in  
 
 
 
 
 /Studies in Greek Linguistics   9 ,  19 – 36 . 
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 1991 )  ‘ On  〈 Z  〉 for  〈 Δ 〉 in Greek dialectal inscriptions  ’ ,  Sprache  35 , 
 82 – 114 . 
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 1993a )  ‘ Met á tesis de cantidad en j ó nico - á tico y heracleota  ’ , in  Emerita   61 , 
 95 – 134 . 
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 1993b )  ‘ El cambio de  〈 e 〉 en  〈 i 〉 ante vocal en los dialectos griegos:  ¿ una 
cuesti ó n zanjada?  ’ , in   E.  Crespo ,   J. - L.   Garc í a - Ram ó n  and   A.  Striano (eds.) ( 1993 )  Dialectologica 
graeca: actas del II coloquio internacional de dialectologica griega ,  Madrid ,  237  – 59 .  
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 1995 )  ‘ The origin of feminine 
 ’ , in  
 
 
 
 
 /
Studies in Greek Linguistics   15 ,  78 – 89 . 
 M é ndez Dosuna ,  J. ( 2000 ) Review of G.C. Horrocks (1997),  Greek: a history of the language 
and its speakers ,  London , in   Journal of Greek Linguistics   1 ,  274 – 95 . 
 M é rtzios ,  K.D. ( 1949 )   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , in 
 
 
  3 ,  264 – 74 . 
 Meyendorff ,  P. (ed.) ( 1984 )  St. Germanus of Constantinople on the divine liturgy ,  New York . 
 Meyer - L ü bke ,  W. ( 1889 )  Grammatica linguae graecae vulgaris (reproduction de l '  é dition de 
1638 suivie d ' un commentaire grammatical et historique) ,  Paris . 
 Migne,   J.P. (ed.) ( 1857 – 66 )  Patrologiae cursus completus: series graeca ,  Paris . 
 Miklosich ,  F. and   J.  M ü ller (eds.) ( 1860 – 90 )  Acta et diplomata graeca medii aevi sacra et profana 
( 6 vols.),  Vienna . 
 Mimbrera ,  S. ( 2006 )  ‘ Gram á tica del Dorio de Sicilia ’ , PhD dissertation, Universid á d Complutense 
de Madrid.  
 Min á s ,  K. ( 1987 )   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ,  Dodone   16 ,  21 – 60 . 
 Mini á tis ,  I. ( 1870 2 )  
 ,  Venice . 
 Mirambel ,  A. ( 1929 )  Etude descriptive du parler maniote m é ridionale ,  Paris . 
 Mirambel ,  A. ( 1937 )  ‘ Les  é tats de langue dans la Gr è ce actuelle  ’ , in  Conf é rences de l ' Institut de 
Linguistique de l ' Universit é de Paris 5 ,  Paris . 
 Mirambel ,  A. ( 1961 )  ‘ Participe et g é rondif en grec m é di é val et moderne  ’ , in  Bulletin de la Soci é t é 
de Linguistique   56 ,  46 – 79 . 
 Mirambel ,  A. ( 1963 )  ‘ Dialectes n é ohell é niques et syntaxe  ’ , in  Bulletin de la Soci é t é de Linguistique 
 58.1 ,  85 – 134 . 

Bibliography 485
 Mirambel ,  A. ( 1964 )  ‘ Les aspects psychologiques du purisme dans la Gr è ce moderne  ’ , in  Journal 
de Psychologie   57 ,  405 – 36 . 
 M í ssios ,  Ch. ( 1985 )  
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Mitchell ,  S. ( 2007 )  A history of the later Roman empire AD 284 – 641: the transformation of 
the ancient world ,  London . 
 Mits á kis ,  K. ( 1983 )  
 
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Mohler ,  L. ( 1942 )  Kardinal Bessarion als Theologe, Humanist und Staatsman III ,  Paderborn . 
 Molinos Tejada ,  T. ( 1990 )  Los dorismos del Corpus Bucolicorum ,  Amsterdam . 
 Moorhead ,  J. ( 1994 )  Justinian ,  London . 
 Moravcsik ,  Gy. ( 1983 ) 2  Byzantinoturcica I: die Byzantinischen Quellen der Geschichte der 
T ü rkv ö lker ,  Berlin . 
 Morgan ,  G. ( 1954 )  ‘ A Byzantine satirical song?  ’ , in  Byzantinische Zeitschrift   47 ,  292 – 7 . 
 Morpurgo Davies ,  A. ( 1987 )  ‘ The Greek notion of dialect  ’ , in  Verbum  10 ,  7 – 28 . 
 Morpurgo Davies ,  A. ( 1992 )  ‘ Mycenaean, Arcadian, Cyprian and some questions of methodol-
ogy in dialectology  ’ , in   J.P.   Olivier (ed.) ( 1992 )  Mykenaika ,  Paris ,  415 – 32 . 
 Morpurgo Davies ,  A. ( 1993 )  ‘ Geography, history and dialect: the case of Oropos  ’ , in 
 Dialectologica Graeca Miraﬂ ores  (Proceedings of the 2nd International Colloquium of 
Greek Dialectology)  ,  Madrid ,  261 – 79 . 
 Morpurgo Davies ,  A. ( 1998 )  Nineteenth - century linguistics ,  London . 
 Moser ,  A. ( 1988 )  ‘ The history of the perfect periphrases in Greek ’ , PhD dissertation, University 
of Cambridge.  
 Moulton ,  J.H. ,   W.F.  Howard and  N.  Turner ( 1906, 1929, 1963, 1976 )  Grammar of New 
Testament Greek  ( 4 vols.),  Edinburgh . 
 Nachmanson,     E.  (ed.) ( 1913 )  Historische griechische Inschriften (HGI) ,  Bonn . 
 Nachmanson ,  E.  ( 1903 )  Laute und Formen der magnetische Inschriften ,  Uppsala . 
 Nagy ,  G. ( 1968 )  ‘ On dialectal anomalies in Pylian texts  ’ , in  Atti e memorie del primo congresso 
internazionale di Micenologia (1967)   II ,  Rome ,  663 – 9 . 
  Neumann ,  G. ( 1980 )  ‘ Kleinasien ’ , in  G.  Neumann and   J.   Untermann (eds.) ( 1980 )  Die Sprachen 
im r ö mischen Reich der Kaiserzeit ,  Cologne ,  167 – 86 . 
 Newton ,  B. ( 1970 )  Cypriot Greek: its phonology and inﬂ ections ,  The Hague . 
 Newton ,  B. ( 1972 )  The generative interpretation of dialect ,  Cambridge . 
 Nicholas ,  N. ( 1999 )  ‘ The story of  pu: the grammaticalisation in space and time of a modern 
Greek complementiser ’ , PhD dissertation, University of Melbourne.  
 Nicol ,  D.M. ( 1991 )  A biographical dictionary of the Byzantine empire ,  London . 
 Nicol ,  D.M. ( 1992 )  The immortal emperor ,  Cambridge . 
 Oikonom í dis ,  D.E.  ( 1958 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Olivier ,  J. - P. ( 1993 )  ‘ Un m ê me scribe  à Knossos et  à la Can é e au MR III B: du soup ç on  à la 
certitude ’ , in  Bulletin de Correspondance Hell é nique  117 ,  19 – 33 . 
 Olivier ,  J. - P. ( 2007 )  Edition holistique des textes chypro - minoens ,  Pisa and Rome . 
 Ostrogorsky ,  G. ( 1928/9 )  ‘ Die Chronologie des Theophanes im 7. und 8. Jahrhundert  ’ , in 
 Byzantinisch - neugriechische Jahrb ü cher  7 ,  1 – 56 . 
 P.   Eleph . =   O.  Rubensohn (ed.) ( 1907 )  Elephantine - Papyri  ( Ä gyptische Urkunden aus den kgl. 
Museen in Berlin)  ,  Berlin . 
 P.   Fay . =   B.P.  Grenfell ,   A.S.  Hunt  and   D.G.  Hogarth  (eds.) ( 1900 )  Fay û m towns and their papyri , 
 London . 
 P.   Flor =   D.  Comparetti and   G.  Vittelli (eds.) ( 1906 – 15 )  Papiri Fiorentini: documenti pubblici 
e privati dell ' et à romana e byzantina (Papiri Greco - Egizii)  ( 3 vols.),  Milan . 

486 Bibliography
 P.   Merton =   H.I.  Bell and   C.H.  Roberts   (eds.) ( 1948 ),   B.R.  Rees ,   H.I.   Bell  and   J.W.B.   Barns 
(eds.) ( 1959 ),   J.D.  Thomas  (ed.) ( 1967 )  A descriptive catalogue of the Greek papyri in the 
collection of Wilfred Merton ,  London and Dublin . 
 P. Mich.  =  A.E.R.   Boak ,   E.M.   Husselman and   H.C.   Youtie  (eds.) ( 1933 – 51 )  Michigan papyri , 
Ann Arbor;   E.M.   Husselman  (ed.) ( 1971 )  Papyri from Karanis , APA monograph 29;   G.M. 
 Browne (ed.) ( 1970 )  Documentary papyri from the Michigan collection  (American Studies 
in Papyrology 6),  Toronto ;   J.C.  Shelton (ed.) ( 1971 )  Papyri from the Michigan collection , 
 Toronto . 
 P.   Oxy . =   B.P.  Grenfell ,   A.S.  Hunt  et al. (eds.) ( 1898 – )  Oxyrhynchus papyri  ( 60 vols.),  London . 
 P.   Par . =   A.J.  Latronne ,   W. Brunet   de  Presle  and   E.  Egger (eds.) ( 1866 )  Notices et textes des 
papyrus grecs du Mus é e du Louvre et de la Biblioth è que Imp é riale  (Notices et extraits de 
manuscrits de la Biblioth è que Imp é riale et autres biblioth è ques 18), part II,  Paris . 
 P. Ross.   Georg . =   G.  Zeretelli ,   O.  Kr ü ger  and   P.  Jernstedt  (eds) ( 1929 – 35 )  Papyri russischer und 
georgischer Sammlungen ,  Tiﬂ is . 
 Page ,  D.L. ( 1950 )  Greek literary papyri  (  Loeb edn.),  Cambridge, MA, and London . 
 Page ,  D.L. ( 1951 )  Alcman: the Partheneion ,  Cambridge . 
 Palmer ,  L.R. ( 1962 )  ‘ The language of Homer  ’ , in   A.B.   Wace  and   F.  Stubbings  (eds.) ( 1962 )  A 
companion to Homer ,  London ,  75 – 178 . 
 Palmer ,  L.R. ( 1980 )  The Greek language ,  London . 
 Panayiot á kis ,  N.M. ( 1993 )   
 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 
  13 ,  247 – 57 . 
 P á ngalos ,  G.E.  ( 1955 )  
 
  
 
 
 
 I ,  Athens . 
 Pantel í dis ,  N. ( 2001 )  
  
 
 
  
 
 , in  
  
 
 
 
 /Studies in Greek Linguistics   21 ,  550 – 61 . 
 Papad ó poulos ,  A.A. ( 1927 )  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 , 
 Athens . 
 Papad ó poulos ,  T. ( 1975 )  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , 
 Nicosia . 
 Pappas ,  P.A. ( 1999 )  ‘ From  thel ō graphein/ ē thela graphein  to  tha graph ō /tha egrapha : comparing 
the development of futures and counter - factuals in early modern Greek  ’ , in  Ohio State 
University Working Papers in Linguistics   52 ,  15 – 40 . 
 Pappas ,  P.A. ( 2001 )   ‘ The microcosm of morphological change: variation in thel ō  +  inﬁ nitive 
futures and  ē thela   +  inﬁ nitive conditionals in early modern Greek  ’ , in  Diachronica   23 , 
 59 – 92 . 
 Pappas ,  P.A. and   B.D.   Joseph  ( 2001 )  ‘ The development of the Greek future system: setting the 
record straight  ’ , in   G.  Aggour á ki ,   A.  Arvan í ti ,   J.   Davy et al. (eds.) ( 2001 )  Proceedings of 
the 4th international conference on Greek linguistics (Cyprus) ,  Thessaloniki ,  354 – 9 . 
 Pappo ú - Zour á vliova ,  E.  ( 1999 )  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis (ed.) ( 1999 )  
 
 
 
 
 /Dialect 
enclaves of the Greek language ,  Thessaloniki ,  55 – 64 (English translation, 129 – 38). 
 Parry ,  A. (ed.) ( 1971 )  The making of Homeric verse: the collected papers of Milman Parry , 
 Oxford and New York . 
 Parry ,  M. ( 1928a )  L ' é pith è te traditionelle dans Hom è re ,  Paris . 
 Parry ,  M. ( 1928b )  Les formules et la m é trique d ' Hom è re ,  Paris . 
 Parry ,  M. ( 1930 )  ‘ Studies in the epic technique of oral verse making I: Homer and the Homeric 
style ’ , in  Harvard Studies in Classical Philology   41 ,  73 – 147 . 
 Parry ,  M. ( 1932 )  ‘ Studies in the epic technique of oral verse making II: the Homeric language 
as the language of an oral poetry  ’ , in  Harvard Studies in Classical Philology   43 ,  1 – 50 . 

Bibliography 487
 Passa ,  E. ( 2008a )  ‘ L ' epica ’ , in   A.C.  Cassio (ed.) ( 2008 )  Storia delle lingue letterarie greche , 
 Florence ,  99 – 144 . 
 Passa ,  E. ( 2008b )  ‘ L ' elegia e l ' epigramma su pietra  ’ , in   A.C.   Cassio (ed.) ( 2008 )  Storia delle 
lingue letterarie greche ,  Florence ,  205 – 230 . 
 Passow ,  A. ( 1860 )  Popularia carmina Graeciae recentioris ,  Leipzig . 
 Pernot ,  H. ( 1907a )  Collection des monuments pour servir  à l ' é tude de la langue n é o - hell é nique 
(3rd series, I),  Paris . 
 Pernot ,  H. ( 1907b )  Phon é tique des parlers de Chio ,  Paris . 
 Pernot ,  H. ( 1934 )  Introduction  à l ' é tude du dialecte tsakonien ,  Paris . 
 Pertusi ,  A. (ed.) ( 1952 )  Constantine Porphyrogenitus: de thematibus ,  Vatican . 
 Peters ,  M. ( 1986 )  ‘ Zur Frage einer  “ ach ä ischen ” Phase des griechischen Epos  ’ , in   A.   Etter  (ed.) 
( 1986 )  O - o - pe - ro - si: Festschrift f ü r E. Risch zum 75 Geburtstag ,  Berlin and New York , 
 303 – 19 . 
 Philipp á ki - Warburton ,  I. ( 1988 )   
  
 
 , in  
  28 ,  34 – 9 . 
 Philipp á ki - Warburton ,  I. ( 1990 )  ‘ The analysis of the verb group in modern Greek  ’ , in  
 
 
 
 
 /Studies in Greek Linguistics   11 ,  119 – 38 . 
 Philipp á ki - Warburton ,  I. ( 1998 )  ‘ Functional categories and Modern Greek syntax  ’ , in  Linguistic 
Review  15 ,  159 – 86 . 
 Pichard ,  M.  ( 1956 )  Le roman de Callimaque et de Chrysorrho é : texte  é tabli et traduit ,  Paris . 
 Pier í s ,  M. and   A.  Nikol á ou - K ó nnari  ( 2003 )  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 ,  Nicosia . 
 Pietsch ,  E.  ( 2005 )  Die  ‘ Chronographia ’ des Michael Psellos: Kaisergeschichte, Autobiographie 
und Apologie ,  Wiesbaden . 
 Pol í tis ,  A. ( 1981 )    
  
  
 ,  Athens . 
 Pol í tis ,  L.   ( 1966 )   ‘ 
   
 
 ’ , in  
  44 ,  528 – 31 . 
 Pol í tis ,  L. ( 1970 )  ‘ L ' é pop é e byzantine de Dig é nis Akritas: probl è mes de la tradition du texte et des 
rapports avec les chansons akritiques  ’ , in  Atti del convegno internazionale sul tema: la poesia 
epica e la sua formazione  (Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Quaderno 139),  Rome , 
 551 – 81 . 
 Pol í tis ,  L.   (ed.) ( 1986 5 )   
 
  
 ,  Athens . 
 Pol í tis ,  N.G. ( 1914  (many repr.))  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Porzig ,  W. ( 1954 )  ‘ Sprachgeographische Untersuchungen zu den altgriechischen Dialekten  ’ , in 
 Indogermanische Forschungen   61 ,  147 – 69 . 
 Powell ,  B. ( 1996 )  Homer and the origin of the Greek alphabet ,  Cambridge . 
 Powell ,  J.U.  ( 1933 )  New chapters in the history of Greek literature: third series ,  Oxford . 
 Probert ,  P. ( 2006 )  Ancient Greek accentuation ,  Oxford . 
 Probon á s ,  I.K. ( 1985 )  
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Prof í li ,  O.  ( 1999a )   
 
 
 
 , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis  (ed.)  
 
 
 
 
 /Dialect enclaves of the Greek language ,  Thessaloniki ,  31 – 8 (English 
translation, 107 – 12). 
 Prof í li ,  O. ( 1999b )  ‘ H 
   t h " Grico  s t h n Grec í a Salentina  ’ , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis  (ed.) 
( 1999 )  
 
 
 
 
 /Dialect enclaves of the Greek language , 
 Thessaloniki ,  47 – 54 (English translation, 121 – 8). 
 Psych á ris ,  J. ( 1888 ( 1905 ) 2 )   
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Rangav í s ,  K. ( 1877 )  
  
 
 
  ,  Athens . 
 Reinl ,  W. ( 1994 )  ‘ Dialect variation in Mycenaean Greek: reality or myth? ’ MPhil dissertation, 
University of Cambridge. 
 Reinsch ,  D.R. (ed.) ( 1983 )  Critobuli Imbriotae historiae ,  Berlin and New York . 
 Reiske ,  I.I. ( 1829, 1830 )  Constantini Porphyrogeniti imperatoris de caeremoniis aulae byzanti-
nae ( 2 vols.),  Bonn . 

488 Bibliography
 Renauld ,  E.  ( 1920 )  Etude de la langue et du style de Michel Psellos ,  Paris . 
 Renauld ,  E.  ( 1926 – 8 )  Michel Psellos: chronographie ,  Paris . 
 Renfrew ,  C. ( 1987 )  Archaeology and language ,  Cambridge . 
 Ricks ,  D. ( 1990 )  Byzantine heroic poetry ,  Bristol . 
 Ricks ,  D. and   P.  Magdalino (eds.) ( 1998 )  Byzantium and the modern Greek identity ,  Aldershot . 
 Riggs ,  G. ( 1954 )  History of Mehmed the conqueror by Kritovoulos ,  Princeton . 
 Risch ,  E. ( 1954 )  ‘ Die Sprache Alkmans  ’ , in  Museum Helveticum   11 ,  20 – 37 . 
 Risch ,  E. ( 1955 )  ‘ Die Gliederung der griechischen Dialekte in neuer Sicht  ’ , in  Museum Helveticum 
 12 ,  61 – 76 . 
 Risch ,  E. ( 1966 )  ‘ Les diff é rences dialectales dans le myc é nien ’ , in  Proceedings of the 1965 
Cambridge Colloquium on Mycenaean Studies ,  150 – 7 . 
 Risch ,  E. ( 1979 )  ‘ Die griechischen Dialekte im 2. vorchristlichen Jahrtausend  ’ , in  Studi Micenei 
ed Egeo - Anatolici   20 ,  91 – 111 . 
 Risch ,  E. ( 1986 )  ‘ La posizione del dialetto Dorico  ’ , in   D.   Musti  (ed.)  Dori e mondo egeo 
(Colloquio Roma 1983),  Laterza . 
 Rivero ,  M. - L. , and  A.  Terz í  ( 1995 )  ‘ Imperatives, V - movement and logical mood  ’ , in  Journal of 
Linguistics   31 ,  301 – 32 . 
 Robertson ,  A.T. ( 1919 ) 3  A grammar of the Greek New Testament in the light of historical 
research ,  New York . 
 Rohlfs ,  G. ( 1924 )  Griechen und Romanen in Unteritalien ,  Munich . 
 Rohlfs ,  G. ( 1930 )  Etymologisches W ö rterbuch der unteritalienischen Gr ä zit ä t ,  Halle . 
 Rohlfs ,  G. ( 1933 )  Scavi linguistici nella Magna Grecia ,  Rome . 
 Rohlfs ,  G. ( 1950 )  Historische Grammatik der unteritalienischen Gr ä zit ä t ,  Munich . 
 Rohlfs ,  G. ( 1962 )  Neue Beitr ä ge zur Kenntnis der unteritalienischen Gr ä zit ä t ,  Munich . 
 Ros é n ,  H.B. ( 1980 )  ‘ Die Sprachsituation in r ö mischen Palestina  ’ , in   G.   Neumann and  J. 
 Untermann (eds.) ( 1980 )  Die Sprachen in r ö mischen Reich der Kaiserzeit ,  Cologne ,  215 – 40 . 
 Ro ú ssou ,  A. ( 1994 )  ‘ The syntax of complementisers ’ , PhD dissertation, University of London.  
 Ruijgh ,  C.J. ( 1961 )  ‘ Le traitement des sonantes voyelles dans les dialectes grecs et la position 
du myc é nien ’ , in  Mnemosyne  14 ,  193 – 216 . 
 Ruijgh ,  C.J. ( 1966 )  ‘ Sur la position dialectale du myc é nien ’ , in   E.  de  Miro ,   L.  Godart  and   A. 
 Sacconi (eds.)  Atti e memorie del I congresso internazionale di micenologia ,  Rome , 
 115 – 26 . 
 Ruijgh ,  C.J. ( 1967 )  Etudes sur la grammaire et le vocabulaire du grec myc é nien ,  Amsterdam . 
 Ruijgh ,  C.J. ( 1978a ) Review of J.L. Garc í a - Ram ó n (1975) in  Bibliotheca Orientalis   30.5/6 , 
 418 – 23 . 
 Ruijgh ,  C.J. ( 1978b ) Review of S. - T. Teodorsson (1974) in  Mnemosyne  31 ,  79 – 89 . 
 Ruijgh ,  C.J. ( 1984 )  ‘ Le dorien de Th é ocrite: dialecte cyr é nien d ' Alexandrie et d ' Egypte ’ , in 
 Mnemosyne  37 ,  56 – 88 . 
 Ruijgh ,  C.J. ( 1991 )  Scripta minora: mycenologica, homerica, morphophonologica, syntactico -
 semantica (eds.   J.M.  Bremer ,   A.  Rijksbaron  and   F.M.J.   Waanders ),  Amsterdam . 
 Ruip é rez ,  M. ( 1956 )   ‘ Esquisse d ' une histoire du vocalisme grec  ’ , in  Word  12 ,  67 – 81 . 
 Runciman ,  S. ( 1965 )  The fall of Constantinople 1453 ,  Cambridge . 
 Rutherford ,  I. ( 2002 )  ‘ Interference or translationese? Some patterns of Lycian - Greek bilingual-
ism ’ , in   J.N.  Adams ,   M.  Janse  and   S.   Swain  (eds.) ( 2002 )  Bilingualism in ancient society: 
language contact and the written word ,  Oxford ,  197 – 219 . 
 Sakellar í ou ,  M.B.  (ed.) ( 1983 )  Macedonia: 4,000 years of Greek history and civilization ,  Athens . 
 Sandfeld ,  K. ( 1930 )  Linguistique balkanique: probl è mes et r é sultats ,  Paris . 
 S á thas ,  K.  ( 1870 )  
  
 
 ,  Athens . 
 S á thas ,  K.  ( 1872 – 94 )  
 
 ( 6 vols.),  Venice and Paris . 

Bibliography 489
 Saunier ,  G. ( 1983 )   
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 SB =   F.   Preisigke ,   F.  Bilabel  and   E.   Kiessling (eds.) ( 1913 – )  Sammelbuch griechischer Urkunden 
aus  Ä gypten ,  Strasburg and Wiesbaden . 
 Schaller ,  H. ( 1975 )  Die Balkansprachen: eine Einf ü hrung in die Balkanphilologie ,  Heidelberg . 
 Schartau ,  B.  ( 1974, 1976 )  ‘ Nathanaelis Berti monachi sermones quattuordecim  ’ , in  Cahiers de 
l ' Institut du Moyen Age Grec et Latin (Copenhagen)   12 ,  11 – 85 , and  17 ,  70 – 5 . 
 Scherer ,  A. ( 1934 )  Zur Laut - und Formenlehre der milesischen Inschriften ,  Munich . 
 Schmid ,  W. ( 1887 – 97 )  Der Atticismus in seinen Hauptvertretern: von Dionysios von 
Halikarnassos bis auf den zweiten Philostratos  ( 5 vols.),  Stuttgart . 
 Schmitt ,  J. ( 1904 )  The Chronicle of the Morea ,  London  (repr. 1967).  
 Schweizer ,  E.  ( 1898 )  Grammatik der pergamesischen Inschriften ,  Berlin . 
 Schwyzer  =  Schwyzer ,  E.  (ed.) ( 1923 )  Dialectorum graecarum exempla epigraphica potiora , 
 Leipzig . 
 Scott ,  R. ( 1990 )  ‘ Byzantine chronicle writing II: the Byzantine chronicle after Malalas  ’ , in   E. 
 Jeffreys ,   B.   Croke and   R.  Scott  (eds.)  Studies in John Malalas ,  Sydney ,  38 – 54 . 
 SEG =   J.J.E.   Hondius et al. (eds) ( 1923 – )  Supplementum Epigraphicum Graecum ,  Leiden and 
Amsterdam . 
 Š ev č enko ,  I. ( 1981 )  ‘ Levels of style in Byzantine prose  ’ , in  Jahrbuch der  Ö sterreichischen 
Byzantistik  31.1 ,  289 – 312 . 
 Š ev č enko ,  I. ( 1992 )  ‘ Re - reading Constantine Porphyrogenitus  ’ , in   J.   Shepard and   S.  Franklin 
(eds.) ( 1992 )  Byzantine diplomacy: papers from the 24th spring symposium of Byzantine 
studies ,  Aldershot ,  167 – 95 . 
 Sewter ,  E.R.A. ( 1966 )  Fourteen Byzantine rulers: the Chronographia of Michael Psellus , 
 Harmondsworth . 
 Sewter ,  E.R.A. ( 1969 )  The Alexiad of Anna Comnena ,  Harmondsworth . 
 Shawcross ,  T. ( 2009 )  The Chronicle of Morea: historiography in crusader Greece ,  Oxford . 
 Siapkar á s - Pitsill í dis ,  T. ( 1952 )  Le P é trarquisme en Chypre: po è mes d ' amour en dialecte chyp-
riote d ' apr è s un manuscrit du XVIe si è cle ,  Paris . (Greek translation (1976),   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , Athens.)  
 SIG =   W.  Dittenberger (ed.) ( 1915 – 24 )  Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum ,  Leipzig . 
 Smith ,  O. ( 1987 )  ‘ Versions and manuscripts of the  Achilleid ’ , in   H.   Eideneier  (ed.) ( 1987 ) 
 Neograeca medii aevi: Text und Ausgabe. Akten zum Symposion K ö ln 1986  ,  Cologne ,
  315 – 25 . 
 Solta ,  G.R.  ( 1980 )  Einf ü hrung in die Balkanlinguistik mit besonderen R ü cksichtung des Substrats 
und des Balkanlateinischen ,  Darmstadt . 
 Somavera ,  A.  de ( 1709 )  Tesoro della lingua greca volgare ed italiana ,  Paris . 
 Sowa ,  W. ( 2006 )  ‘ Makedonische Glossen in antiken Quellen  ’ , in  Studia Etymologica Cracoviensia 
 11 ,  115 – 33 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1966 )  Contributi sulle fonti del romanzo greco - medievale Florio e Platziaﬂ ora , 
(
 
  
 
  
 26),  Athens . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1975 )  ‘ Problemi relativi ai romanzi greci dell ' et à dei Paleologi I: rapporti tra 
 
  
  
 
 
 ’ , in  
  28 ,  302 – 27 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1976a )  ‘ Problemi relativi ai romanzi greci dell ' et à dei Paleologi II: rapporti tra la 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 ’ , in  
  29 ,  287 – 310 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1976b )  ‘ Imberio e Margarona  e  Florio e Plaziaﬂ ore ’ , in  Miscellanea Neograeca: 
atti del I convegno nazionale di studi neogreci (Palermo 1976)  ,  Palermo ,  181 – 6 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1977 )  ‘ Sul  Teseide  neogreco  ’ , in  Folia Neohellenica   2 ,  157 – 60 . 

490 Bibliography
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1978a )  ‘ Problemi relativi ai romanzi greci dell ' et à dei Paleologi III:  Achilleide , 
Georgill á s,  Callimaco, Beltandro, Libistro, Florio, Imperio ,   
 
 
 
 ’ , 
in  
  30 ,  223 – 79 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1978b )  ‘ L ' inedito  Polemos tis Troados  e l ' Achilleide ’ , in  Byzantinische Zeitschrift 
 71 ,  1 – 9 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1981 )   ‘ L '   Achilleide e la 
 
 
 
 di Gheorghill á s ’ , in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2 ,  23 – 41 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1982 – 3 )  ‘  
 
 pseudoisocrateo e Spaneas  ’ , in  
 
 
 
 
 
  3 ,  143 – 59 . 
 Spadaro ,  G. ( 1987 )  ‘ Edizioni critiche di testi greci medievali in lingua demotica: difﬁ colt à  e 
prospettive ’ , in   H.  Eideneier (ed.) ( 1987 )  Neograeca medii aevi: Text und Ausgabe. Akten 
zum Symposion K ö ln 1986 ,  Cologne ,  327 – 56 . 
 Spiridinov ,  D. ( 1913 )  ‘ Methodius: vita Theophanis Confessoris  ’ , in  Ekklesiastikos Pharos   12 , 
 88 – 96 ,  113 – 63 . 
 Stein ,  T. ( 1915 )  ‘ Zur Formenlehre der Prienischen Inschriften  ’ , in  Glotta   6 ,  97 – 145 . 
 Stery é lis ,  A. ( 1967 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 , in  
  9 ,  413 – 23 . 
 Sturtevant ,  E.H.  ( 1940 ) 2  The pronunciation of Greek and Latin ,  Philadelphia  (repr. 1975).  
 Swain ,  S. ( 1996 )  Hellenism and empire: language, classicism, and power in the Greek world, 
AD 50 – 250 ,  Oxford . 
 Symeon í dis ,  Ch.P. ( 1987 )  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 , in  
 
 
 
 
 /Studies in Greek 
Linguistics   8 ,  251 – 74 . 
 Symp ó sio  ( 1977 ) =  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 ,  Thessaloniki . 
 Tafel ,  T.L.F. ( 1832 )  Eustathii metropolitae Thessalonicensis opusculae ,  T ü bingen . 
 Teodorsson ,  S. - T. ( 1974 )  The phonemic system of the Attic dialect 400 – 340  bc ,  G ö teborg . 
 Teodorsson ,  S. - T. ( 1977 )  The phonology of Ptolemaic Koine ,  G ö teborg . 
 Teodorsson ,  S. - T. ( 1978 )  The phonology of Attic in the Hellenistic period ,  G ö teborg . 
 Thackeray ,  H.St.J. ( 1909 )  A grammar of the Old Testament in Greek according to the Septuagint , 
 Cambridge . 
 Thieme ,  G. ( 1906 )  Die Inschriften von Magnesia am M ä ander und das N.T. ,  G ö ttingen . 
 Thompson ,  R.J.E. ( 1995 )  ‘ Dialect diversity within Mycenaean? ’ MS, University of Cambridge.  
 Thompson ,  R.J.E. ( 1996/7 )  ‘ Dialects in Mycenaean and Mycenaean among the dialects  ’ ,  Minos 
 31/2 ,  313 – 33 . 
 Thompson ,  R.J.E. ( 1998 )  ‘ Instrumentals, datives, locatives and ablatives: the  - f i case form in 
Mycenaean and Homer  ’ , in  Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society   44 ,  219 – 50 . 
 Thompson ,  R.J.E. ( 2002/3 )  ‘ Special vs. normal Mycenaean revisited  ’ , in  Minos ,  37/8 ,  337 – 69 . 
 Thompson ,  R.J.E. ( 2005 )  ‘ Two notes on Mycenaean labial stops  ’ , in   Ž iva Antika   55 ,  107 – 15 . 
 Threatte ,  L.  ( 1980 )  The grammar of Attic inscriptions I: phonology ,  Berlin . 
 Threatte ,  L.  ( 1996 )  The grammar of Attic inscriptions II: morphology ,  Berlin . 
 Thumb ,  A. ( 1893, 1897 )  ‘ Der Dialekt von Amorgos  ’ , in  Indogermanische Forschungen   2 ,  64 –
 125 , and  7 ,  1 – 37 . 
 Thumb ,  A. ( 1901 )  Die griechische Sprache im Zeitalter des Hellenismus: Beitr ä ge zur Geschichte 
und Beurteilung der 
 ,  Strasburg . 
 Thumb ,  A. ( 1906 )  ‘ Prinzipienfrage der 
 forschung  ’ , in  Neue Jahrb ü cher f ü r das klassische 
Altertum   17 ,  246 – 63 . 
 Thumb ,  A. ( 1912 )  Handbook of the modern Greek vernacular  (translation of the 2nd German 
edn., Strasburg 1910),  Edinburgh  (repr. 1964).  

Bibliography 491
 Thurn ,  H. (ed.) ( 2000 )  Ioannis Malalae Chronographia ,  Berlin . 
 Till ,  W. C.  ( 1928 )  Achmimisch - koptische Grammatik ,  Leipzig . 
 Till ,  W. C.  ( 1961 ) 2  Koptische Grammatik (sa ï discher Dialekt) ,  Leipzig . 
 Tomba í dis ,  D.E.  ( 1977 )   ‘ L ' inﬁ nitif dans le dialecte grec du Pont Euxin  ’ , in  Balkan Studies   8 , 
 155 – 74 . 
 Tomi č ,  O.M. ( 2006 )  Balkan sprachbund morpho - syntactic features  (Studies in natural language 
and linguistic theory 67)  ,  Dordrecht . 
 Tonnet ,  H. ( 1993 )  ' Histoire du grec moderne ,  Paris  (translated as 
 
 
 
 , Athens 1995).  
 Toufex í s ,  P.(N.)  ( 2005 )  Das alphabetum vulgaris linguae graecae des deutschen Humanisten 
Martin Crusius (1526 – 1607) ,  Cologne . 
 Toufex í s ,  P.(N.)  ( 2008 )   ‘ Diglossia and register variation in medieval Greek  ’ , in  Byzantine and 
Modern Greek Studies  32.2 ,  203 – 17 . 
 Toynbee ,  A. ( 1973 )  Constantine Porphyrogenitus and his world ,  Oxford . 
 Trapp ,  E. ( 1965 )  ‘ Der Dativ und der Ersatz seiner Funktion in der byzantinischen Vulg ä rdichtung 
bis zur Mitte des 15 Jahrhundert  ’ , in  Jahrbuch der  Ö sterreichischen Byzantinistik   14 , 
 21 – 34 . 
 Trapp ,  E. ( 1971 )  ‘ Pontische Elemente im Wortschatz des Digenes - Epos ’ , in  Revue des Etudes 
Sud - Est Europ é ennes   9 ,  601 – 5 . 
 Trapp ,  E.   ( 1993 )  ‘ Learned and vernacular literature in Byzantium: dichotomy or symbiosis?  ’ , in 
 Dumbarton Oaks Papers  47 ,  115 – 29 . 
 Treadgold ,  W.T.  ( 1997 )  A history of Byzantine state and society ,  Stanford . 
 Treadgold ,  W.T. ( 2001 )  A concise history of Byzantium ,  Basingstoke . 
 Treadgold ,  W.T. ( 2007 )  Early Byzantine historians ,  Basingstoke . 
 Triandafyll í dis ,  M. ( 1938 )  
 
 
 
  –  
 
 , 
 Athens . 
 Triandafyll í dis ,  M. (ed.) ( 1941 )  
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Tribulato ,  O.R.M. ( 2008a )  ‘ La lirica monodica ’ , in   A.C.   Cassio (ed.)  Storia delle lingue letterarie 
greche ,  Florence ,  145 – 75 . 
 Tribulato ,  O.R.M. ( 2008b )  ‘ La lirica corale  ’ , in   A.C.   Cassio (ed.)  Storia delle lingue letterarie 
greche ,  Florence ,  176 – 204 . 
 Trudgill ,  P. ( 2003 )  ‘ Modern Greek dialects: a preliminary classiﬁ cation ’ , in  Journal of Greek 
Linguistics   4 ,  45 – 63 , 
 Tryp á nis ,  C.A. ( 1960 )  ‘ Early medieval Greek 
 ’ , in  Glotta   38 ,  312 – 13 . 
 Tryp á nis ,  C.A. ( 1981 )  Greek poetry from Homer to Sef é ris ,  London . 
 Tsak á li ,  V.  ( 2003 )  ‘ On the Greek verbs  erhome   “ come ” and  pijeno   “ go ”  ’ , MPhil dissertation, 
University of Cambridge. 
 Tsopan á kis ,  A.G. ( 1940 )  Essai sur la phon é tique des parlers de Rhodes ,  Athens . 
 Tsopan á kis ,  A.G. ( 1963 )  
 
 
 
 
 , in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  8 ,  3 – 15 . 
 Turtledove ,  H. ( 1982 )  The Chronicle of Theophanes: an English translation of AM 6095 – 6305 
(AD 602 – 813) ,  Philadelphia . 
 Tz á rtzanos ,  A. ( 1946, 1963 )  
 
 
 
 
 ( 2 vols.),  Athens . 
 Tzi ó vas ,  D. ( 1985 )  ‘ The organic discourse of nationalistic demoticism: a tropological approach  ’ , 
in   M.  Alex í ou  and   V.  Lambr ó poulos (eds.) ( 1985 )  The text and its margins: poststructuralist 
approaches to 20th - century Greek literature ,  New York ,  253 – 77 . 
 Tzitzil í s ,  Ch. ( 2000 )  
 
 
 
 
 , in   A. - F.  Christ í dis 
(ed.) ( 2000 )  H 
 
 
 
 
  
 /La langue grecque et ses dialectes , 
 Thessaloniki ,  15 – 22 (French translation, 83 – 90). 

492 Bibliography
 UPZ =   U.  Wilcken (ed.) ( 1927 )  Urkunden der Ptolem ä erzeit ( Ä ltere Funde), Band I: Papyri aus 
Unter ä gypten ,  Berlin and Leipzig ;   ( 1935 – 57 )  Urkunden der Ptolem ä erzeit ( Ä ltere Funde), 
Band II: Papyri aus Ober ä gypten ,  Berlin . 
 Valaor í tis ,  A. ( 1907 )  
 
 
 
 ,  Athens . 
 Vasilik ó s ,  K. ( 1908 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 ,  Trieste . 
 Ventris ,  M. and   J.  Chadwick ( 1973 ) 2  Documents in Mycenaean Greek ,  Cambridge . 
 Vergote ,  J. ( 1973 )  Grammaire copte ,  Louvain . 
 Vessella ,  C. ( 2008a )  ‘ La prosa  ’ , in   A.C.  Cassio (ed.) ( 2008 )  Storia delle lingue letterarie greche , 
 Florence ,  292 – 320 . 
 Vessella ,  C. ( 2008b )  ‘ Menandro ’ , in   A.C.  Cassio (ed.)  Storia delle lingue letterarie greche , 
 Florence ,  328 – 36 . 
 Viscidi ,  F. ( 1944 )  I prestiti latini nel greco antico e bizantino ,  Padua . 
 Vl á chos ,  A. ( 1967 )  
 , in  
  46 ,  126 – 8 . 
 Vogt ,  A. ( 1935 – 40 )  Constantin VII Porphyrog é n è te: le livre des c é r é monies ,  Paris . 
 Vott é ro ,  G. ( 1996 )  ‘ Koinas et Koin é s en B é otie ’ , in   C.  Brixhe (ed.) ( 1996 )  La Koin é grecque 
antique II: la concurrence ,  Nancy ,  43 – 92 . 
 Vott é ro ,  G. ( 2006 )  ‘ Remarques sur les origines  “ é oliennes ”  du dialecte b é otien ’ , in   C.  Brixhe and 
 G.  Vott é ro  (eds.) ( 2006 )  Peuplements et gen è ses dialectales dans la Gr è ce antique ,  Nancy , 
 99 – 154 . 
 Wackernagel ,  J. ( 1892 )  ‘ Ü ber ein Gesetz der indogermanischen Wortstellung  ’ , in  Indogermanische 
Forschungen   1 ,  333 – 436 . 
 Wallace ,  R. ( 1983 )  ‘ An illusory substratum inﬂ uence in Pamphylian  ’ , in  Glotta   61 ,  5 – 12 . 
 Wassiliewsky ,  B.  and   V.  Jernstedt  (eds.) ( 1896 (repr. 1965))   Cecaumeni Strategicon et incerti 
scriptoris de ofﬁ ciis regi libellus  ,  St Petersburg . 
 Watkins ,  C. ( 1964 )  ‘ Preliminaries to the reconstruction of Indo - European sentence structure  ’ , 
in  Proceedings of the 9th International Congress of Linguists (1962) ,  1035 – 42 . 
 Weierholt ,  K. ( 1963 )  Studien im Sprachgebrauch des Malalas ,  Oslo . 
 West ,  M.L. ( 1974 )  Studies in Greek elegy and iambus ,  Berlin and New York . 
 West ,  M.L.  ( 1988 )  ‘ The rise of the Greek epic  ’ , in  Journal of Hellenic Studies   108 ,  151 – 72 . 
 West ,  M.L.  ( 1992 )  Ancient Greek music ,  Oxford . 
 Whiting ,  P. (ed.) ( 1981 )  Byzantium: an introduction ,  Oxford . 
 Will ,  C. (ed.) ( 1861 )  Acta et scripta ,  Leipzig and Marburg . 
 Willi ,  A. ( 2003 )  The languages of Aristophanes ,  Oxford . 
 Wilson ,  N.G.  ( 1971 )  An anthology of Byzantine prose  (Kleine Texte f ü r Vorlesungen und 
 Ü bungen 189),  Berlin and New York . 
 Wilson ,  N.G. ( 1983 )  Scholars of Byzantium ,  London . 
 Woodard ,  R.D. ( 1986 )   ‘ Dialect differences at Knossos  ’ , in  Kadmos  25 ,  49 – 74 . 
 Woodard ,  R.D. ( 1997 )  Greek writing from Knossos to Homer ,  Oxford . 
 Woolf ,  G. ( 1994 )  ‘ Becoming Roman, staying Greek: culture, identity and the civilizing process  ’ , 
in  Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society   40 ,  116 – 43 . 
 Worrell ,  W.H. ( 1934 )  Coptic sounds ,  Ann Arbor . 
 Wyatt ,  Jr ,  W.F. ( 1970 )  ‘ The prehistory of the Greek dialects  ’ , in  Transactions and Proceedings 
of the American Philological Association  101 ,  557 – 632 . 
 Wyatt   Jr .,  W.F. ( 1992 )  ‘ Homer ’ s linguistic forebears  ’ , in  Journal of Hellenic Studies   112 ,  167 – 73 . 
 Yeorgak á s (Georgak á s) ,  D.S. ( 1982 )  A Graeco - Slavic controversial problem reexamined: the 
 - i t s -  sufﬁ xes in Byzantine medieval and modern Greek, their origin and ethnological impli-
cations ,  Athens . 
 Zilliacus ,  H. ( 1935 )  Zum Kampf der Weltsprachen im sp ä tr ö mischen Reich ,  Helsinki . 
 Z ó ras ,  G.T.  ( 1956 )  
 
 ,  Athens . 

Index
Ancient Greek personal names are given in their familiar Anglo-Latin forms, Byzantine names, 
even the most familiar, as transliterations of their Greek spellings (using ch/ph for chi/phi), and 
modern Greek names in a largely phonetic spelling (using ch for chi, and f for phi except where 
ph- is so well established word-initially that f- spellings might hinder effective use of the index; 
so Philippídis not Filippídis etc.). No system is entirely adequate, and none will ever satisfy all 
bodies of opinion; no further justiﬁ cation is therefore attempted.
accent
ancient, based primarily on pitch 
modulation xx, 5, 41
shift to stress-based system in Koine xx, 5, 
41, 118, 122, 162, 165, 167, 169–70
acclamations 325, 327–33
accusative and inﬁ nitive
replaces factive accusative and participle 
construction in ‘basic’ Koine 92–3
widely replaced by ﬁ nite clauses in ‘basic’ 
Koine (indirect statements and 
indirect commands) 93–4, 143, 
156–7, 180
accusative case
as replacement for dative in northern 
dialects of modern Greek 284–5, 384, 
449
as replacement for dative to mark indirect 
objects 116–17, 179–80, 184–5, 337
development of, as ‘default’ prepositional 
case 107–8, 154, 173, 180, 186, 
246–7, 284–5, 341
in competition with genitive as indirect 
object marker 180, 184–5, 284, 337, 
384
Achaean (putative prehistoric dialect 
group) 18
Achaean League 87–8, 124–5
Doric koine of 87–8
Achilles Tatius 136
adjectives, developments in late antique/
Medieval Greek 289–92
Aelian 136
Aeolic (ancient dialect group) 14, 18, 20, 
23–4, 25, 26
see also Boeotian; Lesbian; Thessalian
Aelius Aristides 135, 136, 140–1
Aeschylus 56, 138
Aetolian League 87–8, 124–5
Doric (North-West Greek) koine of 87–8
akritic songs 214–15, 333–4, 407
Albanian 227–9
Alcaeus 50–1, 99
Alcman 53
Alexander the Great 79, 81
Alexandria 79, 98, 99
Alexandrian poetry 98–9
Aléxios I Komnenós 201–2, 213, 238–9
Ancient Greek
decline of local dialects of (excluding 
Attic) 84–8
deﬁ ning characteristics of within Indo-
European family of languages 9–10
literary and ofﬁ cial dialects of (excluding 
Attic) 43–65
local dialects of 13–41
prehistory and early history of 13–24
see also under names of individual dialects
Anna Komnené 201, 213–14
the Alexiad of 238–40, 264–8

494 Index
Antigonids 80
Antioch 79, 245
Antiphon 68
aorist
active/passive forms of in Medieval 
Greek 303, 318
merger with perfect 102, 131–2, 154, 
176–8, 245, 302, 318, 330
middle forms replaced by passive 103, 
130, 256
middle forms replaced by perfect 
active 247, 256, 341
see also past tense paradigms
aphaeresis 276–7, 329, 332, 336, 353
Apókopos 367–8
Apollonius of Rhodes 98
Apostolic Fathers 152–4
Appian 136
Arab conquests, in Byzantine empire 195–6
Aramaic 114, 148–9
Arcadian dialect 14, 18, 21, 25, 27, 36–7
Arcado-Cypriot (ancient dialect group) 14, 
16, 18, 22
archaic Greek poetry 43–56
see also under names of individual poets
Archilochus 49–50
Archimedes 98
Arianism 192–3
Aristophanes 67, 75–6, 101, 104
Armenia 209
Armenian, as a literary language (early 
medieval) 209
Arrian 136, 146
article (deﬁ nite)
development of in Medieval Greek 289
forms of used as relative pronouns 186, 
293–4, 336
Asia Minor
Christians deported from 431
Greek in 13, 18, 20, 75, 76, 81, 90, 
113–14, 170, 207, 208–9, 212, 384, 
398–404, 406
Asianism 99–100, 134–5
Atatürk, Mustafa Kemal 430
athematic verbs, replaced 102, 187, 303–5
Athenian, Old (modern dialect group) see 
Old Athenian
Athens
as capital of modern Greece 383, 428
in the Hellenistic period 101–2
prestige of ancient, as a factor in the rise 
of Attic 67–70, 73–7
Attalus II, king of Pergamum 95
Attalus III, king of Pergamum 125
Attic declension, eliminated from the 
Koine 83
Attic dialect
adopted as ofﬁ cial language by the 
Macedonian court 80–3
advocated as basis for a modern 
standard 427, 439
as a learned language in Roman/Byzantine/
Ottoman periods 133–41, 213–14, 
231–42, 417–18
as a literary dialect (classical period) 56–9, 
67–72
as an ofﬁ cial dialect (classical 
period) 40–1, 73–7
Athenian, in the Hellenistic/Roman 
periods 101–5, 163–5
classical 3, 13–14, 16, 19, 22, 27, 40–1, 
56–9, 67–77
early development as a ‘standard’ 
language 67–77
see also Great Attic; Koine (Hellenistic/
Roman)
orthography of xviii–xx, 3, 40–1, 85–6
see also Atticism
Attic-Ionic (ancient dialect group) 14, 15, 
16, 22–3
see also Attic; Ionic
Atticism
Atticist grammars and lexica 137–9
‘errors’ in Atticizing authors (Roman/
Byzantine) 141, 213–14, 233–4, 
235–6, 239–40
impact on ‘higher’ Koine writing in the 
Roman empire 135–7, 145–6
impact on learned Christian writing 
(Roman period) 155–9
in the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman 
periods 133–41, 213–14, 231–42, 
264–8, 417–18
in the Second Sophistic (Roman 
period) 133–41
moderated in 3rd century ad (‘literary’ 
Koine) 136–7
origins, as reaction to Asianism 99–100
principal markers of 138–9, 157–8, 
267–8

Index 495
augment, in Medieval Greek/Modern Greek 
dialects 319, 327, 342, 386, 395, 
399, 426
Avars 195
Balkan Sprachbund 227–9
‘barbarian’ invasions of Roman empire 193
Basil, St (the Great) 155
‘be’, verb transferred to middle 
paradigm 154, 256, 303–4
Bergadés 367–8
Bértos, Neílos (Nathanaél) 226
Bessaríon, Cardinal 220, 230
bilingualism
Greek–Coptic 111–13, 169–70
Greek–Latin 98, 126–32, 196–7
Greek–Romance 345–9, 367, 368, 396, 
397, 415
Greek–Semitic 106–7, 111, 114, 147–9
Greek–Turkish 379–81, 398–9, 402–4, 
315–16, 418–19
Bithynia 80, 125
Bithynian dialect (modern) 113
Boeotian dialect (ancient) 13, 14, 19, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 84–7
koineization of 84–7
orthography of 27, 33, 85–6
principal characteristics of 32–3, 86
Bulgarian 227–9
Bulgars 197–8, 199, 325–6
language (Turkic) 325
Byron, Lord 377
Byzantine state
at its height 197–200
decline and fall of 200–5
established 194–7
importance of Greek culture 
within 210–14
Callimachus 98
Callinicus 156–7, 237–8
calques (French-/English-based), in written 
Greek of
modern period 221, 421, 447
see also loanwords/loan translations
Cappadocian (modern dialect 
group) 113–14, 274, 382, 398, 
401–2, 403–4
as part of an ‘eastern’ Koine 402, 404
breakdown of gender system in 401–2
marking of deﬁ niteness in 402
Turkish inﬂ uence on 403–4
Carthage 124
Cassius Dio 137
chain effects, in development of Greek vowel 
system 160–3
Chariton 101
Charlemagne 199
Chatzidákis, Yeóryios 455
Choniátes, Michaél 202
Choniátes, Nikétas 202, 213, 264
choral lyric 53–6
Chortátsis, Yeóryios 392–3
Christianity/Christian literature 134, 147–59, 
191, 192–3, 195, 197–8, 199, 202–3, 
204–5, 225–6, 253–8, 373–4, 419–21
Chronicle of the Morea 216, 349–57
vernacular language of 349–51, 353–7
chronicles 222–5
early/middle Byzantine 245–53
in later medieval vernacular 216, 349–57
Chrysostom, John 155, 225
Cicero 69, 126
Clement of Alexandia 155, 223
Cleopatra 125
clitic pronouns see pronouns, personal 
(clitic)
common Greek (hypothetical source of 
ancient dialects) 9–10, 16
compensatory lengthening 27, 38, 41
complement clauses, ﬁ nite variants replace 
accusative + inﬁ nitive in Koine 93–4, 
143, 157
compounds (nominal/adjectival), popularity 
of in medieval vernacular 330, 332–3, 
342
conditional periphrases
forms of in late antique/Medieval 
Greek see under future indicative
shift of to pluperfect function in Medieval 
Greek 297, 300–1
conjugation, anomalies levelled out of Great 
Attic/Koine 73, 102–3
consonant system
summary of changes in Hellenistic/Roman 
periods 170–2
summary of changes in middle 
ages 274–6, 281–3
Constantine the Great 134, 155, 191, 
192–3

496 Index
Constantinople
educated (Greek) speech of, in modern 
period 384, 421, 448–51
educated speech of, in medieval 
period 338, 341–2
falls to the Ottoman Turks 205
founded 155, 193
Greeks hounded out of 433
taken and sacked by the fourth 
crusade 203
contract verbs
interaction with other imperfective classes 
in medieval Greek 307–12
paradigmatic confusion between different 
classes of; development of in Medieval 
Greek 313–16, 350
co-ordination/parataxis in ‘popular’
Greek throughout the ages 107, 151, 245, 
410
Coptic
as an administrative language 191, 
209–10
as a literary language 191, 209–10
inﬂ uence on vernacular Egyptian 
Koine 111–13, 169, 170
Cretan dialect
ancient 25, 27, 29–30
medieval 216–17, 360–2, 366–8
modern 277, 281, 283, 382, 392–8
Cretan Renaissance 361–2, 392–3
Crete
medieval 360–1
modern 382, 392–3
crusades 202–3
Crusius, Martin 416
Cynicism 98
Cypriot dialect
ancient 14, 18, 21, 121, 274
forming part of an ‘eastern’ Koine 
(Hellenistic/Roman) 113–14, 402
medieval 216–17, 274–5, 356–7, 360, 
362–6
modern 274–5, 281, 382, 306–7, 
391–2
phonological characteristics of medieval/
modern 362–4
syllabary (ancient) 12–13
Cyprus
medieval 198, 360
modern 339, 433–5, 436, 437
Danubian principalities (Moldavia and 
Wallachia) 373, 375, 415, 417, 421, 
427
dative case
absence in ‘vernacular’ literature (12th 
century onwards) 337, 350
decline of in Koine/early medieval 
vernacular (replaced by accusative/
genitive/prepositional phrases) 97, 
107–8, 116–17, 179–80, 184–5, 186, 
284–5
obsolete in early modern colloquial 387, 
440
residual in educated colloquial (from 12th 
century) 284, 341–2
restricted popular use in Roman/early 
Byzantine periods 152, 246–7, 255, 
330
retained in ‘formal’ written styles 
throughout Roman/Byzantine/
Ottoman/modern periods 138, 246–7, 
255, 262, 264, 284, 341–2, 418, 
422–3, 453
declensional anomaly, levelled out in Attic/
Koine 82–3, 102, 285–6
degemination
absence of in Cypriot (and other south-
eastern dialects) 274, 363
in late antique/Medieval Greek 274
Dellapórtas, Linárdos 366–7
Delmoúzos, Aléxandros 457–60
demonstrative pronouns see pronouns, 
demonstrative
Demosthenes 69, 72, 79
‘demotic’ Greek in modern period
exempliﬁ ed 406–11, 423–6, 442–5, 
446–52
historical morphology of 284–323
historical phonology of 274–7, 281–4
now distanced from modern standard 411, 
460, 461–2
see also standard Modern Greek
Psycháris and 446–52, 454–7, 459
Solomós and 442–5
see also demoticism
demoticism (20th century)
educational aims of the movement 457–60
linked with left-wing politics 457–62
progress of 454–62
roots of 419–21, 442–5

Index 497
‘demoticizing’ written styles, for practical/
educational purposes 418–21
dialects (ancient) see under Ancient Greek
decline of 84–8
dialects (medieval/modern)
northern group, origins and principal 
markers of 338, 384, 404–6
survey of major divisions (Pontic and 
Cappadocian/south-eastern/Cretan-
Cycladic/Peloponnesian-Heptanesian/
Tsakonian/Old Athenian/northern/
South Italian) 381–4
see also under names of individual dialects
dictatorship
of Metaxás 431
of ‘the Colonels’ 434–5, 461–2
Digenés Akrities, epic of 214–15, 333–7
impact as model for ‘vernacular’ 
literature 215–16, 334
diglossia 3–5
in antiquity 84–8 (Koine vs. local dialect), 
99–100, 133–7 (Attic vs. Koine)
in Byzantium 151–66 (learned vs. 
vernacular)
in the modern period 413–27, 438–62
(semi-)resolved 461–6
Diocletian 191
Diodorus Siculus 131
Dionysius of Halicarnassus 126
Dodecanese, medieval literature from 391
Doric (ancient dialect group)
in literature 53–6, 66, 99
koines 87–8
see North-West Greek; Peloponnesian 
Doric; West Greek
Doúkas, Neófytos 439
dual number
abandoned in Great Attic/Koine 73, 138
East Greek (ancient dialect group/putative 
source thereof) 10, 14–15, 16, 19–24, 
24–6, 36–41
ecclesiastical Greek (ancient/
medieval) 155–9, 220–1, 256–8, 
270–1, 419–20
educated speech (late Byzantine/early 
modern) 338, 341–2, 384–8, 419–21, 
448–9, 451
as factor in development of modern 
standard 383–4
Educational Society 458–60
Egypt 80, 88–9, 111
Koine in 111–13, 114–22, 163–87
see also bilingualism, Greek–Coptic
Elean (ancient North-West Greek 
dialect) 30–1, 121, 123
elegiac and iambic poetry (ancient) 49–50
Epictetus 146–7
Epicureanism 98
Erotókritos, language of 393–8
Euclid 98
Euripides 56, 80, 138
Eusebius 140, 155, 223, 251
Eustáthios, Bishop 201–2
exegesis of Christian texts 225–6, 256–8
Faliéros, Marínos 367
ﬁ nal consonants, prehistoric loss of (other 
than [n, r, s]) 10
ﬁ nal [n]
in Ancient Greek 171–2
in medieval and modern Cypriot 274–5, 
363
in Medieval and Modern Greek 274–5, 
327, 353, 411, 424, 450
ﬁ rst declension (a-stems)
begins to merge with third declension in 
Hellenistic/Roman Koine 120–1, 
181
merger with third declension continued in 
Medieval/Modern Greek 286–8, 
425
origin of imparisyllabic paradigms 
in 287–8
simpliﬁ ed in Medieval Greek 285–6
folk songs 215, 333–4, 406–11
and demoticism 406–7
oral/demotic character of 334, 336–7, 
406–11, 320–1
standardization of language of 406–7, 
460
Fóskolos, Márkos Andónios 393
Frederick Otto, Prince (= King Otto of 
Greece) 378, 428
Friendly Society 376–7
future indicative
decline of through sound change; 
alternations with present indicative/
aorist subjunctive 117, 129, 156, 240, 
256, 264, 298–9, 317, 330

498 Index
future indicative (Cont’d)
decline of through sound change; growth 
of inﬁ nitival and ‘subjunctive’ 
periphrases (future and 
conditional) 117, 130–1, 174, 228–9, 
256, 298–302, 317, 341, 350–1, 355, 
387, 392, 396, 412
Galen 137
gender, breakdown of distinctions of in 
Pontic/Cappadocian 401–2
generics, in late antiquity/early middle 
ages 248, 256
genitive case
as indirect object marker in southern 
dialects (modern) and standard 
Modern Greek 284, 384
as replacement for dative to mark indirect 
object 116, 180, 184–5, 284–5
in competition with accusative as indirect 
object marker 116–17, 179–80, 
184–5, 284–5, 337, 384
Germanós, St 197, 256–8
gerunds, development of from active 
participles see participles
Glínos, Dimítris 459
Glykás, Michaél 215, 227, 337
Gorgias 68–9, 100
Great Attic (the basis for the Koine) 75–7, 
80–3
markers of 82
Great Idea, the (modern Greek 
irredentism) 428–31
Greece, modern 428–37
civil war in 432–3
German occupation of 431–2, 460
irredentism (the Great Idea) 428–31
joins the EC (now EU) 436–7
relations with Turkey 428–31, 433–7
war of independence 377–8
Greek culture (ancient), impact of on Roman 
world 132–7
Greek language
in eastern Roman empire and its Byzantine 
successor 125–6, 196–7, 207–12
in Hellenistic world 88–9
in Ottoman empire 374, 379–81
origins and development of modern 
standard 382–3, 385–8, 411, 448–9, 
451, 461–5
see also Ancient Greek; Atticism; 
bilingualism; ‘demotic’
Greek; diglossia; katharévousa; Koine; 
standard Modern
Greek; vernacular
Gregory, St, of Nazianzus 155
Gregory, St, of Nyssa 155
hagiography 213, 225–6, 253–6
Hannibal 124
Hebrew 106, 107, 147–52
Heliodorus 101
Hellenistic period, deﬁ ned 80
Hellenistic poetry 98–9
Heptanesian dialects (modern, = dialects of 
the Ionian islands) 382, 384
role in formation of modern 
standard 382–4, 386–8, 442–4, 448
Herákleios 195–6
Hermas (the Shepherd) 153
Herodas 105
Herodes Atticus 136
Herodotus 60–4, 74, 231, 233, 239–40, 
242
hesychasts 204–5
Hippocrates 63
Hipponax 105
Homer 44–9
inﬂ uence of language of 49–59
iconoclasm 197–8, 251, 257
imperfect indicative
endings of see past tense paradigms
modal use in late antique/Byzantine 
Koine 154, 237–8
modal use with na[na] in medieval 
vernacular 299
imperfect passive paradigm, remodelled in 
Medieval Greek 320–3
imperfective stem formation, remodelled in 
Medieval Greek 303–16, 276
inﬁ nitives
articular
elimination of from medieval 
vernacular 297
expanded in Hellenistic/Roman/
Byzantine Koine 94–6, 129–30, 
156–7, 245, 260, 262
partly preserved in South Italian and 
Anatolian dialects 389–91, 400

Index 499
use of, steadily reduced in late antique/
Medieval/early Modern Greek 93–4, 
105, 129, 157, 173, 245, 271, 296–7, 
336–7, 341, 387, 389–91, 411
see also accusative and inﬁ nitive; 
subjunctive
interrogative pronouns see pronouns, 
interrogative
Ionic (ancient dialect group) 13, 14, 18, 22, 
27, 37–40
Atticization of 76–7
demise as a written variety 77
development of regional standard 
(ofﬁ cial) 14, 60–1, 76
early regularization of anomalies in 73
in elegiac/iambic verse of archaic 
period 49–50
in Homer 44–9
inﬂ uence of, on literary/ofﬁ cial 
Attic 67–75
literary standard based on 60–5
Ioustinianós (Justinian) 194–5
irredentism (modern Greek) 428–31
Isocrates 69, 99–100, 134, 136
isoglosses (ancient) 15–17, 18–24
Istanbul (= Constantinople after 1930) 433
Italian, South (modern dialect group) 383, 
388–91
inﬁ nitives preserved in 389–91
Italós, Ioánnes 201
Jewish(-Christian) literature in Koine 106–8, 
147–52
see also Semitic substrate in Jewish Greek
Justinian see Ioustinianós
Kakridís, Ioánnis 460
Kálvos, Andréas 443
Kapodístrias, Count Ioánnis 377, 378
Karamanlís, Konstandínos 433, 435–6
Karamanlís, Kóstas 437
Katartzís, Dimítrios 421
katharévousa (‘purifying’ language) 411, 
421, 445–6, 451, 452–4, 458, 459, 
460, 461, 462, 464–5
demise of, as distinct variety 464–5
impact on development of standard 
Modern Greek 461–5
origins and development of 439–42, 
445–6, 452–4
Kekauménos 222, 262–4
kleftic ballads 375, 407
klefts 374–5, 376
Kodrikás, Panayótis 440–2
Koine (Byzantine)
as a spectrum of written styles (archaizing)
academic/ecclesiastical 220–1, 268–70
administrative (ofﬁ cial) 221–2, 270–1
Christian exegesis and 
hagiography 225–6, 253–8
chronography 222–5, 245–53
other secular writing 222, 258–68
as inherited from antiquity 220, 245–51, 
253–6
Atticized/belletristric variety of 213–14, 
233–7
see also Attic dialect; Atticism
deﬁ ned to exclude writing based on 
colloquial varieties (for which see 
vernacular) 220
late, as basis for educated written style of 
17th/18th centuries 221, 226–7, 
271–2
middle-late, as emerging written style 
combining modern syntax with ancient 
morphology/lexicon 224–5, 226–7, 
251–3, 258–68, 68–70, 270–1, 341–2
Koine (Hellenistic/Roman)
as concrete expression of the notion 
‘Greek’ 87
as a continuum of spoken dialects 84, 
88–9, 110–14
as extension of Great Attic (an ofﬁ cial 
variety) 77, 80–3, 88–96, 141–3
as language of technical/philosophical 
discourse 98
as literary dialect in Hellenistic/Roman 
periods 96–8, 146–54, 253–6
early development of 80–3, 90–4
in Asia Minor (‘eastern’ Koine) 113–14
in Egypt 106–8, 111–13, 114–21
in the Middle East 113
in ‘old’ Greece 84–7, 88
impact of Attic/Atticism
on Christian writing in 155–6, 157–8
on ofﬁ cial/literary styles of 134–6, 
144–6, 155–6, 157–8
in contact with Latin 126–32
in popular Christian writing 137, 147–57, 
253–6

500 Index
Koine (Hellenistic/Roman) (Cont’d)
literary reactions to, in Hellenistic 
world 98–100
morphological/syntactic developments 
in 92–6, 97, 102–3, 105, 107–10, 
114–17, 120–2, 172–87
phonological developments in 117–20, 
122, 160–3, 170–2
spoken varieties of, in Roman empire
in Athens 163–5
in Egypt 114–17, 165–70, 172–87
status and role in Hellenistic 
kingdoms 88–90, 96–8, 100–8
status and role in ‘old’ Greece 83–8
status and role in Roman empire 124–6
survival of ‘Ionic’ vocabulary in 97–8
written varieties in Roman empire (stylistic 
levels) 144–59
Koine (in Ottoman empire)
as inherited from Byzantium 413–19
developed as written standard (de facto 
‘ofﬁ cial’ language of independent 
Greece) 422–3, 426–7, 441–2
Koine (modern)
as range of spoken/written styles
subsumed under standard Modern 
Greek 464–5
as written standard in 17th to early 19th 
centuries 422–3, 426–7, 441–2
koineization, of ancient dialects 84–8
Kolokotrónis, Theódoros 377
Komnené, Anna 201, 213, 238–40
metaphrase of the Alexiad 264–8
prose style of the Alexiad 238–40
Komnenós, Aléxios I 200–2, 213, 238, 240
Konstantínos VII Porphyrogénnetos 198, 
222, 258–62
different stylistic ‘levels’ used by 259–62
Konstantínos VIII Palaiológos 205
Koraís, Adamándios 439–42
linguistic programme of 439
Kornáros, Vitséntzos 393, 394
see also Erotókritos
Kostandás, Dimítrios 421
Kritóboulos, Michaél 231, 240–2
Laconian (ancient dialect) 19, 27, 28–9, 53
revival of written use in Roman period 
84
see also Tsakonian
language question
origins of the modern debate 426–7
progress and resolution of 438–66
see also diglossia
Latin
inﬂ uence on Greek 126–32, 143
rapid decline of, in Byzantine 
empire 196–7, 207–8
Lausanne, treaty of 431
Lesbian (ancient dialect) 14, 18, 23–4, 25, 
26, 27, 34–5, 50–2
revival of in Roman times 84
Linear A 1
Linear B see Mycenaean Greek
loanwords/loan translations
from Ancient Greek into 
katharévousa 447–8
from Ancient Greek into modern 
demotic 447–8
from English 421, 466
from French into medieval vernacular 345, 
349, 366
from French into written styles, including 
katharévousa 221, 421, 447
from Italian into medieval vernacular 345, 
397, 415, 443
from Latin into Hellenistic/Roman 
Koine 127–8, 245
from Romanian into modern 
vernacular 415
from Turkish into modern 
vernacular 379–81, 402, 403–4, 411, 
415, 418–19, 447
Longus 101, 136
Lucian 136
Lysias 68–9, 138
Macedonia
partly incorporated into modern Greek 
state 429
rise of ancient 79–80
Macedonian dynasty (Byzantine) 198
Macedonian language (ancient) 79–80
Macedonian language (modern) 227
Machairás, Leóndios 360, 362–6
Makários, Archbishop 435
Makriyánnis, General 381, 411
Malálas, Ioánnes 224, 245–51
Manassés, Konstantínos 224, 227
Manzikert (Malazgirt), battle of 200

Index 501
Mauríkios 328, 329
Mavrokordátos, Aléxandros 417, 418
Medieval Greek (spoken)
principal morphological/syntactic 
developments 277–81, 284–323
principal phonological 
developments 274–7, 281–4
see also Koine (Byzantine)
Menander, conservatism of language 
of 102–5
metaphrases (transposition of texts between 
registers) 213, 227, 264–8
Metochités, Theódoros 220
middle voice
loss of distinct aorist/future forms of, in 
Hellenistic/Roman Koine 103, 130, 
256
mime 101, 105
Mithridates, king of Pontus 125
Moisiódax, Iosípos 421–3, 439
Moldavia see Danubian principalities
monophysitism 195, 209, 210
Morea (= Peloponnese), despotate of 204, 
205, 349
Móschos, Ioánnis 225–6, 253–6
Mycenaean Greek (and Linear B script) xviii, 
1–2, 10–13, 19–21, 22
nasal sufﬁ xes, extended in imperfective 
stems in medieval vernacular 
305–7
National Language Society 457
National Schism 430
Navaríno, battle of 377
negative polarity items, in Medieval/Modern 
Greek 347–8
neologism, in written Modern Greek of 19th 
century 442, 447–8
Neroulós, Iákovos Rízos 442
neuter paradigms, in late antique/Medieval 
Greek 288–9
New Comedy 101–5
New Testament 114, 147–52
as model for ‘popular’ literary 
language 137, 152–5, 253–6
possible Semitisms in 147–9
‘Nika’ riot 194–5, 248–50
nominal morphology and syntax
in Hellenistic/Roman Koine see Koine 
(Hellenistic/Roman)
in Medieval/Modern Greek 284–96
see also under individual topics
nominative, as default case for ‘topical’ 
adjuncts 148–9, 181–3, 245–6
for nominative absolute see also 
participles
Normans 200, 212, 238–9
northern dialects (modern) 382, 404–6
North-West Greek (ancient dialect 
group) 13, 14, 15, 16, 21–2, 23, 24, 
25, 30–2
North-West Greek Koine (Hellenistic/
Roman) 87–8
Noumás (perodical of demoticist 
movement) 457, 460
Oikonómos, Konstandínos 439
Old Athenian (modern dialect group, now 
largely defunct) 274, 276, 283, 382, 
384
Old Athenian School (modern literary 
movement) 445
optative
decline/elimination of from Koine 82, 
102–3, 130, 143
replacements for 130
retention as Atticizing trait (Roman/
Byzantine/Ottoman) 138, 141, 233, 
234, 240
Origen 155, 223
Orthodox church
in Byzantine empire 195, 197–8, 199, 204, 
205
role of in Ottoman period; linguistic 
implications 373–4
see also Christianity/Christian literature
orthography
conservatism of Greek, and 
implications 3–4
of Boeotian 27, 33, 85–6
of classical Attic (basis for Koine and 
modern standard) xviii–xx, 3, 40–1, 
85–6
Otto, King see Frederick Otto, Prince
Ottoman empire
decline of 374–7
expansion of 204–5, 373
fate of Greek speakers in 373–8, 
428–31
Ottoman Turks 204–5, 371–8

502 Index
Palaiológos, Andrónikos 343
Palamás, Kostís 455
Pállis, Aléxandros 456
Pamphylian (ancient dialect) 15, 111
Papadópoulos, Yeóryios 434, 435
Papandréou, Andréas 436, 437
Papandréou, George Andréas 437
Papandréou, Yeóryios 432, 434, 461
papyri (Egyptian) 90, 101, 105, 114–17, 
172–87
participles, decline of in Roman Koine/
medieval vernacular 94, 97, 131–2, 
181–3, 245–6, 253, 255, 297–8
past tense paradigms, remodelled 109–10, 
143–4, 176–8, 318–19, 320–3, 350, 
384
Patriarchate, role of in Ottoman empire 
374
Pausanias 136
Peloponnesian dialects (modern) 382–3
as principal vernacular component of 
modern standard 383
Peloponnesian Doric (ancient dialect 
group) 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 22, 23, 24, 
26, 28–30
local tenacity of 87–8
perfect (and pluperfect) indicative
conditional periphrases acquire pluperfect 
function 297, 300–1
emergence/development of periphrases 
for 131–2, 176–8, 297–8, 300–1, 
346–7, 387, 396, 425
forms of perfect merge with aorist see 
under aorist
forms of perfect replace aorist middles/
irregular aorist actives 181, 188, 
269–70
Pergamum 79, 90, 95, 125
periphrases see future indicative; perfect 
indicative
Persia 63, 66, 67, 79, 80, 124, 195
Persian invasions of the east Roman/
Byzantine empire 195, 252
personal lyric 50–3
see also Alcaeus; Sappho
person-number morphology, development of 
in medieval vernacular 316–23
Petcheneks 200, 201, 238, 260
Phanariots 375, 417
Philippídis, Daniíl 421
Philo 106
Philostratus 134
Phocian (ancient dialect) 16, 31–2
Phokás, Nikephóros 198, 331
phonological developments
in Hellenistic/Roman Koine see Koine 
(Hellenistic/Roman)
in Medieval/Modern Greek 274–7, 281–4
Phótios 199, 220
Phrygia/Phrygian 113–14, 208–9
Phrynichus 138–9, 149–50, 154
Pindar 53, 54–6
Pisidian 113–14, 208–9
Planoúdes, Máximos 204, 221, 268–70
Plato 69, 71–2, 134, 138
pluperfect see under perfect indicative
Plutarch 79, 96, 131, 136
political verse form (decapentesyllable)
in Erotókritos 393–4
in folk songs 393–4, 408
origins and development of 327–9, 336
Polybius 97–8, 100
Pontic (modern dialect group) 113, 114, 
274, 276, 281, 382, 398–403, 404
as part of an ‘eastern’ Koine 402, 404
marking of deﬁ niteness in 402
partial breakdown of gender marking 
in 401–2
retention of inﬁ nitives in Oﬁ tic dialect 
of 389–90, 400
Pontus 80, 125, 203, 382, 398, 402
‘Poor Pródromos’ (Ptochopródromos), poems 
of 215, 337–42
Constantinopolitanisms in 338
mixed language of 215, 338, 341–2
pre-Greek languages of the Balkan 
peninsula 9, 19
prepositional phrases
expanded adverbial use in basic Koine/
medieval vernacular 97, 107–8, 284–5
replacing possessive pronouns in Koine 
(Hellenistic) 92, 104, 143
prepositions
reduced in number in medieval 
vernacular 262, 284–5
supported by adverbs in medieval 
vernacular 262, 285, 345
with accusative as default case in basic 
Koine/medieval vernacular 108, 154, 
173, 180, 284–5, 341, 342, 355

Index 503
prescriptive grammar, origins of the 
tradition 99
present tense paradigms, development of in 
medieval vernacular 319–20
Priene 81, 90
Pródromos, Theódoros 201, 227, 337–8
Prokópios 231–2
pronouns, in late antique/Medieval/Modern 
Greek
demonstrative 128–9, 148–9, 250, 295–6, 
327
indeﬁ nite 292–3, 347–8
interrogative 293
personal (clitic) 108–9, 173, 174, 332, 
354–5
and word order/word-order 
change 108–9, 173, 277–81, 341, 
348, 395–7 (Cretan), 401 (Pontic), 
411
personal (strong/emphatic) 97, 104, 107, 
186, 296, 356–7
reﬂ exive 356–7
relative 186–7, 262, 293–5, 336, 341
Protagoras 68
Protobulgarian inscriptions 325–7
Proto-Indo-European 9, 16
Psellós, Michaél 199, 233–4
Psycháris, Jean 446–51, 454, 455, 456, 457, 
458, 459
artiﬁ ciality of demotic of 448, 451
Constantinopolitanisms of My 
Journey 449–51
critique of katharévousa 447–8
Ptolemies 80, 125, 166
quantitative metathesis 38
Rangavís, Aléxandros Rízos 445
Rangavís, Konstandínos 452
rebétika 407
‘reduced’ paradigms (verbs in velar and 
vowel stems) 310–12
reﬂ exive pronouns see pronouns, 
reﬂ exive
relative pronouns see pronouns, relative
rhetoric
in ancient Athens 67–9, 134
in Byzantium 212–14, 233, 338, 344
in the Cretan Renaissance 397
in the Hellenistic world 99–100
in the Ottoman period 417–18, 422–3
in Psycháris’ written demotic 451–2
in the Roman empire 126, 133–7, 155–6
Rhodes, Doric koine of 87
Roídis, Emmanouíl 446
Romance languages
in contact with Greek in later middle 
ages 345–9, 367, 368, 396, 397, 
415
romances (literary genre)
Byzantine (learned) 212, 214, 217
Byzantine (vernacular) 217–19, 342–5, 
357–9
‘mixed’ language of 215–16, 218–19, 
334, 344–5, 359
Hellenistic and Roman 100–1
Romania (Danubian principalities)/
Romanian 227–9, 373–4, 375, 415, 
417, 421, 427
Romanós II 331
Rome
Greek and Roman cultures in 
contact 132–3
history of the later empire 191–3
philhellenism in 134
progressive domination of the Hellenistic 
world 124–5
see also bilingualism, Greek–Latin; Latin; 
loanwords/loan translations
Rus/Russians 198, 200, 258, 260
Sachlíkes, Stéphanos 366
Salah ad-Din (Saladin) 202
Sappho 50–2, 99
second declension (o-stems)
development of ‘short’ forms in [-is/-in] < 
[-ios/-ion] 175–6
short-form neuters standardized in 
medieval vernacular 175–6, 288, 333
Second Sophistic 133–7, 213
Seféris, Yórgos (Yeóryios Seferiádis) 456, 
467
Seljuk Turks 200, 202, 212, 238
Semitic substrate in Jewish Greek 106–7, 
111, 114, 147–9
Septuagint 106–8
Hebraisms in 106, 107
language of 106–8
Serbian 227–9
Simítis, Kóstas 437

504 Index
Slavs, occupy the Balkan peninsula 195, 196
Smyrna (Izmir) 430–1, 433
Socrates 68
Soﬁ anós, Nikólaos 384, 385, 387
16th-century grammar of educated 
colloquial 385–8
Solomós, Dionysios 443, 445
as a demoticist 443–5
sophists 67–9, 133–7
Sophocles 56, 57–9, 138
Sophron 101
south-eastern dialects (modern dialect 
group) 274, 277, 281, 362–4, 382,
see also Cypriot 391–8
South Italian dialects (modern dialect 
group) 274, 276, 383, 388–91, 
405
inﬁ nitive preserved in 389–91
Soútsos, Aléxandros 446
Soútsos, Panayótis 446
Spanéas 217, 227, 337, 357
standard Modern Greek (SMG)
as the new Koine 465–6
distinct from traditional demotic 
varieties 397, 410–11, 462–5
origins, development, and characteristics 
of 383, 384–8, 410–11, 418–21, 
439–40, 447–9, 451, 462–6
stylistic varieties of 466–70
Stoicism 98
Strabo 136
subjunctive
clauses introduced by ‘ﬁ nal’ conjunctions 
replace accusative + inﬁ nitive and 
control inﬁ nitives 93–4, 105, 129, 
143, 156, 173–4, 245, 271, 296–7, 
301–2, 355, 388
formal renewal with (i”) na [(i)na] (+ future 
use), na [na] becoming a mood 
marker 152, 228–9, 277–8, 280, 
298–9, 301, 341, 355, 387, 412
merge with present/future indicative 
through sound change 117, 129, 
317–18
subordination and word order, in Medieval 
Greek 277–81
sufﬁ xes (imperfective stem), in the medieval 
vernacular 306–13, 354
Symeón Metaphrastés 213
see also metaphrases
synizesis, in Ancient and Medieval Greek 38, 
165, 169, 276, 329, 336, 411, 424
Syria 80, 125, 136, 245, 333
Syriac 114, 136, 245
as a literary language 131, 209
themes (Byzantine military/administrative 
districts) 196
breakdown of administration based 
on 200
Theocritus 89, 98, 99
Theodoret 157–8
Theophánes 224, 251–3, 258
Theophanó 330, 331–2
Thessalian (ancient dialect) 13, 14, 23, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 33–4, 121, 169, 404–5
third-declension (consonant-stems/i- and 
u-stems/eu-stems)
nominative/accusative plural of consonant 
stems fall together 117, 123, 175, 
286–7, 387
progressive merger of with ﬁ rst declension 
(masculine and feminine 
nouns) 120–1, 181, 286–8, 350, 387, 
425
Thrasymachus 68
Thucydides 64, 68, 70–1, 231
style of 68, 73, 74, 75
Timaríon 337
tragedy, language of Athenian 56–9, 67, 83
transposition (of texts between registers) see 
metaphrases
Triandafyllídis, Manólis 459, 460, 461, 462
demotic grammar of 460, 461
Triklínios, Demétrios 204
Tróilos, Ioánnis Andréas 393
Tsakonian 88, 274, 382
Turkey, relations with Greece since 
independence 428–31, 433, 434, 435, 
436, 437
Turkish
impact on Greek 379–81, 402–4, 411, 
415, 418
inﬂ uence on Cappadocian 402, 403–4
inﬂ uence on Pontic 402–3
Tzétzes, Ioánnes 201, 227
Tzimiskés, Ioánnes 198, 331
Venice, rise of/role in Byzantine 
affairs 200–3

Index 505
Venizélos, Elefthérios 429–31, 458
verb morphology and syntax
in Hellenistic/Roman Koine see Koine 
(Hellenistic/Roman)
in Medieval/Modern Greek 277–81, 
296–323
see also under individual topics
vernacular, early modern (including 
vernacular literature) 379–411, 423–6
see also ‘demotic’ Greek; educated speech
vernacular, medieval (spoken and 
written) 214–20, 273–323, 325–68
emergence in literature 214–19, 333–4, 
337–8, 342–5, 357–9
morphological/syntactic developments 
in 277–81, 284–323
phonological developments in 274–7, 
281–4
see also under names of speciﬁ c texts
Vernardákis, Dimítrios 446
Vilarás, Ioánnis 443
vowel system
in Hellenistic/Roman Koine 160–70
in the middle ages 274, 283, 404–6
VSO order, conditioned by clitic placement/
standardized
in medieval vernacular 108–9, 173, 
277–81
Wallachia see Danubian principalities
war of independence 377–8
West Greek (ancient dialect group/putative 
source thereof) 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 
21, 22, 23, 24–6, 27, 28–32
koines based on 87–8
tenacity of 87–8
word order/word-order change 108–9, 173, 
277–81, 341, 348, 396–7, 401, 411
Ypsilándis, Aléxandros Prince 377
Zonarás, Ioánnes 224

