 
 
 
  The Orchard Keeper  
 
 Cormac Mccarthy 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 The tree was down and cut to lengths, the sections spread 
and jumbled over the grass. There was a stocky man with three 
ﬁngers bound up in a dirty bandage with a splint. With him were a 
Negro and a young man, the three of them gathered about the butt 
of the tree. The stocky man laid aside the saw and he and the 
Negro took hold of the piece of fence and strained and grunted until 
they got the log turned over. The man got to one knee and peered 
into the cut. We best come in this way, he said. The Negro picked 
up the crosscut and he and the man began sawing again. They 
sawed for a time and then the man said, Hold it. Goddamn, that's it 
again. They stopped and lifted the blade from the cut and peered 
down into the tree. Uh-huh, said the Negro. It sho is now, ain't it? 
 
 The young man came over to see. Here, said the man, look 
sideways here. See? He looked. All the way up here? he said. Yep, 
the man said. He took hold of the twisted wrought-iron, the mangled 
fragment of the fence, and shook it. It didn't shake. It's growed all 
through the tree, the man said. We cain't cut no more on it. Damned 
old elum's bad enough on a saw. 
 
 The Negro was nodding his head. Yessa, he said. It most 
sholy has. Growed all up in that tree. 
 
 * 
 
 PART I 
 
 For some time now the road had been deserted, white and 
scorching yet, though the sun was already reddening the western 
sky. He walked along slowly in the dust, stopping from time to time 
and hobbling on one foot like some squat ungainly bird while he 
examined the wad of tape coming through his shoe-sole. He turned 
again. Far down the blazing strip of concrete a small shapeless 
mass had emerged and was struggling toward him. It loomed 
steadily, weaving and grotesque like something seen through bad 

glass, gained brieﬂy the form and solidity of a pickup truck, whipped 
past and receded into the same liquid shape by which it came. 
 
 He swung his cocked thumb after it in a vague gesture. Little 
fans of dust scurried up the road shoulder and settled in his cuffs. 
 
 Go on, damn ye, he said to the ﬂeeting mirage. He took out 
his cigarettes and counted them, put them back. He turned his head 
to the sun. Won't be no use after dark, he said. Windless silence, 
not even a rustle from the dusty newsprint and candypapers 
pressed furtively into the brown wall of weeds at the road edge. 
 
 Further on he could see the lights of a ﬁlling station, some 
buildings. Maybe a fork where the trafﬁc slowed. He jerked his 
thumb at a trailer truck as it whined past, sucking up dust and 
papers in its wake, watched it wrench the trees farther up the road. 
 
 You wouldn't pick up Jesus Christ, would you, he asked, 
rearranging his hair with his ﬁngers. 
 
 When he got to the ﬁlling station he had a long drink of water 
and smoked one of the cigarettes. There was a grocery store 
adjoining and he wandered in, cruising with a slithery sound up and 
down the aisles of boxes and cans and ﬁlling his pockets with small 
items--candy bars, a pencil, a roll of adhesive tape ... Emerging 
from behind some cartons of toilet paper he caught the storekeep 
eying him. 
 
 Say now, he said, you don't have any, uh--his eyes took a 
quick last inventory--any tire pumps, do ye? 
 
 They ain't in the cake rack, the man said. 
 
 He looked down at a jumbled mound of bread and cakes, 
quietly lethal in their ﬂyspecked cellophane. 
 
 Over here--the storekeep was pointing. In a crate at the back 
end of the counter were jacks, pumps, tire tools, an odd posthole 
digger. 
 
 Oh yeah, he said. I got em now. He shufﬂed over and 
fumbled among them for a few minutes. 
 
 Them ain't the kind I was lookin for, he told the storekeep, 
making for the door now. 
 
 What kind was that? the man asked. I didn't know they was 
but one kind. 
 
 No, no, he said, musing, standing just short of the door, 
rubbing his lower lip. He was inventing a new tire pump. Well, he 
said, they got a new kind now you don't have to pump up and down 

thisaway (pumping) but what's got a kind of lever handle you go at 
like this (pumping, one hand). 
 
 That a fact, said the storekeep. 
 
 Bet it is, he said. Makes it a whole lot easier on a feller too. 
 
 What kind of car you drivin? the storekeep wanted to know. 
 
 Me? Why I got me a new Ford. Brand-new thirty-four, V-eight 
motor. Scare you jest to set in it... 
 
 Lots of tire trouble though, hmm? 
 
 Well... no, jest this one time is the only ﬁrst time I ever had me 
any tire trouble ... Well, I better ... say now, how fer is it to Atlana? 
 
 Seventeen mile. 
 
 Well, I reckon I better get on. We'll see yins. 
 
 Come back, the storekeep said. Shore hope you get your tire 
blowed up. It would be a sight easier with a pump. 
 
 But the screendoor ﬂapped and he was outside. Standing on 
the store porch he studied the hour. The sun was already down. A 
cricket sounded and a squadron of bull-bats came up out of the 
smoldering west, high on pointed wings, harrying the dusk. 
 
 There was a car pulled in at the ﬁlling station. He cussed the 
storekeep for a while, then walked back down and had another drink 
of water. From his pocket he produced a candy bar and began 
munching it. 
 
 In a few minutes a man came from the restroom and passed 
him, going to the car. 
 
 Say now, he said. You goin t'wards town? 
 
 The man stopped and looked around, spied him propped 
against an oil drum. Yeah, he said. You want a ride on in? 
 
 Why now I shore would preciate it, he said, shufﬂing toward 
the man now. My daughter she's in the hospital there and I got to 
get in to see her tonight... 
 
 Hospital? Where's that? the man asked. 
 
 Why, the one in Atlana. The big one there ... 
 
 Oh, said the man. Well, I'm jest goin as fer as Austell. 
 
 How fer's that? 
 
 Nine mile. 
 
 Well, you don't care for me to ride that fer with ye, do ye? 
 
 Be proud to hep ye out that fer, said the man. 
 
 Coming into Atlanta he saw at the top of a fence of signs one 
that said KNOXVILLE 197. The name of the town for which he was 

headed. Had he been asked his name he might have given any but 
Kenneth Rattner, which was his name. 
 
 East of Knoxville Tennessee the mountains start, small ridges 
and spines of the folded Appalachians that contort the outgoing 
roads to their liking. The ﬁrst of these is Red Mountain; from the 
crest on a clear day you can see the cool blue line of the watershed 
like a distant promise. 
 
 In late summer the mountain bakes under a sky of pitiless 
blue. The red dust of the orchard road is like powder from a brick 
kiln. You can't hold a scoop of it in your hand. Hot winds come up 
the slope from the valley like a rancid breath, redolent of milkweed, 
hoglots, rotting vegetation. The red clay banks along the road are 
crested with withered honeysuckle, peavines dried and sheathed in 
dust. By late July the corn patches stand parched and sere, stalks 
askew in defeat. All greens pale and dry. Clay cracks and splits in 
endless microcataclysm and the limestone lies about the eroded 
land like schools of sunning dolphin, gray channeled backs humped 
at the infernal sky. 
 
 In the relative cool of the timber stands, possum grapes and 
muscadine ﬂourish with a cynical fecundity, and the ﬂoor of the 
forest--littered with old mossbacked logs, peopled with toadstools 
strange and solemn among the ferns and creepers and leaning to 
show their delicate livercolored gills--has about it a primordial 
quality, some steamy carboniferous swamp where ancient saurians 
lurk in feigned sleep. 
 
 On the mountain the limestone shelves and climbs in ragged 
escarpments among the clutching roots of hickories, oaks and tulip 
poplars which even here brace themselves against the precarious 
declination allotted them by the chance drop of a seed. 
 
 Under the west wall of the mountain is a community called 
Red Branch. It was a very much different place in 1913 when 
Marion Sylder was born there, or in 1929 when he left school to 
work brieﬂy as a carpenter's apprentice for Increase Tipton, 
patriarch of a clan whose afﬂuence extended to a dozen jerrybuilt 
shacks strewn about the valley in unlikely places, squatting over 
their gullied purlieus like great brooding animals rigid with 
constipation, and yet endowed with an air transient and 
happenstantial as if set there by the recession of ﬂoodwaters. Even 
the speed with which they were constructed could not outdistance 

the decay for which they held such afﬁnity. Gangrenous molds took 
to the foundations before the roofs were fairly nailed down. Mud 
crept up their sides and paint fell away in long white slashes. Some 
terrible plague seemed to overtake them one by one. 
 
 They were rented to families of gaunt hollow-eyed and 
darkskinned people, not Mellungeons and not exactly anything else, 
who reproduced with such frightening proliﬁcness that their entire 
lives appeared devoted to the production of the ragged line of 
scions which shoeless and tattered sat for hours at a time on the 
porch edges, themselves not unlike the victims of some terrible 
disaster, and stared out across the blighted land with expressions of 
neither hope nor wonder nor despair. They came and went, 
unencumbered as migratory birds, each succeeding family a replica 
of the one before and only the names on the mailboxes altered, the 
new ones lettered crudely in above a rack of paint smears that 
obliterated the former occupants back into the anonymity from 
which they sprang. 
 
 Marion Sylder labored with hammer and saw until late 
September of that year and then he quit, knowledgeable in purlins 
and pole plates, and with his savings bought some clothes and a 
pair of thirty-dollar boots mail-ordered out of Minnesota, and 
disappeared. He was gone for ﬁve years. Whatever trade he 
followed in his exile he wore no overalls, wielded no hammer. 
 
 At that time there was a place in the gap of the mountain 
called the Green Fly Inn. It was box-shaped with a high front and a 
tin roof sloping rearward and was built on a scaffolding of poles over 
a sheer drop, the front door giving directly onto the road. One 
corner was nailed to a pine tree that rose towering out of the 
hollow--a hollow which on windy nights acted as a ﬂue, funneling the 
up-drafts from the valley through the mountain gap. On such nights 
the inn-goers trod ﬂoors that waltzed drunkenly beneath them, 
surged and buckled with huge groans. At times the whole building 
would career madly to one side as though headlong into collapse. 
The drinkers would pause, liquid tilting in their glasses, the structure 
would shudder violently, a broom would fall, a bottle, and the inn 
would slowly right itself and assume once more its normal reeling 
equipoise. The drinkers would raise their glasses, talk would begin 
again. Remarks alluding to the eccentricities of the inn were made 
only outside the building. To them the inn was animate as any old 

ship to her crew and it bred an atmosphere such as few could 
boast, a solidarity due largely to its very precariousness. The 
swaying, the incessant small cries of tortured wood, created an 
illusion entirely nautical, so that after a violent wrench you might half 
expect to see a bearded mate swing through a hatch in the ceiling 
to report all rigging secure. 
 
 Inside there was a genuine bar, purportedly of mahogany, 
that had been salvaged from a Knoxville saloon in 1919, done 
service in a laundry, an ice cream parlor, and brieﬂy in a catacombic 
establishment several miles from Red Branch on the Knoxville road 
that failed early in its career due to an attempted compromise 
between graft and cunning. With the exception of two Doric columns 
of white marble set in either end the bar was of plain construction. 
There were no stools, and along the front ran a high wooden foot-
rail chucked between wagon-wheel hubs. Four or ﬁve tables were 
scattered about the room attended by an assortment of wrecked 
chairs, milkcases, one treacherous folding campstool. When the inn 
closed at night the proprietor opened the back door and swept all 
litter out into the yawning gulf, listening to the crash of glass on 
glass far below. The refuse collected there cascaded down the 
mountain to a depth undetermined, creeping, growing, of 
indescribable variety and richness. 
 
 One evening late in March the drinkers blinked in a sweep of 
lights on the curve, watched a glistening black Ford coupe pull up 
across the road. It was brand new. A few minutes later Marion 
Sylder came through the door of the inn resplendent in gray 
gabardines, the trousers pressed to a knife edge, the shirt creased 
thrice across the back in military fashion, his waist encircled by a 
strip of leather the width of a whip-end. Clamped in his jaw was a 
slender cheroot. On the back of his neck a scarlike gap between 
sunburn and hairline showed as he crossed to the bar. 
 
 There he propped one pebbled goat-hide shoe upon the rail, 
took from his pocket a handful of silver dollars and stacked them 
neatly before him. Cabe was sitting on a high stool by the cash 
register. Sylder eyed the coins brieﬂy, then looked up. 
 
 Come on, Cabe, he said. We drinkin or not? 
 
 Yessir, Cabe said, clambering down from his stool. Then he 
thought: Cabe. He studied the man again. Wraithlike the face of the 
lost boy grew in the features of the man standing at the bar. Say, he 

said, Sylder? You the Sylder ... you Marion Sylder, ain't you? 
 
 Who'd you think I was? Sylder asked. 
 
 Well now, said Cabe, don't that jest beat ... Where you been? 
Hey, Bud! Looky here. You remember this young feller. Well now. 
How about this. 
 
 Bud shufﬂed over and peered up at him, grinned and nodded. 
 
 Here, Sylder said, give these highbinders a drink. 
 
 Sure thing, Cabe said. Who's that? 
 
 Sylder gestured at the dim smoky room. They all drinkin, ain't 
they? 
 
 Well now. Sure thing. He looked about him, uncertain as to 
how to proceed, then suddenly called out into the tiny room: All right 
now! All you highbounders got one comin on Marion Sylder. Better 
get up here and get it. 
 
 * * * 
 
 When Rattner reached the road he stopped and lit a match by 
which to examine his shin. In that small bloom of light the gash in his 
leg looked like tar welling. Blood trickled in three rivulets past the 
black smear his trouser had made, deltaed, rejoined; a thin line shot 
precipitously into his sock. He let go the match and jammed his 
scorched thumb into his mouth. 
 
 Aside from the torn leg his elbow was skinned and stinging 
badly. A low strand of barbed wire had been his undoing. Now he 
pulled a handful of dried weeds, crumpled and struck a match to 
them. They crackled in quick ﬂame and he hiked his trouser leg 
again. Wiping the blood away with his palm he studied the rate of 
ﬂow. Satisﬁed, he patted the sticky cloth back against the wound 
and took from his front pocket a billfold. Holding it to the light he 
pulled out a thin sheaf of folded notes and counted them. Then he 
ripped the billfold open, scattering cards and pictures. These he 
examined carefully along with the insides of the ruined purse, then 
kicked them away and tucked the money into his pocket. The weeds 
had burned to a ball of wispy cinders, still glowing like thin hot wires. 
He kicked them away in a burst of dying sparks. Far up the road a 
pale glow hung in the night like the ﬁrst touch of dawn. He had left 
Atlanta at ten ... it could not be past midnight. He patted his leg once 
more, sucked at his thumb, and started off in the direction of the 
lights. 
 
 Jim's Hot Spot, the sign said in limegreen neon. He circled 

catlike among the few cars, peering in at their black insides and 
keeping one eye weathered to the door where in a dome of yellow 
light an endless whirlpool of insects aspired. He came past the last 
empty car to the door and by this light checked his furrowed leg 
once again and then made his entrance. 
 
 * * * 
 
 The little coupe could be seen leaving or entering the Sylder 
place at strange hours, or in the heat of the day parked glistening 
and incongruous before the house, sleekly muscled and restless-
looking as a tethered racehorse. Saturday evenings he collected 
parcels of townward-walking boys in new overall pants from the 
roadside as you might gather hounds the morning after a hunt--
them leaping awkwardly in, riding solemnly or whispering hoarsely 
one to another until they gained speed. Sylder could feel their 
breath on his neck--those in the rear, wedged in like crated 
chickens--as they peered over his shoulder. A long silence as they 
watched the needle vanquish the numerals on the dial in a slow arc 
to hover brieﬂy at 80 on the last and long straight stretch before 
reaching the city limits. Sometimes one of them would venture a 
question. He always lied to them. Company itself don't know how 
fast she'll go, he'd say. They plannin to take one over to the Sahary 
Desert to ﬁnd out. 
 
 At Gay or Market he would pull to the curb and yell: One stop! 
and watch them erupt from the car like circus clowns--ﬁve, six, as 
many as eight of them, all bound for the show, farmboys with no 
more farm than some wizened tomato plants and a brace of 
ravenous hogs. In the rearview mirror he could see them watching 
the car scoot away, hovering and bobbing on the sidewalk like a 
ﬂock of curious birds. 
 
 Sundays the Knoxville beer taverns were closed, their glass 
fronts dimmed and muted in sabbatical quietude, and Sylder turned 
to the mountain to join what crowds marshaled there beyond the 
dominion of laws either civil or spiritual. 
 
 Jack the Runner's mouth was blue, his tongue blue-black as a 
chow's. At the table by the door of the Green Fly Inn he sipped 
blackberry wine from a liniment bottle. 
 
 Where'd you leave em? Sylder was asking. 
 
 Ahh, Jack gurgled. Over on mountain. 
 
 You're on the mountain now, Sylder said. 

 
 Over, Jack emphasized. Hen'son Valley Road. 
 
 Henderson Valley Road? Whereabouts? 
 
 Top o mountain, like I tol ye ... 
 
 You reckon he's tellin us right? June asked. 
 
 Sylder looked from him to the runner again. Jack studied a 
huge and evil-looking cigar he had found in his shirtpocket and fell 
to turning it against his tongue with drunken singlemindedness. 
Yeah, Sylder said. Most likely he is. 
 
 Right feisty, Jack was saying, holding now the cigar at arm's 
length. A loop of spittle woggled mucously from its underside. Right 
feisty. 
 
 Caught in the yellow glare of the headlights they had the 
temporarily immobilized look of wildlife, deer perhaps, frozen in 
attitudes of surprise predicating imminent ﬂight. Sylder drove past 
and up the mountain. 
 
 Ain't you goin to stop? June asked. 
 
 Comin back, Sylder said. Behind em, like I was goin their way. 
I never ﬁgured they'd be headed wrong. Way they're goin, through 
Sevierville, it's near thirty mile. 
 
 Between them in the crevice of the seat nestled a mason jar 
of whiskey. Sylder heard the skirling tin sound of the lid being 
unscrewed and he reached out his hand for June to pass the jar. 
Moths loomed whitely before the windshield, incandesced, dusted 
the glass with mica. A ballet of gnats rioted in the path of the 
headlights. He drank and handed the jar back. Under the black 
hood the motor hummed its throaty combustions. 
 
 Sylder thought about old man Tipton saying it wasn't sensible 
as any fool could see that with the pistons going on an angle like 
that--lop-ass-sided, he'd said--they were bound to wear through on 
one side. Pistons were supposed to go up and down. Street's are 
full of em, he said, if it's any comfort to know you wadn't the only 
one took. 
 
 They turned at the quarry and came back down the mountain 
coasting silently, the tires making a soft slapping sound at the 
cracks in the asphalt. When the lights picked them up they began to 
group and sidle to the ditch as cows will. Sylder brought the coupe 
to a stop slowly alongside of them. 
 
 Howdy, said June right into the ear of the girl on the outside. 
You-all need a ride? 

 
 The other one was standing next to her then. They looked at 
each other and the ﬁrst one said, Thank ye, I reckon we can make it 
all right. The boy hung back behind them. Across June's shoulder 
Sylder could see him looking not at them or at the women either, but 
at the car. 
 
 How fer ye goin? June wanted to know. 
 
 The two exchanged glances again. This time the taller one 
spoke up. We jest goin down the road a piece, she explained. 
 
 Tell her let's all go down the road for a piece, Sylder 
suggested. 
 
 What? the short one said. Then the boy piped up and they 
both turned to glare at him. 
 
 How fer is it to Knoxville? That was his question. 
 
 Knoxville? June couldn't believe it. You say Knoxville? Why 
you-all cain't walk to Knoxville. It's twenty mile or better--ain't it, 
Marion? 
 
 A groan went up from the travelers. Sylder was already 
motioning him out the door. 
 
 Here, June said, climbing out. You'ns get in here. We goin to 
Knoxville, proud to hep ye out. 
 
 Sylder presented them each with a welcoming smile as they 
climbed in and studied each in turn his face under the domelight. 
 
 He dropped into the Hopper--the steep twin fork road--without 
braking. The little one between him and Tipton squealed once and 
then hushed with her hand clapped over her mouth as they swerved 
across the pike and shot out into blackness, the lights slapping 
across the upper reaches of trees standing sharply up the side of 
the hollow. The coupe dropped, squatted for a moment in the gravel 
of the lower road, sprang again and slithered away obliquely with 
the exhaust bellowing from the cutout and gravel popping and 
rattling in the woods like grapeshot. 
 
 The one in the back was making small sobbing noises. No 
one spoke for a few minutes and then the little one said, Where's 
this go? 
 
 Goes to the gettin pla ... 
 
 Town, June broke in. Goes to town. Shorter this way. He 
thought she seemed to have edged closer to Sylder although she 
turned and was talking to him. He saw Sylder's hand greenly 
phosphorescent under the dashlights pulling out the choke. 

 
 They reached the ﬁrst bridge before it began to sputter 
enough for her to notice. Above here the road began to climb again 
and Sylder let it buck a time or two before he shifted to second. She 
didn't move her leg. He was watching her out of the corner of his 
eye, her sitting forward on the seat and peering out intensely at the 
unfamiliar night. A moth whipped beneath the windscreen, brushed 
her cheek. He cranked the glass in a turn. When the car bucked 
again she ﬂinched and asked what was wrong. 
 
 He started to tell her the generator was out of water but 
thought about the boy in the back seat. No word from him at all. The 
tall one in the back had leaned forward, breathing in Tipton's collar 
and ﬁxing the windshield with a look grim and harassed as if 
contemplating one desperate leap at the black passing night 
country. 
 
 Vapor lockin, he said ﬁnally. Overheats on these hills and you 
have to stop and let her cool off. 
 
 She looked at him and then looked away again, not saying 
anything. A phantom rabbit froze in the headlights, rolled one white 
eye, was gone. June was talking to her in a low voice, her still 
looking straight ahead, saying nothing. The one in the rear had sat 
back. No sound from her. In the mirror Sylder could see half a head 
dark and bushy in silhouette as a bear's. He recognized the smell 
then. A tepid odor of urine, musty-sweet, circulated on the air now 
as they slowed. 
 
 They jerked around the last curve below the pine thicket and 
shuddered to a stop in front of the Olive Branch Negro Baptist 
Church. Sylder switched off the ignition. I guess that's all she wrote, 
he said. 
 
 He opened the door and started to get out when he felt her 
hand on his leg. He stopped and turned. 
 
 Not him, she said. Not the other one. 
 
 No, he said. O.K. Come on. 
 
 He switched off the lights and then they were gone, negated 
in the sudden darkness. Marion, June whispered hoarsely. Hey, 
Marion? 
 
 From his porch Arthur Ownby had watched them pass and 
now he heard the slam of the car door up the road where they had 
stopped. It had begun to rain. A yellow haze in the woods ﬂicked 
out. He could hear low voices, near-sounding on the warm night air. 

With one foot he tapped out the time of some old ballad against the 
corner post of the porch. From under the brim of the roof he studied 
the movements of stars. A night for meteors tonight. They 
cannonaded the towering hump of Red Mountain. Rain falling now 
from a faultless sky. A girl's laugh on the road. He remembered her 
sitting high on the wagon seat Sunday morning that the mule broke 
wind in his ear while he unhooked the singletree and he stove two 
ﬁngers in on a rib and it never even ﬂinched. Late hours for an old 
man. Arthur Ownby had watched from his porch. He dozed. 
 
 When the boy came past on the road he looked up at the 
house on the sidehill, dark and abandoned-looking. He could not 
see the old man and the old man was asleep. 
 
 It was near daylight when they started back from Knoxville, a 
pale cold graying to the east. 
 
 Where'd you take her? Sylder asked. 
 
 June reached for the cigarettes riding in the visor. Goddamn 
she's ugly, he said. You know what she told me? 
 
 What's that, said Sylder, grinning. That I was the nicest boy 
ever needled her. Needled, for God's sake. Where at? Huh? 
 
 Where'd you take her. You come down from the church but I 
never heard you come up. Where'd you go? 
 
 Ah. Up in the backhouse. 
 
 Backhouse? 
 
 Shithouse then. 
 
 Sylder was looking at him in amazed incredulity, acceptance 
and belief momentarily suspended, unable to picture it yet. He had 
one more question: 
 
 Standing up? 
 
 Naw, well ... she sort of sat down and leant back and I ... 
she ... But that was beyond his powers of description, let alone 
Sylder's imagination. 
 
 You mean to say you--Sylder paused for a moment trying to 
get the facts in summary--you screwed her in a nigger shithouse 
sittin on the ... 
 
 Well Goddamnit at least I never took her in no Goddamn 
church, June broke in. 
 
 The coupe wobbled to a halt at the side of the road and 
Sylder collapsed against the door epileptic with laughter. After a 
while he stopped and said: 

 
 Was she the one that ... 
 
 Yes, Goddamn you, she was the one. 
 
 Whooeee! Sylder screamed and rolled out the door where he 
lay in the wet morning grass shaking soundlessly. 
 
 The place was dimly lit and barnlike. A polished dance ﬂoor in 
which at the far end fell the reﬂection of the jukebox lights and those 
of the bar. Behind the bar a long mirror in which he was surprised to 
see himself, silhouetted in the doorframe, poised nimbly atop a 
stack of glasses. He came down and crossed the ﬂoor, limping 
slightly, and clambered up on the corner stool. 
 
 The bartender was sitting in a captain's chair reading a 
magazine. He folded it carefully and shufﬂed down to where the 
man was sitting. 
 
 Beer, Rattner said. His tongue swept his lower lip in 
anticipation. The bartender went to the barrel and drew off a 
schooner, ﬂicked away the foam with a stick and brought it to him. 
He reached and tilted one side of the glass up and lowered his face 
into it; his lips sought the glassrim and fastened on it white and fat 
as leeches while under the yellowgray skin his throatcords jerked 
spastically, pumping the beer down. He drank it all, lifting the glass 
ﬁnally to drain it, and slid it back toward the bartender, who had 
been watching with both fascination and disgust, as one might 
watch pigs mate. 
 
 Say now, that sure was all right. Yessir, jest believe I'll have 
me anothern. 
 
 Ten cents, said the bartender. 
 
 He struggled with his pocket and came up with a dime. You 
betcher, he said. The bartender took the glass, gingerly, and reﬁlled 
it. 
 
 Rattner had been gone for a year this time. He had moved 
from Maryville to Red Branch, taken up quarters in an abandoned 
log house with his wife and son, and left there four days later with 
twenty-six dollars in his pocket, alone and southbound in an empty 
L&N reefer. An incident at the Green Fly Inn had been his windfall: 
 
 The rear door through which Cabe swept the night's litter had 
once given onto a porch that ran the width of the building, supported 
by joists that were extensions of the ﬂoor timbers and braced 
frugally with two-by-fours angled up beneath them. On summer 
evenings the drinkers gathered here, bringing with them their chairs 

or cases or perching riskily upon the narrow railing like roosting 
birds. Weather and termites conspired against this haven and 
brought it to ruin. This was in 1933 then, a hot summer night, that Ef 
Hobie came to the Green Fly Inn. A prodigal return (Petros--Brushy 
Mountain--eighteen months, illegal possession of liquor) that 
attracted a great number of well-wishers. One by one they retired 
through the rear door to take up their stations on the porch. Hobie 
was a favorite and carried on a running monologue of anecdotes. 
He was telling how his old lady had loaned the family soupbone to 
Mrs Fenner, who had cooked peas with it and ruined it, when a 
sharp dry crack issued from somewhere in the ﬂoor. It was a calm 
windless night, laden with heat, and the sound had an ominous 
quality about it. The talk paused a moment, resumed. 
 
 He came through the door and onto the porch, circumspectly, 
nodding across them all with difﬁdence, as if someone he knew 
might be there, beyond the railing itself and suspended mysteriously 
in the darkness, leaned against the doorframe and lifted the bottle 
to his mouth, his eyes shifting among them or when they looked 
closing or seeking again that being in the outer dark with whom only 
he held communion, smiling a little to himself, the onlooker, the 
stranger. The talk eddied and waned, but he offered neither 
comment nor question and after a while they ignored him. He came 
from the doorway and took a seat on the rail at the near end of the 
porch. 
 
 There was a long creaking sound like a nail being pulled and 
again the sharp detonation of strained wood giving way. There 
followed a dead and immobile silence during which the faces 
searched from one to the other uncertainly. A few began to rise and 
mill about, still not saying anything. Already they had begun to eye 
the narrow door, the one point of egress, weighing in their minds not 
so much numbers as tonnage and freight of men, calculating speed 
and congestion with the concern of trafﬁc experts. 
 
 With the third report a section of ﬂooring listed visibly. 
 
 Fellers, Ef started, rising himself, I think this here ... But that 
was all, or as much as anyone heard at least. There ensued a 
single rush as of so many marionettes on one string being drawn in 
violent acceleration toward the door while above the noise of their 
retreat the joists popped like riﬂeﬁre, snapping off in rackety 
succession, and the ﬂoor drooped in long and gathering undulations 

in their wake. 
 
 They hit the opening in one concerted mass and wedged 
there tight as a peg at the same instant that the far end of the porch 
came away, swung out from the building in a long swooping and not 
ungraceful arc. 
 
 Now from the knot of men clawing at the door single ﬁgures 
began to be sucked away in attitudes of mute supplication one by 
one down the dangling incline of the porch, gaining momentum 
among leaping cans and bottles, and dropping at last with wild cries 
into the pit below. A few caught at the rails and dangled there with 
stricken looks eying their fellows rocketing past into the night. 
 
 From within the building Cabe and a few others were trying 
desperately to untangle the mass that writhed in the doorway, 
resorting ﬁnally to taking hold of what limb presented itself and 
pulling until something gave. Thus the survivors came aboard bereft 
of one shoe, or both, or pants, or as with Hobie himself naked save 
for one half of a shirt. Until the frame of the door exploded inward 
carrying a good section of wall and they entered in a roil of bodies 
and crashing wood. 
 
 The porch had swung out and downward and now tottered for 
a moment on the strength of a single two-by-six before it too 
snapped and the whole affair slewed away with a great splintering 
sound. The ﬁgures clutching at the rails began to turn loose their 
holds, coming away by ones and twos like beetles shaken from a 
limb, and the entire wreckage descended in a slow tableau of ruin to 
pitch thunderously into the hollow. 
 
 The atmosphere inside seethed with an inchoate violence. 
Scared men, torn, unclothed and crushed, breathing loudly and 
sweating the sweat of subsiding panic, mounting outrage and 
indignity. One by one the fallen were entering through the front door 
red with blood and clay and looking like the vanquished in some 
desperate encounter waged with sabers and without quarter. As 
they gathered strength from below two factions became apparent 
and they fell upon each other murderously and fought far into the 
night. 
 
 Kenneth Rattner nursed a slashed hand as he squatted in a 
blackberry thicket below the inn and listened with quiet bemusement 
to the thrashings and curses of the victims. Someone had brought a 
light; he could see the ﬂicker and sweep of it through the bramble 

wall. He pulled a kerchief from his pocket and tied it around his 
hand, pulling the knot to with his teeth. Then he worked his way 
carefully up to the road and started for home. Small groups of men 
were running up the mountain to the scene of disaster bearing 
lanterns and whispering hoarsely. 
 
 I got a job, he told her. 
 
 Praise God, she said. Whereabouts? 
 
 Greenville South Carolina, showing her the money now. 
Trainfare, he said. But he gave her ﬁve of the thirty-one dollars and 
they went to the store. He bought the boy an orange drink, lifted him 
onto the box where he sat holding it in both hands, watching. Mrs 
Eller was telling about it. 
 
 That Coy Tipton showed up here this mornin looked like he'd 
fell in a combine. Said they's three or four of em what lost their 
britches--I'd like to know how they done that my own sef--and when 
they clumb down in the holler to get em somebody had beat em 
there and stole their pocketbooks. She sat atilt in her rocker, fanned 
slowly with a church tract. Thiefs and drunks runs together I expect, 
she said. Ain't none of em but got what they's lookin for. 
 
 Mildred Rattner pinched from loaf to loaf across the bread 
rack. When them as wallers in sin thinks they's gettin by with it, she 
said, that's when He strikes em in His holy wrath. He jest bides His 
time. 
 
 Kenneth Rattner stroked his stiffening leg, ﬂexed his ankle. It 
was past midnight and people were coming in now. The bartender 
had abandoned his magazine and was moving nervously up and 
down the counter and ﬁlling glasses for the newcomers. 
 
 He drained the last of the beer and set the glass upon the 
bar. Hey, buddy, he called. Give us anothern over here. Hey, old 
buddy. 
 
 Saturday afternoons Marion Sylder would come in the store 
fresh-looking in starched khakis or overall breeches and go to the 
glass case and point out the socks to Mr Eller. Mr Eller would put 
the box on top of the counter and Sylder would hold up a pair and 
say: How much are these? 
 
 Quarter, Mr Eller would say. No change in price, still a 
quarter. All a quarter, ain't got no other kind. 
 
 Sylder would spin a quarter on the glass, take his socks and 
sit down on a milkcase in front of the stove. He would do them one 

at a time, taking off one shoe and sock and waving his bare foot 
about while he reached for the stove door, opened it, and swung in 
the old sock, holding it delicately. Then he would put on his fresh 
sock, lace up his shoe, and proceed to the other foot, the one with 
the big toe nailless and truncate. He was working in the fertilizer 
plant now. Noontimes he ate in the cafe the regular lunches, the 
thirty-cent specials with the lightbread that clove gluily to the palate, 
three slices with a thumbprint in the center served on a piece of 
waxed paper. Beans and fatmeat oozing grease into the greasy 
gravy that leaked down from the potatoes, a beaded scum of 
grease on the coffee, everything in fact lubricated as if all who ate 
there suffered from some atrophy of the deglutitive muscles which 
precluded swallowing. In late afternoon he returned, parked the 
coupe and crossed the gullied and wasted clay of the yard where an 
old tire still hung from the one knobby and leaﬂess oak, and so into 
the unpainted house. 
 
 Within the hour he was out, washed and combed, blasting 
away the peaceful cricket sounds with the open cutout, tooling 
carefully down the corroded drive and onto the pike and gone. 
 
 To Happy Hollow or McAnally Flats. Mead's Quarry or 
Pennyroyal. Smoking shacks yellow with coal-oil light and areek with 
the sweetmold smell of splo whiskey. 
 
 Drinking, courting with ribald humor the country slatterns that 
hung on the city's perimeter like lost waifs; his favorites the ill-
shapen: Wretha, white lisle uniform, thighs the dimensions of 
oiltuns. The too thin. A nameless one, bony rump that cut into his 
leg. Experimentally he wet a ﬁnger and cut a white streak on the 
grime of her neck. 
 
 Some nights he made it to the Green Fly Inn and rocked 
away with those old boozers to the last man, this afﬂuent son 
returned upon them bearing no olive branch but hard coin and 
greenbacks and ushering in an era of prosperity, a Utopia of paid 
drinks. 
 
 He was hard-pressed now on eighteen dollars a week, who 
had spent that in an evening. He turned twenty-one in August. 
 
 The following Friday he lost his job at the fertilizer plant. 
Aaron Conatser needled him into a ﬁght, and he fought, not out of 
any particular dislike toward Conatser, or even in any great anger, 
but only to get the thing over with, settled. Conatser was the only 

man in the plant his size and had been looking to try him. 
 
 He was on one knee with his arms locked around Conatser's 
neck when he heard Conatser's hoarse breathing stop. There was 
no sound in the shipping room and when he raised his head he saw 
that the men standing around them were looking past him at 
something else and knew before he turned that Mr Petree had 
joined the circle. Not the dock foreman, or even the supervisor, 
either of whom would have said Break it up. He turned loose of 
Conatser and stood. Conatser came up too, stretching his neck like 
a mute rooster, and put his hands in his back pockets with elegant 
indifference. 
 
 He licked at the trickle of blood from his nose, tasting it salty 
and metallic, and turned to see what the old man would have to say. 
But Petree spun on his square leather heel and stalked briskly back 
down the aisle, the shipping-room ﬂoor echoing his hollow footfalls 
among the tiers of bags. 
 
 The three or four men who had gathered to watch the fray 
dispersed in silence, faded or slunk away in the dark malodorous 
aisles, less brazen than the rats that nested beneath the pallets. He 
and Conatser stood glaring at each other for a small minute, 
breathing laboriously. Then Conatser turned his head and spat, 
looked once obliquely across his shoulder at him and sauntered 
away toward the dock. 
 
 The dock foreman came down just before quitting time and 
told him. I tried to put in a word for you, he said, but he wadn't 
hearing any. 
 
 Sylder doubted him but muttered a thanks anyway and 
started for the ofﬁce. Where you goin? he asked. Get my pay. 
 
 Here, he said. Sylder turned. He was holding out the 
envelope toward him. 
 
 Sylder went to Monk's and drank beer till six or seven o'clock, 
and ﬁnally went home. By eight o'clock he had packed some clothes 
into an old cardboard grip and was sitting grimly behind the wheel of 
the little coupe with the headlights clearing out the night ahead and 
a narrow strip of asphalt numbered 129 slipping away beneath him 
like tape from a spool. He stopped once at a grill outside of Chote, 
drank two warm beers from coffeecups and bought cigarettes. In 
the mountains the road was thin and gravel and he slewed down the 
curves on drifting wheels. Once a bobcat stood highlegged and 

lanterneyed in the road, bunched, ﬂoated away over the roadbank 
on invisible wires. For miles on miles the high country rolled lightless 
and uninhabited, the road ferruling through dark forests of owl trees, 
bat caverns, witch covens. 
 
 He smoked continuously, cranking in the windshield to light a 
fresh cigarette from the old stub and studying in the glare of their 
union his shadowed muzzle in orange relief on the glass, watching 
the point of light fade when he exhaled and climb slowly up the dark 
mirror like a sun risen inexplicably by night as he turned the glass 
out again to let in the damp rush of air, the retired butt curving past 
the cowl to be swept away in a swift red arc. At Blairsville he ﬁlled up 
with gas and did not stop again after that. Out across the ﬂats he 
could see the moon on the river curling under the black fall of the 
mountain, plating the rifﬂes in chainwork, hordes of luminous snakes 
racing upriver over the sounding rocks. The air came cool and 
damp under the windscreen. 
 
 He reached Atlanta some time after midnight but did not go 
into town. He pulled in at a roadhouse just short of the city limits and 
sat in the car for a few minutes ﬂexing his eyelids. There were three 
or four other cars parked in front, dimly lustrous in the neon 
ambience. 
 
 He passed through a fanfall of moths under the yellow 
doorlight and inside. Above the heads of the dancers he could see 
himself hollow-eyed and sinister in the bar mirror and it occurred to 
him that he was ungodly tired. He skirted along the high booths 
lining the walls and got to the bar where he ordered and drank 
straight four shots of whiskey. He began to feel better. He was 
sitting with the ﬁfth drink before him when sounds of breaking glass 
issued from the dance ﬂoor and he turned to see two men circling 
warily with clenched bottles. A huge ﬁgure hulked up from the end of 
the bar and shufﬂing out through the gathering spectators seized 
the combatants one in each hand by the belts and turkey-walked 
them out the door, them stepping high, unprotesting, their bottles 
dangling idly. 
 
 Whooee! see them turkeys trot, a man down the bar called 
out. The bouncer came back down the ﬂoor wearily, not smiling, 
faded again into the shadows. Sylder tossed off the drink, watched 
the blur of faces for a few minutes, not even high on the liquor, just 
feeling waves of fatigue roll from him. He didn't even think he was 

mad any more. A few minutes later he left, wondering vaguely as he 
stepped into the air again why he had come here and where he 
thought he was going. Louisiana or anywhere else, his job had gone 
off the market December ﬁfth 1933. 
 
 He walked out in the quiet darkness, across the gravel, 
limping just a little on the bad ground. He got to the car and opened 
the door. 
 
 By the phosphorous glow, more like an emanation from the 
man's face than from the domelight, Sylder froze, his hand batting 
at the air stirred by the outﬂung door. The face stared at him with an 
expression bland and meaningless and Sylder groped for some, not 
cause or explanation, but mere association with rational experience 
by which he could comprehend a man sitting in his car as if conjured 
there simultaneously with the ﬂick of light by the very act of opening 
the door. 
 
 The mouth stretched across the lower face in a slow cheesy 
rictus, a voice said: You goin t'wards Knoxville? 
 
 --A strained octave above normal, the pitch of supplication. 
 
 Sylder's hand found the door and he expelled a long breath. 
What in the Goddamn hell you doin in my car, he croaked. 
Something loathsome about the seated ﬁgure kept him from 
reaching for it violently, as a man might not reach for bird-droppings 
on his shoulder. 
 
 The mouth, still open, said: I seen your plates, Blount 
County--that's where I'm from, Maryville. I ﬁgured you might be goin 
thataway. I need a ride bad ... 'm a sick man. The tone cloying, eyes 
dropped to Sylder's belt as if addressing his stomach. It was not 
presentiment that warned Sylder to get shed of his guest but a 
profound and unshakable knowledge of the presence of evil, of 
being for a certainty called upon to defend at least his property from 
the man already installed beneath his steering wheel. 
 
 You're sick all right, Sylder said. Scoot your ass out of there. 
 
 Thanks, old buddy, the man said, sliding across the seat to 
the far door without apparent use of any locomotor appendages but 
like something on runners tilted downhill. There he sat. 
 
 Sylder leaned his head wearily against the roof of the car. He 
knew the man had not misunderstood him. 
 
 I knowed you wouldn't turn down nobody from home, the 
voice said. You from Maryville? I live right near there, comin from 

Floridy ... 
 
 Sylder lowered himself into the car, the hackles on his neck 
rising. He looked at the man. I would have to put you out with my 
hands, he said silently, and he could not touch him. He slipped the 
key into the switch and started the motor. He felt a terriﬁc need to 
be clean. 
 
 Shore is a nice autymobile, the man was admiring. 
 
 Swinging the little coupe through the rutted drive and out onto 
the paving he thought: He'll be a talker, this bastard. He'll have 
plenty to say. 
 
 In immediate corroboration the man began. This sure will help 
me out, old buddy. You know it sure is hard to get a ride nights. 
 
 Morning, Sylder muttered under the vehement shift to 
second. 
 
 --specially not much trafﬁc and what they is folks won't hardly 
pick you up even ... 
 
 Ah, Sylder thought, shouldn't have thrown that shift. He could 
see the knee out of the corner of his eye, cocked back on the seat, 
the man sitting half sidewise watching him. 
 
 --My mother been real bad sick too, she ... 
 
 Sylder's hand moved in stealth from wheel to shiftlever, 
poised birdlike. The hand on the speedometer climbed with the hum 
of the motor. 
 
 --doctor's bills is higher'n ... 
 
 His left foot dropped the clutch. Now. Under his cupped palm 
the gearshift shot down viciously, quivered where a moment before 
the man's knee had been. 
 
 --so I shore do preciate it ... The man went on, droning, his 
legs now crossed with an air of homey comfort, slightly rocking. 
 
 Sylder hung his elbow over the doorsill and leaned his ear to 
the rush of wind, the pockety rhythm of the open exhaust and the 
black road slishing oily under the wheels, trying to lose the voice. 
 
 No cars passed. He drove in almost a trance, the unending 
and inescapable voice sucking him into some kind of oblivion, some 
faltering of the senses preparatory to ... what? He sat up a little. The 
man had not taken his eyes from him, and yet never looked directly 
at him. 
 
 You bastard, Sylder thought. It began to seem to him that he 
had driven clear to Atlanta for the sole purpose of picking up this 

man and driving him back to Maryville. His back hurt. I must be 
crazy, he said to himself, reaching in his pockets for cigarettes. This 
son of a bitch will have me crazy anyway. He jiggled one from the 
pack, spun it leisurely between thumb and foreﬁnger to his lips. He 
had the pack in his other hand then riding the top of the steering 
wheel. I'll bet I don't make it, he wagered, don't reach it. His right 
hand having delivered the cigarette to his mouth was creeping 
slowly for the pack to put it away. It was halfway up the steering 
wheel when the voice, suddenly clear, hopeful, said: 
 
 Say, wonder could I get one of them from ye ... (leaning 
forward, already reaching) ... I run out a while back and ain't ... 
 
 Sylder chuckled and straight-armed the pack at him. Sure, he 
said. Help yourself. He waited a few seconds, listening to the paper 
rustle, the man getting the cigarette. He could feel him hesitate, the 
eyes turn on him. Then the package came back. 
 
 Thanks, old buddy, the man said. 
 
 Sylder waited. The man didn't say anything more. Waiting too. 
Sylder produced the matches with painful deliberation. Catching up 
his knee to the underside of the wheel he steered that way and with 
studied slowness fumbled a match from the box and struck it. 
Shielding the ﬂame with his hands he lit the cigarette, then dropped 
the dying match over his elbow into the slipstream boring past the 
open windwing and took the wheel once more, exhaling luxuriously 
and repocketing the matches. He waited. 
 
 Say, old buddy, I wonder if I could get a ... why thanks, thank 
ye. 
 
 The match scratched and popped. Sylder meditated in the 
windshield the face of the man cast in orange and black above the 
spurt of ﬂame like the downlidded face of some copper ikon, a 
mask, not ambiguous or inscrutable but merely discountenanced of 
meaning, expression. In the ﬂickery second in which Sylder's glance 
went to the road and back the man's eyes raised to regard him in 
the glass, so that when Sylder looked back they faced each other 
over the cup of light like enemy chieftains across a council ﬁre for 
just that instant before the man's lips pursed, carplike, still holding 
the cigarette, and sucked away the ﬂame. 
 
 They smoked, the heat of the night air moving over them 
heavy as syrup. In the dark glass where the road poured down their 
cigarettes rose and fell like distant semaphores above the soft 

green dawn of the dashlights. 
 
 He stopped at Gainesville for gas which he didn't need and 
went into the men's room taking the keys with him. The man sat in 
the car. Inside, Sylder lit a cigarette, smoked it in long pulls and 
ﬂipped the butt into the toilet. He splashed some cold water on his 
face and went out again, paid the sleepy-eyed attendant and got in 
the car. The man was sitting as he had left him. An unmistakable 
trace of fresh tobacco smoke hung on the wet air. 
 
 Dawn. Fields smoking where the mist shoaled, trees white as 
bone. The gray shrubbery hard-looking as metal in the morning 
wetness. Beads of water raced on the windscreen and he turned on 
the wipers, watched the arms descend in slow benediction, was 
mopping at the glass with the back of his hand when the right rear 
tire went out with a sudden hollow detonation and they ﬂapped to a 
stop. 
 
 Later Sylder realized that the man had passed up one chance 
with the jack handle, had waited until he took the jack from under 
the car and handed it himself to the man to put in the trunk. And 
realized too that the man had only miscalculated by part of a second 
the length of time it would take him to bend and slam the hubcap 
back on the rim with the heel of his hand. So although he never saw 
it, had no warning, he had already made a half turn and started to 
rise when the jack crashed into his shoulder and slammed him into 
the side of the car. Something crashed alongside his head into the 
quarterpanel--he remembered that too, but couldn't know until later 
that it was the base of the jack. He didn't duck the second time 
either, but only slid down the door of the coupe when the man 
swung, sideways--he was watching him now--tearing a ragged hole 
in the metal. Then he was sitting on the ground, his head leaned 
back against the door, looking up, not yet outraged but only in 
wonder, at the ﬁgure above him, his arm trailing in the dirt like a 
shattered wing. But when the man jerked the shaft of the jack from 
the punctured door he reached up, slowly, he thought, and laid his 
hand on the jack and still slowly closed his ﬁngers over it. The man 
looked down at him, and in the gradual suffusion of light gathered 
and held between the gloss of the car's enamel and the paling road 
dust he saw terror carved and molded on that face like a physical 
deformity. They were like that for some few seconds, he sitting, the 
man standing, holding either end of the jack as if suspended in the 

act of passing it one to the other. Then Sylder stood, still in that 
somnambulant slow motion as if time itself were running down, and 
watched the man turn, seeming to labor not under water but in 
some more viscous ﬂuid, torturous slow, and the jack itself falling 
down on an angle over the dying forces of gravity, leaving Sylder's 
own hand and bouncing slowly in the road while his leaden arm rose 
in a stiff arc and his ﬁngers cocked like a cat's claws unsheathing 
and buried themselves in the cheesy neck-ﬂesh of the man who ﬂed 
from him without apparent headway as in a nightmare. 
 
 Whether he fell forward or whether the man pulled them over 
he did not know. They were lying in the road, the man with his face 
in the dirt and Sylder on top of him, motionless for the moment as 
resting lovers. Something in Sylder's shoulder traveled obliquely 
down to his lungs with each breath to cut off the air. He still had one 
hand locked in the man's neck and now he inched himself forward 
and whispered into his ear: 
 
 Why don't you say something now, bastard? Ain't you got 
some more talk to spiel for us? 
 
 He was jerking at the man's head but the man had both 
hands over it and seemed lost in speculation upon the pebbles of 
the road. Sylder let his hand relax and wander through the folds of 
the neck until they arrived at the throat. The man took that for a few 
minutes, then suddenly twisted sideways, spat in Sylder's face, and 
tried to wrench himself free. Sylder rolled with him and had him then 
ﬂat backward in the road and astride him, still the one arm swinging 
from his broken shoulder like a piece of rope. He crept forward and 
placed one leg behind the man's head, elevating it slightly, looking 
like some hulking nurse administering to the wounded. He pushed 
the head back into the crook of his leg, straightened his arm, and 
bore down upon the man's neck with all his weight and strength. 
The boneless-looking face twitched a few times but other than that 
showed no change of expression, only the same rubbery look of 
fear, speechless and uncomprehending, which Sylder felt was not 
his doing either but the everyday look of the man. And the jaw kept 
coming down not on any detectable hinges but like a mass of offal, 
some obscene waste matter uncongealing and collapsing in slow 
folds over the web of his hand. It occurred to him then that the man 
was trying to bite him and this struck him as somehow so ludicrous 
that a snort of laughter wheezed in his nose. Finally the man's 

hands came up to rest on his arm, the puffy ﬁngers trailing over his 
own hand and wrist reminding him of baby possums he had seen 
once, blind and pink. 
 
 Sylder held him like that for a long time. Like squeezing a boil, 
he thought. After a while the man did try to say something but no 
words came, only a bubbling sound. Sylder was watching him in a 
sort of mesmerized fascination, noting blink of eye, loll of tongue. 
Then he eased his grip and the man's eyes widened. 
 
 For Christ's sake, he gasped. Jesus Christ, just turn me 
loose. 
 
 Sylder put his face to the man's and in a low voice said, You 
better call on somebody closer than that. Then he saw his shoulder, 
saw the man looking at it. He dug his thumb into the man's windpipe 
and felt it collapse like a dried tule. The man got his hand up and 
began with his eyes closed to beat Sylder about the face and chest. 
Sylder closed his eyes too and buried his face in his shoulder to 
protect it. The ﬂailings grew violent, slowed, ﬁnally stopped 
altogether. When Sylder opened his eyes again the man was staring 
at him owlishly, the little tongue tipped just past the open lips. He 
relaxed his hand and the ﬁngers contracted, shriveling into a tight 
claw, like a killed spider. He tried to open it again but could not. He 
looked at the man again and time was coming back, gaining, so that 
all the clocks would be right. 
 
 The man had been dead for perhaps a quarter of an hour. 
Sylder staggered to the car and sat on the runningboard, stared 
unblinking into the brass eye of the sun ponderous and unreal on 
the red hills until he lost consciousness. 
 
 Morning. Lying with his cheek in the dust of the road he had a 
child's view, the jack looming like a fallen tree and beyond that the 
man face-upward like a peaceful giant composed for sleep. The 
rocks in the road threw long shadows and the ﬁrst birds were about. 
 
 Sylder had already started dragging the heavy body off into 
the Johnson grass and poison ivy when he heard the sound of a 
motor somewhere on the curves behind him. He stopped, then 
turned and started toward the coupe again trying to run and 
dragging the carcass behind him with one hand, stumbling, knowing 
halfway there that he would never make it, that he had made a 
mistake. So he didn't even open the door but dropped the body as 
he reached the car, squatted over it, and gripping the underside of 

the runningboard for support jacked his feet up into the man's 
armpits and slid him toes up beneath the car for three-fourths his 
length just as a truck rounded the far curve and caught him 
struggling to his feet. 
 
 The sun was well up. Across the open country, the wale of 
pines shedding scarves of mist like swamp gases rising on the 
steamy air, some crows were hawking their morning calls. Sylder 
scooted from under the car, stood and was idly toeing out the drag-
marks when the truck pulled alongside. He knew they would stop 
and already he began to think that he had done the best thing, that 
they would have seen the man inside, would insist on helping when 
they saw his ... His arm: he snapped his head and two faces peering 
from the halted truck blurred and he looked down and saw the great 
smear of blood on his arm and dried and blackening on his 
shirtfront, was still looking at it sickly when a voice from the truck 
said: 
 
 Kin we hep ye? 
 
 He didn't look up for a second, caught in the pain of his 
wrecked shoulder raging now as if loosed by the voice from the 
truck cab, and not lost either to the irony of it. Then he raised his 
face to the curious sympathetic eyes watching him with a bland 
serenity that not even the bloody vision of himself could rufﬂe. 
 
 They were on the far side, he looking at them across the 
incline of the open turtledeck, so that even as he said We he 
thought: They can't see him. Yet he couldn't get his mind that far 
ahead, and even afterwards could not trace the possibilities on their 
separate courses. He reconciled the whole thing by this: that there 
was no way to keep them from getting out of the truck anyway. So 
he said: We had a little accident, and thought Yes, they will get out 
anyway. These bastards will jest have to get out and see good. 
 
 The truck doors spread simultaneously like rusty wings and 
fell to in a rattle of glass uncushioned by any upholstery. They were 
a man and his son, the elder heavy and red, with creased skin, the 
younger a tall and thinner duplication. They came shufﬂing around 
the rear of the car with an air of inﬁnite and abiding patience. Sylder 
turned slowly, his eye raking over the scene, trying to imagine what 
it looked like: the feet protruding solemnly from under the car, the 
car itself with the hole torn in the quarterpanel and in the door, the 
dent where the base of the jack hit and the jack lying in the road ... 

 
 You hurt bad? the man asked. 
 
 Naw, Sylder grunted. The man was looking past him. 
 
 What happent? 
 
 Car fell, Sylder said. No-account piece of a jack give way on 
me. He kicked at the handle. 
 
 The man eyed the strewn jack. Shore did now, didn't it, he 
said. Whew. Them things'r dangerous as a cocked gun. Always 
have maintained it. How about your buddy there? Nodding at the 
upturned feet. 
 
 Yeah, Sylder said to himself. How about him now. Then to the 
man: He's all right. Knocked the mufﬂer down when she fell. Soon's 
he gets her wired back we'll be set. The man was moving around 
him; Sylder cut him off. Say, he said, tell you what you might do. 
 
 What's that? 
 
 Get your dead ass out of here, Sylder thought. He said: Well, 
you might carry me down to Topton, see a doctor. Durned arm's 
bleeding pretty bad. 
 
 Shore, said the man, I guess we might better at that. Looks 
pretty bad. You come on. 
 
 They started for the truck, Sylder behind them, herding them. 
He moved around to the cab, hung back till the older one got in, 
then stooped to one knee and spoke loudly to the corpse: 
 
 Listen, these fellers going to carry me in to Topton to the 
doc's. You come on when you get done ... You all done? He rose 
and turned to the man sitting now in the truck, the motor already 
started. Listen, he said. He's about done, I'll jest go on in with him. 
You fellers go on, we'll be all right now ... and thinking Will you go 
now? Will you go? 
 
 Well, the man said, leaning across the boy (wide-eyed, still 
silent, getting into the truck), you sure you okay now? 
 
 Sure, Sylder said, already waving to them. Much obliged. 
 
 You're more'n welcome, the man said. His face moved back, 
the boy nodded. The gears shifted with a grating sound and the 
motor died, hushed suddenly in the blue stillness of the broken day. 
 
 Sylder stood there listening to the tortured cranking of the 
starter and thinking: Ah, God. I should've knowed. That raggedy-
assed son of a bitch ain't goin to ... 
 
 But it did. The motor coughed a few times, then clattered to a 
low roar. The gears raked again and the truck pulled away sifting up 

dustspurs from the rear wheels and was gone almost instantly 
beyond the curve of the road. 
 
 They never seen the hole, Sylder said. They must never of 
even seen it. Then he thought: How in hell would they know how 
long it'd been there if they had? 
 
 He turned and made for the far side of the car, listing badly, 
staggerfooted, reeled at the rear bumper and collapsed into the 
trunk whacking his broken shoulder against the spare tire. There he 
sat for some minutes dazed and his mind threatening 
unconsciousness again. 
 
 Got to get the hell out of here, he said, shaking his head and 
wobbling to his feet. He steadied himself with one hand against the 
cool skin of the coupe, worked his way to the other side and 
squatted there above the brogans. He cursed them for a while, then 
took hold of one worn heel and bracing a foot against the 
runningboard began to pull the man out. He tried not to look when 
the head emerged, then gave up and had a good look. The eyes 
were leaping from their sockets, an expression of ghastly surprise, 
the tongue still poking out. Sylder pulled him to the back of the car, 
got his hand in the shirt collar, lifting him bodily, and jerked him into 
the trunk. Only the legs dangled over the bumper and these he 
folded in after. Then he collected the jack and threw it in, dropped 
the lid, went to the switch for the keys and locked the trunk. 
 
 Night. The coombs of the mountain ﬂuted with hound voices, 
a threnody on the cooling air. Flying squirrels looped in feathery 
silence from tree to tree above the old man sitting on a punk log, his 
feet restless trampling down the poison ivy, listening to Scout and 
Buster ﬂowing through the dark of the ﬂats below him, a swift slap 
slap of water where they ghosted through the creek, pop of twig or 
leaf-scuttle brought to his ear arcanely--they were a quarter mile 
down--and the long bag-throated trail-call again. 
 
 When Sylder turned the key, the handle, and swung the lid 
up, he didn't expect the stench that followed, poured out upon him 
in a seething putrid breath. He didn't even have time to step back. 
The spume of vomit roiled up from the pit of his stomach and he 
staggered away through the brush and saplings, retching, ﬁnally 
falling to his knees and heaving in dry and tortured paroxysms. After 
a while it stopped. He sat there for a long time with the sour green 
taste of bile in his mouth, lightheaded, trying to make himself believe 

that he could go back and do what he had to. He stood up and 
smoked a cigarette. 
 
 A smell of honeysuckle came up the mountain, wafted on the 
cooling updrafts, Treefrogs and crickets called. A whippoorwill. 
Abruptly the yap of hounds treeing. His shoulder was pounding 
again and the cast had begun to cut into his armpit. He still couldn't 
take a full breath. He started back, the Ford outlined through the 
silhouettes of trunks and branches like a night animal feeding, a 
shape massive and bovine. At the rear bumper he sniffed 
tentatively, then resolutely reached into the foul darkness and 
clamped his hand over one leg. Turning his head he stepped away, 
hearing the rasp and slide of it following and the thump and jar 
when it fell to the ground. Past the car, edging along the screen of 
brush he dragged it, thirty yards or better before stopping to rest. It 
felt lighter. He pulled it the rest of the way to the pit without stopping 
and then he couldn't breathe any more. He lay in the grass very 
quietly, waiting for the shoulder to stop, and held on to the leg, 
afraid if he turned loose he would not touch it again. His breath 
came back and he sat up a little, not hurting, conscious only of his 
hand hooked around the suppurant ﬂesh. Then he got to his feet, 
jerked the body to the edge of the pit in three long steps, talking in a 
voice skirting hysteria: You son of a bitch. You rotten son of a bitch. 
 
 Dropping the leg he planted one foot in the man's side and 
shoved him violently over the rim, the arms ﬂapping brieﬂy in some 
simulation of protest before crashing into the moldery water below. 
 
 Going back down the mountain he left the ruts twice, cutting a 
swath the second time through a stand of sumac one of which 
caught in the bumper and rode there like a guidon. A limb whipped 
in the window and laid open his cheek. He didn't even know the 
trunk was open until a car passed him on the pike where he had 
forced himself to slow down and he realized that he had seen no 
lights in the rearview mirror. 
 
 From his log the old man watched the shape of the retreating 
lights cutting among the trees. When they went from sight he 
brought a pipe from his jacket, ﬁlled and lit it. The dogs had treed 
some time past and their calls were now less urgent. He smoked his 
pipe down, knocked out the ashes on the log and rose stifﬂy, 
ﬁngering a chambered goat-horn slung from his neck by a thong. 
Low in the east a red moon was coming up through the clouds, a 

crooked smile, shard of shellrim pendant from some dark gypsy ear. 
He raised his horn. His call went among the slopes echoing and re-
echoing, stilling the nightbirds, rattling the frogs in the creek to 
silence, and on out over the valley where it faded thin and clear as a 
bell for one hovering breath before the night went clamorous with 
hounds howling in rondelays, pained waitings as of phantom dogs 
lamenting their own demise. From the head of the hollow Scout and 
Buster yapped sharply and started down the creek again. The old 
man lowered his horn and chuckled, turned down the gully wash 
taking the stickrimmed basins like stairs, cautiously, turning as 
alternate feet descended. He had cut a pole of hickory, hewed it 
octagonal and graced the upper half with hex-carvings--nosed 
moons, stars, ﬁsh of strange and pleistocene aspect. Struck in the 
rising light it shone new white as the face of an apple-half. 
 
 The Green Fly Inn burned on December twenty-ﬁrst of 1936 
and a good crowd gathered in spite of the cold and the late hour. 
Cabe made off with the cashbox and at the last minute authorized 
the ﬂeeing patrons to carry what stock they could with them, so that 
with the warmth of the ﬁre and the bottles and jars passing around, 
the affair took on a holiday aspect. Within minutes the back wall of 
the building fell completely away, spiraling off with a great rushing 
sound into the hollow. The rooftree collapsed then and the tin folded 
inward, the edges curling up away from the walls like foil. By now 
the entire building was swallowed in ﬂames rocketing up into the 
night with locomotive sounds and sucking on the screaming updraft 
half-burned boards with tremendous velocity which fell spinning, 
tracing red ribbons brilliantly down the night to crash into the canyon 
or upon the road, dividing the onlookers into two bands, grouped 
north and south out of harm's way, their faces lacquered orange as 
jackolanterns in the ring of heat. Until the stilts gave and the facing 
slid backward from the road with a hiss, yawed in a slow curvet 
about the anchor of the pine trunk, overrode the crumpling poles, 
vaulting on them far out over the canyon before the ﬂoor buckled 
and the whole structure, roof, walls, folded neatly about some 
unguessed axis and dropped vertically into the pit. 
 
 There it continued to burn, generating such heat that the 
hoard of glass beneath it ran molten and fused in a single sheet, 
shaped in ripples and ﬂutings, encysted with crisp and blackened 
rubble, murrhined with bottlecaps. It is there yet, the last remnant of 

that landmark, ﬂowing down the sharp fold of the valley like some 
imponderable archeological phenomenon. 
 
 * 
 
 PART II 
 
 Curled in a low peach limb the old man watched the 
midmorning sun blinding on the squat metal tank that topped the 
mountain. He had found some peaches, although the orchard went 
to ruin twenty-years before when the fruit had come so thick and no 
one to pick it that at night the overborne branches cracking sounded 
in the valley like distant storms raging. The old man remembered it 
that way, for he was a lover of storms. 
 
 The tank was on high legs and had a fence around it with red 
signs that he had been pondering for some time, not just today. 
From time to time he sliced a bite from one of his peaches. They 
were small and hard, but he had good teeth. He propped one foot 
up in the limb with him and fell to stropping the knife slowly on the 
smooth-worn toe of his boot. Then he wet a patch of hair on his arm 
and tested the blade. Satisﬁed, he reached for another peach and 
began peeling it. 
 
 When he had ﬁnished this one he wiped the blade of the knife 
on his cuff, folded and pocketed it, passed a handful of loose sleeve 
across his mouth. Then he got down from his limb and started up 
through the wreckage of the orchard, threading his way among the 
old gray limbs and stopping to look out over the valley now and 
again, at the black corded ﬁelds and the roofs winking in the sun. 
When he came out on the road he turned down to the right, his 
brogans making small padding sounds in the red dust, his huge 
knobby-kneed trousers rolling and moiling about him urgently as if 
invested with a will and purpose of their own. 
 
 This was the orchard road red and quiet in the early sun, 
winding from the mountain's spine with apple trees here along the 
road and shading it, gnarled and bitten trees, yet retaining still a 
kept look and no weeds growing where they grew. Farther up was a 
side road that went off among the trees, shade-dappled, grass ﬁne 
as hair in the ruts. It went to the spray-pit, a concrete tank set in the 
ground that had once been used to mix insecticide. These six years 
past it had served as a crypt which the old man kept and guarded. 
Passing it now he remembered how he had been coming up from 
the hollow with a gallon bucket when a boy and a girl, neither much 

more than waist-high to him, had rounded the curve. They stopped 
when they saw him and it took him a while, coming toward them with 
his pail, to see that they were scared, huge-eyed and winded with 
running. They looked ready to bolt so he smiled, said Howdy to 
them, that it was a pretty day. And them there in the road, balanced 
and poised for ﬂight like two wild things, the little girl's legs brightly 
veined with brier scratches and both their mouths blue with berry 
stain. As he came past she began to whimper and the boy, holding 
her hand, jerked at her to be still, he standing very straight in his 
overall pants and striped jersey. They edged to the side of the road 
and turned, watching him go by. 
 
 He started past, then half turned and said: You'ns ﬁnd where 
the good berries is at? 
 
 The boy looked up at him just as though he hadn't been 
watching him all the time and said something which cracked in his 
voice and which the old man couldn't make out. The girl gave up 
and wailed openly. So he said: 
 
 Well now, what's wrong with little sister? You all right, honey? 
Did you'ns lose your berry bucket? He talked to them like that. After 
a while the boy began to blubber too a little and was telling him 
about back in the pit. For a few minutes he couldn't ﬁgure out what 
was the pit and then it came to him and he said: 
 
 Well, come on and show me. I reckon it ain't all this bad 
whatever it is. So they started up the road although it was pretty 
plain they didn't want to go, and when they turned down the road to 
the spray-pit the boy stopped, still holding the little girl's hand and 
not crying any more but just watching the man. He said he didn't 
want to go, but for him, the old man, to go on and see. So he told 
them to wait right there that it wasn't nothing. 
 
 He saw the berry pails ﬁrst, one of them turned over and the 
blackberries spilled out in the grass. A few feet beyond was the 
concrete pit and even before he got to it he caught a trace of odor, 
sour ... a little like bad milk. He stepped onto the cracked rim of the 
pit and looked down into the water, the furred green top of it quiet 
and touched with light. Sticks and brush poked up at one corner. 
The smell was stronger but other than that there was nothing. He 
walked along the edge of the pit. Down the slope among the apples 
some jays were screaming and ﬂashing in the trees. The morning 
was well on and it was getting warm. He walked halfway round, 

watching his step along the narrow sandy concrete. Coming back he 
glanced down at the water again. The thing seemed to leap at him, 
the green face leering and coming up through the lucent rotting 
water with eyeless sockets and green ﬂeshless grin, the hair dark 
and ebbing like seaweed. 
 
 He tottered for a moment on the brink of the pit and then 
staggered off with a low groan and locked his arms about a tree 
trying to ﬁght down the coiling in his stomach. He didn't go back to 
look again. He got the berry pails and went back to the road, but the 
children weren't there and he couldn't think how to call them. After a 
while he called out, Hey! I got your berry buckets ... 
 
 Some wind turned the apple leaves, shadow of a buzzard 
skated on the road and broke up in the fencing of briers. They were 
gone. He walked up the road a way, then back down, but there was 
no trace of them. 
 
 Three days later when he came back it was still there, no one 
had come. With his pocketknife he cut a small cedar tree with which 
to put it from sight. 
 
 It was still there, what of it had weathered the seasons and 
years. He went on along the road, an old man pedaling the 
scorched dust. 
 
 The sun was high now, all the green of the morning shot with 
sunlight, plankton awash in a sea of gold. Even late spring had dried 
nothing but the dust in the road, and the foliage that overhung either 
side had not yet assumed its summer coat of red talc. In the early 
quiet all sounds were clear and equidistant--a dog barking out in the 
valley, high thin whistle of a soaring hawk, a lizard scuttling dead 
leaves at the roadside. A sumac would turn and dip in sudden wind 
with a faint whish, in the woods a thrash, water-voiced ... 
 
 The old man took a sidepath that led along a spur of the 
mountain, cutting a spiderstick as he went to clear the way where 
huge nets were strung tree to tree across the path dew-laden and 
glinting like strands of drawn glass, bringing them down with a sticky 
whisper while the spiders ﬂed over the wrecked and dangling ﬂoss. 
He came out on a high bald knoll that looked over the valley and he 
stopped here and studied it as a man might cresting a hill and 
seeing a strange landscape for the ﬁrst time. Pines and cedars in a 
swath of dark green piled down the mountain to the left and ceased 
again where the road cut through. Beyond that a ﬁeld and a log 

hogpen, the shakes spilling down the broken roof, looking like some 
diminutive settler's cabin in ruins. Through the leaves of the 
hardwoods he could see the zinc-colored roof of the church faintly 
coruscant and a patch of boarded siding weathered the paper-gray 
of a waspnest. And far in the distance the long purple welts of the 
Great Smokies. 
 
 If I was a younger man, he told himself, I would move to them 
mountains. I would ﬁnd me a clearwater branch and build me a log 
house with a ﬁreplace. And my bees would make black mountain 
honey. And I wouldn't care for no man. 
 
 He started down the steep incline.--Then I wouldn't be 
unneighborly neither, he added. 
 
 The path followed along the south face of the mountain and 
came out on the pike; a dirt road dropped off into a steep hollow to 
the left. The old man went this way, down under the wooded slope 
where water dripped and it was cool. Half a mile farther and the 
road turned up a hill, emerging from the woods to poke through a 
cornﬁeld where a brace of doves ﬂushed out and faired away to the 
creek on whistling wings. Beyond the ﬁeld and set back up from the 
road was a small board shack with the laths curling out like hair 
awry, bleached to a metal-gray. It was to this place that the man 
came, carrying the stick across his shoulders now as one might 
carry a yoke of waterbuckets, his hands ﬂapping idly. 
 
 The hillside in front of the house was littered with all manner 
of cast-off things: barrel hoops, a broken axehead, fragments of 
chicken-wire, a chipped crock ... small antiquated items impacted in 
the mud. There was a black hog-kettle which he didn't use any 
more; it was ﬂecked with rust. The porch was shy the ﬁrst step and 
he had to climb up, using his stick for support. The front of the 
house in the shade under the porch roof was green with fungus and 
the old man sat wearily on the ﬂoor and leaned back against it, 
stretched his legs out ﬂat and opened his collar. It was damp and 
cool. The house faced to the north with a slope of trees behind it 
and snow lay in his yard longer than in most places. 
 
 In spring the mountain went violent green, billowing low under 
the sky. It never came slowly. One morning it would just suddenly be 
there and the air rank with the smell of it. The old man sniffed the 
rich earth odors, remembering other springs, other years. He 
wondered vaguely how people remembered smells ... Not like 

something you see. He could still remember the odor of muskrat 
castor and he hadn't smelled it for forty years. He could even 
remember the ﬁrst time he had smelled that peculiar sweet odor; 
coming down Short Creek one morning a lot more years ago than 
forty, the cottonwoods white and cold-looking and the creek 
smoking. Early in the spring it was, toward the close of the trapping 
season, and he had caught an old bull rat with orange fur, the size 
of a housecat. The air was thick with the scent of musk and had 
reminded him then of something else, but he could never think 
what. 
 
 He dozed, slept, for a long time. Late in the afternoon clouds 
began to pile up in the gap of the mountain and a fresh breeze 
came past the corner of the porch to rock gently the gourds swung 
from the eaves. 
 
 He woke before the rain started. The breeze had cooled and 
cooled, fanning his face and the beads of sweat on his forehead. He 
sat up and rubbed his neck. A pair of mockingbirds were 
pinwheeling through the high limbs of the maples, were still; and 
then, arriving as if surprised themselves in the greengold heat of the 
afternoon, the ﬁrst drops of rain splatted dark on the packed mud 
below the house. A ﬂat shade undulated across the yard, the road, 
and climbed the mountain face with an illusion of sudden haste; the 
rain increased, growing in the distance with the wind and leaching 
the trees beyond the creek lime-silver. The old man watched the 
rain advance across the ﬁelds, the grass jerking under it, the stones 
in the road going black and then the mud in the yard. A gust of 
spray wet his cheek and he could hear the roofshakes dancing. 
 
 When the one gutterpipe wired to the porch roof overﬂowed, 
the water fell in a single translucent fan and the landscape bleared 
and weaved. The rain splashed in until there was a dark border 
about the porch. He took out his tobacco and rolled a cigarette with 
trembly hands, neat and perfect. The wind had gone and he sat 
back with his head against the green plankings and watched the 
smoke standing in the air under the dampness and very blue. After 
a while the rain began to slacken and it was darkening, the sky 
above the mountain black but for a thin reef of failing gray, and then 
that was gone and it was night, staccato with lightning in the 
distance. The old man began to feel a chill and was ready to go in 
when something cracked on the mountain and he looked up in time 

to see the domed metal tank on the peak illuminated, quivering in a 
wild aureole of light. There was a sound like ﬁngernails on slate and 
the old man shivered and blinked his eyes, the image burning white 
hot in the lenses for another moment, and when he looked again it 
was gone and he stood in darkness with the sound of the rain 
slipping through the trees and a thin trickle of water coming off the 
roof somewhere to spatter in a puddle below. He waggled his hand 
in front of his face and couldn't even see it. 
 
 He stood up and batted his eyes. Far back beyond the 
mountain a thin wire of lightning glowed brieﬂy. Corner post and 
porch began to materialize slowly out of the murk and he could see 
the hound when it loomed up over the edge of the porch, snufﬂing, 
ears ﬂapping and collar jingling as he shook the rain from his 
reeking hide. He came up, toenails clicking on the planks, and 
snuffed at the old man's trousers. 
 
 Where you been, old dog? the old man said. The dog began 
to rub against his leg and the old man pushed him away with his 
foot, saying Go on, Scout. Scout moved over against the house and 
settled. The man rubbed the back of his neck, stretched and went 
in. 
 
 The house was musty, dank and cellar-like. He felt his way to 
the corner table and lit a coal-oil lamp, the ratty furniture leaping out 
from the shadows in the yellow light. He went into the kitchen and lit 
the lamp there, took down a plate of beans and a pan of dry 
cornbread from the warmer over the stove. He sat at the table and 
ate them cold, and when he had ﬁnished went outside with a 
handful of biscuits and threw them to the dog. The rain had almost 
stopped. The hound bolted down the biscuits and looked up after 
him. The screendoor banged to, the square of light on the porch 
ﬂoor narrowed and went out with the click of the latch. The old man 
did not appear again. The dog lowered his head on his paws and 
peered out at the night with wrinkled and sorrowing eyes. 
 
 Cats troubled the old man's dreams and he did not sleep well 
any more. He feared their coming in the night to suck his meager 
breath. Once he woke and found one looking in the window at him, 
watching him as he slept. For a while he had kept the shotgun 
loaded and lying on the ﬂoor beside the bed but now he only lay 
there and listened for them. Very often they would not start until late 
and he would still be awake, his ears ringing slightly from having 

listened so long. Then would come a thin quavering yowl from some 
dark hollow on the mountain. He had used to trot to the window and 
peer out at the hills, at the silhouette of pines in the low saddle 
above Forked Creek like a mammoth cathedral gothically spired ... 
Now he only lay in his gray covers and listened. He did not sleep 
much at night and he was sore and bone-worn from napping in 
chairs, against logs and trees, sprawled on the porch. 
 
 When he was a boy in Tuckaleechee there was a colored 
woman lived in a shack there who had been a slave. She came 
there because, as she said, there weren't any other niggers and 
because she felt the movements and signiﬁcations there. She wore 
a sack of hellebore at her neck and once he had seen her on the 
road and hadn't been afraid of her, as he was very young then, so 
she put three drops of milfoil on the back of his tongue and chanted 
over him so that he would have vision. She told him that the night 
mountains were walked by wampus cats with great burning eyes 
and which left no track even in snow, although you could hear them 
screaming plain enough of summer evenings. 
 
 Ain't no sign with wampus cats, she told him, but if you has 
the vision you can read where common folks ain't able. 
 
 He related this to his mother and she held the cross of Jesus 
against his forehead and prayed long and fervently. 
 
 The old man lay on his back listening to the heart surge under 
his ribcage, his breath wheening slow and even. In the fall before 
this past winter he had come awake one night and seen it for the 
second time, black in the paler square of the window, a white mark 
on its face like an inverted gull wing. And the window frame went all 
black and the room was ﬁlling up, the white mark looming and 
growing. He reached down and seized the shotgun by the barrel, 
spun it around and thumbed the hammer and let it fall. The room 
erupted ... he remembered the orange spit of ﬂame from the muzzle 
and the sharp smell of burnt powder, that his ears were singing and 
his arm hurt where the butt came back against it. He got up and 
stumbled to the table, dragging the gun by its warm barrel, found 
and struck a match and got the lantern lit. Then he went to the 
window, the light ﬂickering thin shadows up the wall, playing to the 
low ceiling and whitening the spiderwebs. He held the lamp up. 
Above the window the boards were blasted and splintered clean and 
honeycolored. He didn't keep the shotgun by the bed any more but 

over in the corner behind the table. 
 
 The old man lay awake a long time. Once he thought he 
heard a cry, faintly, beyond the creek and the ﬁeld, but he wasn't 
sure. A car passed on the road and he wondered about that but 
then he dozed and the crickets had already stopped. 
 
 Deep hole between her neckcords, smokeblue. Laddered 
boneshapes under the paper skin like rows of welts descending into 
the bosom of her dress. Eyes lowered to her work, blink when she 
swallows like a toad's. Lids wrinkled like walnut hulls. Her grizzled 
hair gathered, tight, a helmet of zinc wire. Softly rocking, rocking. A 
looping drape of skirt slung in a curtain-fold down the side of the 
chair swept softly at the ﬂoor. She sat before the barren ﬁreplace 
stitching buttonholes in a shirt of woolen millends. From out his 
scrolled and gilded frame Captain Kenneth Rattner, ﬂeshly of face 
and rakish in an overseas cap abutting upon his right eyebrow, the 
double-barred insignia wreathed in light, soldier, father, ghost, eyed 
them. 
 
 With the lamps aligned one on either side she had a ritualistic 
look, a nun at beads perhaps. Later he watched from the kitchen 
lean-to because it had a tin roof and a wind had come up now and 
was blowing the rain across it with long ripping sounds like silk 
tearing. He turned the pages of his magazine but he had read it so 
much that he scarcely looked at the pages any more; mostly he 
watched how the lampﬂame quivered and the polished work that 
bound the stove, burnt to peacock colors of bronze and copper, 
violet-blue, changed patterns, ran to whorls and ﬂamepoints. He 
waved his hand over the glass and the blue canisters above the 
stove bowed. 
 
 In the kitchen the man on the mantel couldn't watch him any 
more either. After a while he put down the magazine and turned 
around in the chair, sat with his elbows propped on the back and 
watched out the window for lightning. Thin cracks of it far back over 
Winkle Hollow like heat lightning. There was no thunder, only the 
rain and wind. 
 
 The boy thought he could remember his father. Or perhaps 
only his mother telling about him ... He remembered a man, his 
father or just some other man he was no longer sure. His father 
didn't come back after they moved from Maryville. He remembered 
that, the moving. 

 
 It was a house of logs, hand-squared and chinked with clay, 
the heavy rafters in the loft pinned with wooden pegs. There had 
been a loom in the loft but it had since been burned piece by piece 
for kindling. It was a huge affair of rough-cut wood that under the 
dust had retained even then a yellow newness. The rafters still 
looked that way. In the summer wasps nested over the boards, 
using the auger-holes where dowels had shrunk in some old dry 
weather and fallen to the ﬂoor to emerge out into the hot loft and 
drone past his bed to the window where a corner of glass was gone 
and so out into the sunlight. There had been mud-dobber nests 
stacked up the wide planks too but his mother had raked them all 
down one day and aside from the wasps there were only the borers 
and woodworms, which he never saw but knew by the soft cones of 
wood-dust that gathered on the ﬂoor, the top log beneath the eaves, 
or trailed down upon the cobwebs, heavy yellow sheets of them 
opaque with dust and thick as muslin. 
 
 The house was tall and severe with few windows. Some 
supposed it to be the oldest house in the county. It was roofed with 
shakes and they seemed the only part of it not impervious to 
weather and time, for they were blackened and split, and now 
curling in their ruin they seemed victims of a long-ago ﬁre which the 
house had somehow escaped altogether, for it was sound and the 
logs were ﬁnely checked and seasoned. They sagged and bellied 
and seemed supported only by the chimneys of clay and river rock 
at either end, but the house was strong and settled and no wind 
could bring a creak from it. 
 
 They paid no tax on it, for it did not exist in the county 
courthouse records, nor on the land, for they did not own it. They 
paid no rent on either house or land, as claimants to either or both 
properties were nonexistent in deed as the house itself. They paid 
Oliver Henderson, who brought water to them three times a week 
on his milk route. 
 
 The well hidden in the weeds and Johnson grass that 
burgeoned rankly in the yard had long shed its wall of rocks and 
they were piled in the dry bottom in layers between which rested in 
chance interment the bones of rabbits, possums, cats, and other 
various and luckless quadrupeds. 
 
 He didn't know that, but only guessed because he had found 
a young rabbit in the well one spring and was afraid to climb down 

after it. He brought green things to it every day and dropped them in 
and then one day he ﬂuttered a handful of garden lettuce down the 
hole and he remembered how some of the leaves fell across it and 
it didn't move. He went away and he could see for a long time the 
rabbit down in the bottom of the well among the rocks with the 
lettuce over it. 
 
 She had ﬁnished now and put one lamp on the mantel and 
was looking at it with the shirt in her hand held up against her. She 
stood that way for a while and then she turned and saw him 
watching her over his shoulder, each of them touched with light and 
the space between them through the narrow door dark. He couldn't 
see her eyes and he made out that he was looking at something 
else and ﬁnally turned back to the window and the rain. 
 
 Boy, she said. 
 
 Yesm. 
 
 You get to bed. 
 
 Yesm, he said again. He did not move. 
 
 Your bed ain't got wet, is it? 
 
 No mam. 
 
 It would be wet, always was when it rained even if it didn't 
blow. It was musty and smelled good then and cool enough for the 
blanket. This year, this summer, he had moved to the porch off the 
kitchen, carrying his bed down one Sunday evening while she was 
at church and in it by the time she got back, breathing deeply when 
she stopped at the door on her way in. Then he could hear her at 
the dishes in the kitchen humming to herself, and she never said 
anything about it except she made him carry out the two boxes of 
bottles and cans he had evicted from the corner. The lean-to porch 
was screened in from waist-high up; after he was in bed a while he 
could see even the acorns in the yard oaks. Some nights a tall 
gaunt hound came and peered in the screendoor at him and he 
would speak to it, it standing there high-shouldered and ﬂat-looking, 
not moving, and then it would be gone and he could hear its feet 
padding off through the yard and the clink of its collar. 
 
 He pulled the bed out from the corner, turned back the 
spread and felt the pillow. Then he turned it over and took the 
blanket from under his arm and put it on the bed and got in. That 
was the last night of that summer. He fell asleep to the water and 
metal sounds of the rain runneling over the tin and sluicing through 

the gutterpipe, the rapid slash of it in a gust of wind and the ﬁne mist 
spraying his face through the bellying screen. The oaks stirred 
restlessly, low admonitions, shhh ... 
 
 In the morning the rain had stopped and there was a chill in 
the air and smoke. He smiled at that, for he was waiting and 
weathers and seasons were his timepiece now. There were still 
warm days but that didn't matter to him. Jays were in the blackoaks 
mornings and the grackles had come back, great ﬂocks of them 
bending the trees, their feathers glinting dark metal colors and their 
calls harshly musical, like a rusty swing. Or they would be on the 
ground, the yard rolling blackly with them, and he would run out and 
pop his hands once and see them explode sunward, a ﬂapping 
shrieking horde bearing leaves and debris into the air on the updraft 
of their wings. 
 
 The ﬁrst weeks of September went and the weather held and 
no frost. The veins were coming up in his arms and he would press 
them and then raise his ﬁst and feel the blood in the soft tubes. 
 
 He was pushing time now and he could feel it give. She 
canned the remainder of the garden in two days and was after him 
to get his bed back up to the loft before he took cold. It rained and 
the pond went blood-red and one afternoon he caught a bass from 
the willows in water not a foot deep and cleaned it and held the tiny 
heart in the palm of his hand, still beating. 
 
 His bed was still on the porch. These nights he could not bear 
to be in the house. He would go out after dinner and come back at 
bedtime--and then out again directly she was asleep, walking the 
dark roads, passing by the shacks and houses, the people illumined 
yellowly behind the windowlights in gestures mute and enigmatic... 
 
 One night cutting through a ﬁeld he came upon two ﬁgures 
struggling in the grass, naked, white and frantic in the gloss of the 
quarter-moon as stranded ﬁsh. He went on. They did not see him. 
When he got to the road he began to run, his shoes slapping loud 
on the asphalt till they burned and stung, ran till his chest was 
seared. Below the forks of the road in Stiefel's yard was a great tulip 
poplar. He crawled up the kept-grass bank and folded in the 
shadows of the trunk like a malefactor gone to earth, his breath 
dragging coals through his lungs. 
 
 He sat there for a long time, watching the lights go out one by 
one over the valley. Sound of voices close and urgent on the 

acoustic night air, doors falling to, laughter ... An encampment 
settling for rest, council ﬁres put out ... In caverns by torchlight a 
congress of ﬁends and warlocks rattling old dry bones in wistful 
hunger. 
 
 You goin to hunt him out. When you're old enough. Goin to 
ﬁnd the man that took away your daddy. (Remember: ﬁerce and 
already aging face downthrust into his, sweetsour smell ...) 
 
 How can I? He had begun to cry. 
 
 Your daddy'd of knowed how. He was a Godfearin man if he 
never took much to church meetin ... The Lord'll show you, boy. He 
will not forsake them what believe. Pray and the way will be made 
known to ye. He ... You swear it, boy. 
 
 His arm was growing numb with pain ... could feel her tremble 
through the clutched hand ... I swear, he said. 
 
 You won't never forgit. 
 
 No. 
 
 Never long as you live. 
 
 Long as I live. 
 
 Yes, she said. 
 
 Long as I ... 
 
 I won't forgit neither, she said, tightening once more on his 
arm for a moment, leaning her huge face at him. And, she hissed, 
he won't forgit neither. 
 
 I live ... 
 
 He never forgot. From somewhere in the darkness came the 
sound of a banjo, tentative chords ... a message ... what news? Old 
loves reconsummated, sickness, a child's crying. Silence now in the 
houses. Repose. Even to those for whom no end of night could 
bring rest enough. And silence, the music ﬂed in the seeping amber 
warmth of innumerable dreams laid to death upon the hearth, 
ghostly and still ... The morning is yet to the nether end of the earth, 
and he is weary. Bowing the grass in like sadness the dew followed 
him home and sealed his door. 
 
 Still the weather held, and the rain. The days were gray and 
misty and in the night the trees dripped and spattered. The pond 
had been bottled and he watched them drifting about one morning 
while still-ﬁshing from the limestone ledge at the upper end. Later a 
man came in a skiff poling through the fog and he saw him stop 
what bottles skittered and jerked and lift up the lines to take off the 

ﬁsh. The man saw him and nodded his head and he nodded back. 
The skiff circled at the upper end and returned down the pond, 
silent but for the thud of the pole on the stern-boards. 
 
 He was pushing hard now and the days were bending under 
and cold weather came. His cot was still on the porch and daily he 
checked the undoing of the yard trees, woke to a red world with the 
sun wedged huge and squat in the mountain gap and the maples 
incandesced. Couched in his musty blanket he sniffed to test the air. 
A limp breeze water-wrought and tempered with smoke came 
lisping through the screen with no news yet. 
 
 He waited. In the slow bleeding month of October he 
watched, looking torpid and heavylidded as a toad, his nerves coiled 
and tuned like a waiting cat's. 
 
 One evening coming from the store he saw her on the road 
and she smiled at him and said Hidy. He nodded and went on, 
heard them giggle behind him. He hadn't seen her since late in the 
summer. 
 
 He was crossing Saunders' ﬁeld and bound for the creek, the 
homemade crokersack seine riding his shoulder like a tramp's 
dunnage. He never saw her until she spoke, leaning against a post 
with her hands capping the top of it and her chin resting on them. 
She looked as if she might have been standing there for days with 
an incalculable patience just waiting for him to come by. 
 
 Well, he thought, she ain't old enough to own the land to want 
to run me off of it even if she is big enough. So he said Howdy back 
to her. 
 
 Your name's John Wesley, ain't it? 
 
 He started to say, Yesm, but he said, Yep, that's my name. 
 
 She moved down from the post and came toward him, 
unhurried, sauntering. She wore a cotton print dress that buttoned 
up like a housecoat and where it stretched across her belly or 
strained to cover her rolling breasts white ﬂesh and pink silk pursed 
out between the buttons. She pulled a weed and began chewing on 
it, eying him sidewise, standing in front of him now and favoring one 
leg so that her hip tilted out. What you doin? she asked. 
 
 Jest messin around, he said. 
 
 Messin around? 
 
 Yeah. That's all. 
 
 She nudged a stone with the toe of her slipper. Who you 

messin around with? 
 
 Why, nobody. Jest me. 
 
 The tips of her breasts were printed in the cloth like coins. 
She was watching him watch. You ain't supposed to mess around 
with yourself, she told him, part of a smile at her mouthcorners and 
eyes squinting in mischief. 
 
 Who says that? he asked. 
 
 Me. Preacher says that too. 
 
 I got to get on, he said. 
 
 You goin to mess with yourself some more? 
 
 He started on and she fell in alongside him. Where you goin? 
she asked. 
 
 Pond, he said. 
 
 What you goin there for? 
 
 Fish. 
 
 Fish. Fishin? You ain't got a pole. 
 
 Got one over there, he told her. 
 
 Hid. You don't carry your pole with you? 
 
 Nah. 
 
 She giggled. 
 
 They were walking along slow, much slower than he walked. 
After a while when she didn't say anything he asked her where she 
was going. 
 
 Me? she said. I ain't goin nowhere. Jest messin around. Who 
you goin to mess around with? 
 
 Hmph, she laughed. You'd like to know, wouldn't you? 
 
 Nah. I don't care who you mess with. 
 
 He walked on, looking up at the trees, the sky. 
 
 You carry your ﬁsh in that? 
 
 What's that? 
 
 She was pointing at the croker seine. That, she said. 
 
 Oh. Naw, that's a seine. I got to seine me some minners ﬁrst 
afore I go to the pond. 
 
 She didn't leave. Wading up the creek poking the pole of the 
seine up under the banks he would see her walking along or 
standing and watching. Where the honeysuckles thinned at one 
place she came up to the bank and took off her shoes and kicked at 
the water with her toes as he went by. When he looked back she 
was in the creek to her knees with her skirt hiked up and tucked 

under in the waist of her bloomers and her thighs were incredibly 
white against the surge of brown water where she walked unsteadily 
into the current, leaning, her breasts swinging. She caught up to him 
and splashed water at him. She said: 
 
 You don't know my name, do you? 
 
 All right, he said. What's your name? 
 
 What do you care? 
 
 I don't care, you jest... 
 
 What'd you ast me for then? 
 
 You ... I never ... He stopped. You was the one ast me if ... 
 
 Wanita, she said. If you jest got to know. Wanita Tipton. I live 
over yander. She motioned vaguely beyond the creek, across the 
late summer ruins of a cornﬁeld, a stand of walnut trees surrounding 
a stained house with a green tin roof. He nodded, fell to seining 
again. He didn't have enough ﬂoats and the minnows kept going 
over the back. Still he had half a dozen in the can tied to his belt. 
 
 You like to do this? she asked over his shoulder. 
 
 He turned around and looked at her. She was standing on a 
rock with her legs together. The back of her dress had come down 
and was dark and wet. 
 
 You got a leech, he said. 
 
 I got to what? 
 
 Leech, he said. You got one on your leg. 
 
 She looked down; it didn't take her long to ﬁnd it, a fat brown 
one just below her knee with a thin ribbon of blood going pink on the 
wetness of her shin. She put her hand to her mouth and just stood 
there looking at it. It was a pretty good-sized leech for the creek 
although the pond leeches came much bigger. She just kept looking 
at it and after a while he said: 
 
 Ain't you goin to take him off? 
 
 That moved her. She looked up at him and her face went red. 
Goddamn you, she said. Goddamn you for a ... a ... Goddamn you 
anyway. 
 
 Hell, I never put him there. 
 
 Take it off! Damn you! God ... will you take it off? 
 
 He sloshed over to where she was. Standing like that in water 
halfway to his waist and her up on the rock he could see up her 
thighs to where the skirt was tucked into her bloomers. He got hold 
of the leech, trying to look up and not to at the same time, and 

feeling giddy, shaky, and pulled it loose and ﬂipped it past her onto 
the bank. He said: You ought not to wade barefooted. 
 
 He had felt for a minute that he wasn't even afraid of her any 
more and all he could remember now was running. The huge 
expanse of ﬂesh and the bloomers and her holding him by the collar 
with her feet somehow in the water on either side of him until he 
jerked away with his shirt ripping loudly and splashed back through 
the creek to the bank and out and across Saunders' ﬁeld shedding 
water and minnows from his bucket with the foolish little seine still in 
his hand and water squishing in his shoes, running. 
 
 She said something to the other one and they giggled again. 
He went on with his bread, home, his face burning in the chill of the 
low October sun. When he came in through the porch he saw that 
his bed was gone. She was in the kitchen. He put the bread on the 
table and went up to the loft, his tread hollow on the boxed steps, up 
to the cobwebby gloom under the slanting eaves where the bed had 
been set and made with fresh linen. 
 
 By now in the early mornings the pond was steeped in mist, 
thick and coldly swirling, out of which sounded the gabble of 
phantom ducks. At sunrise the whole valley would be glazed white 
and crystal and the air smoked and tangy from the stoves and later 
from the open ﬁres where women gathered about the kettles with 
long wooden paddles, elvish-looking in their shawls and bonnets, a 
clutch of trolls at their potions. First days of frost, cold smoky days 
with hogs screaming and now and again the distant hound-calls of 
geese howling down the south in thin V's ﬂattening on the horizon to 
a line and then gone. He cut wood, went out early to the rising 
stacks of new pine kindling rimed and shining in the morning frost 
like wedges of frozen honey. He worked hard at it and the days 
went. For that much time he would have buried the yard house-high 
in stovewood. 
 
 If he'd lived, she told him one evening, you wouldn't want for 
nothin. And him disabled in the war with that platmium plate in his 
head and all--turned down the govmint disability, he did. Too proud. 
Wouldn't take no handout from nobody even if it was the govmint. 
He was a provider all right, may the Lord God Jesus keep him. 
 
 Yes, she said, eying him doubtfully, you make half the man he 
was an you'll be goin some. 
 
 The ﬁre ticked on in the little stove, cherrying softly the one 

side of it till the cracks in the old iron showed like thin spiders 
sprawled there. 
 
 Rocking quietly in her chair she had the appearance of one 
engaged in some grim and persevering endeavor in which hope 
was the only useful implement. Not even patience. As if perhaps in 
some indistinct future the chair itself would rise and bear her away 
to glory with her sitting ﬁercely sedate and her feet maybe tucked 
under the rung, her skirt gathered about her. She was humming 
something in her high nasal hum, faint evocation of summer bees. 
The coals chuckled, settled with easy sifting sounds. She rocked. 
That was how winter came that year. 
 
 Through the weary slide of the wiper on the glass, the water 
sluicing away, Sylder watched the rain dance in the lights, ﬂash from 
the black road. Behind him the siren sounded again, louder and with 
a new sense of urgency. I never tried it in the rain, he was thinking. 
The accelerator pedal was crushed hard under his foot and he 
watched the needle strain upward to sixty before he let off for the 
next curve. Got to do it afore I start up the mountain, he told himself, 
or I'm in a sling. So it would have to be at the forks of the road. 
 
 Lightning glared in threatful illusions of proximity and quick 
shapes appeared in the road, leapt from ditch or tree in 
conﬁgurations antic and bizarre. Ghosts of mist rose sadly from the 
paving and broke in willowy shreds upon the hood, the windshield. 
One curve more. Behind him the rear window blackened, then the 
slow inexorable reach of lights crept out and ﬁngered their way 
across the hillside off to his left, remarking scrub pines, ropes of 
limestone stretched in a yellow path like rows of somnolent sheep. 
When he reached the top of the hill the lights dropped away and the 
siren sounded again. 
 
 I can take a wide sweep, he told himself hopefully. The road 
looked like oil. Then there was no more time and he was there, 
nerve and muscle on their own and him just watching. He went into 
it at forty by the speedometer, saw the store blink its square eyes, 
cut the wheel to the left, one hand locking for just a moment the 
handbrake. 
 
 He couldn't see any more then. He brought the wheel back, 
the brake already released. Except he couldn't pull it sharp enough 
and the front end was sliding away and not turning. Then it gave 
and a streaming herd of trees swam past in the lights as if rushing 

headlong off the very rim of the earth and the store loomed again, 
glazed onto the green frieze, spinning past starkly white and in 
incredible elongation. And yet once more, trees and building in one 
long blur and then he was jarred from the rear by a solid whump of 
a sound and heard something snap like a dry stick cracking and 
then a rattling spray of glass. The lights had come to rest straight 
back down the road and he already had the shiftlever up in second, 
the tires whining, inching forward, when the cruiser leapt over the 
hill before him. Then the tires bit and he was gone, raking a fender 
of the other car on the way out with deliberate skill. Behind him the 
store squinted with half a post leaning in through one window and a 
corner of the porch sagging down, abject and humble in the 
pounding rain. 
 
 Sylder popped a match on the dash and lit a cigarette. Adios, 
John, he said. He sang quietly to himself: Long gone, ain't he lucky? 
Long gone, from Kentucky ... rocking slightly with the car's motion 
as it strung the curves. 
 
 It was in August that he had found the sparrowhawk on the 
mountain road, crouched in the dust with one small falcon wing 
fanned and limp, eying him without malice or fear--something hard 
there, implacable and ungiving. It followed his movements as he 
approached and then turned its head when he reached out his hand 
to it, picked it up, feeling it warm and palpitant in the palm of his 
hand, not watching him, not moving, but only looking out over the 
valley calmly with its cold-glinting accipitral eyes, its hackles rifﬂing in 
the wind. He carried it home and put it in a box in the loft and fed it 
meat and grasshoppers for three days and then it died. 
 
 Saturday he went into town with Mr Eller, holding the bag in 
one hand and sitting up high in the cab of the old truck watching the 
ﬁelds go by and then houses and more of them and ﬁnally stores 
and ﬁlling stations, the river-bridge, and beyond that the shape of 
the city against the hot morning sky. 
 
 How you gettin back? Mr Eller asked. 
 
 I'll get back, he said. I got some things to do. 
 
 He was standing on the runningboard, one foot in the street 
at the corner of Gay and Main. Here, Mr Eller said, leaning across 
the seat, holding his hand down. 
 
 What? 
 
 Here. 

 
 I got money, he said. It's okay. 
 
 Go on, damn it, the man said. He was shaking the quarter at 
him. Behind them a horn sounded. 
 
 Okay, he said. He took the quarter. Thanks, I'll see ye. 
 
 He slammed the door and the truck pulled away, Mr Eller 
lifting his hand once in parting; he waved at the back of his head in 
the rear glass, crossed the street and went up the walk to the 
courthouse, up the marble stairs and inside. 
 
 There was a woman at a small desk just inside the door 
fanning herself with a sheaf of forms. He stood for a few minutes 
looking around the hall and reading the signs over the doors and 
ﬁnally she asked him what it was that he needed. 
 
 He held the bag up. Hawk bounty, he said. 
 
 Oh, she said. I think you go in yonder. 
 
 Where's that? 
 
 Over there--she pointed to a hallway. Much obliged, he said. 
 
 There was a long counter and behind it were other women at 
desks. He stood there for a while and then one of them got up and 
came over to him and said, Yes? 
 
 He hefted the ratty little bag to the counter. From the sweat-
crinkled neck exuded an odor rich and putrid even above the stale 
musty smell of the old building. The woman eyed the package with 
suspicion, then alarm, as the seeping gases reached her nostrils. 
Delicately with two ﬁngers she touched the pinked mouthing of the 
bag, withdrew. He upended it and slid the malodorous contents out 
on the polished wood in a billowing well of feathers. She stepped 
back and looked at it. Then she said, not suspiciously or even 
inquiringly, but only by way of establishing her capacity as ofﬁcial: 
 
 Is it a chickenhawk? 
 
 Yesm, he said. It's a youngern. 
 
 I see. She turned sharply and disappeared on a click of heels 
behind a tier of green ﬁling cabinets. In a few minutes she was back 
with a little pad of printed forms, stopping further down the counter 
and writing now with a pen from a gathering of inkstands there. He 
waited. When she had ﬁnished she tore the form from the pad and 
came back and handed it to him. Sign where the X's are, she told 
him. Then take it to the cashier's ofﬁce. Down the hall--she pointed. 
He signed the two lines with the pen, handed it back and started 
away when she called him back. 

 
 I wonder if you would mind, she said, wrinkling her nose and 
poking a squeamish ﬁnger at the little bird, mind putting it back in 
the bag for me. He did. Holding the slip of paper delicately in one 
hand and waving the ink to dry he went to collect his bounty. 
 
 He left through the open door with the wind hollowing through 
into the hall and skirmishing with the papers on the bulletin board, 
warm wind of the summer forenoon fused with a scent of buckeyes, 
swirling chains of soot about on the stone steps. He held the dollar 
in his hand, folded neatly twice. When he got outside he took it and 
folded it again, making a square of it, and thrust it down between 
the copper rivets into the watchpocket of his overall pants. He 
patted it ﬂat and went down the walk past the grimy trees, the 
monuments, the poised and interminably peering statue, and out to 
the street. 
 
 A band was playing, wavering on the heat of the city strains of 
old hymns martial and distantly strident. Rows of cars were herded 
in shimmering somnolence beneath a vapor of exhaust fumes and 
at the intersection stood a policeman at parade rest. 
 
 He crossed the street and the music came suddenly louder as 
if a door had opened somewhere. When he got to the corner he 
could see them coming, eight and ten abreast, a solemn phalanx of 
worn maroon, the drill-cloth seedy and polished even at that 
distance, and their instruments glinting dully in the sun. In a little 
knot to the fore marched the leader, tall-hatted and batoned, and 
the four guidons bracing up their masts, the colors furling listlessly. 
A pair of tubas in the mass behind them bobbed and rode like 
balloons, leaped ludicrously above the marchers' heads and 
belched their frog-notes in off-counterpoint to the gasping rattle of 
the other instruments. Behind the marchers came a slowly wending 
caravan of buses through the windows of which ﬂocks of pennants 
waved and ﬂuttered. 
 
 He watched, gathered up and pressed in the crowd, the 
people sweating in their thin summer clothes, a maze of shapes and 
colors similar only in the dark patches under their armpits, straining 
their necks, toe-standing, holding up children. The marchers passed 
them under the canopy of heat, sweaty and desperate-looking. He 
saw the near tuba player redfaced and wild as if perhaps he were 
obliged to puff at his instrument to keep it from deﬂating and 
drooping down over the heads of his fellows. They passed in an 

enormous shudder of sound and the buses came, laborious in low 
gear, churning out balls of hazy blue smoke, their windows alive with 
streamers, pennants, placards, small faces. Long paper banners 
ran the length of the buses proclaiming for Christ in tall red letters, 
and for sobriety, offering to vote against the devil when and 
wherever he ran for ofﬁce. One by one they passed and again the 
multicolored ﬂags in small children's hands waving at the spectators 
who in turn mopped listlessly at their necks and faces with 
handkerchiefs. A blue and yellow card legended: Don't Make My 
Daddy a Drunkard fell to the street like a stricken bird, leaving an 
empty hand clutching at the window. The next bus splintered and 
ground the ﬂagstem and printed tiretreads over the sign. 
 
 Then the music stopped abruptly and there was only the 
uneasy shifting of the crowd, the slow drone of the buses. The 
pennants and signs came gradually to rest, to a collective 
embarrassment as if someone had died and they went on that way 
until the last bus was by, the little faces looking out solemn as 
refugees, onto the bridge and so out of the city. The crowds ebbed 
into the streets and thinned and the trafﬁc began, the cars moving 
and the streetcars clicking past. 
 
 He was still standing on the sidewalk and now he saw the city, 
steamed and weaving in heat, and rising above the new facings of 
glass and tile the bare outlandish buildings, towering columns of 
brick adorned with fantastic motley; arches, lintels, ﬂuted and 
arabesque, ﬂowered columns and crowstepped gables, bay 
windows over corbels carved in shapes of feet, heads of nameless 
animals, Pompeian ﬁgures ... here and there, gargoyled and 
crocketed, wreathed dates commemorating the perpetration of the 
structure. Rows of pigeons dozed on the high ledges and the heat 
rose in visible waves up from the paving. He patted the folded dollar 
again and started up Gay Street. When he got to the Strand he 
stopped and studied the pictures advertising the Saturday serial and 
ﬁngered the quarter. Then he turned left and went up to Market 
Square. On the corner a man was screaming incoherently and 
brandishing a tattered Bible. Next him stood an old woman strapped 
into an accordion, mute and patient as a draft horse. He crossed the 
street behind the half-circle of spectators. The man stopped 
screaming and the accordion began and they sang, the two voices 
hoarse and high-pitched rising in a sad quaver to the calliope-like 

creaking of the instrument. 
 
 He went up the far side of the square under the shadow of 
the market house past brown country faces peering from among 
their carts and trucks, perched on crates, old women with faces like 
dried fruit set deep in their hooded bonnets, shaggy, striated and 
hooktoothed as coconut carvings, shabby backlanders trafﬁcking in 
the wares of the earth, higgling their goods from a long row of 
ancient vehicles backed obliquely against the curb and freighted 
with fruits and vegetables, eggs and berries, honey in jars and 
boxes of nuts, bundles of roots and herbs from sassafras to 
boneset, a bordello of potted plants and ﬂowers. By shoe windows 
where shoddy foot-gear rose in dusty tiers and clothing stores in 
whose vestibules iron racks stood packed with used coats, past bins 
of socks and stockings, a meat market where hams and ribcages 
dangled like gibbeted miscreants and in the glass cases square 
porcelain trays piled with meat white-spotted and trichinella-ridden, 
chunks of liver the color of clay tottering up from moats of watery 
blood, a tray of brains, unidentiﬁable gobbets of ﬂesh scattered here 
and there. 
 
 Among overalled men and blind men and amputees on roller 
carts or crutches, ﬂour and feed bags piled on the walk and pencil 
pedlars holding out their tireless arms, past stalls and cribs and 
holes-in-the-wall vending tobacco in cut or plug, leaf or bag, and 
snuff, sweet or scotch, in little tins, pipes and lighters and an esotery 
of small items down to pornographic picture books. Past cafes 
reeking with burned coffee, an efﬂuvium of frying meat, an 
indistinguishable medley of smells. 
 
 Under the Crystal's marquee of lightbulbs a group of country 
men stood gazing hard past the box ofﬁce where a tired-looking 
woman sat beneath a sign: Adults 25--Children 11--watching the 
ﬁlm through a missing panel of curtain. Sounds of hooves and 
gunﬁre issued onto the street. He couldn't see past or over them 
and went on by, up the square, until he stood before a window 
garnished with shapes of wood and metal among which he 
recognized only a few common handtools. He held his hand up to 
one eye to break the glare of light on the glass and he could see 
them in the dim interior, hanging from their nail on the wall. He 
checked the dollar and went in. His footfalls were mufﬂed on the 
dark oiled ﬂoors, bearing him into an atmosphere heavy with smells 

of leather and iron, machine-oil, seed, beneath strange objects 
hung from hooks in the ceiling, past barrels of nails, to the counter. 
They were hanging down by their chains and looking ﬁerce and 
ancient among the trace chains and harness, bucksaws and 
axehelves. A clerk passed behind the counter and waited on a man 
idly turning a brass doorknob in his hand. Together they 
disappeared, into the gloom, ducking under a fringe of dangling 
strap leather, to the rear of the store. A few minutes later a gray 
haired man came up the aisle and leaned on the counter looking 
down at him. 
 
 Can I hep ye, son? he said. 
 
 How much are they? He motioned vaguely past the man as if 
there were but one item of merchandise displayed there. The 
traps ... your traps there. 
 
 The man turned. Traps? Steel traps. 
 
 Yessir. 
 
 Well, he said, let's see ... what size? 
 
 Them. He pointed. Number ones. 
 
 The man studied the dull metal shapes as if aware for the ﬁrst 
time of their existence, seemingly puzzled not over their price but as 
to how they came to be there in the ﬁrst place. Then he said, Yes. 
And lifted one down and set it on the counter before the boy at a 
quarter-angle, straightening the chain, as one might show a watch 
or a piece of jewelry. 
 
 The boy touched the oiled smoothness of it, pan, trigger, 
jaws, spring. How much? he asked again. 
 
 Thirty cents. 
 
 Thirty cents, the boy repeated. 
 
 Lessen you buy by the dozen. They're three dollars the 
dozen. 
 
 The boy turned that over in his mind. That would make em 
twenty-ﬁve then, wouldn't it? 
 
 Well, the man said, twelve and three ... four for a dollar ... is 
right, twenty-ﬁve cents is right. 
 
 Well, he said, I aim to get a dozen but I cain't get all of em 
together at the same time. So I wonder if I couldn't get four of em 
today and then get the rest later on ...? 
 
 The man looked at him for a minute and then he smiled. Why 
I reckon, you could, he said. Course you'd have to sign a pledge for 

the whole dozen so as for me to let you have the four at the dozen 
price. 
 
 The boy nodded. 
 
 He reached up and unhooked three more traps and put them 
on the counter, their chains rattling angrily, reached under the cash 
register and came up with a book of old order forms. He wrote in it 
for a while and then tore off two copies and handed one to the boy. 
Sign that, he said. He was holding out the pen. 
 
 The boy took it and started to write. 
 
 Better read it ﬁrst, the man cautioned. 
 
 He read it, ciphering out the tall thin handwriting: 
 
 I, the undersigned, do hereby agree to purchase 8 (eight) 
Victor no. 1 traps from the Farm & Home Supply Store prior to Jan. 
1, 1941. Price to be @ 25 cents ea. 
 
 Signed............... 
 
 signed his name to the bottom and handed back the pen. 
 
 The man took the signed paper and handed him the other 
one, the carbon. Thisn's your copy, he told him. The boy took it and 
folded it, then took the dollar from his watchpocket and smoothed it 
on the counter. The man took the dollar and rang it up in the 
register. Wait till I get you a poke, he said. 
 
 He pulled a sheet of brown paper from a roll and wrapped the 
traps in it and tied them with string. The boy took the package, 
hefting the weight of it in his hands. I'll be back to get the othern's 
afore long, he told the man. 
 
 Then he was gone, out into the blinding sunshine among the 
high-shouldered crowds, sped and well-wished by an old man's 
smile. 
 
 They were still tied up in the brown paper and wedged in back 
of the rafter. On the morning of the ﬁfteenth of November he got up 
early and crossed the icy ﬂoor of the loft, reached in and pulled 
them out and went back and sat in bed, feeling the shape of them 
through the dusty paper. Then he undid the string and dumped 
them out on the blanket. He set them one by one and touched them 
off with his thumb under the lower jaw and they leaped in his hand 
and rang shut viciously. After a while he hung them on a nail over 
the bed and went down to breakfast. 
 
 He was at the creek all that day wading in the steely water, 
poking among the dried honeysuckles, noting tracks and droppings, 

slides and dens. One sleeve was wet past the elbow where he had 
reached to feel an underwater hole and his toes were numb in the 
leaky kneeboots. By the time he got home he was chilled and 
shaking but he had his four sets laid. 
 
 When he left the house the next morning, quietly out through 
the lean-to, letting the door back softly, light was just coming low in 
the east, breaking along the gray ridges, and a cold rim of moon still 
hung over the mountain. The oaks were black and stark and the 
leaves in the yard were frosted and snapped under his feet with thin 
glassy sounds. He cut straight through the woods to Saunders' ﬁeld, 
hoary and pale in the hazy cold of that ﬁrst light, the dead grass 
sheathed in ice like slender bones, rock shoals lapped in mist and 
crows ambling stiff-legged on the far side where willows marked the 
creek's course. He crossed the fence, the icy wire in the web of his 
thumb like a cut. The crows skulked off on hooked wings to a clump 
of gray cedars. He quartered across the ﬁeld, crossed another 
fence, near to the creek now, under the mountain, past the slain 
corn in hushed and battered ﬂanks where doves had fed till late. 
Already he could hear the rifﬂe and purl of the water and then he 
was out on the high bank where the slide went down--a slash of 
packed clay casehardened with frost and pressed with the scrabble-
marks of muskrats--and below in the water his trap lying in wait still. 
He went on up the creek, crossed a shelf of limestone where 
periwinkles crowded and watercress swayed in the current. In a 
honeysuckle tunnel reeds and grasses were tramped down and a 
tangled sheaf of white weed stalks ﬂoated over his second trap. The 
other two were close together just below the pike bridge and there 
were no sleek muskrats in them either. The creek clattered down 
through green stone grottoes, over the rocks, curling, eddying under 
the white roots of cottonwoods where crawﬁsh peered out with 
stemmed eyes. And the sun running red on the mountain, high killy 
and stoop of a kestrel hunting, morning spiders at their crewelwork. 
But no muskrats struggled in his sets. 
 
 After ﬁve mornings he pulled one trap and carried it to the 
bridge. There were fresh tracks on a siltbar there and he set his trap 
in the shallow water where they came and went. Two mornings later 
the trap was pulled out in the creek and there was a toenail clamped 
in the underside of the jaws. He reset it and was at the creek an 
hour before daylight in the morning with a ﬂashlight. 

 
 Light pale as milk guided the old man's steps over the ﬁeld to 
the creek and then to the mountain, stepping into the black wall of 
pine-shadows and climbing up the lower slopes out into the 
hardwoods, bearded hickories trailing grapevines, oaks and crooked 
waterless cottonwoods, a quarter mile from the creek now, past the 
white chopped butt of a bee tree lately felled, past the little hooked 
Indian tree and passing silent and catlike up the mountain in the 
darkness under latticed leaves scudding against the sky in some 
small wind. Light saw him through the thick summer ivy and over 
windfalls and limestone. Past the sink where on a high bluff among 
trilobites and ﬁshbones, shells of ossiﬁed crustaceans from an 
ancient sea, a great stone tusk jutted. 
 
 The old man kept to a steep path off to the right and came 
through the last thick brush to the mountain road, breathing heavily. 
He stopped there to lean on his cane and the ﬁrst slant light of 
moon topped the mountain on the far side so that the crest of it was 
washed in a watery silver and the dust of the road shone like mica. 
A half mile to his left was the circle at the end of the road and 
beyond that the fence and the installation. The road to the spray-pit 
was but a few yards to the right of where he stood in the road now, 
hearing his breath soar out in the silence. He looked as one peering 
from vast heights, the sky seeming to lie below him in a 
measureless spread, ﬂickering like foil by half-light and gleaming 
lamely into shadow where it folded to the trees. 
 
 Years back on summer nights he used to walk with neighbor 
boys two miles to the store to buy candy and cigars. They would 
come back over the warm and deserted roads talking and smoking 
the cigars. One night taking a shortcut they passed a house and 
saw through one window a woman undressing for bed. The others 
had gone back for a second look but he would not go and they 
laughed at him. The old man remembered it now with dim regret, 
and remembered such nights when the air was warm as a breath 
and the moon no dead thing. He started down the road to the 
orchard path and to the pit for this second look. 
 
 The moon was higher now as he came past the stand of 
bullbriers into the orchard, the blackened limbs of the trees falling 
ﬂatly as paper across the path and the red puddle of moon moving 
as he moved, sliding sodden and glob-like from limb to limb, fatly 
surreptitious, watching as he watched. His feet moved ahead of him, 

disembodied and unfamiliar, ﬂoating through the banded shadows, 
and the limecolored grass swished and folded, breaking to light-
shivered undersides like glass splintering softly, catching the pale 
light and then rushing to darkness. Excepting the counterpoint of 
crickets there was no other sound. 
 
 Where the road curved to bring into view the clearing, the dim 
outline of the pit, the old man paused. The glade seemed invested 
with an aura of antiquity, overhung with a silence both spectral and 
reverent. He could feel something cold rising up in him and was 
almost of a mind to turn back. Taking a little tighter grip upon his 
cane he stood so for a while, then stepped into the clearing and 
came to the edge of the pit, ushering his own presence forward like 
a child to the pale gray lip of concrete stretched in the grass like a 
fallen monument, stepped up on it and looked into the black square 
of the pit incised geometrically into the earth. 
 
 The old man had visited here in the years past but never by 
night. Each winter he came and cut a cedar to serve for wreath and 
covering, the waxed and ciliate sprigs holding their green well into 
the spring before the heat blasted them and even then they held 
their shape, like reproductions in dull copper. It took a year's 
weather to fret them into the aromatic humus which steeped in what 
rainwater the pit held and so rendered in turn a tannic liquor dark as 
pitchblende by which the old man fancied had long been stained the 
wormscored bones that lay here. These things he observed, for he 
was a watcher of the seasons and their work. By the coming 
Christmas he would have cut the seventh cedar and with this he felt 
might come an end to his long deadwatch. 
 
 So he stood, looking down, and now he thought it less eerie 
than he had supposed, the half-darkness about him almost 
sheltering. Seeing that the range of his visibility extended at least 
partially into the pit he even sat down on the concrete edge and 
dangled his feet. He tugged a pipe from the folds of his overalls, 
ﬁlled it from a small sack of tobacco and lit it, pufﬁng deeply, 
watched the smoke pale against the night by the matchﬂare. Then 
he held the match out over the pit and peered down, but he could 
not see even the rustcolored tips of the cedars and the match 
burned down to his thumb and he dropped it. 
 
 There was nothing. The dead had risen and gone; no 
revenant mourned here the unburied remains. Slanting down the 

near wall was a half square of light and he could see the blotches of 
moss and fungus on the pale concrete like land-shapes from some 
ancient atlas. But that was all. Then in the silence there came from 
the pit a single momentary water-sound, softly, a small, almost 
tentative slosh. 
 
 He got to his feet and stepped back, then turned and trotted 
back up the path with his queer shambling gait, neither a run nor a 
walk, waving his cane about curiously. 
 
 Back in the road he slowed his steps; his breath was rasping 
and his chest tight. 
 
 He wandered up the road a way and came to a cleared place 
where he could see down through the thin trees faced with light the 
slope of the ground pouring over like a waterfall to break 
somewhere below, and the small yellow pinholes, lights from shacks 
and houses, warmth and life, burning steadfast among the ﬁtful 
lightning bugs. A dog barked. He squatted on one heel in the road, 
tilted his cane against his shoulder, laved a handful of the warm 
dust through his ﬁngers. A light breeze was coming up from the 
valley. 
 
 To his right, off beyond the last black swatch of trees in 
silhouette cresting the nob, he could hear a long cry of tires on the 
curves; in a little while the sound of a motor racking the night. The 
car came through the cut of the mountain, howling brokenly in the 
windgap. Fine pencils of light appeared far below him, swinging an 
arc, shadows racing on the lit trees and then lining down the road 
and the car hurtling into sight, small and black, pushing the lights 
ahead of it. It rocketed down the grade and in a thin and slowly 
fading wail of rubber slid to darkness again where the road curved 
at the foot of the mountain. 
 
 The old man's legs began to cramp under him and he rose 
and stood about trying to work the stiffness out of them. He 
balanced on one leg and bent himself up and down by the strength 
of his knee. Then he stooped all the way down and tried to raise 
himself, an old man, exercising at midnight on a mountain top--too 
old to get up that way, and that was the good leg too. He hadn't 
been able to do it with the other leg for years and it creaked like dry 
harness. It still had birdshot in it, above the knee and higher, almost 
(he could remember yet the doctor pointing to the last little blue 
hole) to where a man surely oughtn't to be hit. Years later the leg 

had begun to weaken. The head too, the old man told himself, and 
got up, looked out over the valley once more before starting up the 
road. 
 
 Toward Red Branch a dog barked again. Another answered, 
and another, their calls and yaps spreading across the valley until 
the last sound was thin and distant as an echo. No dogs howled in 
the Hopper or down along Forked Creek where the old man lived. 
He thought of Scout bedded under the house, old and lame with his 
tattered hide half naked of hair, the bald patches crusted and scaly-
skinned as a lizard. Scout with his hand-stitched belly and ribboned 
ears, split their length in places, whose brows so folded over his 
eyes that he could see at all only by holding up his head--which 
gave him an inquisitive air as he walked, as if he followed forever 
some wonderful odor strung out before him. Big even for a redbone, 
a strong dog in his day, but he was seventeen years old. The old 
man had traded a broken shotgun for him when he was a pup. 
 
 He walked and ruminated and furrowed the dust absently with 
his cane until he came to the circle at the end of the road and the 
knoll beyond where the trees had been plucked from the ground 
and not even a weed grew. A barren spot, bright in the moonwash, 
mercurial and luminescent as a sea, the pits from which the trees 
had been wrenched dark on the naked bulb of the mountain as 
moon craters. And on the very promontory of this lunar scene the 
tank like a great silver ikon, fat and bald and sinister. When he got 
to the fence he stopped and leaned his cane and hooked his ﬁngers 
through the mesh of the wire. Within the enclosure there was no 
movement. The great dome stood complacent, huge, seeming older 
than the very dirt, the rocks, as if it had spawned them of itself and 
stood surveying the work, clean and coldly gleaming and capable of 
inﬁnite contempt. 
 
 He clung there wrapped in the fence for some time, perhaps 
the better part of an hour. He did not move except that from time to 
time he licked the cold metal of the diamonded wire with his tongue. 
 
 When the old man reached home again the moon was down. 
He did not remember coming back down the mountain. But there 
was the house looming, taking shape as he approached, and he felt 
that he had come a great distance, a sleepwalker who might have 
spanned vast and dangerous terrains unwittingly and unharmed. 
 
 As he turned his steps up the path a shadow swirled past his 

knees and ﬂed soundlessly into the night. 
 
 In one corner of the front room there was an old wooden 
footlocker and the old man cleared away papers and clothes from 
the top of it and set the lamp on the ﬂoor close by. Then he undid 
the broken hasp and lifted it open. He rummaged through it, 
stopping now and again to examine some object: a brass watch 
weighing perhaps a quarter of a pound, a pair of cock-gaffs, a .32 
rimﬁre revolver with owlhead grips and the hand broken so that the 
cylinder spun smooth as a barrel in water. Reams and sheafs of old 
catalogs and lists he thumbed through. An eight-gauge shotgun 
shell. At length he came up with a small square box decorated with 
ﬂying ducks and this he set on the ﬂoor beside the lamp. He 
dropped the lid of the locker closed and the lamp ﬂickered, on the 
wall a black ghoul hulking over a bier wavered. 
 
 He took the lamp and the box to the kitchen and placed them 
on the table. From the drawer he took a short curved meat knife 
and tested the edge on his thumb, pulled the drawer out further and 
reaching back in it came out with a worn gray piece of soapstone. 
With this he honed the knife, trying it from time to time on the hair of 
his arm until he was satisﬁed, then replaced the stone and opened 
the box. There were twelve bright red waxed tubes in it and he set 
them out on the table one by one, their dull brass bases orange in 
the lampglow. He selected one and with the knife made a thin cut 
around the base of the paper where the brass met. He examined it 
carefully, then deepened the cut, turning the shell against the blade. 
He checked it again, nodded to his nodding shadow and put the 
shell back in the box. He performed the same operation on the 
remaining eleven, putting each in turn in the box again. When he 
had ﬁnished he replaced the knife in the drawer and returned to the 
front room where he took them one by one, the twelve circumcised 
shotgun shells, and deposited them in the pocket of his coat. 
 
 Ef Hobie's father had been dead too long for the people who 
admired Ef to remember him. They were a whiskey-making family 
before whiskey-making was illegal, their family history mythical, 
preliterate and legendary. They had neither increased nor 
prospered and now Garland was the last surviving son. Ef had died 
in a car wreck in 1937, less than a year after coming out of Brushy 
Mountain. Not in the wreck either--he lived three weeks and was 
even back on his feet, where he wasn't supposed to be at all, and in 

the store where people looked uneasily at his gaunt frame, who had 
weighed just short of three hundred pounds. He had been thrown 
clear of the car and then the car had rolled on top of him and they 
had removed a good part of his insides in the process of restoring 
him to health. He was showing them the slick red scar that angled 
across his withered paunch and sucking long drafts from an orange 
dope. 
 
 They performed a autopsy on me and I lived, he told them. 
Then he laughed and got down off the drink box, emptied his 
orange and reached to put it in the rack. The bottle clattered on the 
ﬂoor, he lurched once, wildly, collapsed into the bread rack and 
went to the ﬂoor in a cascade of cupcakes and moonpies. 
 
 So there were only two Hobies, Garland and his mother, and 
hard luck dogged them. Within the month Jack the Runner was 
arrested and sent up to Brushy for three years himself and county 
deputies broke into their smokehouse and took off what whiskey 
was there and took Mrs Hobie, aged seventy-eight, off to jail, 
sending her back home only when it was discovered she had cancer 
of the duodenum. 
 
 So Garland had to carry the whiskey up the mountain now to 
a den in the honeysuckles just below the circle and leave it there for 
Marion Sylder to pick up and haul to Knoxville. There was a gate 
across the orchard road since the installation had been set up on 
the mountain and only ofﬁcial carriers were permitted access--olive-
painted trucks with gold emblems on the doors, passing in and out 
of the gate, the men in drab fatigues locking and unlocking the chain 
sedulously. With like diligence Sylder bolted and unbolted the ring-
plate that held the chain on his comings and goings in the old 
Plymouth. But the two parties using the road kept different hours 
and they never met. 
 
 It was four o'clock in the morning when Sylder heard the old 
man shoot the ﬁrst hole in the tank. He almost let go the case of 
whiskey he was carrying and then when the second shot came, 
hard upon the ﬁrst, he set the case down carefully and stood dead 
still, waiting for cries, commands--an explanation. All was quiet. The 
birds were stilled in their ﬁrst tentative and querulous chirpings. Low 
in the east and beyond the town a gray soulless dawn gnawed the 
horizon into shape. He was braced for another report, holding his 
breath, echoing the outrageously loud concussion in his inner ear 

before it came--two more shots, evenly spaced, something 
deliberate about them. Sylder made his way stealthily along the 
edge of the honeysuckle jungle, crossed an open space, arm of the 
orchard, going in the direction of the shooting. 
 
 When he got to the edge of the clearing where the installation 
stood he could see the man with the muzzle of the gun sticking 
through the fence-wire. He ﬁred and the barrel came up short, 
sending waves out along the woven mesh and back. The man 
jerked under the recoil and the smoke spurted, slowed and billowed 
in the damp air. There were six neat black holes in the polished skin 
of the tank, angled up across it in a staggered line. The man broke 
the gun and picked the shells out. Slyder saw him hold them up for 
brief inspection before throwing them to one side, and saw them 
dance in the new light and knew what they were: the brass bases of 
the shells only, ﬂicking and turning like coins as they fell. 
 
 The man was putting two more shells into the breech of the 
shotgun and Sylder could see them now, and the dull red of the 
waxed cardboard tubes that had been missing from the extracted 
cases. The man didn't hesitate; he raised the gun and breeched it in 
one quick motion. Two more blasts ripped the silence and two holes 
appeared now in the lower corner. He was making a huge crude X 
across the face of the tank. Again he examined the bits of brass 
before reloading. 
 
 Sylder watched wide-eyed from his retreat in the bushes. He 
could hear the solid whop of the full cases lamming into the tank 
and the tank seemed to reel under the impact like a thing alive. 
There was something ghastly and horriﬁc about it and he had the 
impression that this gnomic old man had brought with him an 
inexhaustible supply of shells and would cease his cannonading 
only when he became too weary to lift the gun. He backed out of his 
hiding place and returned to the car. Daylight was coming on fast 
and he began to worry lest the old man's shooting bring 
investigation. He was late anyway and didn't know but that the legal, 
the ofﬁcial, carriers might use the road at this hour even if a crazy 
old man wasn't shooting holes in their responsibility with a shotgun 
and rung shells. There were six cases of whiskey still in the 
honeysuckles and he brought them out two at a time with a hobbling 
half-run. The ﬁring had ceased. He got the turtledeck loaded and 
fastened, got in and started the motor. When he pulled out of the 

weeds and into the road he looked back and there was the old man 
standing on the hill above him at the turnaround, holding the 
shotgun in one hand and leaning on a cane. Sylder lowered his 
head and ﬂoor-boarded the gas pedal. 
 
 When he was safe around the ﬁrst curve he relaxed and 
drove slowly to the gate so as to leave as few signs as possible. He 
refastened the ring-plate and chain, got back in and turned onto the 
pike and toward Knoxville. Just beyond the creek he passed an 
olivecolored truck, the driver and the other man in the cab looking 
serious and ofﬁcial, but somewhat sleepy and not in any particular 
hurry. Genial, unofﬁcial, and awake, Marion Sylder drove to town. 
 
 His light played on the wet mudbanks among roots and 
stumps, a sheaf of brown honeysuckle hanging down and trailing in 
the water like hair. His boots made sucking sounds as he waded 
against the slight current, walked softly the silted ﬂoor of the creek. 
He could hear a car on top of the mountain coming down, the 
exhaust rattling and the tires sounding on the switchbacks. He came 
to the bridge and waded to the spit of loam ﬁlled in against the 
concrete wall. Throwing his light to the set he could see the trap with 
the jaws cocked and the pan, all brown-looking under the water and 
wrinkling in the small ebb and lap of it. He put the ﬂashlight in his 
pocket and squatted on the sand among tracks of feet and tails, 
wiggling his numb toes, huddling down in his mackinaw and 
breathing slowly into his cupped hands, listening in the darkness to 
the water curling past his feet with small muted water-sounds, to his 
cough echoing hollow and blankly among the beams overhead. 
 
 The tires sounded again, closer, and then the motor revving 
between engagements of the clutch and the explosive sound of the 
shift to high gear as the car came out of the last turn at the base of 
the mountain. He followed with his muscles the downward thrust of 
the lever, locked the shift home arm and shoulder. The car was on 
the straight stretch approaching the creek and he could feel the 
vibrations of it, waiting for it to pass overhead. It did not. He heard 
the motor building speed and then there was a sudden explosion, a 
doglike yelp, followed by a suspension of all sound, a momentary 
eclipse of animation even to the water and his own breathing. 
 
 The trees at his left leaped, wild with light, went out again. 
There came an eruption of limbs cracking, splitting, of wrenched 
metal screaming like slate, a heavy and ﬁnal concussion like a steel 

drum bursting. Silence again through which ﬁltered a thin and 
diminishing rain of glass. By the pulsing wash of water at his feet he 
knew that it was in the creek and he tugged his ﬂashlight free and 
poked the beam out along the bridge, the bank of the creek where 
broken saplings and peeled trunks stood out whitely all about like 
markers and ﬁnally to the sleek black ﬂank of the car, upturned in 
the creek with the hood tilted into the water and the off-wheel still 
spinning idly. The side window-glass was laced with myriad cracks, 
shining in the beam like dewed spiderwebbing, and he could not see 
inside. The waterline angled across it, from cowl to centerpost, 
giving it an inverted look of anger. 
 
 By then he was already in the creek again, scrambling low 
under the beamed ﬂooring of the bridge and dipping water into his 
boots with gentle sluicing sounds where he ﬂoundered in over the 
tops, squatting down too far under the canopy of sumacs broken 
over the bank, and the water on his backside icy as alcohol. He was 
thinking: I'll have to pull up on the doorhandle. Then he was at the 
car, stepping and threading the brush it had pulled into the creek 
with it, reached for the doorhandle, crammed it upward, and jerked 
back on it with his full weight. 
 
 It catapulted outward as if something inside had been 
galvanized into violent effort, shot open and pitched him backward 
through a tangle of down saplings and into the creek. In the 
darkness the water closed over him thickly as running oil, choking 
off his breath, ﬁlling his nose. He ﬂoundered to his feet streaming 
and numb, coughing up creek water. Wiping water from his eyes he 
looked about and saw the ﬂashlight, still lit, scuttling downstream 
over the bed of the creek like some incandescent water-creature 
bent on escape. He waded after it, tearing recklessly about in the 
freezing water with the boots leaden and rolling about his shins, 
reached for it, his hand like a bat's shadow poised over the dome of 
light, and then it was gone, sucked down through the silt and mire 
inexplicably, and he was left balancing on one foot in the darkness 
with his arm and shoulder deep in the water. He groped about and 
ﬁnally came up with the ﬂashlight and shook it. The metal cylinder 
sloshed softly water among the batteries. He stuck it in his pocket 
and surged noisily back upstream to the car. 
 
 He was aware for the ﬁrst time now of a sickly-sweet odor, 
faintly putrescent, and by the time he reached the car again it was 

thick in the air and he knew it was whiskey without having ever 
smelled it. Then he could see the man taking shape out of the 
gloom, sprawled on the upturned headliner and half out through the 
open door, one arm hanging into the water. The sour smell of the 
whiskey, the mustiness of the old car upholstery, and what he 
perceived to be blood on the man's face--these burned such an 
image of death into his brain that he made for the bank, panicky, 
clawing wildly at the brush, up to the ﬁeld where light in fragile 
shellpink reefs broke on an unreal world. 
 
 But the man wasn't dead. The boy was already on the bank, 
catching his breath and teetering with the dry rollings of his 
breakfastless stomach, when he heard a voice out of the void, 
hollow and half lost among the chatterings of the creek. 
 
 Hey, the call came. 
 
 He turned, hanging to a jagged sapling, saw in the shade 
below him a movement among the wreckage, a pale face against 
the dark interior of the car, the man propped up on his hands 
looking at him. Hey you, he said. 
 
 He hung there looking at him. A sweep of lights tracked the 
shadows of the mountain and a car hammered the bridge, echoing 
the noise of its passage in the creek. Finally he said: What do you 
want? 
 
 The man groaned. There was a moment of silence and then 
he said, Goddamn, man; how about giving me a hand. 
 
 Okay, he said. He wasn't afraid any more, just cold, sliding 
down the mud and into the creek again and then squatting in the 
water facing the man, wondering what he should say. He could see 
him quite clearly now, there was a dark smear of blood down the 
side of his face. The man looked at him, a suggestion of a grin 
breaking painfully on his face. Played hell, didn't I? he said. 
 
 You hurt? His own words rattled like bb's through a clatter of 
teeth. He started to say something else but a further chill rendered 
him inarticulate, his palsied jaw jerking like an idiot's. 
 
 I don't rightly know, the man was saying. Yes. Here ... he 
reached out one hand and the boy steadied it on his shoulder while 
the man drew up one knee and stepped out into the water. Then he 
pulled the other leg out, his face wrinkling with pain, and so was 
standing in the creek, his hand still on the boy's shoulder in an 
attitude of fatherly counsel. When he started for the bank the hand 

withdrew for a moment, one faltering half-step, and then ﬂew back 
and clamped there like a predatory bird striking. Whew, the man 
said. I must of busted the shit out of my leg. 
 
 It took them some time to get up the bank, the boy trying to 
push him up and him pulling himself along by trees, roots, handfuls 
of dead grass, holding the leg out behind him. Then they sat in the 
weeds at the edge of the ﬁeld breathing white plumes into the cold 
morning air. In the quarter-darkness the ﬁelds looked like water, ﬂat 
and gray. The boy was wet and cold; everything was wet and very 
cold. The man ran his hand along his leg trying to tell whether it was 
broken or not. His trousers were clammy against his skin. The boy 
sat in front of him hugging his shoulders and shivering, his toes 
lifeless, squishing in his boots when he wiggled them and sand and 
grit rasping in his socks. He said: Your head's bleeding. 
 
 The man ran his hand along the side of his face. Other side. 
 
 He reached across and his hand came away sticky with blood 
and he wiped it on his trouser leg and turned to the boy. You want 
to do something for me? 
 
 Sure, the boy said. 
 
 Go down and get them keys then, and let's get the hell out of 
here. 
 
 The boy disappeared over the cut of the bank; the man could 
hear him in the water. Presently he came back and handed the keys 
over. 
 
 Thanks, he said. Here. He took the boy's hand and turned it 
over. What'd you do here? 
 
 The boy looked down at his palm. There was a black and 
jagged line across it. 
 
 You jest do that? the man asked. 
 
 The boy looked at it dumbly. No, he said. I don't think so. I 
must of done it when I fell in the creek. Before ... 
 
 The man dropped the keys in his pocket and struggled to his 
feet. Well, come on, he said. We better get ourselves patched up. 
This way, he added, seeing the boy start for the road. He motioned 
toward the ﬁeld and set off with a hopping gait, muttering under his 
breath Whew, Mother. 
 
 The boy followed him for a few paces, then quartered off to 
the creek again and the man watched him go, his legs disappearing 
in the mist, then the rest of him, so that he seemed to be gliding 

away toward the line of willows marking its course like some 
nightwraith ﬂeeing the slow reaching dawn until the man wasn't sure 
that he had really been there at all. Then he came back with a pole 
and handed it to him. Thanks, the man said. 
 
 They moved on across the ﬁeld, through vapors of fog and 
wisps of light, to the east, looking like the last survivors of 
Armageddon. 
 
 Their path led them up the creek, along the edges of the 
ﬁelds that terminated there--a curve of ﬁelds and the creek and the 
cupped slope of the mountain rising up to their right along which 
shafts of light now appeared laterally among the ghostgray trees. 
They struggled through the last fence, the boy holding the wire and 
trying to help him and him cussing, crossed a plank bridge at the 
fork of the creek, out through a cattle gate and onto the road, 
Henderson Valley Road. 
 
 The boy fastened the gate behind them and the man said, 
We got to stay off this road. They might of found it by now what with 
the light and all. 
 
 They crossed the road and started up a steep dirt drive on 
the other side. We can call here, the man said. The boy could see 
him better now. He needed a shave and the blood crusted on the 
side of his face was broken in ﬁne cracks like old dark pottery where 
he winced with the pain of his slow progress, leaning heavily on the 
pole and breathing hoarsely. He was leanhipped and tall and his 
poplin jacket hung loosely about his shoulders. The boy thought he 
must be awfully cold dressed no warmer than that and wet to the 
knees besides. His own feet he couldn't feel at all now; they were 
like hooves rattling inside his boots. He hadn't stopped shivering the 
whole time. The drive climbed and turned and then there was a 
house. 
 
 It was an older man came to the door, a tremendous paunch 
slung in a gray and ragged undershirt drooped pendulously over the 
waist of his trousers like a sacked hog carcass. Out of a meaty face, 
jowled and white-stubbled with beard, two porcine eyes regarded 
them, blinking. Hot-toe-mitty, he said, slow and evenly. Then: Well, 
come on in if you're able. They entered, the man hobbling in with his 
pole and the boy following. The room was warm and suffused with 
odors of cooking meat. 
 
 Hey, old woman, their host called out, they's two fellers here 

jest fell out of a aryplane. 
 
 A woman came to the door at the far end and looked at them. 
Lord God, she said. She looked as if she might be going to say 
something else, then she clamped her jaw shut and disappeared 
with an air of briskness. 
 
 The room itself was comfortable with the new catalog store 
prosperity of china lamps, linoleum ﬂoors, a Warm Morning heater 
in front of which he installed himself while the two men stood talking. 
They paid little attention to him and he just watched them, the 
injured man waving his arms, telling the story, the other scratching 
alternately belly and head and saying Godamighty softly to himself 
from time to time by way of comment. After a while the woman 
came to the door again and called them in for coffee. 
 
 As they started for the kitchen the younger man motioned at 
him. This here is ... he nodded to the boy. 
 
 John Wesley, he said. 
 
 John Wesley. This here is June Tipton--and this is his Mrs. 
 
 Mrs Tipton nodded back at him as they entered the kitchen 
and said, How do, John Wesley. 
 
 They sat down at the table and June said to the woman: John 
Wesley's the one what pulled Marion out of the creek. 
 
 She looked at her husband and then to him and smiled 
appreciatively. The one called Marion was ﬁshing through his 
pockets for cigarettes. That's right, he said. I might near of 
drownded. 
 
 She smiled again. After a while she turned to her husband 
and said, What all was he doin in the creek? 
 
 Jest laying there, June said. He blowed a tire and his car fell 
in. 
 
 She looked at the boy again and smiled and went on sipping 
her coffee demurely. The boy lowered his face to the steaming mug 
before him. Small waterdrops tripped down from his thawing hair, 
beaded and dropped from his earlobes. He was still in his soaked 
mackinaw and a puddle of water was gathering on the linoleum 
beneath his chair. Raising his eyes above the rim of the cup he saw 
the woman looking at him, leaning forward. She reached out and 
squeezed his coat. It made a funny squishing sound. 
 
 Lord God, she said, this youngern's wet clear through. He's a-
ﬁxin to take pneumony. She set down her cup and began pulling at 

the coat, trying to help him off with it. He seemed bent and tottering 
under the sheer weight of it. 
 
 They got him out of his coat and by then the man had ﬁnished 
his coffee and stood and he said he was ready to go if June didn't 
mind taking them. 
 
 So they thanked the woman, declining breakfast two or three 
times, and ﬁled through the door, him holding the mackinaw in his 
arms now like a great bundle of wet wash, and got into a pickup 
truck parked behind the house and pointing down the drive. June 
kicked the blocks from under the front wheels and got in and they 
began rolling silently, gaining speed, and then he let in the clutch 
and the motor came to life angrily and they catapulted down to the 
road, turned left toward the mountain, the truck coughing and 
lurching and a bluish haze boiling up in the cab. He sat in the middle 
between the two men, trying to keep his knees clear of the gearshift. 
Through a missing slat in the ﬂoorboard he could see the gray road 
sliding under and a slip of bitter wind angled up one jean-leg. 
 
 They drove a mile or so up the mountain and turned into 
another drive not unlike the one from which they started. June 
turned the truck around in the yard and stopped and Marion opened 
the door and climbed painfully down. The boy waited. 
 
 Better come on in, Marion said. The boy turned and started to 
say something and then June said, behind him: 
 
 Reckon I better get on back. 
 
 Well, he said, I sure am much obliged. John Wesley, you 
better come on in and get dried out some; your old lady'll skin you 
for shoe leather. 
 
 So he clambered out of the truck and slammed the door, the 
truck already moving and June waving at them, and he and the man 
started for the house. It was full light now, the air smoky and cold. A 
woman was standing in the door with her arms crossed, holding her 
shoulders. She let them past and came in, closing the door behind 
her. 
 
 Mornin, the man said cheerfully. 
 
 Are you hurt? she asked. She was small and blond and very 
angry-looking. 
 
 Breakfast ready? he wanted to know. 
 
 She looked like she might be going to cry, her face crumpled 
a little and her chin quivering. Damn you, she said. Won't nothin do 

till you've killed yourself, is they? Why you ain't dead afore now is a 
mystery to me and God too I reckon, as I don't see why He'd have 
any call to look out after the likes of you any more than ... she broke 
off suddenly and looked at the boy, standing there holding the coat 
in his arms and still dripping water. What about him, she pointed. 
Your helper. He hurt? 
 
 The boy looked down at himself, soggy and mud-splattered, 
seeds and burrs collected on his waterdark jeans like some rare 
botanical garden being cultivated there, at his rubber kneeboots 
with twigs and weeds sticking out of them, feeling the blisters they'd 
worn and the cords in his ankles pulled from walking in them. One 
sock was completely off and scrunched down somewhere in the toe 
of the boot. I ain't no helper, he said. I jest found him. 
 
 He shot a glance up at the man. He was grinning. Don't let 
him fool you, he said. He was drivin. But he ain't hurt I don't reckon. 
I ain't neither, my leg is jest wore out ﬁghtin that dashboard. 
 
 Your head's wore out is what's wore out, she said. You get 
out of them clothes. Here, set down. She guided him to a sofa and 
began trying to undo the laces of his shoes. 
 
 The boy stood about uneasily, wondering what he was 
supposed to do. She got the man's shoes off and his socks. Now 
she was unfastening his belt. He just sat there, quiet and 
unresisting, as if engaged in some deep speculation. She kept 
saying Damn you, damn you, in a tone of despair and solicitude at 
once. 
 
 She was pulling his trousers off. The boy began to look about 
him wildly. 
 
 What are you doin? the man said in mock indignity. 
 
 You raise up, damn you! 
 
 Here! he said. I'm in no shape for this kind of carryin-on. 
 
 Marion Sylder, I'm not puttin up with your foolishness, you 
hear me? Now you get out of them britches and get out of them now 
and quick. God rest your poor mother I don't know why she ain't 
dead either puttin up with you long as she did ... lift your feet. You ... 
here, wait. I'll get you some shoes too. She disappeared through a 
door and the man winked hugely at him, sitting there with his 
trousers in a pile under his feet. 
 
 She came back and dumped some clothes into his lap--then 
she saw the great bruise on the side of his calf, livid in hues of red 

and purple against the bare white of his naked legs. She knelt and 
touched it, whimpering softly. She went out again and returned with 
a basin of water and a cloth and bathed it carefully, the man crying 
out from time to time in simulated anguish. But she didn't cuss him 
any more. When she ﬁnished she turned to the boy. What about 
you? she said. 
 
 Yesm? 
 
 Yesm? She looked from him to the man and back. You goin 
to die standin there I reckon, Yesm. She narrowed her eyes at him. 
Start shuckin, she said. 
 
 What? 
 
 The man on the couch giggled. He was pulling on a clean 
shirt. 
 
 Here, she said, go in yonder. She pointed behind her. I'll get 
you some clothes in jest a minute. 
 
 He started past her with strange sluicing sounds. Empty them 
boots ﬁrst, she told him. He stopped. Outside. 
 
 He said Yesm again, went to the door and returned, one sock 
on and one off, leaving odd unmatched tracks on the raw pine 
ﬂooring. 
 
 The door she pointed him through led to a bedroom. There 
was a ﬁreplace with a coal grate and a faint warmth still issuing from 
it. He stood in front of it on a small hooked rug for a minute, then 
softly eased the door to. 
 
 Get that blanket, the woman called to him. 
 
 He peeled off his wet clothes, piling them on top of the 
mackinaw which he had laid carefully on the ﬂoor, took the rolled 
blanket from the foot of the bed and wrapped himself in it. 
 
 He was standing at the window looking out at the gray 
morning when she came in with the shirt and pants and handed 
them to him. Then she scooped his things off the ﬂoor and went out. 
He unfolded himself out of the blanket and got into the dry clothes. 
There was a pair of army socks too and he put these on and sat on 
the bed, wondering if it was all right to walk on the ﬂoor with them. 
She didn't bring any shoes though and after a while he ventured out 
into the front room again. The man was dressed, his head 
bandaged, and he was sitting with his feet in a pan of water and 
reading a magazine. He looked up and saw the boy standing there 
in the drooping shirt and the trousers turned up at the bottoms and 

gathered at the waist by the expedient of fastening the front 
buttonhole to a suspender button on the side. 
 
 They ain't much of a ﬁt, are they? the man said. 
 
 Nosir. 
 
 Marion. 
 
 What? 
 
 Marion. Sylder. That's my name, Marion Sylder. 
 
 Oh, he said. 
 
 Pleased to meet ye. 
 
 Yessir. 
 
 Well, the man said, get ye a chair. 
 
 He pulled up a cane rocker from beside the stove, sat quietly 
with his hands on his knees. The man leaned back on the sofa, a 
huge shapeless affair draped with a ﬂower-print cover. Behind him 
on the wall in an oval frame hung a picture of him and the woman, 
the wife, peering out upon the room with tentative and uncertain 
smiles. There were small rugs scattered about the ﬂoor, some 
pieces of furniture--a sideboard, a table and chairs. On a small 
cabinet in one corner stood a walnut trophy with a small bronze 
automobile perched on top of it. 
 
 You know what was in the car? 
 
 The boy looked back at him. Yessir ... Marion. 
 
 Well, the man said. He returned to his magazine, leafed a 
page over slowly, looked back at the boy. He grinned. It was good 
stuff too, he said. Sixty gallons of it. 
 
 Then the woman called them to breakfast and he put down 
the magazine and reached for a towel to dry his feet with. The boy 
noticed that part of the big toe was missing from the man's left foot. 
It was nailless, curious-looking, sort of like a nose. The man eased 
his slippers on and stood up, supporting himself on the couch. 
Come on, he said, let's eat some. And hopped off to the kitchen. 
The boy followed. 
 
 They sat down to a breakfast of eggs and grits, biscuits and 
pork tenderloin and huge cups of coffee. The coffee was black and 
bitter and there was no milk or sugar on the table. The boy sipped it 
slowly, watched the man. The woman didn't eat with them. She 
hovered about the edge of the table resupplying eggs and biscuits 
to their plates, ﬁlling their cups. The man didn't say anything until he 
had ﬁnished except that from time to time he would nudge; a plate 

toward the boy and frown and grunt, urging him to eat. He ﬁnished 
off with biscuits and dark honey and got up from the table. In a few 
minutes he was back with coats and boots and handed a set to the 
boy. Come on, he said, I got somethin to show you you might like. 
The boy pulled on the coat and stepped into the cavernous brogans 
and they went out the kitchen door into the new morning, the air 
clear and cold as springwater, shreds of mist lifting off the mountain 
above them and light pouring through the gap like a millrace. The 
man hobbled ahead of him to a smokehouse where he pulled a bent 
nail from the wood and swung out the door, hinge, hasp, lock, and 
all, and went in. Come on, he said. The boy followed him into the 
musty gloom. Hello, gal, the man said. The air was rife and fetid with 
dog smells. Sounds of snufﬂing. Thin mewlings from somewhere in 
the corner. A small hound poked her face around the man's knee 
and looked up at him. This here's Lady, the man said. Lady sniffed 
at his billowing trousers. 
 
 He could see now: a broken lantern swung from a beam, a 
clutter of tools, a grindstone, an anvil fashioned from a section of 
rail ... The man was squatting in the corner, the hound skirting 
nervously behind his back, poking her nose under his arm. She got 
around him and settled in a pile of crokersacks and he could see the 
puppies then too over the man's shoulder. They crawled over each 
other and fell to nursing. Lady blinked her mild hound eyes and 
gazed at the roof. 
 
 The man picked out one and handed it to him. He took it, the 
fat slick little belly ﬁlling his palm, legs dangling, took it and looked at 
the quiet and already sad eyes, the pushed-in puppy face with the 
foolish ears. 
 
 Four weeks old, the man was saying. That's the best'n, but 
you can pick whichever one you want. 
 
 Do what? 
 
 His daddy's a blooded bluetick--half bluetick half walker, the 
pups. Makes as good a treedog as they is goin. You like that'n? 
 
 Yessir, he said. 
 
 Well, he's yourn then. You can take him home with ye in 
about another month, say. 
 
 Jefferson Gifford thumbed his galluses onto his shoulders, 
took a last swallow of coffee from the still full earthenware cup and 
crossed with heavy boot-tread the curling linoleum of the kitchen 

ﬂoor to the rear entrance way where he took down his hat and 
jacket from a peg. 
 
 A Plymouth? he repeated. 
 
 Legwater was buttoning his coat. That's what he said. I ain't 
been down there. All I know is he said it was a Plymouth. He come 
straight to my place on account of it was on his milk route and he 
ast for me to call you. So I jest come on over. He said it was a 
Plymouth. 
 
 Gifford adjusted his hat and opened the door. Well, come on, 
he said. I sure never heard of nobody hauling whiskey in a 
Plymouth. 
 
 Ain't you goin to call the Sheriff? 
 
 Reckon I'll see what all it is I'm callin him about ﬁrst, Gifford 
said. 
 
 They parked the car just beyond the creek and climbed 
through the wire fence and walked along slow, studying the swath 
the car had cut through the brush and small trees. It had cleared the 
fence completely, peeling a limb from a cottonwood that grew by the 
bridge, and come to earth some thirty feet from the road. It was 
upside down in the creek against the far bank and facing back the 
way it came. Gifford couldn't see anything yet but the undercarriage, 
but he knew it wasn't a Ford this time by the two semi-elliptic springs 
at the rear axle. They had to go back to the road and cross the 
bridge to get to the car. It was smashed up against some roots on 
the bank and they could see the glass leaking from the trunk lid. 
 
 Later when they got a truck down and winched the wreck out 
the lid fell off and glass poured into the creek--someone said later 
for thirty minutes--for a long time anyway. There were even two or 
three jars unbroken, which pleased Gifford--evidence, he said ... 
 
 It was a Plymouth, a 33 coupe; there was a hole in the right 
front tire you could put three ﬁngers in. Other than that there was 
nothing remarkable about it except that it was wrecked in Red 
Branch with the remains of a load of whiskey in the back end. 
 
 Gifford examined the ground carefully, walking back and forth 
along the bank as if he had lost something there. He had written the 
license number down on a slip of paper but on looking closer saw 
that they were last year's plates repainted and threw the paper 
away in disgust. 
 
 Looks to me like he'd of been hurt, Legwater was saying. 

They. 
 
 They what? 
 
 Them, Gifford said. They's two of em. 
 
 You mean tracks? Them's most likely Oliver's; he come down 
to see was they anybody hurt ... 
 
 Cept he never clumb down into the creek to ... See? Here ... 
Gifford paused, staring at the ground. After a long minute he looked 
up at Legwater. Earl, he said, I reckon you're right. 
 
 Figured I was ... 
 
 Yep. The othern wadn't in the car. He jest come along and 
got whoever was in out. 
 
 It wadn't Oliver, Legwater persisted. He never even seen 
nobody around when he come by. He ... 
 
 Ain't talkin about him, the constable said. Come on, if you're 
ready. 
 
 It had begun to rain a little by then. 
 
 Believe it may warm up for a spell, Gifford said. If it don't turn 
snow. 
 
 In the store the old men gathered, occupying for endless 
hours the creaking milkcases, speaking slowly and with conviction 
upon matters of profound inconsequence, eying the dull red bulb of 
the stove with their watery vision. Shrouded in their dark coats they 
had a vulturous look about them, their faces wasted and thin, their 
skin dry and papery as a lizard's. John Shell, looking like nothing so 
much as an ill-assembled manikin of bones on which clothes were 
hung in sagging dusty folds, his wrists protruding like weathered 
sticks from his ﬂapping prelate sleeves, John Shell unhinged his 
toothless jaw with effort, a slight audible creaking sound, to speak 
his one pronouncement: It ain't so much that as it is one thing'n 
another. 
 
 An assemblage of nods to this. In the glass cases roaches 
scuttled, a dry rattling sound as they traversed the candy in broken 
ranks, scaled the glass with licoriced feet, their segmented bellies 
yellow and ﬂat. Summer and winter they patrolled the candy case, 
inspected handkerchiefs, socks, cigars. Occasionally too they 
invaded the meat case, a medicinal white affair rusted from sweat 
where the lower edge of the glass was mortised, so that brown 
stains like tobacco spit or worse seeped down the enamel, but they 
soon perished here from the cold. Their corpses lay in attitudes of 

repose all along the little scupper to the front of the case. 
 
 Leaning against the case John Wesley could see the car pull 
in alongside the rusty orange gas pump and the two men get out. 
When they came through the door the nasal clacking voices 
paused, the chorus of elders looking up, down, back to the stove. 
Some fumbled knives from their overalls and fell to whittling idly on 
their milkcases. John Shell struggled to his feet, opened the stove 
door with kerchiefed hand, dropped in a small chunk of coal from 
the hod. A draft of sparks scurried upwards. He spat assertively at 
them and clanked the loose iron door closed. 
 
 The two men crossed to the dope box in close order, on the 
raw subﬂooring their steps heavy and martial. They selected their 
drinks and the taller man came over to the counter and spun down 
a dime. The other one closed the lid and hiked himself up on the 
box where he sat taking little sips of his drink and smirking strangely 
at the old men. 
 
 John Shell turned to the man at the counter and said, Howdy, 
Gif. 
 
 Howdy, said Gifford, nodding in general to the group. He took 
a drink of his dope. 
 
 Mr Eller came from his chair by the meat block and rang up 
the dime. Gifford said Howdy to him too and he grunted and went 
back to his chair taking with him a newspaper from the counter. 
 
 Warmin up, Gifford said. Outside the rain had stopped and a 
cold wind feathered the red water puddles in front of the store. He 
tilted his head and drank again. A ﬂy rattled electrically against the 
front window. The ﬁre cricked and moaned in the stove. 
 
 Gifford hoisted his dope to eye-level, examined it, his mouth 
pursed about the unswallowed liquid, swirling the bottle slowly, 
studying viscosity and bead, suspicious of foreign matter. In the 
folds of ﬂesh beneath his chin his Adam's apple rose and fell. 
 
 See where somebody lost a old Plymouth down in the creek, 
he said. 
 
 A few looked up. That a fact, someone said. 
 
 Yessir, said Gifford. Seems a shame. 
 
 Legwater, the county humane ofﬁcer, ﬁnished now with his 
drink, sat leaning forward, hands palm-downward, sitting on his 
ﬁngers--an attitude toadlike but for his thinness and the spindle legs 
dangling over the side of the box. He was swinging them out, 

banging his heels against the drink case. A longlegged and 
emaciated toad, then. He kept leering and smirking but no one paid 
him any attention. Most of the old men had been there the day he 
shot two dogs behind the store with a .22 riﬂe, one of them seven 
times, it screaming and dragging itself along the fence in the ﬁeld 
below the forks while a cluster of children stood watching until they 
too began screaming. 
 
 He said, Sure does ... brightly, enjoying himself. 
 
 Gifford passed him a sharp glance sideways and he hushed 
and fell to watching his heels bounce. 
 
 I don't reckon anybody knows whose car that is, do they, 
Gifford went on. 
 
 A few of the elders seemed to be dozing. The ﬂy buzzed at 
the glass. 
 
 I got a towtruck comin to take it on in to town. Sure would like 
to get that car to the rightful owner. 
 
 What kind of car did you say it was? It was the boy leaning 
against the meat case who spoke. 
 
 Gif drained the last of his dope with studied indifference, set 
the bottle carefully on the counter. He looked at the boy, then he 
looked at the boy's feet. 
 
 You always wear them slippers, son? 
 
 The boy didn't look down. He started to answer, but he could 
feel the cords in his throat sticking. He coughed and cleared his 
throat noisily. His feet felt huge. 
 
 Them ain't enough shoes for wet weather, Gifford said. Then 
he was moving across the ﬂoor. Legwater eased himself down from 
the drink box and fell in behind him. At the door Gif stopped, the 
door half open, studying something obliquely overhead. Yessir, he 
said, looks like it's ﬁxin to clear off. Legwater hovered behind him 
like some dark and ominous bird. 
 
 Well, we'll see ye, Gifford said. 
 
 By the meat block Mr Eller dozed with his paper. He had not 
looked up nor did he now. Come back, he said. 
 
 And they were gone. The ﬂy rattled again at the window. The 
congress of ancients about the stove stirred one by one. The boy 
stood uneasily by the meat case. Some of the old men were rolling 
smokes with their brown papery hands. It was very quiet. He went to 
the door and stood there for a while. Then he left. 

 
 Her ﬁrst high yelp was thin and clear as the air itself, its 
tenuous and diminishing echoes sounding out the coves and 
hollows, trebling to a high ring like the last fading note of a chime 
glass. He could hear the boy breathing in the darkness at his elbow, 
trying to breathe quietly, listening too hard. She sounded again and 
he stood and touched the boy's shoulder lightly. Let's go, he said. 
 
 The strung-out ringing yelps came like riﬂeﬁre. The boy was 
on his feet. Has she treed yet? he asked. 
 
 No. She's jest hit it now. Then he added: She's close though, 
hot. He started down the steep hummock on which they had been 
resting, through a maze of small pines whose polished needles thick 
on the ground made the descent a series of precarious slides from 
trunk to trunk until they got to the gully at the bottom, a black slash 
in the earth beyond which he could see nothing although he knew 
there was a ﬁeld there, pitched sharply down to the creek some 
hundred yards further on. He dropped into the gully, heard the 
beaded rush of sliding dirt as the boy followed, came up the other 
side and started out through the ﬁeld at a jog-trot, the heavy weeds 
popping and his corduroys setting up a rhythmic zip-zip as he ran. 
 
 The cottonwoods at the creek loomed up stark and pale out 
of the darkness; he crossed a low wreck of barbed wire, heard 
again the resonant creak of the rusty staples in the checked and 
split cedar post as the boy crossed behind him. They were in the 
woods above the creek then, rattling through the stiff frosted leaves. 
 
 Lady's sharp trail-call still broke excitedly off to their right. 
They moved out under the dark trees, through a stand of young 
cedars gathered in a clearing, vespertine ﬁgures, rotund and 
druidical in their black solemnity. When the man reached the far 
side, the woods again, he stopped and the boy caught up with him. 
 
 Which way is she going? He was trying not to sound winded. 
 
 The man paused for just a moment more. Then he said, 
Same way he is--motioning loosely with his hand. His back melted 
into the darkness again. The boy moved after him, keeping his feet 
high, following the sound of the brittle leaves. Their path angled 
down toward the creek and he could hear at intervals the rush of 
water, high now after the rain, like the rumble of a distant freight 
passing. 
 
 Watch a log, the man called back to him. He jumped just in 
time, half stumbled over the windfall trunk, lost his balance, 

ricocheted off a sapling, went on, holding his head low, straining to 
see. Trees appeared, slid past with slow gravity before folding again 
into the murk beyond. They were climbing now, a long rise, and 
when he came over the crest he caught a glimpse of the ﬁgure 
ahead of him, framed darkly for an instant against the glaucous 
drop of sky. Below him he could make out the course of the creek. 
They dipped into a low saddle in the ridge, rose again, and the man 
was no longer there. He stopped and listened. Lady's clear voice 
was joined by another, lower and less insistent. She was much 
closer now, quartering down, coming closer. He could follow her 
progress, listening between the explosions of his breath. Then she 
stopped. 
 
 There was a moment of silence, then the other dog yapped 
once. Sounds of brush crashing. Two wild yelps just off to his right 
and then a concussion of water. A low voice at his side said: He's 
got her in the creek, come on. The man started down the side of the 
hill, the boy behind him, and out onto a small ﬂat set in the ﬁnal 
slope to the creek and dominated by a thick beech tree. Something 
was coming down from the ridge above them and they halted. A 
long shadow swept past in a skitter of leaves and on toward the 
creek bank. There was one short chopped bark and then a splash. 
They followed, sidling down the slope and out along the bank where 
the water gathered a thin membranous light by which they could 
see, directed by frantic surging sounds and low intermittent growls, 
some suggestion of ﬁgures struggling there, and the new dog 
striking out in the water now to join them. The ﬁght moved down, out 
in deep water and under the shadow of the far bank. The snarls 
stopped and there was only the desperate rending of water. 
 
 A light blinked through the trees to their right, went out, 
appeared again, bobbing, unattached and eerie in the blackness. 
They could hear the dry frosted crack of sticks and brush, muted 
voices. The light darted out, peered again suddenly down upon 
them, sweeping an arc along the edge of the creek. 
 
 Howdy, a voice said. 
 
 Cas? 
 
 Yeah ... that you, Marion? 
 
 Bring that light; they're in the creek. 
 
 They came down the slope, four dismembered legs hobbling 
in the swatch of light as they descended. 

 
 Thow your light, Sylder said. 
 
 They came alongside, dispensing an aura of pipesmoke and 
doghair. The shorter one was working the beam slowly over the 
creek. Whereabouts? he said. 
 
 Down some. Howdy, Bill. 
 
 Howdy, the other said. In the glare emanating from the 
ﬂashlight their breath was smoke-white, curling, clinging about their 
heads in a vaporous canopy. The oval of the ﬂashbeam scudded 
down the glides against the far bank, passed, backed, came to rest 
on the combatants clinching in the icy water, the coon's eyes 
glowing red, pin points, his fur wetly bedraggled and his tail swaying 
in crestfallen buoyancy on the current. The big dog was circling him 
warily, trudging the water with wearying paws and failing 
enthusiasm. They could see Lady's ear sticking out from under the 
coon's front leg, and then her hindquarters bobbed up, surging 
through the face of the creek with a wild ﬂash of tail and sinking 
back in a soundless swirl. 
 
 Cas swung the beam to shore, scrabbled up a handful of rock 
and handed the light to the other man. Hold it on him, he said. He 
scaled a rock at the coon. It cut a slow arc in the beam and pitched 
from sight with a mufﬂed slurp. The big hound started for shore and 
Lady's tail had made another desperate appearance when the 
second rock, a ﬂitting shadow, curving, ﬂashed water under the 
coon's face. 
 
 He turned loose and struck out downstream, stroking with the 
current. The big dog, on the other bank now, had set up a pitiful 
moaning sound, pacing, the man with the light calling to him in a 
hoarse and urgent voice, Hunt im up, boy, hunt im up. He turned to 
the men. He's skeered of rocks, he explained. 
 
 Hush a minute, Sylder said, taking the light from him. She was 
already some thirty yards below them. When the light hit her she 
turned her head back and her eyes came pale orange, ears fanned 
out and ﬂoating, treading the water down before her with a tired and 
grim determination. She had her mouth turned up at the corners in 
a macabre and ludicrous grin as if to keep out the water. 
 
 Ho, gal, Sylder called. Ho, gal. They were moving down the 
creek too, raking through the brush. She's ﬁxin to drownd herself, 
someone said. 
 
 Ho, gal, Ho ... 

 
 He never even felt the water. He couldn't hear them any 
more, hadn't heard them call since he left them somewhere back up 
the creek when he hit the bullbriers full tilt, not feeling them either, 
aware only of them pulling at his coat and legs like small hands 
trying to hold him. Then he was over the bank, feet reaching for 
something and ﬁnally skewing on the slick mud, catapulting him in a 
stifﬂegged parabola down and out into the water, arms ﬂailing, but 
not falling yet, not until he had already stopped, teetering thigh-
deep, and took a ﬁrst step out into the current where he collapsed 
forward like a shot heron. 
 
 But he didn't even feel it. When he came up again he was in 
water past his waist, the soft creek ﬂoor squirming away beneath his 
feet as if he were walking the bodies of a colony of underwater 
creatures clustered there. He could see a little better now. There 
was no light on the bank and he thought: I come down too far. And 
no voices, only the sounds of the creek chattering and rocking past 
all around him. Then he went in again, over his head this time, and 
came up treading water and with something heavy pushing against 
his chest. He got his arms under it and lifted. Lady's head came up 
and her eyes rolled at him dumbly. He reached and got hold of her 
collar, the creek bottom coming up and sliding off under his feet, 
falling backwards now with the dog rolling over him and beginning to 
struggle, until his leg hit a rock and he reached for it and steadied 
himself and rose again and began to ﬂounder shoreward with the 
dog in tow. 
 
 They came with the light and Sylder looked at him huddled in 
the willows, still holding the dog. He didn't say anything, just 
disappeared into the woods, returning in a few minutes with a pile of 
brush and dead limbs. 
 
 One of the men was kneeling with him and stroking the dog, 
examining her. She looks all right, he said, don't she, son? 
 
 He couldn't get his mouth open so he just nodded. He was 
beyond cold now, paralyzed. 
 
 The other man said: Son, you goin to take your death. We 
better get you home fore you freeze settin right there. 
 
 He nodded again. He wanted to get up but he couldn't bear 
the rub of his clothes where he moved. 
 
 Sylder had the ﬁre going by then, a great crackling sound as 
the dry brush took, orange light leaping among the trees. He could 

see him in silhouette moving about, feeding the blaze. Then he 
came back. He gathered the quivering hound up in one arm and 
motioned for the boy to follow. You come over here, he said. And 
get them clothes off. 
 
 He got up then and labored stifﬂy after them. 
 
 Sylder put the hound by the ﬁre and turned to the boy. 
Lemme have that coat, he said. 
 
 The boy peeled off the leaden mackinaw and handed it over 
to him. He passed it around the trunk of a sapling, gathered the 
ends up in his hands and twisted what looked to be a gallon of water 
out of the loose wool. Then he hung it over a bush. When he looked 
back the boy was still standing there. 
 
 Get em off, he said. 
 
 He started pulling his clothes off, the man taking from him in 
turn shirt and trousers, socks and drawers, wringing them out and 
hanging them over a pole propped on forks before the ﬁre. When he 
was ﬁnished he stood naked, white as a slug in the cup of ﬁrelight. 
Sylder took off his coat and threw it to him. 
 
 Put it on, he said. And get your ass over here in front of the 
ﬁre. 
 
 The two men were behind him in the woods; he could hear 
them crashing about, see the wink of their light. One of them came 
back toting a huge log and dropped it on the ﬁre. A ﬂurry of sparks 
ascended, ﬂared, lost in the smoke pulling at the bare limbs 
overhead, returned tracing their slow fall redly through the dark 
trees downwind. 
 
 He sat in a trampled matting of vines, the long coat just 
covering his buttocks. Sylder made a ﬁnal adjustment to the pole 
and came over. He lit a cigarette and stood regarding him. 
 
 Kind of cool, ain't it? he said. 
 
 The boy looked up at him. Cool enough, he said. 
 
 The clothes had begun to steam, looking like some esoteric 
game quartered and smoking on the spit. Then he said, What'd you 
do with the coon? 
 
 Coon? 
 
 Yeah. The coon. 
 
 Goddamn, the boy said, I never saw the coon. 
 
 Oh, Sylder said. But his voice was giving him away. Hell, I 
ﬁgured you'd of got the coon too. 

 
 Shoo, the boy said. Over his teeth the ﬁrelight rippled and 
danced. 
 
 The two men were warming their hands at the ﬁre, the shorter 
one grinning goodnaturedly at the boy. The other hound had 
appeared, hovering suddenly at the rim of light and snufﬂing at the 
steaming wool and then slouching past them with nervous 
indifference, the slack hound grace, to where Lady lay quietly 
peering across her paws into the ﬁre. He nosed at her and she 
raised her head to look at him with her sad red eyes. He stood so 
for a minute, looking past her, then stepped neatly over her and 
melted silently into the black wickerwork of the brush. The other 
man moved over to her and reached down to pat her head. One ear 
was mangled and crusting with blood. 
 
 Coon's hard on a walker, he said. Walker's got too much 
heart. Old redbone like that--he motioned toward the blackness that 
encircled them--he'll quit if it gets too rough. Little old walker 
though--he addressed the dog now--she jest got too much heart, 
ain't she? 
 
 When Sylder let him out of the car his clothes were still wet. 
You better scoot in there fast, he told him. Your maw raise hell with 
you? 
 
 Naw, he said, she'll be asleep. 
 
 Well, Sylder said. We'll go again. You got to stay out of the 
creek though. Here, I got to get on. My old lady'll be standin straight 
up. 
 
 All right, we'll see ye. He let the door fall. 
 
 Night, Sylder said. The car pulled away trailing ropy plumes of 
smoke, the one red taillight bobbing. He turned toward the house, 
lightless and archaic among the crumbling oaks, crossed the frosted 
yard. His shadow swept upward to the lean-to roof, dangled from a 
limb, upward again, laced with branches, stood suddenly upon the 
roof. He slid downward over the eaves and disappeared in the black 
square of the gable window. 
 
 * 
 
 PART III 
 
 Some time after midnight on the twenty-ﬁrst of December it 
began to snow. By morning in the gray spectral light of a brief and 
obscure winter sun the ﬁelds lay deadwhite and touched with a 
phosphorous glow as if producing illumination of themselves, and 

the snow was still wisping down thickly, veiling the trees beyond the 
creek and the mountain itself, falling softly, and softly, faintly 
sounding in the immense white silence. 
 
 On that morning the old man rose early and stared long out at 
the little valley. Nothing moved. The snow fell ceaselessly. When he 
pushed the screendoor it dragged heavily in the drifts packed on the 
porch and against the house. He stood there in his shirtsleeves 
watching the great wafers of snow list and slide, dodging the posts 
at the corner of the house. It was very cold. The hiss of the 
coffeepot boiling over on the stove brought him in again. 
 
 All day it darkened so that when night came no one could tell 
just when it had come about. Yet the snow fell, undiminished. 
Windless, pillowed in silence, down-sifting ... No one was about. All 
the dogs were quiet. In his house the old man lit a lamp and settled 
back in a stout rocker near the stove. He selected a magazine from 
a rack alongside, an ancient issue of Field and Stream, limp and 
worn, the pages soft as chamois, spread it on his lap and began to 
leaf through it who knew it now almost by heart--stories, pictures, 
advertisements. From time to time he could hear scufﬂing sounds 
beneath him, scratchings in the darkness under the ﬂoor where 
Scout turned uneasily in his nest of rotting sacks. 
 
 He turned the pages for a while and then got up and went to 
the kitchen where from a high cupboard above the tapless sink he 
fetched down a molasses jar near ﬁlled with a viscous brickcolored 
liquid opaque as clay. He screwed off the cap, took a clean jelly jar 
from the sideboard and poured it full. Then he went back to his 
chair, settled the drink on its broad arm, adjusted the magazine in 
his lap and began to rock gently back and forth, the liquid in the 
glass lapping sluggishly with the motion. Now and again he took a 
sip, staining the white stubble beneath his lip a deep maroon. The 
oil-lamp glowed serenely at its image, a soft corolla, inﬂaming the 
black window-glass where a curled and withered spider dangled 
from a dusty thread. 
 
 The old man rocked, dwarﬂike in his ponderous chair. He 
seemed to be weighing some dark problem posed in the yellowed 
pages before him. 
 
 Toward late morning a rooster called and the old man's 
window blushed in a soft wash of rose. He slept and color drained 
from the glass and the east paled ash-gray. The rooster called once 

again, questioningly, and shortly the old man jerked awake in his 
chair, knocking the jelly glass to the ﬂoor where it rolled about 
woodenly. 
 
 He peered through the hazy light of the room. It was morning, 
the lamp out and the stove too, and he found himself stiff and 
shivering with the cold, rubbing his eyes now, then his back. He rose 
gingerly and opened the door of the stove, poked among the 
feathery ashes. He went to the window and looked out. The snow 
had stopped. Scout was standing in snow to his belly, gazing out at 
the fantastic landscape with his bleary eyes. Across the yard, 
brilliant against the facade of pines beyond, a cardinal shot like a 
drop of blood. 
 
 There were three of them coming up the trackless road past 
the house, and two dogs. One of them carried a rabbit, holding it 
loosely by the hind legs, its head jerking limply as they went. The 
other two carried guns and the boy knew one of them. He hadn't 
seen him since school started in September. 
 
 They were talking and gesturing and they didn't notice him 
standing there in the yard so he moved out toward the road, making 
for the mailbox, plopping his feet into the dazzling and unbroken 
drifts. The one carrying the rabbit had his feet wrapped--wound and 
encased in burlap sacks to the knee and held with twine. He saw 
him coming and then Warn turned and saw him too and waved. 
 
 Heyo, John Wesley. 
 
 Howdy, he said, sliding down the bank. 
 
 He met Warn Pulliam in the summer, headed toward the pond 
one afternoon when he saw the buzzard circling low over Tipton's 
ﬁeld and noticed that there was a string looping down from its leg. 
He came up through the ﬁeld to the crest of the hill and there was 
Warn holding the other end of the string while the buzzard soared 
with lazy unconcern above his head. 
 
 Howdy, Warn said. 
 
 Howdy. He was looking up at the buzzard. What you doin? 
 
 Ah, jest ﬂyin the buzzard some. He cain't get up lessen they's 
some wind. So when we get a little wind I gen'ly ﬂy him some. 
 
 Where'd you get him, he asked. The back of his neck was 
already beginning to ache from staring up at the wheeling bird. 
 
 Caught him in a steel trap. You want to see him? 
 
 Sure. 

 
 He pulled the bird out of the sky by main force, heaving on 
the cord against the huge and ungiving expanse of wing, lowering 
him circle by circle until he brought him to earth. There the buzzard 
ﬂopped about on its one good leg and came to rest eying them 
truculently, beady eyes unblinking in the naked and obscene-looking 
skull. 
 
 Turkey buzzard, Warn explained. They's the ones got red 
heads. 
 
 Where do you keep him? 
 
 Been keepin him in the smokehouse, he said. 
 
 Don't nobody care for you to keep him? 
 
 Naw. The old lady set up a fuss but I told her I was goin to 
bring him in the house and learn him to set at table and that calmed 
her down some. Here, don't get too close or he'll puke on ye. He 
puked on Rock and Rock like to never got over it--stit won't have 
nothin to do with him. Don't nobody think much of him I reckon but 
me. I like him cause he's about a mean son of a bitch and twice as 
ugly. What's your name? 
 
 The two dogs were beagles, shortlegged and frantic, leaping 
in and out of the chest-high fall of snow, or plowing their noses 
through it and furrowing snow up and past their ears, their tails 
spinning, then looking up with white brows and whiskers, gnomic 
and hoary-faced as little old men. 
 
 Where you-all goin? he asked them. 
 
 T'wards the quarry, Warn said. Come on go with us--I got me 
a skunk in a hole I got to get out. This here's Johnny Romines--
motioning at the tall boy with the shotgun--and that there's Boog. 
 
 Howdy, he said. They nodded. 
 
 We done got us a rabbit, Boog said, holding up the snow-
dusted and stiffening quarry. Johnny shot him in the ﬁeld yonder. 
 
 The dogs circled him, snifﬁng his cuff. Them's Johnny's dogs, 
Boog added. Rabbit dogs. Bugles. 
 
 Beagles, idjit, Warn said. 
 
 Yeah, Boog said. Them's what they are. 
 
 Where's Rock? the boy asked. 
 
 He's layin up under the house still lickin his foot where he 
accidental stepped in the snow this mornin. Cain't get him to stir a 
stump. Sides he won't run rabbits noway. He's a bear dog. 
 
 I got me a dog now, he told them. Half bluetick and half 

walker. Makes as good a tree dog as they is goin. They were 
moving up the road, the beagles for outriders prancing and frisking. 
 
 You run him? Boog asked. 
 
 Naw. He's jest a pup. I been keepin him with a feller over on 
Henderson Valley Road raises dogs. He's the one give him to me. 
 
 You don't need no more excuse to run wild at night. That was 
what she said to him standing there in the kitchen with the pup 
under his arm. She must be a pistol, Sylder said when he returned 
with it, embarrassed, explaining why he couldn't keep it. Don't make 
no difference though. He's stit yourn; you jest keep him here is all 
and come get him any time you've a mind to. 
 
 I got me a old musket at home belonged to my great-
grandaddy, Boog said. It's nigh on long as me my own sef. 
 
 They left the road and crossed a ﬁeld dotted with scrub 
cedars, the beagles coursing now and Johnny Romines calling to 
them to hunt. He and Warn trampled the brush piled all down a rock 
draw and scouted the frozen drainage ditches but no rabbits 
appeared. They crossed a fence and came out onto the railroad, 
following it south across the white quilted ﬁelds, the sun on them 
now glinting and the last traces of icefog dispersing in myriad blue 
crystals on the shining air. 
 
 At the sinkhole they stopped and skittered down the bank to 
test the ice; it was black and evil-looking and woven with sticks and 
weeds. The beagles came to the edge and whined, pawing 
tentatively. After a while they came out too and rushed wheeling and 
sliding in a game of tag, their hindquarters spinning from under 
them as they turned. Boog couldn't skate because of his feet being 
wrapped so he sat on the bank holding the rabbit and watching 
them. Later he built a ﬁre, making a platform of hickory bark and 
piling dead cedar branches on top and they came and sat around it. 
 
 This here's where Johnny caught the bullfrog, Warn said. 
Right over yander off the end of that log. By the ass in a mousetrap. 
 
 How'd he do that? John Wesley asked. 
 
 He bet me a dope on it. I seen him come by the house with 
this mousetrap on a piece of bailin wire. Said he was ﬁxin to catch 
him a bullfrog. We come on over and he set it on the end of that log 
there and then we went on to the store. I thought the poor bastard 
had done lost his rabbit-assed mind ... 
 
 Johnny Romines grinned. He told everybody in the store, he 

said. 
 
 Yeah, we all like to of fell out laughin. So the son of a bitch 
bets me a dope he's caught one by the time we come back and 
sure as hell there he is. Pinched right by the ass. I like to never got 
over it. And wouldn't nothin do but we come straight back to the 
store frog trap and all and me buy him the dope right there. 
 
 It's a old Indian trick, said Boog. 
 
 What's that? 
 
 Puttin bark down like that. To lay your ﬁre on. 
 
 When he reached the fence he rested again, removed his 
gloves and blew into his cupped hands. Along the face of the 
mountain and down the valley ﬂoor guns were sounding, echoing in 
diminishing reiteration. The trees were all encased in ice, limbless-
looking where their black trunks rose in aureoles of lace, bright 
seafans shimmering in the wind and tinkling with an endless bell-like 
sound, a carillon in miniature, and glittering shards of ice falling in 
sporadic hail everywhere through the woods and marking the snow 
with incomprehensible runes. Something ﬂicked rapid and invisibly 
past and struck with a soft pock into the bark of a poplar above him. 
The thin spat and whine of a riﬂe followed. 
 
 The old man paid no attention. He pulled his gloves on, 
gathered the wire in one hand and stepped through, the posts on 
the downhill side jiggling where they dangled in their wires like sticks 
in a spiderweb, the earth having long been washed from about their 
moorings. Some dogs were trailing and after a while he could see 
them below him where the last ﬁnger of bleak trees reached into a 
cut and met the barren ﬁelds, the dogs coming out from behind the 
timber, moving slow and diminutive, their voices small as a child's 
horn, two of them. They dipped into the cut and swarmed up the 
other side and out, across the ﬁelds, their brown and white shapes 
losing deﬁnition in the confectionary landscape of mudclods and 
snow until only their motion was discernible, like part of the ground 
itself rumoring upheaval. 
 
 He went slowly, the snow heavier now, drifted and billowing in 
the honeysuckle and breaking it down into the path so that he had 
to skirt below it in places, teetering with edged steps along the 
incline, uncovering in his footsteps wet patches of leaf black as 
swampwater, not even frozen. When he reached the top of the 
mountain, the road curving away in a white swath through the trees, 

he paused to brush the snow from his shoulders and turn out the 
lumps of ice gathered in his cuffs. He plowed his way down the drifts 
some hundred yards and re-entered the woods to the other side, 
carrying in his hand now the huge handleless knife forged from an 
old millﬁle, receding among the small trees in his stooped and 
shambling gait, apparitional, a strange yuletide assassin. 
 
 A quarter hour later he emerged back into the road again still 
carrying the knife and dragging behind him a small cedar tree. At 
the curve below the orchard he stopped and looked back, then 
relegated the knife to some place in the folds of his coat and 
shouldered the tree. A little further on he entered the woods again, 
trace of a path or road leading off to the right. This time he was 
gone for only a few minutes. When he came back, unburdened of 
the tree now, he followed his tracks to where he had ﬁrst come onto 
the road and so disappeared once more into the woods, down the 
slope of the mountain the way by which he came. 
 
 They threaded their way over the jumbled limestone of the 
quarry, Warn in the lead, until they came to the cave. 
 
 It don't look like much, Johnny Romines said. 
 
 It opens up inside, Warn said. Here, let me hang him up here 
and I'll show ye. He wedged the skunk in the fork of a sapling and 
then disappeared down into the earth, crawling on hands and knees 
through a small hole beneath the rocks. They followed one by one, 
the stiff winter nettles at the cave door rattling viperously against the 
legs of their jeans. Inside they struck matches and Warn took a 
candlestub from a crevice and lit it, the calcined rock taking shape, 
tonsiled roof and ﬂowing concavity, like something gone partly to 
liquid and frozen back again misshapen and awry, their shadows 
curling threatfully up the walls among the dried and mounded bat-
droppings. They studied the inscriptions etched in the soft and 
curdcolored stone, hearts and names, archaic dates, crudely erotic 
hieroglyphs--the bulbed phallus and strange centipedal vulva of 
small boys' imaginations. 
 
 They followed the strip of red clay that traced the cave ﬂoor 
into another and larger room, hooted at their lapping echoes, their 
laughter rebounding in hollow and mocking derision. Water dripped 
ceaselessly, small ping and spatter on stone. The two dogs hung 
close to them, stepping nervously. 
 
 This'n here's the biggest room, Warn said. Then I got me a 

secret room on back with a rock in front of it so you cain't see it. 
Then they's a tunnel goes back, but I ain't never been to the end of 
it. Ain't no tellin where-all it goes. 
 
 Boog came up dragging a load of dead limbs and presently 
they had a ﬁre going in the center of the big room. This here is the 
way the cave-men used to do, Boog said. 
 
 They used to be cave-men hereabouts, said Warn. Pre-storic 
animals too. They's a tush over on the other side of the mountain 
stickin out of some rock what's long as your leg. Ain't no way to get 
to it lessen you had ropes or somethin. 
 
 Johnny Romines took out a packet of tobacco and rolled a 
cigarette. Boog borrowed it and rolled one too and they sat smoking 
in long steady pulls. Which'd you rather be, Boog asked John 
Wesley, white or Indian? 
 
 I don't know, the boy said. White I reckon. They always 
whipped the Indians. 
 
 Boog tipped the ash from his cigarette with his little ﬁnger. 
That's so, he said. That's a point I hadn't studied. 
 
 I got Indian in me, Johnny Romines said. 
 
 Boog's half nigger, said Warn. 
 
 I ain't done it, Boog said. 
 
 You said niggers was good as whites. 
 
 I never. What I said was some niggers is good as some 
whites is what I said. 
 
 That what you said? 
 
 Yeah. 
 
 I had a uncle was a White-Cap, Johnny Romines said. You 
ought to hear him on niggers. He claims they're kin to monkeys. 
 
 John Wesley didn't say anything. He'd never met any niggers. 
 
 Tell John Wesley here about the time we dynamited the birds, 
Warn said. This is last Christmas, he explained. His daddy give him 
a electric train one time and they got it out for his little brother. 
 
 Johnny Romines told it, slowly, smiling from time to time. 
They had wired the transformer of the train to a dynamite cap stolen 
from the quarry shack and buried the cap in the snow. 
 
 We had us a long piece of lightwire, he said, and we set in the 
garage with the transformer all hooked up. Warn here claimed it 
wouldn't work. Well, we'd sprinkled breadcrumbs all round over 
where the cap was buried out in the yard and directly you couldn't 

see for the birds. I told Warn to thow the switch. 
 
 Goddamn but it come a awful blast, said Warn. I eased the 
switch on over and then BALOOM! They's a big hoop of snow 
jumped up in the yard like when you thow a ﬂat rock in the pond and 
birds goin ever which way mostly straight up. I remember we run out 
and you could see pieces of em strung all out in the yard and 
hangin off the trees. And feathers. God, I never seen the like of 
feathers. They was stit fallin next mornin. 
 
 Lord, whispered Boog, I'd of liked to of seen that. 
 
 John Wesley had begun to cough. Ain't it gettin kindly smoky 
in here to you? he asked. Above their heads smoke roiled and 
lowered and they noticed they could no longer see the walls of the 
cave. 
 
 Believe it is some, Warn said. He stood up and was closed 
from sight by the smoke. Hell's bells, he said, let's get out of here. 
 
 This is the way the cave-men done it, Boog said. 
 
 Cave-men be damned, we're ﬁxin to get barbycued. 
 
 They crawled and stumbled to the mouth of the cave--a 
shifting patch of murky light weaving beyond the smoke combers, 
came red-eyed and weeping from their crypt, their jacket fronts 
encrusted with slick red mud. When they had dried their eyes and 
could see again they were in some volcanic and infernal under-
region, the whole of the quarry woods wrapped in haze and smoke 
boiling up out of the rocky ground from every cleft and ﬁssure. 
 
 Mr Eller stood at the counter and watched them come in, the 
clothes steaming on the backs of the men as they stomped off the 
slush from their shoes and stood about the stove making cigarettes 
with chilled ﬁngers, the stove popping and whistling with the snow-
wetted coal, the women excited with the cold, making their 
purchases with deliberation, some towing small children about in the 
folds of their skirts, leaving again, young boys with shotguns and 
riﬂes buying shells not by the box but by fours and sixes and lending 
to the bustle a purposeful and even militant air. He rang the money 
up in the cash register or marked it in his credit books. 
 
 Odor of smoke and cold, wet clothing and meat cooking. The 
snow was falling again and they watched it. Lord, Mr Eller said, 
reckon it's ever goin to quit. 
 
 Boog and Johnny Romines came in with a rabbit and they 
each got a dope. 

 
 Whereabouts you get him, Johnny? Mr Eller asked. 
 
 Over on the creek. 
 
 Warn Pulliam caught a skunk in a hole, Boog said. That right? 
How's he smell? He don't smell too purty. 
 
 The men laughed. He's a fat'n, one said, nodding toward the 
rabbit. How's them pups run? Purty good? 
 
 Purty good little old rabbit dogs, Johnny said. They jumped 
two more but I never got a clear shot. 
 
 Them's beagles, said Boog. 
 
 The old man came out on the pike road at the gap where the 
Green Fly Inn had stood. There was no trace of the inn now but the 
black and limbless pine trunk that stood in the hollow. Snow had 
started again, dropping like a veil over the valley or riding the wind 
through the gap, stinging his face a little. He walked down until he 
came to the Twin Fork road and took it into the Hopper and 
homeward. From a lightwire overhead, dangling head downward 
and hollowed to the weight of ashened feathers and ﬂuted bones, a 
small owl hung in an attitude of forlorn exhortation, its wizened 
talons locked about the single strand of wire. It stared down from 
dark and empty sockets, penduluming softly in the bitter wind. 
 
 At the head of the hollow there was a springhouse and they 
stopped to drink, the water green and pulsing up from the rocks 
where a scalloped fringe of ice jutted just above the waterline. 
 
 I ﬁgured to set here, Warn said, but they's too many people 
come by and you'd get your traps stole. Come on I'll show you 
where I got my culvert-set. He dipped up another mouthful of the 
numbing water, took the riﬂe and trap and handed the skunk to the 
younger boy. He don't smell so bad out in the air, he said. The old 
lady'll pitch a hissy when she gets a whiff of me though. 
 
 They came out on the road and crossed to the other side 
where the creek ran. Warn got down on one knee and peered back 
through the culvert under the road where the spring run trickled 
through. 
 
 It don't never freeze in here, he said. I done caught me one 
muskrat here but what I'm lookin for is a mink. See? I got the trap 
jest back inside where nobody won't notice it. 
 
 The boy peered into the dark tunnel, the water loping slowly 
down the corrugated metal and ﬂaring where it passed over the 
trap. 

 
 I seen mink sign here back in the fall and some lately, Warn 
said. They's mink on Stock Creek too. Used to be some on Red 
Branch but they ain't any more is how come I don't trap it no more. 
You ready to go? 
 
 See, they ain't been no cars in here yet, Warn said. Ain't but 
jest a few people live over here in the holler and mostly they ain't 
got cars. You see that house up yander? 
 
 He looked where Warn pointed. Set back off the road was a 
squat saddle-roofed structure with a thin wisp of smoke swirling and 
circling about the top of the chimney. 
 
 That's where Garland Hobie lives, he told him. You mess 
around there you get your ass shot off. 
 
 How come? 
 
 On account of he makes whiskey, Warn said. Him and his old 
lady. Here. I'll show you somethin directly. 
 
 Beyond the curve of the road there was an old frame church 
and Warn pointed it out. See that church? Well, that was a nigger 
church. They used to be a bunch of niggers lived in the holler and 
they built this here church and commenced singin and hollerin of a 
night till old man Hobie, he's dead now, he run em ever one off. 
He's been dead since afore you and me was born and they ain't 
none of em come back yet. That's how strong he was on niggers. 
They say Ef was even meaner'n the old man. He died right at the 
store back a few year ago. Jest got out of Brushy Mountain. 
Garland, he's meaner'n hell too. They raided em one time here 
back and he give em the old lady to take off to jail. His own mama. 
That's how bad he is. Then they's Uncle Ather lives up here--
nodding ahead of them--he's a purty good old feller. 
 
 Is he your uncle? 
 
 Naw. Him and Grandaddy Pulliam worked together cuttin 
sleepers for the K S & E. So the old man always called him Uncle. 
He's purty old. Got a dog pret-near old as you and me both. 
 
 That's purty old, the boy said. How old is he, Uncle ... 
 
 
Uncle Ather? He must be ninety or better. He's older'n 
Grandaddy Pulliam and Grandaddy Pulliam's daddy fought in the 
Civil War. He owned a lot of land in Knox County and when the war 
was over they took it away from him on account of him bein a 

Confederate. Grandaddy Pulliam says they wouldn't even let 
nobody vote ceptin niggers and yankees.
Why was that?
On account of back then this was the North I reckon.
Late in the afternoon the old man was sweeping the snow 
from his front porch when he saw them coming up the road, two 
small ﬁgures dark against the unbroken fall of snow, laboring 
through the drifts. One of them was carrying a dead skunk. They 
came abreast of his mailbox and the taller one raised his hand. 
Heyo, Uncle Ather, he called.
The old man squinted his milkblue eyes against the glare. 
Hiram Pulliam's grandson. He grinned and waved them up and they 
came, toiling on the slope, bowlegged for a better grip in the snow, 
the Pulliam boy leaning on his riﬂe and the other one sliding and 
waving the skunk about in the air.
They sat around the stove with their shoes off, their socks 
steaming. The old man wrinkled his nose and laughed.
I believe you must of ﬁt that there polecat hand to hand, he 
said.
Can you smell it? Warn said. I cain't smell it myself.
He had to crawl back in a hole to get him out, John Wesley 
said.
I crawled past where he was at, Warn said. I thought he was 
way on back and then I come to see the wire and it went off into a 
little side-hole, but I was already past it then. I was all hunkered up 
down in there and couldn't hardly turn around, but directly I got to 
where I could poke my pine knot in the side-hole there and I seen 
his eyes. I got my riﬂe turned around and aimed the best way I 
could and when I shot, it like to busted out my eardrums.
We could hear him shoot, John Wesley said. It sounded like a 
little old popgun or somethin from on the outside.
Well, when I shot he cut loose too. I mean it really steamed 
things up in there. I come scootin out hind-end ﬁrst and we waited a 
while and then directly I went back and got holt of the wire and 
come draggin him out and he's shot between the eyes.
The old man laughed. That puts me in mind of a coon hunt I 
was on one time, he said. Feller with us shot a coon in a tree and it 
hung in a limb. So I helt the light and he went up after him. Time he 
got to the limb where the coon was at it come to life and made at 

him. He ﬁgured purty quick he didn't want no part of it, but stead of 
comin down he scooted up another limb and there he set. Ever time 
he made like he was comin down the coon'd go at him, growlin like 
a bear. Well, directly he got mad and he decided he'd come on 
down anyway. So here he come. He was goin to kick the coon off of 
the limb is what he hollered down to us. We had the lannern on him 
and could see purty good. He made two or three swipes at the coon 
and about that time the old coon latched on to his foot. I never 
heard the like of hollerin. He commenced swingin that coon around 
on the end of his toe and he got so took up with it he kindly eased 
up his holt on the tree. Well, wadn't but a few minutes one of us 
hollered to Look out! and here they come pilin down out of the tree. 
He hit the ground like a sack of feed and jest laid there and the dogs 
piled on to the coon and they commenced walkin all in his face and 
ﬁghtin till we got em kicked off. We thought he's dead, but directly 
he begun to breathe a little and his eyes to ﬂitter some and we seen 
he wadn't hurt, jest the wind pooched out of him and scared purty 
bad. We all laughed considerable and he set there and cussed us, 
but he was a purty good old boy and I reckon he never helt it 
against us. I remember he used to tell it on his own sef for years 
and years and laugh jest like anybody.
The old man sighed. Used to be good coon huntin 
hereabouts, he said.
What about painters? Warn asked. Was that a painter was 
hollerin around here one time?
The old man leaned back in his rocker, a wise grin settling 
among his sagging skinfolds. Well now, he said. Shore, I remember 
that right well. Been about ten year ago I'd say. There followed a 
moment of silence in which he seemed to be contemplating with 
satyric pleasure some old deed. Then he crossed one knee over the 
other and leaned forward. Shore, he repeated, I heard it. Many's the 
time. Had folks stirred up and scared all of one summer. Yessir, 
stirred up a blue fog of speculatin,
What'd it sound like? the boy asked.
Oh, purty ﬁerce ...
Well, you reckon it was a painter?
Nope, the old man said.
After a minute Warn said, What was it?
The old man had begun to rock gently, a benign look upon his 

face, composed in wisdom, old hierophant savoring a favorite 
truth ... He stopped and looked down at them. Well, I'll tell ye. It was 
a hoot-owl.
He studied their fallen faces, the hopeful incredulity. Yep, he 
said, a hoot-owl. One of them big'ns, screechin and a-hollerin on 
this mountain of summer evenins like any painter. They's folks said 
painter, folks said not. But I knowed what it was right along. So I let 
em do their speculatin and arguin ... I recollect one evenin I was at 
the store gettin some things, late summer it was and nigh dark, bout 
eight o'clock I reckon, when it commenced hollerin. Well, I never 
said nothin. In a little bit it come again. Boys, I mean it got quiet in 
that store to where you could hear the ants in the candy jar. Stit I 
never let on nothin and after a while Bob Kirby--he's there--he 
hollered at me and he said, Hey! Uncle Ather. You ﬁxin to walk crost 
that mountain tonight?
Well, I turned to him kind of surprised-like and I said, Why 
shore. A feller's got to get home sometime, and the best way he 
can. How come you to ast me that?
He jest looked at me for a minute, then he kind of grinned and 
he said, Cain't you hear that wampus cat?
Why, I said, shore I hear it. Anybody't wadn't deaf could hear 
that, I reckon.
Well, he kind of ﬁgured he had me then so he says, Ain't you 
skeered of painters, Uncle Ather?
Why shore, I says. Anybody ceptin a fool'd be skeered of one, 
a full-growed one leastways.
Then I never said nothin, jest went to the dope box and got 
me a dope and commenced drinkin it and lookin at my watch ever 
oncet in a while. I could see he was plenty puzzled and he tried to 
slip a grin to the rest of the fellers there once or twicet cept they 
wadn't grinnin and I reckon was more puzzleder'n he was. So he 
never said nothin neither, but after a while they's a young feller 
there, he piped up and ast me if that wadn't a full-growed one that 
was raisin all that hell out there. Well, about that time it come again, 
hollerin, and I looked at him and I said, They Lord God, son, I don't 
know what you'd do if a growed one was to squall. Why that ain't 
nothin there. But then course they ain't painters round like they used 
to be. Back ﬁfty, sixty years ago they'd sing out back and forth crost 
these mountains all night of a summer till you got to where you 

couldn't sleep lessen you did hear em. But it takes a big old tom 
painter to set up a fuss. That there ain't nothin. I told him that and 
about that time shore enough that owl let out another screech 
couldn't of been a hundred yards off and I could see the hackles 
come up on his neck and on Bob Kirby's too.
I ﬁnished my dope and set it down and made like I was ﬁxin to 
leave then and Kirby, he says, stit grinnin kind of, You mean, Uncle 
Ather, that you can tell one painter from anothern by its squall?
Well, I said, I don't reckon I can so good any more. He grinned 
right big at that.
But, I says, since I seen this'n t'other night I guess it jest don't 
worry me none.
Well, they all jumped up with somethin to ast then, how big it 
was and all. I was already half out the door, but I ﬁgured to give em 
somethin to think about while they walked home, so I turned to em 
and I says, Why it ain't more'n a kitten. It's right up here in the gap 
not even dusk-dark t'other night I seen it scoot crost the road. Old 
Scout was layin there on the concrete. Now he's fell off some of late 
but used to be he come a good bit higher'n my knee--to where you 
jest could straddle him, and weighed better'n a hunderd pound. So I 
looked around and I seen him there and I jest pointed to him and I 
said, Why he ain't a whole lot bigger'n Scout here, and said em a 
good night and went on.
Down the small panes of glass behind the old man's chair the 
sun lowered, casting his head in silhouette and illumining his white 
hair with a prophetic translucence. A little later he rose and went to 
the table and lit the lamp.
You boys care for some ... here, jest a minute. He excused 
himself and went ﬂapping off to the kitchen from where issued in a 
moment sounds of cupboards and glassware. When he came back 
he was carrying two glasses and a cup, a mason jar of some dark 
red liquid. Here, he said, handing them each a glass. He unscrewed 
the lid of the jar and poured their glasses. A heavy and evil-looking 
potion the color of iodine. Muskydine wine, he said. Bet you-all ain't 
never had none.
It beaded black and sinister in the soft lampglow. He settled 
himself in his rocker and ﬁlled his cup, watching them taste it.
Mighty ﬁne, Warn said.
Yessir, said the boy.

They sipped their wine with the solemnity of communicants, 
troglodytes gathered in some ﬁrelit cave. The lamp guttered in a 
draft of wind and their shadows, ponderous and bearlike upon the 
wall, weaved in unison.
Uncle Ather, said the boy, was they really painters back then?
Warn's face, a harlequin mask etched in black and orange by 
the lamplight, turned to the old man. Tell him about that'n, Uncle 
Ather, he said. That'n you had.
Uncle Ather had already started. Oh yes, he said, allaying 
doubt with an upthrust of his chin. Yes, they was, long time back. 
When I was a young feller, workin on the road crew at that time, I 
caught one.
Caught one?
Yep. He smiled mysteriously. Shore did. Caught him with my 
bare hands, and I got the scars to prove it. Here he extended a 
leathery thumb for inspection. The boy slid from his chair and bent 
studiously over it.
Right here, the old man said, pointing to a place on the inside 
just above the web. See?
Yes, he said. The skin was wrinkled like an old purse; in that 
myriad cross-hatching any line could have been a scar. He sat back 
down and the old man chuckled throatily.
Yessir, he said. He was a vicious critter. Must of weighed all of 
ﬁve pound.
Warn laughed softly. The boy raised his head. The old man 
sat complacent and mischievous in his rocker, his eyes dancing.
Well, he said, this is what happent. They was a place called 
Goose Gap--it's up t'wards Wears Valley. Well, it was when we was 
blastin in there. Bill Munroe, he's dead now, he went up right after, 
soon as rock quit fallin, and then he hollered for me to come up and 
look see. They's stit lots of smoke and dust and I couldn't see too 
good but I got on up a little ways and directly I seen he's holdin up 
somethin. Looked like a groundhog or a little old dog. When I got to 
where he was at I seen what it was. I hadn't never seen one afore 
and it was all tore up and bloody, but I knowed right off what it was. 
Bill, he couldn't make nothin out of it. What it was was a painter kit.
We started up through them rocks and directly we come up on 
anothern. It wadn't tore up as bad and Bill allowed as to how it must 
not of been blowed as fer and so we was headed right. Anyway it 

turned out he was right and in a little bit we come up on the den-
hole. It was all blowed out in the front and about a yard and a half of 
bones layin all around, and back in the back under some rocks we 
found this'n, the third'n, he's alive and mewlin jest about like a 
housecat.
Old Bill, he backed off some, said that old she-painter might 
be around. Well, I was younger'n him and likely didn't have as good 
sense, so in I goes and grabs the little feller up by the scruff of the 
neck. That's when he hung his tushes in my thumb here. I turnt 
loose right fast, I'll tell ye. Well, I ﬁgured a minute, and then I took off 
my shirt and scotched him up in that and brought him on home with 
me.
Here the old man paused and helped himself to a chew of 
tobacco from a huge paper pouch. I lived ﬁve mile this side of 
Sevierville then, he continued. I--you boys don't chew, do ye? no--I 
had bought me a place off a man named Delozier--twenty acres, 
mostly sidehill and not much of a house neither, a old piece of a 
barn ... I was married then and that was my ﬁrst place so I reckon I 
was kindly what you might say proud of it. I kep some hogs and 
chickens and later on I had me a cow and a wore-out mule, put me 
in some corn ... I never had nothin, ain't got nothin now, but I ﬁgured 
it was a start. I wadn't a whole lot older'n you fellers, nineteen, I 
think I was. But anyway what I was ﬁxin to tell was about that 
painter. I brought him on home and give him to Ellen. She took to it 
right off, kep it in a box and give it milk and sech as that. It got to 
where it'd folly her around the house like a everday walkin-around 
cat. It wadn't but about the size of a cat too ... I recollect he's 
speckled kindly like a bobcat. Well, they's even a feller come out 
from the newspaper and wrote it up about us havin him; folks come 
from pret-near everwhere to see him.
I reckon it was about two weeks we'd had him when one 
evenin I heard one of the hogs squeal. I got the lannern and went 
out but I couldn't ﬁnd nothin wrong and went on back in and never 
thought no more about it. Well, next mornin they's a hog gone. I 
hadn't never heard of nobody stealin hogs but I ﬁgured maybe 
they's hog thieves jest like ary other kind, up in Sevier County 
leastwise as that was purty woolly country at that time. But they 
wadn't a whole lot I could do about it, not knowin where to even start 
lookin. Then two nights later anothern of em went. Well, I says, they 

gettin slicker now. The secont one never even squealt.
Next night I laid up on the roof of the house with the shotgun--
a old single-barrel muzzleloader and me with not enough money to 
buy caps with even--I was usin matchheads and cottonseed hulls--
and here's somebody stealin my hogs. So I laid up there all night, 
no further'n from here to the porch yonder from that hogpen. I never 
seed nothin nor heard nothin. Come mornin I never even looked at 
the hogs even. Then when she, Ellen, went out later on and slopped 
em she come back in and she says, Ather, they's another hog gone.
I was settin in a chair about half asleep and I come from there. 
I don't recollect how many hogs it was that we had but seven or 
eight I reckon anyway, and I run out and counted em and come up 
short one more hog. I'd been mad afore but now I was scared.
Here the old man found the cup of wine in his hand and he 
regarded it for a moment with mild surprise, raised it and took a 
drink. He closed his eyes for a moment,
the high wagon and them coming up to the house, wagon and 
house both belonging to his uncle, and him owning nothing more 
than he could carry in his two hands, her things in an old leather 
trunk tied down behind the seat.
That her? he asked.
Yessir.
He walked around the wagon slowly, studying her as a man 
might a horse. Then he said, Well, light.
He got down and she was still sitting there.
What's she? goin to put the mule up?
Nosir, he said. Ellen. Here.
He took her hand and she got down.
You go on with Uncle Whitney, he said. I'll get the things.
Helen, he said.
It's Ellen, she said. The wagon moved away behind her.
Ellen.
Daddy said he'd kill him, she said.
Ain't nobody goin to kill nobody, he said. Here, watch the mud.
She said something else. He watched them go in.
What happent then, Uncle Ather, Warn said.
Hmm? Oh, well I'd done lost three of them I think it was then. 
That was three more'n I was willin to lose and two more'n I thought I 
would lose without I caught somebody. Aside that it looked like I 

would lose jest as many as whoever I was losin em to was willin to 
take, which probably meant all of them. So I was mad-scared. Ellen, 
she claimed I'd gone to sleep on the roof, but I knowed better.
That was late of a summer. I was stit on the road crew and 
workin twelve and fourteen hours a day and here I got to come 
home nights and set up with a bunch of hogs. But we never lost no 
more for a week or better. Then one night Ellen went to the door to 
thow out a pan of water and I heard her holler. I run out and she 
grabbed on to me like she'd seen a hant or somethin, and I ast her 
what it was but she jest stood there and shook like she's freezin to 
death. I walked her back in and went out and looked but I never 
seen nothin, so I got the pan and come on in. Somethin had scared 
her real bad but she couldn't tell me what all it was. After a while all 
she'd say was I don't know, or I couldn't tell what it was.
The old man paused again, arrested but for the rise and fall of 
his breathing, the slow mechanical rotation of his jaws, gazed 
upward--the image of the lampﬂame on the ceiling, the split corona 
a doubling egg, like the parthenogenesis of primal light.
He kept on for a week, coming back each night to the dark 
and empty house. Then he stopped going to work. That morning he 
took out the few things she had left--a housecoat, odds and ends, 
and put them on the bed. He sat and looked at them for a long time. 
When he got up it was evening.
He stayed for ﬁve more days, wandering about the house or 
sitting motionless, sleeping in chairs, eating whatever he happened 
to ﬁnd until there wasn't any more and then not eating anything. 
While the chickens grew thin and the stock screamed for water, 
while the hogs perished to the last shoat. An outrageous stench 
settled over everything, a vile decay that hung in the air, ﬁlled the 
house.
On the sixth day he went out and knocked a plank from the 
back of the barn with the poll of his axe, cut from it two boards. On 
one he carefully incised her name with the point of his knife. Then 
he chopped a stake-point on the other board and nailed the two 
together in the form of a cross. He took it and took her clothes and a 
spade down to a corner of the lot where he scooped a hole, buried 
the clothes, and with the shank of the spade pounded the cross into 
the ground. Then he walked straight through the house and out 
again, across the yard, to the road and toward Sevierville. He had 

gone half a mile before he noticed the shovel in his hand and 
pitched it into the weeds.
I know you cain't, he said.
I ain't goin back.
I'll go out tomorrow. Corne on, you clean up and eat some.
What?
And get some rest, sleep. I'll go out tomorrow.
Well, you can. I ain't.
I was goin out anyways. R. L. come by yesterday mornin to 
see if you was comin back. You goin back?
I don't know. No. I ain't goin back.
You aim to sell your place?
It don't... I don't care.
Well. I do.
He looked at him for the ﬁrst time, the older face, dark and 
hard as a walnut. Why? he asked.
Count of you owe me two hunderd dollars, mainly.
Oh. He thought for a minute, then he said, Yes. Here, I got to 
clean up.
The old man was swaying slowly in his rocker holding the cup 
before him in both hands like a ciborium. After a minute Warn said, 
Did you ever ﬁnd out what it was?
The old man turned and spat into a coffeecan.
That goddamned bibledrummer, wadn't it?
Don't say nothin else.
Well, nobody never died from it.
Don't say nothin else I told you.
Yessir, he said. It was the old she-painter, come after the little 
one. You boys care for some more wine?
They still had some. The old man labored up from his rocker 
and went to the table where he had set the wine, reﬁlled his cup. 
Yep, he said, that had to of been what she seen.
Did you shoot it? the boy asked.
Nope. Never even seen her. I lost one more hog and then I 
give it up. I turnt the little one loose and that's the last I ever seen of 
it and the last hog I lost. You see, he said slowly, darkly, they's 
painters and they's painters. Some of em is jest that, and then 
others is right uncommon. That old she-painter, she never left a 
track one. She wadn't no common kind of painter.

Early next morning the old man worked his way up the 
mountain, following the prints of the two boys. The snow was drifted 
deeply in places and it was hard going. He stopped often to catch 
his breath, leaning on the shotgun, the stock sunk cleanly through 
the crust to the depth of the triggerguard. By the time he reached 
the road he was winded and leg-weary. From here he could see out 
into the valley, through the stark trees standing blackly in an ether of 
white like diffused milk, glazed and crystalline as shattered ice 
where the sun probed, the roofs thatched with snow, pale tendrils of 
smoke standing grayly in the still air.
He could smell smoke, but he didn't think about it until it 
occurred to him that it had a sharp and pungent quality about it and 
he realized that it was cedar burning--postwood, not ﬁrewood--
elusive in the cold air, in his nostrils, faintly antiseptic.
He turned up the road and walked steadily until he carne to 
the cut-off to the pit. The snow was dry and powdered as marble-
dust on his trouser legs. Now he could see the faint pall of smoke 
through the trees. The tracks turned here and furrowed in two 
drunken lanes, curving into the woods. He followed them, moving 
faster, stumbling in and out of the snow ruts, shadowed by some 
presentiment of ruin, into the clearing.
When he saw the smoke rolling up from out of the pit he 
stopped for a moment and he could feel the old ﬁerce pull of blood 
in power and despair, the pulse-drum of the irrevocable act. And it 
was done, what soul rose in the ashes forever unknown, out of his 
hands now. He squatted on one knee in the snow, watching. On his 
face a suggestion of joy, of anguish--something primitive and half 
hidden. The pale eyes burned cold and remote in their hollows like 
pockets of smoldering gas.
He rose and retraced his steps back to the road. In the pit the 
amber coals glowed molten in their bed beneath the charred 
skeletons of the cedars.
Because the car was pulled over up the road and I couldn't 
see it from the creek. And he wadn't on the bridge when I come 
down but after I waded through and come out the other side he was 
standin on it lookin down at me and I seen him then and he said 
Come here. So he took your traps.
All of em ceptin one, the boy said. He'd of had to of waded to 
ﬁnd it so I never told him about it. He took the three of em. I didn't 

have but four.
Lowlife son of a bitch, Sylder said. What'd you tell him?
I never told him nothin. He said he was goin to take me to jail 
for trappin without license and bettin criminals. I told him I didn't 
know nothin bout some criminals.
Legwater, what'd he say?
Not much. Jest sort of grinned like a possum. Yeah, he said 
it'd go a lot easier on me if I was to tell em about it. That it was the 
same thing--bettin a criminal--as bein one your ownself. Then 
Gifford said that was right, how I'd likely get three to ﬁve years but 
that if I'd hep em out and tell who it was I might get off with jest a 
suspendered sentence.
But they didn't take you in?
No. He turned me loose at the forks, the store. He said soon 
as they got the rest of the evidence they'd pick me up and how it 
wouldn't do me no good to try to run.
He sat back in the chair, ﬁnished now and waiting to know 
what to do, just beginning to be not so scared.
Sylder leaned toward him. Listen, he said. You know that's all 
horseshit, don't you? You know what a ass it'd make him look to 
come draggin a fourteen-year-old boy in? Even for helpin a runner, 
let alone trappin without license? He's jest tryin to scare you. I know 
him. He cain't prove no way in the world you helped me and if they 
caught me it'd have to be with a load, in which case they wouldn't 
need nobody's testifyin, let alone yours, and even if they did I'd 
swear I never seen you before in my life and you'd do the same 
thing so they still couldn't bother you. It's all horseshit, tryin to bluff 
and scare you into helpin him poke his nose where it don't belong. 
He bothers you again you tell him nothin, tell him you'll get him for 
false arrest. Cept I don't think he's goin to bother you no more.
He said he'd catch you anyway.
He couldn't catch cowshit in a warshtub. It ain't even his 
business; he ain't the A. T. U. Anyway don't you let him bother you. 
I'll tend his apples for him my ownself. He knowed you didn't have 
no daddy, nobody to take up for you in the ﬁrst place is the reason 
he ﬁgured he could jump on you. He's a lowlife son of a bitch and a 
caird to boot. Here, come take a look at your pup; he's fat as a 
butterball. Come on, I got em on the back porch on account of it 
bein so cold.

The pike had been cleared some time in the afternoon so that 
he didn't even need the chains after he came off the orchard road, 
dark now, something after six o'clock, the rear end of the car heavy 
and swaying low over the wheels even with the love joys set up as 
far as they would go. It was very cold and his toes had not yet 
thawed under the gas heater. He thought how the stump of a toe in 
his left boot was particularly sensitive, remembering again the 
sweep of the cutter's lights on the stanchions of the bridge, the 
glazed and blinding eye of the spotlight when it picked him out, 
standing on the forward deck under a canopy of mangrove with his 
foot braced on the cleat and holding the anchor rope. When the light 
caught him he yelled once down into the cabin and began hauling in 
on the rope. The starter whirred and the motor coughed gutturally at 
the water, the boat jostling, already moving. He got the anchor in 
and watched the cutter lights. Even above the high wheening of 
their own motor he could hear her revving the big double Gray 
engines as she swung about, then voices, commands, detached 
and sourceless on the steamy calm of the Gulf. The cutter's spot 
followed them, swamping them in light as they came out of the 
backwater. He might have been a ballerina pirouetting there. He 
could see the twin spume ﬂaring from the prow of the cutter, rising 
as she took speed, and the running lights bobbing and bobbing 
again in the black wash of the cutwater. He heard the shots too, 
quite clearly, but made no association between them and himself. It 
didn't occur to him that he was being shot at until a real ﬂurry broke 
out and he could see the muzzleﬂashes minute and intermittent like 
cigarettes glowing and hear the pebbly thoop thoop of the bullets in 
the passing water. Then he jumped and started for the cabin. 
Instantly there came the sounds of splintering wood and then 
something tore at his foot and threw him to the deck. He crawled to 
the companionway and slid down it on his belly.
Jimmy, he called, a hoarse whisper as if someone might hear 
them. Ho, Jimmy.
It was dark in the compartment except for the skittering glow 
of the searchlight passing and repassing the portholes, the 
portholes in bright silhouette wandering back and forth on the far 
wall.
Hey, kid. What you say?
Jimenez standing in the passageway. The tiller momentarily 

abandoned, the craft tilting full throttle across the water, the pulsing 
slap slap of it under the keel.
I'm shot, he said.
Jimenez holding the ﬂashlight while he removed the shredded 
shoe, the sock sticky with blood, examined the pulpy mess of his big 
toe.
Where else, Mario?
I reckon that's it, he said.
Jimmy patting his shoulder commiseratingly. Is hard on the 
feets that, he said.
They went forward and he wrapped his toe in a strip torn from 
his shirt and sat there miserably, watching Jimenez's face green 
and serious in the glow of the panel lights.
He drove slowly, coming through the gap with the moon riding 
low over the pines that edged the long and barren slash of white 
beneath the power line, icefog coming up from the hollow, scintillant 
in the lights. Here where the inn stood, the carnival atmosphere with 
the few cars strung alongside the road, the heat ﬂickering over them 
and the men standing about passing the last of the bottles back and 
forth, talking quietly now, their faces ﬂushed and convivial. Some 
late arrivals claimed the blaze to have been visible from Vestal. 
Someone saying You done missed it, Marion.
Was it a good'n?
Best you ever seen.
Nothin to be done there. A drink of whiskey, sneaking it now, 
Gifford having arrived. Gifford with a long pole poking steaming 
holes in the melt of glass. Gloop gloop. Vitreous tar. Damndest thing 
I ever seen. One brogan toe began to blister and blacken and a 
moment later he was hopping away snatching at his shoelaces. 
Goddamn. Whew. Leaning against a tree with his naked foot 
cradled in his hands like a hurt bird he dared a snicker with ﬁerce 
eyes.
And two days later the charred shaft of the pine tree still 
smoldering, pitch bubbling gently from the shell of the bark and 
small electricblue ﬂames seeping and curling, the spire of smoke 
standing straight up in the motionless air like a continuation of the 
tree itself.
On the curve below the gap the rear wheels drifted slightly and 
he realized that there was a thin sheet of ice on the road. He sat up 

over the wheel and wiped the glass with a rag. He passed Tipton's, 
the lights above the road warm and friendly-looking through the 
trees. Old married men. Sylder chuckled, reached for his cigarettes. 
He was the nicest boy ... the rain peening steadily the tin roof of the 
church, obelisks of light slanting down from the high windows like 
buttresses. After the creak of the door nothing but the huge 
breathing silence, musty odor, the patient and quiet abandonment, 
chairs, benches, the pulpit, all orderly and still in their coats of dust, 
an air of mild surprise about them at this late visitation. Their steps 
ghostly on the warping boards, rousing an owl from the beams, 
passing over them on soundless wings, a shadow, ascending into 
the belfry like an ash sucked up a ﬂue and as silently. She gripped 
his arm. Together to the mourners' bench. O Lord, O Lord. 
Witnessed by one nightbird.
Topping the hill above the creek he came upon a half-ton 
truck with a horse on it, the long bland face peering down at him 
over the slatted tailgate with eyes luminous and round as 
bottlebottoms in the carlights. The truck was laboring at the hill with 
beetle-like industry, the gears grinding out a low whine. He watched 
the snow swirling over the road behind it, serpentine, white wisps 
like smoke on glass, eased up the shiftlever and passed them, the 
horse's off eye rolling wildly, past the cab, the driver dimly lit within, 
pufﬁng at a cigar, looking down at him once.
One side for the hooch man, Sylder said. New Year's whiskey 
comin. Figure ten headaches to the gallon, makes ... a thousand ... 
about twelve hunderd real hat stretchers. How about that, old man?
Old man puffed his cigar, receding rearward, dimmed his 
lights to one dull orange globe.
He drove straight down Gay Street, halting obediently at the 
stoplights, gazing at the numbed trafﬁc ofﬁcers with insolent 
bemusement.
Howdy, Blue-boy. Keer for a drink?
Out on the west side of town he pulled into a drive and around 
behind an aged and ill-kept frame house. He backed the coupe up 
to the garage and got out, stretching a little. Two men came from 
the house, the kitchen, where a small window was lit. Another man 
came to the door and stood there leaning against the jamb, his 
shirttail out, smoking a cigarette and taking the air. A woman's voice 
small and shrill somewhere in the house behind him: Shet the door, 

idjit. You raised in a barn? He didn't move.
Howdy, Sylder, the ﬁrst man said, going past him to the 
garage, not even looking at him.
Howdy, Sylder said.
The other one stopped. How's the new car? he asked.
All right.
Ward says it come out of Cosby.
Could be.
Ward says it's plenty fast. Says they blockaded the feller on 
the Newport highway is the only way they ever come to catch him at 
all.
Let's go, Tiny, the other man called from the garage.
Sylder went to the rear of the coupe and opened the decklid. 
They began to unload, carrying the cases back into the garage, the 
car creaking and rising bit by bit until they had ﬁnished and it stood 
with its rear end high in the air like a cat in heat.
Sylder took a ﬂashlight and wrench from the glove 
compartment, stooped by the rear wheels each in turn and lowered 
the car. Then he undid the chains, got in and drove off them, came 
back and put them in the trunk. The motor was still running and as 
he slid behind the wheel once more Tiny came to lean on the door.
Don't she sound sweet though, he said.
Sylder looked up at him. That what Ward says?
Tiny grinned. Naw, he said. Seems to me that's what McCrary 
said. When Ward loant him the money to buy it.
Tell Ward good cars costs good money. Even at a government 
auction. Or even if you done paid for em oncet.
He set the gears and ran the motor up once and Tiny-stood 
up. Come back, he said.
Sylder was rolling up the glass. We'll see ye, he said, switched 
on the headlights and pulled away down the drive.
He drove slowly back to the mountain, past the forks and the 
store, the porch posts deadwhite as plaster casts of those 
untrimmed poles, the huge carved lion's head in ﬁerce cameo upon 
the door, the brass knocker brightly pendant from its nostrils, and 
the barred panes buckling in the light planeless as falling water, 
passing out of the glare in willowing sheets to darkness, stark and 
stable once again. Past his own house, dark but for the light on the 
porch, and then across the mountain, still slowly, pulling the grades 

down under the wheels easily.
The road was glazed with ice on the far side and he amused 
himself by drifting the coupe from curve to curve like a boat tacking. 
At the foot of the mountain he left Henderson Valley Road and 
turned right down Bay's Mountain Road, driving on gravel now, 
slowing to some ten or ﬁfteen miles an hour and ﬁnally switching off 
the headlights. He drove that way for half a mile, the coupe rolling 
ghostly over the road, black and silent against the snow. Then he 
turned the car around in a drive, pointing it back down the road, and 
got out.
He walked up the road until he came to the next drive and 
here he turned in, plodding through the snow to the lightless house 
where it brooded in a copse of trees, solitary above the empty ﬁelds, 
over and around it the naked branches tangled like ironwork.
He walked around the house twice. No dogs barked. At the 
back again he tested a window, lifted it, the weights slithering in the 
sashes, stepped through and inside. He found himself in an 
areaway off the kitchen, two doors in front of him, one leading to a 
large open room, the other one closed.
Hola, Jeffo, he called, whispered, in mock and inaudible 
greeting. Dorme? On downpointed cat's feet he stepped the three 
steps to the closed door and folded his hand over the knob. Oh, 
Jeffo, he whispered. Es muy malo que no tengas un perro. Turned 
the knob and opened the door.
There was one small high window in the room, a square of 
gray standing out of the blackness, and other than that he could see 
nothing. He stood at the door for a few minutes, listening to the 
rumbling breath of the man asleep. After a while he could make out 
the shape of the bed, directly in front of him.
It was warm in the room, he could feel the sweat in his 
armpits, but the man was swathed heavily in blankets. Thickness of 
them under his hand ... here shape of arm, of shoulder, chest... 
sleeping on his back. Gifford snufﬂed. One gluey eyelid came 
unstuck as the covers receded from his chin with maternal 
solicitude.
He even raised his head a little, wonderingly, sleep leaving 
him in slow grudging waves, so that he seemed to be coming up to 
meet it, the shut ﬁst rocketing down out of blackness and into his 
face with a pulpy sound like a thrown melon bursting.

When he got home it was past midnight and had turned off 
colder yet. He parked the coupe at the back of the house, scotched 
the wheel and went in through the kitchen. He took some biscuits 
and a jar of preserves from the icebox and ate them, walking up and 
down a little, ﬂexing his knuckles. When he had ﬁnished he put the 
preserves back, took a long drink from a jar of buttermilk, and then 
went into the bedroom. His right hand was swollen and he picked 
delicately at the buttons of his coat.
Marion ...?
Yeah, he said.
Oh ... what time is it?
Late, I reckon. I got tied up.
Are you okay?
Yeah.
He stepped out of his trousers and crawled in beside her.
She could feel him laughing silently. What? she said.
He kept astin who it was.
What? Who did.
Hmm? Naw, nothin. Just some feller. Go on to sleep.
She turned over and put her hand on his chest. She said, 
Hush.
He lay on his back, his hand over hers, the other hand 
stiffening. Suddenly he had a bile-sharp foretaste of disaster. Why 
was that old man shooting holes in the government tank on the 
mountain?
You sure have got cold feet, she said.
He stared up at the dark ceiling. I'll be damned if I do, he 
whispered to himself.
*
PART IV
A warm wind on the mountain and the sky darkening, the 
clouds looping black underbellies until a huge ulcer folded out of the 
mass and a crack like the earth's core rending rattled panes from 
Winkle Hollow to Bay's Mountain. And the wind rising and gone 
colder until the trees bent as if borne forward on some violent 
acceleration of the earth's turning and then that too ceased and with 
a clatter and hiss out of the still air a plague of ice.
The old man looked out through a veil of water fringing his 
hatbrim, beadwork swinging as he turned his head. The hail had 

stopped and the wind was coming up again with the rain. He had set 
forth from his refuge under the claybank and already he was wet 
through. The road had gone from dust shocked up in dark water-
balls to geysers of erupting mud, a sluggish ﬂow beginning in the 
wheelruts and blistering under the rain. The old man began to run, 
hobbling in an odd bandylegged progress through the blinding rain, 
great windblown sheets of it sweeping over the road. The air was 
ﬁlled with branches and foliage of trees and the trees whipped and 
cracked. By the time he left the road and entered the woods they 
were coming down, the dead and leaﬂess trunks, grasping with 
brittle gray ﬁngers and going prone on the earth with the mufﬂed 
thunder of their fall half lost in the fulminations overhead. The old 
man kept to his course, over last year's leaves slick with water, 
hopping and dancing wildly among the maelstrom of riotous 
greenery like some rain sprite, burned out of the near-darkness in 
antic conﬁguration against the quick bloom of the lightning. As he 
passed it thus a barren chestnut silver under the sluice of rain 
erupted to the heart and spewed out sawdust and scorched mice 
upon him. A slab fell away with a long hiss like a burning mast tilting 
seaward. He is down. A clash of shields rings and Valkyrie descend 
with cat's cries to bear him away. Already a rivulet is packing clay in 
one ragged cuff and a quiff of white hair depending from his forelock 
reddens in the seeping mud.
Rainwater seeped among the porous boards of the outhouse 
until the windrowed leaves in the cat's corner were black and lifeless 
and the cat left through the leaning door to seek new shelter. Pools 
of black water stood in the path swirling slowly their wrack of straw 
and weeds, armadillo beetles coiled round as shot and strangely 
buoyant. She skirted them on wincing feet, bore squeamishly the 
wet slide of last year's limp and slime-brown weeds.
Arthur Ownby's hound rooted and burrowed in his wad of ripe 
sacks, slept again, his tail clasped to his hairless stomach. He did 
not see the cat that came to the door of his cellar and stood on 
three legs.
Such light as there was to announce the new day ﬁltered thinly 
through a mizzle of rain and remarked the ﬂuff of her taupe fur 
curled in a cleft treebole on the south slope of Red Mountain. 
Hunger drove her out in the late afternoon, cautious, furtive, dusted 
with wood-rot.

Still the rain, eating at the roads, cutting gullies on the hills till 
they ran red and livid as open wounds. The creek came up into the 
ﬁelds, a river of mud questing among the honeysuckles. Fenceposts 
like the soldiers of Pharaoh marched from sight into the ﬂooded 
draws.
In Saunders' ﬁeld a shallow marsh, calm and tractable 
beneath the dimpling rain. And yet rain. What low place did not hold 
water? At the little end of McCall's pond water fell thunderously into 
the sinkhole that drained it. Along Little River the ﬂats stood weed-
deep in livercolored water ﬂecked with thatches of small driftwood 
and foam that coiled and spun near imperceptibly, or rocked with 
the wind-rifﬂes passing under them. By day ﬂocks of rails gathered. 
A pair of bitterns stalked with gimlet eyes the fertile shallows. At 
night the tidelands rang with peepers, with frogs grufﬂy choral. 
Great scaly gars from the river invaded the ﬂats, ﬁerce and primitive 
of aspect, long beaks full of teeth, ancient ﬁshes survived 
unchanged from mesozoic fens, their yellowed boneless skeletons 
graced the cracked clay-beds later in the season where the water 
left them to what querulous harridans, ﬁshcrow or buzzard, might 
come to glean their frames, the smelly marvel of small boys.
Rafts of leaves descended the ﬂowage of Henderson Valley 
Road, clear water wrinkling over the black asphalt. The mud-choked 
gullies ran thick with water of a violent red, roiling heavily, pounding 
in the gutters with great belching sounds. The cat trod the high 
crown of the road, bedraggled and diminutive, a hunted look about 
her.
A low sun ﬁred the pine knots in the smokehouse wall till they 
glowed like rubies, veined and pupiled eyes, peering in at the gloom 
where the cat gnawed a dangling side of pork-ribs. The salt drew 
her mouth but she kept at it, pausing now and again to listen at the 
silence. Mildred Rattner's mule-slippers carried her with care past 
the bad spots in the mud, chancing rather the dampness of the 
ragged grass that grew along the path. What with the pat of rain on 
the tarpaper overhead the cat heard nothing until the keys jangled 
just beyond the door and the lock rattled. She leapt to a high shelf, 
poised, sprang again, making for the air vent under the peaked roof. 
As the door let in she was hanging by one toenail from this opening, 
hindclaws ﬂailing desperately for purchase, and then a sliver of the 
molding wood gave way and she lost her grip.

When Mildred Rattner swung open the door and stepped into 
the smokehouse she saw a cat drop with an anguished squall from 
somewhere overhead, land spraddle-legged facing her, and make a 
wild lunge at her, teeth gleaming in the dimness and eyes 
incandesced with madness. She screamed and fell backwards and 
the cat with a long despairing wail ﬂowed over her and was gone.
In Tipton's ﬁeld four crows sat in a black locust, ranged upon 
the barren limbs with heads low between their wingblades, 
surveying the silvergray desolation, the silent rain in the country. 
They watched the cat come across the ﬁeld at a slow lope, an 
erratic dancing progress where she veered and leapt, keeping to 
the spotty dry ground. Their calls in the afternoon stillness had a 
somber loneliness about them, the mournful quality of freight 
whistles. They came from the roost and deﬁled low over her head, 
dipping and swooping. The cat spun low on her haunches, batted at 
them. So did they harry her out of the ﬁeld, her pausing at each 
attack to make a stand and grapple at the wind of their passage, 
hard-pressed to preserve dignity, the birds ﬂaring, wheeling, setting 
to again in high crude humor. They left her at the bank of the creek 
to return, settle with treading wings among the locust branches. She 
marked them down, her yellow eyes narrowed in contempt, turned 
downstream and followed the swollen creek to the bridge. Here she 
crossed and continued, taking the high wooded ground on the south 
bank, pausing here and there with random inquisitiveness at holes 
and hollow logs to smell, shake herself or lick the water from her 
chest, until a strong odor of mink musk brought her to the creek 
proper again.
The mink was dead, swaying in the shore currents among the 
swamped and ﬂaring grass. She crept to it on cocked legs, leapt to 
a mud hummock and swatted it with a long reach downward. She 
stood up and watched it. It bobbed lifelessly. The chain was hung on 
a stob somewhere out in the water and when she hooked her claws 
into the mink to pull it toward her it did not come. Finally she 
ventured one foot into the water and bit into the neck of the animal. 
The grit impregnated in its fur set her teeth on edge and she 
attacked it savagely, then stopped suddenly as if her attention had 
wandered or returned to something of importance which she had 
forgotten. She left the mink and set a course across the ﬁelds 
toward the pike road.

The rain had plastered down her fur and she looked very thin 
and forlorn. She gathered burdock and the curling purple leaves of 
rabbit weed as she went; a dead stalk of blackberry briar clung to 
her hind leg. Just short of the road she stopped, shivered her loose 
skin, ears ﬂat against her head. She squalled once, hugging the 
ground with her belly, eyes turned upward at the colorless sky, the 
endless pelting rain.
On the afternoon of the third day the rain slacked and through 
the high pall of faint gray, blades of light swung like far beacons, 
cutting slowly the wisped cloud edges, lace-tatter or swirl of sea 
mist. Dark fell early, and later as he lay quilted and awake in his 
black loft the rainless silence of the roof seemed to measure time, 
something lying in wait. He had already decided to go to the creek in 
the morning. The water might even have fallen some.
So it was the morning of the fourth day before he went to his 
traps again, passing the pond and skirting the lower end where it 
ﬂared out into the ﬁeld with the weeds standing in the water like rice, 
then down along the limestone ledges, past the hail-shattered ﬂoats 
of water lilies, shoals of new green leaves, on across the ﬁeld and 
out to the road.
Before he came to the bridge he left the road, turned down a 
steep bank and crossed a fence, following a mud path until he came 
out on the creek bank. It had not fallen any. Troughs of clayey water 
rocked through the shallow ﬁeld on the far side, seething in the 
matted honeysuckle, the tops of milkweeds and willow shoots 
quivering in the pull of it. The creek itself was a roily misshapen 
ﬂume more like solid earth in motion than any liquid, cutting past 
him, each dip and rifﬂe, eddy, glide, uncurling rope coil ﬁxed and 
changeless and only the slight oily tremor of the water and the rush 
of noise testifying to motion at all. Unless a limb or stick came down, 
or here: a ﬂuted belt of water curling upward in a long scoop like a 
snarled lip broken suddenly by a tree branch lashing out of the 
perfect opacity of it, rapid and deft as a snake striking, subsiding 
again and invisible with no ring or ripple to trace it by. He sat down 
for a few minutes and watched it all. A kingﬁsher came up the creek, 
tacking back and forth, saw the boy and ﬂared, veered away over 
the watery ﬁelds trailing in the morning quiet his high staccato call.
He got up and started along the path over the shelf of woods 
between the creek and the mountain, by hickories feathered in mist, 

by cottonwoods still coldly skeletal for all the new green of the 
spring. He began to climb, his approach forewarned by the patter of 
nut hulls, a dipping branch, scrabble of small feet on bark. He 
crossed the spine of the ridge and started down, seeing the 
horseshoe bend of the creek below him distended with blisters of 
brown water spread out into the ﬁelds, down the slope to the creek 
again--a shortcut he took, who measured only horizontal travel.
He couldn't ﬁnd it. The creek was none that he had ever seen 
before, and when he turned his back to it at what looked like a place 
he knew he was surprised to see a draw, a fence-corner, a stand of 
locust oddly mis-located. He passed the place and came back. He 
had been too far down. He hurried along upstream for another ﬁfty 
yards and then stopped short. The rock where his trap had been 
was submerged, but a dome of water rose over it and now he saw 
the wire reaching up to the sapling on the opposite bank. Just above 
here the creek narrowed--it was the place where he usually crossed 
on a long and mossy pier of stone, that too lost now beneath the 
ﬂoodwaters. In the narrows the current leaped in a slick chute, 
plummeted into the pool below, churning a chocolate-dark foam and 
spreading again, a hissing sheet of ﬂecks and bubbles, small twigs, 
bark and debris. A naked and swollen young bird turned up its 
round white belly brieﬂy, rolled and folded into the thick brown liquid 
like a slowly closing eye. And below the rock something roiled darkly 
to the surface, sank again, as if struggling with some unseen 
assailant. He watched. A moment later it ﬂared again and he could 
make it out better, the hair ﬂoating undulant as black grass wracked 
in the eddies. He looked along the bank until he found a stick, came 
back and leaned on tiptoes out over the water, poking. He found the 
ledge of rock, tested along it with his stick and then stepped out, 
panicky for a moment as his foot sank. Then he was straddle-
legged with one foot on the bank and the other in the creek, the 
water boiling between his legs, ribboning high on his calf. He got the 
other foot down and turned, carefully, facing upstream, standing 
with the thin brown wings of water ﬂying over his shins with a slicing 
sound, standing so in an illusion of fantastic motion. He worked his 
way crabwise to within a yard of the other bank, to the channel 
where the rocks terminated, launched out wildly across the 
remaining stretch of water. He went in nearly to his waist, his feet 
chopping rapidly at the slick and steep-pitched mud, ﬂailing mightily 

with his stick before he could get a proper foothold. Then he was 
across, pulling himself up the bank by what roots or weeds would 
hold his weight, cold and mud-slavered.
He hobbled down to where the sapling was and slid down the 
bank to it, catching himself with one foot against the slender trunk, 
took hold of the wire and undid it, the wire humming electrically in 
his hand, took a good grip on it and climbed the bank again pulling it 
after him. When he got to the top and turned around he could see 
his catch ﬂoating in the grass and even before he pulled it up to him 
he could see the white places on it like hanging leeches. Then he 
had it in his hand, feeling the fur gritty with mud, the cusped bone-
end jutting from the foreleg wrecked between the jaws of the trap, 
the white bib smeared with clay and the ﬁne yellow teeth bared in a 
ﬁerce grin. And turning it slowly in his hand, studying dumbly the 
clean ugly slits, white and livid. Wounds, but like naked eyelids or 
dead mouths gaping.
He took it from the trap and put it in his pocket, wound the wire 
around the trap and put that in the other pocket. The sun was well 
up, but already the promised light was drowned in a sweep of wet 
clouds rolling and building darkly to the southeast. He did not 
recross the creek but headed out into the ﬁeld. Before he reached 
the woods the ﬁrst drops of rain had already spattered his shoulder. 
When he got to the road it was black and slick with water and he 
hunched his shoulders forward against the mounting downpour, 
shivering a little. Sheets of spray gusted over the smoking road and 
over the swamped land--the houses standing bleak and gray--a ﬁnal 
desolation seemed to come, as if on the tail of the earth's last winter 
a well of water were rising slowly up through the very universe itself.
It had been raining for six days steady when Marion Sylder 
ﬁnally left the house. He came down the drive sideways, slewing 
sheets of mud from under the cavorting wheels, got straightened 
out on the road and drove to the forks. A small pond had formed in 
front of the store and customers were obliged to tread a plankwalk 
to get to the porch. The rain had settled into a patient drizzle and 
the people of Red Branch sat around their stoves, looked out from 
time to time at the gray wet country and shook their heads. Sylder 
backed his car up to the gas pump and got out, sloshing the mud 
from his boots in the puddle, waded to the porch and went in. There 
was a mesh of welding rod over the front windows now and he 

smiled a little at that.
Mr Eller looked up from his chair by the meat block. Well, he 
said, ain't seen you for a while. Bring some money with ye?
Sylder ignored that. Gas, he said. Where's the keys?
Mr Eller sighed and rose from his chair, went to the cash 
register, rang open the drawer, handed the keys across the counter.
Hope you don't keer to wade, he said.
Sylder took the keys and went out to the pump. He unlocked it 
and began cranking the lever, pumping gas up into the glass bowl at 
the top of the rusty orange tank. When he had it full he unscrewed 
the cap from the fender, let in the hose and depressed the lever. 
The gas in the bowl surged and bubbled, sluiced into the tank of the 
car. After the bowl emptied it remained beaded on the inside, a 
greasy look to it. Sylder didn't notice. He re-hung the hose and 
locked the pump, waded back to the porch and inside to give the 
keys to Mr Eller. A loosed box of kittens came tottering aimlessly 
over the ﬂoor, rocking on their stub legs and mewling. Their eyes 
were closed and festered with mucus as if they might have been 
struck simultaneously with some biblical blight.
Them's the nastiest-lookin cats I ever did see, Sylder said.
That's what Mrs Fenner said, droned the storekeeper. Young 
Puiliam told her she ought to see the ones back in the back propped 
up with sticks. He picked the keys up off the counter and rang them 
back in the cash drawer again.
Put it on the bill, Sylder said.
Seems like they ought to be a handsign for that, Mr Eller said. 
Like for Howdy or we'll see ye. Save a lot of talk in here.
If I had your money I'd retire for life.
It'd pay about the same.
Sure it would, Sylder said.
Seems to me like, Mr Eller began ...
Never mind, Sylder said. I got to get on. Poor folks don't have 
time to stand around jawin all day.
He waved and went out, stopped at the door a minute and 
looked back. Say, he called.
What's that?
A Christian'd of drownded em.
What's that? Mr Eller asked again.
Leaning in the door and grinning Sylder pointed at the kittens 

bobbing over the ﬂoor like blown lint.
Mr Eller shooed his hand at him and he left.
The storekeeper drummed his nails on the marble ledge of the 
cash register for a minute. Then he turned and went back to his 
chair. He had been resting for only a short time when the clock 
among the canned goods began a laborious unwinding sound as if 
about to expire violently in a jangle of wheels and leaping springs, 
stopped, tolled off four doomlike gongs evocative of some oriental 
call to temple, then hushed altogether.
Mr Eller stirred from his chair, went to the clock and wound it 
with a key hanging down from a string. It made a loud ratcheting 
noise. Then he seized it from the shelf and slammed it back. It set 
up once more a low wooden ticking.
One of the cats had wandered behind the meat block and on 
his return to the chair he stepped over it carefully. It went by in a 
drunken reel, caromed off the meat case, continued. Lost, they 
wandered about the ﬂoor, passing and repassing each other, 
unseeing. One staggered past a coffecan set next the stove, 
slipped, fell in the puddle of tobacco spittle surrounding it. He 
struggled to his feet again, back and side brown-slimed and sticky, 
tottered across to the wall where he stood with blind and suppurant 
eyes and offered up to the world his thin wails.
Mr Eller dozed and his head rocked in small increments down 
his shoulder, onto his chest. After a while a little girl in a thin and 
dirty dress came through the door behind the counter and gathered 
up all the kittens, now wailing louder and in broken chorus, carried 
them out again, talking to them in low remonstrances.
Mr Eller dozed, the clock ticked. The ﬂypaper revolved in slow 
spirals. The wind had come up again and the rainwater blown from 
the trees pattered across the tin roof of the store, mufﬂed and 
distant-sounding through the wallboard ceiling.
Sylder closed the gate behind him and started up the orchard 
road. It was guttered and channeled and sluices of water still 
seeped along the myriad mud deltas that ﬁlled the ﬂats between the 
inclines. The car slewed giddily on the turns, bogged ﬁnally to a 
frantic stop skittering quarterwise like a nervous horse and the rear 
wheels unwinding thick ropes of mud that broke and shot 
precipitately across the low hem of brush and on into the woods 
where they slapped up against the trees with a sound oddly hollow. 

Sylder cut the motor and stepped out into the bright mud. It was a 
quarter mile to the turnaround and he started straightaway, his 
leather boots sucking.
There were apples on the trees the size of a thumbnail and 
green with a lucent and ﬁery green, deathly green as the bellies of 
bottleﬂies. He plucked one down in passing and bit into it ... 
venomously bitter, drew his mouth like a persimmon. If green apples 
made you sick, Sylder reﬂected, he would have been dead long 
ago. Most people he knew could eat them. Didn't take poison ivy 
either. The boy John Wesley, he was bad about poison ivy. Bad 
blood.
It took him until dark to get done, joggling the cases two at a 
time back down the road, nine trips in all. When he had stacked the 
last two cases in the turtle he locked it and opening the door of the 
car sat down and took off his boots, shapeless with mud, and stood 
them on the ﬂoor just behind the front seat.
He got the car rocked loose and then had to back down for 
almost half a mile before he could ﬁnd a place that looked wide and 
solid enough to turn around in. By the time he got out on the pike a 
wind had come up and small spits of rain were breaking on the 
glass. He propped his left sock foot on the handbrake and drove 
leisurely down the mountain.
The lights of the city hovered in a nimbus and again stood 
fractured in the black river, isinglass image, tangled broken shapes: 
the shapeless splash of lights along the bridgewalk following the 
elliptic and receding rows of pole lamps across to meet them. The 
rhythmic arc of the wipers on the glass lulled him and he coasted 
out onto the bridge, into the city shrouded in rain and silence, the 
cars passing him slowly, their headlamps wan, watery lights in 
sorrowful progression.
Sylder's motor spat and jerked, caught again for a handful of 
revolutions, died with a spastic sucking noise. He let in the clutch 
and coasted for a minute, engaged it again. The motor bucked and 
the car shuddered violently and came to a stop.
He sat at the wheel of the motionless car for a minute or two 
before he tried the starter. It cranked cheerfully, caught and 
sputtered once or twice without ever running. He ﬂipped the switch 
off, reached a ﬂashlight from the glove compartment, took a deep 
breath and surged wildly out into the rain. Waist-deep in the engine 

compartment with the upturned hood sheltering him like the maw of 
some benevolent monster he checked the wiring, the throttle 
linkages. Then he removed the ﬂoat-bowl from the fuel pump, held 
the ﬂashlight up to the glass and looked at it. The liquid in it was a 
pale yellow. He poured it out and replaced the bowl, dropped the 
hood and got back in the car. He had to crank the engine for some 
time before the bowl ﬁlled again and then the motor caught and he 
engaged the gears. He drove along cautiously, listening. The 
streetlamps passed bleary whorls along the window; there was no 
more trafﬁc Before he got to the end of the bridge the motor rattled 
and died again.
The old man awoke to darkness and water running, trickling 
and coursing beneath the leaves, and the rain very soft and very 
steady. The hound was lying with its head on crossed forepaws 
watching him. He reached out one hand and touched it and the dog 
rose clumsily and sniffed at his hand.
The wind had died and the night woods in their faintly 
breathing quietude held no sound but the kind rainfall, track of 
waterbeads on a branch--their measured fall in a leaf-pool. With 
grass in his mouth the old man sat up and peered about him, heard 
the rain mendicant-voiced, soft chanting in that dark gramarye that 
summons the earth to bridehood.
They came three times for the old man. At ﬁrst it was just the 
Sheriff and Gifford. They were one foot up the porch steps when he 
swung the door open and threw down on them and they could see 
the mule ears of the old shotgun laid back viciously along the locks. 
They turned and went back down the yard, not saying anything or 
even looking back, and the old man closed the door behind them.
The second time they pulled up in the curve of the road with 
three deputies and a county ofﬁcer. The old man watched them 
from his window darting and skulking among the bushes, slipping 
from tree to tree like boys playing Indians. After a while when 
everyone was set the Sheriff called from his place under the bank of 
the road.
Come out with your hands up, Ownby. We got you 
surrounded.
The old man never even turned his head. He was in the 
kitchen with the shotgun propped over the back of the chair and he 
was watching one of the deputies hunkered up under a lilac bush in 

the west corner of the lot. The old man kept watching him and then 
the Sheriff called out again for him to surrender and somebody shot 
out a window-glass in the front room so he didn't wait any more but 
pulled the stock in against his cheek and cut down on the deputy. 
The man came up out of the bushes like a rabbit and hopped away 
toward the road with a curious loping gait, holding the side of his 
leg. He'd expected the man to yell and he didn't, but then the old 
man remembered that he hadn't yelled either.
The kitchen glass exploded in on him then and he got behind 
the stove. There was a cannonade of shots from the woods and he 
sat there on the ﬂoor listening to it and to the spat spat of the bullets 
passing through the house. Little blooms of yellow wood kept 
popping out on the planks and almost simultaneously would be the 
sound of the bullet in the boards on the other side of the room. They 
did not whine as they passed through. The old man sat very still on 
the ﬂoor. One shot struck the stove behind him and leaped off with 
an angry spang, taking the glass out of the table lamp. It was like 
being in a room full of invisible and malevolent spirits.
He had the shotgun across his knees, broken, still holding the 
empty shell in his hand. The ﬁring died in a few minutes and he 
crawled along the cupboard and got his shells off the table and 
came back and reloaded the empty chamber. Then he rolled a 
cigarette. He could hear them calling to one another. Someone 
wanted to know if anyone was hurt. Then the Sheriff told them to 
hold up a minute, that the old bastard hadn't shot since the ﬁrst 
time, and hollered loud, as if a person couldn't hear him anyway, 
wanting to know if Ownby was ready to come out now.
The old man lit his cigarette and took a deep pull. Outside all 
was silence.
Ownby, the Sheriff called, come out if you're able.
There was more silence and ﬁnally he heard some voices and 
after that they ﬁred a few more rounds. The stick propping up the 
glassless window leaped out on the ﬂoor and the window dropped 
shut. He could hear the bits of lead hopping about in the front room, 
chopping up the furniture and scuttling off through the walls and 
rafters like vermin.
They stopped and the Sheriff was talking again. Spread out, 
he was saying. Keep under cover as much as you can and 
remember, everybody goes together.

That didn't make much sense to the old man. He pulled twice 
more on his cigarette and put it out and crawled under the stove. 
Through a split board he could see them coming, looking squat 
above the grass from his low position. Two deputies were moving 
down from the south end with drawn pistols. One of them was 
dressed in khakis and looked like an A T U agent. The old man 
marked their position, wiggled back out from under the stove, 
riposted to the window and shot them both in quick succession, 
aiming low. Then he ducked back to his stove, broke the shotgun, 
extracted the shells and reloaded. No sound from outside. The 
Sheriff did not call again and after a while when he heard the cars 
starting he got up and went to the front room to see what they'd 
shot up.
Toward late afternoon it began to rain again but the old man 
couldn't wait any longer. Black clouds were moving over the 
mountain, shading the sharp green of it, and in the coombs 
horsetails of mist clung or lifted under the wind to lace and curl 
wistfully, break and trail across the lower slopes. A yellowhammer 
crossed the yard to his high hole in the jagged top of a lightning-
wrecked pine, under-wings dipping bright chrome.
The old man carried out the last of his things and piled them 
on the sledge, buckled them down with the harness straps he had 
nailed under the sides. He went back in one more time and looked 
around. Some last thing he could save. He came out at length with a 
small hooked rug, shook the dust from it and put it over the top of 
the sledge. He took up the rope and pulled the sledge to the road 
and called for Scout. The old dog came from under the porch, 
peering with blue rheumy eyes at his indistinct world of shapes. The 
old man called again and the dog started for the road, hobbling 
stifﬂy, and they set out together, south along the road, until they 
were faint and pale shapes in the rain.
So when they came for the old man the third time he was not 
there. They lobbed teargas bombs through the windows and 
stormed the ruined house from three sides and the house jerked 
and quivered visibly under their gunﬁre. A county ofﬁcer was 
wounded in the neck. He sat on the muddy ground with the blood 
running down his shirtfront, crying, and calling out to the others to 
Get the dirty son of a bitch. When they came back out of the house 
no one would look at him. Finally the Sheriff and another man came 

to where he was and helped him up and took him to the car.
No, the Sheriff said. He got away.
Got away? How could he get away. The man asked two or 
three times but the Sheriff just shook his head and after that the 
man didn't ask any more. They left in a spray of mud, four cars of 
them, with sirens going.
When the old man came out upon the railroad the rain had 
moved off the mountain and in the last light under the brim of the 
clouds he could see the long sharp ridges like lean burning hounds 
racing down the land to the land's end westward, hard upon the 
veering sun. He turned his back to them, going east on the railbed, 
the sledge rocking over the moidering ties. It was still raining and 
dark was coming on fast. From time to time he stopped to check his 
load and cinch the harness straps up. For two hours he followed the 
tracks, down out of the darkening ﬁelds through cuts where night fell 
on the high banks and fell upon the honeysuckle drawing shadow 
forms there, grotesques, shapes of creatures mythical or extinct and 
silently noting his passage. The old man bent east along the tracks, 
leaning into the rope, into the rich purple dusk.
By full dark he had left the tracks and turned into the woods to 
the south, feeling out the path with his feet, shivering a little now in 
his wet clothes. They came past the old quarry, the tiered and 
graceless monoliths of rock alienated up out of the earth and 
blasted into ponderous symmetry, leaning, their ﬂuted faces pale 
and recumbent among the trees, like old temple ruins. They went 
silently along over the trace of the quarry road, the sledge 
whispering, the gaunt dog padding, past the quarryhole with its 
vaporous green waters and into the woods again, the limestone 
white against the dark earth, a populace of monstrous slugs 
dormant in a carbon forest. Groups of trees turned slowly like 
masted carousels, blending shadows and parting in darkness and 
wonder. The rain stopped falling. They passed, leaving a trail of 
foxﬁre shufﬂed up out of the wet leaves like stars plowed in a ship's 
wake.
Morning found them on the south slope of Chilhowee 
Mountain, the dog buckled down on top of the sledge now and the 
old man pulling them tree by tree up the steep and ﬁnal rise. From 
his high place on the slope he could see the ﬁrst strawcolored light 
sourceless beyond the earth's curve, the horizon warped in a 

glaucous haze. An hour later and they had gained the crest of the 
mountain and stood in a ﬁeld of broom sedge bright as wheat, 
treeless but for a broken chestnut the color of stone.
The sun was up by then and the old man rested, leaning 
against the tree. After a while he fell asleep, the sledge's painter still 
wrapped in his blistered hand. The dog stretched out in the sun too, 
wrinkling his ragged hide at the ﬂies. Far below them shades of 
cloud moved up the valley ﬂoor like water ﬂowing, darkened the 
quilted purlieus, moved on, the brushed land gone green and umber 
once again. The clouds broke against the mountain, coral-edged 
and bent to the blue curve of the sky. A butterﬂy struggled, down 
through shells of light, down to the gold and seagreen tree tips ...
The old man came awake late in the afternoon and ate some 
cold cornbread, sharing it with the hound. He did not eat much and 
the cornbread was enough. Then he started down the mountain, 
trucking behind him his sorry chattel, picking a course through the 
small trees and laurel jungles. Some time after midnight he came 
out on a road and turned south along it, crossed a wooden bridge, a 
purling clearwater stream, climbed with the road into the mountains 
again, the sledge drifting easily behind him and the hound plodding.
The light at the house the old man came to that morning he 
could see a good while before he got to it. He caught glimpses of it 
once or twice somewhere on the ridge above him as he was coming 
through a mountain meadow, a huge pool in the darkness swept 
with the passing shadows of nightbirds, but he had no way of 
knowing that the road would take him there. He didn't see the light 
again until he topped the hill where the house stood and where a 
section of road was banded out of the night in a tunnel of carlights. 
Some men were talking and he could hear the sound of the motor 
running.
He kept on, into the light. The voices stopped. The old man 
looked up at them, two men leaning against the side of the 
automobile, another seated inside. He didn't stop. They faded 
behind the glare of the headlights, reappeared ﬁlmily, not moving, 
watching him. With the lights out of his eyes the old man stopped 
and nodded to them. Howdy, he said.
You ain't lost, are ye?
Don't reckon, he said.
One of them said something. The car eased down the drive, 

the two men walking alongside. The man in the car leaned out 
toward him. This road don't go thew, he said. It jest loops and 
comes on back.
How fer is it to the Harrykin? the old man wanted to know.
The man turned out the lights. The other two had come up 
now and said Howdy, each in turn. Scout clambered up onto the 
sledge and eyed them balefully.
Wants to know how fer is it to the Harrykin, the driver said.
What fer?
The other one stepped forward and eyed the old man with 
bland curiosity, the sledge heaped with his worthless paraphernalia 
and topped by the prone and wasted hound. You cain't hardly get 
there from here, he said. You ort to of come thew Sunshine, crost 
the river there ... it ain't easy to get to from nowhere but that there'd 
of been a nigher cut. What you aim to do in there, cut timber?
No, said the old man. Jest ﬁxin to put up some kind of a piece 
of a house and kindly settle there.
In the Harrykin?
Yessir.
Where-all you from? the man in the car wanted to know.
From t'wards Knoxville.
The man in the car was silent for a minute. Then he said, I'm 
goin in to Sevierville here in jest a minute. I can carry you that fer if 
you don't keer to ride in a old beat-up car such as it is.
Much obliged, the old man said, but I reckon I'll jest get on.
Well, the man said. He turned to the other two. I got to get, 
myself, he said. We'll see yins.
They nodded. You come back. The car eased away, the lights 
coming on again, rattled out of sight down the road. The old man 
had the sledge rope in hand and was saying a goodbye to the men.
You best come on in and have some breakfast with us, one of 
them said.
Much obliged, the old man said, but I reckon I'll jest be gettin 
on.
Might as well eat some with us, the other said. We jest ﬁxin to. 
Well, the old man said. If you-all don't care.
The house the old man entered that morning was no shotgun 
shack but a mountain cabin of squared logs rent deeply with 
weather-checks and chinked with clay. It was long and saddle-

bowed, divided into two rooms of equal size, and at the far end of 
one a ﬁreplace of river rock, rocks tumbled smooth as eggs, more 
ancient than the river itself. From a door to the right a woman's face 
peered at them furtively as they sat, the taller of the men motioning 
the old man to a chair cut from a buttertub and padded in hair-worn 
cowhide. They produced tobacco and papers and passed them to 
him not ceremoniously but with that deprecatory gesture of humility 
which country people confer in a look, a lift of the hand. The old 
man began to feel right homey.
Say you from t'wards Knoxville? the tall man said.
Yessir, he answered, taping down the paper of his cigarette.
I got a sister lives over thataway. Meanest kids I ever seen. 
Married a boy from Mead's Quarry--you know where that's at?
Shore, the old man said. I come from Red Mountain my 
ownself. We used to whup Mead's Quarry boys of a Sunday 
afternoon jest to keep a hand in.
The man grinned. That's what he told me about you-all, he 
said.
Then the old man grinned.
The other one broke in. Don't reckon you'd keer fer a little 
drink this early of a mornin?
Not lessen you fellers is ﬁxin to have one.
He disappeared through the door into the lean-to and 
presently came back with a mason jar. Less see if this here is the 
one I wanted, he said, tilting it, watching the slow-rising chain of 
beads. He took off the cap and stretched a draught down his lean 
corded neck, swallowed deep, cocked his head in a listening 
attitude, then passed the jar to the old man. That's the one, he said. 
It's right good drinkin whiskey.
The old man accepted the jar and took a good drink. His legs 
were beginning to feel a little heavy and he lifted ﬁrst one and then 
the other, slightly, testing their weight. He raised the jar again, drank 
and handed it back to the man. Now that's a right nice little whiskey, 
he said.
The two men relayed the jar between them and then it was 
capped and set on the ﬂoor. The shorter man was looking out the 
tiny window. Gettin daylight, he said.
He turned to the old man. You get a right early start, don't ye?
The old man recrossed his legs, taking a look out himself.

Well, he said, kindly early, yes.
You come up from Walland this mornin I reckon?
No, the old man said, Knoxville.
I mean on foot, comin up the mountain ...
I come straight acrost, the old man said.
They looked at each other. The tall one hesitated a moment, 
then he said: You say you goin to the Harrykin?
Aim to, the old man said.
Cain't say as it seems like much of a place to jest go to, he 
said. I've knowed one or two people at different times what was 
there and would of give some to of been away from it though. 
Daddy I remember would leave dogs treed there of a night rather'n 
go in after em. He said they was places you could walk fer half a 
mile thout ever settin foot to the ground--jest over laurel hells and 
down timber, and a rattlesnake to the log ... I never been there 
myself.
You aimin to stay there long? the other one asked.
But before the old man could answer that, the woman thrust 
her face through the door and announced breakfast. Both men rose 
instantly and started for the kitchen, then paused, remembering the 
old man still seated with the slow words forming on his lips. They 
had the uneasy look of boys sneaking to table with dirty hands. The 
old man stood and walked between them, the shorter one smiling a 
sort of half-smile and saying: I reckon we jest about forgot how to 
act, ain't we?
Pshaw, said the old man.
At the foot of the mountain the old man found himself in a 
broad glade grown thick with rushes, a small stream looping placidly 
over shallow sands stippled with dace shadows, the six-pointed 
stars of skating waterspiders drifting like bright frail medusas. He 
squatted and dipped a palmful of water to his lips, watched the dace 
drift and shimmer. Scout waded past him, elbow-deep into the 
stream, lapped at it noisily. Strings of red dirt receded from his 
balding hocks, marbling in the water like blood. The dace skittered 
into the channel and a watersnake uncurled from a rock at the far 
bank and glided down the slight current, no more demonstrative of 
effort or motion than a ﬂute note.
The old man drank and then leaned back against the sledge. 
The glade hummed softly. A woodhen called from the timber on the 

mountain and to that sound of all summer days of seclusion and 
peace the old man slept.
Yessir, the storekeeper said. Yessir, now I believe I do 
recollect who tis. You some kin of hisn?
No, the man said. No kin. Jest somethin I got to see him 
about.
He was dressed in clean gray chinos and had a neat felt hat 
tipped back on his head. Huffaker stole a look out the window to 
where his car was parked at the side of the porch, a plain black 
Ford, a late model.
The man saw him look, watched the glint of suspicion narrow 
the storekeeper's eyes.
Well, Huffaker said, I couldn't tell you offhand where-all you 
might ﬁnd him at. He lives up yander somewheres--a random 
gesture at the brooding hills that cupped in the valley.
He trade here? the man wanted to know.
Well, I couldn't? rightly say he did, nosir. Not regular at all. I 
ain't seen him in here but once or twicet and that's back several 
week ago. He's a right funny old feller, don't have no money at all I 
don't reckon.
What'd he buy then?
Well, he got him some backer and a sack of corn-meal. Little 
sidemeat last time he's in.
He got credit?
Well, no. I don't give out a whole lot of credit. He brings in 
sang. Ginseng roots. Had some goldenseal too but it ain't worth a 
whole lot. I give trade on that.
Roots?
Yessir, Huffaker said. I send em off to St. Louis. Same place 
as I send hides.
The man looked puzzled but he didn't ask any more about 
that.
You from around here? the storekeeper asked.
From over t'wards Maryville.
Oh, Huffaker said. I got kin over there myself.
He still got that dog?
Who's that?
The old feller ... the one ...
Oh. Yessir, did have one with him. A old redbone looked like 

he'd been drug half to death or warshed in lye one. Didn't have no 
hair hardly at all. Right pitiful-lookin, like.
Well, the man said, you say you don't know where-all he lives 
at?
Nosir, I shore don't.
Well, much obliged.
Yessir. You come back.
He did. He came every day for seven days.
He was there next morning early among the un-churched 
Sunday idlers, hovering on the edge of the circle they formed about 
the ﬁreless stove, their conviviality so broken by his presence that 
they took on the look of refugees grimly awaiting bulletins of some 
current disaster, the news of ﬂood or ﬁre or plague. From time to 
time he got a drink from the box and stood sipping it, hand on hip, 
gazing up at the phantasmagoria of merchandise hung about the 
ceiling beams. Or peered solemnly out the window, beyond the river 
and the narrow bridge to where a broad green hollow rose and rose 
into the mountains.
Monday when Huffaker came down he was not there yet but 
half an hour later when he went out to unlock the gas pump the car 
was parked on the gravel ramp approaching the store and the man 
was perched upon the fender in the same creased and tireless 
clothes sipping coffee from a paper cup. The sun was coming up 
behind him and to the west fog was breaking, lifting off the slopes to 
leave the laurel balds burning with the ﬁerce green light of morning. 
The man was watching again, the peaks across the river, as if with 
those slategray eyes he might mark out an old man and a hound 
somewhere on the face of a mountain not less than four miles 
distant.
When Huffaker let the door to, the man turned. He lifted a 
palm in greeting and the man nodded. He went down to the pump 
and undid the lock.
Looks like another purty day, don't it? he called.
Does at that, the man said. He drained the coffee and pitched 
the cup away, got down from the fender and took a few steps up 
and down the gravel, stretching himself. Huffaker returned to the 
store.
Around eleven o'clock he came in, nodding once again to the 
proprietor. He bought a box of soda crackers and some cheese, 

looked for a long time at the cake rack and ﬁnally took a moonpie. 
He laid his lunch on the counter and Huffaker began to total it 
laboriously on a scratch pad, adding the ﬁgures aloud.
And a quart of sweet milk, the man said.
He put that down, then went to the cooler and brought back 
the milk in a quart mason jar. The man looked at it, turned it around 
on the counter.
That's Mrs Walker's milk, he reassured the man. It's good as 
ever you drunk, garntee ye.
The man nodded and pulled a clip of bills from his pocket.
Forty-ﬁve cents, Huffaker said.
He paid it and went out on the porch where he sat back 
against a post and ate his lunch. After he had ﬁnished he squatted 
there a long time smoking cigarettes. Then he brought the jar back 
inside and set it on the counter. Huffaker took it out again and 
washed it under the tap at the side of the building. Some customers 
were coming up toward the store and he waved at them and went 
in.
Later on in the afternoon the man came in again and drank a 
Coca-Cola. Before he went back out to his car he asked Huffaker 
what time it was that the old man usually came in.
The old feller?
The one I was astin you about.
Oh. Well, times he come in it was genly of a mornin. But then 
he don't come regular enough for me to say when a feller be most 
likely to expect him.
Light gained on the high peaks and in the dawn quiet ﬁrst 
birdcalls fell like water on stone. In the wood mists like old gray 
spirits paled and scattered, by moss coverlets the dark earth stirred 
and nightfurled wild-ﬂowers unbent their withered fronds all down 
the path where came the derelict hound shambling along in an 
aureole of its own incredibility, the old man picking his steps over 
the schist and quartz chines, his hex-cane bobbing lightly on his 
shoulder, carrying a limp and greasy paper bag of the curious 
twisted roots with which he bartered. They crossed a broad rock 
slide emblazoned with sun and threaded by a trickle of water in a 
rock channel rusted copper-dark. The old man paused to scale a 
slate down into the gorge where trees lay tossed and broken. The 
dog peered down, looked at the old man inquisitively, studied the 

empty gorge again and then moved on, the old man taking up his 
cane and following. The sole of his brogan was all but off now and 
he limped, favoring the odd shoe to save the binder twine with which 
he had tied it together.
Crossing the slide they entered the deep woods once more, 
the sun winnowed in tall fans among the spiring trunks, greengold 
and black verrniculated on the forest ﬂoor. With his cane the old 
man felled regiments of Indian Pipe, poked the green puffballs to 
see the smoke erupt in a poisonous verdant cloud. The woods were 
damp with the early morning and now and again he could hear the 
swish of a limb where a squirrel jumped and the beaded patter of 
waterdrops in the leaves. Twice they ﬂushed mountain pheasants, 
Scout sidestepping nervously as they roared up out of the laurel.
The path the old man took was a ﬁre trail that had been built 
by the C C C. From the glade in which he now made his home he 
had to climb nearly a thousand feet to reach it, but once on the trail 
the walking was easy and excepting the injured shoe he would have 
swung along at a good pace. It was six miles to the river where he 
crossed and came to the highway and the same ubiquitous 
crossroads store with the drunken porch, the huge and rock-
battered Nehi signs, the weather-curled laths, the paintless 
stonecolored wood--but the old man had taken an early start. 
Through a gap in the trees he could see the valley far below him 
where the river ran, a cauldron in the mountain's shadow where 
smoke and spume seethed like the old disturbance of the earth 
erupting once again, black mist languid in the cuts and trenches as 
ﬂowing lava and the palisades of rock rising in the high-shored rim 
beyond the valley--and beyond the valley, circling the distant hoary 
cupolas now standing into morning, the sun, reaching to the slope 
where the old man rested, speared mist motes emblematic as 
snowﬂakes and broke them down in spangled and regimental 
disorder, reached the trees and banded them in light, struck 
weftwork in the slow uncurling ferns--the sun in its long lightfall 
recoined again in leafwater.
Brogan and cane and cracked pad clatter and slide on the 
shelly rocks and stop where a snake lies curled belly-up to the silent 
fold and dip of a petal-burst of butterﬂies fanning his ﬂat and 
deadwhite underside. Scout smells cautiously at the snake, the 
butterﬂies in slow riot over his head, ﬂowery benediction of their 

veined and harlequin wings. With his cane the old man turns the 
snake, remarking the dusty carpet pattern of its dull skin, the black 
clot of blood where the rattles have been cut away.
They go on--steps soft now in the rank humus earth, or where 
carapaced with lichens the texture of old green velvet, or wet and 
spongy earth tenoned with roots, the lecherous ganglia of things 
growing--coming down, pursuing the shadowline into the smoking 
river valley.
Huffaker would have said it was by chance that he happened 
to be looking out the window toward the river the morning the old 
man came, but he had been watching not much less keenly than the 
patient and taciturn visitor in the pressed gray chinos. So he had 
been looking for him for a week and there he was on the bridge with 
the crudely carved staff, carrying a small paper bag in his hand, a 
moldy crokersack tied at his waist in front like an immense and 
disreputable sporran, and the wreckage of dog padding at his heels, 
raising its bitten muzzle into the air from time to time in a sort of 
hopeless and indomitable afﬁrmation--proceeding on the weathered 
sun-washed bridge, jaunty and yet sad, like maimed soldiers 
returning. Huffaker stepped to the door and the man, coming from 
the car with slow bootcrunch in the gravel, shot him a quick look. 
Huffaker walked to the broken thermometer on the tin snuff sign at 
the corner of the store and pretended to check it, gazed at the 
mounting sun and sniffed at the air, went back in. The old man was 
on the road, coming toward the store. The man was standing on the 
porch with one arm hooked loosely about a post, his foreﬁnger in his 
watchpocket, chewing a straw slowly and watching his approach 
with the composed disinterest of a professional assassin.
The old man climbed onto the porch and the man said:
Arthur Ownby.
Arthur Ownby's eyes swam slowly across, ﬁxed upon him.
Yessir, he said.
Get in that car over yonder. Let's go.
The old man had stopped. He was looking at the man, and 
then he was looking past him, eyes milkblue and serene, studying 
the dipping passage of a dove, and beyond, across the canted ﬁelds 
of grass to the green mountain, and to the thin blue peaks rising into 
the distant sky with no crestline of shape or color to stop them, 
ascending forever.

You hear?
The old man turned. You don't keer if I trade ﬁrst, do ye? he 
said.
You're under arrest. You don't need to trade nothin.
The old man turned back toward the store with an empty 
gesture, holding the sack of ginseng in his hand.
Let's go, the man said again.
So he started down off the porch with a forlorn air and the 
dog, bland, patient, turning behind him with myopic and near-
senseless habituation until, led by the man in the starched and 
rattling clothes, they reached the car. The man swung the door 
open and the old man fumbled and climbed his way onto the front 
seat. As the door was closing it began to occur to him that the dog 
was still out and apparently not under arrest as he was and he 
ﬂailed violently at the glass and upholstery swinging toward him and 
checked it. The man looked at him questioningly.
He didn't know how to begin so he sat there for part of a 
minute with his jaw going up and down as if he couldn't breathe and 
the man said, Well, what now?
The old man nodded his head to where in the gravel the 
ancient hound stood gazing up at the machine before him with a 
bafﬂed look. What about him? the old man said.
What about him?
Well, you don't keer if he rides, do ye?
You're resistin arrest, Ownby, now get on in there. He 
slammed the door but the old man's cane was hanging over the 
runningboard and in mutual defeat the door rocked open again as 
the cane cracked. The old man pulled it in the car with him and 
studied the lower part of it, stooping to examine the whiskers of 
wood standing up from the break. The man slapped the door again 
and it bounded in snugly upon the old man and all but took his 
breath.
The man was coming around the car and he hadn't much 
more time so he pulled at the handles and got the right one and 
opened the door again and leaned out and called to the dog, 
standing off a few feet now and rocking back and forth in 
consternation.
Hya, Scout, the old man whispered. Come on, get in here.
Hey! the man called. What in the hell you think you're up to 

now?
The dog started, backed away. The man paused midway in 
his passage from door to door, returned. The old man straightened 
up and watched him come.
I told you oncet, the man said, coming up fast and reaching for 
the door. The old man recoiled, waiting for it to buffet shut against 
him, but instead it wrenched outward and the man's face jutted in 
and stared at him in a mask of classic anger. You tryin to excape? 
he wanted to know.
Nosir, the old man said. I was jest gettin my dog in ...
Jest what! Dog? He turned and seemed to see the hound for 
the ﬁrst time. They said you's crazy. Dog's ass, you cain't take no 
dog ...
He cain't shift for hisself, the old man said. He's too old.
I ain't no dog catcher and this ain't no kennel, the man said. 
And I wadn't sent here to haul no broken-down sooner around. Now 
get in the goddamned car and stay put. He said it very slowly and 
evenly and the old man really began to worry. But he suffered the 
door closed to once more and didn't mention it again until the man 
came around and got in beside him.
It wouldn't hurt nothin for him to ride, he said. I cain't hardly 
leave him jest a-standin there.
Old-timer, the man said, I advise you jest to set still and hush 
up cause you in plenty of trouble already. He cranked the engine 
and slid the gearshift upward and the old man felt himself rocketed 
backward violently with a welter of dust boiling and receding before 
him and the dog standing there in the drive with the gravel dancing 
about him and then they cut one long rattling curve and were on the 
road and leaving, and the old man, clutching his cane, holding the 
dirty little sack between his knees, looked back at the dog still 
standing there like some atavistic symbol or brute herald of all 
questions ever pressed upon humanity and beyond understanding, 
until the dog raised his head to clear the folds above his milky eyes 
and set out behind them at a staggering trot.
Warn blew little cone-shaped thistles into the fur. No, he said. 
Ten maybe. See here--he blew again, cotton mink. Takes a ﬁrst-
class mink to bring twenty dollars. The boy nodded.
Fur's slippin, Warn said. Whew, here. He handed the mink 
back. Sure raised hell with it, didn't he?

The boy took it and pitched it underhand back up onto the 
shelf in the woodshed. He clambered down the pile of logs and they 
went out together. Some wasps were hovering beneath the eaves 
with their long legs dangling. Small buds already on the locust trees. 
It would soon be nothing but bones, but he wouldn't come to see, 
like when he dug up the ﬂying squirrel he had buried in a jar and 
found only bones with bits of fur rolling around inside the glass like 
bed-lint.
They took the road to Warn's house, the ﬁelds still too wet to 
cross, passed the store.
You got any money? Warn asked him.
No, he said. I ain't sold my hides yet. You?
Naw. I sold my hides but I ain't got nothin left. I blow it in quick 
as I get it. Got me some new shoes for school is about all.
What you get for em?
For the hides? I don't know; two dollars on most of em. That 
big rat got three I think it was and some of em the man said was kits 
and they didn't bring but a dollar. I had eighteen hides and I think it 
come to thirty-one dollars.
I should get six dollars, the boy said. I owe out two. Who you 
owe?
Sylder. He loant me the money for traps when Gifford got 
mine. I'd done signed a paper to buy em uptown--on account of the 
man let me have those ﬁrst ones I bought at lot price.
You keep messin with Sylder and signing papers uptown and 
sech shit as that and you goin to get your ass slung in the jail after 
all. Lucky Gifford didn't do it.
Gifford's chickenshit.
Oh, Warn said. I didn't know you had him scared of you.
Warn had his own room in the back of the house. The boy sat 
on the bed while he went through the top drawer of an old-
fashioned sewing cabinet. He dredged up: a hawkbill knife, three 
arrowheads, a collection of riﬂe-balls velvety gray with oxidation, a 
scalpel, rocks, some dynamite caps, miscellaneous pieces of ﬁshing 
tackle, dried ginseng, a roll of copper wire ... Riﬂing through the 
mass he at length came up with a thin and dog-eared pamphlet, its 
cover decorated with an archaic and ill-proportioned ink sketch of a 
trapped lynx. Across the top in black script was the title TRAPPING 
THE FUR BEARERS OF NORTH AMERICA. Warn handled the 

treasure reverently. I got this from Uncle Ather, he said. It'll have 
something in it.
Under a section entitled Lynx and Bobcat Sets they found a 
plan of such devious cunning as appealed to their minds. The bait 
was to be suspended from a limb and overhanging a stump. The 
trap would be set on top of the stump, so that when the victim 
stood--the illustration depicted a great hairy lynx snifﬁng at the bait 
on hind legs--his paw would come to rest on the stump and so into 
the trap--also illustrated, in broken-line, straining beneath a handful 
of leaves.
Warn nodded in solemn approval. That's the one, he said. The 
boy studied the set carefully and then Warn tucked the book away in 
the sewing cabinet.
You reckon it really was a bobcat?
I don't know what-all else it could of been, Warn said. Ain't 
nothin else around here got sharp claws that I know of.
I sure could of used that ten dollars, the boy said.
The desk sergeant studied Marion Sylder's angular frame with 
a hurt look, as if he were being put upon. Sylder looked back at him 
with a suggestion of good humor. The desk sergeant rebent his 
head to his papers, his lips working in patient disgust. He pondered 
for some minutes, replaced a folder in the ﬁling drawer of the desk 
and reached for a pen. Name, he said, gazing at the inkstand with 
weary boredom.
Fred Long.
Marion Paris Sylder. Occupation.
Iron and steel ...
None. Married?
No.
Married. Address.
Red Mountain Tennessee.
Route Nine, Knoxville. Mm ... Age.
Twenty.
--eight. Previous convictions.
Silence.
Previous convictions.
The sergeant looked up at Sylder as if surprised to see him 
there. Previous convictions, he said again, slowly.
Again a moment or two of silence. Far to the rear of the 

building a remote clanking sound. The sergeant waited. Then he 
nodded wearily to the patrolman sitting in a chair by the door. The 
man rose and sauntered over to the prisoner, something of the 
laconical about him. Sylder turned to look at him. When he turned 
back to the man at the desk the patrolman jabbed his nightstick into 
his ribs.
Ow! Sylder said.
The patrolman looked aggrieved. Previous convictions, droned 
the sergeant, stiﬂing a yawn.
You seem to know all about it, Sylder said. Oof!
The patrolman studied his face with an eager look, holding the 
stick in readiness again.
Previous con--
None, Sylder said.
None.
The sergeant leaned back with closed eyes, a rapt and serene 
look. The patrolman returned to his post at the door. From the cells 
to the rear of the building came bits and pieces of a sad voice 
singing. The sergeant turned papers over. In the outer corridor men 
were coming in, stamping their feet arid rattling their raincoats, 
cussing the weather. A furnace pipe clattered.
At length the sergeant regarded Sylder again. I reckon that's 
all for now, he said. You're booked on illegal possession--untaxed. I 
got somebody comin down wants to see you, have a little talk kindly.
Who's that? Sylder said.
Fella name of Gilford. Ever hear of him?
Jailer!
Sylder's third visitor was the boy, wide-eyed and serious 
before the smirking usherance of the jailer.
Here's your uncle, the jailer said. Little buddy come a-callin.
The boy stared at the man seated on the steel bunk. The jailer 
followed his gaze. Well now, he said, he don't seem too peart, does 
he? Looks kindly like he's been sortin cats. Step on in and say 
howdy. Cheer the poor feller up some.
The boy stepped in. Sylder's eyes focused onto him, he 
managed a small grin, a nod. Howdy there, Hogjowls, he said. The 
door rattled to behind them, the jailer departing, heelclack, 
keyjangle, echoing down the corridor.
Howdy, said the boy. What happent to you?

Well, I had a little disagreement with these fellers ... as to 
whether a man can haul untaxed whiskey over tax-kept roads or 
whether by not payin the whiskey tax he forfeits the privilege of 
drivin over the roads the whiskey don't keep up that ain't taxed or if 
it was would be illegal anyway. I think what they do is deeport you.
No, the boy said, I mean ... you wreck?
Oh. No ... I was wrecked all right, but I didn't wreck. He 
ﬁngered sorely the particolored swellings on his cheek and 
forehead. Kindly a bang-up job, ain't it? Mutual acquaintance helped 
out with the decoratin ... the deacon Gifford. With two buddies to 
hold me. Wadn't even much spirited about it till I kicked him in the 
nuts. Now they got to worry about gettin me unswole so as I can 
appear in court. I got some busted ribs too that they don't know 
about yet. I'm sort of holdin em for a ace. Here, set down. He 
grimaced and dropped his feet down off the bed to clear a seat.
The boy hadn't said anything else. He lowered himself onto 
the bunk, still staring at Sylder. Then he said:
That son of a bitch.
Ah, said Sylder.
How'd they ... you said you never wrecked, how did they ...
Catch me? It wadn't hard. I had my choice though, I could of 
jumped off the bridge. They live ever oncet in a while.
What?
Water in the gas. A little too much rain, I reckon. Too much for 
old Eller's leaky-assed tank leastways. There's one bill the son of a 
bitch'll play hell collectin.--It quit in the middle of the Henley Street 
Bridge.
Oh.
Sylder had leaned back against the concrete wall and was 
tapping a cigarette from its package. Ain't that a hell of a note? he 
said.
I'll get him.
Hmm?
I'm goin to get the son of a bitch.
What! That old fart? Why I'll be dipped in ... Then he said Oh.
That's right, the boy said. The deacon.
The smile had fallen from Sylder's face. Wait a minute, he 
said. You don't get nobody.
Him, the boy said.

No, Sylder said. He was looking very hard at the boy but the 
boy knew he was in the right.
Why? he said.
You jest stay away from Jefferson Gifford, that's all.
You hear?
You jest think I'll get in trouble, the boy said. That I ...
Stubborn little bastard, ain't you? Look.
Sylder paused, he seemed to be trying to think of something, 
a word perhaps. Look, he said, what's between him and me is 
between him and me. It don't need nobody else. So I thank ye kindly 
but no thank ye, you don't owe me nothin and I ain't crippled. I'll 
tend to my own Giffords. All right?
The boy didn't answer, didn't seem to be listening. Sylder lit 
the cigarette and watched him. He turned and looked once at Sylder 
and then he seemed to remember something and he reached into 
the watchpocket of his jeans and took out two folded dollar bills and 
handed them to him.
What's that? Sylder said.
The two dollars I owe you. That you loant me for traps.
Naw ... Sylder started. Then he stopped and looked at the boy 
still holding out the two dirty bills. Okay, he said. He took the money 
and crammed it into his shirtpocket. Okay, that makes us square.
The boy was silent for a minute. Then he said:
No.
No what?
No it don't make us square. Because maybe I lost the traps on 
your account but that's okay and I earned em back and paid for em 
and that's okay ... but you got beat up on my account and maybe in 
jail too that ... and that's why it ain't square yet, that part of it not 
square.
Sylder started to reach for the money, thought better of it and 
sat up, grinding the cigarette out beneath his heel. Then he looked 
at the boy. Square be damned, he said. I ast you to stay away from 
Gifford, that's all. Will you?
The boy didn't say anything.
Swear it? Sylder said.
No.
Sylder watched him, the still childish face set with truculent 
purpose. Look, he said, you're ﬁxin to get me in worse trouble than I 

already am, you ...
I won't get no ...
No, wait a damn minute.
He did. They sat looking at each other, the man's face 
misshapen as if bee-stung, him leaning forward gaunt and huge and 
the boy perched delicately on the edge of the metal pallet as if loath 
to sit too easily where so many had lain in such hard rest.
Look, Sylder said, taking a long breath, you want to talk about 
square, all right. Me and Gif are square.
The boy looked at him curiously.
Yes, he said. I busted him and he busted me. That's fair, ain't 
it?
The boy was still silent, calmly incredulous.
No, Sylder went on, I ain't forgettin about jail. You think 
because he arrested me that thows it off again I reckon? I don't. It's 
his job. It's what he gets paid for. To arrest people that break the 
law. And I didn't jest break the law, I made a livin at it. He leaned 
forward and looked the boy in the face. More money in three hours 
than a workin man makes in a week. Why is that? Because it's 
harder work? No, because a man who makes a livin doin somethin 
that has to get him in jail sooner or later has to be paid for the jail, 
has to be paid in advance not jest for his time breakin the law but for 
the time he has to build when he gets caught at it. So I been paid. 
Gifford's been paid. Nobody owes nobody. If it wadn't for Gifford, 
the law, I wouldn't of had the job I had blockadin and if it wadn't for 
me blockadin, Gifford wouldn't of had his job arrestin blockaders. 
Now who owes who?
His voice was beginning to rise and he had about him a look 
almost furious. But you, he went on, you want to be some kind of a 
goddamned hero. Well, I'll tell ye, they ain't no more heroes.
The boy seemed to shrink, his face ﬂushing.
You understand that? Sylder said.
I never claimed I wanted to be no hero, the boy said sullenly.
Nobody never claimed it, Sylder said. Anyway I never done 
nothin on your account like you said. I don't do nothin I don't want 
to. You want to do me a favor jest stay away from Gifford. Stay 
away from me too. You ought not to of come here. You'll get me 
charged with delinquency to a minor. Go on now.
He leaned back against the wall and stared at the emptiness 

before him. After a while the boy got up and went to the door and 
tried it, and Sylder, not looking up or speaking to the boy, called for 
the jailer. He heard him come and the clank of keys, the cell door 
grating open. Then quiet. He looked up. The boy was standing in 
the doorway, half turned, looking at him with a wan smile, puzzled, 
like one who aspires to disbelief in the face of immutable fact. Sylder 
lifted one hand in farewell. Then the door clanged to.
He sat up, half rose from the cot, would call him back to say 
That's not true what I said. It was a damned lie ever word. He's a 
rogue and a outlaw hisself and you're welcome to shoot him, burn 
him down in his bed, any damn thing, became he's a traitor to boot 
and maybe a man steals from greed or murders in anger but he 
sells his own neighbors out for money and it's few lie that deep in 
the pit, that far beyond the pale.
Softly and with slow grace her leathered footpads fell, hind 
tracking fore with a precision profoundly feline, a silken movement 
where her shoulders rolled, haunches swayed. Belly swaying slightly 
too, lean but pendulous. Head low and divorced of all but linear 
motion, as if ﬁxed along an unseen rail. A faint musty odor still clung 
to her, odor of the outhouse where she had slept all day, restless in 
the heat and languishing among the dusty leaves in the corner, 
listening to the dry scratch and slither of roaches, the interstitial 
boring of wood-beetles. Now she came down the patch obscure with 
parched weeds shedding thin blooms of sifting dust where she 
brushed them. At dusk-dark from her degenerate habitation, 
emerging to make her way down the narrow patch as cats go.
She passed through the honeysuckles by a dark tunnel where 
the earth still held moisture, down the bank to a culvert by which she 
crossed beneath the road and came into a ﬁeld and into a dry gully, 
the cracked and curling clay like a paving of potsherds, and turned 
up an artery of the wash, grown here with milkweed and burdock, 
following a faint aura of vole or shrew, until she came to a small 
burrow in the grasses. She scratched at the matted whorl, caved it 
in and trod it down, moved on across the ﬁeld, crickets scuttling, 
grasshoppers springing from their weed-stems and whirring away. A 
shadow passed soundlessly overhead, perhaps a ﬂock of late-
returning birds.
Near the center of the ﬁeld was a single walnut tree bedded in 
a crop of limestone which had so far fended it against axe and 

plowshare. Among these rocks she nosed, in their small labyrinths 
undulant as a ferret. Odor of walnuts and ground squirrels. But she 
found nothing.
When she left the rocks, was clear of the overreaching 
branches of the tree, there grew about her a shadow in the 
darkness like pooled ink spreading, a soft-hissing feathered sound 
which ceased even as she half turned, saw unbelieving the 
immense span of wings cupped downward, turned again, already 
squalling when the owl struck her back like a falling rock.
Mr Eller closed the lionheaded door behind him and rattled the 
latch to see that it was secure. Then he checked the plaited fob on 
the notecase in his hip pocket, adjusted his straw hat, and started 
up the road toward the house. At the mailbox he was arrested by 
the high thin wail of a cat coming apparently from straight overhead. 
He looked up but there were no trees there. He shook his head and 
went on, stepping carefully in the gutted drive. The squall sounded 
once more, this time more distant and to the ridge of pines behind 
the house. He continued on, to the porch where a yellow bulb held 
forth its dull steadfast light, to a place of surcease.
A young social worker recently retained by the Knox County 
Welfare Bureau, having been notiﬁed through his ofﬁce of the 
detention of one aged and impecunious gentleman at the county jail 
pending hearing of his case (charges ranging from Destruction of 
Government Property to Assault with Intent to Kill) proceeded to 
make such investigation as would determine whether the gentleman 
had relatives, and if not, to what department or agency he might 
properly be assigned as ward. The agent, having been admitted into 
the cell where the elderly gentleman was conﬁned, addressed him:
Mr Ownby?
Yessir.
I represent the Welfare Bureau for the county. Welfare?
Yes. We ... you see, we help people.
The old man turned that over in his mind. He didn't seem to be 
paying much attention to the thin young man standing just inside the 
door. He scratched his jaw and then he said, Well, I ain't got nothin. 
I don't reckon I can hep yins any.
The agent made a ﬂeeting effort at comprehension, passed it 
over. All we need, he said, is some information.
The old man turned and looked at him. You another 

policeman? he asked.
No, said the agent. I represent the Welfare Bureau for ... I 
have been asked to see you--to see if perhaps we can help you in 
any way.
Well, the old man said, I kindly doubt it. I'm what you might call 
Brushy bound.
Yes, said the agent. I mean ... you see, Mr Ownby, there are 
certain beneﬁts to which you may be entitled. You seem to have 
been overlooked by our department for some time and we would 
like to have a record of your case for our, our, records, you see. 
And so I have some forms here that I need your help in ﬁlling out.
Hmm, the old man said.
Do you mind answering a few questions?
Don't reckon, the old man said. Here, set down.
Thank you, said the agent. He lowered himself gingerly onto 
the cot and began to unstrap his briefcase. His hand disappeared 
inside and emerged with a sheaf of printed forms intershufﬂed with 
carbon paper. Now, he said comfortably, ﬁrst of all, your age.
Well, I don't rightly know.
Yes. I beg your pardon?
Don't know for sure, that is. There's a part of it I don't 
remember too good. Well, could you tell us when you were born? 
The old man eyed him curiously. If I knowed that, he said patiently, I 
could ﬁgure how old I was. And tell us that.
The agent smiled weakly. Yes. Of course. Well, could you 
estimate your age then? You are over sixty-ﬁve?
Considerable.
Well, about how old would you say?
It ain't about, the old man said, it's either. Either eighty-three 
or eighty-four.
The agent wrote that down on his form, studied it for a 
moment with satisfaction. Fine, he said. Now, where is your present 
residence?
If'n I'm eighty-four I'll live to be a hunerd and ﬁve providin I get 
to eighty-ﬁve.
Yes. Your ...
When was you born?
The agent looked up from his forms. Nineteen-thirteen, he 
said, but we ...

What date?
June. The thirteenth. Mr Ownby ...
The old man tilted his eyes upward in reﬂection. Hmm, he 
said. That was a Friday. Kindly a bad start. Was your daddy over 
twenty-eight when you was born?
No, please, Mr Ownby. These questions, you see ...
The old man hushed and the agent sat watching him for a 
minute. Now, he said. Your present address?
Well, the old man said, I did live on Forked Creek--Twin Fork 
Road, but I moved to the mountains. I got me a little place up there.
Where is that?
That's all right where it's at.
But we have to have an address, Mr Ownby.
Well, put down Twin Fork Road then, the old man said.
You live alone?
Jest me and Scout. Or we did.
Scout?
Dog.
The agent continued to write. You have, I believe, no family or 
relatives.
Yessir.
The agent looked up. Well, he said, we'll need their names 
then.
I mean yes I don't have none, the old man said wearily.
The agent continued with his questions, the old man 
answering yes or no or giving information. Upturned upon his knee 
his right hand opened and closed with a kneading action, as though 
he were trying to soften something in his palm. Until at length it 
stopped and the old man sat upright, ﬁst clenched and quivering 
and the veins like old blue thread imprinted in the paper skin, sat 
erect and cut the agent off with a question of his own:
Why don't you say what you come here to say? Why not jest 
up and ast me?
I beg your pardon? said the agent.
Why I done it. Rung shells and shot your hootnanny all to hell? 
Where you from, heh? You talk like a Goddamned yankee. What 
you do for a livin? Ast questions?
Mr Ownby ...
Mr Ownby's ass. I could tell you why--and you stit wouldn't 

know. That's all right. You can set and ast a bunch of idjit questions. 
But not knowin a thing ain't never made it not so. Well, I'm a old 
man and I've seen some hard times, so I don't reckon Brushy 
Mountain'll be the worst place I was ever in.
Mr Ownby, I'm sure you're upset and I assure you ...
Ahh, said the old man.
Mr Ownby, there are only a few more questions. If you'd like I 
could come back another time. I ... We at the agency feel ...
I reckon you could, the old man said. I ain't goin nowhere. He 
leaned back against the wall and passed one hand across his eyes 
as if to wipe away some image. Then he sat very still with his hands 
on his knees, his shaggy head against the bricks, restored to 
patience and a look of tried and inviolate sanctity, the faded blue 
eyes looking out down the row of cages, a forest of sweating iron 
dowels, forms of men standing or huddled upon their pallets, and 
the old man felt the circle of years closing, the ﬁnal increment of the 
curve returning him again to the inchoate, the prismatic ﬂux of 
sound and color wherein he had drifted once before and now 
beyond the world of men. By the time the agent had gathered his 
forms and tucked them once again into his briefcase the old man 
had closed his eyes and the agent called quietly for the jailer and 
left him.
The jailer walked with him down the corridor. The agent had 
regained his composure. Well, he said cheerily, he's a cantankerous 
old rascal, isn't he?
The old feller? I reckon. Been pretty quiet here, but then they 
shore had a time gettin him here.
How's that? said the agent.
Why, he shot four men. Luther Boyd's stit hoppin around on 
crutches.
Did he kill anyone? the agent asked.
No, but it wadn't from not tryin. That old man's ornery enough.
Yes, the agent said, musing. Deﬁnitely an anomic type.
Mean as a snake, said the jailer. Here, watch the door.
The agent thanked the desk sergeant as he passed through 
the outer room. He swung the briefcase to his left hand and dabbled 
his handkerchief upon his forehead. Over the worn runner on the 
ﬂagged hall ﬂoor his steps were soundless and he moved with a 
slender grace of carriage, delicate and feline.

In the spring of the year you may see them about the grounds 
walking or sitting perhaps in the wake and swath of the droning 
mowers lifting up strewn daisyheads white and torn, softly fallen in 
the grass. Long monologues rise and fall, they speak of great deeds 
and men and noble eras gone. The mowers return along the fence 
in martial formation drowning the babble of voices.
The brick buildings atop the hill are dark with age, formidable 
yet sad, like old fortress ruins. Families come from the reception 
room into the pale sun, moving slowly, talking, grieving their silent 
griefs. The un-visited amble hurriedly about the grounds like 
questing setters, gesticulant and aimless.
There are others who sit quietly and unattended in the grass 
watching serene and childlike with serious eyes. Tender voices 
caress their ears endlessly and they are beyond sorrow. Some 
wave hopefully to the passing cars of picnickers and bathers. The 
eldest of all sits a little apart, a grass stem revolving between his 
yellowed teeth, remembering in the summer.
The mountain road brick-red of dust laced with lizard tracks, 
coming up through the peach orchard, hot, windless, cloistral in a 
silence of no birds save one vulture hung in the smokeblue void of 
the sunless mountainside, rocking on the high updrafts, and the 
road turning and gated with bullbriers waxed and green, and the 
green cadaver grin sealed in the murky waters of the peach pit, 
slimegreen skull with newts coiled in the eyesockets and a wig of 
moss.
The old man paused at the door, the attendant leading him by 
one arm through and into the room apparently against his will, 
peered at the boy through slotted lids as if unused to light of any 
intensity. He looked older than the boy remembered him. The 
attendant pulled him into the room, him shufﬂing in the old brogans 
with the paper-thin soles, a rasping sound on the concrete ﬂoor.
They came over to where the boy sat. Here's your nephew, 
the attendant said loudly into the old man's ear. You remember 
him?
The old man ﬂashed a glint of blue eyes from deep beneath 
the closing lids. I reckon, he said.
The attendant pushed him down into the wicker chair next to 
the boy and left them, going back through the door, high squeak of 
crepe diminishing in the corridor. The old man sat in his chair 

staring across at the unrelieved spanse of whitewashed plaster.
Uncle Ather?
He turned. The boy was holding at him a huge bag of chewing 
tobacco.
I brought you some tobacca, he said. Beech-Nut, like you like.
The old man took it from him slowly and slid it inside his 
shirtfront. Thank ye, son, he said. I'm much obliged.
They sat quietly. The mowers passed again beneath the 
window, droning louder and then fading. Laughter and distant 
voices, someone crying, quite softly, like a child who is just lonely.
Kindly warmin up a little, ain't it? the old man said.
We had a little rain out to the mountain, the boy said. Sunday 
week I believe it was.
Yes, the old man said. Well, be little of it this year I reckon. 
Done had it all at oncet. They's a good warm spell comin on. Won't 
nothin make, won't nothin keep. A seventh year is what it is.
He gazed at the ﬂoor between his shoes, out of the bell-ﬂared 
tops his shinbones rising hairless, pale and polished as shafts of 
driftwood and into his trouser legs. Get older, he said, you don't 
need to count. You can read the signs. You can feel it in your 
ownself. Knowed a blind man oncet could tell lots of things afore 
they happent. But it'll be hot and dry. Late frost is one sign if you 
don't know nothin else. So they won't but very little make because 
folks thinks that stuff grows by seasons and it don't. It goes by 
weather. Game too, and folks themselves if they knowed it. I 
recollect one winter, I was jest a young feller, they wadn't no winter. 
Not hardly a frost even. It was a sight in the world the things that 
growed. That was a seventh year seventh and you'll be old as me 
afore it comes again.
The old man paused, consulted a trouser button. Then he 
said: I look for this to be a bad one. I look for real calamity afore this 
year is out.
When the boy asked him the old man explained that there was 
a lean year and a year of plenty every seven years. The boy 
thought about it. Then he said: That makes it ever fourteen year 
then, don't it?
Well, said the old man, depends on how you count I reckon. 
If'n you count jest the lean and not the plenty, or the other way 
around, I reckon you could call it ever fourteen year. I reckon some 

folks might ﬁgure thataway. I call it the seventh my ownself.
He gazed at the wall above the line of wicker chairs. The 
attendant passed through the room with a young man and a 
woman. She was drying her eyes with a yellow lace handkerchief. 
They went out. After a while the boy said:
They got Marion Sylder.
The old man turned his head, the ﬁne white silk of his hair 
lifting slightly with the motion as if a breeze had touched it. Who's 
that? he said.
Sylder. The ... the feller used to haul whiskey for Hobie. They 
caught him with a load and sent him to Brushy.
Thought his name was Jack, the old man said.
No, Sylder. Marion Sylder. He was a friend of mine.
Yes, the old man said. I recollect seein him on the mountain 
time or two. Had a black car. Kindly a new one I believe it was. Say 
they sent him to Brushy.
Three years. For runnin whiskey.
That's pitiful, the old man said. Feller nowadays you don't get 
by with much. Yes, I recollect the boy, don't know as I ever did meet 
him. Well, I hope he fares better'n me. I cain't get used to all these 
here people. The old man looked like he might be going to say more 
but he stopped and he looked at the boy, his wiry and tufted brows 
bunched whether in pain or anger and eyes blanched with age a 
china-blue, but ﬁerce, a visage hoary and peregrine.
How long do you have to ... stay in?
Here? he said, looking about him. Likely a good while, son. 
They ain't never said what I was charged with nor nothin but I 
suspicion they think me light in the head is what it is. I reckon you 
knowed this was a place for crazy people. What they tend to do with 
me when they come to ﬁnd out I ain't crazy I couldn't speculate. He 
patted the front of his shirt where he had put the tobacco. How's 
young Pulliam? he said.
He's gone up in the country to stay with his gram-maw, the 
boy said. Ain't nobody much left around no more.
No, the old man said. He ever catch him a mink?
No. I caught one though.
Did, eh? What did it bring?
It never brought nothin. They was a bobcat or somethin got 
aholt of it and tore it up.

That's a shame, said the old man. Did ye lay ye a set for that 
old cat?
Me and Warn did. But we never caught nothin but a big old 
possum.
Cats is smart, allowed the old man. Course it could of been a 
common everday housecat. They'll tear up anything they come up 
on, a cat will. Housecats is smart too. Smarter'n a dog or a mule. 
Folks thinks they ain't on account of you cain't learn em nothin, but 
what it is is that they won't learn nothin. They too smart. Knowed a 
man oncet had a cat could talk. Him and this cat'd talk back and 
forth of one another like ary two people. That's one cat I kept shy of. 
I knowed what it was. Lots of times that happens, a body dies and 
their soul takes up in a cat for a spell. Specially somebody 
drownded or like that where they don't get buried proper.
But not for no longer than seven year so he would be gone 
now and I don't have to fool with him no more except he ought not 
to of got burnt, that ought not to of happent and maybe I done 
wrong in that way to of let that happen, but it's done now and he's 
gone, that had to of been him Eller was supposed to of heard, 
wonderin what all it could of been squallin thataway, not that I'd of 
told anybody--him leavin out cat and all and bound most probably 
for hell and I hope they don't nobody hear no more from him never. 
So that man put him there either justiﬁed or not is free too afore 
God because after that seven year they cain't nobody bother you, 
what that lawyer said and I had been scoutin nine year he said was 
two year longer than needful but this time I was too old and they 
catched me.
Yes, he said, they's lots of things folks don't know about sech 
as that. Cats is a mystery, always has been. He stopped, passed a 
hand across his face dreamily. Then he turned to the boy. Believe 
you've growed some, ain't ye? he said.
The boy ran his palms along his knees. I reckon, he said.
Mm hm, the old man said. What do you ﬁgure you'll make?
I don't know, he said. Not much of nothin.
Well, the old man said, it's always hard for a young feller to get 
a start. Does seem like they's any number of ways to get money 
nowadays, not like when I was growin up cash money was right 
hard to come by. They's even a bounty on ﬁndin dead bodies, man 
over to Knoxville does pretty good grapplehookin em when they 

jump off of the bridge like they do there all the time. They tell me he 
gets out fast enough to beat anybody else to em only not so fast as 
they might stit be a-breathin. So they tell it leastways.
But I never done it to beneﬁt myself because I knowed I'd 
have to scout the hushes if they found I done it as I allowed they 
would and if I did have my reasons stit they cain't a man say I done 
it to beneﬁt myself.
A man gets older, he said, he ﬁnds they's lots of things he can 
do jest as well without and so he don't have to worry about this and 
that the way a young feller will. I worked near all my life and never 
had nothin. Seems like a old man'd be allowed his rest but then he 
comes to ﬁnd they's things you have to do on account of nobody 
else wants to attend to em. Like that would make em go away. And 
maybe they don't look like much but then they lead you around like 
you might start a rabbit dog to hunt a fence-corner and get drug 
over half the county against nightfall. Which a old man ain't good at 
noway. He eased himself slightly in the chair and shifted his weight. 
Most ever man loves peace, he said, and none better than a old 
man.
Or even knows they need attendin to. But I never done it to 
beneﬁt myself. Shot that thing. Like I kept peace for seven year 
sake of a man I never knowed nor seen his face and like I seen 
them fellers never had no business there and if I couldn't run em off 
I could anyway let em know they was one man would let on that he 
knowed what they was up to. But I knowed if they could build it they 
could build it back and I done it anyway. Ever man loves peace and 
a old man best of all.
Do they allow you to chew in here?
I kindly doubt it, the old man said. I ain't a-ﬁxin to ast noway, 
I'll jest slip me one when I see clear to. They's some in here I 
wouldn't put past tellin on a feller. Half loonies. The real loonies 
wouldn't. Some here that ain't crazy, like me, but I doubt they'd want 
to tell.
I wonder how come them to be here, the boy said. The old 
man ran a lank and corded hand through his hair. I couldn't say, he 
said. The ways of these people is strange to me. I did mean to ast 
you, you ain't seen my old dog I don't reckon?
No, the boy said, I've not seen him. You want I could go out to 
your place and hunt him.

Well, ever you're out thataway might holler for him. I don't 
know what to tell ye to do with him. I ain't got no money to ast 
nobody to feed him with and I couldn't shoot him was he too poor to 
walk, but might could somebody else ...
I see him I'll take care of him, the boy said. I wouldn't charge 
you nothin noway.
Well, the old man said, refolding his hands in his lap. They 
looked up together, an orderly crossing the room with prim steps 
and bearing in tow an odor of disinfectant, cleaning ﬂuid redolent of 
sassafras from the corridor where two Negroes mopped backwards 
toward each other. They could hear the measured slap of the mops 
on the baseboard above the door's long pneumatic hiss until it 
closed and they sat again in quiet, the sunlight strong and airy in the 
room.
That wasn't the one. He said:
What are these? the stethoscope still about his neck and 
jerking about rubbery when he moved.
Shotgun done it, said the old man, seated half naked and in 
decorous rectitude upon the examining table with his feet just 
clearing the ﬂoor and looking straight ahead--so that the intern had 
moved him about roughly without speaking either as you might a 
cataleptic wasted thin with years until the old man had asked him 
quietly if he intended to kill him.
What were you doing, robbing a henhouse?
The old man didn't answer. He said again:
I know she's here.
If she is she don't want to see you.
I mean to see her.
Then the barrel of the gun shortening and withdrawing in the 
cup of his shoulder and his face bent to the stock and him walking 
into it, the black plume of smoke forming soundlessly about the 
muzzle and the shot popping into his leg, audible and painless in his 
ﬂesh and him taking another step with the same leg and pitching 
forward as if he had stepped in a hole and then he could hear the 
shot.
You reckon you'll come back to the mountain, the boy said. 
When you ... come back?
Oh, said the old man, well. Yes. Yes, most likely I will. I 
allowed I might go back up yander in the mountains where my new 

place is at but I don't know as I will. A man gets lonesome off by 
hisself he ain't used to it. I spect I'll jest come on back if the old 
house ain't fell down. Yes.
He shufﬂed his feet on the ﬂoor. A shadow fell over them and 
he looked up to see the boy standing. Are ye leavin? he said.
Yes, the boy said. I got to get on back.
Well. I thank ye for the tobacca.
It's all right.
Well.
I'll come again.
No, the old man said.
Yes. I will.
Well.
He stopped again at the door and lifted his hand. The old man 
waved him on, and then he was alone again. The mowers came 
back. A little later the attendant to lead him away.
He stood in front of the courthouse again, again the heat and 
the sulphurous haze in ﬁxed and breathless canopy above the 
trafﬁc. He took the dollar from his pocket and pressed out the 
creases between his palms. It would leave him two dollars and what 
was left of the ﬁfty cents, since he had gotten ﬁve and a half for the 
hides of which, he had paid the two to Sylder and now this dollar 
which he hadn't even known that he owed. Then he climbed the 
walk, the dollar in his hand, past the arch and past the tireless 
bronze soldier and under the new shade of the buckeyes. He 
mounted the gritty footworn steps upward in a rush, into the hall, 
turning left and coming again to the long counter with the desks 
behind it. There was only one woman there, not the one he had 
traded with before. She was at a typewriter, the machine clacking 
loudly in the empty room. He stood at the counter watching her. 
After a while he coughed. She stopped and looked up. Can I help 
you? she said.
Yesm.
She still sat, hands poised over the machine. He stared back 
at her. She lowered her hands into her lap, swiveled the chair about 
to face him. He said no more and she rose and crossed slowly to 
the counter, adjusting her glasses as she went.
Well, she said, what can I do for you?
It's about the bounty, mam. Hawks.

Oh. You have a hawk. She was looking down at him.
No mam, I done give it to ye. He had the dollar out in his hand 
now and waving it feebly, wondering could the price have gone up. I 
was ﬁguring on trading back with ye if you-all don't care, he said.
Her brows pinched up a small purse of ﬂesh between them. 
Trade back? she said. You mean you want to get the hawk back?
Yesm, he said. If you-all don't care.
When did you bring it in?
He looked to the ceiling, back again. Let's see, he said. I 
believe it was around in August but it could of been early in 
September I reckon.
They Lord God, son, the woman said, it wouldn't still be here. 
Last August? Why ...
What all do you do with em? he asked, somehow ﬁguring still 
that they must be kept, must have some value or use 
commensurate with a dollar other than the fact of their demise.
Burn em in the furnace I would reckon, she said. They sure 
cain't keep em around here. They might get a little strong after a 
while, mightn't they?
Burn em? he said. They burn em?
I believe so, she said.
He looked about him vaguely, back to her, still not leaning on 
or touching the counter. And thow people in jail and beat up on em.
What? she said, leaning forward.
And old men in the crazy house.
Son, I'm busy, now if there was anything else you wanted ...
He smoothed the dollar in his hand again, made a few 
tentative thrusts, pushed it ﬁnally across the counter to her. Here, 
he said. It's okay. I cain't take no dollar. I made a mistake, he wadn't 
for sale. He turned and started for the door.
You, she called. Here! You come back here, you cain't ...
But that was all he heard, through the door now, running down 
the long hall toward the wide-ﬂung outer doors where a breeze 
rifﬂed the posters and notices on the wall and past them and again 
into the candent May noon.
The boy had already gone when they came from Knoxville, 
seven years now after the burial and seven months after the 
cremation, and sifted the ashes, since whipped to a broth by the 
rains of that spring and now dried again, caked and crusted, sifted 

them and there found the chalked sticks and shards of bone gray-
white and brittle as ash themselves, and the skull, worm-riddled, 
vermiculate with the tracery of them and hollowed and ﬁred to the 
weight and tensile cohesiveness of parched cardboard, the caried 
teeth rattling in their sockets. And a zipper of brass, fused 
shapeless, thick-coated with a dull green paste.
That was all. They were there four hours, the two ofﬁcers 
deferential before the coroner, dusting the pieces with their 
handkerchiefs and passing them on to him who placed them in a 
clean bag of white canvas.
Mr Eller bit with his small teeth a piece from his plug of spiced 
tobacco, refolded the cellophane and put it again into his breast 
pocket. And the skull, he said. With all the ﬁllins melted out of the 
teeth.
Okay. And the skull. Johnny Romines stopped, the cigarette 
half rolled in his left hand and leaking as he gestured with it. So, he 
said, what I want to know is did the boy know about it or not, and 
would he know was it his daddy?
I don't know, Mr Eller said. If he did I never heard it. Asides 
he's been gone off now since May or June and this is the fourth day 
of August they jest now gettin up there. I ﬁgure maybe the old man 
was the only one that knowed.
Old man Ownby? Was he the one done it?
No, Mr Eller said. Course they liable to thow it off on him to 
save huntin somebody else.
But he was the one told it?
Near as I can ﬁnd out he was.
Johnny Romines passed the paper across his tongue and 
folded it shut. Well, do you reckon it was him? he said.
His daddy you mean? Room for speculatin there too I reckon. 
Miz Rattner claims that it was and that the boy has gone off to hunt 
whoever it was put him there. She says it all come to her in a 
dream--a vision, she called it.
Wonder if she had a vision about him bein wanted in three 
states, Gifford said.
Mr Eller turned on the constable. No, he said, I doubt she has. 
I don't reckon she needs any sech either. She's a good Christian 
woman don't matter who-all she might of been married to and not 
knowed no better.

The constable looked at the storekeeper.
Or the boy either, Mr Eller added.
Never you mind about the boy, Gifford said. Me and him is 
due for a nice little talk anyway.
Well, you'll have to ﬁnd him ﬁrst.
Wonder who it was, Johnny Romines said. That put him in 
there I mean. Reckon it was somebody from around here?
I doubt it was somebody from New York City, the constable 
said. He turned to Mr Eller. And what about that fancy plate he was 
supposed to have? In his head from the war.
What about it?
Well, they wadn't none. How's she account for that?
I don't reckon she ever thought to ast about it. She jest never 
would of doubted or wondered about it in the ﬁrst place. About 
whether he had one, if he said he did, or about whether that was 
him in that dittybag if she'd decided that it was either one. Mr Eller 
rolled his cheeks and spat soundlessly across the constable's bow 
and into a coffeecan. Seems like you ought to tell your sidekick 
about it though, he said.
Who's that?
Legwater.
He ain't my sidekick, Gifford said. And I don't have to tell 
nobody nothin cept as I see ﬁt.
Mr Eller studied a passing ﬂy, apparently ruminating on some 
obscure problem in the dynamics of ﬂight. Well, he said agreeably, I 
reckon you're right. Keep him out of mischief anyhow.
Gifford's eyes narrowed suspiciously. What? What will?
Campin up on the mountain. With his shovel and his 
winderscreen.
Some coughs went their rounds. A milkcase settled ﬂoorward 
creakily.
Humph, said Gifford, unleaning from the counter with studied 
ease. He ﬁngered cigarettes deftly from one straining pocket. Then: 
What's he doin up there?
Mr Eller waited while the match rocketed across the counter. 
Then he said: Huntin platymum I reckon. Lessen he's siftin them 
ashes for to make soap.
Legwater was on the mountain three days before anyone 
could get close enough to him to tell him it wasn't so, that the man 

never had any platinum in his head and that he was wasting his 
time, it was all a mistake. The ﬁrst night he built his ﬁre and was 
sitting by it with his shotgun leaning against a tree and was sipping 
coffee from a canteen cup when the hound staggered into the 
clearing on the far side of the ﬁre and stood with his blind head 
swinging back and forth like a bear's, muzzle up to catch what clue 
the wind might bring.
Ha! cried Legwater, leaping up, the coffee ﬂying. Ha! he said, 
stepped to the tree and snatched up the shotgun. But before he 
could get a proper sight the dog was gone again, absorbed quietly 
into the darkness. Legwater leveled the gun at the night and ﬁred, 
listened after the compounding echoes of the shot for a long time 
and then stepped to the ﬁre and got the cup and poured it full from 
the pot, squatting, the shotgun leaning against his knee. He listened 
some more, but could make nothing out. He set the pot back on the 
little circle of stones he had constructed and tried the hot rim of the 
cup against his lip. The hound did not reappear. When he had 
ﬁnished the coffee he rolled his blankets out, reloaded the empty 
chamber of the gun and settled for sleep.
Toward early morning he woke, sat up quickly and looked 
about him. It was still dark and the ﬁre had long since died, still dark 
and quiet with that silence that seems to be of itself listening, an 
astral quiet where planets collide soundlessly, beyond the auricular 
dimension altogether. He listened. Above the black ranks of trees 
the midsummer sky arched cloudless and coldly starred. He lay 
back and stared at it and after a while he slept.
When he woke again the sun was up. He was still lying on his 
back and now in the depthless blue void above him a hawk 
wheeled. He got to his feet and began to walk around, feeling stiff 
and poorly rested. He scouted in the woods and came back with a 
load of dead limbs, snapped them to length under his foot and soon 
had a ﬁre going and coffee warming. When it had perked he sat 
blowing at a cupful and shifting it from hand to hand as it got too hot 
or he found a new mosquito bite to scratch at. There was an army 
rucksack hanging from the tree near his blankets and from the 
pocket he took some cold biscuits and ate them. Then he got to 
work.
The ashes in the pit were better than a foot deep and the 
ground all about was strewn with them. He worked all day, shoveling 

out piles of ash and then climbing from the pit to sift them with his 
window-screen. Late in the afternoon some boys came into the 
clearing and stood for a time watching him. He kept at it, the clouds 
of ash billowing up out of the pit. Before long they began to 
comment. He looked at them sharply, not stopping, sifting the 
ashes, examining charred bits of cedar wood. Soon they were 
giggling among themselves. He ignored them, adopting an ofﬁcial 
air about his work. It was no good.
Might be gold teeth too, one of them sang out. A ﬂurry of 
titters surged and died. Legwater stood up and glared at them. They 
were ﬁve, standing together just at the edge of the trees with 
grinning faces. He climbed back into the pit with his shovel. From 
time to time he would stretch his head up over the top of the hole to 
see what they were about, but about the third time one of them 
gobbled like a turkey and they all howled with laughter so he gave it 
up and tried not to look their way. He kept at his shoveling. After a 
while he heard something clatter near the pit. He looked up and the 
boys had gone. Then an apple dropped into the ashes at his feet 
with a soft puff. He stopped and craned his neck up. Sure enough, 
here; came another. He marked its course, leaped out of the pit and 
seizing the shotgun as he went began a fast walk in the direction 
from which the apple had come. Brush began crashing. A voice 
called: Run, fellers, run! He'll shoot ye down and scalp ye. Another: 
You got silver in your teeth you're a dead'n. He stopped. The 
sounds died away. On the road further down the mountain high 
laughter, catcalls. He went back to work. By nightfall he was a 
feathery gray efﬁgy--face, hair and clothing a single color. He spat 
gobs of streaky gray phlegm. Even the trees near the pit had begun 
to take on a pale and weathered look.
The hound came back after dark. He could hear it padding in 
the leaves, stop, shufﬂe again. He had eaten the last of what food 
he had brought and could hardly sleep for the cramping in his belly. 
He held the shotgun and waited for the hound to enter the ﬁrelight. 
It did not. Finally he went to sleep with the shotgun lying across his 
lap. He was very tired.
When he went to the pit the following morning the ﬁrst thing he 
saw was an old goatskull, the brainpan crammed with tinfoil. He 
pitched it away in disgust and fell to shoveling.
By late in the afternoon his hunger had subsided and he had 

cleared the pit so that in one end the bare concrete was visible, 
blackened and encrusted with an indeﬁnable burnt substance that 
scaled away under the shovel and showed green beneath.
He was shoveling faster, approaching desperation as the 
residue of unsifted ashes diminished, when Gifford showed up, 
badly winded from his climb up the mountain. Legwater stopped and 
watched him come across the little clearing, his shoes weighted with 
clay, his face inﬂamed with a red scowl. When he got to the pit 
Legwater leaned on the shovel and looked up at him. Well, he said, 
you want shares I reckon? After I done ...
Idjit, Gifford said. Goddamn, what a idjit. He was standing on 
the concrete rim now looking down at the humane ofﬁcer gaunt and 
fantastically powdered with ash, and looking at the great heaps of 
ashes and the screen, the bedroll, rucksack, shotgun.
You think so? Legwater said.
I know so. He wadn't no war hero. It ain't for sure it was even 
him, but if it was he never had no--no thing in his head.
I'll be the jedge of that, Legwater said, bending with his shovel.
Gifford watched him, moving around to the upwind side to 
keep clear of the dust. In a few minutes the humane ofﬁcer leaped 
from the pit and began shoveling the new ashes onto the screen, 
then shaking it back and forth to sift them through, a fevered look in 
his eye like some wild spodomantic sage divining in driven haste the 
fate of whole galaxies against their imminent ruin. The constable lit 
a cigarette and leaned back against the tree.
Legwater threw out two more piles of ash and sifted them and 
then when he disappeared into the pit again Gifford could hear him 
scraping around but not shoveling. He ventured over and peered in. 
Legwater was on hands and knees, going over the scraped ﬂoor of 
the pit carefully, scratching here and there with the tip of the shovel. 
Finally he stopped and looked up. The little bastard was lyin, he 
said. He got it his ownself, the lyin little son of a bitch.
Let's go, Earl.
His own daddy, the humane ofﬁcer was saying.
Gifford started toward the road with long disgusted strides. 
When he got to the apple trees he turned and looked back. 
Legwater was standing in the pit, just his head showing, staring 
vacantly.
Well, said the constable.

He kept staring.
Hey! Gifford called.
Legwater turned his head to give him a dumb look, the 
incredulous and empty expression common to victims of tragedy, 
disaster and loss.
You want a ride or not?
He pulled himself from the pit and began walking toward the 
constable, then he was hurrying, loping along, the shovel still in his 
hand and bouncing behind him. Gifford let him get all the way to him 
before he sent him back after the shotgun and the camping gear.
They went down the orchard road together, their steps 
padding in the red dust, the constable swaggering slightly as he did 
and the humane ofﬁcer, haggard-looking, his black and sleepless 
eyes all but smoking, grimly apparitional with the shotgun and the 
spade dangling one at either side from his gaunt claws. Gifford 
carried the other's rucksack and blanket roll with light effort and 
from time to time he sidled his eyes to study Legwater with pity, or 
with contempt. Neither spoke until they saw the dog and that was 
very near to the pike, on the last turn above the gate. They had 
overtaken it and even in the few minutes in which he was allowed to 
watch it alive Gifford was struck by its behavior. It was walking in the 
wheelruts with an exotic delicacy, like a trained dog on a rope, and 
holding its head so far back, its nose near perpendicular, that 
Gifford looked up instinctively to see what threat might be 
materializing out of the sky. The shovel bounced in the road with a 
dull bong and when he turned it was in time only to see Legwater 
recoil under the shotgun and to recoil himself as the muzzleblast 
roared in his ears. He spun and saw the dog lurch forward, still 
holding up its head, slew sideways and fold up in the dust of the 
road.
The few small windows were glassless but for a jagged side or 
corner still wedged in the handmade sashes. The roofshakes lay in 
windrows on the broad loft ﬂoors and this house housed only the 
winds.
Dervishes of leaves rattled across the yard and in the wind the 
oaks dipped and creaked, and in the wind even the spavined house 
hung between the stone chimneys seemed to give a little. The doors 
stood open and wind scurried in the parlor, rifﬂed the drift leaves on 
the kitchen ﬂoor and stirred the cobwebbed window corners. He did 

not go to the loft. The lower rooms were dusty and barren and but 
for some half-familiar rags of clothes altogether strange. He came 
back into the yard and sat quietly for a while beneath one of the 
trees. Watched a waterbird skim beneath the shadowline of the 
mountain, cupped wings catching the slant light of the sun, then 
holding the wide curve in a wingset sweep low over the trees to the 
pond, homing to the warm black waters. He watched it down. What 
caught his ear? The high thin whicker of a feather, a shadow 
passing, nothing. Light was breaking in thin reefs through the clouds 
shelved darkly up the west. Old dry leaves rattled frail and withered 
as old voices, trailed stifﬂy down, rocking like thinworn shells 
downward through seawater, or spun, curling ancient parchments 
on which no message at all appeared.
Young Rattner ﬁnished his cigarette and went back out to the 
road. An aged Negro passed high on the seat of a wagon, dozing to 
the chop of the half-shod mule-hooves on the buckled asphalt. 
About him the tall wheels veered and dished in the erratic parabolas 
of spun coins unspinning as if not attached to the wagon at all but 
merely rolling there in that quadratic symmetry by pure chance. He 
crossed the road to give them leeway and they swung by slowly, 
laboriously, as if under the weight of some singular and 
unreasonable gravity. The ruined and ragged mule, the wagon, the 
man ... up the road they wobbled, rattle and squeak of the fellies 
climbing loose over the spokes ... shimmered in waves of heat rising 
from the road, dissolved in a pale and broken image.
He followed along behind, going toward the forks. Once at the 
top of the hill he paused and looked back and he could see the roof 
of the house deep-green with moss, or gaping black where patches 
had caved through. But it was never his house anyway.
Evening. The dead sheathed in the earth's crust and turning 
the slow diurnal of the earth's wheel, at peace with eclipse, asteroid, 
the dusty novae, their bones brindled with mold and the celled 
marrow going to frail stone, turning, their ﬁngers laced with roots, at 
one with Tut and Agamemnon, with the seed and the unborn.
It was like having your name in the paper, he thought, reading 
the inscription:
MILDRED YEARWOOD RATTNER
1906--1945
*

If thou afﬂict them in any wise,
And they cry at all unto me,
I will surely hear their cry.
Exod.
*
the stone arrogating to itself in these three short years already 
a gray and timeless aspect, glazed with lichens and nets of small 
brown runners, the ring of rusted wire leaning awry against it with its 
stained and crumpled rags of foliage. He reached out and patted 
the stone softly, a gesture, as if perhaps to conjure up some image, 
evoke again some allegiance with a name, a place, hallucinated 
recollections in which faces merged inextricably, and yet true and 
ﬁxed; touched it, a carved stone less real than the smell of 
woodsmoke or the taste of an old man's wine. And he no longer 
cared to tell which were things done and which dreamt.
His trouser legs were wet and clammy against his ankles. 
Sitting on the small square of marble he removed one shoe, testing 
the sock for dampness, resting as any traveler might. From across 
the tall grass and beyond the ruins of the spiked iron fence came 
the click of the lightbox at the intersection. A car emerged from the 
trees at his right and rolled to a stop. There were a man and a 
woman. She looked at him across the man's shoulder, then turned 
to the man. They both looked. The box clicked. He waved to them 
and the man turned, saw the green light and pulled away, the white 
oval of the woman's face still watching him. So he waved again to 
her just as the car slid from sight behind a hedgerow, the wheels 
whisking up a ﬁne spray from the road.
He sat there for a while, rubbing his foot abstractedly, whistling 
softly to himself. To the west a solid sheet of overcast sped the 
evening on. Already ﬁreﬂies were about. He put on his shoe and 
rose and began moving toward the fence, through the wet grass. 
The workers had gone, leaving behind their wood-dust and chips, 
the white face of the stump pooling the last light out of the gathering 
dusk. The sun broke through the ﬁnal shelf of clouds and bathed for 
a moment the dripping trees with blood, tinted the stones a 
diaphanous wash of color, as if the very air had gone to wine. He 
passed through the gap in the fence, past the torn iron palings and 
out to the western road, the rain still mizzling softly and the 
darkening headlands drawing off the day, heraldic, pennoned in 

ﬂame, the ﬂeeing minions scattering their shadows in the wake of 
the sun.
They are gone now. Fled, banished in death or exile, lost, 
undone. Over the land sun and wind still move to burn and sway the 
trees, the grasses. No avatar, no scion, no vestige of that people 
remains. On the lips of the strange race that now dwells there their 
names are myth, legend, dust.
*
BOOKS BY CORMAC MCCARTHY
"McCarthy puts most other American writers to shame."
--The New York Times Book Review
*
THE ORCHARD KEEPER
Set in a small, remote community in rural Tennessee between 
the two world wars, this novel tells of John Wesley Rattner, a young 
boy, and Marion Sylder, an outlaw and bootlegger who, 
unbeknownst to either of them, has killed the boy's father. Together 
with Rattner's Uncle Ather, they enact a drama that seems born of 
the land itself.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-72872-6 (trade)
978-0-307-76250-4 (eBook)
**
OUTER DARK
Outer Dark is a novel at once fabular and starkly evocative, 
set in an unspeciﬁed place in Appalachia around the turn of the 
century. A woman bears her brother's child, a boy, whom he leaves 
in the woods and tells her the baby died of natural causes. 
Discovering her brother's lie, she sets forth alone to ﬁnd her son.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-72873-3 (trade)
978-0-307-76249-8 (eBook)
*
CHILD OF GOD
Child of God is a taut, chilling novel that plumbs the depths of 
human degradation. Falsely accused of rape, Lester Ballard--a 
violent, dispossessed man who haunts the hill country of East 
Tennessee--is released from jail and allowed to roam at will, preying 
on the population with his strange lusts.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-72874-0 (trade)
978-0-307-76248-1 (eBook)

*
SUTTREE
This is the story of Cornelius Suttree, who has forsaken a life 
of privilege to live in a houseboat on the Tennessee River. 
Remaining on the margins of the outcast community--a brilliantly 
imagined collection of eccentrics, criminals, and squatters--he rises 
above the physical and human squalor with detachment, humor, 
and dignity.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-73632-5 (trade)
978-0-307-76247-4 (eBook)
*
THE STONEMASON
The setting is Louisville, Kentucky, in the 1970s. The Telfairs 
are stonemasons and have been for generations. Ben Telfair has 
given up his education to apprentice himself to his grandfather, 
Papaw. Out of the love that binds these two men and the gulf that 
separates them from the Telfairs who have forsaken--or 
dishonored--the family trade, McCarthy has crafted a drama that 
bears all the hallmarks of his great ﬁction.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-76280-5
*
BLOOD MERIDIAN
This is an epic novel of the violence and depravity that 
attended America's westward expansion. Based on historical events 
that took place on the Texas-Mexico border in the 1850s, it traces 
the fortunes of the Kid, a fourteen-year-old Tennesseean who 
stumbles into a nightmarish world where Indians are being 
murdered and the market for their scalps is thriving.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-72875-7 (trade)
978-0-307-76252-8 (eBook)
*
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES
All the Pretty Horses tells of young John Grady Cole, the last 
of a long line of Texas ranchers. Across the border, Mexico 
beckons--beautiful and desolate, rugged and cruelly civilized. With 
two companions, he sets off on an idyllic, sometimes comic 
adventure, to a place where dreams are paid for in blood.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-74439-9 (trade)
978-0-307-48130-6 (eBook)

*
THE CROSSING
In the late 1930s, sixteen-year-old Billy Parham captures a 
she-wolf that has been marauding his family's ranch. Instead of 
killing it, he takes it back to the mountains of Mexico. With that 
crossing, he begins an arduous and dreamlike journey into a 
country where men meet like ghosts and violence strikes as 
suddenly as heat-lightning.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-76084-9 (trade)
978-0-307-76246-7 (eBook)
*
CITIES OF THE PLAIN
It is 1952 and John Grady Cole and Billy Parham are working 
as ranch hands in New Mexico. Their life is made up of trail drives 
and horse auctions and stories told by campﬁre light, a life they 
value because they know it is about to change forever.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-679-74719-2 (trade)
978-0-307-77752-2 (eBook)
*
NO COUNTRY FOR OLD MEN
McCarthy returns to the Texas-Mexico border, the setting of 
his famed Border Trilogy. A good old boy named Llewellyn Moss 
ﬁnds a pickup truck surrounded by dead man. A load of heroin and 
two million dollars in cash are still in the back. When Moss takes the 
money, he sets off a chain reaction of catastrophic violence that not 
even the law can contain.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-375-70667-7 (trade)
978-0-307-39053-0 (eBook)
*
THE SUNSET LIMITED
A startling encounter on a New York subway platform leads 
two strangers to a run-down tenement where a life or death decision 
must be made. In that small apartment, "Black" and "White," as the 
two men are known, begin a conversation that leads each back 
through his own history, mining the origins of two fundamentally 
opposing world-views. White is a professor whose seemingly 
enviable existence of relative ease has left him nonetheless in 
despair. Black, an ex-con and ex-addict, is the more hopeful of the 
men--though he is just as desperate to convince White of the power 

of faith as White is desperate to deny it. Their aim is no less than 
this: to discover the meaning of life.
Fiction/Literature/978-0-307-27836-4 (trade)
978-0-307-49812-0 (eBook)
*
THE ROAD
A father and his son walk alone through burned America. 
Nothing moves in the ravaged landscape save the ash on the wind. 
It is cold enough to crack stones, and when the snow falls it is gray. 
The sky is dark. Their destination is the coast, although they don't 
know what, if anything, awaits them there. They have nothing; just a 
pistol to defend themselves against the lawless bands that stalk the 
road, the clothes they are wearing, a cart of scavenged food--and 
each other.
 

