Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups, 
L-Functions and Automorphic Forms, 
Mumbai 1998 

TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH 
STUDIES IN MATHEMATICS 
Series Editor: S. RAMANAN 
1. SEVERAL COMPLEX VARIABLES by M. Hew6 
2. DIFFERENTIAL ANALYSIS 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1964 
3. IDEALS OF DIFFERENTIABLE FUNCTIONS by B. Malgrange 
4. ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1968 
5. ABELIAN VARIETIES by D. Mumford 
6. RADON MEASURES ON ARBITRARY TOPOLOGICAL 
SPACES AND CYLINDRICAL MEASURES by L. Schwartz 
7. DISCRETE SUBGROUPS OF LIE GROUPS AND 
APPLICATIONS TO MODULI 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1973 
8. C.P. RAMANUJAM - A TRIBUTE 
9. ADVANCED ANALYTIC NUMBER THEORY by C.L. Siege1 
10. AUTOMORPHIC FORMS, REPRESENTATION THEORY AND 
ARITHMETIC 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1979 
11. VECTOR BUNDLES ON ALGEBRAIC VARIETIES 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1984 
12. NUMBER THEORY AND RELATED TOPICS 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1988 
13. GEOMETRY AND ANALYSIS 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1992 
14. LIE GROUPS AND ERGODIC THEORY 
Proceedings of International Colloquium, 1996 
15. COHOMOLOGY OF ARITHMETIC GROUPS, L-FUNCTIONS 
AND AUTOMORPHIC FORMS 
Proceedings of International Conference, 1998 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups, 
L-Functions and Automorphic Forms, 
Mumbai 1998 
Edited by 
ToNo Venkataramana 
Published for the 
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research 
Narosa Publishing House 
New Delhi Chennai Mumbai Kolkata 
International distribution by 
American Mathematical Society, USA 

Contents 
SERIES EDITOR 
S. Ramanan 
School of Mathematics 
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research 
Mumbai, INDIA 
EDITOR 
T.N. Venkataramana 
School of Mathematics 
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research 
Mumbai, INDIA 
Copyright O 2001 Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai 
N A R O S A  P U B L I S H I N G  H O U S E  
22 Daryaganj, Delhi Medical Association Road, New Delhi 110 002 
35-36 Greams Road, Thousand Lights. Chennai 600 006 
306 Shiv Centre, D.B.C. Secta 17, K.U. Bazar P.O., Navi Mumbai 400 705 
2F2G Shivam Chambers, 53 Syed Amir Ali Avenue, Kolkata 700 019 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form a by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, witbout the prior permission of the publisher. 
All export rights for tbis book vest exclusively with Narosa Publishing House. 
Unauthorised export is a violation of Copyright Law and is subject to Iegal action. 
ISBN 81-7319-421-1 
Published by N.K. Mehra for Narosa Publishing House, 22 Daryaganj, 
Delhi Medical Association Road, New Delhi 110 002 and printed at 
Replika Press Pvt Ltd. Delhi 110 040 (India). 
Converse Theorems for GL, and Their Application to Liftings 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro .................................... 1 
Congruences Between Base-Change and Non-Base-Change Hilbert 
Modular Forms 
Eknath Ghate ................................................... 35 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
Chandrashekhar Khare ........................................... 63 
On Hecke Theory for Jacobi Forms 
M. Manickam ................................................... 89 
The L2 Euler Characteristic of Arithmetic Quotients 
Arvind N. Nair .................................................. 94 
Dipendra Pmsad ........... 
The Seigel Formula and Beyond 
S. Raghavan ............... 
The Space of Degenerate Whittaker Models for GL(4) over p-adic Fields 
103 
...................................... 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
Raw' Raghunathan ............................................... .I27 
Kirillov Theory for GL2 (V) 
A. Raghuram .................................................... 143 
An Algebraic Chebotarev Density Theorem 
C. S. Rajan ...................................................... 158 
Theory of Newforms for the M a d  Spezialschar 
B. Ramakrishnan ................................................ 170 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
M. Ram Murty .................................................. 180 

Contents 
I 
vi 
On the Restriction of Cuspidal Representations to Unipotent Elements 
.............................. 
Dipendm Prasad and Nilabh Sanat 
197 
Nonvanishing of Symmetric Square L-functions of Cusp Forms Inside 
the Critical Strip 
.................................... 
W. Kohnen and J. Sengupta 
.202 
Symmetric Cube for GL2 
............................. 
Henry H. Kim and hydoon Shahzdi 
205 
L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteristic 
............................................... 
Danesh S. Thakur 
214 
Automorphic Forms for Siege1 and Jacobi Modular Groups 
................................................ 
T. C. Vasudevan 
.229 
Restriction Maps Between Cohomology of Locally Symmetric Varieties 
............................................ 
T.N. Venkatammana 
.237 
International Conference 
an 
Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups, L-functions 
and Autpmorphic Forms 
Mumbai, December 1998 - January 1999. 
This volume consists of the proceedings of an International Conference 
on Automorphic Forms, L-functions and Cohomology of Arith- 
metic Groups, held at the School of Mathematics, Tata Institute of Fun- 
damental Research, during December 1998-January 1999. The conference 
was part of the 'Special Year' at the Tata Institute, devoted to the above 
topics. 
The Organizing Committee consisted of Prof. M.S. Raghunathan, Dr. 
E. Ghate, Dr. C. Khare, Dr. Arvind Nair, Prof. D. Prasad, Dr. C.S. Rajan 
and Prof. T.N. Venkataramana. 
Professors J. Cogdell, M. Ram Murty, F. Shahidi and D.S. Thakur, 
respectively from Oklahoma State University, Queens University, Purdue 
University and University of Arizona, took part in the Conference and 
kindly agreed to have the expositions of their latest research work pub- 
lished here. From India, besides the members of the Institute, Professors 
M. Manickam, D. Prasad, S. Raghavan, B. Ramakrishnan T.C. Vasudevan 
and N. Sanat gave invited talks at the conference. 
Mr. V. Nandagopal carried out the difficult task of converting into one 
format, the manuscripts which were typeset in different styles and software. 
Mr. D.B. Sawant and his colleagues at the School of Mathematics office 
helped in the organization of the Conference with their customary efficiency. 

Converse Theorems for GL, and Their 
Application to Liftings* 
J. W. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro 
Since Riemann [57] number theorists have found it fruitful to attach 
to an arithmetic object M a complex analytic invariant L(M, s). usually 
called a zeta function or L-function. These are all Dirichlet series having 
similar properties. These L-functions are usually given by an Euler product 
L(M, s) = n, L(Mv, s) where for each finite place v, L(Mv, s) encodes 
Diophantine information about M at the prime v and is the inverse of a 
pol~nomial in p, 
whose degree for almost all v is independent of v. The 
product converges in some right half plane. Each M usually has a dual 
object M with its own L-function L(M,s). If there is a natural tensor 
product structure on the M this translates into a multiplicative convolution 
(or twisting) of the L-functions. Conjecturally, these L-functions should 
all enjoy nice analytic properties. In particular, they should have at least 
meromorphic continuation to the whole complex plane with a finite number 
of poles (entire for irreducible objects), be bounded in vertical strips (away 
from any poles), and satisfy a functional equation of the form L(M, s) = 
E(M, S)L(M, 1 - S) with E(M, S) of the form E(M, S) = AeBs. (For a brief 
exposition in terms of mixed motives, see [ll].) 
There is another class of objects which also have complex analytic in- 
variants enjoying similar analytic properties, namely modular forms f or 
automorphic representations T and their L-functions. These L-functions are 
also Euler products with a convolution structure (Rankin-Selberg convolu- 
tions) and they can be shown to be nice in the sense of having meromorphic 
continuation to functions bounded in vertical strips and having a functional 
equation (see Section 3 below). 
The most common way of establishing the analytic properties of the 
L-functions of arithmetic objects L(M,s) is to associate to each M what 
Siege1 referred to as an "analytic invariant", that is, a modular form or 
automorphic representation T such that L(T, s) = L(M, s). This is what 
*The first author was supported in part by the NSA. The second author was supported 
in part by the NSF. 

2 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
Riemann did for the zeta function [(s) [57], what Siege1 did in his analytic 
theory of quadratic forms [60], and, in essence, what Wiles did [67]. 
In light of this, it is natural to ask in what sense these analytic properties 
of the L-function actually characterize those L-functions coming from auto- 
morphic representations. This is, at least philosophically, what a converse 
theorem does. 
In practice, a converse theorem has come to mean a method of determin- 
ing when an irreducible admissible representation ll = @TI, of GL,(A) is 
automorphic, that is, occurs in the space of automorphic forms on GLn(A), 
in terms of the analytic properties of its L-function L(ll, s) = n, 
L(&, s). 
The analytic properties of the L-function are used to determine when the 
collection of local representations {II,) fit together to form an automor- 
phic representation. By the recent proof of the local Langlands conjecture 
by Harris-Taylor and Henniart [22], [24], we now know that to a collec- 
tion {a,) of n-dimensional representations of the local Weil-Deligne groups 
we can associate a collection {II,) of local representations of GLn(kv), 
and thereby make the connection between the practical and philosophical 
aspects of such theorems. 
The first such theorems in a representation theoretic frame work were 
proven by Jacquet and Langlands for GL2 [30], by Piatetski-Shapiro for 
GLn in the function field case [51], and by Jacquet, Piatetski-Shapiro, and 
Shalika for GL3 in general [31]. In this paper we would like to survey what 
we currently know about converse theorems for GL, when n 2 3. Most of 
the details can be found in our papers [4], [5], [6]. We would then like to 
relate various applications of these converse theorems, past, current, and 
future. Finally we will end with the conjectures of what one should be able 
to obtain in the area of converse theorems along these lines and possible 
applications of these. 
This paper is an outgrowth of various talks we have given on these 
subjects over the years, and in particular our talk at the International Con- 
ference on Automorphic Forms held at the Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research in December 1998/ January 1999. We would like to take this 
opportunity to thank the TIFR for their hospitality and wonderful working 
environment. 
We would like to thank Steve Rallis for bringing to our attention the 
early work of MaaD on converse theorems for orthogonal groups [46]. 
1 A bit of history - mainly n = 2 
The first converse theorem is credited to Hamburger in 1921-22 [21]. Ham- 
burger showed that if you have a Dirichlet series D(s) which converges 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
3 
for Re(s) > 1, has a meromorphic continuation such that P(s) D(s) is an 
entire function of finite order for some polynomial P(s), and satisfies the 
same functional equation as the Riemann zeta function [(s), then in fact 
D(s) = c<(s) for some constant c. In essence, the Ftiemann zeta function 
is characterized by its basic analytic properties, and in particular its func- 
tional equation. This was later extended to L-functions of Hecke characters 
by Gurevic [20] using the methods of Tate's thesis. These are essentially 
converse theorems for GL1. 
While not the first converse theorem, the model one for us is that 
of Hecke [23]. Hecke studied holomorphic modular forms and their L- 
functions. If f (T) = Cr=l ane2"inT is a holomorphic cusp form for SL2 (Z), 
* 
its L-function is the Dirichlet series L(f, s) = Cr=, ~ , n - ~ .  
Hecke related 
the modularity of f to the analytic properties of L(f, s) through the Mellin 
transform 
and from the modularity of f (T) was able to show that A( f, s) was nice 
in the sense that it converged in some right half plane, had an analytic 
continuation to an entire function of s which was bounded in vertical strips, 
and satisfied the functional equation 
where k is the weight of f. Moreover, via Mellin inversion Hecke was 
able to invert this process and prove a converse theorem that states if a 
Dirichlet series D(s) = Cr=l arm-" is "nice" then the function f (T) = 
00 ane2"'"' is a cusp form of weight k for SL2 (Z). Besides dealing with 
cusp forms, Hecke also allowed his L-functions to have a simple pole at 
s = k corresponding to the known location of the pole for the Eisenstein 
series. Hecke's method and results were generalized to the case of M
d
 
wave forms, i.e. non-holomorphic forms, by MaaB [45], still for full level. 
In the case of level, i.e., f (7) cuspidal for rO(N), Hecke investigated 
the properties of the L-function L(f, s) as before but did not establish a 
converse theorem for them. This was done by Weil [65], but he used not 
just L(f, s) but had to assume that the twisted L-functions L(f x X, s) = 
xF==, 
a,x(n)n-" 
were also nice for sufficiently many Dirichlet characters 
X .  In essence, r o ( N )  is more difficult to generate and more information 
00 
was needed to establish the modularity of f (T) = En=, ane2"inT . In Weil's 
paper he required control of the twists for x which were unramified at the 
level N. 
Many authors have refined the results of Hecke and Weil for the case 
of GL2 in both the classical and representation theoretic contexts. Jacquet 

Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
5 
4 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
and Langlands [30] were the first to cast these results as result in the theory 
of automorphic representations of GL2. Their result is a special case of 
Theorem 2.1 below. They required control of the twisted L-functions for 
all x. 
Independently, Piatetski-Shapiro [49] and Li [43], [44] established a con- 
jecture of Weil that in fact one only needed to control the twisted L-function 
for x that were unramified outside a finite set of places. They also showed 
that in addition one could limit the ramification of the x at the places divid- 
ing the conductor N. Piatetski-Shapiro also noted that over Q one in fact 
only needed to control the twisted L-function for a well chosen finite set of 
X, related to the finite generation of ro(N). This was also shown later by 
Razar in the classical context [56]. More recently, Conrey and Farmer [lo] 
have shown in the classical context that for low levels N on can establish 
a converse theorem with no twists as long as one requires the L-function 
L( f, s) to have a Euler factorization at a well chosen finite number of places. 
This method replaces the use of the twisted L-function with the action of 
the Hecke operator at these places and requires fairly precise knowledge of 
generators for ro (N) . 
There are also several generalization of Hecke's and MaaP results on 
converse theorems with poles. In her papers [43], 1441, Li allowed her L- 
functions to have a finite number of poles at the expected locations. As a 
consequence, she was able to derive the converse theorem for GL1 of Gurevic 
from her GL2 theorem allowing poles [44]. More recently, Weissauer [66] 
and Raghunathan [53] have established converse theorems in the classical 
context allowing for an arbitrary finite number of poles by using group 
cohomology to show that the functional equation forces the poles to be at 
the usual locations. 
In what follows we will be interested in converse theorems for GL, with 
n > 3. We will present analogues of the theorem of Hecke-Weil-Jacquet- 
Langlands requiring a full battery of twists, the results of Piatetski-Shapiro 
and Li requiring twists that are unramified outside a finite set of places, and 
results that require twisting by forms on GLn-2 which have no analogues 
for GL2. At present there are no results that we know of for GL, in general 
which allow for only a finite number of twists nor allowing poles. Both of 
these would be very interesting problems. 
2 The theorems 
Let k be a global field, A its adele ring, and 1C, a fixed non-trivial (contin- 
uous) additive character of A which is trivial on k. We will take n 2 3 to 
be an integer. 
To state these converse theorems, we begin with an irreducible admis- 
sible representation ll of GL,(A). 
It has a decomposition l l  = @'ITv, 
where Itv is an irreducible admissible representation of GLn(kv). By the 
local theory of Jacquet, Piatetski-Shapiro, and Shalika [33], [36] to each II, 
is associated a local L-function L(IIv, s) and a local &-factor e(IIv, s, +,). 
Hence formally we can form 
We will always assume the following two things about II: 
1. L(n, s) converges in some half plane Re(s) >> 0, 
2. the central character wn of II is automorphic, that is, invariant under 
k X .  
Under these assumptions, e(n, s, $) = E (II, s) is independent of our choice 
of @ [41. 
As in Weil's case, our converse theorems will involve twists but now by 
cuspidal automorphic representations of GL, (A) for certain m. For con- 
venience, let us set A(m) to be the set of automorphic representations of 
GL, (A), 
(m) the set of (irreducible) cuspidal automorphic representa- 
tions of GL, (A), and 7(m) = Uy=l Jlo(d). (We will always take cuspidal 
representations to be irreducible.) 
Let r = 8'7, be a cuspidal automorphic representation of GL,(A) 
with 
m < n. Then again we can formally define 
since again the local factors make sense whether II is automorphic or not. 
A consequence of (1) and (2) above and the cuspidality of r is that both 
L(ll x T ,  S) and L(fI x 7, s) converge absolutely for Re(s) >> 0, where fI and 
? are the contragredient representations, and that ~ ( l l  
x r, s) is independent 
of the choice of 1C,. 
We say that L(II x r, S) is nice if 
1. L(n x r, s) and L(fI x i, s) have analytic continuations to entire func- 
tions of s, 
2. these entire continuations are bounded in vertical strips of finite width, 
3. they satisfy the standard functional equation 

6 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
The basic converse theorem for GL, is the following. 
Theorem 2.1 Let II be an irreducible admissible representation of GL,(A) 
as above. Suppose that L(II x T, s) is nice for all T E T(n - 1). Then II is 
a cuspidal automorphic representation. 
In this theorem we twist by the maximal amount and obtain the strongest 
possible conclusion about II. As we shall see, the proof of this theorem 
essentially follows that of Hecke and Weil and Jacquet-Langlands. It is of 
course valid for n = 2 as well. 
For applications, it is desirable to twist by as little as possible. There 
are essentially two ways to restrict the twisting. One is to restrict the rank 
of the groups that the twisting representations live on. The other is to 
restrict ramification. 
When we restrict the rank of our twists, we can obtain the following 
result. 
Theorem 2.2 Let II be an irreducible admissible representation of GL,(A) 
as above. Suppose that L(II x T, s) is nice for all T E T(n - 2). Then II is 
a cuspidal automorphic representation. 
This result is stronger than Theorem 2.1, but its proof is a bit more 
delicate. 
The theorem along these lines that is most useful for applications is one 
in which we also restrict the ramification at a finite number of places. Let 
us fix a finite set S of finite places and let ~ ~ ( m )  
denote the subset of T(m) 
consisting of representations that are unramified at all places v E S .  
Theorem 2.3 Let II be an irreducible admissible representation of GL,(A) 
as above. Let S be a finite set of finite places. Suppose that L(II x 7, s) is 
nice for all T E TS(n - 2). Then II is quasi-automorphic in the sense that 
there is an automorphic representation II' such that II, E II; for all v 4 S .  
Note that as soon as we restrict the ramification of our twisting repre- 
sentations we lose information about II at those places. In applications we 
usually choose S to contain the set of finite places v where II, is ramified. 
The second way to restrict our twists is to restrict the ramification at 
all but a finite number of places. Now fix a non-empty finite set of places S 
which in the case of a number field contains the set S, of all Archimedean 
places. Let Ts(m) denote the subset consisting of all representations T in 
T(m) which are unramified for all v 4 S. Note that we are placing a grave 
restriction on the ramification of these representations. 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
7 
Theorem 2.4 Let II be an irreducible admissible representation of GLn(A) 
above. Let S be a non-empty finite set of places, containing S,, 
such 
that the class number of the ring os of S-integers is one. Suppose that 
L(II x 7, 
S )  is nice for all T E Ts(n - 1). Then II is quasi-automorphic in 
the sense that there is an automorphic representation II' such that II, E IIL 
for all v E S and all v 4 S such that both II, and Il; are unramified. 
There are several things to note here. First, there is a class number 
restriction. However, if k = Q then we may take S = S, and we have 
a converse theorem with "level 1" twists. As a practical consideration, 
if we let Sn be the set of finite places v where n, is ramified, then for 
applications we usually take S and Sn to be disjoint. Once again, we are 
losing all information at those places v 4 S where we have restricted the 
ramification unless II, was already unramified there. 
The proof of Theorem 2.1 essentially follows the lead of Hecke, Weil, 
and Jacquet-Langlands. It is based on the integral representations of L- 
functions, Fourier expansions, Mellin inversion, and finally a use of the 
weak form of Langlands spectral theory. For Theorems 2.2 2.3 and 2.4, 
where we have restricted our twists, we must impose certain local conditions 
to compensate for our limited twists. For Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 there 
are a finite number of local conditions and for Theorem 2.4 an infinite 
number of local conditions. We must then work around these by using 
results on generation of congruence subgroups and either weak or strong 
approximation. 
3 The integral representation 
Let us first fix some standard notation. In the group GLd we will let 
Nd be the subgroup of upper triangular unipotent matrices. If $ is an 
additive character of k, then $J naturally defines a character of Nd via 
$(n) = $J(nl,a + . - . + nd-l,d) for n = (ni,j) E Nd. We will also let Pd 
denote the mirabolic subgroup of GLd which fixes the row vector ed = 
(0,. . . ,0,1) 
E kd. It consists of all matrices p E GLd whose last row is 
(0,. . . ,0,1). For m < n we consider GL, embedded in GL, via the map 
The first basic idea in the proof of these converse theorems is to invert 
the integral representation for the L-function. Let us then begin by recall- 
ing the integral representation for the standard L-function for GL, x GL, 
where m < n [34], [9]. So suppose for the moment that II is in fact a 

8 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
cuspidal automorphic representation of GLn(A) and that T is a cuspidal 
automorphic representation of GL,(A). 
Let us take < E Vn to be a cusp 
form on GL,(A) and cp E V, a cusp form on GL, (A). 
In GL,, let Y, 
be the standard unipotent subgroup attached to the 
partition (m + 1,1, . . . ,I). For our purposes it is best to view Y, 
as the 
group of n x n matrices of the following shape 
where u = u(y) is a m x (n - m) matrix whose first column is the m x 1 
vector all of whose entries are 0 and n = n(y) E Nn-,, 
the upper triangular 
maximal unipotent subgroup of GL,-,. 
If 1C, is our standard additive 
character of k\$ then 1C, defines a character of Y,(A) 
trivial on Y,(k) 
by setting $(y) = +(n(y)) with the above notation. The group Y, 
is 
normalized by GLm+l c GL, and the mirabolic subgroup P,+l c GL,+l 
is the stabilizer in GL,+l 
of the character $J. 
If ((9) is a (smooth) cuspidal function on GL,(A) define IP,<(h) 
for 
h E GL, (A) by 
As the integration is over a compact domain, the integral is absolutely 
convergent. P,<(h) is again an automorphic function on GL,(A). 
A 
Consider the integrals 
The integral I(<, cp, s) is absolutely convergent for all values of the complex 
parameter s, uniformly in compact subsets, and gives an entire function 
which is bounded in vertical strips of finite width. These integrals satisfy a 
functional equation coming from the outer involution g I+ ~ ( g )  
= g ' =  =g-'. 
If we define the action of this involution on automorphic forms by setting 
((9) = ~(<)(g) 
= <(gL) and let P, = L o IP, 
o L then we have 
where 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
If we substitute for <(g) its Fourier expansion [50], [59] 
where 
I' 
is the (global) Whittaker function of < then the integral unfolds into 
with Wh E W(T, $-I) as above. Then by the uniqueness of the local and 
global Whittaker models [59] for factorizable < and cp our integral factors 
into a product of local integrals 
s-(n-m 
!? 
k m ( k v ) \  GLm(kv) 
0 
1n-m 
with WCv E W(n,, $,) 
and WVv E W(r,, $;I). 
If we denote the local 
integrals by 
wtV ("" 
0 In-, 
O ) wbv (a,) det(h,),- 
dh, 
then the family of integrals I (< , cp, s) is Eulerian and we have 
with convergence absolute and uniform for Re(s) >> 0. There is a similar 
unfolding and product for f([, +,I- s) with convergence in a left half plane, 
namely 
f((, $7 1 - S) = I'I f(~(wn,rn)W<,, 
9 W&, 7 1 - S) 
21 
where 

10 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
with the h integral over Nm(k,)\GLm(kv) and the x integral over 
Mn-m-l,m(k;), the space of (n - m - 1) x m matrices, p denoting right 
tranlsation, and w,,, 
the Weyl element 
the standard long Weyl element in GLd. 
Now consider the local theory. At the finte places v where both n, and 
rv are unramified and $, is normalized, if we take t: and cpz to be the 
unique normalized vector fixed under the maximal compact subgroup, we 
find that the local integral computes the local L-function exactly, i.e., 
In general, the family of integrals {I(WeV, WGv, s) ( &, E Vnv , cp, E V,) 
generates a C[qt, q;']-fractional 
ideal in C(qi8) with (normalized) genera- 
tor L(nV x rV, 
S) [33], [7]. In the case of v an Archimedean place something 
quite similar happens, but one must now deal not with the algebraic version 
of the representations (i.e., the (8, K)-module) but rather with the space of 
smooth vectors (the Casselman-Wallach completion [64]). Details can be 
found in [36]. In each local situation there is a local functional equation of 
the form 
with &(nu x T, , s, $,) 
a monomial factor. 
Now let us put this together. To obtain that L(II x r, S) is nice, we must 
work in the context of smooth automorphic forms [64] to take full advantage 
of the Archimedean local theory of [36]. Then there is a finite collection of 
smooth cusp forms {t,) and {qi) (more precisely, a finite collection of cusp 
forms in the global Casselman-Wallach completion II&) such that 
which shows that L(n x 7,s) has an analytic continuation to an entire 
function of s which is bounded in vertical strips of finite width. 
Let Sn (respectively ST) be the finite set of finite places v where 
(respectively T,) is ramified, that is, does not have a vector fixed by the 
Cogdell and Piat etski-Shapiro 
11 
maximal compact subgroup of GL, (k,) (respectively GL, (k,)) , and S,J the 
set of finite places where $, is not normalized. Let S = S, U Sn U ST U S* . 
For the functional equation, we have 
where 
and similarly 
where 
By the local functional equations one has 
so that from the functional equation of the global integrals we obtain 
So, indeed, L(n x T, s) is nice. 
4 Inverting the integral represent ation 
. 
We now revert to the situation in Section 2. That is, we let ll be an irre- 
ducible admissible representation of GL,(A) such that L(II, s) is convergent 
in some right half plane and whose central character wn is automorphic. 
For simplicity of exposition, and nothing else, let us assume that ll is 
(abstractly) generic. In the case that ll is not generic, it will at least of 
Whittaker type and the necessary modifications can be found in [4]. 
Let < E Vn be a decomposable vector in the space Vn of n. Since 
II is generic, then fixing local Whittaker models W(nV, $,) at all places, 
compatibly normalized at the unramified places, we can associate to < a non- 
zero function W5(g) on GL,(A) which transforms by the global character 
$ under left translation by N,(A), i.e., W<(ng) = $(n) W< (g). Since $J is 

12 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
trivial on rational points, we see that WC(g) is left invariant under N,(k). 
We would like to use WS to construct an embedding of Vn into the space of 
(smooth) automorphic forms on GL,(A). The simplest idea is to average 
Wt over N, (k)\ GL, (k), but this will not be convergent. However, if we 
average over the rational points of the mirabolic P = P, then the sum 
is absolutely convergent. For the relevant growth properties of Ut see [4]. 
Since II is assumed to have automorphic central character, we see that 
Ut(g) is left invariant under both P(k) and the center Z(k). 
Suppose now that we know that L(II x T, s) is nice for all T. E T(m). 
Then we will hope to obtain the remaining invariance of Ut from the 
GL, x GL, 
functional equation by inverting the integral representation 
for L(II x T, s). With this in mind, let Q = Q, 
be the mirabolic subgroup 
of GL, which stabilizes the standard unit vector tern+l, that is the column 
vector all of whose entries are 0 except the (m + 1) th, which is 1. Note that 
if m = n - 1 then Q is nothing more than the opposite mirabolic 
=t P-' 
to P. If we let a, be the permutation matrix in GL,(k) given by 
then Q, = a;lan-lFa~~lam 
is a conjugate of 
and for any m we have 
that P(k) and Q(k) generate all of GL, (k). So now set 
where N' = a;' 
Nn am c Q. This sum is again absolutely convergent and 
is invariant on the left by Q(k) and Z(k). Thus, to embed II into the space 
of automorphic forms it suffices to show Ut = Vt. It is this that we will 
attempt to do using the integral representations. 
Now let T be an irreducible subrepresentation of the space of automor- 
phic forms on GLm(A) and assume cp E V, is also factorizable. Let 
This integral is always absolutely convergent for Re(s) >> 0, and for all s 
if T is cuspidal. As with the usual integral representation we have that this 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
unfolds into the Euler product 
= 11 I(WtV , w;, 
, s). 
Note that unless T is generic, this integral vanishes. 
Assume first that T is irreducible cuspidal. Then from the local theory 
of Efunctions for almost all finite places we have 
and for the other places 
with the E,,(s) entire and bounded in vertical strips. So in this case we have 
I(Ut, p, s) = E(s)L(II x T, S) with E(s) entire and bounded in vertical strips 
as in Section 3. Since L(II x T, S) is assumed nice we thus may conclude 
that I (U€, 
9 ,  s) has an analytic continuation to an entire function which is 
bounded in vertical strips. When T is not cuspidal, it is a subrepresenta- 
tion of a representation that is induced from cuspidal representations Ui of 
GL,, (A) for Ti < m with C ri = m and is in fact, if our integral doesn't 
vanish, the unique generic constituent of this induced representation. Then 
one can make a similar argument using this induced representation and 
the fact that the L(ll x u,, s) are nice to again conclude that for all T, 
I(Ut, 9 ,  s) = E(s)L(II x T, S) = E1(s) n L(II x u,, s) is entire and bounded 
in vertical strips. (See [4] for more details on this point.) 
Similarly, one can consider I(V& cp, s) for cp E V, with T an irreducible 
subrepresentation of the space of automorphic forms on GL,(A), 
still with 
Now this integral converges for Re(s) << 0. However, when one unfolds, 
one finds I(Q,v,s) = n i(P(wn,m)~tv, 
wbV, 1-s) = ~ ( 1 - s ) ~ ( f i x i ,  
1-s) 
as above. Thus I (Ve, cp, s) also has an analytic continuation to an entire 
function of s which is bounded in vertical strips. 

14 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to Iiftings 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
15 
Now, utilizing the assumed global functional equation for L(II x T, s) 
in the case where T is cuspidal, or for the L(II x ui, s) in the case T is not 
cuspidal, as well as the local functional equations at v E S, U Sn U ST U S$ 
as in Section 3 one finds 
for all cp in all irreducible subrepresentations T of GLm(A), in the sense of 
analytic continuation. This concludes our use of the L-function. 
We now rewrite our integrals I(U€, cp, s) and I(V, , cp, s) as follows. We 
first stratify GL, (A). For each a E AX let 
GLk(A) = {g E GLm(A) I det(g) = a). 
We can, and will, always take 
and similarly for (P,V€, cp),. 
These are both absolutely convergent for 
all a and define continuous functions of a on kX\AX . We now have that 
I(UE, cp, s) is the Mellin transform of (P, U€, cp), , similarly for I (V, , cp, s) , 
and that these two Mellin transforms are equal in the sense of analytic 
continuation. Hence, by Mellin inversion as in Lemma 11.3.1 of Jacquet- 
Langlands [30], we have that (P,UE, cp), = (P,&, cp), for all a, and in 
particular for a = 1. Since this is true for all cp in all irreducible subrep- 
resentations of automorphic forms on GL,(A), 
then by the weak form of 
Langlands' spectral theory for SL, we may conclude that P,U, 
= P,Vt 
as functions on SL,(A). 
More specifically, we have the following result. 
Proposition 4.1 Let II be an irreducible admissible representation of 
GLn(A) as above. Suppose that L(II x T, s) is nice for all T E T(m). 
Then for each t E Vn we have PmUg (Im) = P,V< (Im). 
This proposition is the key common ingredient for all our converse 
theorems. 
5 
Proof of Theorem 2.1 [4] 
Let us now assume that II is as in Section 2 and that L(II x T, s) is 
nice for all T E T(n - 1). Then by Proposition 4.1 we have that for all 
< E Vn, Pn-lUt(In-1) = Pn-lI$(In-l). 
But for m = n - 1 the projection 
operator 
is nothing more than restriction to GL,-l. 
Hence we have 
U<(In) = &(I,) for all < E Vn 
Then for each g E GL,(A), we have 
ut (9) = hqg)< 
(In) = vn(g)r (In) = V' (9). So the map t t+ 
UC (9) gives our 
embedding of II into the space of automorphic forms on GLn(A), since now 
U, is left invariant under P(k), Q(k), and hence all of GLn(k). Since we 
still have 
€
9
 
= C 
Wdp9) 
Nn (k)\ P(k) 
we can compute that U, is cuspidal along any parabolic subgroup of GL,. 
Hence It embeds in the space of cusp forms on GLn(A) as desired. 
0 
6 Proofs of Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 [6] 
We begin with the proof of Theorem 2.2, so now suppose that II is as in 
Section 2, that n 2 3, and that L(II x T, S) is nice for all T E T(n - 2). Then 
from Proposition 4.1 we may conclude that Pn-2Ut(In-2) = Pn-2Vt(In-2) 
for all t E Vn. Since the projection operator Pn-2 now involves a non- 
trivial integration over kn-'\An-' 
we can no longer argue as in Section 5. 
To get to that point we will have to impose a local condition on the vector 
at one place. 
Before we place our local condition, let us write FE = Ut - V,. Then F, 
is rapidly decreasing as a function on GLn-2. We have Pn-2Fr(In-2) = 0 
and we would like to have simply that F'(In) = 0. Let u = (ul, . . . , un-') E 
An-' and consider the function 
Now f<(u) is a function on kn-'\An-' 
and as such has a Fourier expansion 
where t,b, (u) = $(a .t u) and 
In this language, the statement Pn-2F€(In-2) = 0 becomes j,(en-') = 0, 
where as always, ek is the standard unit vector with 0's in all places except 
the kth where there is a 1. 

16 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
Note that F((g) = Ut(g) - Vt(g) is left invariant under (Z(k) P(k)) n 
(Z(k) Q(k)) where Q = Qn-,. This contains the subgroup 
Using this invariance of FE, it is now elementary to compute that, with 
this notation, fn(,lr (en-1) = &a) where a = (a', anWl) E kn-'. 
Since 
(en-,) = 0 for all <, and in particular for n(r)<, we see that for every 5 
we have fE (a) = 0 whenever an-1 # 0. Thus 
Hence f< (0, . . . , 0, u,-1) 
= C,, ,k.-2 it (a', 0) is constant as a function of 
un-1. Moreover, this constant is fE(en-l) = Ft(In), which we want to be 
0. This is what our local condition will guarantee. 
If v is a finite place of k, let o, denote the ring of integers of k,, and let 
p, denote the prime ideal of 0,. We may assume that we have chosen v so 
that the local additive character +, is normalized, i.e., that +, is trivial on 
o, and non-trivial on pi1. Given an integer n, 2 1 we consider the open 
compact group 
(As usual, gi,j represents the entry of g in the i-th row and j-th column.) 
L e m m a  6.1 Let v be a finite place of k as above and let (n,, Vnv) be an 
irreducible admissible generic representation of GLn(kv). Then there is a 
vector t; E Vnv and a non-negative integer n, such that 
The proof of this Lemma is simply an exercise in the Whittaker model 
of II, and can be found in [6] 
Cogdell and Pia tetski-Shapiro 
17 
If we now fix such a place vo and assume that our vector < is chosen so 
that <,, = <Lo, then we have 
for such <. 
Hence we now have Ut(In) = VE (In) for all 6 E Vn such that <,,, = <Lo 
at our fixed place. If we let G' = Koo,vo (p:') 
GvO, where we set GvO = 
n:,,, 
GLn(kv), then we have this group preserves the local component (Lo 
up to a constant factor so that for g E G' we have 
We now use a fact about generation of congruence type subgroups. Let 
rl = (P(k) Z(k)) n GI, I'2 = (Q(k) Z(k)) n G', and = GLn(k) n G'. Then 
UE(g) 
is left invariant under rl and Q (g) is left invariant under r2. It is 
essentially a matrix calculation that together rl and I'2 generate I?. So, 
as a function on GI, U,t(g) = Q(g) is left invariant under r. So if we 
let nvo = 8:,,,,II, 
then the map e0 Ut:oB(vo (g) embeds Vnvo into 
A(I'\ GI), the space of automorphic forms on G' relative to I'. Now, by 
weak approximation, GLn(A) = GL,(k) - GI and I' = GLn(k) n GI, so 
we can extend nV0 
to an automorphic representation of GLn(A). Let no 
be an irreducible component of the extended representation. Then no is 
automorphic and coincides with II at all places except possible vo. 
One now repeats the entire argument using a second place vl # vo. 
Then we have two automorphic representations 111 and no of GLn(A) which 
agree at all places except possibly vo and vl. By strong multiplicity one 
for GL, [34] we know that no and nl are both constituents of the same 
induced representation 5 = Ind(al 8 . . 8 a,) where each a, is a cuspidal 
representation of some GL,, 
(A), each m, 2 1 and 
mi = n. We can 
write each ai = up 8 I det Jti with a: unitary cuspidal and ti E W and 
assume tl 2 - - -  2 t,. If r > 1, then either ml 5 n - 2 or m, 5 n - 2 (or 
both). For simplicity assume m, 5 n - 2. Let S be a finite set of places 
containing all Archimedean places, vo, vl, Sn, and SOi for each a. Taking 

18 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
r = 5, E T(n - 2), we have the equality of partial L-functions 
Now LS (or x CT, s) has a pole at s = 1 and all other terms are non-vanishing 
at s = 1. Hence L(II x r, S) has a pole at s = 1 contradicting the fact that 
L(II x r, S) is nice. If ml 5 2, then we can make a similar argument using 
~ ( f i  
x 01, s). So in fact we must have r = 1 and IIo = Ill = Z is cuspidal. 
Since IIo agrees with II at vl and 111 agrees with 
at vo we see that in 
fact II = no = 111 and II is indeed cuspidal automorphic. 
0 
Now consider Theorem 2.3. Since we have restricted our ramification, 
we no longer know that L(II x T, s) is nice for all T E T(n - 2) and so Prop* 
sition 4.1 is not immediately applicable. In this case, for each place .u E S 
we fix a vector t: :, Env as in Lemma 6.1. (So we must assume we have 
chosen @ so it is unramified at the places in S.) Let EL = nvEs(; 
E IIs. 
Consider now only vectors 
of the form tS @ EL with JS arbitrary in Vns 
and <$ fixed. For these vectors, the functions Pn-2Ut (h) and Pn-2Q(h) 
are unramified at the places v E S, so that the integrals I(Ut, cp, s) and 
I(&, cp, s) vanish unless cp(h) is also unramified at those places in S. In 
particular, if T E T(n - 2) but r 4 Ts(n - 2) these integrals will van- 
ish for all cp € V,. 
So now, for this fixed class of t we actually have 
I(Ut,cp, s) = I(Q,cp, s) for all cp E V, for all T E T(n - 2). Hence, as 
before, Pn-2U6(In-2) = Pn-2%(In-2) for d l  S U C ~  t. 
Now we proceed as before. Our Fourier expansion argument is a bit 
more subtle since we have to work around our local conditions, which now 
have been imposed before this step, but we do obtain that UE(g) = Vt(g) 
for all g E G' = 
KwlV(p:v)) G ~ .  
The generation of congruence 
subgroups goes as before. We then use weak approximation as above, but 
then take for II' any constituent of the extension of IIS to an automorphic 
representation of GLn(A).There no use of strong multiplicity one nor any 
further use of the L-function in this case. More details can be found in [6]. 
0 
7 Proof of Theorem 2.4 [4] 
Let us now sketch the proof of Theorem 2.4. We fix a non-empty finite 
set of places S, containing all Archimedean places, such that the ring os 
of S-integer has class number one. Recall that we are now twisting by all 
cuspidd representations T E Ts(n - I), that is, T which are unramified at 
Cogdell and Pia te tski-Shapiro 
19 
all places v 4 S. Since we have not twisted by all of T(n - 1) we are not in 
a position to apply Proposition 4.1. To be able to apply that, we will have 
to place local conditions at all v 4 S. 
We begin by recalling the definition.of the conductor of a representation 
II, of GLn(kv) and the conductor (or level) of II itself. Let K, = GLn(oV) 
be the standard maximal compact subgroup of GLn(kv). Let p, C o, be 
the unique prime ideal of o, and for each integer mu > 0 set 
and Kl,,(prv) = {g E Ko,,(pTv) I g,,, 
1 (mod prv))). Note that for 
m, = 0 we have Kl,, (p&) = KO,, (p&) = Kv. Then for each local component 
11, of I1 there is a unique integer m, 2 0 such that the space of Kl,v(prv)- 
fixed vectors in n, is exactly one. For almost all v, m, = 0. We will' call 
the ideal prv the conductor of II,. (Often only the integer mu is called the 
conductor, but for our purposes it is better to use the ideal it determines.) 
Then the ideal n = n, prv C o is called the conductor of II. For each place 
v we fix a non-zero vector t," E II, which is fixed by Kl,,(prv), which at 
the unramified places is taken to be the vector with respect to which the 
restricted tensor product II = @'II, is taken. Note that for g E K0,,(prv) 
we have &(g)S," = wn, (gn,n)Sz- 
Now fix a non-empty finite set of places S, containing the Archimedean 
places if there are any. As is standard, we will let Gs = nu,, GLn(kv), 
G~ = nvds 
GLn(kv), IIs = @,,,II,, 
IIS = @:,,II,, 
etc. The the compact 
subring nS = rives prw C kS or the ideal it determines ns = k n ksnS C 
os is called the S-conductor of II. Let ~ f ( n )  
= nu,, Kl,,(pFv) and 
similarly for ~ i ( n ) .  Let to = @,,ese 
E IIS. Then this vector is fixed 
by ~ f ( n )  
and transforms by a character under ~ t ( n ) .  In particular, since 
~v,sGLn-l(o,) embeds in ~ f ( n )  
via h H ( h  
we see that when we 
restrict IIS to GLnel the vector 5" is unramified. 
Now let us return to the proof of Theorem 2.4 and in particular the 
version of the Proposition 4.1 we can salvage. For every vector Ss E IIs 
consider the functions UtsBE" and V&g,€o. When we restrict these functions 
to GLn-1 they become unramified for all places v 4 S. Hence we see 
that the integrals I(UtsBE0, cp, s) and I(&sBEo, cp, s) vanish identically if 
the function cp E V, is not unramified for v 4 S, and in particular if cp E V, 
for T E T(n - 1) but r 4 Ts (n - 1). Hence, for vectors of the form J = J s @ r  
we do indeed have that I(UtSmto, cp, s) = I(Qs @to, cp, s) for all cp E V, and 
all T E T(n - 1). Hence, as in the Proposition 4.1 we may conclude that 
UtSep (L) 
= 
(In) for all [s E Vns. Moreover, since Js was arbitrary 

20 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liflings 
in Vns and the fixed vector to transforms by a character of K;(n) we may 
conclude that Uts8(0 (9) = Vtse(o (9) for all ts E Vn, and all g E Gs K:(n). 
What invariance properties of the function Uts 
have we gained from 
our equality with 
Let us let ri(ns) = GL,(k) n GsK?(n) which 
we may view naturally as congruence subgroups of GLn(os). Now, as a 
function on Gs K:(n), 
U,=,@(o (9) is naturally left invariant under 
while Vt,@(o (9) is naturally left invariant under 
where Q = 9,-I- Similarly we set l?l,p(ns) = Z(k) P(k) n Gs K:(n) 
and 
r1.Q 
(ns) = Z(k) Q(k) nGs K;(n). The crucial observation for this Theorem 
is the following result. 
Proposition 7.1 The congruence subgroup ri (ns) is generated by ri,p (ns) 
and ri,Q(ns) for i = 0,l. 
This proposition is a consequence of results in the stable algebra of 
GL, due to Bass [I] which were crucial to the solution of the congruence 
subgroup problem for SL, by Bass, Milnor, and Serre [2]. This is reason 
for the restriction to n > 3 in the statement of Theorem 2.4. 
Fkom this we get not an embedding of ll into a space of automorphic 
forms on GL,(A), but rather an embedding of IIs into a space of classical 
automorphic forms on Gs. To this end, for each & E Vns let us set 
for gs E Gs. Then QtS will be left invariant under rl (ns) and transform by 
a Nebentypus character xs under r0(ns) determined by the central char- 
acter wns of IIS. Furthermore, it will transform by a character ws = wn, 
under the center Z(ks) of Gs. The requisite growth properties are satisfied 
and hence the map ts H QtS defines an embedding of IIs into the space 
A(r0(ns)\ Gs; ws, xs) of classical automorphic forms on Gs relative to the 
congruence subgroup ro(ns) with Nebentypus xs and central character ws. 
We now need to lift our classical automorphic representation back to 
an adelic one and hopefully recover the rest of II. By strong approxima- 
tion for GL, and our class number assumption we have the isomorphism 
between the space of classical automorphic forms A(ro (ns)\ Gs; ws, xs) 
and the Kf (n) invariants in A(GL, (k)\ GL,(A); w) where w is the central 
character of II. Hence IIs will generate an automorphic subrepresentation 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
21 
of A(GL,(k)\ GL,(A); w). To compare this to our original 11, we must 
check that, in the space of classical forms, the QtS@p are Hecke eigenforms 
and their Hecke eigenvalues agree with those from II. We check this only 
for those v 
S which are unrarnified. The relevant Hecke algebras are as 
follow. 
Let St be the smallest set of places containing S so that IIv is unram- 
ified for all v $ St. If 3'' = % f l ( ~ ~ ' ,  
K") is the algebra of compactly 
supported Ksl-bi-invariant functions on G" then there is a character A 
of 31" 
so that for each 5? E ?is' we have I I S 1 ( ~ ) ~ ~  
= A(~?)<o. Since 
K" is naturally a subgroup of K:(n) 
we see that 'HS' also naturally acts 
on A(GL,(k)\ GL,(A); w ) ~ ? ( " )  by convolution and hence there will be a 
corresponding classical Hecke algebra H:' 
acting on the space of classical 
fcrms W
o
 
(ns) \ Gs; us, xs). 
Let 
cS(n) = ( n KO,.(PF)) GS1 . 
vES1-S 
Then ~ : ( n )  C ~'(n). and we may form the Hecke algebra of bi-invariant 
functions 'HS (n) = %(G' (n) , K: (n)). This convolution algebra is spanned 
by the characteristic functions of the Kf(n)-double cosets. Similarly let 
M = GL,(k) n GS ~ ' ( n ) ,  so that rl (ns) c M, and let %,(ns) be the 
algebra of double cosets rl(ns)\M/rl(ns). 
This is the natural classical 
Hecke algebra that acts on A(ro(ns)\ Gs; ws, xs). 
Lemma 7.2 
(a) The map a : %,(ns) + zS(n) given by 
the normalized characteristic function of Kf(n)t Kf(n), is an isomor- 
phism. Furthermore if we have the decomposition into right cosets 
rl (ns)trl (ns) = U a j r l  (ns) then also K; (n)t K: (n) = U aj Kf(n). 
(b) Under the assumption of the ring os having class number one, we have 
that for t E M there is a decomposition rl (ns)trl (ns) = U ajrl (ns) 
with each a j  E Z(k) P(k)ro (ns) . 
Now 31:' 
is the image of %(G", KS1) under a-' in X,(ns). Utilizing 
Lemma 7.2, and particularly part (b), it is now a standard computation that 
for the classical Hecke operator Tt E 31:' 
corresponding to rl (ns)trl (ns) 
and, characteristic function f" of the double coset ~ f ( n ) t  
K;(n) we have 
TtQts = A(T~)@(, . Hence each at, is indeed a Hecke eigenfunction for the 
Hecke operators from 31:'. 

22 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
Now if we let II' be any irreducible subrepresentation of the represen- 
tation generated by the image of IIs in A(GL,(k)\ GL,(A); w), then II' 
is automorphic and we have IIL 21 II, for all v E S by construction and 
IIL E n, for all v 4 S' by our Hecke algebra calculation. Thus we have 
proven Theorem 2.4. 
0 
8 
Applications 
In this section we would like to make some general remarks on how to apply 
these converse theorems. 
In order to apply these these theorems, you must be able to control the 
global properties of the L-function. However, for the most part, the way we 
have of controlling global L-functions is to associate them to automorphic 
forms or representations. A minute's thought will then lead one to the 
conclusion that the primary application of these results will be to the lifting 
of automorphic representations from some group H to GL,. 
Suppose that H is a split classical group, n an automorphic represen- 
tation of H, and p a representation of the L-group of H. Then we should 
be able to associate an L-function L(n,p, s) to this situation [3]. Let us 
assume that p : L  H + GL,(C) so that to n should be associated an auto- 
morphic representation II of GL,(A). What should II be and why should 
it be automorphic. 
We can see what 11, should be at almost all places. Since we have 
the (arithmetic) Langlands (or Langlands-Satake) parameterization of rep- 
resentations for all Archimedean places and those finite places where the 
representations are unramified [3], we can use these to associate to n, and 
the map p, :L H, + GL, (C) a representation ll, of GL, (k,). If H happens 
to be GL, then we in principle know how to associate the representation 
II, at all places now that the local Langlands conjecture has been solved 
for GL, 
[22], [24], but in practice this is still not feasible. For other sit- 
uations, we do not know what II, should be at the ramified places. We 
will return to this difficulty momentarily. But for now, lets assume we can 
finesse this local problem and arrive at a representation ll = @II, 
such 
that L(n, p, s) = L(II, s). II should then be the Langlands lifting of n to 
GL, associated to p. 
For simplicity of exposition, let us now assume that p is simply the 
standard embedding of LH into GL,(C) and write L(w,p,s) = L(n,s) = 
L(II, s). We have our candidate II for the lift of n to GL,, but how to tell 
whether II is automorphic. This is what the converse theorem lets us do. 
But to apply them we must first be able to not only define but also control 
Cogdell and Pia tetski-Shapiro 
23 
the twisted L-functions L(n x T, S) for T E 7 with an appropriate twisting 
set 7 from Theorems 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, or 2.4. This is one reason it is always 
crucial to define not only the standard L-functions but also the twisted 
versions. If we know, from the theory of L-functions of H twisted by GL, 
for appropriate T, that L(n x T, s) is nice and L(T x 7, s) = L(n x T, s) for 
twists, then we can use Theorem 2.1 or 2.2 to conclude that ll is cuspidal 
automorphic or Theorem 2.3 or 2.4 to conclude that II is quasi-automorphic 
and at least obtain a weak automorphic lifting II' which is verifiably the 
correct representation at almost all places. At this point this relies on the 
state of our knowledge of the theory of twisted L-functions for H. 
Let us return now to the (local) problem of not knowing the appropriate 
local lifting n, I+ II, at the ramified places. We can circumvent this by 
a combination of global and local means. The global tool is simply the 
following observation. 
Observation Let II be as in Theorem 2.3 or 2.4. Suppose that q is a fixed 
(highly ramified) character of kX \AX . Suppose that L(II x T, s) is nice for 
all T E 7 €3 q, where 7 is either of the twisting sets of Theorem 2.3 or 2.4. 
Then II is quasi-automorphic as in those theorems. 
The only thing to observe is that if T E 7 then 
so that applying the converse theorem for II with twisting set 7 
8 77 is 
equivalent to applying the converse theorem for II €3 7 with the twisting set 
7. 
So, by either Theorem 2.3 or 2.4, whichever is appropriate, II €3 
is 
quasi-automorphic and hence II is as well. 
Now, if we begin with n automorphic on H(A), we will take T to be the 
set of finite places where n, is ramified. For applying Theorem 2.3 we want 
S = T and for Theorem 2.4 we want S n T = 0. We will now take 77 to be 
highly ramified at all places v E T. So at v E T our twisting representations 
are all locally of the form (unramified principal series)@(highly ramified 
character). 
We now need to know the following two local facts about the local theory 
of L-functions for H. 
(i) Multiplicativity of gamma: If T, = Ind(r1,, GO T2,,), with Tilv and 
irreducible admissible representation of GL,, (k,), then 
and L(rV x %, s)-' 
should divide [L(x, x T~,,, s)L(x x 5,,, 
s)]-l. 
If n, = Ind(o, 8 n:) with a, an irreducible admissible representation 

24 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
of GL,(k,) and a; an irreducible admissible representation of H1(k,) 
~ 
with H' c H such that GL, x H' is the Levi of a parabolic subgroup 
of H, then 
(ii) Stability of gamma: If al,, and r2,, are two irreducible admissible 
representations of H(kv), then for every sufficiently highly ramified 
character q, of GLl(k,) we have 
Once again, for these applications it is crucial that the local theory of 
L-functions is sufficiently developed to establish these results on the local 
y-factors. Both of these facts are known for GL,, the multiplicativity being 
found in [33] and the stability in 1351. 
To utilize these local results, ;hat 
one now does is the following. At the 
places where a, is ramified, choose II, to be arbitrary, except that it should 
have the same central character as a,. This is both to guarantee that the 
central character of It is the same as that of r and hence automorphic and 
to guarantee that the stable forms of the y-factors for r, and II, agree. 
Now form II = @'It,. Choose our character q so that at the places v E T 
we have that the L- and y-factors for both rv 8 q,, and n, 
q, are in their 
stable form and agree. We then twist by 'T 8 q for this fied character q. 
If r E T D q ,  then for v E T, T, is of the form r, = Ind(p, 8...@pm)@q,, 
with each pi an unramified character of k,X. So at the places v E T we have 
and similarly for the L-factors. F'rom this it follows that globally we will 
have L ( r  x r, s) = L(II x r ,  s) for all r E 7 8 q and the global functional 
equation for L(r x r, s) will yield the global functional equation for L(II x 
7,s). SO L(II x r, s) is nice and we may proceed as before. We have, in 
essence, twisted all information about a and II at those v E T away. The 
Cogdell and Pia tetski-Shapiro 
25 
price we pay is that we also lose this information in our conclusion since we 
only know that It is quasi-automorphic. In essence, the converse theorem 
fills in a correct set of data at those places in T to make the resulting global 
representation automorphic. 
9 
Applications of Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 
Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 in the case n = 3 was established in the 1980's by 
Jacquet, Piatetski-Shapiro, and Shalika [31]. It has had many applications 
which we would now like to catalogue for completeness sake. 
In their original paper [31], Jacquet , Piatetski-Shapiro, and Shalika used 
the known holomorphy of the Artin L-function for three dimensional mono- 
mial Galois representations combined with the converse theorem to estab- 
lish the strong Artin conjecture for these Galois representations, that is, 
that they are associated to automorphic representations of GL3. Gelbart 
and Jacquet used this converse theorem to establish the symmetric square 
lifting from GL2 to GL3 [14]. Jacquet, Piatetski-Shapiro and Shalika used 
this converse theorem to establish the existence of non-normal cubic base 
change for GL2 [32]. These three applications of the converse theorem 
were then used by Langlands [43] and Tunnel1 [63] in their proofs of the 
strong Artin conjecture for tetrahedral and octahedral Galois representa- 
tions, which in turn were used by Wiles [67] . . . . 
Patterson and Piatetski-Shapiro generalized this converse theorem to 
the three fold cover of GL3 and there used it to establish the existence of 
the cubic theta representation [47], which they then turned around and used 
to establish integral representation for the symmetric square L-function for 
GL3 [48]. 
More recently, Dinakar Ramakrishnan has used Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 
for n = 4 in order to establish the tensor product lifting from GL2 x GL2 
to G 4  1551. In the language Section 8, H = GL2 x GL2, LH = GL2(C) x 
GL2 (C) and p : GL2 (C) x GL2 (C) + GL4 (C) is the tensor product map. 
If a = r1 8 a 2  is a cuspidal representation of H(A) and r is an automor- 
phic subrepresentation of the space of automorphic forms on GL2(A) then 
the twisted L-function he must control is L(n x r, s) = L(ar x r s  x r, s), 
that is, the Rankin triple product L-function. The basic properties of this 
L-function are known through the work of Garrett [13], Piatetski-Shapiro 
and M l i s  [52], Shahidi [58], and Ikeda [25], [26], [27], [28] through a combi- 
nation of integral representation and Eisenstein series techniques. Rarnakr- 
ishnan himself had to complete the theory of the triple product L-function. 
Once he had, he was able to apply Theorem 2.3 to obtain the lifting. 
After he had established the tensor product lifting, he went on to apply it 

26 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
to establish the multiplicity one theorem for SL2, certain new cases of the 
Artin conjecture, and the Tate conjecture for four-fold products of modular 
curves. 
We should note that Ramakrishnan did not handle the ramified places 
via highly ramified twists, as we outlined above. Instead he used an 
ingenious method of simultaneous base changes and descents to obtain the 
ramified local lifting from GL2 x GL2 to GL4. 
10 An application (in progress) of 
Theorem. 2.4 
Theorem 2.4 is designed to facilitate the lifting of.generic cuspidal repre- 
sentations rr from a split classical group H to GL. The case we have made 
the most progress on is the case of H a split odd orthogonal group S02n+l. 
Then LH = Sfin(@) and we have the standard embedding p : Sfin(C) 
GL2,(@). So we would expect to lift a to an automorphic representation 
II of GL2,(A). 
We first construct a candidate lift II = &II, as a representation of 
GL2,(A). If v is Archimedean, we take II, as the local Langlands lift of a, 
as in [3, 411. If v is non-Archimedean and rr, is unrarnified, we take II, as 
the local Langlands lift of a, as defined via Satake parameters [3,40]. If v is 
finite and rr, is ramified, we take II. to be essentially anything, but we will 
require a certain regularity: we want II, to be irreducible, admissible and 
to have trivial central character, we might as well take it to be unramified, 
and we can take it generic if necessary. Then II = @TIv is an irreducible 
admissible representation of G L2, (A) with trivial central character. 
To show that II is a (weak) Langlands lifting of ?r along the lines of Sec- 
tion 8, we need a fairly complete theory of L functions for S02n+t 
x GL,, 
that is, for L(a x T, S) for T E 7 ~ ( 2 n  - 1) 0 q with an appropriate set S and 
highly ramified character q. The Rankin-Selberg theory of integral repre- 
sentations for these L-functions has been worked out by several authors, 
among them Gelbart and Piatetski-Shapiro [15], Ginzburg [17], and Soudry 
[61, 621. For T a cuspidal representation of GL,(A) 
with m 5 2n - 1 the 
integral representation for L(rr x T ,  S) involves the integration of a cusp form 
9 E V, against an Eisenstein series E,(s) on SO2, built from a (normal- 
ized) section of the induced representation ~ndg:", 
u ( ~ l  
det Is). We know 
that for these L-functions most of the requisite properties for the lifting are 
known. 
The basics of the local theory can be found in (17, 61, 621. The multi- 
plicativity of gamma is due to Soudry [61, 621. The stability of gamma was 
established for this purpose in [8]. 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
27 
As for the global theory, the meromorphic continuation of the L-function 
is established in [15], [17]. The global functional equation, at least in the 
case where the infinite component rr, 
is tempered, has been worked out 
in conjunction with Soudry. The remaining technical difficulty is to show 
that L(a x T, s) is entire and bounded in strips for T E Ts(n - 1) 8 q. 
The poles of this L-function are governed by the exterior square L-function 
L(T, A ~ ,  
S) on G L, 
[15], [17]. This L-function has been studied by Jacquet 
and Shalika [37] from the point of view of Rankin-Selberg integrals and by 
Shahidi by the method of Eisenstein series. We know that the Jacquet- 
Shalika version is entire for T E Ts(n - 1) 8 q, but we know that it is the 
Shahidi version that normalizes the Eisenstein series and so controls the 
poles of L(a x T, s). Gelbart and Shahidi have also shown that, away from 
any poles, the version of the exterior square L-function coming from the 
theory of Eisenstein series is bounded in vertical strips [16]. So, we would 
(essentially) be done if we could show that these two avatars of the exterior 
square L-function were the same. This is what we are currently pursuing 
. . . a more complete knowledge of the L-functions of classical groups. 
We should point out that Ginzburg, Rallis, and Soudry now have inte- 
gral representations for L-functions for Spz, x GL, for generic cusp forms 
[19], analogous to the ones we have used above for the odd orthogonal 
group. So, once we have better knowledge of these L-functions we should 
be able to lift from Snn to GL2n+l. 
Also, Ginzburg, Rallis, and Piatetski-Shapiro have a theory of L-func- 
tions for SO x GL, which does not rely on a Whittaker model that could 
possibly be used in this context 1181. 
11 Conjectures and extensions 
What should be true about the amount of twisting you need to control in 
order to determine whether II is automorphic? 
There are currently no conjectural extensions of Theorem 2.4. However 
conjectural extensions of Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 abound. The most widely 
believed conjecture, often credited to Jacquet, is the following. 
Conjecture 11.1 Let II be an irreducible admissible generic representa- 
tion of GL,(A) whose central character wn is trivial on k X  and whose L- 
function L(II, s) is convergent in some half plane. Assume that L(II x T, s) 
as nice for every T E 7 ([:I). 
Then ll is a cuspidal automorphic represen- 
tation of GL,(A). 
Let us briefly explain the heuristics behind this conjecture. The idea is 
that the converse theorem should require no more than what would be true 

Converse Theorems for GL, and application to lifting 
if II were in fact automorphic cuspidal. Now, if II were automorphic but 
not cuspidal, then still L(II x r, S) should have meromorphic continuation, 
be bounded in vertical strips away from its poles, and satisfy the functional 
equation. However, since II would then be a constituent of an induced rep- 
resentation B = Ind(ol @. - . @ or) where the oi are cuspidal representations 
of GL,, (A), we would no longer expect all L(II x r, s) to be entire. In fact, 
since we must have n = ml + - - + m,, then at least one of the mi must 
satisfy mi 5 [$] and in this case the twisted L-function L(II x bi7 
s) should 
have a pole. The above conjecture states that, all other things being nice, 
this is the only obstruction to II being cuspidal automorphic. 
There should also be a version with limited ramification as in Theo- 
rem 2.3, but you would lose cuspidality as before. 
The most ambitious conjecture we know of was stated in [4] and is as 
follows. 
Conjecture 11.2 Let II be an irreducible admissible generic representa- 
tion of GL,(A) whose central character wn is trivial on k X  and whose L- 
function L(II, s) is convergent in some half plane. Assume that L(II co w, s) 
is nice for every character w of kX \AX , i.e., for all w E T(1). Then there 
is an automorphic representation II' of GL,(A) such that II. - IIL for all 
finite places v of k where both II, and II: are unramified and such that 
L(II@ w, s) = L(n' @ w, s) and'e(II @ w, s) = c(II' @ w, s). 
This conjecture is true for n = 2,3, as follows either from the classical 
converse theorem for n = 2 or the n = 3 version of the Theorem 2.4. In 
these cases we in fact have II' = II. For n > 4 we can no longer expect 
to be able to take II' to be II. In fact, one can construct a continuum of 
representations ll; on GL4(A), with t in an open subset of C, such that 
L(II; @ w, s) and 
8 w, s) do not depend on the choice of the constants 
t and L(n; @ w, s) is nice for all characters w of k /AX [51], (61. All of 
these cannot belong to the space of cusp forms on GL4(A), since the space 
of cusp forms contains only a countable set of irreducible representations. 
There are similar examples for GL, with n > 4 also. 
Conjecture 11.2 would have several immediate arithmetic applications. 
For example, Kim and Shahidi have have shown that for non-dihedral cus- 
pidal representations n of GL2(A) the symmetric cube L-function is entire 
along with its twists by characters [38]. F'rom Conjecture 11.2 it would 
then follow that there is an automorphic representation II of G 4  
(A) hav- 
ing the same L-function and &-factor as the symmetric cube of n. This 
would produce a (weak) symmetric cube lifting from GL2 to GL4. 
If these conjectures are to be attacked along the lines of this report, the 
first step is carried out in Section 4 above. What new is needed is a way to 
push the arguments of Section 6 beyond the case of abelian Y,. 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
29 
The most immediate extension of these converse theorems would be to 
allow the L-functions to have poles. As a first step, one needs to determine 
the possible global poles for L(II x r, s), with II an automorphic representa- 
tion of GL,(A) and say T a cuspidal representation of GL,(A) 
with m < n, 
and their interpretations from the integral representations. One would then 
try to invert these interpretations along with the integral representation. 
We hope to pursue this in the near future. This would be the analogue of 
Li's results for GL2 [43, 441. 
If one could establish a converse theorem for GL, allowing an arbitrary 
finite number of poles, along the lines of the results of Weissauer 1661 and 
Raghunathan [53], these would have great applications. Finiteness of poles 
for a wide class of L-functions is known from the work of Shahidi 1581, but 
to be able to specify more precisely the location of the poles, one usually 
needs a deeper understanding of the integral representations (see Rallis [54] 
for example). A first step would be simply the translation of the results of 
Weissauer and Raghunathan into the representation theoretic framework. 
An interesting extension of these results would be converse theorems 
not just for GL, but for classical groups. The earliest converse theorem 
for classical groups that we are aware of is due to Mad3 [46]. He proved 
a converse theorem for classical modular forms on hyperbolic n-space ?in, 
i.e., (essentially) for the rank one orthogonal group O,J, which involves 
twisting the L-function by spherical harmonics for 
The first attempt 
at a converse theorem for the symplectic group Snn that we know of is 
found in Koecher7s thesis [39]. He inverts the Mellin transform of holo- 
morphic Siegel modular forms on the Siegel upper half space 3, but does 
not achieve a full converse theorem. For Sp4 a converse theorem in this 
classical context was obtained by Imai [29], extending Koecher7s inversion 
in this case, and requires twisting by M a d  forms and Eisenstein series for 
G4. It seems that, within the same context, a similar result will hold for 
Sn,. Duke and Imamoglu have used Imai7s converse theorem to analyze 
the Saito-Kurokawa lifting [12]. It would be interesting to know if there is 
a representation theoretic version of these converse theorems, since they do 
not rely on having an Euler product for the L-function, and if they can then 
be extended both to other forms on these groups as well as other groups. 
Another interesting extension of these results would be to extend the 
converse theorem of Patterson and Piatetski-Shapiro for the three-fold cover 
of GL3 [47] to other covering groups, either of GL, or classical groups. 

30 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
References 
[I] H. Bass, K-theory and stable algebra, Publ. Math. IHES 22 (1964), 
5-60. 
(21 H. Bass, J. Milnor, and J-P. Serre, Solution of the congruence subgroup 
problem for SL, (n > 3) and Sp2, (n > 2), Publ. Math. IHES 33 
(1976), 59-137. 
[3] A. Borel, Automorphic L-functions, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 33 part 
2 (1979), 27-61. 
[4] J. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Converse theorems for GL,, 
Publ. Math. IHES 79 (1994) 157-214. 
[5] J. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, A Converse Theorem for GL4, 
Math. Res. Lett. 3 (1996), 67-76. 
[6] J. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Converse theorems for GL,, 11, 
J. reine angew. Math. 507 (1999), 165-188. 
[7] J. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Derivatives and L-functions for 
GL,, to appear in a volume dedicated to B. Moishezon. 
[8] J. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Stability of gamma factors for 
SO(2n + I), Manuscripta Math. 95 (1998), 437-461. 
[9] J. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, L-functions for GL,, in progress. 
[lo] 8. Conrey and D. Farmer, An extension of Hecke's converse theorem, 
Internat. Math. Res. Not. (l995), 445-463. 
[ll] C. Deninger, L-functions of mixed motives in Motives (Seattle, WA 
lggl), Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 55 American Mathematical Society, 
1994, 517-525. 
(121 W. Duke and 0. Imamoglu, A converse theorem and the Saito- 
Kurokawa lift, Internat. Math. Res. Not. (1996), 347-355. 
[13] P. Garrett, Decomposition of Eisenstein series; Rankin triple products 
Ann. of Math. 125 (1987), 209-235. 
[14] S. Gelbart and H. Jacquet, A relation between automorphic represen- 
tations of GL(2) and GL(3), Ann. Sci. ~ c o l e  
Norm. Sup. 11 (1978), 
471-542. 
[I51 S. Gelbart, 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, and S. Rallis, Explicit Constructions 
of Automorphic L-functions, SLN 1254, Springer-Verlag, 1987. 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
31 
[16] S. Gelbart and F. Shahidi, Boundedness in finite vertical strips for 
certain L-functions, preprint . 
[17] D. Ginzburg, L-functions for SO, x GLr J. reine angew. Math. 405 
(1990), 156-280. 
[18] D. Ginzburg, 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, and S. Rallis, L-functions for the 
orthogonal group, Memoirs Amer. Math. Soc. 128 (1997). 
[19] D. Ginzburg, S. Rallis, and D. Soudry, L-functions for the symplectic 
group, Bull. Soc. Math. France 126 (1998), 181-144. 
(201 M.I. Gurevic, Determining L-series from their functional equations 
Math. USSR Sbornik 14 (1971), 537-553. 
[21] H. Hamburger, 
h e r  die Riemannsche Funktionalgleichung der 5- 
funktion, Math. Zeit. 10 (1921) 240-254; 11 (1922), 224-245; 13 
(1922), 283-31 1. 
[22] M. Harris and R. Taylor, On the geometry and cohomology of some 
simple Shimura varieties, preprint, 1998. 
[23] E. Hecke, h e r  die Bestimmung Dirichletscher Reihen durch ihre Funk- 
tionalgleichung, Math. Annalen 112 (1936), 664-699. 
1241 G. Henniart, Une preuve simple des conjectures de Langlands pour 
GL(n) sur un corps p-adique, preprint, 1999. 
(251 T. Ikeda, On the functional equations of the triple L-functions, J. 
Math. Kyoto Univ. 29 (1989), 175-219. 
[26] T. Ikeda, On the location of poles of the triple L-functions, Compositio 
Math. 83 (1992), 187-237. 
(271 T. Ikeda, On the Gamma factors of the triple L-functions, I, Duke 
Math. J. 97 (1999), 301-318. 
[28] T. Ikeda, On the Gamma factors of the triple L-functions, 11, J. reine 
angew. Math. 499 (1998), 199-223. 
[29] K. Imai, Generalization of Hecke's correspondence to Siege1 modular 
forms, Amer. J. Math. 102 (1980), 903-936. 
[30] H. Jacquet and R. Langlands Automorphic Forms on GL(2), SLN 114 
Springer-Verlag (1970). 
[31] H. Jacquet, 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, and J. Shalika, Automorphic forms 
on GL(3), I & I1 Ann. of Math. 109 (1979), 169-258. 

I 
32 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
[32] H. Jacquet; 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, and J. Shalika Relevement cubique 
non normal, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Ser. I. Math., 292 (1981), 567-571. 
[33] H. Jacquet, 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, and J. Shalika Rankin-Selberg con- 
volutions, Amer. J. Math. 105 (1983), 367-464. 
[34] H. Jacquet and J. Shalika On Euler products and the classification of 
automorphic representations, I, Amer. J. Math. 103 (1981), 499-558; 
I1 103 1981, 777-815. 
[35] H. Jacquet and J. Shalika, A lemma on highly ramified r-factors, Math. 
Annalen 271 (1985), 319-332. 
[36] H. Jacquet and J. Shalika, Rankin-Selberg Convolutions: Archimedean 
Theory, Festschrift in Honor of 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Part I, Weiz- 
mann Science Press, Jerusalem, 1990, 125-207. 
[37] H. Jacquet and J. Shalika, Exterior square L-functions, Automor- 
phic Forms, Shimura Varieties, and L-Functions, Volume 11, Academic 
Press, Boston 1990, 143-226. 
[38] H. Kim and F. Shahidi, Symmetric cube L-functions for GL2 are entire, 
Ann. of Math., to appear. 
[39] M. Koecher, a e r  Dirichlet-Reihen mit Funktionalgleichung, J. reine 
angew. Math. 192 (1953), 1-23. 
[40] R.P. Langlands Problems in the theory of automorphic forms, SLN 170 
Springer-Verlag (1 970), 18-86. 
[41] R.P. Langlands, On the classification of irreducible representations of 
real algebraic groups, Representation Theory and Harmonic Analysis 
on Semisimple Lie Groups, AMS Mathematical Surveys and Mono- 
graphs, 31 (1989), 101-170. 
[42] R.P. Langlands, Base Change for GL(2), Annals of Math. Studies 96 
Princeton University Press, 1980. 
[43] W.-C. W. Li, On a theorem of Hecke- Weil-Jacquet-Langlands, Recent 
Progress in Analytic Number Theory, 2 (Durham 1979), Academic 
Press, 1981, 119-152. 
[44] W.-C. W. Li, On converse theorems for GL(2) and GL(l), Amer. J. 
Math. 103 (1981), 851-885. 
Cogdell and Piatetski-Shapiro 
33 
[45] H. M a d ,  h e r  eine neue Art von nichtanalytischen automorphen 
Funktionen une die Bestimmung Dirichletscher Reihen durch Funk- 
tionalgleichungen, Math. Annalen 121 (1944), 141-183. 
[46] H. M a . ,  Automorphe Funktionen von mehren Vercinderlichen und 
Dirichletsche Reihen Abh., Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 16 (1949), 72- 
100. 
[47] S.J. Patterson and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, A cubic analogue of cuspidal 
theta representations, J. Math. Pures and Appl. 63 1984, 333-375. 
[48] S.J. Patterson and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, A symmetric-square L- 
function attached to cuspidal automorphic representations of GL(3), 
Math. Annalen 283 1989, 551-572. 
[49] 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, On the Weil-Jacquet-Langlands Theorem, Lie 
Groups and their Representations, I. M. Gelfand, ed. Proc. of the 
Summer School of Group Representations, Budapest, 1971,1975,583- 
595. 
[50] 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Euler subgroups Lie Groups and their Repre- 
sentations, I. M. Gelfand, ed. Proc. of the Summer School of Group 
Representations, Budapest, 1971, 1975, 597-620. 
[51] 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Zeta-functions of GL(n) Dept. of Math. Univ. 
of Maryland, Technical report TR, 76-46, 1976. 
I 
[52] 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro and S. Rallis Rankin triple L-functions, Com- 
1 
positio Math. 64 1987, 31-115. 
I 
[53] R. Raghunathan, A converse theorem for Dirichlet series with poles, 
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, S6r. Math 327 1998, 231-235. 
[54] S. Rallis, Poles of standard L-functions, Proceedings of the Interna- 
tional Congress of Mathematicians, 11, (Kyoto, 1990) 1991, 833-845. 
[55] D. Rarnakrishnan, Modularity of the Rankin-Selberg L-series and mul- 
tiplicity one for SL(2), preprint. 
I 
[56] M. Razar, Modular forms for r o ( N )  and Dirichlet series, Trans. Amer. 
Math. Soc. 231 (1977), 489-495. 
I 
[57] B. Riemann, h e r  die Anzahl der Primzahlen unter einer gegebenen 
Grosse, Monats. Berliner Akad. 1859, 671-680. 
[58] F. Shahidi, On the Ramanujan conjecture and the finiteness of poles 
I 
of certain L-functions, Ann. of Math. 127 (1988), 547-584. 

34 
Converse Theorems for GL, and application to liftings 
[59] J. Shalika, The multiplicity one theorem for GL,, Ann. of Math. 100 
(1974), 171-193. 
[60] C.L. Siegel, Lectures on the Analytic Theory of Quadmtic Forms, The 
Institute for Advanced Study and Princeton University mimeographed 
notes, revised edition 1949. 
[61] D. Soudry, Rankin-Selberg convolutions for SOzl+1 x GL,, Local the- 
ory, Memoirs of the AMS 500 (1993). 
[62] D. Soudry, On the Archimedean Theory of Rankin-Selberg convolutions 
for SOzr+1 x GL,, Ann. Sci. EC. Norm. Sup. 28 (1995), 161-224. 
[63] J. Tunnell, Artin's conjecture for representations of octahedml type, 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 5 (1981), 173-175. 
(641 N. Wallach, Cm vectors, Representations of Lie Groups and Quan- 
tum Groups (Trento l993), Pitman Res. Notes Math. Ser. 31 1 (l994), 
Longman Sci. Tech., Harlow, 205-270. 
(651 A. Weil, h e r  die Bestimmung Dirichletscher Reihen durch Funktion- 
algleichungen, Math. Annalen 168 (1967), 149-156. 
[66] R. Weissauer, Der Heckesche Umkehrsatz, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. 
Hamburg, 61 (1991), 83-119. 
[67] A. Wiles, Modular elliptic curves and Fermat's Last Theorem, Ann. of 
Math. 141 (1995) 443-551. 
Congruences Between Base-Change and 
Non-Base-Change Hilbert Modular Forms 
Eknath Ghate 
1 Introduction 
Doi, Hida and Ishii have conjectured [7] that there is a close relation 
between: 
the primes dividing the algebraic parts of the values, at s = 1, of 
the twisted adjoint L-functions of an elliptic cusp form f ,  where the 
twists are by (non-trivial) Dirichlet characters associated to a fixed 
cyclic totally real extension F of Q, and, 
the primes of congruence between 7, the base change of f to F, and 
other non-base-change Hilbert cusp forms over F. 
The purpose of this note is threefold: 
i) to describe this conjecture in the simplest non-trivial situation: the 
case when F is a real quadratic field; 
ii) to mention some recent numerical work of Goto [12] and Hiraoka 
(201 in support of the conjecture; this work nicely compliments the 
computations of Doi, Ishii, Naganuma, Ohta, Yamauchi and others, 
done over the last twenty years (cf. Section 2.2 of [7]); and finally 
iii) to describe some work in progress of the present author towards part 
of the conjecture (cf. [lo], [ll]). 
The conjectures in [7] of Doi, Hida and Ishii go back to ideas of Doi and 
Hida recorded in the unpublished manuscript [6]. Some of the material in 
this note appears, at least implicitly, in [7]. We wish to thank Professor 
Hida for useful discussions on the contents of this paper. 

2 
Cusp forms 
Congruences Bet ween Hi1 bert Modular Forms 
Fix once and for all a real quadratic field F = ()(dB), 
of discriminant 
D > 0. Let X D  denote the Legendre symbol attached to the extension 
F/Q. Let O = OF denote the ring of integers of F ,  and let IF = { L ,  w )  
denote the two embeddings of F into R The embedding a will also be 
thought of as the non-trivial element of the Galois group of F/Q. J c IF 
will denote a subset of IF. 
There are three spaces of cusp forms that will play a role in this paper. 
Let k 2 2 denote a fixed even integer. Let 
denote the space of elliptic cusp forms of level one and weight k; respectively, 
the space of elliptic cusp forms of level D, weight k, and nebentypus XD. 
Finally, let 
denote the space of holomorphic Hilbert cusp forms of level 1, and parallel 
weight (k, k) over the real quadratic field F. 
The definition of the spaces S+ and S- are well known, so for the 
reader's convenience we only recall the definition of the space S = 
(OF) 
here. For more details the reader may refer to [17]. 
Let G = R ~ S F / ~ G L ~ / ~ .  
Let G = G(Af ) denote the finite part of G(A), 
where A = Af x W denotes the ring of adeles over Q. Let G, 
= G(R), 
and let G,+ 
denote those elements of G, 
which have positive determinant 
at both components. Let Kt = npGL2(0,) be the level 1 open-compact 
subgroup of G(Af ), let K, = 02(R)IF denote the standard maximal com- 
pact subgroup of G(R), and let K,+ 
= SO~(R)'F denote the connected 
component of K, 
containing the identity element. Let Z denote the center 
of G, and let 2, denotk the center of G,. 
Consider the space Sk, 
J (OF) of function f : G(A) -+ cC satisfying the 
following properties: 
f (zg) = lzl~(*-~) 
f (g) for all z E Z(A), where I IF denotes the norm 
character on A$ 
Eknath Ghate 
37 
D, f = (9 
+ k - 2) f ,  where D, is the Casimir operator at T E IF 
f has vanishing 'constant terms': for all g E G(A), 
where N is the unipotent radical of the standard Bore1 subgroup of 
upper triangular matrices in G. 
Every f E Sk,IF 
(OF) has a Fourier expansion. We recall this now. Let 
W : (R; )IF + C be defined by 
for y = (y,, y,). Let tP be an idele which generates the different of F/Q. 
Let e~ : F\AF + C denote the usual additive character of AF. Then 
where [[I = {r E IF I ET > 0 if r E J and ET < 0 if r $! J). Here, the 
Fourier coefficients c(g, f )  only depend on the fractional ideal generated by 
the finite part gf of the idele g. Thus if gfOF = m, then we may write 
c(m, f )  without ambiguity. Moreover, one may check that m tt c(m, f )  
vanishes outside the set of integral ideals. 
Let 2 = H x H ,  where H is the upper-half plane. Each f E SkjIF 
(OF) 
may be realized as a tuple of functions (fi) on Z satisfying the usual trans- 
formation property with respect to certain congruence subgroups ri defined 
below. To see this let zo = (fl, 
fl), 
denote the standard 'base point' 
in 2. For y = (::) 
E GL2(!R) and r E @ let 
denote the standard automorphy factor. Let a = (a,,%) E G,+ 
and 
z = (zL,zO) 
E 2, and set 
Now consider the modular variety: 

38 
Congruences Between Hilbert Modular Forms 
Then Y(K) is the set of complex points of a a quasi-projective variety 
defined over (0. By the strong approximation theorem one may find ti E 
G(A) with (ti), = 1 such that 
h 
G(A) = U G(QtiKfGm+. 
i=l 
Here 
is just the strict class number of F. Now set Fi = GL:(F) 
n tiKf ~ , + t r ' .  
Then one has the decomposition 
Note that since we may choose tl = 1, 
NOW define fi : 2 + @ by 
where g, 
E G,+ 
with det(g,) = 1 is chosen such that 
One may check that for all 7 E F,, 
Moreover, the fact that f is an eigenfunction of the Casimir operators, along 
with the fact that f transforms under K,+ in the manner prescribed above, 
ensures that each fi is holomorphic in z, for T E J and antiholomorphic 
in z, for T $! J (cf. (171, pg. 460). When J = IF, we denote the space of 
holomorphic Hilbert modular cusp forms by 
Finally, the Fourier expansion of f induces the usual Fourier expansion of 
the (f,). Choosing the idele g, 
= & (E ;) in (2.2) above, one may easily 
compute that each f, has Fourier expansion 
Eknath Ghate 
39 
When i = 1 and J = IF, this reduces to the usual Fourier expansion of 
holomorphic Hilbert modular cusp forms: 
3 Hecke algebras 
It is a fact that each of the spaces S+, S- and S of the previous section 
has a basis consisting of cusp forms whose Fourier coefficients lie in Z. Let 
T+, respectively T-, 7, denote the corresponding Hecke algebras. These 
algebras are constructed in the usual way as sub-algebras of the algebra of 
Z-linear endomorphisms of the corresponding space of cusp forms generated 
by all the Hecke operators. It is a well known fact that all three algebras 
are reduced: T+ and 7, because the level is 1, and T-, since the conductor 
of XD is equal to the level D. Moreover, since these algebras are of finite 
type over Z, they are integral over Z, and so have Krull dimension = 1. 
Let S = S+, S- or S denote any one of the above three spaces of 
cusp forms, and let T = T+, T- or 7, denote the corresponding Hecke 
algebra. There is a one to one correspondence between simultaneous eigen- 
forms f E S of the Hecke operators (normalized so that the 'first' Fourier 
coefficient is I), and Spec(T) (o), 
the set of Z-algebra homomorphisms X 
of the corresponding Hecke algebra T into 0: 
The subfields Kt of 
generated by the images of such homomorphisms, 
(that is the field generated by the Fourier coefficients of f )  are called Hecke 
fields. 
Since T is of finite type over Q, Kf is a number field. Moreover, it 
is well known that Kf is either totally real or a CM field. If f E S+ 
or S ,  then Kf is totally real, as follows from the self-adjointness of the 
Hecke operators under the appropriate Peterson inner product. However, 
if f E S- , then Kf is a CM field. Indeed, if f = C, 
c(m, f )  qm E S- , 
then define fc = C c(m, f )  qm E S-. Since f E S-, we have 
c(m, f )  = c(m, f )  .xD(m) for all m with (m,D) = 1, 
so that f, is the normalized newform associated to the eigenform f@xD. 
Using Galois representations it may be shown that if f = fc, then f is 
constructed from a grossencharacter on F by the Hecke-Shimura method. 
This would contradict the non-abelianess of the Galois representation when 

40 
Congruences Between Hilbert Modular Forms 
restricted to F. We leave the precise argument to the reader. In any case, 
we have f # f,, from which it follows that Kf is a CM field. 
As we have seen, eigenforms in S- do not have 'complex multiplication' 
if by the term complex multiplication one understands that j has the same 
eigenvalues outside the level, as the twist of f by its nebentypus. However, it 
is possible that f = j @x, where x # XD is a quadratic character attached to 
a decomposition of D = Dl D2 
into a product of fundamental discriminants. 
Such a phenomena might be called 'generalized complex multiplication' or 
better still, 'genus multiplication', since it is connected to genus theory. Let 
us give an example which was pointed out to us by Hida. Suppose that D = 
pq with p e 3 
q (mod 4), and that q = qij splits in K = Q ( ( J 3 ) .  If there 
is a Hecke character X of 
of conductor q, satisfying X((a)) = ak-I 
for all a E K with a I 1 (modx q), and such that X induces the finite order 
character (3) 
when restricted to nl Z;, 
then the corresponding form f = 
Leo, A(%)~~"~N(%~L)Z 
E S- h as 'genus multiplication' by the character 
(
)
 
We shall come back to the phenomena of 'genus multiplication' 
later. 
The full Galois group of Q ~al@//Q, acts on the set of normalized 
eigenforms via the action on the Fourier coefficients: 
where a E ~al@/Q) and X : T -+ a E SP~C(T)(@. This shows that 
is a one to one correspondence between the Galois orbits of normalized 
eigenforms, and, the minimal prime ideals in T. 
Finally if SIA denotes those elements in S which have Fourier coeffi- 
cients lying in a fixed sub-ring A of C, and if TIA C EndA(S) denotes the 
corresponding Hecke algebra over A, then there is a perfect pairing 
where c(1, f )  denotes the 'first' Fourier coefficient. 
4 
Doi-Naganuma lifts 
The spaces Sf, S- are intimately connected to the space S via base change. 
If f E S+ or S- is a normalized eigenform, then, in [8] and 124) Doi and 
Naganuma have shown how to construct a normalized eigenform f^ E S, 
defined a prior-i by its 'Fourier expansion', that is defined so that the stan- 
$2 d 
dard L-function attached to f satisfies: 
L(S, 7) )= L(s, f )L(s, f @xD)- 
(4.1) 
The existence of f^ 
established using the 'converse theorem' of Weil. 
Briefly, this stat? that f E S if for each grossencharacter $ of F, the twisted 
L-function L(s, f @ I)) has sufficiently nice analytic properties: namely an 
analytic continuation to the whole complex plane, a functional equation, 
and the property of being 'bounded in vertical strips'. 
Using Galois representations, and their associated (Artin) L-functions, 
we give here a heuristic reason as to why the above analytic properties 
should hold. Eichler, Shimura and Deligne attach a representation pf : 
Gal(o/Q) -+ GL2(M) to f satisfying 
where M is a completion of the Hecke field of f. Note that the identity 
(4.1) above shows that 
Let p+ denote the 1-dimensional Galois representation attached to $ via 
the reciprocity map of class field theory. Then, using standard properties 
of Artin L-functions, we have 
Thus the analytic properties we desire could, theoretically, be read off from 
those of the the Rankin-Selberg L-function of f and the (Maass) form g 
whose conjectural Galois representation should be ~nd;(p$). This heuristic 
argument was carried out by Doi and Naganuma in [8] and [24], in a purely 
analytic way (with no reference to Galois representations). 
In any case, from now on we will assume the process of base change as 
a fact. Let us denote the two base change maps f e f by 
BC+ : S+ + S and BC- : S- -+ S. 
These maps are defined on normalized eigenforms f E S*, and then 
extended linearly to all of S*. 

40 
Congruences Bet ween Hil ber t Modular Forms 
restricted to F .  We leave the precise argument to the reader. In any case, 
we have f # f,, from which it follows that Kf is a C M  field. 
As we have seen, eigenforms in S- do not have 'complex multiplication' 
if by the term complex multiplication one understands that f has the same 
eigenvalues outside the level, as the twist of f by its nebentypus. However, it 
is possible that f = f @x, where x # XD is a quadratic character attached to 
a decomposition of D = Dl D2 into a product of fundamental discriminants. 
Such a phenomena might be called 'generalized complex multiplication' or 
better still, 'genus multiplication', since it is connected to genus theory. Let 
us give an example which was pointed out to us by Hida. Suppose that D = 
pq with p z 3 r q (mod 4), and that q = qlj splits in K = Q(,/q). If there 
is a Hecke character X of %,/q) 
of conductor q, satisfying X((a)) = ak-' 
for all a E K with a r 1 (modx q), and such that X induces the finite order 
character (3) 
when restricted to nl Z: , then the corresponding form f = 
Cacon ~ ( 2 i ) e ~ ~ ~ ~ ( ~ ) ~  
E S- has 'genus multiplication' by the character 
(2). 
We shall come back to the phenomena of 'genus multiplication' 
later. 
The full Galois group of Q, 
~al@/Q), acts on the set of normalized 
eigenforms via the action on the Fourier coefficients: 
where cr E ~al@/Q) and X : T -+ a E S ~ ~ C ( T ) ( ~ ) .  
This shows that 
is a one to one correspondence between the Galois orbits of normalized 
eigenforms, and, the minimal prime ideals in T. 
Finally if SIA denotes those elements in S which have Fourier coeffi- 
cients lying in a fixed sub-ring A of C, and if TIa c EndA(S) denotes the 
corresponding Hecke algebra over A, then there is a perfect pairing 
where c(1, f )  denotes the 'first' Fourier coefficient. 
4 Doi-Naganuma lifts 
The spaces S+, S- are intimately connected to the space S via base change. 
If f E Sf or S- is a normalized eigenform, then, in [8] and [24] Doi and 
Naganurna have shown how to construct a normalized eigenform f^ E S, 
Eknath Ghate 
4 1 
defined a priori by its 'Fourie~ expansion', that is defined so that the stan- 
dard L-function attached to f satisfies: 
The existence of f^ $ established using the 'converse theorem' of Weil. 
Briefly, this state that f E S if for each grossencharacter li, of F, the twisted 
L-function L(s, f 8 $J) has sufficiently nice analytic properties: namely an 
analytic continuation to the whole complex plane, a functional equation, 
and the property of being 'bounded in vertical strips'. 
Using Galois representations, and their associated (Artin) L-functions, 
we give here a heuristic reason as to why the above analytic properties 
should hold. Eichler, Shimura and Deligne attach a representation pf : 
Gal(o/Q) + GL2(M) to f satisfying 
where M is a completion of the Hecke field of f. Note that the identity 
(4.1) above shows that 
Let p* denote the 1-dimensional Galois representation attached to li, via 
the reciprocity map of class field theory. Then, using standard properties 
of Artin L-functions, we have 
Thus the analytic properties we desire could, theoretically, be read off from 
those of the the Rankin-Selberg L-function of f and the (Maass) form g 
whose conjectural Galois representation should be 1ndg(P+). This heuristic 
argument was carried out by Doi and Naganuma in [8] and [24], in a purely 
analytic way (with no reference to Galois representations). 
In any case, from now on we will assume the proces of base change as 
a fact. Let us denote the two base change maps f 
f by 
BC+ : S+ + S and BC- : S- + S 
These maps are defined on normalized eigenforms f E Sf, and then 
extended linearly to all of S f .  

42 
Congruences Between Hilbert Modular Forms 
By the perfectness of the pairing (3.3) over Z, the maps BC* give rise 
to dual maps BC*, which are Z-algebra homomorphisms. At unramified 
primes we have: 
T~ I+ iTp 
if p = pp" splits, 
T '  F 2pk-' 
if p = p is inert. 
(4-3) 
These formulas are a ~imple consequence of analogous formulas for the 
Fourier coefficients of f ,  in terms of those of f .  Indeed, a comparison of 
Euler products in (4.1) shows that, for f E S*, 
if p = ppu splits, 
2pk-1 if p = p is inert. 
(4.4) 
Let us now discuss what happens when p = p2 ramifies. First note that, 
since f E S* is a newform, the Euler factors Lp(s, f )  for plD are, so to 
speak, already there. We have 
P
f
-
 = { 1 - c(p, f)p- + pk-1-2~ 
i f f  E S+, 
1 - C(P, f )P-* 
iff E S-. 
On the other hand, L(s, f@xD) does not have any Euler factors at the 
primes plD. Since both L(s, f? and L(s, f )  have functional equations, it 
might be necessary to add some Euler factors at the primes p(D so that 
L(s, f @xD) too has a functional equation. Equivalently, one might have to 
replace the cusp form f @xD by the (unique) normalized newform f' which 
has the same Hecke eigenvalues as f @xD outside D. 
Now, when f E S+, the cusp form f@xD E S;ew(I',-,(D2)) 
is already a 
newform, so f' = f @xD. However, when f E S-, f @xD E Sk (ro(D2), xD) 
is an oldform. In this case, f' is just the newform f,, defined above (3.2). 
Thus, the following Euler factors need to be added to L(s, f@xD) at the 
primes pl D: 
i f f  E S+, 
1 - c(p,f)p- 
if f E S-. 
We can now complete the formula (4.4) by noting that when p = p2 is 
ramified, 
c(p, f )  
, 
= { 
- 
i f f  € 9 ,  
c(p,f)+c(p,f) i f f  €5'-. 
Eknath Ghate 
43 
Before we proceed further we would like to investigate which elliptic 
cusp forms can base change to the space S. 
Let us start with some observations. If f E S+, then the above discus- 
sion shows that both f and f @xD base change to the same Hilbert modular 
cusp form f E S. However, note f @xD E S;eW(ro(D2)) does not lie in S+. 
More generally a similar phenomena holds by genus theory: if D = Dl Dz 
is a product of fundamental discriminants, then for f E S+, the newform 
f 8xD1 E S;L" (1 Dl 12) also base changes to S ,  since the base change of XD, 
is an unramified quadratic character of F. 
Similarly, twists of forms in S- by XD, or by genus characters, also base 
change to S, but in this case the twisting operation preserves the spaces 
S- . 
We now claim, that, up to twist by such characters, there are in fact 
only two types of cusp forms whose elements can base change to elements 
of S, namely the cusp forms in S+ and S- that we have already considered 
above- 
Proposition 4.1 Let 1 > 2 and N > 1 be integers, and let x be an arbitrary 
character mod N. Suppose that f A E Sl(N, X) is a normalized eigenform 
and a newform, whose base change f lies in S .  Then, by possibly replacing 
f by the normalized newform associated to f@xD, or by the normalized 
newform associated to f @yo,, where D = Dl D2 is a decomposition of D 
into a product of fundamental dascscriminants, we have f E S+ or f E S-. 
Proof Let pf denote the Xadic representation attached to f? by the work 
of many authors (Shimura, Ohta, Carayol, Wiles, Taylor [28], Blasius- 
Rogawski [2]). The identity (4.2) by which f^is defined shows that 
A comparison of the determinant on both sides of (4.6) shows immediately 
that 1 = k, and that x = 1 or XD. So it only remains to show that, in the 
former case (after possibly replacing f by a twist), that N = 1, and that, 
in the later case, N = D. 
Note that pp is unramified* at each prime p of OF, 
so a preliminary 
remark is that, in either case, plN 
plD, since otherwise the ramifica- 
tion of pf at p could not possibly be killed by restriction to Gal(F/Q). 
Let us now suppose that x = I. If N = 1 we are done. So let us assume 
that N > 1: say PI, p2, . . . , p,. (r > 0) are the primes dividing N. For 
*Actually pf may be ramified at the primes dividing 1, the residue characteristic of 
A, but, by choosing another representations in the compatible system of representations 
of which p- is a member, we may work around this. 
f 

44 
Congruences Between Hi1 bert Modular Forms 
i = 1,2,. . . , r, let ai 2 1 be such that pqi is the exact power of pi dividing 
N, Also, let N' be the exact level of the normalized newform f' associated 
to f @XD- 
If pil 1 N, namely ai = 1, for some i, then Theorem 3.1 of Atkin-Li [I] 
shows that pfllN1, By Theorem 4.6.17 of [23], we have c(pi, f') = 0, and 
so the Euler factor Lpi (s, f ') is trivial. On the other hand, since pi! 1 N, the 
same theorem of Miyake, shows that the Euler factor Lpi (s, f )  has degree 
1 in pYs. This yields a contradiction since the right hand side of (4.1) has 
degree 1 + 0 = 1 in prs, whereas the left hand side has degree 2 in pCs. 
Thus we may assume that ai > 2, for all i. 
C. Khare has pointed out that an alternative argument may be given 
using the local Langlands' correspondence. Indeed if pilJN, for some i, 
then the local representation at pi of the automorphic representation corre- 
sponding to f would be Steinberg. Consequently, the image of the inertia 
subgroup, Ipi , at pi, under pj, would be of infinite cardinality, and so could 
not possibly be killed by restricting p j  to the finite index (in fact index 
two) subgroup Gal(F/Q) of ~ a l ( a / Q .  
In any case, we may now assume that ai 2 2, for i = 1,2,. . . , r. S u p  
pose now that in addition 
ai # 2 when pi is odd, and, 
ai # 4 whenp, = 2. 
Then, again an argument involving Euler factors yields a contradiction. 
Indeed, the same theorem of Atkin-Li shows that pi 1 N', so Lpi (s, f ') has 
degree at most 1 in pi-'. 
On the other hand, p:I 
N, so by Miyake again, we 
have c(pi, f )  = 0, and Lpi (s, f ) = 1 is trivial. This yields a contradiction 
7% 
since the right hand side of (4.1) has degree 0 + 1 = 1 in pys, whereas the 
left hand side has degree 2 in pTs. Presumably, an alternative argument 
using the local Langlands' correspondence could be given here as well, but 
we have not worked it out. 
In any case, we may now assume that N = p:p$. - -p:, where if pi = 2, 
we replace pi by 4. The above discussion shows that we may further assume 
that (N', plp2 - - .p,) = 1. 
Now say that ql , q2, . . . , q, (S 2 0) are the primes of D that do not 
divide N. Since f' is associated to f @xD we have qj 1 N' for j = 1, . . . , s. If 
s = 0, that is if N' = 1, then we would be done, since in this case f would 
be a twist of f' with f' of level one. 
So let us now assume now that s > 0 a 
N' > 1. By symmetry 
(applying the entire argument above with f' in place of f )  we have N' = 
q:qg 
. ~9.2, where, as above if pi = 2, we replace q, by 4. 
Now write D = DlD2 where Dl (respectively, D2) is the fundamen- 
tal discriminant divisible by the pi's (respectively, by the qj's). We have 
Eknath Ghate 
45 
XD = X D ~  . X D ~  
Since all characters here are quadratic characters, we 
obtain the following identity of oldforms: 
The left hand side of (4.7) has exact level divisible only by the pi, whereas 
the right hand side has exact level divisible only by the qj. This shows that 
the exact level is one. Thus f (respectively f') is the twist of a level one 
form, by the genus character XD, (respectively xD2). 
In sum, when x = 1, either N = 1 and f is of level one, or N' = 1 and 
f is the twist of a level one form by XD, or N > 1 and f is the twist of a 
level one form by a genus character, as desired. 
Now suppose that x = XD. Then we have that DIN. We want to 
show that N = D. So suppose, towards a contradiction, that plD is an 
odd prime and p21N, or that p = 21D and 81N. Then again Lp(s, f )  = 1, 
since the power of p dividing N is larger than the power of p dividing the 
conductor of XD (cf. the same theorem in [23] used above). On the other 
hand, Lp(s, f') has degree at most 1 in p-'. 
This is because f' must again 
have p in its level, since p divides the conductor of its nebentypus. Thus 
we get the usual contradiction, since the right hand side of (4.1) has degree 
at most 1 in P - ~ ,  whereas the left hand side has degree 2. 
Thus when x = XD, we have N = D, as desired. 
0 
For simplicity, we now make two assumptions for the rest of this article. 
The first assumption is: 
The strict class number of F is 1. 
(4.8) 
Recall that the genus characters on F are characters of C ~ z / ( C l z ) ~ ,  
where 
Clz is the strict class group of F .  Thus (4.8) implies that 
The group c~$/(cz$)~ is trivial, 
(4.9) 
which, by genus theory, is equivalent to the fact that D is divisible by only 
one prime. Under (4.9), Proposition 4.1 says that all eigenforms in S that 
are base changes of elliptic cusp forms are contained in the image of either 
BC+ or BC- . 
For the second assumption, note that a E Gal(F/Q) induces an auto- 
morphism of the Hecke algebra 7, which we shall again denote by o: 

46 
Congruences Between Hilbert Modular Forms 
Eknath Ghate 
47 
The formulas (4.3) show that if 
: I- -+ a satisfies = X o BC* for some 
X : T* -+ 
(that is 5 corresponds to a base change form from S+ or S-), 
then 
Consequently o fixes the minimal primes in I- corresponding to base-change 
eigenforms, and permutes the minimal primes corresponding to non-base- 
change forms amongst themselves. We now assume that the algebra I- is 
'F-proper' (cf. [7]), that is: 
There is only one Galois orbit of non-base-change forms. 
(4.11) 
Let h denote a fixed element of this orbit. Since o must preserve the 
corresponding minimal prime ideal ker(Xh) of 7 we see that there must 
exists an automorphism T of Kh such that 
commutes. Let K: denote the subfield of Kh fixed by T. 
Thus we have the following decompositions (of finite semisimple com- 
mutative Qalgebras) : 
and 
Here [ 
] denotes a representative of a Galois orbit, and all the decom- 
positions are induced by the algebra homomorphisms of (3.1). Also the - 
indicates that the sum over [g] is further restricted to include only one of g 
Of $7,- 
Remark 4.2 It is a well known conjecture that in the level 1 situation 
(that is the + case) there is only one Galois orbit. This has been checked 
numerically, at least for weights k 5 400 (cf. [22], [19], [4]). In fact Maeda 
conjectures more: that the Galois group of (the Galois closure of) the Hecke 
field Kf is always the full symmetric group Sd, where d = dims+ (cf. [3] 
and [19]). 
Remark 4.3 From the formulas (4.4) and (4.5) one may deduce the 
inclusions K- C Kf and Kg C Kg. The former inclusion is usually 
6 
expected to e an equality. But the latter inclusion is never an equality 
since Kg is a totally real field, whereas Kg is a CM field. This phenomena 
will be reflected in some of the numerical examples of Section 8; see also 
Remark 10.4 below. 
5 
Adjoint L-functions 
Let f = Cr==, 
c(n, f )  qn E S+ or S-. Let x = 1, respectively x = XD, 
denote the nebentypus character of f. For the readers convenience we recall 
the definition of the imprimitive adjoint L-function attached to f . For each 
prime p, define a, and Pp via 
Then the adjoint L-function attached to f is defined via the Euler product 
When f E S- we omit the factors corresponding to the primes p with p I D. 
Note that, since a,& = X(p)pk-l, 
where L(s, sym2(f)) is the usual imprimitive symmetric square L-function 
attached to f .  Thus the value L(l, Ad(f)) is a critical value in the sense of 
Deligne and Shimura. 
Similarly, we define the twisted adjoint L-function by 
where the product is over all p such that p 4 D. 
We also set 
where rc(s) = (~T)-T(s) and rR(s) = T-Sr(f ). 
If f E S is a Hilbert cusp form, then L(s, Ad(f)) and r(s, Ad(f)) are 
defined in a similar fashion. 


50 
Congruences Bet ween Hi1 bert Modular Forms 
The Eichler-Shimura-Harder isomorphism now is 
Again, the Hecke algebra 7 acts on both sides, and 6 is equivariant with 
respect to this action. 6 is also equivariant with respect to the action of 
the group { f 
l}IF, induced by the complex conjugations 
which acts naturally on both sides. Let M and [f, f ]  denote the eigenspaces 
with respect to these actions. Then as before, for a p.i.d A, 
is one dimensional, and so, for a valuation ring A of K as above one may 
define the periods 
attached to f E SklIF(OF), via 
where ~ ( f ,  
f , f , A) is an (integral) generator of (6.2), and 6(*,*) (f) is the 
projection of 6(f) onto the [f 
, f 
] eigenspace. 
The following conjecture will be crucial for the analysis of congruences 
in terms of adjoint L-values. It relates the Eichler-Shimura periods of a 
cusp form f E S* with those of its base change lift f^ E SkTI, 
(OF). Recall 
that A is a valuation ring in a Galois extension K/Q that contains all the 
Hecke fields, and whose residue characteristic is an odd prime p. 
Conjecture 6.1 (Doi, Hida, Ishii [7], 
Conjecture 1.3) Let f E S f .  
Suppose that f is ordinary at p, and that the mod p  representation at- 
tached to f is absolutely irreducible when restricted to ~al(n/F'). Then the 
following period relations hold in CX /AX : 
Recall that a prime p  is said to be ordinary for f if p  (c(p, f). 
Eknath Ghate 
7 Statement of main conjecture 
We can now finally state the main conjecture. Define the sets: 
there exists f E S+ or S- such that p  I numerator of 
r(l,Ad(f) 8 ~o)L(l,Ad(f) 
@ XD) 
Q(f,+,A) Wf,-3-41 
and 
where D(K/L) denotes the relative discriminant of K / L . ~  Finally let B 
denote the set of 'bad7 primes 
p  'divides' the fundamental unit of F as in Theorem 9.3 
{ P  1 below 
B := { p l p ) 3 0 . ~ )  U 
{ p J p < k - 2 )  
U 
{ p  ( p is not ordinary for some f E S+ or S-} 
The following conjecture is implicit in [?I, and we refer to it as the main 
conjecture. 
p  
Conjecture 7.1 (Doi, Hida, Ishii [7]) The following two sets are equal: 
there exists f E S+ or S- such that the mod p  represen- 
tation of ~ a l ( o / Q )  attached to f is not absolutely irred- 
ucible when restricted to F 
In the following sections we will sketch how one might attempt to prove 
the main conjecture. Briefly the idea is this: 
The first step is to show that a prime p lies in N if and only if there 
is a congruence (mod p) between a base-change form in S and a non-base- 
change form in S. To see this, one first relates untwisted adjoint L-values 
over Q (respectively F) to congruence primes. This has been worked out 
in the elliptic modular case by Hida in a series of papers 1141, [15] and 116). 
The Hilbert modular case is currently being investigated by the present 
t Hida has pointed out to us that here we are assuming that the image of the homo- 
morphism Ah : 'T --+ Kh corresponding to h is the maximal order in Kh. It is indeed 
possible that this image may not be the full ring of integers of Kh, in which case one 
should really consider the relative discriminant of these 'smaller' orders. We ignore the 
complications arising from such a possibility in the sequel. 

52 
Congruences Bet ween Hi1 ber t Modular Forms 
author (see [lo] and (111). A natural identity between all the adjoint L 
functions involved, along with the period relations in Conjecture 6.1 then 
allows us to deduce the first step (see Proposition 10.2 below). 
The second step identifies the congruence primes above with the primes 
in D (see Proposition 10.9 below). Using the simplicity of the non-base- 
change part of the Hecke algebra (recall the assumption made in (4.11)) 
and some algebraic manipulation one easily establishes that if p is such a 
congruence prime, then p E D. The converse is more difficult, but would 
follow from (a weak version of) Serre's conjecture on the modularity of mod 
p representations. 
We emphasize again that the plan of proof outlined above is due es- 
sentially to Hida, and has been learned from him through his papers, or 
through conversations with him. 
8 Numerical evidence 
Before elaborating on the details of the 'proof' of the main conjecture we 
first would like to give a sample of some numerical examples in support of 
it. These computations are but a small sample of those done by Doi and his 
many collaborators Ishii, Goto, Hiraoka, and others, over the last twenty 
years. 
If f E Sf, set 
Example 1 D = 5, k = 20 : 
S+ = Szo(SL2(Z)) has dimension 1, with one Galois orbit M and 
977 1 numerator of L* (1, Ad( f )  8 x5), 
S- = Szo(ro(5), x5) has dimension 8, with one Galois orbit [g] and 
5 -67169 ( numerator of L* (1, Ad(g)@x5), 
9349 1 denominator of L* (1, Ad(g)@x5), 
7 is F-proper, with Kh = Q( J5 -977 - 67169). 
Example 2 D = 5, k = 22 : 
S+ = S22(SL2(Z)) has dimension 1, with one Galois orbit [f] and 
71 1 numerator of L* (1, Ad( f )  @ x5), 
Eknath Ghate 
53 
S- = Sz2 
(ro (5), xs) has dimension 10, with one Galois orbit [g] and 
5 -2867327 1 numerator of L* (1, Ad(g) 4 x5), 
29 211 1 denominator of L* (1, Ad(g) @ x5), 
7 is Fproper, with Kh = Q(d5 - 7 1  2867327). 
Example 3 D = 5, k = 24 : 
S+ = S24(SL2(Z)) has dimension 2, with one Galois orbit [f] and 
109 - 54449 1 numerator of L* (1, Ad( f ) @ xs) , 
S- = S24 (ro (5), x5) has dimension 10, with one Galois orbit [g] and 
5 .15505829 ( numerator of L* (1, Ad(g) @ x5), 
139 - 461 1 denominator of L* (1, Ad(g) @ x5), 
7 is F-proper, with Kh = O((J5 -109 - 54449 15505829). 
The computations in the - case, and the Hecke fields of the F-proper 
part of the Hecke algebra can be found in the table in Section 2.2 of [?I. We 
refer the reader to that table and to the references in [7] for other numerical 
examples in the - case. The method of computation in this case relies on 
a formula of Zagier expressing the twisted adjoint L-values of f E S- in 
terms of the Petersson inner product (f, 4) for an explicit cusp form 6 E S- 
(see Theorem 4 and equation (90) of [32]). 
Due to the large size of the numbers involved in the computations, 
Zagier's method has not been practical to use in the + case. Recently, 
however, the first computations in the + case were made by Goto [12] 
(Example 1 above) and then by Hiraoka (201 (Examples 2 and 3 above). 
These authors used instead an identity of Hida (see Theorem 1.1 of [12]), 
which reduces the computation of twisted adjoint L-values to those of the 
Rankin-Selberg L-function, which in turn can be computed by Shimura's 
method. 
9 Adjoint L-values and congruence primes 
In this section we recall how (untwisted) adjoint L-values are related to 
congruence primes. We treat the elliptic modular 00 case first. 
Let Sk(r, X) be either S+ or S-. Let f = Ern=, 
a(m, f )  qm be a nor- 
malized eigenforms in Sk (I?, x). Fix a prime p. Recall that K is a large 
Galois extension of Q containing F ,  as well as all the Hecke fields of all 
normalized eigenforms in S k  (I' , X) . 

Congruences Bet ween Hilbert Modular Forms 
We make the 
Definition 9.1 The prime p is said to be a congruence prime for f ,  if there 
exists another normalized eigenform g = xE=, b(m, g) qm E &(I?, X )  and 
a prime p of K with p ( p, such that f r g (mod p), that is 
for all m. 
The following beautiful theorem of Hida completely characterizes con- 
gruence primes for f as the primes dividing a special value of the adjoint 
L-function of f: 
Theorem 9.2 (Hida [14], [15], [16]) L e t p  2 5 be an ordinary prime for 
f .  Then p is a congruence prime for f if and only if 
In [26], Ribet has removed the hypothesis on the ordinarity of p when 
p > k - 2 .  
A partial result in the Hilbert modular situation has been worked out 
in [lo]. There we establish one direction, namely that almost all prime that 
divide the corresponding adjoint L-value are congruence primes. Moreover, 
we show that the primes that are possibly omitted are essentially those that 
'divide' the fundamental unit of F. More precisely, we have: 
Theorem 9.3 ([lo], Corollary 2) Say F has strict class number 1. Let 
f = f^E S be a base-change of a cusp form f E S~ of weight (k, k). Let L -be 
the fundamental unit of F. Assume that p > k-2, p , / ' ~ O . D - N ~ ~ ~ ( ~ ~ - ~  
-1) 
and 
ifk = 2, 
p is ordinary for f ,  
if k > 2. 
Eknath Ghate 
55 
For the definition of the set Sinvariant, 
and for more general results, we 
refer the reader to [lo]. 
Establishing a converse to Theorem 9.3, namely showing that (almost) 
all (ordinary) congruence primes are captured by the untwisted adjoint L- 
value, is more difficult. However a proof should now be accessible (cf. [ll]) 
given the recent work of Fujiwara [9] and Diamond [5] (that builds on work 
of Taylor and Wiles [29]) on a certain freeness criterion for the integral 
cohomology groups of Hilbert-Blumenthal varieties as Hecke-modules. 
10 'Establishing' the main conjecture 
In this section we outline a method for establishing Conjecture 7.1. The 
arguments presented here have not been worked out in detail, and we there- 
fore offer our apologies to the reader for the occasional sketchiness of the 
presentation. We hope that this section will serve, if nothing more, as a 
guide for future work. 
Lemma 10.1 Let p be a n  odd prime. Let f ,  g E s ~ ,  
and assume that 
the corresponding mod p representations are absolutely irreducible when 
restricted to Gal(F/Q). Suppose that there is a congruence 
f^lc 
(mod g), 
for some p I p. Then in fact both f and g are in S+ or both are in S- 
Proof By the Brauer-Nesbitt theorem, the mod p representations pf and 
pg are equivalent when restricted to Gal(F/Q, since they have the same 
traces. By the assumption of absolute irreducibility, we see that 
Suppose, towards a contradiction, that f E S+ and g E S-. Then by 
comparing determinants on the two sides of either of the possibilities (10. I), 
we get a congruence between the trivial character and xD mod p. This is 
impossible since p # 2. 
0 
Proposition 10.2 Assume that p $ B, and that the period relations of 
Conjecture 6.1 hold. Assume in addition that p is not a congruence prime 
for any f E s f .  
Then p E N if and only if there is a congruence 
A f E h (mod p), 
h 
then p is a congruence prime for f = f .  
for some f E S+ or S- and some g 1 p. 

56 
Congruences Bet ween Hilbert Modular Forms 
Proof Suppose there is a congruence 
A f r h (mod p), 
for some p I p with f E SC or S- Then by (the expected converse to) 
Theorem 9.3, we see that 
On the other hand, assuming the period relations, we have the following 
identity of L-values: 
Thus p must divide one of the two terms on the right hand side of (10.2). 
By Theorem 9.2, the first term is divisible by primes of congruence between 
f and other elliptic cusp forms in S+ (or S-). Since we have assumed that 
p is not a congruence prime for f ,  we must in fact have that 
That is, p E N. This shows one direction. 
The above argument is essentially reversible. Suppose that p divides the 
twisted adjoint L-value for some f E Sf. Then 
divides the left hand side 
of the the identity (10.2). By Theorem 9.3, there is a congruence f^ 
h' 
(mod p) for some Hilbert cusp form h'. Assume that h' = 5 (g E Sf) is a 
base change form. By Lemma 10.1, we see that f and g either both lie in 
S+ or both in S-. If f ,  g E S-, then the relations (10.1) show that either 
f r g (mod p) or f = g, (mod p), 
contradicting the assumption that p is not a congruence prime for f .  A 
similar argument applies if both f ,  g E S+ (though in this case admittedly 
the twist g @ x ~  
is no longer in the space S+). 
The upshot of all this is that h' is a non-base-change form, and so is a 
Galois twist of h by the standing assumption (4.11). By replacing f with 
a Galois twist, we have a congruence of the form f^ 
h (mod XJ') for some 
p' I p, and this proves the other direction. 
Eknath Ghate 
5 7 
Remark 10.3 The hypothesis that p is not a congruence prime for any 
f E Sf in the statement of Proposition 10.2 is needed to make the argument 
used in the proof work. It is expected to hold most of the time. It is however 
conceivable that a prime p may divide both the terms on the right hand 
side of (10.2), in which case the above argument would have to be modified. 
In the sequel we have ignored the complications arising from this second 
possibility. 
Remark 10.4 We now discuss some issues connected to the fact that, in 
the - cases of the examples given in Section 8, certain primes appear in 
the denominators of the twisted adjoint L-values of g. 
It is a general fact that, for forms g E S- , the primes dividing D(Kg /Kc) 
are essentially~ the primes of congruences between g = C b(m, g)qm and 
the complex conjugate form g, = C b(m, g) qm. Also, it can be shown (cf. 
Lemma 3.2 of [7]), that if p,, the mod p representation attached to g, is 
absolutely irreducible, then 
9 - gc 
(mod@) 
a F ~ = P $ , @ X D  
o 
~ e s c ( 4 )  
is reducible 
u 
= ~ n d g ( ~ ) ,  
for some mod p character 9 of ~ a l ( n / ~ ) ,  
and, generalizing results of Shimura and others for k = 2, Hida has shown 
2. 
[18] that such primes p have an arithmetic characterization: they are related 
5 
to the primes p dividing NFIQ(ek-l - 1). 
Now, by Theorem 9.2, the primes dividing D(Kg /Kg) occur in the first 
term on the right hand side of the analogue of the identity (10.2) for g. 
However, the relations (4.4) and (4.5) show that ij = &, so that these 
primes do not 'lift' to congruence primes over F.5 Suppose momentarily 
that Theorem 9.3 (and its expected converse) is also valid for the set of 
primes dividing N ~ / Q ( C ~ - '  
- I), which, as we have hinted at above, is 
essentially the same as the set of primes dividing D(Kg/K5) as g varies 
through the set of non-CM forms. Then any such prime, being lost on 
lifting, would not occur in the numerator of the left hand side of the relation 
(10.2) for g, and would therefore have to be 'compensated for' by occurring 
in the denominator of the second term in the right hand side of (10.2). 
A numerical check (cf. the Table in Section 2.2 of [7]), confirms that the 
primes occurring in the denominators of the twisted adjoint L-value of 
$see footnote t. 
31n fact when D is a prime, the map BC- : S- + S is exactly 2 to 1 on eigenforms; 
more generally see Proposition 4.3 of [31]. 
+- 

58 
Congruences Between Hilbert Modular Forms 
g, as g varies through the set of non-CM forms, are the primes dividing 
~ ~ , ~ ( e * - '  
- 1). 
Reversing our perspective, the existence of primes in the denominators 
of the twisted adjoint L-value, suggests that Theorem 9.3 (and its expected 
converse) should be valid for primes dividing NFIQ(ck-' - 1) as well. Thus 
the apparent obstruction NFIQ(ek-' - I), which arose in [lo] as a measure 
of the primes of torsion of certain boundary cohomology groups, is likely 
to be more a short coming of the method of proof used there, rather than 
a genuine obstruction. 
Remark 10.5 The proof of Proposition 10.2 hinges on the validity of the 
I 
integral period relation of Conjecture 6.1. Interestingly, Urban has some 
I 
I 
results towards the proposition that circumvents using these relations. His 
idea is that the primes dividing the twisted adjoint L-values are related 
to the primes dividing the Klingen-Eisenstein ideal for 
and so, to 
the primes dividing an appropriate twisted Selmer group. He is able to 
establish one direction of Proposition 10.2 subject to some assumptions (cf. 
Corollary 3.2 of [30]). For the other direction, an idea of D. Prasad, using 
\ 
theta lifts, may work (cf. Remarks following [30], Corollary 3.2). 
1 
We now establish the connection of the primes in N with the primes in 
V. Let F denote a finite field of characteristic = p. Recall the well known: 
Coqjecture 10.6 (Serre) Let a : ~ a l ( ~ / Q )  
+ GL2(F) be an odd irre- 
ducible mod p representation. Then 
is modular. 
I 
I 
The following weaker version of Serre7s Conjecture may be more accessible, 
and in any case, it would suffice for our purposes: 
Coqjecture 10.7 Let 
: Gal(a/o) + GL2(F) be an odd irreducible mod 
p representation. Assume that Re%@) is modular. Then a is modular. 
I/ 
I 
Remark 10.8 Using recent work of Ramakrishna [25], as well as work 
of Fujiwara [9] and Langlands, Khare now has some preliminary results 
towards Conjecture 10.7 under some hypothesis (see [21]). 
Proposition 10.9 Assume that the period relations of Conjecture 6.1, and 
the 'weak' Serre Conjecture 10.7 is true. Then the main conjecture (i.e. 
Conjecture 7.1) is true. That is, 
Eknath Ghate 
59 
Proof Suppose p E N \ B. Then by Proposition 10.2, there exists p 1 p 
and an eigenform f E S+ or S- such that f^ = h (mod g). Thus 
c(m, f3 = ~ ( m ,  
h) (mod g) 
(10.3) 
for all ideals m c OF. Then if r denotes the automorphism of Kh (extended 
to K )  making the diagram of display (4.12) commute, we have, (mod p), 
that 
c(m, h)' 
c(ma , h) 
by the commuativity of (4.12) 
r c(ma7f^) 
by(10.3) 
r c(m,f3 
by(4.10) 
r c(m, h) 
by (10.3) again! 
Since the c(m, h) generate the ring of integersq of Kh we see that the in- 
ertia group of the quadratic extension Kh/Kh+ at @ is non-trivial. Thus 
g ID(K~/K;), i.e., p E V. This shows that N \ B C V \ B. 
To show the other inclusion, suppose that p E V. Then as above, we 
see that 
c(m, h) z c(ma7 h) (mod g), 
(10.4) 
for all integral ideals m C OF. Let fi : ~ a l ( a / ~ )  
+ GL2(K,) denote 
the Galois representation attached to h (by Shimura, Ohta, Carayol, Wiles, 
Taylor [28] and Blasius-Rogawski [2]), and let pi denote the conjugate 
representation defined via 
The congruences (10.4) above show that the corresponding mod p represen- 
tations F,, and 
are isomorphic. By general principles (assuming absolute 
irreducibility) a,, extends to a mod p representation, say g, of ~ a l ( a / Q ) .  
By Conjecture 10.7 one deduces that this representation is modular, say at- 
tached to an elliptic cusp form f. A careful analysis of ramification would 
(probably!) show that f E S+ or S-. This would finally yield the de- 
sired congruence 
I h (mod g). Thus p E N and this 'proves' the other 
inclusion. 
0 
l ~ e e  
footnote t. 

60 
Congruences Between Hilbert Modular Forms 
Eknath Ghate 
61 
References 
[I] A. 0. L. Atkin and Wen Ch'ing Winnie Li, Twists of newforms 
and pseudo-eigenvalues of W-operators, Invent. Math. 48 3, (1978), 
221-243. 
[2] D. Blasius and J. Rogawski, Motives for Hilbert modular forms, 
Invent. Ma,th. 114 (1993), 55-87. 
[3] K. Buzzard, On the eigenvalues of the Hecke operator T2, J .  Number 
Theory 57 1 (1996), 130-132. 
[4] J .  B. Conrey and D. Farmer, Hecke operators and the non-vanishing 
of L-functions, Topics in number theory (University Park, PA, 1997), 
Math. Appl. 467, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 143-150, 1999. 
[5] F. Diamond, The Taylor- Wiles construction and multiplicity one, 
Invent. Math. 128 2 (1997), 379-391. 
[6] K .  Doi and H. Hida, Unpublished manuscript, 1978. 
[7] K. Doi and H. Hida and H. Ishii, Discriminants of Hecke fields 
and twisted adjoint L-values for GL(2), Invent. Math. 134 3 (1998), 
547-577. 
[8] K. Doi and H. Naganuma, On the functional equation of certain 
Dirichlet series, Invent. Math. 9 (1969), 1-14. 
[9] K. F'ujiwara, Deformation rings and Hecke-algebras in the totally real 
case, preprint, 1996. 
[lo] E. Ghate, Adjoint L-values and primes of congruence for Hilbert mod- 
ular forms, preprint, 1999. 
[ll] E. Ghate, On the freeness of the integral cuspidal cohomology groups 
of Hilbert-Blumenthal varieties as Hecke-modules, In preparation, 
1999. 
[12] K. Goto, A twisted adjoint L-value of an elliptic modular form, 
J. Number Theory 73 1 (1998), 34-46. 
[13] G .  Harder, Eisenstein Cohomolgy of Arithmetic groups, The case 
GL2, Invent. Math. 89 (1987), 37-118. 
[14] H. Hida, Congruence of cusp forms and special values of their zeta 
functions, Invent. Math. 63 (1981), 225-261. 
[15] H. Hida, On congruence divisors of cusp forms as factors of the special 
values of their zeta functions, Invent. Math. 64 (1981), 221-262. 
[16] H. Hida, Modules of congruence of Hecke algebras and L-functions 
associated with cusp forms, Amer. J .  Math. 110 2 (1988), 323-382. 
[17] H. Hida, On the Critical Values of L-functions of GL(2) and GL(2) x 
GL(2), Duke Math. J .  74 (1994), 431-528. 
[18] H. Hida, Global quadratic units and Hecke algebras, Doc. Math. (elec- 
tronic) 3 (1998), 273-284. 
[19] H. Hida and Y .  Maeda, Non-abelian base change for totally real fields, 
Pacific J .  Math. (Special volume in honor of Olga-Taussky Todd) 189- 
217, 1997. 
[20] Y. Hiraoka, Numerical calculation of twisted adjoint L-values attached 
to modular forms, Experiment. Math. 9 1 (2000), 67-73. 
[21] C. Khare, Mod p-descent for Hilbert modular forms, preprint, 1999. 
[22] W .  Kohnen and D. Zagier, Values of L-series of modular forms at the 
center of the critical strip, Invent. Math. 64 (1981), 175-198. 
[23] T .  Miyake, Modular Forms, Springer-Verlag, 1989. 
[24] H. Naganuma, On the coincidence of two Dirichlet series associated 
with cusp forms of Hecke's 'Weben"-type and Hilbert modular forms 
over a real quadratic field, J .  Math. Soc. Japan 25 (1973), 547-555. 
[25] R. Ramakrishna, Deforming Galois representations and the conjec- 
tures of Serre and Fontaine-Mazur, preprint, 1999. 
[26] K. Ribet, Mod p Hecke operators and congruences between modular 
forms, Invent. Math. 71 1 (1983), 193-205. 
[27] G. Shimura, On the periods of modular forms, Math. Annalen 229 
(1977) 211-221. 
[28] R. Taylor, On Galois representations associated to Hilbert modular 
forms, Invent. Math. 98 2 (1989), 265-280. 
[29] R. Taylor and A. Wiles, Ring-theoretic properties of certain Hecke 
algebras, Ann. of Math. 141 3, (1995), 553-572. 
[30] E. Urban, Selmer groups and the Eisenstein-Klingen ideal, preprint, 
http://www.math.uiuc.edu/Algebraic-Number-Theory, 
1998. 

62 
Congruences Between Hilbert Modular Forms 
[31] G. van der Geer, Halbert modular surfaces, Springer-Verlag, 1988. 
[32] D. Zagier, Modular forms whose Fourier coeficients involve zeta func- 
tions of quadratic fields, Modular functions of one variable V, SLN 
627 Springer-Verlag (1 977), 105-169. 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, 
TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL 
RESEARCH, 
HOMI BHABHA 
ROAD, MUMBAI 400 005, INDIA 
E-mail: eghate@math.tifr.res.in 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
1 Introduction 
Let K / F  be a finite extension of number fields. In this paper we study 
the restriction map between the cohomology of congruence subgrups of 
GL2(K) and GL2(F). We describe below the restriction map we study. As 
notation, denote the degrees of K/Q, F/Q and K I F  by dK, dF and dKIF 
respectively. For a number field K we denote by IK the set of embeddings 
K + C, by SK the set of infinite places (equivalence class of embeddings) 
of K ,  and by C (EX) and C (C) the real and complex places of K (SK = 
CK (R) U CK (C)). We denote by r l , ~  
the number of real places in SK and 
by r 2 , ~  
the number of complex places in SK. We denote by 
the symmetric space for GL2(K); the superscript + stands for the sub- 
group of GL2(R) with positive determinant. For v € SK we denote by 
Kv the completion of K at v, by g, the Lie algebra of GL2(Kv), by Kv 
a maximal compact mod centre subgroup, and define g~ := llvESKgv, 
KK := IIvESK 
K,. We will often drop the subscript K if that is unlikely to 
cause confusion. For a group H we denote by I? the quotient of H by its 
centre. 
Let l7 (respectively, I?, := g-117g n GL2(F) for g E GL2(K)) be a 
congruence subgroup of GL2 (K) (respectively GL2 (F)) . Assuming that I' 
(respectively, I?,) 
is torsion-free, F (respecticely, Fg) acts freely and discon- 
tinuously on XK (respectively, XF) . We have isomorphisms: 
For g E GL2(K) we have the left translation action on XK which induces a 
map (jg)* : H* (r\XK, @) 4 H* (g-'rg\X~, C) on cohomology. We have 

64 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
a proper mapping rg\XF + g-lrg\XK that induces a map 
Thus we obtain the (Oda) restriction map: 
We will often drop the subscript K I F  if its unlikely to cause confusion. 
Notation We signal an abuse of standard notation all through this paper. 
We will always mean by Cm (r\G) the subspace of C" (r\G) on which the 
connected component of the centre of G acts trivially; the same holds good 
for all the other spaces of functions that will appear below. This abuse 
takes advantage of the fact that we are working with trivial coefficients 
throughout. 
The cohomology groups H* (r\XK, M) have an interpretation as (g, K) 
cohomology. Define G = GL2 (K 
R). Then: 
We may define the cuspidal and discrete cohomology to be: 
where L:,,,(r\G) 
is the space of (smooth) cuspidal functions, and 
L&(r\G)* 
is the (maximal) direct summand of L2 which decomposes 
discretely as a (g, K) module. We also have a (g, K) description of com- 
pactly supported cohomology: 
where S(r\G) is the Scwhartz space of smooth, rapidly decreasing functions 
( 6  [CI). 
We have the natural maps 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
65 
By general results of Borel, the map up (and hence p) is injective. The map 
v is in general not injective. Thus we may define the cuspidal sgbspace of 
H* (r\XK, C) by H&,(I', @) := Im(up), and also denote by H&(r, C) 
the image of discrete cohomology in the f$l cohomology. In the case at 
hand we also know by [Har] that Im(u) = H&(r\XK, C). 
As the map rg 
\XF -+ r\XK is proper (this is a consequence for instance 
of the proof of Proposition 1.15 of [De]), we have a map on compactly 
supported cohomology: 
By the result of Harder in [Har] recalled above this also induces a map 
We will show (Lemma 4.1 of Section 4) that this also implies that we have 
a map: 
We will study only the restriction of cuspidal eigenclasses in the present 
paper, viewing the cuspidal eigenclass either in compactly supported coho- 
mology or in cuspidal cohomology via the maps p and u above. 
To state our results it is convenient to adopt an adelic formulation. All 
through the paper we will keep switching between the adelic and classical 
formulation: as a rule, it is cleaner to formulate statements in the adelic 
framework, while the proofs come out looking cleaner in the classical frame- 
work. 
For any neat, open, compact subgroup UK (respectively, UF) of G L ~ ( A ~ )  
(respectively, G L ~  
(A:)), 
where the superscript f denotes finite adeles, we 
can consider. the adelic modular variety: 
(respectively, Xu, := G L ~  
(F)\GL~ (AF )+/u&'$,~zF(R)). 
Here the plus 
sign stands for taking the connected component of the identity at the infinite 
places, c;,, 
(respectively, c:,,) 
is the connected component of a maximal 
compact of GL2 (K @R) (respectively GL2 (F@R)), and ZK (R) (respectively 
ZF(R)) is its centre. We may and will assume that CK," contains CF,". 
By the strong approximation theorem Xu, and Xu, are the disjoint unions 
of the classical modular varieties considered above, i.e., there exist finitely 
many t , , ~  
'S (respectively, ti,F7s) in GL2 (AL ) (respectively, GL2 (A:)) 
so 
that XuK (respectively, Xu,) is the disjoint union of the rK,,\XK7s (re- 
spectively, rF,i\XF'~), where rK,i = GL2 (K) tl ~ , Y ; U ~ ~ , ~ G L ~ ( K  
8 R))+ 

66 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
(respectively, r~,i 
= GL2 (F) fl ~C:UF~~,FGL~ 
(F 8 R)')). 
We can con- 
sider the direct limits of the cohomology groups H*(XU,, @) (respectively, 
H * (XU, , @) ) , and define 
(respectively, 
H * ( ~ F , @ )  
:= lim H*(XuF,@)) 
UF 
where the direct limit is taken with respect to pull-back maps, and the 
indexing set is the cofinal system of open compact subgroups of G L ~ ( A ~ )  
(respectively, G L ~  
(A; )) . 
As the adelic cohomology groups at the finite level are just the direct 
sums of the cohomology groups considered above, we can define just as 
above: 
H*(ZK , @) = H*(g, K; Cm(GL2(K)\GL2(AK ))). 
We may define the cuspidal and discrete cohomology to be: 
and 
H:isc (ZK, @) = H* (0, K; Liisc(GL2 (K)\GL2 ( A  )m))w 
where Lzusp(GL2(K)\GL2(A~)) is the space of cuspidal functions on 
GL2(K)\GL2(AK) that are smooth at the infinite places and locally con- 
stant at the finite places etc. Just as before we also have natural maps: 
All these cohomology groups are ~ ~ 2 ( ~ & ) - m o d u l e s .  
We have a similar 
notions for the cohomology of 2~ 
which to save the reader further boredom 
we do not repeat. Thus we may consider restriction maps: 
- 
where Hiisc etc again denotes the image of discrete cohomology in the full 
cohomology. 
We state below the main results proven in this paper. 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
1.1 Results 
Theorem 1.1 We have the following case- by-case analysis: 
(1) If K / F  is CM, and * = 112 dim(XF) = [F : Q], f E ~ i ~ ' ~ ~ ( % ~ ,
C) 
a cuspidal newform, then Rest( f) # 0. 
( 2 )  If K I F  is a CM extension, * = dim(XF), and f E ~
,
d
~
~
(
~
~
)
 
(ZK, @) 
is a (cuspidal) newform, then Resc(f) is non-zero precisely when f is 
the twist of a base change of a cuspidal automorphic representation 
of GL2 (AF ) . 
Theorem 1.2 The map Rescusp is trivial unless K I F  is a quadratic 
extension, with K totally imaginary - and * # dF. When in addition K I F  is 
a CM extension, * = dF, and f E ~ $ d , ~ ( f ~ ,  
C) a cuspidal newform, then 
Rescusp(f) # 0. 
Remarks 
1. We recall in Section 2 below the association of a differential form 
b(f) (which may be viewed either as an element of H*(XuK, @), 
H:,,, 
(Xu,, 4, or Hf.sp(XuK, C)) to a cuspidal automorphic form 
invariant under UK (of weight 2). Thus by restriction of f we mean 
the restriction (or pull-back) of the differential form 6(f) in the rele- 
vant cohomology. 
2. We have not yet been able to handle all the cases of K I F  quadratic, 
with K totally imaginary, in degree dF. We point out below (at the 
end of Section 4) that arguments at the archimedean places suggest 
that the map should be non-trivial in this case too. 
3. A more general result than Theorem 1.1 (with a less clean statement) 
is proven as Theorem 3.5 below. 
1.2 Comments 
1. Unlike many of the earlier studies of the restriction map, our situa- 
tion is non-algebraic, i.e., at least one of r,\XF and r\XK is not a 
quasi-projective algebraic variety in most situations for non-trivial sit- 
uations of restriction of (image of) cuspidal cohomology; for compact 
cohomology when K I F  is quadratic and K, F both totally real, and 
thus the above map can be viewed as a morphism of quasi-projective 
varieties, the map sometimes can be non-trivial in degree 2dF. 

Restriction Maps and L-values 
2. There is 
no map H&rp(r\XK,M) -+ Hfusp(rO\XF,M) as the 
restriction of a cuspidal function need not be cuspidal. We will give 
below instances of this (see also 5 below), and show in fact that the 
cuspidal summand of compactly supported cohomology need not be 
preserved under restriction (cf. Proposition 3.3 below). This is unlike 
the case for restriction of holomorphic cuspidal classes in the coho- 
mology of Shimura varieties (to (holomorphically) embedded subva- 
rieties), which are always cuspidal (Proposition 2.8 of [CV]). 
3. It is true that we have a restriction mapping S(r\GL2(K 8 R)) --+ 
S(rg\GL2(F 8 R)). This follows from Lemma 2.9 of [CV] (though 
the result stated there is for Shimura varieties, it is easily checked 
that the proof extends to our situation). Thus as rapidly decreasing 
automorhic forms are cuspidal (see [C]), the restriction of cuspidal 
functions not being cuspidal is due to the fact that the restricted 
function may not be SF-finite, for SF the centre of the universal 
enveloping algebra of g&(F 8 R). This is automatically the case for 
holomorphic forms on Shimura varieties. 
4. In the situation of Theorem 1.1 if f is the twist of a base change 
form one can obtain sharper results about the level at which the 
restriction is non-zero. 
5. In the situation of Theorem 1.2, with K I F  a CM extension, and 
* = dF, when f is a base change form from GL2(AF), Res,( f )  is 
never cuspidal. 
6. The non-vanishing statements in these theorems are simple conse- 
quences of well-known results about integral expressions of L-series 
associated to automorphic representations (of GL2 and GL2 x GL2) 
and non-vanishing results about special L-values (in the context of 
Theorem 1.1 even the vanishing statement follows from considera- 
tions of L-functions). For this reason we will only give enough detail 
in the proof to convince the reader that our results follow readily from 
those of [HI, [HI], [R] etc. The purpose of this paper is to show that 
these results about L-values give a coherent picture of the restriction 
maps studied here. 
7. Unlike in the case of restriction of holomorphic classes of Shimura 
varieties, in our "non-algebraic" setting, (g, K) cohomology argu- 
ments are not capable of proving non-vanishing results, though of 
course if the restriction map vanishes at the archimedean places then 
it does vanish in (cuspidal, or image of cuspidal) cohomology of 
the corresponding discrete groups (see Section 2.2). In this paper, 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
69 
besides the well-known limitations on degrees of cuspidal cohomology 
imposed by (g, K) cohomology calculations, we do not need to use 
the latter in any serious way. 
8. We do not have a complete analysis of restriction maps within the 
framework of this paper for compact support cohomology, as (g, K) 
cohomology arguments cannot be directly used to prove even vanish- 
ing. 
9. The methods of this paper are analytic. In a companion piece (cf. 
[K]) we will prove injectivity results for restriction using algebraic 
methods, and with special attention to mod p cohomology. 
Acknowledgements 
I am grateful to Haruzo Hida for helpful correspondence. I also thank 
Eknath Ghate, Arvind Nair and Dipendra Prasad for helpful conversations. 
I specially thank Don Blasius for a key suggestion that led to the proof of 
the first part of Theorem 1.1. 
2 
Cohomology of congruence subgroups of 
GL2 of number fields 
2.1 Cusp forms and the Eichler-Shimura isomorphism 
The main references for this section are Sections 2 and 3 of [HI; we only 
briefly sketch the association of differential forms to cuspidal, automorphic 
functions to the extent that we require below. These span the cuspidal part 
of the de Rham cohomology of congruence subgroups of GL2(K) for K a 
number field. 
, 
We persevere with all the notation introduced in the introduction. Let 
UK be a neat, open, compact subgroup of GL2(K), with K a number 
field with rl,K real and r 2 , ~  
complex places. We will denote the algebraic 
group associated to GL2 by G. For each complex place a E SK, we consider 
L, (C), the homogeneous polynomials in Xu, Y, of degree 2 with the natural 
action of GL2(C). We consider L(2; C) := @,,c(q L, (C) (we will drop the 
subscript K from CK(R) etc.). Let J be a subset of C(R) the real places 
of K .  Consider functions 
which satisfy the conditions: 

70 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
7 1 
1. They are in the kernel of the Casimir operator 
3. f(xu; x) = f (x; u,x)e(C 
28, - 
20,) where e(s) is e2nis, 
u E U K C ~  
and the components of u, 
at the real places are 
The action of u, 
on x is through its components at complex places. 
4. SU!K)\U(AK f (us; x)du = 0, for almost all x E G(AK) with U a 
unlpotent subgroup of G. 
We denote this space, i.e., functions as in (2.1) which satisfy 1, 2, 3, 4 
above, by SJ(UK). We have the disjoint union: 
by the strong approximation theorem, where h is the class number of a 
certain ray class group of K .  Let ri = G(K) n tiUKG(K 8 4 + t r 1 .  Then 
out of f we can define fi (i = 1, . . . , h) : 
by fi(x,) 
= f (tix,) 
for X, 
E GL2(K D R) which have properties derived 
from the above (see pg. 470 of [HI) and in particular 
for 7 in Pi. 
We have 
with XK, := GL2(KV)+/CV where SK is the set of archimidean places of K, 
the subscript v denotes completion at that place, and C, are the maximal, 
connected compact subgroups modulo the centre (thus if v is a real place, 
we may take C, = R* SO2 (R), and if v is complex C, = cC' U2(C)). Now 
(x E C, y E R # 0) is the hyperbolic upper-half 3-space if v is a complex 
place and 
(x, y E IW, y # 0), if v is a real place. The action of GL2(R)+ and GL2(C) 
on XK, is explicated in [HI in these co-ordinates. A basis of differential 
forms for XKv at 
in the real case is given by (dx, -dy ) and in the complex case by (dx, -dy , &). 
These have nice pull-back properties detailed in [HI (pg. 458). 
Formally replacing (X: , Xu Y, , Y: 
) , by either 
or 
Y,l(dy, A dx,, -2dx, 
A c, 
dy, A &), 
the f,'s give rise to closed differential forms in ri\XK of the form 
and the filj's are the (scalar) coefficients GL2(K DR) + C of fi : GL2(K 8 
IlU) + L (2; C) , and where the - . - are filled in by the recipe above. Thus for 
each subset J' of C(C) of cardinality dK - q, we get a q-differential form 
Sj,p (f,) on ri\XK, where for each a E J' we have replaced the variables 
(X:, X,Yu, y:), 
by (dx,, -dy,, &). 
We define ~ J , J #  
(f) := @L,~J,J~ 
(fi), 
which is an element of H&s,(XuK, C). Thus we have the Eichler-Shimura 
isomorphism: 
Taking direct limits we have: 
In [HI the Hecke action on both sides is described, and $is equivariant for 
this action. A newform f gives rise to class S(f) that is an eigenform for 
the Hecke action, in the space H* (XU,, 4' for a suitable open compact 
subgroup U of GL2(AK), and a fixed degree * between rl + r2 and rl + 
2r2. Further we note that the SJ (UK)'s for different subsets of C(R) are 
related to each other by the action of the group of connected components 
of G(K 8 R) (cf. pg 473 of [HI). 

72 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
Fourier expansion of cusp forms and L-functions 
The reference for this is Section 6 of [HI. We only recall the form of the 
Fourier expansion of a modular form f as above. We have the proposition 
(Theorem 6.1 of [HI): 
Proposition 2.1 For a cusp form f as above, we have a function af :I + @ 
such that af vanishes outside the set of integral ideals and 
Here W is a Whittaker function, [C] are the real places a form which Cu 
is positive, e~ is the adelic exponential function, and 6 is the idele element 
corresponding to the discriminant of FIK; for the definition of all these 
terms we refer to Section 6 of [HI. 
The L-function of a cuspidal newform as above can now be defined as: 
where m runs over the ideals of K .  
2.2 
(g, K) cohomology 
We recall the Matsushima formula: 
lim H&,,(I'\XK, M) = 
+r 
where n runs through the irreducible cuspidal subrepresentations of 
L,Z,,,(I'\G)", 
with infinitesimal character x,(n) 
trivial, nf denotes the 
finite part of n, '33 is the parabolic subalgebra of g normalised by K (g = 
k @ !$.I), and m(n, I') is the multiplicity with which 7r occurs in L2(I'\G). 
The isomorphism is one of ~ ~ ~ ( ~ L ) - m o d u l e s .  
Thus a first step in studying the cohomology is to determine the 
admissible representations V with non-trivial (g, K )  cohomology. As we 
have a Kunneth formula in (g, K) cohomology (see [BW]), it will be enough 
to recall the the results when g = ge2(R) or g = ge2(C). 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
73 
Case @ 
If V is a non-trivial (i.e.,not one-dimensional), irreducible, admissible, 
unitary (ge2(@), @* U2(@)) module, such that H*(g, K; V) # 0, then V is 
the pricipal series of weight 2, Vx, with trivial central character given by: 
VA = { f : GL2(@) + @If 
(bg) = X(b), f K,-finite) 
where B is the subgroup of upper triangular matrices, X being the character 
We have 
if i = 1,2 and zero otherwise. This follows from the fact that V'lK = 
@i>o Sym(2i), and !$.I and /I2!$.I are ismorphic to sym2 of the standard rep- 
resentation of K = @*U2(@), with !$.I being the (3-dimensional) parabolic 
subalgebra normalised by @*U2(@), and that is orthogonal to its Lie alge- 
bra. The constant representation has cohomology in degrees 0 and 3. 
Case W 
We recall the results here even more sketchily than before, as we do not 
need detailed information for the results proven in this paper. 
In this case the constant representation has cohomology in degrees 0 
and 2, i.e., 
for i = 0,2 and zero otherwise. 
On the other hand, if if V is an infinite dimensional Harish Chan- 
dra module such that such that H*(g, K ;  V) # 0, then VISL2(R+-) = 
V2 + V-2, the holomorphic and anti-holomorphic discrete series of weight 2. 
As GL2(R) = R* SL2(R)+-, this determines V upto twisting by a central 
character (see Knapp's article in the Corvallis volume). We assume that 
the central character is trivial, and refer to that V as the discrete series of 
weight 2 and denote it by Vdisc. We have H*(g, K; V) = @ if * = 1, and is 
0 otherwise. 
Remarks 
1. We deduce from this the fact (that we implicitly recalled in the 
Eichler-Shimura isomorphism above) that for a number field K with 

Restriction Maps and L-values 
b 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
rl real and 7-2 complex embeddings, congruence subgroups of GL2 (K) 
have non-constant cohomologyl with coefficients in a complex alge- 
braic representation of GL2(K), for degrees between rl,K + r2,K and 
rl + 2 r 2 , ~ .  
Here by constant cohomology we mean the image of the 
cohomology of H*(g, K; C) where g is ge2(K 8 R) and K its maximal 
compact, in the congruence subgroup cohomology. 
2. The restriction maps of the introduction can be seen from the point of 
view of (8, K)-cohomology. As we chose embeddings so that we had 
an inclusion of the compact subgroups at the archimedean places, the 
restriction map (1.1) of the introduction is just the map: 
Though as we will see below that cus~idal summands are not pre- 
served under restriction, the maps on H&,, arises from this by pro- 
jecting to the cuspidal summand, and the same is true for the map 
on discrete cohomology. 
3 Restriction in compactly supported 
cohomology 
We divide our analysis according to the degree of cohomology that we 
are studying. We use results about non-vanishing of special values of L- 
functions due to Rohrlich, cf. [R], to prove the first part of Theorem 1.1. 
Theorem 3.1 If K / F  is CM, with d( f )  E H I ~ : ~ ] ( & ,  
@) the diflerential 
form attached to a cuspidal newform, then Res,(S(f)) # 0. 
Remark Note that from the Eichler-Shimura isomorphism recalled above 
(see (2.2) and (2.3), we may deduce that f appears with multiplicity one in 
H $ & ( ~ ~ ,  , C). Thus there are no choices of J' (and also J as K is totally 
imaginary) involved. 
Proof We will draw heavily from [HI, and use its notation too. Set d = d F .  
The embedding of XF in XK is given by the inclusion of the upper half- 
plane 
( -3 
(x, 
y E W, y # 0) into the hyperbolic upper-half 3-space: 
(x E C, y # 0 E R). We have inclusions: 
given by: 
where Kz+ (respectively, F2+) is the connected component of the identity 
of K& (respectively, FG), and K1 (respectively, F1) is the subgroup such 
that lzil = 1 (i = 1,. . . , d). These induce proper maps: 
lim 
VF F * \ I ~ / v ~ F ~  
-+ %F 
are compact open subgroups of the finite ideles 
where VK (respectively, VF ) 
of IK (respectively, IF). Thus we have the induced maps on cohomology: 
where the last map comes from the fact that the map 
is an isomorphism, where EK is a (torsion-free) subgroup of finite index of 
the units of K and EF = F* n 02. This follows because in fact EF = EK 
as the unit rank of 0; and 0; is the same. 
We claim the stronger statement: 
Claim: The image of 6( f )  under the map 
is not-zero. 

76 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
We will prove the claim, arguing by contradiction. Let UK be a neat, 
open compact subgroup such that the differential form S( f )  corresponding 
to f ,  an association that we have recalled above ((2.2) and (2.3)), is in 
Hd (Xu, , @) = $ H~ 
( r i \ ~ K ,  c) , for finitely many congruence subgroups 
ri of GL2(K). Throughout we are using de Rham cohomology. 
We have proper maps 
for each i where Ei's are subgroups of 0; of finite index. These induce 
maps: 
where the last isomorphism comes from integrating over E,. The compu- 
tations on page 484 and 485 of [HI show that the image of 6(fi) under 
this map is a non-zero multiple of the value of the partial L-function of 
f at s = 1. Now for any primitive Hecke character 4, of finite order and 
conductor c, we have the twisting operator: 
with 
with u E (c-l/O~)*. Fkom this we see that all the twists of f by finite 
order Hecke characters are sums of GL~(A!,)-translates of f E H,d(ZK, C). 
Further for almost all characters +, f @+ is a newform. Thus from the above 
considerations we deduce that L(1, f @ 4) = 0 for (almost) all characters 
4. This contradicts the main theorem of [R], and thus the assumption that 
the image of f under the map 
Cbandrashekhar Khare 
77 
is identically 0, is wrong. This proves the theorem. 
H. Hida has kindly pointed out to us that in fact we may deduce the 
stronger statement: 
Corollary 3.2 The restriction map considered in the theorem above: 
is injective on all of the cuspidal summand of H , ~ F  ( g K ,  C). 
Proof We claim that for any d( f )  E H ~ ~ S , , ( ~ ~ ,  
, C), coming from a cus- 
pidal form f ,  there is a finite linear combination 
(ai E C )  of GL~(A~)-translates 
of 6(f), such that 
follows from: 
f' is a newform. This 
1. The multiplicity one theorem for cuspidal newforms 
2. The Eichler-Shimura isomorphism above, from which we deduce that 
as dF is the lowest degree in which congruence subgroups of GL2(K) 
have cuspidal cohomology, multiplicity one also holds for the coho- 
mology HtlSp (ZK , 4. 
Namely from 1 and 2 above we deduce that certain linear combina- 
tion of GL~(A!,)-translates of S(f) gives a non-zero element that under 
the GL? (As)-action on ed=,, 
( a K ,  @) generates an irreducible (admissi- 
ble) representation. From this the claim follows, and thus the corollary 
follows from the theorem. 
Remarks 
1. As we will see below in Proposition 3.4, it is not true that the restric- 
tion of a cuspidal form is cuspidal (Proposition 3.4 shows this even 
in cohomology). In fact we will see below that it need not even be in 
the discrete part of the spectrum. 
2. The claim that occurs in the midst of the proof of the theorem above 
shows the stronger statement that the restriction maps associated to 
the embedding of split torus in GL2(K) is injective. Note that the 
"integral" points of split tori in GL2(K) and GL2(F) are the same 
(as the rank of the unit groups of the rings of integers of K and F 
are the same). 
3.1 Asai L-funct ions 
We will prove the second part of Theorem 1.1 using information about 
(special values of) Asai L-functions. The Asai L-function coresponding 
to a cuspidal newform f of GL2(AK) (of weight 2) as above (see (2.4) of 
Section 2), with respect to a quadratic extension K I F  is given by: 
where the summation runs over the the ideals of K extended from F ,  and 

78 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
79 
df is the restriction of the central characater of f to A>. Let a denote the 
non-trivial automorphism of KIF, and f" the a-conjugate of f (i.e., via 
the action of a on AK). We note the relation: 
where (IYKIF is the character of the extension K/F. If f is a base change 
newform of a newform g of GL2(AF ), we have the relation: 
where y!~ is the (finite order) central character of g. 
We begin by noting that there is another approach to the theorem we 
have proved above, at least for (some) f's such that the corresponding 
automorphic representation is a base change from GL2(F). This method 
gives sharper results in that case. 
Let us assume for simplicity that K is an imaginary quadratic extension, 
and hence F = Q (as the reference [GI we are using assumes that). The 
method rests on the perfect pairing: 
In [GI, following the method of Asai (cf. [A]) and Shimura, the wedge 
product Res,(6( f)) A El with E an element of H1 (r\XQ, M) that arises 
from an Eisenstein series, is shown to be the special value of an Asai L- 
function. Here I' is simply given by UK n GL2(Q). Note that E is in the 
orthogonal complement of the cuspidal summand of HE (Xu,, 0. 
Let f be a base change from w' a cuspidal automorphic representation 
of GL2(Q), with central character of non-trivial conductor that we assume 
prime to the discriminant of KIF. In that case we see from [GI, that for a 
suitable element E E H1 (XUK nGL2 
(Q), C): 
where * is a non-zero number, and a is the character associated to the 
extension KlQ. Because of our assumption that $ is different from a we 
have: 
1. Finiteness and non-vanishing of L(l, a$), 
2. L(l, Ad(g) @ $) # 0 by well-known results (cf. [S2] and [S3]). 
Together 1 and 2 above imply that Resc(G(f)) # 0. This result is 
sharper than Theorem 3.1 above as we can control the level for which the 
restriction is non-zero. Thus we have proved: 
Proposition 3.3 Let S(f) be a diflerential form (associated to a new- 
form f) in H,'(XV, ,C), such that 7rf is the base change of .rr' an auto- 
morphic representations of GL2(&) with central character of non-trivial 
conductor, prime to the discriminant of KlQ. Then Resc(f) projected to 
H: (XUK nGL2(Q), 
C) is non-zero. 
Remark Though we have stated the proposition in the above form for 
simplicity, a similar result can be proven when wf is the base change of 
T' whose central character has arbitrary conductor; in that case we may 
have to work with a twist of f and hence the restriction will be non-trivial 
at a congruence subgroup of higher level than UK n GL2(Q). But the 
level may still be controlled. This is unlike the situation of Theorem 3.1 
where one cannot even hope to control the level (or equivalently, control 
the GL~(A!,)-translates of 6(f)) at which the restriction will be non-zero. 
Note that the pairing: 
has the equivariance property: 
where g E G L ~ ( ~ )  
and * is the main involution given by g* = det(g)g-l. 
This implies that the cuspidal summand of H,'(ZQ, C) pairs trivially with 
continous summand of H1 (%, 0, 
as the cuspidal summand of the above 
cohomology groups is "distinguished" by its Hecke eigenvalues (and hence 
by the G L ~ ( ~ )  
action). This implies that with f as in the above proposi- 
tion, Res,(G(f)) is never cuspidal. As H: (& 
, C) does not have discrete, 
non-cuspidal (residual, which in the presesent case means constant) coho- 
mology (see [Har] or Section 2.2 above) we deduce: 
Proposition 3.4 If 6( f )  is the diflerential form in H,' (ZK, M) associated 
to a newform f ,  such that ~f is the base change of .rr,, that has conductor 
prime to disc(K/F) and has non-trivial nebentypus, then Res,(G(f)) is not 
contained in the summand of H: (&, C) spanned by the cuspidal part and 
one-dimensional characters. 
Proof This follows from the considerations above. 

80 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
81 
Remark This shows that injectivity results for &7f,,, 
cannot be proved as 
a formal consequence of injectivity results for compact support cohomology. 
We now turn to the proof of the second part of Theorem 1.1 of the 
introduction. The main input is the results of [Hl]. It is curious to note 
that while above we evaluated Asai L-functions at points where they are 
finite and non-zero to deduce non-vanishing of restriction, below we will 
evaluate the residue of Asai L-functions to deduce non-vanishing results. 
We have: 
Theorem 3.5 Let J and J' be subsets of CK (R) and CK (C), such that 
J contains exactly one real place above each real place of F that splits in 
K ,  and J' contains exactly one of the two complex places in K above each 
complex place of F .  
d i m ( X ~ )  
(i) If KIF is quadratic, * = dim(XF) and S J, J, (f) E Hc 
( X K , ~ )  
is 
the differential form associated to a (cuspidal) newform f ,  with J, J' 
as in the previous sentence, then Resc(S J, Jl ( f  )) is non-zero whenever 
f is the twist (by a finite order character) of a base change of a cus- 
pidal, automorphic representation of GL2(AF) if one of the following 
conditions hold: 
(a) K / F  is a CM extension 
(b) The archimedean places of F split in K 
(c) The central character $ of g is ~ K I F .  
d i m ( X ~ )  - 
(ii) If K / F  is quadratic, * = dim(XF) and 6 J, JI (f) E Hc 
(XK, c )  is 
the diflerentid form associated to a (cuspidal) newform f ,  with J, J' 
as in the first sentence, then Resc(S J, J I  (f)) is zero whenever f is not 
the twist of a base change of a cuspidal, automorphic representation 
of GL2 ( AF ) . 
Remarks 
1. Here by dimension we mean as usual dimension as a (pro) real analytic 
manifold, i.e., we ascribe XF the dimension 2rl ,F + 3 r 2 , ~ .  
2. The conditions (a), (b), (c) arise because of Lemma 2.2 in [HI] which 
delas with extending the character $-'aKlF of F to K (see the proof 
below). 
3. Unlike in the case of Theorem 3.1, there is some choice of J and J' 
involved, as the degree 2rl ,F + 3 r 2 , ~  
we are considering is such that, for 
congruence subgroups of GL2 (K) , it may be an intermediate degree 
(i.e., between r 1 , ~  
+ 7 - 2 , ~  and r l , ~  
+ 2 ~ 2 , ~ ) .  
Even after constraining 
J and J' to be as above, there is still some ambiguity. On the other 
hand, if J and J' are not as constrained to be above, ResC(SJ,p(f)) 
is forced to vanish. This can be seen by counting degrees of cohomol- 
ogy at each complex archimedean place, together with the fact that 
H,dim(XF) (I'\XF, C) is spanned by a differential form that is of type 
(1,l) at each o E CF (R). 
Proof The proof follows directly from the results of [Hl]. We will just 
indicate the broad lines of the argument, referring to [Hl] for the technical 
details. 
First we prove the non-vanishing assertion in the theorem, and then the 
vanishing assertion. 
(i) Non-vanishing We fix the choice J, J' as above, and consider the 
restriction of 6 
Jt ( j )  E H ~ ~ ~ ( ~ F )  
(xux, C) to H ~ ~ ~ ( ~ F )  
(xuF , C) for suit- 
able open compact subgroups UK and UF of GL2(AfK) and GL2(A$) 
respectively. As we are in degree that is the dimension of the real manifold 
XF, it will be enough to show that: 
for some f' that is in the space spanned by the GL2 (A:, )-translates of f , 
where IF denotes the restriction or pull-back under Xu, + Xu,. By the 
above integral we understand the sum of integrals 
where the Fj\XF3s are the connected components of Xu, and fl are the 
classical cuspidal forms associated to f' as in Section 2. Let us assume that 
f is the base change of a form g of GL2(A.L) that has central character $. 
Note that in our (weight 2) situation, $ is necessarily of finite order. It 
is explained in Lemma 2.2 of [HI], that under either of the conditions (a), 
(b), (c) of Theorem 3.5, the character ? ) - ' ~ r ~ / ~  
of A> arises by restriction 
of a (finite-order) character of A;, 
upto characters of conductor 1. This is 
enough to ensure (see Section 2.4 of [HI]) that for a suitable f' in the space 
spanned by the G L ~  
(A;)-translates of f we have: 
where c is non-zero. As the right hand side is known to be non-zero, this 

82 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
finishes the proof of this part of the theorem. 
The comment before the statement of the theorem arises because in [HI] 
the above integral is interpreted as the residue of the Asai L-function that 
has the integral expression (upto I' factors and constants) 
for a suitable f' and open compact XuF, and an Eisenstein series E(s) 
defined in [HI]. The series has a pole at s = 1 and thus (3.2) arises by 
taking residues at s = 1. 
We now go to: 
(ii) Vanishing As we are in degree that is the dimension of XF, to show 
vanishing of the pull-back of 6(f) (we suppress J, J' from the notation) it 
will be enough to check that all the integrals above 
vanish, where f: is a G L ~ ( A ~ )  
translate of f,. This is enough simply 
because 
~ , d i m ( x ~ )  
(ri\XF C) 
C 
and the isomorphism arises by integrating a compactly supported differen- 
tial dim(XF) form over ri\XF. In [HI] each of these integrals is interpreted 
as the residue at poles of some partial L-series of twists of As(f) at s = 1. 
But these partial L-functions are holomorphic under the assumption that 
f is not the twist of a base change form; this follows from results of [St], 
[S2] and [HLR], and formula (3.1) above, as explained in [HI]. 
0 
Remarks 
1. In this case too, the Asai L-function gives sharp results about the 
level at which the restriction map is non-zero. 
2. Results like the above, in the broader context of "distinguished repre- 
sentations", have been pursued in many papers of Jacquet, Jacquet- 
Ye, Flicker etc. (the interested reader may consult [J] for a survey 
and bibliography on the subject). 
3. In the case when K and F are both totally real, one may give a 
Galois theoretic perspective on the vanishing part of these results 
(see [HLR]). As in that case both the manifolds zK and XF are 
pro-algebraic varieties. The newform f contributes to the l-adic &ale 
cohomology 
(XK, Q) (the middle dimension of Z K )  via the 
tensor induction @,pu (cf. [BL]) of the 2-dimensional t-adic Galois 
representation p attached to f (where o runs through the embeddings 
of K). On .the other hand, the l-adic cohomology of H : ~ F  (ZF, Q ) 
is abelian (as idF is the dimension of zF). The restriction maps are 
Galois equivariant for small enough open subgroups of GQ. Thus we 
would want that @,pU has abelian quotients for the restriction map 
on the " f -component" to be non-zero. This can be made precise and 
explains the results of Theorem 3.5 in that case. 
4. In Theorem 3.5, the restriction being zero or non-zero depends on 
"arithmetic information" at all the places of the automorphic rep- 
resenttaion n attached to f (i.e., whether we are restricting a base 
change form or not), rather than just archimedean information which 
is the only relevant information for restriction of holomorphic classes 
in the setting of Shimura varieties (as in [CV]). Note that even in 
the one case where we are in the setting of Shimura varieties in the 
theorem (i.e., K and F both totally real), our choice of J ensures 
that we are restricting a non-holomorphic class. This dependence (on 
whether the automorphic representation is "distinguished" or not (cf. 
[J], [Fl]) can perhaps be explained from the (g, K)-cohomology point 
of view (see Section 2.2 above and also the end of Section 4 below), 
by noting that in the situation of the theorem we will be considering 
a map (at each infinite place) of the form Vj, @ Vx -+ C (this is the 
form at a complex place of F); if a real place of F splits in K then 
the map involved is Vdisc 
8 Vdisc 
-+ (C; if a real place stays inert the 
map involved is VA 4 C. The point is that the target is the trivial 
representation, rather than an infinite admissible representation as 
will be involved in arhimedean considerations in the situation of say 
Theorem 3.1 above or Theorem 4.3 below. 
5. It is interesting to note the important role (as in Proposition 3.3 
above, but with a twist!) played by the central characters of the form 
that gives rise to f by base change in part (i) (see also Proposition 
0.1 of Fl]). 
4 
Restriction maps in cuspidal cohomology 
We first have to justify the statement we made - 
in the - introduction that 
fi&sp (-fox ) , C) is indeed mapped to IIGL2 
(AL H 
(
X
 
, ) 
under the 
restriction map. 

Restriction Maps and L-values 
For this it is enough to prove: 
Lemma 4.1 The cuspidal sumand 
(zUK, C) of Hd(guK, C) is mapped 
- 
to the cuspidal summand H & , ( ~ ~ ,  , C) of Hd (zuF, C) under restriction, 
for any degree d. 
Proof We do know that H,' (XK, C) 
maps to Hf (TK, C) under restriction. 
We also know that by results of Harder (cf. [Harl), the image of compact 
. 
- 
- 
support cohomology in the full cohomology is the image of H&(XK, C) in 
the full cohomology H * (FK, C) (the same statements hold good, of course, 
for the cohomology of ZF). In fact it injects into the full cohomology for all 
but the top dimension, and in the top degree the map is just 0 (this follows 
from the calculations in [Har]) . Suppose, for contradiction, that the state- 
ment in the lemma was false. Then we would have that the cohomology 
class that f gives rise to in the summand m(a)af H* (g, K; n,) 
correspond- 
ing to f in the Matsushima formula (see (2.5) above) is mapped to a class 
arising from the constant cohomology H* (g , K; C) . But then the fact (re- 
called in the (g, K)-cohomology section above) that the only positive degree 
in which g12 (C, C* U2 (C)) and (g12 (It), R* SO2 (R)) have constant cohomol- 
ogy is 3 and 2 respectively, shows that the resulting invariant cohomology 
class is forced to have degree the dimension of XF. Thus v:e are done if the 
degree of the cohomology is strictly less than dim(XF). In the case the de- 
gree is dim(XF), we have noted above that HdF (zF, C) has no contibution 
from invariant cohomology classes. This finishes the proof of the lemma. 
We calculate the instances in which congruence subgroups of GL2(K) 
and GL2(F) have non-constant cohomology in a common degree. Let F 
have r1,F real embeddings and 7 - 2 , ~  complex embeddings. For each real 
place COi (1 < i 5 r l , ~ )  
of F, let ai be the number of real places of K 
above it, and bi the number of complex places (thus ai + 2bi = d K / ~ ) .  
There 
are dKIF complex places above each complex place COj (1 5 j < r 2 , ~ )  
of 
F. Then (congruence subgroups of) GL2 (K) has non-constant cohomology 
between degrees xL2r (ai + bi) + dK,(K/FrP,~ 
and x:Lr (ai + 26,) + 2dKIFr2,~, 
while for GL2(F) the relevant degrees are between T ~ , F + T ~ , F  and rl i - 2 ~ 2 , ~ .  
F'rom this note that these ranges can overlap in at most one integer, namely 
the integer r1.F + 2 r 2 , ~  
and this happens if and only aj = 0, bi = 1 for 
1 5 i < r1,F. Equivalently this happens only if dKIF = 2 and K has no 
real embeddings (leaving aside of course the uninteresting situation when 
dKIF = I!). This justifies part of an assertion made in the introduction. 
Chandrashekhar Khare 
We thus have: 
- 
Lemma 4.2 The restriction map fi&, ( z K ,  C) + IIH& ( z F ,  C) can be 
non-zero, only when KIF is a quadratic extension, K is totally imaginary 
and * = [F :GI. 
Proof This follows from the considerations above. 
0 
We now prove Theorem 1.2 of the introduction. We will only sketch the 
proof as it is entirely similar to the proof of the first part of Theorem 1.1 of 
the introduction, the only difference being that here we have to integrate 
against compact rather than non-compact cycles. 
Theorem 4.3 When K I F  is a CM extension, and 6( f )  E fi,"&,(XK, C) 
the dzgerential associated to a czlspidal newjorm f ,  then RescusP(6(f)) # 0. 
Remark As before there is no choice of J' (nor of J as K is totally imagi- 
nary) involved as we are in the lowest degree in which cuspidal cohomology 
exists. 
Proof The proof is entirely analogous to that of Theorem 3.1 above and 
thus we will be brief. This time around we can detect the non-vanishing of 
the restriction of 6( f )  by integrating against compact cycles. As if 6( f )  is 
cohomologous to 0, Stokes theorem: 
yields that its integral over compact cycles will be 0; note that this makes 
sense only when C is compact. The compact cycles we consider arise from 
embeddings of non-split tori into GL2(F) (for details on this see Section V 
of [Har]). Thus if F'IF is any quadratic extension, we have an embedding 
F' + GL2 (F) that gives rise to compact cycles in Xu,, just as in the case 
of split tori that occurred in the proof of Theorem 1.1. Note that choosing 
F' = K means that the composition F' + GL2(F) + GL2(K) gives a split 
torus. Thus integrating Res(6( f )) (and its ~ ~ ~ ( A i ) - t r a n s l a t e s )  
against 
the compact cycle in zF coming from F' = K we see, just as before in the 
proof of Theorem 3.1, that Res,..,(d( 
f )  Jg) vanishing, for all g E G L ~  
(A&-), 
contradicts results of [R]. 
0 

86 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
Corollary 4.4 The restriction map considered in Theorem 4.3: 
is injective. 
Proof The proof is identical to the proof of Corollary 3.2. 
0 
Remarks 
1. Though we have gotten by cheaply above, we could also have used 
the fact that integrating newforms f against compact cycles in ZK 
coming from an extension KF'IK (that arises from F'IF), one gets 
L(1, f 8 aFt IF. NrnKIF); thus we could have used tori arising from 
other quadratic extensions of F than K .  
2. Just as in the proof of Theorem 1.1 we have proven in fact something 
stronger, i.e., that the restriction maps associated to the embedding 
of the tori common to GL2 (K) and GL2(F) are injective. 
One cannot test non-vanishing of the restriction on the cuspidal sum- 
mand by integration against non-compact cycles (coming from split 
tori in GL2(F)). For example, when the degree of the cohomology 
is dim(XF), integrating the restricted differential form associated to 
a cuspidal newform can sometimes be non-zero (as we saw above in 
Theorem 3.5), but still the map from cuspidal summand to the cus- 
pidal summand is zero as there is no cuspidal cohomology in degree 
dim(XF) . 
Let us assume now that we are in the one left-over case in which the 
restriction map may be non-trivial that is not ruled out by degree consid- 
erations as in Lemma 4.2; i.e., the situation when K I F  is quadratic, K is 
totally imaginary, and F has at least one complex place. Then we want to 
study the restriction map: 
with * = dF (= rl,F + 2 r 2 , ~ ,  
the highest dimension in which zF has 
cuspidal cohomology). We have not yet studied this case, and only make 
a few preliminary remarks below about what is happening at the infinite 
places. 
We note that the map: 
does not vanish; the last arrow arises from the (essentially) unique non- 
trivial map Vx 8 VA + VA that exists by [L] (see Section 2.2 for the notation 
being used). Thus the restriction map does not vanish for trivial reasons. 
We justify this; but before that we remark that indeed.= already said in 
the introduction, we cannot deduce non-vanishing of restriction maps by 
simply knowing the non-vanishing at infinity (in contrast, for example, to 
the situation studied in [CV]). 
Now for the justification: we know that HornK (p, VA) is one-dimensional, 
generated by say f ,  and so the first map above is specified by 
thus it takes values in h2 (VA 8 V,). The map f takes 71 to the sym2 (C)- 
summand of Vj, l K  = @,>I ~ ~ m ~ ~ ( @ ) ,  
and thus h2( f )  takes values in h2 (sym2) 
- sym2(@). We have-to show that this subspace is not mapped to 0 
under the unique (g, K)-equivariant map VA @ V', + VA. This follows from 
Proposition 4.2 of [L] which is attributed to D. Prasad there, whom we also 
thank for these arguments. 
References 
T. Asai, On certain Dirichlet series associated with Hilbert modular 
forms and Rankin's method, Math. Annalen 226 (1977), 81-94. 
A. Borel, Stable real cohomology of arithmetic groups. 11, Manifolds 
and Lie groups (Notre Dame, Ind., 1980), 21-55, Progr. Math. 14, 
Birkhauser, Boston. 
J-L. Brylinski, J-P. Labesse, Cohomologie d'intersection et fonctions 
L de certaines varietes de Shimura, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. (4) 
1 7  (1984), no. 3, 361-412. 
A. Borel and N. Wallach, Continuous Cohomology, Discrete Sub- 
groups, and Representations of Reductive Groups, Mathematical 
Surveys and Monographs, 67 Second Edition, American Mathemat- 
ical Society, 2000. 
W. Casselman, Automorphic forms and a Hodge theory for congru- 
ence subgroups of SL2(Z), Lie group representations, 11; SLN 1041, 
Springer-Verlag, 1984. 
L. Clozel, T. N. Venkataramana, Restriction of the holomorphic co- 
homology of a Shimura variety to a smaller Shimura variety, Duke 
Math. J .  95 (1998). 

88 
Restriction Maps and L-values 
[De] 
P. Deligne, Travaux de Shimum, Sem. Bourbaki, 1970/71, SLN 244. 
[FI] 
Y. Flicker, On distinguished representations, J. reine angew. Math. 
418 (1991), 139-172. 
[GI 
E. Ghate, Critical values of the twisted tensor L-function in the 
imaginary quadratic case, preprint. 
[Har] G. Harder, Eisenstein cohomology of arithmetic groups. The case 
GL2, Invent. Math. 89 1 (1987), 37-118. 
[HI 
H. Hida, On the critical values of L-functions of GL2 and GL2 x 
GL2, Duke Math. J. 74 (1994), 431-545. 
[HI] 
H. Hida, 
Non-critical values of adjoint L-functions for SL2, 
preprint . 
[HLR] G. Harder, R. P. Langlands, M. Rapoport, Algebmische Zyklen auf 
Hilbert-Blumenthal Flachen, Crelle 366 (1986), 53-120. 
H. Jacquet, Automorphic spectrum of synmetric spaces, Represen- 
tation theory and automorphic forms (Edinburgh, 1996), 443-455; 
Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. 61 Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 
1997. 
C. Khare, A note on restriction maps in the cohomology of S- 
arithmetic groups, preprint. 
H. Loke, Rlinear forms for 9&, preprint. 
D. Prasad, %linear forms for representations of GL2 and r-factors, 
Comp. Math. 75 (1990), 1-46. 
D. Rohrlich, Non-vanishing of L-functions for GL2, Invent. Math. 
97 (1989), 381-403. 
F. Shahidi, On the Ramanujan conjecture and finiteness of poles for 
certain L-functions, Ann. of Math. 127 (1988), 547-584. 
F. Shahidi, On certain L-functions, Amer. J. of Math. 103 (1981), 
297-355. 
F. Shahidi, On non-vanishing of twisted symmetric and exterior 
square L-functions for GL(n), Pacifica J. Math. (issue dedicated 
to Olga Todd) 1997, 311-322. 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, 
TATAT INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL 
RESEARCH, HOMI BHABHA 
ROAD, MUMBAI 400 005, INDIA 
E-mail: shekhar@math.tifr.res.in 
On Hecke Theory for Jacobi Forms 
M. Manickam 
Abstract 
N.-P. Skoruppa and D. Zagier [7] studied the theory of Hecke oper- 
ators for Jacobi forms of weight k, index m, and level 1. Through 
explicit computation of the trace of Hecke operators, they proved 
that the theory is compatible with the Atkin-Lehner theory of new- 
forms for certain space of integral weight modular forms. In this 
article, we extend the theory of Hecke operators for Jacobi forms of 
weight k, index m and level M, with the assumption that M is an 
odd square-free positive integer, 
Introduction 
A Jacobi form )(r,z) of weight k, index rn and level M has a Fourier 
development of the form 
where e(s) = e21is, 8 E @. Its Fourier coefficient c(n, r) satisfies the follow- 
ing property: 
if rt2 - 4mn1 = r2 - 4mn and r' a r (mod 2m). 
Due to this fact, the Fourier coefficients are denoted by c(D,r), where 
D = r2 - 4mn and the expansion (1.1) is written in the form 
. . 
~
~
r
2
 
(mod 4m) 

90 
On Hecke Theory for Jacobi Forms 
In particular, if m = 1, the coefficients c(n, r) depend only on the discrimi- 
nant D. Using this fact, M. Eichler and D. Zagier [2] constructed a perfect 
link between JLyP(l) and ~ : - ~ / ~ ( 4 ) ,  
via a certain map. In our recent paper 
with B. Ramakrishnan [5], we have generalised the Eichler-Zagier map to 
Jacobi forms of weight k, index m and level M and obtained an analogue 
of the Atkin-Lehner theory of newforms and further exhibited a perfect 
isomorphism between the space of Jacobi newforms and certain subspace 
in Kohnen's (+) newform space. By combining the results of M. Ueda [a], 
we get the strong multiplicity one theorem for Jacobi newforms (when mM 
is odd). In this article, we present a brief account of our results without 
proofs. 
2 
Preliminaries 
Let k, m, M, N E PI. The notations for the various spaces of modular forms 
and Jacobi forms are already given in the article of B. Ramakrishnan, which 
appears in this volume. The following two spaces are frequently used. They 
are S:+112(4~), the Kohnen's + space of modular form of half-integral 
weight (when N is odd) and J;Y(M), the space of Jacobi cusp forms of 
weight k, index m and level M. The Hecke operators in J;?(M) 
are 
denoted by Tj(p), for p JmM and Uj(p) for plmM. For the Kohnen's + 
space, the Hecke operators are denoted by T(p2) for p AZN, T+(4) and 
U(p2) for plN. Throughout this article, p denotes a prime number. 
3 Eichler-Zagier map 
Let 
~
l
r
~
 
(mod 4m) 
Define the map 2, as follows: 
For each negative discriminant D and an integer r modulo 2m, with D z r2 
(mod 4m), we have the (D,T)-th Poincar6 series P(D,r) E J;Y(M), which 
is characterised by 
where 4 E JLYAp(M) is given by (1.3) and (., .) is the Petersson inner 
product in the space of Jacobi forms. Our main result of this section is the 
following. 
Theorem 3.1 The linear map 2, maps P(D,,) onto PIDI, if (m, D) = 1, 
where qDi 
is the ]Dl-th PoincarC series in ~:-,,,(4rn~). 
In order to extend the mapping property of 2, to all Jacobi forms, we use 
the following three Propositions: 
Proposition 3.2 If 4 E J;Z(M) satisfies c(D, r) = 0 for all 0 > D I r2 
(mod 4m) with (D, m) = 1, then 
where u d  is the operator sending 4 ( ~ ,  
z) into 4 ( ~ ,  
dz) 
Proposition 3.3 
where PJ(m) is the @ span of P(D,r) with (D,m) = 1. 
Proposition 3.4 If 4 E J;YT(M), 6 $ Pj (m), then 
where B(&) : f ( z )  I+ f (d2z), 
4 Strong Multiplicity One Theorem 
Let fi, f2, - - . fe be orthogonal basis of orthogonal basis of normalised Hecke 
eigenforms for ,535 (mM), L = dimS,?ty2 (mM). Define the following: 

I 
92 
On Hecke Theory for Jacobi Forms 
and 
e 
J;7'new(M) = $ J;?(M; 
fi); 
a= 1 
where in the above, S:;T/~(~~M) is the subspace of ~:-,,,(4rnM), 
consisting of forms f for which the n-th Fourier coefficient af(n) is zero 
unless (-l)*-ln = (mod 4m). We then have the following: 
Theorem 4.1 2, 
is an onto isomorphism between J;y'new 
(M) and 
Sr:;;,W 
(mM) . 
First we prove that P$:) = P$;,) (r' r r (mod 2m)). As a conse- 
quence, we conclude that the (D, r)-th Fourier coefficients of a newform 
q!~ E J;y*new(M) depends only on D and not on r modulo 2m. Now by 
invoking Theorem 3.1, we obtain Theorem 4.1. 
Note that Zm preserves the Hilbert space structures. 
Corollary 4.2 The Strong Multiplicity One theorem is true for the space 
m,new 
S,-,,, 
(mM) and J;y'neW 
(M) . 
Remark 4.3 When mM is square-free, we can decompose the oldform 
space as a direct sum of eigensubspaces as in the case of integral weight. 
Acknowledgements: This is an expanded version of the talk given by 
the author in the international conference on "Cohomology of Arithmetic 
Groups, L-functions and Automorphic forms", held at TIFR, Mumbai dur- 
ing December 1998. The author thanks the organisers of the conference for 
giving the opportunity to present a talk in the conference. He also thanks 
B. Ramakrishnan for preparing the typed version of the manuscript. 
References 
[I] A. 0. L. Atkin and J. Lehner, Hecke operators on Fo(m), Math. Ann. 
185 (1970), 134-160. 
M. Manickam 
93 
[3] N. I. Koblitz, Introduction to Elliptic Curves and Modular Forms, 
Graduates Texts in Mathematics 97, Springer-Verlag, 1984. 
[4] W. Kohnen, Newforms of half-integral weight, J. reine angew Math. 
333 (1981), 32-72. 
[5] M. Manickam and B. Ramakrishnan, On Shimura, Shintani and 
Eichler-Zagier correspondences, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 352 (2000). 
no. 6, 2601-2617. 
[6] G. Shimura, On modular forms of half-integral weight, Ann. Math. 97 
(l973), 440-481. 
[7] N. -P. Skoruppa and D. Zagier, Jacobi forms and a certain space of 
modular forms, Invent. Math. 94 (1988), 113-146. 
[8] M. Ueda, On twisting operators and newforrns of half-integral weight, 
Nagoya Math. J. 131 (l993), 135-205. 
DEPARTMENT 
OF MATHEMATICS 
RAMAKRISHNA 
MISSION VIVEKANANDA 
I 
COLLEGE MYLAPORE, 
CHENNAI 
600 004 INDIA. 
E-mail: mmmanickam@@ yahoo.com 
[2] M. Eichler and D. Zagier, The theory of Jacobi forms, Progress in 
Mathematics 55, Boston-Bikhaiiser 1985. 

Arvind N. Nair 
95 
The L~ Euler Characteristic of Arithmetic 
Quotients * 
Arvind N. Nair 
Abstract 
A formula for the L~ Euler characteristic of a noncompact arithmetic 
quotient I'\G/K 
of an equal-rank symmetric space is stated, and is 
used to deduce some (known) results of on limit multiplicities of 
discrete series representations in the cuspidal spectrum. 
1 Introduction 
Consider the classical Eichler-Shimura isomorphism 
Here Xr = r\SL2(R)/S0(2) is the modular curve associated to a con- 
gruence subgroup I? of SL2(Z), 4 is the homogeneous local system on Xr 
associated to the kth symmetric power of the natural representation of SL2, 
and Sk+2(r) (resp. Sk+2 (r)) is thb space of holomorphic (resp. antiholo- 
morphic) cusp forms of weight k + 2. The left side of (1.1) is topological, 
while the dimension of Sk+n(r), which is the multiplicity of\a particular dis- 
crete series representation in the space L& (r\SL2(R)), is of arithmetic 
interest. The isomorphism (1.1) holds out the possibility of computing these 
multiplicities by geometric means. (Of course, in this classical situation one 
recovers classical formulae for the dimensions of spaces of cusp forms.) 
For a general noncocompact arithmetic group I?, the cohomology theory 
most naturally related to automorphic forms is the L2 cohomology; in the 
modular curve case, it is (in degree one) the right side of (1.1). When 
the symmetric space is Hermitian it has a topological interpretation as the 
intersection cohomology of a suitable compactification (Zucker's conjecture, 
'Based on a lecture given at the Conference on Automorphic Forms, TIFR, Dec. 
1998. 
proven by Looijenga and Saper-Stern); this is (1.1) in the case of modular 
curves. In the general equal-rank case a replacement for (1.1) is given 
by results of [GHM] and [NJ and these also give a formula for the Euler 
characteristic of the L2 cohornology (stated in [GHMN]). Here I shall recall 
this formula in some detail (this part is mainly expository), and then show 
how it can be used to give a quick proof of a result of Rohlfs and Speh [RS] 
on multiplicities. 
2 The formula 
2.1 Preliminaries 
Let G be a reductive algebraic group over Q, G = G(R) its real points, 
and g = Lie(G). Let K be a maximal compact subgroup of G, and let 
AG be the identity component of the group of real points of a maximally 
Qsplit torus of the centre of G .  Assume that G/AG has a discrete series 
or, equivalently (by Harish-Chandra's results), that a maximal torus of K 
projects to a Cartan subgroup for G/Ac. Let I' c G be a noncocompact 
arithmetic subgroup and let 
Let E be an irreducible algebraic representation of G .  Assume that AG 
acts trivially on E, although this is not essential. 
By the L2 cohornology groups of I' with coefficients in E we mean 
Here L2(rAG\G) carries the right regular representation, and it is under- 
stood that we are passing to its dense submodule of smooth and K-finite 
vectors to compute (g, K)-cohomology. (This is one of several possible def- 
initions of L2 cohomology, all of which are well-known to be equivalent.) 
Under the assumption that G/AG has discrete series representations, these 
groups are finite-dimensional ([BC]). The L2 Eder characteristic is 
2dG) 
L ~ ~ ( I ' ,  
E) = 
(-l)i dim ~ ' ( g ,  
K; L ~ ( I ' A ~ \ G )  
8 E) 
(2.1) 
i= 1 
2.2 The formula 
The formula below follows from results in [GHM] and [N] and is stated in 
[GHMN]. It was also proved by Stern [St] when Xr is Hermitian. 

96 
The L2 Euler Characteristic of Arithmetic Quotients 
Theorem 2.1 The L2 Euler chamcteristic (2.1) is given by 
There is notation to be explained: 
0 9 
is a set of representatives for the I?-conjugacy classes of rational 
parabolic subgroups of G. For P E P with Levi quotient L, P = 
P(R), L = L(W) and rL is the projection of r n  P to L. 
~ ( r )  
is the Euler characteristic of I' when I' is torsion-free. If I' has 
torsion, choose a torsion-free I" c I' and set ~ ( r )  
= (I' : I")-lX(I"). 
e.g. x(SL2(Z)) = -1112. 
choose a minimal parabolic subgroup Po E 9 
and let Lo be its Levi 
quotient. Let A. denote the identity component of the group of real 
points of the maximally split central torus of Lo. Choose a Cartan 
subalgebra $ and a Bore1 subalgebra b > $ of gc such that b c 
Lie(Po)c and Ij > a0 = Lie(A0). Then p E $* is half the sum of the 
positive roots (i.e. of the roots of 9 in b) and h E $* is the highest 
weight of E. 
Wo(P) is a certain subset of the Weyl group W = W($,g) defined 
as follows: Suppose first that P > P o  and A c Ao,a c % are the 
subgroup and subalgebra defined by P. Let Wp be the Weyl group of 
Ij in Lie(L); it is naturally identified as a subgroup of W. Let W(P) 
be a set of left coset representatives for Wp in W that are of minimal 
length. Then Wo(P) c W(P) is the subset of elements w such that 
w(h +p) la is positive (in the natural notion of positivity for characters 
on a). If P E 9 does not contain Po it is G(Q)-conjugate to some 
P' 3 Po, and we set Wo (P) = Wo (P') . 
E & + ~ ) - ~  
is the irreducible representation .of L with highest weight 
W(A + p) - p E $* (here I) is thought of as a Cartan subalgebra of 
Lie(L)c). 
This explains all the elements of the formula. 
Arvind N. Nair 
2.3 Remarks 
(a) It is not difficult to see that ~ ( r )  
= xC(I') (compactly supported Euler 
characteristic), so that in the formula ~ ( r )  
dim(E) should be thought 
of as coming from the interior and the other terms should be thought 
of as boundary terms. 
(b) How easy is it to evaluate the formula? It involves calculating: 
x(I')? Suppose that V is a semisimple simply connected group 
scheme over the ring of integers Bk of some number field k and 
I? = g(Bk). Then ~ ( r )  
has an explicit formula in terms of the 
values of the zeta function of 
k at certain negative 
integers. (When 
is splitlk this is Harder's Gauss-Bonnet for- 
mula [HI and the final word on the subject is [PI. Note that 
these formulae incorporate subtle arithmetic facts about Tam- 
agawa numbers etc.) e.g. for I' = Sp4(Z) we have ~ ( r )  
= 
C(-~)C(-~)ISP~(~/(P))~. 
0 9: 
Terms coming from conjugate parabolic subgroups are equal, 
so one has to compute numbers of I'-conjugacy classes of parabolic 
subgroups. In general this will involve class numbers and may 
be difficult. 
Wo(P), d i m ( E k ( ~ + ~ ) - ~  
): These are easily calculated. 
2.4 An example 
In [GHMN] the formula is evaluated for I' = I?(n) the principal congruence 
subgroup of Sp4(Z) of level n and E = C : 
2.5 
Some remarks on the proof of the formula 
Suppose that we have a compactification X of X and a complex of sheaves 
2" on X such that 
(lHP means hypercohomology). Suppose further that fT is stratified W = 
U, 
Xi with manifold strata Xi such that the cohomology sheaves of 22" 

98 
The LZ Euler Characteristic of Arithmetic Quotients 
are locally constant along each Xi. Then the Euler characteristic of the left 
hand side of (2.2) is given by 
Here Xi E Xi is any point and x,,,,(Ym) is the compactly supported Euler 
characteristic of the stalk cohomology at xi. (This is due to Goresky and 
MacPherson. See [GM], section 11 .) 
Now a pair x, 
2' is given in [GHM] and by [N] it satisfies (2.2): X is 
the reductive Borel-Serre compactification and Y e  is the middle weighted 
cohomology complex. The strata of X are indexed by 9, 
and the stra- 
tum of P E b is simply I'L\L/A~ 
KL. The local cohomology modules at a 
point in this stratum are submodules of the Lie algebra cohomology mod- 
ules H*(Lie(N), E) (N= real points of the unipotent radical of P). Using 
Kostant's description (see [W2]) of H* (Lie(N), E) and (2.3) one arrives at 
Theorem 2.1. 
In the Hermitian case another possibility i s  to take the Baily-Bore1 
compactification and the intersection complex on it and then use Zucker's 
conjecture as (2.2); the result of [GHMN] calculates the local cohomology 
modules. 
3 An application 
3.1 L2 Euler characteristic in towers 
A tower is a sequence I'i 3 I'i+l (i 2 0) of normal subgroups of I' of finite 
index such that niri = (1). An immediate corollary of Theorem 2.1 is 
Corollary 3.1 For a tower {ri) of arithmetic subgroups in G, 
There is a Hilbert 
continuous spectrum 
lim L2x(ri7 
= X(r) dim(E) 
i+m 
(I' : ri) 
space decomposition of L2(r&\G) into discrete and 
Arvind N. Nair 
99 
into cuspidal and residual spectrum. These induce decompositions in 
(g, K)-cohomology; under the assumption that G/AG has a discrete series 
[BC] shows that H* (g, K; L:.,,(I'AG\G) 
8 E) = 0 and so 
and correspondingly 
3.2 Two useful facts 
There is an elaborate theory of unitary representations with (g, K)-cohomo- 
logy due to Parthasarat hy, Kumaresan, and Vogan-Zuckerman (see [W2]). 
I will need two facts from this theory. 
FACT 1: If E has a regular highest weight and r is a representa- 
tion of G with H*(g, K; r 8 E) # 0 then (a) r is a discrete series 
representation with the same infinitesimal character as E* and (b) 
Hi(g, K; r 8 E) = C if i = q(G) and is zero otherwise. 
Let the packet of such representations be denoted DS(E*). The second 
useful fact is an observation of Wallach [Wl] 
FACT 2: If r is tempered then it cannot appear in L&,(rAG\G). 
3.3 Multiplicities 
There is a Hilbert space decomposition of Liis(rAG\G) as a G-module: 
This induces an algebraic direct sum decomposition in cohomology and 
hence an equality 
where 
~ ( ~ , ~ ) ( r  
8 E) = x(-1)' 
dim ~ ' ( g j ,  K; n @I E). 
i 

Arvind N. Nair 
100 
The L2 Euler Characteristic of Arithmetic Quotients 
Now suppose that E has regular highest weight. By FACT 1 the only 
contribution to the right side of (3.2) is from r in DS(E*) and then FACT 
2 implies that L&x(r, E) = 0. Therefore: 
Now suppose that we have a tower {ri}. Then 
Hence, in the limit, by Corollary 3.1, 
3.4 Comparing measures 
Let w be Harder's N Gauss-Bonnet form on G; it satifies JrAo\? w = ~ ( r ) .  
The following lemma relates it to the formal degrees d, of rr in DS(E*) 
and the Haar measure p on rAG\G. 
Lemma 3.2 [RS, 1.41 (-I)'(~) dim(E)w = C,EDS(E.) 
drip. 
The essential point is that both sides give an Euler-Poincare measure 
with respect to discrete cocompact subgroups: the left side does so by 
definition and the right side does so by using the limit multiplicity result 
of DeGeorge-Wallach [DW] for cocompact subgroups. 
3.5 Limit multiplicities 
It follows from (3.3) and Lemma 3.2 that 
Theorem 3.3 [RS, Theorem 1.51 For a tower {Ti} of arithmetic subgroups 
m ( ~ ,  
r i )  = 
d,. 
,'"R~(riA~\G) 
,EDs ( E * )  
nEDS(E8) 
Remarks 
Savin [Sa] showed that, for any r, 
lim 
m(n7ri) < d, 
i--too p(riAc\G) - 
where d, = 0 for non-discrete-series representations. Combined with 
the above, this establishes the optimal result, namely that the limit 
is exactly d, (in the cocompact case this result is due to DeGeorge 
and Wallach [DW]). Clozel [C] showed, in the adelic setting, that the 
limit is positive with an added condition about the local factor at one 
prime, a result that is more useful for arithmetic applications. 
Theorem 3.3 immediately implies a stable nonvanishing theorem for 
(cuspidal) cohomology in the middle dimension. Instead of computing 
an Euler characteristic one could compute the trace of an automor- 
phism of finite order in the L2 cohomology (by topological means) 
and deduce nonvanishing results (see e.g. [RS2] and other work of 
these authors). 
References 
[BC] 
A. Bore1 and W. Casselman, L2 cohomology of locally symmetric 
manifolds of finite volume, Duke Math. J. 50 (1983), 625-647. 
[cl 
L. Clozel, On limit multiplicities of discrete series representa- 
tions in spaces of automorphic forms, Invent. Math. 83 (1986), 
265-284. 
[DW] 
D. DeGeorge and N. Wallach, Limit formulas for multiplicities in 
L2(I'\G) I, Ann. of Math. 107 1978, 133-150; 11, Ann. of Math. 
109 (1979), 477-495. 
[GHM] 
M. Goresky, G. Harder and R. MacPherson, Weighted cohomol- 
ogy, Invent. Math. 116 (1994), 139-213. 
[GHMN] M. Goresky, G. Harder, R. MacPherson and Arvind Nair, 
Local intersection cohomology of Baily-Bore1 compactifications, to 
appear. 
[GM] 
M. Goresky and R. Macpherson, Local contribution to the 
Lefschetz filced-point formula, Invent. Math. 11 1 (l993), 1-33. 
[HI 
G .  Harder, A Gauss-Bonnet formula for discrete arithmetically 
defined groups, Ann. Sci. ~ c o l e  
Norm. Sup. 4 (1971), 409-455. 

The L2 Euler Characteristic of Arithmetic Quotients 
Arvind Nair, 
Weighted cohomology of 
arithmetic groups, 
to appear in Ann. of Math. 150. 
Gopal Prasad, Volumes of S-arithmetic quotients of semi-simple 
groups, Publ. Math. IHES 69 (1989), 91-117. 
J. Rohlfs and B. Speh, On limit multiplicities of representations 
with cohomology in the cuspidal spectrum, Duke Math. J. 55 
(1987), 199-211. 
J. Rohlfs and B. Speh, Automorphic representations and Lefschetz 
numbers, Ann. Sci. h o l e  Norm. Sup. (4) 22 (1989), 473-499. 
G. Savin, Limit multiplicities of cusp forms, Invent. Math. 95 
. 
(1989), 149-159. 
M. Stern, Lefschetz formula for arithmetic varieties, Invent. 
Math. 115 (1994), 241-296. 
N. Wallach, On the constant term of a square-integrable auto- 
morphic form, Operator Algebras and Group Representations I1 
(Mono. Stud. Math. vol. 18), Pitman, Boston (1984), 227-237. 
N. Wallach, Real reductive groups I, Academic Press, 1988. 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, TATA INSTITUTE 
OF FUNDAMENTAL 
.ESEARCH, HOMI BHABHA ROAD, MUMBAI 400 005, INDIA 
E-mail: arvind@math.tifr.res.in 
The Space of Degenerate Whittaker Models 
for GL(4) over padic Fields 
Dipendra Prasad 
1 Introduction 
Let G = GL2,(k) where k is a non-Archimedean local field. Let P be the 
(n, n) parabolic in G with Levi subgroup GL, (k) x GL, (k) and unipotent 
radical N = M,(k). Let $0 be a non-trivial additive character $0 : k + C*. 
Let $ ( X )  = t,!Jo(trX) be the additive character on N = Mn(k). Let V be an 
irreducible admissible representation of G. Let VN,+ be the largest quotient 
of V on which N operates via $: 
Since tr(gXgA1) = tr(X), it follows that VN,+ is a representation space for 
b 
i 
H = AGL,(k) v GLn(k) x GL,(k). The space VN,+ will be referred to as 
the space of degenerate Whittaker models, or sometimes also as the twisted 
Jacquet functor of the representation V. These considerations~also work for 
the group G = GL2(D) where D is any central simple algebra with center 
k. Again to any irreducible admissible representation V of GL2(D), one 
can define VN,+ which will now be a representation space for H = D*. 
The aim of this work is to understand the structure of VN,+ as a 
representation space for GL,(k). 
In an earlier work, cf. [P4], we had 
done this in the case of finite fields. The case of padic field seems much 
more difficult, and it appears that VN,+ has interesting structure only for 
n = 4 where the following multiplicity 1 theorem due to Rallis holds. 
Theorem 1.1 (Rallis) Let V be an irreducible admissible representation 
of G = GL4(k) (respectively GL2(D), D a quaternion division algebra) and 
W an irreducible admissible representation of H = GL2(k) (respectively 
D*). Then 
I 
dimHom~[V~,+, 
W] 5 1. 

104 
Degenerate Whit taker Models for GL(4) 
In this paper we make a conjecture about the structure of VN,+, when 
the group is GL4(k), or GL,(D) where D is a quaternion division alge- 
bra. Before we state our conjecture which tells exactly which represen- 
tations W of GL2(k) or D* appear in VN,+, we recall that by Langlands 
correspondence for G = GL4 (k) or GL2 (D), for any irreducible admissible 
representation V of G there is a natural Cdimensional representation of the 
Weil-Deligne group Wk of k which will be denoted by ov. 
Here is the main conjecture. The statement of the conjecture involves 
epsilon factors attached to representations of the Weil-Deligne group of k 
for which we refer to the article [Ta] of Tate. We are able to prove this con- 
jecture only for those representations which are irreducibly induced from a 
proper parabolic subgroup in which case the conjecture reduces to author's 
earlier work on the trilinear forms for representations of GL2, cf. [PI]. We 
will also reformulate the conjecture for many other representations so as to 
not involve epsilon factors directly. 
Conjecture 1.2 Let V be an irreducible admissible generic representation 
of G = GL4(k) (respectively of GL2(D) whose Jacquet-Langlands lift to 
G 4  is generic) and W an irreducible admissible generic representation 
of H = GL2(k) (respectively D*). Assume that the centml characters of 
V and W are the same. Then H O ~ ~ ~ ~ ( ~ ) [ V ~ , + ,  
W ]  # 0 if and only if 
c[(h20v) C3 o h ]  = (det ow)(-l), and H o ~ D * [ ~ N , + ,  
W] # 0 if and only if 
c[(h20v) 8 o h ]  = -(det ow) (- 1). 
Remark 1.3 The above conjecture is essentially Conjecture 6.9 of [G-PI 
for the particular case when the orthogonal group is of 6 variables which is 
closely related to GL(4). The motivation for the present work comes from 
some work which the author has done with A. Raghuram in [P-R] which 
is an attempt to develop Kirillov theory for GL2(D) in which the space of 
degenerate Whittaker models plays a prominent role. The global analogue 
of the space of degenerate Whittaker models that we consider will consist 
in looking at the following period'integral: 
where F is a cusp form belonging to an automorphic representation nl 
on GL4 over a global field k with P as the (2,2) maximal parabolic with 
P(A) as its adelic points; the function G belongs to a cuspidal automorphic 
representation 7r2 of GLZ The analogue of our main conjecture will relate 
the non-vanishing of this integral to the non-vanishing at the central critical 
value of L(h2rl 8 rr; , 4). We refer to the paper (JS] of Jacquet and Shalika 
for some related work. 
Dipendra Prasad 
105 
Acknowledgement The author thanks TIFR for the invitation to speak 
on this work in the conference on Automorphic Forms in December, 1999. 
This work was written when the author was visiting the University of Paris 
Nord under the CEFIPRA programme 1501-1 in the summer of 1999. 
2 
Calculation of degenerate Whittaker 
models for principal series 
Let nl and n2 be irreducible representations of GL2 (k) . Denote by Ps(rr1, lr? ) 
the principal series representation of GL4(k) induced from the (2,2) para- 
bolic with Levi subgroup GL2(k) x GL2(k). In this section we calculate the 
twisted Jacquet functor of Ps(nl, 712). 
Theorem 2.1 The twisted Jacquet functor Ps(rrl, n2) N,+ of Ps(nl, a2) 
where nl and n2 are irreducible representations of GL2(k) neither of which 
is l-dimensional, and with central characters wl and w2 sits in the following 
exact sequence 
Here Ps(wl, w2) is the principal series representation of GL2(k) induced 
from the character (wl, w2) of k* x k*. 
Proof Let P denote the (2,2) parabolic stabilising the 2-dimensional sub- 
space {el, e2} of the Cdimensional space {el, e2, es , e4}. The set GL4 (k)/P 
can be identified to the set of 2-dimensional subspaces of {el, e2, e3, e4); 
two elements of GL4(k)/P are in the same orbit of P if and only if the 
corresponding subspaces intersect {el, e2) in the same dimensional sub- 
spaces of {el,e2). It follows that there are three orbits of P on GL4(k)/P 
corresponding to the dimension of intersection 0, 1, 2. 
Denote by w the automorphism which takes el to e3, e2 to e4, es to el, 
and e4 to e2. Also, denote by W23 the automorphism which takes el to el, 
e2 to e3, e3 to ez, and e4 to e4. It follows that we have the decomposition 
GL4 (k) = P JJ P u ~ ~  
P U PwP. 
By Mackey theory, the restriction of Ps(nl, 7r2) to P has 
as Jordan-Holder factors. Since A = nl @I nz is a representation of P on 
which N operates trivially, this summand does not contribute to twisted 

106 
Degenerate Whit taker Models for GL(4) 
Jacquet functor. Since P n wPw = GL2 (k) x GL2 (k) , it is easy to see that 
as a representation space for N = M2 (k). From this isomorphism it is easy 
to see that the twisted Jacquet functor of C = 1ndgL2(*) 
xCL2(k) (a1 8 r2) 
is a1 8 a 2  as a representation space for GL2(k). Finally we calculate the 
twisted Jacquet functor of B = ~ n d ~ ~ , ~ ~ ~ , ~ ~ ( ~ l  
8 a2). For this, we first 
need to calculate P n w ~ ~ P w ~ ~ .  
For this purpose, we note that since P 
is the stabiliser of {el, e2}, w ~ ~ P w ~ ~  
is the stabiliser of the 2 dimensional 
subspace {el, e3). Therefore P n w ~ ~ P w ~ ~  
is the stabiliser of the pair of 
planes {el, el) and {el, e3}. It follows that P f l  w23 Pwz3 is exactly the set 
of matrices of the form 
It is easy to see that 
We note that in the induced representation ~ n d ~ ~ ~ , , ~ ~ , ,  
(al 8 n2), 7rl 8 a 
is considered as a representation space of P n w ~ ~ P w ~ ~  
via the inclusion of 
by x -+ W23ZW23. 
Observe that since a1 is not 1-dimensional, the representation a1 has 
a Whittaker model, and hence there is exactly a 1-dimensional space of 
linear forms, generated by el, on which the upper-triangular unipotent 
matrices operate via the character +. Similarly we find a linear form C2 on 
a 2 .  Therefore recalling the expression for ~
2
3
~
~
2
3
 
given earlier, the set of 
matrices of the form 
211 
513 
5 1 2  
5 1 4  
0 
5 2 2  
operate on the linear form el 8 t2 on a1 8 7r2 by 
. 
Dipendra Prasad 
107 
from which it is easy P to see by Fkobenius reciprocity that the twisted 
Jacquet functor of Indpn,23pw23 (nl 8 n2) is Ps(wl , w2), completing the 
proof of the theorem. 
0 
3 Principal series representations 
In this section we prove Conjecture 1.2 for those representations V of 
GL4(k) which are induced from a representation, say a1 8 7r2 of the Levi 
subgroup GL2(k) x GL2 (k) of the (2,2) parabolic. If the Langlands param- 
eters of the representations a1 and a 2  of GL2(k) are 01 and 0 2 ,  then the 
Langlands parameter a v  of V is a1 @ 02. Therefore, 
Therefore for a representation W of GL2(k) with the same central character 
as v, 
Since the central characters of V and W are the same, we have 
Therefore, 
It follows that 
Therefore, 
e(A2av 8 ah) = det(ow)(-1) 
if and only if 
€(al 8 0 2  8 a;) 
= 1. 

108 
Degenerate Whit taker Models for G L (4) 
Dipendra Prasad 
F'rom Theorem 1.4 of [PI] this is exactly the condition for the appear- 
ance of the representation W of GL2(k) as a quotient of rl 8 r 2 .  We 
therefore need to check that the representations of GL2(k) which appear as 
a quotient of Ps(r1, XZ)N,+ are exactly those which arise as a quotient of 
r1 8 r 2 .  
By Theorem 2.1, the twisted Jacquet functor of Ps(nl , 72) sits in the 
following exact sequence, 
Rom this we get the following long exact sequence, 
~xt&L,(,~ 
[ ~ s ( w i ,  
'4'21, W] # 0, if and only if H o ~ G L , ( ~ )  
[Ps(wi w2), W] #O- 
Therefore if we can check that non-triviality of H
o
~
~
~
~
(
~
)
 
[Ps(wl, W ~ ) ,  
W] 
implies the non-triviality of HornGL, (*) [rl €3 7r2, W], we will have proved 
that HornGL2(*) 
[Ps(rl, r2)N,+, W] is nonzero if and only if W is a quotient 
of rl 8 a which implies our conjecture in this case. It follows from [PI] 
that an irreducible principal series (of right central character) is a quotient 
of n l 8  q for any choice of nl and r 2 .  We therefore need only to take care 
of when Ps(wl, w2) has the Steinberg representation as a quotient. Again 
it follows from [PI] that the Steinberg representation of GL2(k) appears as 
a quotient of rl @ r 2  unless rl = a1 l'14st and r z  = a-' Il-'/4~t where rr 
is a quadratic character of k*, and S t  denotes the Steinberg representation 
of GL2. (We are using here the fact that Ps(w1, w2) has the Steinberg 
representation as a quotient.) It can be seen that for these choices of rl and 
Q, the principal series representation ~ s ( a l 1  
'l4st, a-' 11 -'/'st) 
is actually 
reducible which we are omitting from our considerations here. 
This completes the proof of Conjecture 1.2 for those principal series 
representations of GL4(k) which are irreducibly induced from the (2,2) 
parabolic. 
Remark 3.1 It is easy to see that if r is a principal series representation 
of GLa(k) induced from the (3,l) parabolic, then every irreducible generic 
representation W of GL2 (k) with the same central character as 7r appears as 
a quotient in r ~ , + ,  
and moreover, €[(A2 uv) 8 051 = (det a w  ) (- 1). Hence 
Conjecturel.2 is true for this case of parabolic induction too, and is a case 
where 6 factors play no role. We omit the details of the argument which 
are via standard application of the Mackey orbit theory. 
4 Supercuspidal representat ions 
In this section we will make an equivalent formulation of Conjecture 1.2 
for those represent ations V of G 4  
(k) which are obtained by automorphic 
induction of a representation, say II, of GL2(K) where K is a quadratic 
extension of k. When the residue characteristic of k is odd, it is known that 
all the supercuspidal representations of GL4(k) are obtained in this manner. 
This equivalent form will describe the space of degenerate Whittaker models 
without any explicit mention of epsilon factors. 
If the Langlands parameter of a representation II of GL2(K) is the 
2-dimensional representation a of the Weil-Deligne group WK of K ,  then 
the Langlands parameter of the representation V of GL4(k) which is 
- 
obtained by automorphic induction from ll, is 
In this case 
h20v = lndFK ( ~ ~ 0 )  
@ M ~ O ,  
where Mku is a Cdimensional representation of Wk obtained from the 
index 2 subgroup WK by the process of multiplicative or tensor induction 
described in [P2]. 
If ww is the central character of the representation W, and w ~ l k  
denotes 
the quadratic character of k* associated to the quadratic extension K ,  then 
by a theorem due to Saito [S] and Tunnel1 [Tu], 
if and only if the character x = A2u of K* appears in W. 
By Theorem D of [P2], 
if and only if the representation W of GL2(k) appears as a quotient in the 
representation II of GL2(K) when restricted to GL2(k). Combining these 
two theorems, we can interpret the condition 
and hence Conjecture 1.2 as follows. 
Consequence 1 of Conjecture 1.2 Let V be supercuspidal representa- 
tion of GL4(k) which is obtained by automorphic induction of a representa- 
tion II of GL2(K) where K is a quadratic extension of k. Then a represen- 
tation W of GL2(k) with the same central character as that of V appears 
in VN,+ if and only if either, 

110 
Degenerate Whit taker Models for GL(4) 
(a) The character wn of K* appears in the representation W of GL2(k) 
and the representation W of GL2(lc) appears as a quotient when the 
representation II of GL2 (K) is restricted to GL2 (k) . 
(b) The character wn of K* does not appear in the representation W 
of GL2(k) and the representation W of GL2(k) also does not appear 
as a quotient when the representation ll of GL2(K) Is restricted to 
GL2 (k). 
5 
Generalised Steinberg represent ations 
Suppose n is a cuspidal representation of GL2 (lc) . Then it is known that the 
principal series representation of GL4(lc) induced from the representation 
a( - 11/2 x ?rl . 
of the (2,2) parabolic of GL4(k) with Levi subgroup 
GL2(k) x GL2(k) has length 2 with a unique irreducible quotient which 
is a discrete series representation of GL4(k), called generalised Steinberg 
and denoted by St(n). We will denote the unique subrepresentation of this 
principal series by Sp(n). This theorem due to Bernstein-Zelevinsky has 
also been proved in the context of GL2(D) by Tadic in [TI with exactly 
analogous statement. 
The Langlands parameter of the representation St(x) is a C?J s2 where 
o is the Langlands parameter of the representation n of GL2(k), and for 
any n 2 1, s, denotes the unique irreducible representation of SL2(C) of 
dimension = n. 
We interpret what Conjecture 1.2 says about the space of degenerate 
Whittaker functionals in this case which we will divide into two separate 
cases. We will often use the following relation about epsilon factors 
where T is a representation of the Weil group, F is a F'robenius element of 
the Weil group and r' denotes the subspace of T on which the inertia group 
acts trivially. 
5.1 The case when W is not a twist of Steinberg 
For vector spaces Vl and V2, there is a natural isomorphism of complex 
vector spaces, 
Dipendra Prasad 
It follows that 
h2(o@s2) = 
= det a 
ss @ sym20. 
Using this and taking into account Equation (5.1), we have 
r ( ~ ~ ( o  
8 s2) €3 oty) = ~ ( d e t  
o s3 
ot,)r(sym20 @ oty) 
= c(det o - 
det(- F, [det o - ~ t y ] ' ) ~  
x 
c(Sym20 8 ot,). 
Since the central character of St(n) is (det  IS)^, from the condition on the 
central characters, 
(det 
= det ow. 
It follows that 
[deto.ob]* 2 deta -at,. 
Therefore ~ ( d e t  
o - ~ t , ) ~  
= ww (- 1). Moreover note that since we are assum- 
ing that ow is an irreducible representation of the Weil group of dimension 
2, there are no invariants under the inertia group in det o ot,. Therefore, 
r(h2(o C?J s2) @ o b )  = c(det o - I s ~ , ) ~  
det(-F, [det o - ~ f y ] ' ) ~ .  
r ( ~ ~ m ~ o B o i y )  
= ww(-l)c(det o oty) - 6(sym20 8 o b )  
= ww(-l)&(a €3 IS @ ob). 
It follows that E ( A ~ ( O  
@ s2) 8 0%) = WW(-1) if and only if 
Therefore by Theorem 1.4 of [PI], Conjecture 1.2 reduces to the follow- 
ing statement. 
Consequence 2 of Conjecture 1.2 Suppose that 7r is an irreducible 
admissible cuspidal representation of GL2(k). Then a representation W 
of GL2(k) which is not a twist of the Steinberg appears as a quotient in 
the degenerate Whittaker model of the generalised Steinberg representation 
St(.lr) of GL4(lc) if and only if it appears as ct quotient in .rr 8 IT. 

112 
Degenerate Whit taker Models for GL(4) 
5.2 The case when W is a twist of Steinberg 
In this subsection we analyse what Conjecture 1.2 implies for W, a twist 
of the Steinberg representation St on GL2(k) by a character x of k*. In 
this case the Langlands parameter ow is given by ow = x - s2 with the 
determinant condition (det o)2 = X2. Let x = w det a with w a quadratic 
character of k*. We have, 
a(h2 (o 8 s2) 8 o h )  = 
s ( ~ ) ~  
det (- F, ~ ' ) ~ s ( ~ - ' ~ ~ m ~ o ) ~  
det (-F, [x-' ~ ~ m ~ o ] ' )  
= w(-1) . x(-1) . det u(-1) 
det(-F, [X-1~ym20]') 
= det(- F, [X-1~ym20]'). 
Here we have used the relation ~ ( w ) ~  
= w(- 1), and det (- F, w')~ = 1, both 
arising because w is a quadratic character. 
Since Wk/ I is a cyclic group, the subspace on which the inertia group 
acts trivially can be decomposed as a sum of Wk-invariant lines. It is easy to 
see that if o is an irreducible but non-dihedral representation, then sym20 
is an irreducible representation of Wk, and therefore has no I-invariants. If 
on the other hand, o is a dihedral representation obtained by inducing a 
character, say p on K*, for K a quadratic extension of k, then sym2a has 
a unique Wk invariant line on which Wk acts by the restriction of p to k*. 
Therefore X-1~ym20 has an I-invariant vector if and only if pX-' is trivial 
on the inertia subgroup, and -F acts by -1 on the corresponding line if 
and only if p restricted to k* is X .  We therefore obtain that, 
if and only if o is a dihedral representation obtained by inducing a char- 
acter, say p on K*, for K a quadratic extension of k, with p = x on k*. 
Conjecture 1.2 therefore reduces to the following in this case. 
Consequence 3 of Conjecture 1.2 For a character x of k*, the twist of 
the Steinberg representation x 8 St appears in the space of degenerate Whit- 
taker models of the generalised Steinberg representation St(n) on GL4(k) 
for a cuspidal representation a on GL2(k) with wz = x2 If and only if 
either the representation a does not come from a quadratic extension, or if 
Dipendra Prasad 
113 
the representation a comes from a quadratic extension K of k obtained by 
inducing a character, say p on K*, for K a quadratic extension of k, then 
p # x on k* (but p2 = X2 on k* by the condition on central characters). 
It is easier to state what Conjecture 1.2 reduces to for GL2(D). 
Consequence 4 of Conjecture 1.2 Let ?r be an irreducible representa- 
tion of D* of dimension > 1 and central character w,. 
Then the space of 
\ 
degenerate Whittaker models of Sp(a) is the 1-dimensional representation 
of D* obtained from the character w, 
by composing with the reduced norm 
mapping. 
Proof Let Ps(a( - ('I2, a( (-'I2) be the principal series representation of 
GL2(D) obtained by inducing the representation a1 - ['I2 x rl - 1-'l2 of the 
minimal parabolic of GL2(D) with Levi subgroup D* x D*. By work of 
Tadic [TI, it is known that if dim(*) > 1, Ps(a( - 1 'I2, ?rl- (-'I2) has length 2 
with a unique irreducible quotient which is a discrete series representation 
of GL2(D), called generalised Steinberg and denoted by St(a). We will 
denote the unique subrepresentation of this principal series by Sp(?r). We 
have therefore an exact sequence of representations 
Since the twisted Jacquet functor is an exact functor, and since the twisted 
Jacquet functor of P s ( ~ l - ) ' / ~ ,  
?rl 
is n 8 n ,  we have the exact sequence 
of D* representations 
Therefore the twisted Jacquet functor of Sp(s) consists of those irreducible 
representations of D* which appear in a IT a but not in S ~ ( T ) ~ , $ .  
By our 
calculation of epsilon factors, all the irreducible representations of D* of 
dimension > 1 appearing in a 8 a also appear in S ~ ( T ) ~ , +  
(as by Theo- 
rem 1.4 of [PI], the condition for appearance in the two representations 
is the same). This proves that no representations of D* of dimension > 1 
appears in SP(T)~,$. Since a 
w, -a*, it follows that ?r8a always contains 
the character w, of k*, and is the only character of k* it contains unless 
n comes from a character of a quadratic field extension K in which case it 
also contains w, - w ~ / k .  Therefore from Consequence 3 of Conjecture 1.2, 
this corollary follows. (One needs to know that if a is a dihedral repre- 
sentation of D* obtained by inducing a character, say p on K*, for K a 
quadratic extension of k, then the central character of such a representation 
is ~ l k *  
' w K / ~ ) -  
0 

114 
Degenerate Whittaker Models for GL(4) 
Consequence 5 of Conjecture 1.2 The generalised Steinberg representa- 
tion St(n) of GL(2, D) has a Shalika model if and only if the representation 
n is self-dual with non-trivial central character. 
Remark 5.1 The above corollary was conjectured in [P3]. 
6 Relation to triple product epsilon factor 
There is an intertwining operator between the principal series represen- 
tations Ps(n1, n2) and Ps(7r2, nl ) where Xi are either representations of 
GL2(k) or of D* for D a quaternion division algebra over k. The intertwin- 
ing operator is defined in terms of an integral over the unipotent radical 
of the opposite parabolic to the (2,2) parabolic, and is in particular over a 
non-compact space, and depends on a certain complex parameter s. The 
integral converges in a certain region of values for s, and is defined for all 
representations TI, 7r2 by analytic continuation. 
The action of the intertwining operator from the principal series 
P ( n 1 2 )  to Ps(n2,nl) seems closely related to the triple product 
epsilon factor. We make this suggestion more precise. We will assume 
in this section that D is either a quaternion division algebra or a 2 x 2 
matrix algebra over a padic field k. Let n1 and n2 be two irreducible 
representations of D* neither of which is l-dimensional if D* is isomorphic 
to GL2 (k). 
The intertwining operator induces an action on the twisted Jacquet 
functor which as we have seen before for Ps(al, 7r2) is essentially xl 8 n2. 
Therefore the intertwining operator induces a D*-equivariant mapping from 
nl 8 7r2 to 7r2 8 nl. Composing this with the mapping from n1 8x2 to x2 8 nl 
given by vl 8 v2 + v2 8 vl, we now have an intertwining operator, call it 
I, from nl 8 Q to itself. If n3 is an irreducible representation of D*, then 
by the multiplicity 1 theorem of [PI], the space of D*-invariant maps from 
nl 8 
w2 to ng is at most 1-dimensional. The intertwining operator I acts 
on this l-dimensional vector space, and therefore the action of I on this 
1-dimensional space is by multiplication by a complex number I(nl, a,, n3). 
Conjecture 6.1 I(nl, 7r2,n3) = c6(n1 8 n2 8 n3) where c is a constant 
independent of nl , n2, n3. (We remark that the intertwining operator from 
the principal series Ps(al,n2) to the principal series Ps(m,nl) itself 
depends on the choice of Haar measure on N - ,  and therefore the constant 
c depends on the Haar measure on N - . )  
Remark 6.2 The conjecture above is analogous to the works of Shahidi 
in which he relates the action of intertwining operators on the Whittaker 
Dipendra Prasad 
115 
functional to local constants. We refer to the paper [Sh] of Shahidi for one 
such case. 
References 
[G-PI B.H. Gross and D. Prasad, On irreducible representations of 
SO(2n + 1) x S0(2rn), Canad. J. Math. 46 (5) (1994), 930-950. 
[JS] H. Jacquet and J. Shalika, Exterior square L-functions, Automorphic 
forms, Shimura varieties, and L-functions, Perspectives in Maths. 11 
Eds. L. Clozel and J. Milne, Academic Press (1990). 
[PI] D. Prasad, Wlinear forms for representations of GL(2) and local 
epsilon factors, Compositio Math. 75 (1990), 1-46. 
[P2] D. Prasad, Invariant linear forms for representations of GL(2) over 
a local field, Amer. J. Math. 114 (1992), 1317-1363. 
[P3] D. Prasad, Some remarks on representations of a division algebra 
and of Galozs groups of local fields, J. of Number Theory 74 (1999), 
73-97. 
[P4] D. Prasad, The space of degenerate Whittaker models for General 
linear groups over a finite field, IMRN 11 (2000), 579-595. 
[P-R] D. Prasad and A. Raghuram, Representation theory of GL2(D) where 
D is a division algebra over a non-Archimedean local field, Duke 
Math J. 104 (2000), 19-44. 
[S] 
H. Saito, On Tunnell 's formula for characters of GL(2), Compositio 
Math. 85 (1993), 99-108. 
[Sh] F. Shahidi, Fourier transforms of intertwining oprators and 
Plancherel measures for GL(n), Amer. J. Math. 106 (l984), 67-111. 
[TI 
M. Tadic, Induced representations of GL(n,A) for p-adzc division 
algebras A, J. reine angew. Math. 405 (1980), 48-77. 
[Ta] J. Tate, Number theoretic background, Automorphic forms, represen- 
tations and L-functions, Corvallis Proceedings, AMS (l979), 3-26. 
[Tu] 3. Tunnell, Local epsilon factors and characters of GL(2), Amer. J. 
Math. 105 (1983), 1277-1307. 
MEHTA RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE, 
CHHATNAG 
ROAD, JHUSI, ALLAHABAD- 
211019, INDIA 
E-mail: dprasad@mri .ernet .in 

More generally, consider 
The Siegel Formula and Beyond 
S. Raghavan 
A classical question in the 
positive integer as a sum of 
of such a problem require at 
Theory of Numbers is one of expressing a 
squares of integers. The qualitative aspects 
times no more than rudimentary congruence 
- 
considerations - e.g., a natural number leaving remainder 03 under divi- 
sion by 4 can not be a sum of two squares of integers; however, in general, 
subtle arguments are called for - Fermat's Principle of Descent needs to 
come into play for a proof of the (Euler-Fermat-) Lagrange theorem that 
every positive integer is a sum of 4 squares of integers! Skilful use of elliptic 
theta functions was made by Jacobi to obtain a quantitative refinement of 
that theorem, viz., according as n is an odd or even natural number, the 
number of ways of expressing n as a sum of 4 squares of integers is 80*(n) 
or 24a* (n), where a* (m) for any natural number m is the sum of all the odd 
natural numbers dividing m; Jacobi's famous identity linking the 4th power 
9: of the theta 'constant' B3 with other theta 'constants' 92, 
and their 
derivatives is an analytical encapsulation of the above formulae as n varies 
over all natural numbers. An analytic formulation of similar nature arises 
also as a special case of the Siegel Formula (extended suitably to cover 
the so-called 'boundary case' involving quaternary quadratic forms as well) 
which connects theta series associated with quadratic forms to Eisenstein 
series: for complex z with positive imaginary part, 
the right hand side representing an Eisenstein series 
(P - 
odd 
which converges only 
conditionally and can be realized (via Hecke's Grenzprozess) by analytic 
continuation from an absolutely convergent Eisenstein series (The inner 
sum over p is over all integers coprime to q and of opposite parity to that 
of 9). 
for a positive definite quadratic form f given by 
with coefficients sij = sji in Z and m variables X I , .  . , xm and associated 
(m, m) matrix S := (sij) : clearly, 0 5 r(f; t) < oo and r(f; t) is the number 
of representations oft by f over Z. We recall that, given quadratic forms 
gl, 92 over a (good) ring R, gl is said to represent 92 over R if there exists 
a linear transformation of the variables with coefficients from R taking 
e. 
?L 
gl precisely to 92; moreover, gl and 92 are called R-equivalent if gl and 
92 represent each other over R. Taking gl = f as above and 92 to be 
an integral quadratic form with associated (n, n) symmetric matrix T, the 
number of representations of 92 by (gl =) f is denoted by r(S; T) and is just 
the number of (m, n) integral matrices G such that 'GSG = T, where 'G is 
the transpose of G; in particular, for gl = f(xl, ... ,xm),g2 = ty2, we are 
a?C 
indeed led to r(S; t) above. Analogously, for any power ps of a given prime 
F, 
tb 
number p,r(f; t I pS) stands for the number of representations of t by f 
over Z/pSZ : then d,( f ,  t) , the p- adic density of representation of t by f is 
%, 
defined as Cm lim r( f ; t I ps)/ps(m-l) with C, := 2 or 1 according as m = 1 
8-+00 
$ 
or m > 1 and it is clear that this density is non-negative, vanishing precisely 
when f fails to represent t over the ring Zp of p-adic integers. The infinite 
product n d,(f, tJ extended over all primes p converges and is equal to 0 
exactly when f fails to represent t over at least one Z, (i.e., when at least one 
d,,(f, t) equals 0). The real density t,( f, t) measuring the representation of 
t by f over R is defined as lim vol (f 
(U))/ vol (U) taken over measurable 
neighbourhoods U of t shrinking to { t )  with vol (.) denoting Lebesgue 
measure; it is known (181 that &(f, t) = ~ ~ / ~ t ( ~ - ~ ) / ~ / { r ( m / 2 )  
(det f)'l2} 
where I? is Euler's gamma function and det f is the determinant of f. 
From Minkowski's reduction theory for quadratic forms, we know that 
the genus gen (f) consisting of all quadratic forms g which are equivalent 
to f over lR and Z, for every prime p, splits into finitely many Z-equivalence 
classes for which we choose a complete set { fl = f, f2, . . . , fh) of represen- 
tatives. For 1 5 a 5 h, let ei denote the number of linear transformations 
J;- 
over Z preserving the positive definite quadratic form fie 
Siegel's main 
I 
theorem for positive definite integral quadratic forms f ,  in this case for 

The Siegel Formula and Beyond 
t E N, reads: 
where 
= 1 or 0 according as rn = 2 or not. We note that for f to 
represent t over Z, it is necessary that it does so over B and over every Zp. 
But, on the other hand, the representation of t by f over B and every Z, 
can only ensure that f represents t over Q, 
by the Hasse Principle and not 
necessarily over Z. In such an event, Siegel's main theorem ensures that at 
least one among fl, . . . , fh represents t over Z (if not f itself); it is thus 
more subtle and a quantitative refinement. The remarkable string of papers 
([l8], (191, [20]) by Siegel deal with the more general case of representation 
of quadratic forms by quadratic forms, not merely over Z but even rings of 
algebraic integers (in totally real fields) and also where the forms do not 
need to be definite quadratic forms. 
For m > 4, Siegel's main theorem as in (*) can be formulated as an ana- 
lytic identity between theta series (associated with the fis) and Eisenstein 
series: 
(**> 
where, for complex z with imaginary part y := (z - r ) / 2 m  > O), the 
theta series 
O(fj,z) := C 
e ~ ~ ( r G ~ f j ( a l , . . - , a r n ) ) ,  
01, ... ,am€Z 
H (  f ;  b, a) := (fl/b)m/2 (det s)-'I2 . x 
exp (n-f 
(a1 , - - - , am)a/b) 
al,... ,am€Z/(b)/(b) 
are generalized Gauss sums and the summation over a, b on the right hand 
side of (**) is taken over all coprime pairs of integers a E Z, b E W while 
the accent on C requires ab to be even, if f represents over Z some odd 
integer. The right hand side of (**) gives an Eisenstein series converging 
absolutely (in view of "rn > 4"). To cover the 'boundary case m = 4' 
(like one encountered for the case of 4 squares), we need to invoke Hecke's 
limiting process, in order to obtain , via analytic continuation, the required 
Eisenstein series. For j # k, the theta series B(fj, z), B( f k  , z) have the same 
S. Raghavan 
119 
asymptotic behaviour when the variable z goes to infinity or approaches 
any 'rational point' a/b; so the theta series are 'indistinguishable' when 
viewed through an analytical prisom. Thus it is all the more remarkable 
that the arithmetical version of Siegel's main theorem, thanks to an aptly 
chosen mean of the fils, achieves an identity linking theta series to Eisen- 
stein series (looking so different from the former although exhibiting similar 
'asymptotics'). 
In the context of the representation over Z of quadratic forms g by the given 
f ,  the complex variable z gives way to a matrix variable Z in the Siegel 
upper half plane H, of degree n, consisting of all (n, n) complex symmetric 
matrices Z with 'imaginary' part Irn(Z) := &(Z - Z) 
positive definite; 
here n is the number of variables in the form g. The associated theta series is 
now B(S, Z) := x 
exp (r- 
tr (tGSGZ)) with G running over all (m, n) 
G 
integral matrices and tr(.) denoting matrix trace. Siegel's main theorem in 
the present situation leads to an analogue of (t*) where the'Eisenstein 
series on the right has its general summand in the form H(S; C, D) det 
(CZ + D)-"/~ with generalized Gauss sums H (S; C, D) and the summation 
of the series is over n-rowed coprime symmetric pairs (C, D) such that no 
two distinct pairs differ from one another by a matrix factor from GL(n, Z) 
on the left (two (n, n) integral matrices R, S such that 
i 
ii) 
Such 
RtS = StR and 
any rational matrix G making both GR and GS integral is necessarily 
integral form an n-rowed coprime symmetric pair (R, S)). 
pairs make up the last n rows of elements of 
Known as the Siegel modular group of degree n, I?, 
acts on H, via the 
modular transformations Z I+ M < Z >:= (AZ + B) (CZ + D)-I for 
M = 
E I',. 
Under these modular transformations, the Eisenstein 
series on the right hand side of an analogue of (**) behaves in a way quite 
like any of the theta series f3(Si, 2). Recalling that a holomorphic function 
p : H, + C ("bounded at infinity" for n = 1) such that for all M = (g E) 
I'n := {(: :) 
(P Q), (R S) are n-rowed coprime symmetric pairs 
such that PtS - QtR = En, the (n,n) identity 
matrix 

120 
The Siege1 Formula and Beyond 
in a subgroup of finite index in I?,, cp(M < Z >) det (CZ + D ) - ~  = p(Z) is 
called a Siegel modular form of degree n and weight k, the afore-mentioned 
Eisenstein series is a modular form of weight m/2 just like each O(S,, Z) 
for a 'congruence subgroup' of r,. For n = 1, the Eisenstein series under 
consideration differs from O(S, z )  by a 'cusp form' and one is easily led to 
an asymptotic formula for r(S; t) with the Fourier coefficient corresponding 
to the index t in the Eisenstein series as the principal term and an error 
term of order tml4. This phenomenon does not replicate itself, in general, 
for n > I! 
S. Raghavan 
121 
on both sides of the identity F(S, 2) = Em12(Z) yields Siegel's main the- 
orem on representation of (n, n) matrices T by S, provided m > 2n + 2. 
Despite this condition looking 'stringent' especially in the context of the 
arithmetical main theorem for quadratic forms holding good without such 
a 'stringent' condition, the above 'function-theoretic' proof (with its sheer 
novelty) does represent a spinoff for Arithmetic! On the other hand, Siege17s 
main theorem for quadratic forms with its powerful analytic formulation as 
in (**) seems to have been the starting point for his path-breaking work 
[21] on modular functions of degree n and also a full-fledged theory of these 
functions - a cradle for the modern theory of automorphic forms as well as 
a touchstone and driving force thereafter. 
Andrianov ([I], [4, Ch.IV, SS 6-71) has given a nice and interesting proof 
for Siegel's main theorem for integral representation of (n, n) symmetric 
matrices T by (m,m) positive definite integral matrices S of determinant 
1, with even diagonal entries and m > 2n+2. The proof depends on explicit 
determination of the effect of Hecke operators on O(S, Z) for such S and on 
properties of Eisenstein series. First, for such S, m is a multiple of 8. Let 
{S1 = S, S2,. . . , Sh) be a complete set of representatives of Z-equivalence 
classes in the genus of S. Then, for 1 5 i 5 h,O(Si,Z) = Cr(Si;T). 
exp (ri tr (TZ)) where T runs over (n, n) symmetric non-negative definite 
integral matrices with even diagonal entries and tr(.) denotes matrix trace; 
each theta series is a Siegel modular form of weight m/2, for r,. For a 
given prime number p, the Hecke operator T(p) on Siegel modular forms cp 
of weight k, for r,) is defined by 
where Nj = (2 2) 
and I?, ( 2  .in) I?, 
= Uj rnNj. Explicitly deter- 
mining the effect of T(p) on O(Sj, Z), Andrianov showed that the analytic 
genus invariant F(S, Z) := 
e j l O ( ~ j ,  
Z)/ 
l/ej is actually 
an eigenform of T(p) for every prime p; the constant term in the Fourier 
expansion of F is clearly 1. On the other hand, any Siegel modular form of 
weight m/2 for r,, with constant term 1, that is an eigen form of an infinity 
of T (p) has necessarily to coincide, for m/2 > n + 1, with the Eisenstein 
series Em12 (2) = C( D ) det (CZ + D)-"I2, the summation being over a 
complete set of n-rowed coprime symmetric pairs ( c  D) such that no two 
distinct ones differ by a factor on the left from GL(n, Z). Since m/2 > n + 1 
the series converges absolutely and its Fourier coefficients are well-known 
from Siegel's fundamental paper [21]. Comparison of Fourier coefficients 
A crucial step in the proof of Siegel's main theorem for representations of 
quadratic forms by quadratic forms f (not necessarily definite and not just 
over Z but over rings of algebraic integers) is to show that a certain number 
p(S) = p(f) depending on f is (a constant) equal to 2; for positive definite 
1 
integral S, we have 
where the limit is taken over a suitable sequence like that of factorials, 
w(q) is the number of prime factors of q and e,(S) is the number of linear 
transformations over Z leaving f fixed modulo q. Bringing in the special 
orthogonal group G = SO(f) of the (integral) quadratic form f and taking 
Z, Z,, R for base rings, the definition above for p(S) may be seen to identify 
it with the (Weil-) Tamagawa number r(G) attached to the special orthog- 
onal group G of f ;  it was actually proved by Tamagawa that T(G) = 2 
(for m 2 2). For non-degenerate quadratic forms in m 2 3 variables (over 
number fields), Weil [25] proved, by induction on m, the "Siegel-Tamagawa 
theorem that r(G) = 2" for the corresponding special orthogonal group G, 
! 
introducing 'adelic zeta functions' attached to G (generalizing even Siegel's 
zeta functions for indefinite quadratic forms) and examining the residues 
1, 
at their poles etc.. 
Using the fascinating setting of adelic analysis, Weil presented in two 
powerful papers [26, 271 the analytic formulation of Siegel's main theorem 
for quadratic forms as a "Siegel Formula" (more generally, for "classical 
groups" arising from algebras with involution) in the form of an identity 
between two "invariant tempered distributions" - 
the 'theta distribution' 
and the 'Eisenstein distribution', A vital ingredient in Weil's proof is a 

122 
The Siege1 Formula and Beyond 
general Poisson Formula involving transforms FG of Schwartz-Bruhat func- 
tions 9 on locally compact abelian groups X and the Fourier transform Fa 
of F; as well as the correct recognition of the measures 'making up' Fa. 
On specializing @ and X suitably, Siegel's analytic formulation of the main 
theorem for quadratic forms can be recovered. Using high-power analysis 
and deep results such as Hironaka7s resolution of singularities in Algebraic 
Geometry, Igusa [9] generalized Weil's Poisson Formula in his researches 
on forms f of higher degree m in n variables (with appropriate restrictions 
such as n > 2m 2 4 or that the zero variety of f is irreducible and normal). 
Rich dividends arise from an application of Igusa7s Poisson Formula - e.g. 
Birch's local-global theorem [2] generalizing Davenport's results on cubic 
forms concerning the existence of rational points on hypersurfaces defined 
by f (See [7], for a nice survey). 
Recently, Sato [16] obtained a generalization of the Siegel Formula in 
the guise of a relation between two invariant measures on the space of 'finite 
adeles' of homogeneous spaces X of semisimple algebraic groups G (defined 
over Q) with the 'strong approximation theorem' valid for G. The two 
invariant measures coincide but for a factor of proportionality that is just 
the Tamagawa number; while one of them is the Tamagawa meausre, the 
other is the one induced from the measure on the completion of X (0) with 
respect to the "congruence subgroup topology". Specializing G, X suitably 
say G = SL(m),X = SL(m)/SO(m - n) for m 2 n 2 1 and m 2 2, 
one can recover Siegel's main theorem for representation of (n, n) integral 
matrices T by a given (m, m) integral nondegenerate matrix S. In Sato7s 
measure-theoretic approach, volumes of fundamental domains for discrete 
subgroups of Lie groups appear as really natural agents for measuring the 
size of all solutions of relevant Diophantine equations e.g. integral matrices 
A with tASA = T. 
The Siegel Formula for quadratic forms f as generalized by Weil has 
been extended by recent remarkable work of Kudla and Rallis [15] so as 
to cover situations where, for example, in the case of the 'dual reductive 
pair' (Sp(n), SO( f )), we no longer have the absolute convergence of the 
Eisenstein series concerned or of even the theta integral involved. In such 
critical environment, delicate analysis is indeed called for, as we shall see 
in the following section while having to deal with just the failure of the 
Eisenstein series to converge absolutely! 
Given a Siegel modular form f of degree n and weight k, the Siegel 
operator 9 on f is defined by 
for Zl E Hn-l. Whenever 9 f vanishes identically, f is called a cusp form 
and is then characterized by all its Fourier coefficients a(T) corresponding to 
degenerate T becoming zero. For given f, the function f is a modular form 
of degree n - 1 and weight k. For large enough k, Maass showed the Siegel 
operator to be surjective, by using Poincaie series [12]; employing Eisenstein 
series G(Z, g) 'lifting', to degree n, cusp forms of degree j < n, Klingen [lo] 
proved again the surjectivity of 9. The Eisenstein series G(Z; g) are of the 
form 
C g ( r j ( ~  
< Z >) det(CZ + D)-' 
M 
where for W E H,, rj(W) is the principal (j, j) minor of W and M = (6 g) 
runs over a complete set of representatives of left cosets of I', 
modulo the 
The series converge absolutely for k > n + j + 1 and an-i(G(Z; g)) = g. 
For k 2( 272, one needs to attach for convergence, Hecke convergence factors 
{det( Im (xj(M < Z >))I 
det( Irn (M < Z >))-'I 
with a complex parameter s ensuring absolute convergence for large Re(s). 
The analytic continuation of the Eisenstein series with the convergence 
factors inserted has to be studied as a function of s. For n = 1, the first such 
(vector-valued Dirichlet) series in s arising from Eisenstein series as above 
associated to Jacobi theta constants el, 02, O3 or to theta series attached to 
even quadratic forms (of given 'signature') were thoroughly investigated by 
Siegel [22, 231 in regard to analytic continuation and functional equation 
(as functions of s). For general n, the corresponding results are taken care 
of by the general framework in Langlands' theory of Eisenstein series on 
semisimple Lie groups [I 11. 
Even for a simple-looking Eisenstein series (with Hecke convergence 
factors) defined by 
EP) (2; s) = (det irn(Z))'C det (CZ + D)-' (abs det (CZ + D))-~' 
C, 
D 
convergent absolutely for k > n + 1 and complex s with Re(s) 2 0, it is not 
clear on the face of it that we are led to a holomorphic function of Z while 
taking the limit as s tends to 0, in the 'boundary case' of k = n + 1 E 2N. 
For n = 1 and k = 2, we know from Hecke [S] that the limit as s tends to 0 
exists but it is not holomorphic in Z. The first example, for degree n > 1, 
where the Hecke Grenzprozess yields a non-zero holomorphic modular form 
of degree n and weight k = n+ 1 is the case when n = 3 with Ic = 4 (see [13]). 

124 
The Siege1 Formula and Beyond 
For general n > 1 and the 'boundary case' of (even) k = n + 1, Weissauer's 
comprehensive results [28] settled the issue, by showing, in particular, that 
Hecke's Grenzprozess yields non-zero holomorphic modular forms for even 
k > (n + 3)/2 or if 4 divides k ( 5  (n + 1)/2); we have also, independently of 
Weissauer's, the complete investigations on Eisenstein series due to Shimura 
[l7]. Weissauer [28] determines, as well, the obstruction to @-lifting (i.e., 
lifting a cusp form g of degree j and weight k to a holomorphic limit) of 
series resembling G(Z, g) but with appropriate Hecke convergence factors 
inserted to take care of 'boundary weights' k. Further, he applies these 
results in [28] to prove theorems, in particular, on representing Siegel mod- 
ular forms as linear combinations of theta series 8(S, Z) just as in Bocherer's 
beautiful results [3]. Actually Bocherer showed that every Siegel modular 
(respectively cusp) form of degree n and weight k E 4W with k > 2n is a 
linear combination of theta series (respectively with spherical harmonics) 
associated to even unimodular positive definite quadratic forms, by first 
determining the Fourier expansion of Klingen's G(Z; g) and then applying 
Garrett's important results [4], Andrianov's difficult work [I] on Euler prod- 
ucts and Siegel's main theorem for quadratic forms. The 'basis problem' 
for elliptic modular forms (of level 2 1) is one of expressing them linearly 
in terms of theta series associated with quadratic forms; for the first time, 
Waldspucger's significant paper [24] invoked Siegel's main theorem to tackle 
the 'basis problem'. At the other end of the spectrum when the weight k 
of Siegel modular forms of degre n is much smaller in relation to n (say, 
k 
2n but actually k 5 7112) we land on Siegel modular forms which are 
singular (i.e. having in their Fourier expansion no non-zero Fourier coeffi- 
cient a(T) 
with non-degenerate n, n) non-negative symmetric matrices T). 
We know ([4, Ch. IV, S 51, [14]) that every singular Siegel modular form 
of degree n for I?, 
is a linear combination of theta series associated with 
even unimodular positive definite quadratic forms. It is possible to obtain 
an analogue for (singular) Hermitian modular forms for the full Hermitian 
modular group corresponding to an imaginary quadratic field. A difficult 
paper of Freitag [5] has nicely tackled the problems for singular Hilbert- 
Siegel modular forms of arbitrary stufe. 
References 
[I] A.N. Andrianov, The multiplicative arithmetic of Siegel modular forms, 
Russian Math. Surveys 34 (1979), 75-148. 
[2] B.J. Birch, Forms in many variables, Proc. Roy. Soc. Ser. A 265 
(l961/62), 245-263. 
S. Raghavan 
125 
[3] S. Bocherer, ~ b e r  
die Fourier-Jacobi-Entwicklung Siegelscher Eisen- 
steinreihen, Math. Zeit. 183 (1983), 21-46; 11, Math. Zeit. 189 (1985), 
81-110. 
[4] E. Freitag, Siegelsche Modulfunktionen, Grundlehren Math. Wissen- 
schaften 254, Springer Verlag, 1983. 
[5] E. 
Freitag, 
Hilbert-Siegelsche singulare Modulformen, 
Math. 
Nachrichten. 170 (l994), 101-126. 
[6] P.B. Garrett, Pullbacks of Eisenstein series, Proc. Taniguchi Sympo- 
sium on Automorphic Forms in Several Variables, Birkhaiiser, 1984. 
[7] S.J. Harris, Number theoretical developments arising from the Siegel 
formula, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 2 (1980), 417-433. 
[8] E. Hecke, Theorie der Eisensteinschen Reihen hoherer Stufe und ihre 
Anwendung auf Funktionentheorie und Arithmetik, Abhand. Math. 
Seminar Hamburg. Universitat , 5 (l927), 199-224; also Gesamm. 
Abhard 461486. 
[9] J.-I. Igusa, Criteria for the validity of a certain Poisson Formula, 
Algebraic Number Theory, Kyoto, 1976,43-65. 
[lo] H. Klingen, Zzlm Darstellungssatz fiir Siegelsche Modulformen, Math. 
Zeit. 102 (1967), 30-43. 
[ll] R.P. Langlands, On the functional equation satisfied by Eisenstein 
series, SLN 544 Springer-Verlag, (1976). 
[12] H. Maass, Siegel's Modular Forms And Dirichlet Series, SLN 216 
' 
Springer-Verlag, (1971). 
[13] S. Raghavan, On an Eisenstein series of degree 3, J. Indian Math. Soc. 
39 (1975), 103-120. 
[14] S. Raghavan, Singular modular forms of degree s, in C.P. Ramanujam 
- A Tribute, T.I.F.R. Studies in Math. 8 (1978), 263-272. 
[15] S.S. Kudla and S. Rallis, On the Weil-Siege1 Formula, J. Reine angew. 
Math. 387 (1988), 1-68; 11, J. reine angew. Math. 391 (1988), 65-84. 
[16] F. Sato, Siegel's main theorem of homogeneous spaces, Comment. 
Math. Univ. St. Paul. 41 (1992), 141-167. 
[17] G .  Shimura, On Eisenstein series, Duke Math. J. 50 (1983), 417-476. 

126 
The Siegel Formula and Beyond 
[18] C.L. Siegel, ~ b e r  
die analytische Theorie der quadratischen Formen, 
Ann. of Math. 36 (1935), 527-606; Gesamm. Abhand. Bd.1, 326-405. 
[I91 C.L. Siegel, ~ b e r  
die analytische Theorie der quadratischen Formen, I1 
Ann. of Math. 37 (1936), 230-263; Gesamm. Abhand. Bd.1, 410-443. 
[20] C.L. Siegel, h e r  die analytische Theorie der quadratischen Formen, 
111, Ann. of Math. 38 (1937), 212-291; Gesamm. Abhand. Bd.1, 
469-548. 
[21] C.L. Siegel, Einfuhrung in die Theorie der Modulfunktionen n-ten 
Grades, Math. Annalen 116 (l939), 617-657; Gesamm. Abhand. Bd. 
11, 97-137. 
[22] C.L. Siegel, Die Funktionalgleichungen einiger Dirichletscher, Reihen 
Math. Zeit. 63 (1956), 363-373; Gesamm. Abhand. Bd.111, 228-238. 
[23] C.L. Siegel, A generalization of the Eps,tein Zeta function, J. Indian 
Math. Soc. 20 (1956), 1-10; Gesamm. Abhand. Bd. 111, 239-248. 
[24] J.L. Waldspurger, Engendrement par des sdries theta de certains 
espaces de formes modulaires, Invent. Math. 50 (1979) 
[25] A. Weil, Adiles and Algebraic Groups, Inst. for Adv. Study, Princeton, 
1961. 
[26] A. Weil, Sur certains groupes d 'opkrateurs unitaires, Acta Math. 11 1 
(l964), 143-211. 
[27] A. Weil, Sur la formule de Siegel dans la the'orie des groupes classiques, 
Acta Math. 113 (1965), 1-87. 
[28] R. Weissauer, Stabile Modulformen und Eisensteinreihen, SLN 1219 
Springer-Verlag, (1986). 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with 
Poles 
Ravi Raghunathan 
1 Introduction 
A Converse Theorem is a theorem which establishes criteria for Dirichlet 
series to be modular. Typically, the Dirichlet series in question must satisfy 
one or several functional equations as well as certain analytic criteria. Tra- 
ditionally, one assumes that the relevant Dirichlet series extend to entire 
functions or to meromorphic functions with poles at certain predetermined 
locations. For instance, Hecke, in the proof of his remarkable Converse 
Theorem [Hell assumed that the Dirichlet series in question were either 
entire or had poles only at the points s = 0 and s = k of the complex plane 
C, where the critical strip of the Dirichlet series is assumed to be given by 
0 5 Re(s) 5 k, s E C. Weil [W] made similar assumptions in his gener- 
alisation of Hecke's theorem for congruence subgroups while Jacquet and 
Langlands [J-L] assume their L-functions are entire in their adelic version 
of Weil's results. More recent theorems for GL3 [J-PS-S] or GL, [C-PSI] 
have also followed Jacquet-Langlands in their formulation. This assump- 
tion would seem somewhat superfluous- after all, Dirichlet series arising 
in quite natural contexts may have poles, and, even otherwise, it may not 
always be possible to verify that an L-function is entire. It may still be 
possible, however, to show that the series are meromorphic or have only a 
finite number of poles and in this case proving Converse Theorems for such 
series becomes potentially useful, for instance, for lifting questions. It is 
worth remarking that Hamburger's theorem [HI, H2, H3] which is, after all, 
a Converse Theorem for GLl/Q, does not require that the Dirichlet series 
be entire- in fact, the series may have a finite number of poles at arbitrary 
locat ions. 


128 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
2 
Preliminaries 
In this section we fix the notation to be used in the rest of this paper. We 
recall the action of the stroke operator on functions on the upper-half plane 
IHL Let k be an even integer. Suppose f is a holomorphic function on W 
and 
We define 
where y (z) = 5. 
If we set q,(z) = f J,(z) - f (z), q, (2) measures the 
departure from modularity of f (2). In order to show that f (z) is modular it 
suffices to show that q,(z) vanishes identically for all y E I?. The collection 
q,, y E l? satisfies the cocycle condition, i.e., 
for yl772 E I?. Such a collection of functions { q , ( ~ ) ) , ~ ~  
is called a cocycle. 
(Strictly, we must impose certain growth conditions on the functions f (2) 
for much of what follows to be ,valid. However, these conditions will be 
automatically satisfied for the functions we will be dealing with since they 
arise from Dirichlet series of finite growth on vertical strips (Condition (3) 
in Theorem 1.1)). 
00 
Now suppose that f (z) = C a,e2"inz is obtained from a Dirichlet series 
n=O 
satisfying the conditions of Theorem 1.1. Let {q,(z)) be the corresponding 
cocycle. Then, we shall show that the space of cocycles spanned by the 
q,(z) arising from such f (z) vanishes, if k > 2, and is one-dimensional, if 
k = 2. Let us set 
and recall that S and T generate r. Notice that qT(z) = 0. Thus, we are 
reduced to showing that qs(z) = 0. In order to do this ,we have to realise 
Ravi Raghunathan 
129 
L 
that the modular cocycles determine (and are determined by) the poles of 
the L-function L(s). This is the content of the next section. 
3 A lemma of Bochner 
We discuss a lemma of Bochner [B] which relates residual terms arising from 
the poles of the Dirichlet series in functional equation (3.1) (see below) and 
the modular cocycles defined above. 
Suppose D(s) satisfies the conditions (I), (2) and (3) of Theorem 1.1 
for X = 1. Suppose that L(s) = (2~)-~I?(s) 
D(s) - % has poles at -Pi E C 
of order equal to mi + 1, 1 5 i 5 n. 
Lemma W e  can write 
where $(z) has the form 
mi 
and bi(t) = C bijt', bij E C. 
j=1 
Remark 3.1 From (3.1), it is clear that 4(z) in the lemma is really the 
qs(z) defined in Section 1. On the other hand, (3.2) gives us an explicit 
expression for q s ( x )  as a "polynomial" (with complex exponents) with 
coefficients which are themselves polynomials in log z. As we shall see 
in the next section, this condition, together with the relation (ST)3 = I in 
SL2(Z), is sufficient to guarantee that qs = 0, if k > 2. If k = 2, the space 
of cocycles is one dimensional. In fact we will show that qs(z) = f , where 
b E C, in this case. 
' 
Remark 3.2 By Remark 3.1, it is clear that if k > 2 the only possible 
poles D(s) can have are at 0 and k, since the structure of qs(z) determines 
all poles other than those at 0 and k. In the case k = 2, the poles must lie 
a t s = O 7 s = 1 a n d s = 2 .  
Remark 3.3 We note that condition (1) of Theorem 1.1 assumes that 
D(s), has a finite number of poles while in the formulation of Bochner's 
Lemma condition (1) of the lemma makes the same assumption for L(s). 

130 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
The two, however, are easily seen to be equivalent. We first note that r(s) 
has no zeros. Hence if L(s) has finitely many poles so must 
=D(s). 
Conversely, assume that D(s) has only finitely many poles. If L(s) has 
infinitely many poles, then all but finitely many of these come from the 
poles of r(s). On the other hand, the functional equation for L(s) gives 
which shows that D(k - s) has zeros at all but a finite number of the poles 
of r(k - s). Hence, D(s) has zeros at all but a finite number of the poles 
of I'(s). It follows that L(s) has only finitely many poles. 
Remark 3.4 Since D(s) satisfies a functional equation symmetric under 
s I-+ (k - s), if it has a pole at -pi it will also have a pole k + pi. Thus if 
the expression (3.2) for qs(z) contains the term zOi, it will also contain the 
term z-*-Oi. 
Actually, Bochner proved the above lemma for general X but the case 
X = 1 will suffice for our purposes. The proof of the lemma involves a 
standard argument using the inverse Mellin transform and the Phragmen- 
Lindelof principle and follows Hecke's argument in the proof of his Converse 
Theorem. The only additional reasoning involved is in obtaining the form 
of the "residual term" (in Bochner's terminology) @(z) in (3.2). One gets 
this simply by expanding D(s) in a Laurent series about each pole and 
calculating the residue. For more detailed accounts we refer the reader 
to [B], where the formulation is slightly different but easily seen to be 
equivalent, or to [K]. The lemma stated above is a special case of the 
Riemann-Hecke-Bochner correspondence. 
4 Proof of the main theorem 
Proof (of Theorem 1.1) Let f (z) be defined as in the statement of The- 
orem 1.1 and Q,(z) as in Section 2. The relation (ST)3 = I can bea-ewritten 
ST-IS = TST from which follows the equality of cocycles 
Using the cocycle condition we can compute both sides of the above equality. 
The right-hand side gives us 
Ravi Raghunathan 
Recalling that QT = 0 we have 
which gives 
QTST = QS(Z + 1)- 
We first observe that QT-'(2) = 0. Evaluating the left-hand side we obtain 
Since T-'S = ( -: -A ), we get z-*Qs(- 1 - $) + QS(Z) for the left-hand side. 
Equating the expressions for the two sides yields 
n 
Recall, that by Remark 3.1 of Section 3, we know that qs (z) = C bi (log z)zPi , 
i=l 
where -pi E @ are the poles of D(s). Substituting this expression for qs(z) 
in (4.1) gives 
We notice that once we choose a suitable branch cut for the logarithm 
both sides of equation (4.2) are well defined on the whole half-plane IHL 
In fact, if we choose our branch cut to lie along [0, -zoo) we see that we 
may extend the function qs(z) to the whole of the complex plane with 
this ray removed. We note that our functions are holomorphic so they 
are completely determined by their behaviour on the real line, since if they 
vanish on any subinterval of R they must vanish identically. Hence, in what 
follows, we restrict our attention to real z. If lzl is is sufficiently large we 
may thus rewrite (4.2) as 

132 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
If we send lzl to m, we see that we may compare the orders of growth 
on both sides of equation (4.3). Since a polynomial in logz grows slower 
than any power of z, and since purely imaginary powers of z are bounded, 
it will be clear that only the real parts of the pi will be relevant for the 
initial part of our discussion. We may assume without loss of generality 
that R e ( a )  5 Re(&) 5 .. . .. . . 5 Re&). Expanding the terms (1 + $)Pi in 
power series, we see that the left-hand side of (4.3) can be rewritten as 
The binomial exapnsion is valid whenever lzl > 1 and hence (4.4) is valid 
whenever lzl > 1. We have two cases: 
Case (i) b, (log(z + 1)) - bi (log z) # 0 for some i such that Re(&) = Re&). 
Before we analyse this case we first make the following observation. 
(lo& + 1))" - (log z)" = 
[log(z + 1) - log z] [(log(z + 1))"-' + - - + (log z)"-'1 
As lzl + oo, log(1 + !) -+ 0 like !. Hence the expression 
Pi (10g(z + 1) log 2) 
bi(log(z + 1)) - bi(log Z) -+ 0 like 
9 
z 
where P;(u, 
v )  is a polynomial in two variables of degree mi - 1 (recall that 
m, is the degree of bi). 
Let jl , j2, . . . , jr be the indices such that Re(pj, ) = Re(@,) = y. Let 
Im(pj,) = 6,. We may assume without loss of generality that jl = n - r + 1. 
The coefficient of the term of highest order zRe(P-) = z'Y on the left-hand 
side of (4.3) is 
Proposition 4.1 The expression (4.5) does not identically vanish. 
Proof (of Proposition 4.1) We may assume 
for all I, 1 5 1 < r (by assumption we know that there is at least one such 
I ) .  Further, we may assume that ir = n and that bn(t) is the polynomial of 
Ravi Raghunathan 
133 
highest degree among the bj,, 1 5 1 5 r .  Now, suppose that the expression 
(4.5) vanishes identically. Then, we may rewrite (4.5) in the form 
Let deg(b,-,+l) 
denote the degree of the polynomial bn-,+1(t) in t. If 
deg(b,-,+l) 
< deg(bn), for all 1, 1 5 1 5 r ,  then the right-hand side of (4.6) 
tends to 0 as lzl + oo, while 1
.
~
~
~
~
1
 
= 1, which is absurd. Hence we may 
assume that there is at least one 1 such that deg(bn-,+l) = deg(bn). Hence, 
for all such I, 
where cl # 0. 
Now by the linear independence of characters we know that 
for any complex numbers al. Hence, in particular, we must have 
For each 1 we can choose B,,, a ball of radius €1 about ci such that the 
inequality (4.7) holds even if we replace q by any a1 E B,, . But, if we now 
choose 1.z) large enough we can ensure that 
which contradicts our assumption that the expression (4.5) vanishes iden- 
tically. This proves our proposition. 
Returning to the proof of Theorem 1.1, we now examine the right-hand 
side of (4.3) where the term of highest possible order is z - ~ .  If we expand 
the terms (-1 - !)Pi on the right-hand side in power series we get 

134 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
Hence if 1 > 0 is the smallest integer such that 
then the highest order term is z-~-'. The coefficient of zA in (4.4) is the 
expression (4.5), which by Proposition 4.1 is not identically zero, while the 
coefficent of z-k in (4.8) is the expression (4.9), which is not identically 
zero by assumption. Comparing orders of growth of the left and right- 
hand sides when lzl goes to co, we see that it follows that we must have 
Re(@,) = -k-1. But if pn occurs in (3.2), then, by Remark 3.4 of Section 3, 
SO must -k - @,. 
But 
which contradicts the assumption that Re(@,) 2 Re(Pi) for all 1 5 i < n. 
Case (a;) b,(log(z + 1)) - bi(log z) = 0 for all i such that Re(Pi) = Re(@,). 
We notice immediately that this means that the polynomials bi, n - r + 1 < 
i 5 n are all constant polynomials. We will continue to refer to these 
constants as bi. As in case (i), we make a power series expansion on both 
sides and examine the resulting expressions (4.4) and (4.8). The coefficient 
of z7 = zRe(On) in (4.4) is identically zero by assumption. Recall that we 
assumed in case (i) (without loss of generality) that Re(Pi) 5 Re(@,-,) < 
Re(@,), .l 
5 i 5 n - r and that Re(@,) = Re(@,) if n - r + 1 5 i 5 n. We 
continue to assume this is the case. If j,, 1 5 m < s, are the indices such 
that Re(pjm) = Re(@,-,), we may as well assume that jm = n - r + m. 
Let Re(&,) 
= 71. Two cases arise: 
Case (a) Re(@,-,) < Re(@, - 1). 
In expression (4.4) the term of highest possible order is zRe(On-l) = 2'-l. 
Its coefficient is 
By the linear independence of characters, this is non-zero unless 
for all I. If (4.10) vanishes identically, since we may as well assume that 
bn-,+1 # 0, we see that this means Pn-,+1 = 0 for all 1. All the expo- 
nents Pn-,+1 are thus equal to each other and vanish. Thus, r = 1 and 
Ravi Raghunathan 
135 
71 = Re(@,-1) < Re(@,). It is now easy to see that the term of next 
highest possible growth in (4.4) is zy1 with coefficient 
where 17, = Im(Pn-l-8+m), 1 < m 5 s. Two further sub-cases arise: 
8 
Case (1) C bn-1-s+m(log(z + 1)) - bn-1-s+m(logz) # 0 
m=l 
Since Pn-l-s+m # 0, we may use the Proposition 4.1 (for these new bfs) 
to show that the expression (4.11) does not identically vanish. Now, com- 
paring orders of growth on both sides of (4.3), we see that we must have 
71 = 
= -k - I, where I 2 0 is the smallest integer such that the 
coefficient of z-"-' 
is non-zero in the power series expansion of the right- 
hand side of (4.3) (see formula (4.8) in case (i)). Once again, we notice 
that if @n-l occurs in (3.2), so must - k - 
But 
which contradicts the maximality of Re(@,), unless 1 = 0. If 1 = 0, then, 
equating the coefficients of z-k on both sides of (4.3) gives 
Using the linear independence of characters and arguments similar to those 
in Proposition 4.1 we see that s = 1, so we get 
If Re(@,-2) < Re(@,-1) - 1, then the coefficient of r k - l  on the left-hand 
side of (4-3) is bn-1 (log(z + I))@,-I. If Re(/%-2) = 
- 1, then the 
coefficent of z-"l 
is 
In either case, as lzl + co, the coefficient of z-"l 
approaches infinity, 
while on the right-hand side the coefficients tend to a finite limit. This 
gives a contradiction. 

136 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
s 
Case (2) 
bn-l-s+m(log(z + 1)) - b,-~-~+~(logz) 
= 0 
m=l 
As in case (i), this means that zY1 is the term of highest possible order on 
the left-hand side of (4.3). Its coefficient is bn-1 (log(z+ l))Pn- 1. Comparing 
orders of growth on both sides of (4.3), we get 71 - 1 = - k - 1, i.e., 
71 = -k + 1 - 1, which we can easily show contradicts the maximality of 
Re(/?,) if I > 1. If I = 1, it is easy to see that we are essentially back to case 
(1). Once again, it is clear that this contradicts the maximality of Re(&) 
if k > 2. We treat the case k = 2 in the next section. 
We return now to the case when the expression (4.10) does not iden- 
tically vanish. Once again let z-~-' be the term of the highest order in 
the power series expansion of the right-hand side of (4.3) (as in formula 
(4.8) of case (i)).Thus, the term of highest order on the left-hand side of 
(4.3) is z7-', while on the right-hand side it is z-*-'. 
Hence, we have 
y - 1 = -k - 1, i.e., y = -k - I + 1. If 1 > 0, then it is easy to see that 
we are back in the situation of case (i). If 1 = 0, then we get y = -k + 1, 
which, as before, contradicts the maximality of Re@,), unless k = 2. We 
treat this case in the next section. 
Case (b) Re(&,) 
= Re(Pn - 1) 
In this case the coefficient of 27-l is 
Analysing this expression as in the cases above we can easily that this yields 
a contradiction unless k = 2. 
0 
5 
The weight 2 case 
It is not hard to see that when k = 2 all the cases above yield the following: 
n = 3, bl, b2, and b3 are all constants and Dl = -2, B2 = -1 and h = 0. 
Thus, equation (4.3) yields 
in this case. Comparing the coefficients of z-I on both sides of the above 
equation we see that b3 = 0, while comparing the coefficients of zM2 yields 
, 
Ravi Raghunathan 
137 
bl = 0. Now, one can easily verify that qs(z) = %, b2 E C satisfies equation 
(3.2) and this is clearly the unique solution to (3.2) when k = 2. On the 
other hand, Hecke's non-holomorphic (meromorphic) Eisenstein series of 
weight 2 ([He2]) satisfies equation (3.1) and gives rise to poles precisely at 
s = 0 , l  and 2. By the uniqueness of the solution to (3.2) , we see that qs (2) 
must arise from this Eisenstein series of weight 2. 
The discussion above makes it clear that one cannot have a cocycle of 
the form (3.2) which is not identically zero when k > 2. By the comments 
made in Section 2, this completes the proof of Theorem 1.1. 
6 Corriparing the zeros of L-functions 
In this section our main goal will be to discuss the following question. 
Let Dl (s) and Dz (s) be two Dirichlet series which extend to meromorphic 
functions Ll(s) and L2(s) on the whole complex plane C. For i = 1,2, let 
the sets S, be defined as follows: 
Suppose further that L, (s), i = 1,2, satisfy a suitable functional equation 
and certain analytic conditions. Then is IS2 \ S1l = oo? 
We note that answering the above question is the same as establishing 
f 
that Ll(s)/L2(s) has infinitely many poles in the strip 0 < Re(s) < 1, 
f 
and indeed, this is the approach we use. We are able to answer the above 
question affirmatively in a number of cases. This affirmative answer also 
shows that Theorem 1.1 would be false if the hypothesis of finiteness of the 
number of poles of the Dirichlet series were to be removed. 
The proofs of Theorems 6.1-6.5 crucially involve either Hamburger's 
Theorem or Theorem 1.1 of this paper. In particular, Theorems 6.1-6.5 do 
not follow from Hecke's original result. The other key ingredients of our 
proofs are the non-vanishing theorems of Jacquet-Shalika and Shahidi for 
various classes of L-functions. We also use various analytic properties of 
L-functions established by several different authors including Godement- 
Jacquet, Gelbart-Jacquet, Kim-Shahidi and Shahidi. We discuss the main 
results below briefly. 
Let K be a number field and AK denote the addes of K. Then we have 
Theorem 6.1 For n 2 1, let .rrl and .rrz be cuspidal autornorphic repre- 
sentations of GLn (AK). Let L(nl, s) and L(Q, s) be their associated L- 
functions and S1 and S2 be their corresponding sets of zeros. If L(.rrl, s) and 
L(7r2, s) have the same gamma factors at infinity (i.e., the local archimedean 
L-functions are the same), then IS2 \ S1) = 00. 

138 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
In particular, Theorem 6.1 answers the above question for certain pairs 
of Dirichlet characters. In this case a stronger result has been proved by [I?] 
but the proof does not seem to generalise. This is the only other uncondi- 
tional result of which we are aware. [C-Gh-Gol, C-Gh-Go21 have a stronger 
result but it is conditional on the Generalised Riemann Hypothesis, while 
the results of Bombieri and Perelli in the Selberg Class [B-PI depend on 
Selberg's Conjectures A and B. The proof of Theorem 6.1 appears in [R3]. 
It uses the theorem of Hamburger [HI, H2, H3] mentioned in the introduc- 
tion, the holomorphy of the L-functions Ll(s) and L2(s) due to [Go-J] and 
the non-vanishing on the line Re(s) = 1 of these L-functions twisted by 
appropriate characters due to [J-S] . 
For i = 1, ... , ml, let p; denote a cuspidal automorphic representation 
of GL,, (AK ), ni 2 1, L(pi, s) its corresponding L-function and D(pi, s) the 
corresponding Dirichlet series. Similarly, for j = 1, . . . , m2, let oj denote 
a cuspidal automorphic representation of GL,, (AK), n j  2 1, L(uj, S) its 
corresponding L-function and D(uj, s) the corresponding Dirichlet series. 
We further assume that uj $ p; for all i and j as above. We set 
and Dl(s) to be the corresponding Dirichlet series for I = 1,2. Let L(s) = 
Theorem 6.2 For some even integer 
L ( ~ )  = 2r-(s+V)r 
We then have the following theorem. 
k 2 2, assume that 
Further, suppose that pl does not arise from a holomorphic cusp form on 
G L 2 ( 4 )  and that L(s) satisfies the functional equation 
L(s) = L(l - s). 
Then IS2 \ SII = oo. 
The proof of Theorem 6.2 depends crucially on Theorem 1.1. One also 
needs the more sophisticated results of Shahidi [Sh2] establishing the holo- 
morphy and non-vanishing on the line Re(s) = 1 of the above L-functions 
twisted by iil , the contragredient representation of TI. 
Ravi Raghunathan 
139 
Corollary 6.3 Let fl and f2 be holomorphic cuspidal eigenforms satisfying 
either of the conditions (1) or (2) below: 
1. fl and f2 have the same weight. 
2. fl and f2 are foms of the same level and fi has even weight k 2 12. 
We let Li(s) = L ( f i , s - 9 ) ,  f o r i =  1,2. Then)S2\S11.=m. 
The proof of the corollary appears in [R3]. The first case of the theorem 
follows from Theorem 6.1, while the second case follows from Theorem 6.2. 
In [R3], 
however, the second case is proved directly. 
Let .rrf denote a cuspidal automorphic representation of GL2(Aq) asso- 
ciated to a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform f of weight k and nebentypus 
w. We will assume that .rr is not monomial and that w is odd. Let x 
be a primitive Dirichlet character. We denote by L(Syrnn(.rr), s) (resp. 
L(Symn(rr) 8 X, s)) the nth symmetric power L-function of rr (resp. the 
nth symmetric power L-function twisted by x). We will denote by A the 
Rarnanujan cusp form of weight 12. 
Theorem 6.4 Let f ,  A and x be as above. The quotients 
have infinitely many poles in 0 < Re(s) < 1. 
Note that it has not yet been established that the numerator of the 
second quotient, in Theorem 6.5 is automorphic. We do know, however, that 
it is entire [Ki-Sh]. We also need the result of [Ge-Sh] and the non-vanishing 
results of [Sh2, Sh3] for this case. The holomorphy and other relevant facts 
necessary to treat the first quotient mentioned in Theorem 6.5 can be found 
in [Ge-J]. We also note that both the quotients in Theorem 6.5 have the 
additional feature of an Euler product. The relevant Converse Theorem 
to be applied here is, once again, Theorem 1.1. The proof of Theorem 6.5 
appears in [R3]. In a similar vein, we also have 
Theorem 6.5 Let f be as above with k = 1. The quotients 
(n = 1,2,3) have infinitely many poles in 0 < Re(s) < 1. 
The proofs of Theorems 6.1-6.5 are essentially similar in structure, 
although each individual case may require slightly different treatment. Since 
Theorem 6.2 is the only theorem whose proof has not appeared, we give a 
brief outline of the proof. 

140 
A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
Proof (of Theorem 6.2) Suppose L(s) has at most finitely many poles. 
We first note that L(s) is a quotient of automorphic L-functions each of 
which is of order 1 on C. Hence, one checks easily that if L(s) has at most 
finitely many poles then it must satisfy condition (3) of Theorem 1.1. One 
checks that L(s + 9) 
satisfies all the conditions of Theorem 1.1 and is 
thus modular. We may thus write 
where uk is a cuspidal automorphic representation of GL2(&), 1 5 j 5 m, 
unramified at all finite places and holomorphic discrete series at the real 
place. After omitting a suitable finite set of primes S we may twist both 
sides of equation (17) by fi , the contragredient of pl , to obtain ([J-S] , [Shl]) 
Since the n all arise from holomorphic cusp forms of level 1 on GL2 (AQ), 
p1 is not isormorphic to r k ,  for all 1 5 k 5 m. By [Shl] L S ( ~  
@ PI, S) is 
holomorphic at s = 1, while Ls(pi @ Pl , s) and Ls (uj 8 pl, s) are non- 
vanishing at s = 1 for all i and j. But Ls(pl @ pl, s) has pole at s = 1, so 
the left-hand side of (16) has a pole at s = 1 while the right-hand side is 
finite, which is clearly absurd. This proves the theorem. 
0 
As remarked in [R3], there are a number of other examples we could 
treat using our method. The main feature of all the above examples is that 
the archimedean factors of the quotient of the L-functions Ll (s)/L2(s) are 
of certain restricted types. 
References 
[Bl 
S. Bochner, Some properties of modular relations, Ann. of 
Math. 53 (1951). 
[B-P] 
E. Bombieri and A. Perelli, Distinct zeros of L-functions, Acta 
Arith. 83 (111) (1998), 271-281. 
[C-Gh-Gol] Conrey, Ghosh, and Gonek, Simple zeros of the zeta-function 
of a quadratic number field, I, Invent. Math. 86 (1986), 
563-576. 
Ravi Raghunathan 
141 
[C-Gh-Go21 Conrey, Ghosh, and Gonek, Simple zeros of the zeta-function 
of a quadratic number field, 11 Analytic Number Theory 
and Diophantine Problems, Birkhauser Progress in Math. 70 
(1987), 87-144. 
J. W. Cogdell and 1.1: Piatetski-Shapiro, Converse Theorems 
for GL,, Publ. Math. IHES 79 (1994), 157-214. 
J.W. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Converse Theorems 
for GL, 11, J. reine angew Math. 507 (1999), 165-188. 
A. Fujii, On the zeros of Dirichlet L-functions, Acta Arith- 
metica 28 (IV) (l975), 395-403. 
S. Gelbart and H. Jacquet, A relation between automorphic 
representations of GL(2) and GL(3), Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. 
Sup. (4) 11 (1978), 471-552. 
S. Gelbart and F. Shahidi, On the boundedness of automorphic 
L-functions, in preparation, 1999. 
R. Godement and H. Jacquet, Zeta-functions of Simple 
Algebras, SLN 260 Springer-Verlag, (1972). 
H. Hamburger, ~ b e r  
die Funktionalgleichung der <-Funktion, 
Math. Zeit. 10 (1921), 240-258. 
H. Hamburger, ~ b e r  
die Funktionalgleichung der [-Funktion, 
Math. Zeit. 11 (1921), 224-245. 
H. Hamburger, h e r  die Funktionalgleichung der <-Funktion, 
Math. Zeit. 13 (1922), 283-311. 
A. Hassen, Log-polynomial period functions for Hecke groups, 
Rarnanujan J. 3 (2) (1C&9), 119-151. 
E. Hecke, h e r  die Bestimmung Dirichletscher Reihen durch 
ihre Funktionalglechung, Math. Annalen (Mathematische 
Werke, No. 33) 112 (1936), 664-699. 
E. Hecke, Theorie der Eisenstein Reihen hohre Stuffe und ihre 
Anwendung auf Funkiontheorie und Arithmetic, Abh. Math. 
Sem. Hamburg 5 3 (1927) 199-224. 
H. Jacquet and R.P. Langlands, Automorphic forms on GL(2), 
SLN 114 Springer-Verlag, (1970). 

A Converse Theorem for Dirichlet Series with Poles 
H. Jacquet , 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro and J. Shalika, Automorphic 
foms on GL3, I and II, Ann. of Math. 109 (1979), 16-258. 
H. Jacquet and J. Shalika, A non-vanishing theorem for zeta- 
functions of GL,, Invent. Math. 38 (1976), 1-16. 
M. Knopp, On Dirichlet series satisfying Riemann's functional 
equation, Invent. Math. 117 (1 994), 361-372. 
M. Knopp and M. Sheingorn, On Dirichlet series and Hecke 
triangle groups of infinite volume, Acta Arith. 76 (3) (1996), 
227-244. 
H. Kim and F. Shahidi, Symmetric cube L-functions are entire, 
preprint, 1997. 
Converse Theorems for Dirichlet series with poles, Doctoral 
dissertation, Yale University, 1996. 
A Converse Theorem for Din'chlet series with poles C. R. 
Acad. Sci. Paris, Sdrie 1 327 (1998), 231-235. 
A comparison of zeros of L-functions, Math. Res. Lett. 6 (2) 
(1999), 155-167. 
F. Shahidi, On certain L-functions, Amer. J. Math. 103 
(1981), 297-356. 
F. Shahidi, 3rd Symmetric Power L-functions for GL(2), Com- 
positio Math. 70 (3) (1989), 245-273. 
F. Shahidi, Symmetric Power L-functions for GL(2), CRM 
Proc. Lect. Not. 4, Amer. Math. Soc., 1994, 159-192. 
F. Shahidi, Local coeficients as Artin factors for real groups, 
Duke Math. J. 52 (1985), 279-289. 
A. Weil, ~ b e r  
dae Bestimmung Dkichletscher Reihen durch 
Funktionalgleichungen, Math. Annalen. 168 (1967), 149-156. 
R. Weissauer, Der Heckesche Umkerhsatz, Abh. Math. Sem. 
Univ. Hamburg 61 (1991), 83-119. 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, 
TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL 
RESEARCH, 
HOMI BHABHA 
ROAD, MUMBAI 
400 005, INDIA 
E-mail: ravir@math.tifr.res.in 
Kirillov Theory for GL2(D) * 
A. Raghuram 
Let F be a non-Archimedean local field. Jacquet and Langlands in [7] 
develop a theory, the main ideas of which are attributed to Kirillov, of 
explicitly constructing models for irreducible representations of GL2(F). 
In particular, the representation space of an irreducible admissible repre- 
sentation of GL2(F) is realized as a certain space of functions on F* on 
which the standard Bore1 subgroup acts in a specified manner. The repre- 
sentation is then determined by describing what the Weyl group element 
in does and this description is in terms of local factors associated to the 
representation. 
Using Kirillov theory as in [7], Casselman [3] developed a representation 
theoretic analogue of for GL2(F) of the theory of new forms in the context 
of classical modular forms which is due to Atkin and Liehner. All these 
results for GL2(F) are summarized in Section 2. 
In a joint work with Dipendra Prasad we have developed a similar 
Kirillov theory for the group GL2(V) where V is a division algebra over 
F. This work appears in [lo]. In particular, the representation space V 
of an irreducible admissible representation (a, V) is realized as a space 
of functions on V* which take values in a finite dimensional vector space 
which is canonically associated to (T, 
V) such that the standard minimal 
parabolic subgroup P acts in specified manner. We then use this Kirillov 
theory (which is really a concrete description of the restriction of T to P) to 
develop a theory of new forms which generalizes Casselman's work to our 
context. The main results of this work [lo] are summarized in Section 3. 
In Section 4 we give an alternative approach to constructing the 
Kirillo model for representations (irreducible or not) which come by parabolic 
induction. This also has been inspired by [7] (more precisely Godement's 
- 
'These are the notes of a talk given in the international conference on "Cohomology 
of arithmetic groups, L-functions and Automorphic forms" held at T.I.F.R., Mumbai, 
from 28th December '98 to 1st January '99. 

144 
Kirillov Theory for GL@) 
A. Raghuram 
145 
notes [5]). The motivation in [7] for this is to understand points of reducib- 
lity in induced representations. But since [7] appeared (roughly thirty years 
ago) there has been a good deal of work on reduciblity and has been quite 
well understood in our context of GL2(V) in the work of [12]. The reason 
we go through this approach is to understand the asymptotic behaviour of 
functions in the Kirillov space. 
No proofs are given in Section 3 as they are all contained in [lo]. How- 
ever we have given all details in Section 4 as this has not appeared elsewhere. 
The author believes that the details set forth in this last section have not 
reached their logical conclusion as yet and may have implications towards 
another view at the work of Tadic on reduciblity as in [12] and perhaps also 
towards describing the unitary dual of GLn(D). 
2 Kirillov theory and new forms for GL2(F) 
The main references for Kirillov theory are Jacquet-Langlands [7] and Gode- 
ment's notes on Jacquet-Langlands [5]. For new forms the references are 
Casselman [3] and an article of Deligne [4]. 
Let F be a non-Archimedean local field. Let OF be the ring of integers 
in F .  Let pF be the maximal ideal in OF. Let W F  be a uniformizer in F, 
i.e., pF = wFOF. Let q denote the cardinality of the residue field of F 
which is 
Only for this section let G = GL2 (F). Let B be the standard Bore1 sub- 
group consisting of upper triangular matrices in G. Let N be the unipotent 
radical of B. Note that N - F+ the additive group of F. Let qF be a 
non-trivial character on F+ which is normalized such that the conductor 
of qF is OF, i.e., the largest fractional ideal on which $JF is trivial is OF. 
As usual $F will also be thought of as a character on N. Let Z 21 F* be 
the center of G. 
Let (A, V) be an irreducible admissible representation of G. Here ad- 
missibility means that (i) Stabilizer in G of any vector in V is open and (ii) 
Invariants in V under any open subgroup of G is finite dimensional. It is 
easy to see that a finite dimensional irreducible admissible representation 
of G is necessarily one dimensional. So we henceforth assume that the di- 
mension of V is infinite. The central (quasi-)character of n will be denoted 
as w,. 
The starting point for Kirillov theory is the following multiplicity one 
theorem. Refer Proposition 2.12 in [7]. 
Theorem 2.1 If (A, V) is an irreducible admissible representation of G 
then the twisted Jacquet module of n, denoted A~v,+,, which is the maximal 
quotient of n on which N acts via the character $JF is one dimensional. 
Using the above theorem, the main theorem of Kirillov theory is the 
following. (Refer Theorem 1, Lemma 4, Theorem 3 and Equation 144 in 
PI.) 
Theorem 2.2 Let (A, V) be an irreducible admissible representation of G .  
The representation space V can be embedded in Cm(F*) which is the space 
of C-valued locally constant functions on F* such that if K(n) denotes the 
image then : 
1. Any f E K(A) vanishes outside some compact subset (depending on 
f) of F .  
2. The action of B on V can be realized on K(A) via the formula 
for all f E K(r), for all x E F* and for all (E pi) E P .  
3. The space of compactly supported functions in Cm(F*), denoted as 
Cr (F*), is a subspace of finite codimension of K(A). Further the 
quotient K(n)/C,OO(F*) can be identified with the usual Jacquet mod- 
ule of T which is basically the space of co-N-invariants of A. 
4. The dimension of the usual Jacquet module is O,1 or 2 according as 
7r is a supercuspidal, special or a principal series representation of G .  
Bruhat decomposition for G states that G = B U BwB where w is 
the Weyl group element given by (TI A). So to describe the action of G 
completely on K(A), it is enough now to describe the action of w. This is 
done in [7] using formal Mellin transforms as follows. Let v be any character 
on UF the group of units in F*. To any f E K(T) is associated its formal 
Mellin transform with respect to v, which is a formal Laurent power series 
in one variable t given by the formula 
Here the coefficients are given by 
where du is the Haar measure on UF normalized such that the volume of 
UF is one. The action of the Weyl group element is then given by the 
following theorem. Refer Proposition 2.10 and Corollary 2.19 in [7]. 

Kirillov Theory for GL2 (V) 
Theorem 2.3 Given an iireducible admissible representation 71 of G, for 
every v a character on UF, there exists a formal Laurent power series in 
t ,  denoted C(v, t) whose principal part is finite and such that for all f E 
C,"(F*) one has 
The C(v, t )  's are related to the local factors by the formula 
where x is any character on F*. 
Using Kirillov theory Casselman [3] proved the following result. Deligne 
[4] provided a much simpler proof again using Kirillov theory of the same 
result. Let ro(n) denote the congruence subgroup given by : 
Given (w, V) as before, let Vn for n > 0 be given by 
Theorem 2.4 If (n, V) is an irreducible admissible infinite dimensional 
representation of G then there exists an integer m > 0 such that Vm # (0). 
Let c = c(n) denote the least among all such integers m. Then 
1. For all m > c, dimc(Vm) = m - c +  I. 
2. The €-factor of T is given by 
where the notation f 
N g means that upto a constant multiplier the 
two functions f and g are equal. (The implied constant involves some 
volume terms.) 
3 Kirillov theory and new forms for GL2(D) 
We shall now present the main results in [lo] which generalize most of the 
results in Section 2 to the case of GL2(V). No proofs are given in this 
section as they are all contained in [lo]. 
A. Raghuram 
147 
Let V be a central division algebra over F of index d, i.e., dimr;. (27) = d2. 
Let O be the ring of integers in 27. Let v be the unique left (equivalently 
right and equivalently two sided) maximal ideal in 0. Let a be a uni- 
formizer for V, i.e., 
= a0 = Ow. Let U be the group of units in 0. 
Let Qj be the character on D+ given by Qj(X) = GF(TDIF(X)) where T D / ~  
is the reduced trace map from V to F. Let o denote the additive valua- 
tion and let I - I denote the normalized multiplicative valuation on D*, i.e., 
1x1 = q - d D ( X )  for all X E D*. 
We change notations a bit now and henceforth G denotes GL2 (V) and N 
denotes the unipotent radical of the standard minimal parabolic subgroup P 
consisting of upper triangular matrices in G. Let M be the Levi subgroup 
such that P is the semi direct product of M and N. Then N -- V and 
M 21 V* x D*. AS before Qj will be thought of as a character of N. 
As in the case of GL2(F) one can easily prove that a finite dimensional 
irreducible admissible representation of G is necessarily one dimensional. 
We henceforth assume that (w, V) is an infinite dimensional irreducible 
admissible representation of G. The center of G will again be denoted by Z 
and is identified with F*. The central (quasi-)character of .rr will be denoted 
by w x .  
The starting point for us is the following theorem. 
Theorem 3.1 Let (71, V) be an infinite dimensional irreducible admissible 
representation of G. The twisted Jacquet module of 71, denoted TN,Q, is 
always finite dimensional. 
Remark 3.2 This actually follows from a theorem of Moeglin and Wald- 
spurger [9]. But we are able to give a proof totally independent of [9] in 
the context of G. (See [ll] for more details.) It is easily checked that TN,Q 
is a module for V* sitting as the diagonal subgroup in M and its structure 
as a representation of D* is still not clear. This question is of great interest 
as it will be soon be evident that this representation of V* controls to a 
large extent the representation 71 of G. However for principal series repre- 
sentations it is fairly easy to give a description and is the content of the 
following proposit ion. 
Proposition 3.3 Let 711 and w2 be two irreducible representations of V*. 
Let V(nl, Q) = 1ndF(sl 4 w2) denote the representation of G which is the 
parabolic induction from P to G of the representation 711 @ rs. Then 
1. The twisted Jacquet module of V (wl , r2) is given by nl 8 712 
2. The semi-simplification of the usual Jacquet module of V(rl, 712) is 
given by (711 @ 712) @ (TI @ 712). 

148 
Kirillov Theory for GL2 (2)) 
A. Raghuram 
149 
Remark 3.4 The above proposition says that unlike the case of GL2(F), 
for an irreducible representation n of G one need not have the dimen- 
sions of TN or of n ~ , g  
to be bounded above independent of n. This 
follows for instance from a formula due to Deligne and Tunnel1 which says 
that there exists constants cl and c2 such that the dimension of a for an 
irreducible (non-degenerate) representation a of V* is sandwiched between 
clqa(u)(d-1)/2 and c2qa(u)(d-1)/2 
where a(o) is the conductor of o. It follows 
from the computation of a(a) that for any positive integer n there is an 
irreducible representation whose conductor is n. (See [2] for an exact for- 
mula and more details on such matters.) Hence the claim on unboundedness 
of dimensions of Jacquet modules. 
Our version of Kirillov theory is the following theorem. 
Theorem 3,5 Let (n, V) be an infinite dimensional irreducible admissible 
representation of G. Then V can be embedded in the space of ~ ~ , ~ - v a l u e d ,  
locally constant functions on V*, which will be denoted by Cm (V*, nN,*). 
Let K(n) denote the image of V. We have : 
1. Any f in K(s) vanishes outside some compact subset (depending on 
fl of 2)- 
2. The action of P on K(n) is given by the formula : 
for all f E K(n), for all X E V and for all ( g) E P. 
3. The Kirillov space K(a) contains C~(V*,aN,e) as a subspace of 
finite codimension. The usual Jacquet module of n can be identified 
with K(n)/Cr(2>*, n~,tp). 
4. n is supempidal if and only if K(n) = C F  (2). rN,*). 
Remark 3.6 Bruhat decomposition for G states that G = P U PwP. So 
to have a complete description of the action of G on K(n) it suffices to 
describe the action of w an any f E K(n). At this moment we don't have 
a completely satisfactory way of describing this action. 
Now we go to the theory of new forms. It turns out that the congruence 
subgroup to consider is : 
Given an irreducible representation (n, V) of G let Vn denote invariants 
in V under the congruence subgroup r;(n). For convenience define V-l 
to be (0). For an integer m 2 0 we may call a non-zero vector v E V, 
and v f Vmbl a new form of level m. We have not been able to prove an 
analogue of Theorem 2.4 for any irreducible n. But we have been able to 
do so when n is one of the two possibilities given below. 
1. An irreducible principal series representation V (nl , n2). (By a the- 
orem of Tadic 1121 the representation V(nl, n2) = I.ndg(nl @ n2) is 
irreducible if and only if n1 is not equivalent to 7r2 @ I - If .) 
2. A supercuspidal representation which is obtained by compact induc- 
tion from a (very cuspidal) representation of a maximal open compact 
mod center subgroup of G. This notion of very cuspidality is a direct 
generalization of the corresponding notion gor GL2(F). See [lo] and 
[ll] for two possible ways of defining this. 
Remark 3.7 Only for this remark let G be the F-points of a reductive 
algebraic group defined over F .  In the representation theory of p-adic 
groups it is one of the 'big' open questions if every irreducible supercuspi- 
dal representation is obtained by compactly inducing a representation of a 
maximal open compact mod center subgroup of G. For G = GL,(F) this is 
true and is a famous theorem of Bushnell and Kutzko [I]. For G = GLn(V) 
the question is still open. 
Theorem 3.8 Let (n, V) be an irreducible admissible representation of G 
as in (1) or (2) above. Then : 
1. There exists an integer m 2 0 such that Vm # (0). 
Let C(n) 
denote the least among all such integers. This C(n) may be called 
the conductor of n in the sense of new forms. 
2. Vc(,) E VN,* as V*- modules. 
3. L e t a =  (A:). 
Then forallm_>C(n) 
So in particular we have dimc(Vm) = (m - C(n) + 1) dimc(VN,*). 
4. Let Ce (n) be the integer such that r(n, s, $ J ~ )  q ~ - ~ e ( ~ ) ' .  
This integer 
Ce (n) may be called the conductor of .R. in the sense of epsilon factors. 
The two conductors are related by the formula 

150 
Kirillov Theory for GL2 ( V )  
(The epsilon factor associated to a is as in [6] wath the normalization 
of +F as in Section 2.) 
Remark 3.9 The formula in (4) in the above theorem is a GL2 ( V )  ana- 
logue of the following formula due to Koch and Zink [B] for D*. Let (o, W )  
be an irreducible representation of D* of level t! = t!(o), i.e., o containes 
the trivial representation of 1 + 
but not that of 1 + 7)l-l. (This t! is like 
the C(a).) Then Ce(o) - e(o) = d - 1 where Ce(o) is the exponent which 
occurs in the epsilon factor €(a, s, + F )  of a. 
Remark 3.10 There is a natural question which might be asked here as 
to what do the new forms look like in the Kirillov space. This has been 
satisfactorily answered when C ( r )  = 0 (the so called spherical representa- 
tions) or if a is a supercuspidal representation which comes via compact 
induction. See [lo]. 
4 Asymptotics in the Kirillov model 
Let (a, V )  be an irreducible admissible representation of G. We have real- 
ized V as a space of functions K ( a )  on V *  with values in a finite dimensional 
vector space X N , , ~ .  This section deals with describing the asymptotics of 
functions in K (a). By that we mean the following. If f E K (a) then f 
vanishes outside a compact subset of 23. So f is zero in a neighbourhood 
of infinity. We investigate the behaviour of f in a neighbourhood of 0. 
Note that if a is supercuspidal then by Theorem 3.5 f vanishes in a neigh- 
bourhood of 0. So this section is relevant when a is not a supercuspidal 
representation. We imitate sections 1.9 and 1.10 of [5] where an analysis is 
carried out for principal series and special representations of GL2(F). We 
can not get results as satisfactory as in [5] due to the vagaries of division 
algebras. However for irreducible principal series representations of G we 
can get a complete picture of the asymptotics around the origin of functions 
in the Kirillov space. 
Let (a1, Wl)-and (a2, W2) be two smooth irreducible representations of 
D*. We let V(al, a2) denote the representation of G obtained by parabolic 
induction using a1 and a2. TO be specific V ( s l ,  a2) consists of locally 
constant, Wl @ W2 valued functions f on G satisfying 
for all g E G and for all (a g) E P. We call this representation V ( n l ,  a2) 
a principal series representation irrespective of whether it is irreducible or 
not. The aim of this section to develop a Kirillov model for such a principal 
series representation and in doing so we get hold of the asymptotics of 
functions in the Kirillov space. See Theorem 4.12. 
Note that any f E V(al,a2) is determined completely by its values 
on PwP = PwN. This is so because f is locally constant and every 
neighbourhood of 1 E G intersects PwP. Now by the defining equivariance 
on the left with respect to P such an f is determined by the function 
X t) 
f (W ( 
)). AS an artifice to have some convenient signs we replace 
w by w-I = -w. We therefore get that the function f is completely 
determined by the function f' E Cm(V7 a1 @ 7 ~ 2 )  given by: 
Using the matrix identity 
So f' satisfies the property that (XI (a1 ( X )  @ a2 (X-l )) f ' ( X )  is constant 
for large I X 1. 
With this in view we define the following space of functions which we 
denote by F(al, a2) : 
{# E Cm(V, al@a2) : I X I ( X ~ ( X ) @ ~ ~ ( X - ~ ) ) # ( X )  
is constant for 1x1 >> 1). 
We omit the proof of the following easy lemma. 
Lemma 4.1 The map f 
f' gives a bijection from V ( a l ,  n2) onto 
3(7h, 
~ 2 ) .  
On this space 3(?r1, 
7r2) we will define a Fourier transform. Then given 
a function # E F(al, 7r2) twisting its Fourier transform by a certain repre- 
sentation of V *  we will get a function in the Kirillov space of V(.rrl, a2). 
Definition 4.2 Let # E 3 ( a 1 ,  
7r2). Its Fourier transform is defined by 
The set of all the fourier transforms is denoted by 
F(al,a2) := {$: # E 3 ( a l , a 2 ) } .  

Kirillov Theory for GL2 (2)) 
Definition 4.3 
This space K(sl, s2) will turn out to be a Kirillov model for the repre- 
sentation V(sl,s2). The non-trivial point will be to show the convergence 
of the series in Definition 4.2. In the course of proving convergence we will 
also get asymptotics of functions in K(sl, s2). AS a notational convenience 
we denote XA to be the characteristic function of the subset A of V. The 
following lemma is easy and the proof is omitted. 
Lemma 4.4 For v E sl @ rrz let +, 
be the function in F(sl,s2) given by 
&(X) = IXI-'(sl (X-l) 8 7r2(X))v if 1x1 > 1 and is zero if 1x1 < 1. Let 
Then the space F(sl, s2) can be split up as 
Basically the space F is cut up into the direct sum of three vector spaces 
depending on the behaviour at 0 and at m. The convergence and the actual 
value of the Fourier transform on functions in two of these spaces, namely 
in C r  and Fo are easy to describe and this is the content of Lemmas 4.5 
and 4.6 respectively. Convergence of the Fourier transform of functions in 
Fm is much more difficult to prove. We return to this point after disposing 
off the above mentioned easy cases. 
Lemma 4.5 Let 4 E CF(V*, sl @ s2). Then the series in Definition 4.2 
is actually a finite sum and hence is convergent absloutely. The function 4 
is a locally constant function on V* which vanishes outside compact subsets 
of 2) and is a constant in a neighbourhood of the origin. 
Proof Let A E V*, n 2 0 and v E sl @ 7r2. To this is associated the 
function $(A, n, v) which takes the constant value v on A(l + ?)") and is 
zero outside this set. It is clear that C,O"(V*) is spanned by such functions. 
It is an easy computation which yields that +(A, n, v) (X) is c*(XA)v if 
X E 
for some constant c and is zero outside p-"-'(")+ 
A. Raghuram 
153 
Lemma 4.6 Let + = ~o v E Fo(sl, s2). Then &x) = C X ~ I - ~  
(X)v. 
h 
Hence the function q5 is a locally constant function on 'D* which vanishes 
outside a compact subset of V and is a constant in a neighbowhood of the 
origin. 
Proof Obvious. 
0 
Now 'we go into the proof of convergence of Fourier transform of func- 
tions in 3,. We begin with a lemma which rephrases this convergence prob- 
lem into a convergence problem for an operator valued (in fact End(nl @n2) 
valued) series which we denote by A(X). This A(X) is now independent of 
the function in F,. We would like to point out here that each summand 
of A(X) is a certain kind of non-abelian Gaussian sum. 
Lemma 4.7 Let 
h 
Let 4 = 4, E F, (sl, 7r2). Then the series defining +, ( X )  converges if and 
only if the series defining A(X) converges and in this case we have 
h 
h ( X )  = (1 €3J T~(x-')) - A(X) - (sl (X) @ 1 ) ~ .  
Proof Note that 
In the above integral, notice that IY 1-l dY = d Y and by putting XY = T 
we get 
Now the main point is the convergence (and then getting the asympo- 
totics) of the 'function' A(X). The simplest case to handle is when both 
.rrl and n2 are unramified and in this case we can get explicit information 
on A(X). This is the content of the next lemma. 

154 
Kirillov Theory for GL2 (D) 
Lemma 4.8 Let nl and 7r2 be unmmified irreducible representations of D*, 
i.e., there exists complex numbers sl and s 2  such that xi(X) = lXlsi for 
i = 1,2. L e t s  = sl - s2. Then 
1. If s = 0 then 
2. If s = -1 then 
3. If s # 0, -1 then 
where a and b are some arbitmy constants and two occurences of the 
same symbol for constants should not be interpreted as being the same con- 
stant. (Note that the s ~ ,  
s2 and s are well defined modulo ( 2 ~ i / l n ( ~ ~ ) ) Z  
.) 
Proof Note that 
- 
A(X) = m<~(x) ' 
l(T)=m *(T)(sl (T-') 8 a 2  (T)) dX T 
Now it is easy to see that 
from which the lemma easily follows. 
A. Raghuram 
155 
To handle A ( X )  when at least one of the ni is not unramified we need 
the following lemma. It says that in this case the series defining A(X) is 
actually a finite sum and hence is definitely convergent. We will then be in 
a position to state a preliminary form of the main theorem of this section 
which gives the asymptotics of functions in 'a' Kirillov space for n. 
Lemma 4.9 Let nl and n2 be two irreducible representations of D* . Let 
el and l2 be the levels (Remark 3.9) of nl and n2 respectively. Let t = 
max{ll, la). Assume l > 0. Let 
Then if m < -l + 1 - d then I, = 0. 
Proof For the sake of brevity let U denote the group of units OX and let 
Ui denote 1 + pa for all i > 1. 
Note that 
I, 
= C Jaeu(e) 
*(mmab)(nl (b-la-') 8 7r2 (ab)) d X  b 
&J/U(e) 
(nl (a-l) €3 ~2 (a)) 
a€U/U(C) 
The inner integral vanishes. This can be seen by going to !J3' via a substitu- 
tion like b = 1 + P and noting that P I+ @ (wmap) is a non-trivial character 
(since m < -l + 1 - d) on a compact group g'. 
Corollary 4.10 If at least one of nl or 7r2 is ramified then the series 
defining A ( X )  is a finite sum and A 
hence convergent. For any function 
& E .Fm(n1, 7r2) the series defining 6, converges and gives a locally con- 
stant function on D* which vanishes outside compact subset a compact sub- 
set of D. 
Remark 4.11 We would like to point out that Lemma 4.9 is a partial 
analogue of Equation 22 in [5]. Of course, one expects the integral Im to 
vanish for all m # -t + 1 - d. One can prove this when at least one of 
nl and 7r2 is ramified (the case we are interested in) and when they have 
distinct levels. The case when the levels are the same seems technically 
complicated, at least to the author! 

156 
Kirillov Theory for GL2 (D) 
We now state and prove the main theorem in this section which gives a 
Kirillov model for representations V(al, n2) and also gives asymptotics for 
the functions in the corresponding Kirillov space K(al, a 2 )  Note that the 
asymptotics given below is a direct generalization of the table on page 1.36 
of [5]. 
Theorem 4.12 Let a1 and a 2  be two irreducible representations of V*. 
For each f E V(n1, Q) let Er E Cm (D* 
, TI @ a2) be given by 
1.   or all (t:) 
E P andfor  all^ E D *  
we have 
2. There ezists a function X rt A(X) in Cm(D*, End(% 8 a2)) such 
that given any f E V(n1, n2) there exists vectors a and p (depending 
on f) in Wl @ W2 such that in some neighbourhood of 0 we have 
EfW = 1 ~ 1 " ~ ( 1 @  
~ 2 ( X ) ) 0  + I X ~ ~ / ~ A ( X ) ( T ~ ( X )  
€3 1)P. 
Proof The proof of (1) is an easy computation and we give a sketch of it 
below. Using the definition we get 
A B 
(X) is equal to 
( 0  df 
A B 
ccl Y 
x1'21 2
)
)
 1 *(xY) ((o 
D) f) (w-' ( 
d ~ .  
n ~ z  
o(Y)=n 
Simplifying the above integral and making the substitution Z= A-I (B+YD) 
we get 
and this expression simplifies to the right hand side of the equation in (1). 
The proof of (2) follows from Lemmas 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8 and Corol- 
lary 4.10. 
0 
References 
[I] C. Bushnell and P.C. Kutzko, The admissible dual of GL(N) via com- 
pact open subgroups, Princeton University Press, (1993). 
A. Raghuram 
157 
[2] H. Carayol, Representations cuspidales du groupe lineaire, Ann. Sci. 
Ecole Norm. Sup. 17 (1984), 191-225. 
[3] W. Casselman, On some results of Atkin and Lehner, Math. Annalen 
201 (l973), 301-314. 
[4] P. Deligne, Fomes modulaires et representations de GL(2), Modular 
functions of one variable 11, SLN 349 Springer-Verglag, 1973. 
[5] R. Godement, Notes on Jacquet-Langlands theory, Mimeographed 
notes, Ins. for Adv. Study, Princeton, 1970. 
[6] R. Godement and H. Jacquet, Zeta functions of simple algebras, SLN 
260 Springer-Verlag, (1972). 
[7] H. Jacquet and R. Langlands, Automorphic Forms on GL2, SLN 114 
Springer-Verlag, (1970). 
[8] H. Koch and E.W. Zink, Zur Korrespondenz von Darstellungen der 
Galoisgruppen und der tentralen Divisionsalgebren uber lokalen Kor- 
pen (Der tahme Fall), Math. Nachr. 98 (1980), 83-119. 
[9] C. Moeglin and J.-L. Waldspurger, Modeles de Whittaker degeneres 
pour des groups p-adiques, Math. Zeit. 196 (3) (1987), 427-452. 
[lo] D. Prasad and A. Raghuram, Kirillov theory for GL2(D) where D is 
a division algebra over a non-Archimedean local field, Duke Math. J. 
104 (2000). 
[Ill A. Raghuram, Some topics in Algebraic groups: Representation the- 
ory of GL2(D) where D is a division algebra over a non-Archimedean 
local field, Thesis, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, University 
of Mumbai, (1999). 
[12] M. Tadic, Induced representations of GL(n, A) for p-adac division al- 
gebras A, J. reine. angew. Math. 405 (1990), 48-77. 
A.RAGHURAM, 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, 
T.I.F.R., DR. HOMI 
BHABHA 
ROAD, COLABA, MUMBAI-400005, INDIA. 
E-mail: raghuram@math.tifr.res.in 
Current Address: DEPARTMENT 
OF MATHEMATICS, 
UNIVERSITY 
OF 
TORONTO, 100 ST. GEORGE STREET, TORONTO, ON, CANADA 
M5S 
3G3. 
E-mail: raghuram@math.toronto.edu 

C.S. Rajan 
An Algebraic Chebotarev Density Theorem 
C.S. Rajan 
Abstract 
We present here results on the distribution of Robenius conjugacy 
classes satisfying an algebraic condition associated to a 1-adic rep- 
resentation. We discuss applications of this algebraic Chebotarev 
density theorem. The details will appear elsewhere. 
1 Chebotarev density theorem 
The classical Chebotarev density theorem provides a common generalisa- 
tion of Dirichlet's theorem on primes in arithmetic progression and the 
prime number theorem. Let K be a number field, and let OK be the ring of 
integers of K. Denote by CK the set of places of K. For a nonarchimedean 
place v of K ,  let p, denote the corresponding prime ideal of OK, and N v  
the norm of v be the number of elements of the finite field OK/pv. Suppose 
L is a finite Galois extension of K ,  with Galois group G = G(L/K). Let 
S denote a finite subset of K ,  containing the archimedean places together 
with the set of places of K ,  which ramify in L. For each place v of K not in 
S, and a place w of L lying over v, we have a canonical F'robenius element 
ow in G, defined by the following property: 
The set {ow 1 wlv) form the Frobenius conjugacy class in G, which we 
denote by ov. Let C be a conjugacy class in G. We recall the classical 
Chebotarev density theorem [LO], 
where fora positive real number x, s(x) = #{v E CK I N u  < x), denotes 
the number of primes of K whose norm is less than x. 
The Chebotarev density theorem has proved to be indispensable in 
studying the distribution of primes associated to arithmetic objects. Hence 
it is of interest to consider possible generalisations of the Chebotarev 
density theorem, in the context of i-adic representations associated to 
motives, and also in the context of automorphic forms. Such a general- 
isation is provided by the Sato-Tate conjecture. 
2 
Sato-Tate conjecture 
Let GK denote the Galois group of K/K. Suppose p is a continous 1-adic 
representation of GK into GL,(F), where F is a non-archimedean local 
field of residue characteristic 1. Let L denote the fixed field of I? by the 
kernel of p. Write L = U, L, ,' where L, are finite extensions of K. We 
will always assume that our 1-adic representations are unramified outside a 
finite set of primes S of K ,  i.e., each of the extensions La is an unramified 
extension of K outside S. Let w be a valuation on L extending a valuation 
v $! S. The F'robenius elements at the various finite layers for the valuation 
wlLa patch together to give raise to the F'robenius element ow E G(L/K), 
and a F'robenius conjugacy class ov E G(L/K). Thus p(aw) (resp. p(ov)) 
is a well defined element (resp. conjugacy class) in GL,(F). 
The analogue of the Chebotarev density theorem for the 1-adic repre- 
sentations attached to motives is given by the Sato-Tate conjeture [Ser2, 
Conjecture 13.61. Let G denote the smallest algbebraic subgroup of GL(V) 
containing the image of p(GK). G is also the Zariski closure of p(GK) inside 
GL,. We assume that the I-adic representation satisfies the Weil estimates 
and is semisimple. G will then be a reductive group. When p is a 1-adic 
representation associated to a motive, there should exist a homomorphism 
t from G to GL1, and let G1 denote the kernel of t. 
Fix an embedding of F into C. Let J be a maximal compact subgroup 
of G1(C), and let j denote the space of conjugacy classes in J. On j 
one can define the 'Sato-Tate measure' p, which is the projection of the 
normalised Haar measure of J onto j. Assume that p(a,) are semisimple, 
and that there exists a positive integer i such that the normalised conjugacy 
7 
class p(ov) := (~v)-'/~p(o,) considered as a conjugacy class in G1(C) 
intersects J. The latter assumption is equivalent to the conjecture that 
the eigenvalues of p(ov) satisfy the Weil estimates. If M is a subgroup of 
GL(V)(C), and C c M is a subset of M stable under conjugation by M, 
then denote by 
Sc = {v @ S  
I p(aw) nc # 4) 
and for a positive real number x > 1, denote by 
T,(x) = #{v E CK - S ( NU < 2, p ( ~ )  
n C  # 4). 

160 
An Algebraic Chebo tarev Density Theorem 
The Sato-Tate conjecture is the following: - 
Conjecture 2.1 (Sato-'Pate) The conjugacy classes p(a,) E 3 are equidis- 
tributed with respect to the measure p on 3, i.e, given a measurable subset 
C c 3, then the following holds: 
This conjecture is still far from being proved, and little is known regarding 
the distribution of the F'robenius conjugacy classes for the 1-adic represen- 
tations associated to motives. However when C is defined by 'algebraic 
conditions', a simple, amenable expression for the density of primes v with 
a, E C can be obtained, which mirrors the classical Chebotarev density 
theorem, and is particularly useful in applications. 
3 An algebraic Chebotarev density theorem 
In this section, we give a generalisation of the Chebotarev density theo- 
rem to I-adic representations, provided the conjugacy class is algebraically 
defined. 
Let M denote an algebraic subgroup of GL, 
such that 
p(GK) c M(F). Suppose X is an algebraic subscheme of M defined over 
F, and stable under the adjoint action of M on itself. Let 
Let Go be the identity component of G, and let 8 = G/GO, be the finite 
group of connected components of H. For 4 E a ,  let G4 denote the cor- 
responding connected component of G, p ( G ~ ) 4  = p(GK) n G#(F), and 
C4 = C n G4. We have the following theorem which was proved in [Ral, 
Theorem 31, under the additional assumption that p is semisimple. 
Theorem 3.1 With notation as above, let @ = (4 E 
I G4 C X). Then 
I'kI 
x 
7rC (x) = - - 
181 1% x + o ( & ) ,  
as x + m .  
Hence the density of the set of primes v of K with p(uv) E C is precisely 
l'kl/l@l. 
Remark 3.2 The heuristic for the theorem is as follows: We first observe 
the following well known lemma [SerS], which is a direct consequence of the 
Chebotarev density theorem. 
C.S. Rajan 
161 
Lemma 3.3 Suppose C is a closed analytic subset, stable under conju- 
gation of G(L/K), of dimension strictly less than the dimension of the 
analytic group p(GK). Then 
Suppose C is a closed analytic subset such that the density of F'robenius 
conjugacy classes @(av) belonging to C is positive. It follows from the 
lemma, that C must have at least one component of dimension the same as 
the dimension of p(GK). In the algebraic context this would then amount 
to counting the number of connected components. This motivates the 
introduction of algebraic concepts. 
Suppose now that p is semisimple. It follows that G is a reductive 
algebraic group. Base changing to C, we see that that G(C), is a complex, 
reductive Lie group. Let J be a maximal compact subgroup of G(C). Since 
G(C) is reductive, we have G/GO e J/JO, where J0 denotes the identity 
component of K .  Corresponding to an element 4 E a, let ~4 denote the 
corresponding connected component of J .  It is well known that ~4 is Zariski 
dense in G#(C). Hence the following theorem is a consequence of the above 
theorem, and can be thought of as an algebraic analogue of the Sato-Tate 
conjecture. It is this form that is crucially needed for the applications. 
Theorem 3.4 Suppose that p is also a semisimple representation. With 
notation as above, 
rc(x) = ((4 E @ I J4 c X(C)) x 
IJ/JOI 
- 
log x + 0 (1) 
log x ' 
a s x + m .  
4 Refinements of strong multiplicity one 
We recall the notion of upper density. The upper density ud(P) of a set P 
of primes of K ,  is defined to be the ratio, 
ud(P) = limsup,,, 
#{v E CK ( NV 5 X, v E P )  
#{v E CK I Nv < x) 
7 
where Nu, the norm of v, is the cardinality of the finite set OK 
/ p v ,  OK is 
the ring of integers of K ,  and p, is the prime ideal of OK corresponding to 
the finite place v of K. A set P of primes is said to have a density d(P), if 
the limit exists as x + oo of the ratio 

162 
An Algebraic Chebotarev Density Theorem 
and is equal to d(P). 
Suppose pi, p2 are 1-adic representations of GK into GL,(F). Consider 
the following set: 
SM(pi,pz) := {v E CK - S I Tr(pl(0,)) = Tr(fi(o,))}. 
We will say two representations pl and h have the strong multiplicity one 
property if the upper density of SM(pl, p2) is positive. We answer in the 
affirmative the following conjecture due to D. Ramakrishnan ([DRI]): 
Theorem 4.1 ([Ral]) If the upper density X of SM(pl,p2) is strictly 
greater than 1 - 1/2r2, then pl 21 pa. 
I 
The result was known for finite groups. There were examples con- 
structed by J.-P. Serre ([DRl]), which showed that the above bound is 
sharp. For unitary, cuspidal automorphic representations on GL2/K, the 
corresponding result was established by D. Ramakrishnan ([DR2]). The 
proof was based on the following result of Jacquet-Shalika: If nl and x2 
are unitary cuspidal automorphic representations on GL,, then nl - ii2, 
if and only if L(s, nl x n2) has a pole at s = 1, where 5 2  denotes the con- 
tragredient of n2. In analogy, it was expected that the obstruction to the 
proof of the above theorem, lies in the Tate conjectures on the analytical 
properties of L-functions attached to 1-adic cohomologies of algebraic vari- 
eties defined over K. However the theorem follows from Theorem 3.4 and 
the following well-known lemma on representations of finite groups, and the 
corresponding generalisation to compact groups. 
Lemma 4.2 Let G be a finite group and let pl, p2 be inequivalent repre- 
sentations of G into GL(n, C). Then 
Theorem 4.1 is still not completely satisfactory, as it does not pro- 
vide any information on the relationship between p, and p, possessing the 
strong multiplicity one property. One of the motivating questions for us 
was the following: suppose pl and p2 are 'general7 representations of GK 
into GL2(F), possessing the strong multiplicity one property. Does there 
exist a Dirichlet character x such that pa 2. p, @ X ?  It is this stronger 
question that provides us with a clue to the solution of this problem (see 
the foregoing remark after Theorem 3.1). The following result can be con- 
sidered as a qualitative version of strong multiplicity one and provides a 
vast strengthening of Theorem 3.1 in general. 
Theorem 4.3 ([Ral]) Suppose that the Zariski closure HI of the image 
pl(GK) in GL, is a connected, algebraic group. If the upper density of 
C.S. Rajan 
163 
SM(pl, pa) is positive, then the following hold: 
a) There is a finite Galois extension L of K ,  such that pl I G L -  
p2 I G L .  
b) The connected component H; 
of the Zariski closure of the image 
p2(GK) in GL, is conjugate to HI. In particular, H; -- HI. 
c) Assume in addition that pl is absolutely irreducible. Then there is a 
Dirichlet character, i.e., a character x of Gal(L/K) into GL1 (F) of 
finite order, such that p2 e pl @I X .  
Hence in the 'general case', the strong multiplicity one property indi- 
cates that the representations are Dirichlet twists of each other, and the set 
of primes for which Tr(pl(av)) = Tr(p2(av)), is not some arbitrary set of 
primes, but are precisely the primes which split in some cyclic extension of 
K. Morever, for any pair of representations satisfying the strong muliplicity 
one property, the above theorem indicates, that the set of primes for which 
Tr(pl (0,)) = Tr(p2 (a,)), has a 'finite' Galois theoretical interpretation. 
5 
Applications to modular forms 
Let N, k be positive integers, and r : (Z/NZ)* + C, be a character mod 
N, satisfying r(-1) = (-l)k. Denote by S(N, k, r) the space of cusp forms 
on ro(N) of weight k, and Nebentypus character e. Given f E S(N, k, r), 
we can write f (2) = Cz=o 
~ , ( f ) e ~ ~ ~ " ' ,  
Im(z) > 0, where an(f) is the nth 
Fourier coefficient of f .  Denote by S(N, k, e)O the set of cuspidal eigenforms 
for the Hecke operators T,, 
(p, N) = 1, with eigenvalue a,( f). We will 
define two such forms fi E S(Ni, ki, e,) , i = 1,2, to be equivalent, denoted 
by f l  - f2, if ap(fl) = ap(f2) for almost all primes p. Given any cuspidal 
eigenform f as above, it follows from the decomposition of S(N, k, s) into 
old and new subspaces and by the mulitplicity one theorem, that there 
exists a unique new form equivalent to f .  By a twist of f by a Dirichlet 
character X, we mean the form represented by C;=o 
X(n)an (f )e2linZ. 
We recall the notion of CM forms ([Rib]). f is said to be a CM form, if 
f is a cusp form of weight k 2 2, and the Fourier coefficients ap(f) vanish 
for all primes p inert in some quadratic extension of Q .  
Theorem 5.1 ([Ral]) Suppose fi E S(Ni,ki,ri)O, i = 1,2, and fl is a 
non CM cusp form of weight kl 2 2. Suppose that the set 
has positive upper density. Then there exists a Dirichlet character x of Q ,  
such that f2 N fl 63 X. In particular, f2 is also a non CM CUSP form of 
weight k2 = Icl . Hence apart from finitely many primes, the set of primes at 
which the Hecke eigenvalues of fl and f2 agree, is the set of primes which 
split in a cyclic extension of Q .  

164 
An Algebraic Chebotarev Density Theorem 
We now give an extension of a theorem of D. Ramakrishnan on recov- 
ering modular forms from knowing the squares of the Hecke eigenvalues 
[DR3]. We will just give the application to modular forms and not give the 
general 1-adic statement generalising Theorem 4.3. 
Theorem 5.2 Let fl, f 2  be cuspidal ezgenforms in S(N, k, s)O, k > 2. Fix 
a positive integer m. 
a) Suppose that a , ( f ~ ) ~  
= ~ , ( f 2 ) ~  
on a set of primes of density at least 
1 - 1/2(m + I ) ~ .  Then there exists a Dirichlet character x of order 
m, such that f2 
fl 8 X. 
b) Suppose fl is a non CM cusp form. If a,( fl)m = ap(f2)rn on a set 
of primes of positive density, then there exists a Dirichlet character 
x of order m, such that f2 - fl 8 
X .  
6 
On a conjecture of Serre 
In this section we discuss a conjecture of Serre [SerZ, Conjecture 12.91 
regarding the distribution of maximal Frobenius tori, in the context of 
cohomology of smooth projective varieties. Let X be a nonsingular com- 
plete variety over a global field K .  Fix a non-negative integer a, and a 
rational prime 1. There is a natural, continuous representation p of GK on 
the 1-adic &ale cohomology groups V := Hi(X X K  K, Qr). p is unramified 
outside a finite set of finite places S of K. We assume that S contains the 
primes v of K lying over the rational prime 1. For a prime v @ S, and w a 
valuation of K extending v, we have a well defined Fkobenius element ow 
in the image group p(GK). 
The concept of 'Frobenius' subgroups was introduced by Serre, in 
relation to his work on the image of the Galois group for the 1-adic rep- 
resentations associated to abelian varieties defined over global fields. For 
an unramified prime v $! 
S and w(v, denote by H, the smallest algebraic 
subgroup of G containing the semisimple part of the element a,. Denote 
by T, 
the connected component of H,. 
H, and T, 
are diagonalisable 
groups, being generated by semisimple elements. Since the elements ow are 
conjugate inside p(GK), as w runs over the places of K extending v, the 
groups Hw and T, are conjugate in G. Thus the connectedness of H,, or 
the property of being a maximal torus inside G depends only on v, and not 
on the choice of w lv. 
It is expected that the elements a, are semisimple [Ser2, Question 12.41. 
Granting this conjecture, H, is then the smallest algebraic subgroup of G 
containing a,. In case p is assumed to be semisimple, we have the following: 
C.S. Rajan 
165 
Proposition 6.1 Suppose that p is semisimple. There exists a set of places 
of density 1 of K at which the corresponding Frobenius conjugacy class 
consists of semisimple elements. 
In general, it is not even clear that there is even a single prime v at 
which H, is a maximal torus for w(v, nor that the density of the set of 
such primes is defined. Our theorem is the following result; conjectured by 
J.-P. Serre in the context of motives [Ser2, Conjecture 12.91. 
Theorem 6.2 
a) The set of primes v @ S of K ,  at which the corre- 
sponding fiobenius subgroup Hw is a maximal torus inside G, has 
density 1/(G : GOI. 
b) The density of connected Frobenius subgroups H,, 
is also 1/IG : Go!. 
In particular the theorem implies that G is connected if the set of primes 
v at which the corresponding Frobenius subgroup H, is a maximal torus is 
of density 1. We now apply the above theorem to the 1-adic representations 
arising from abelian varieties. First let us define the following notion for 
abelian varieties defined over Fp. 
Definition 6.3 Let A be an abelian variety defined over F,. A is said to 
be endomorphism ordinary if the following holds: 
EndFp (A)o := EndF, (A) 8 Q = EndFp (A x 8,) 8 Q. 
We recall the notion of ordinarity for abelian varieties. An abelian vari- 
ety A of dimension g, defined over a perfect field k of positive characteristic 
p is said to be ordinary, if the group of ptorsion points A[p] over an alge- 
braic closure k of k is isomorphic to (Z/pZ)g. In other words the prank 
of A is the maximum possible and is equal to g. It is known that if A is a 
simple abelian variety over F, defined over Fp and if A is ordinary, then it 
is endomorphism ordinary [Wa]. Our theorem is the following: 
Theorem 6.4 Let A be an abelian variety defined over a number field K .  
Let CA denote the number of connected components of the algebraic enve- 
lope of the image of the Galois group acting on H ~ ( A ,  
Ql), for some prime 
1. Then there is a set T of primes of K of degree 1 over Q and of den- 
sity at least 1/cA, such that for all p € T ,  the reduction mod p of A is 
endomorphism ordinary. 
It is a conjecture of Serre and Oort, that given an abelian variety A 
over a number field K ,  there is a set of primes of density one in some 
finite extension L of K, such that the base change of A to L has ordinary 

166 
An Algebraic Chebotarev Density Theorem 
reduction at these primes. We would like to refine the conjecture to assert 
that in fact the set of primes of K at which A has ordinary reduction is of 
density l/cA. The above theorem seems to be a step towards a proof of this 
conjecture. Notice one consequence of the theorem: by a theorem of Tate 
characterising the endomorphism algebras of supersingular varieties [Tall, 
it follows that the set of primes at which A has supersingular reduction is 
of density at most 1 - l/cA. In particular if the Zariski closure of the image 
of the Galois group is connected, then the set of primes of supersingular 
reduction is of density 0. 
If the conjectures of Tate are assumed for motives defined over finite 
fields, then results similar to the classification of the endomorphism algebras 
of abelian varieties over finite fields has been obtained for motives defined 
over finite fields [Mi]. It seems plausible that the above methods can be 
applied to establish a conditional result for general motives also. 
7 Analytical aspects 
We will discuss now some of the analytical analogues of the results stated 
above. These results, especially the qualitative form of the strong multi- 
plicity one for GL(l), were the main motivations for the algebraic theory 
discussed above. We now state a theorem, which can be considered as a 
qualitative form of the strong multiplicity one theorem for GL(l), and is 
essentially due to Hecke. 
Theorem 7.1 Let el and O2 be two idele class quasi-characters on a num- 
ber field K .  Suppose that the set of primes v of K for which 01,, = 02,, is 
of positive upper density. Then O1 = x02 for some Dirichlet character x on 
K. In particular the set of primes at which the local components of O1 and 
O2 coincide has a density. 
Let K be a global field, and AK denote the ring of adeles of K .  Suppose 
nl and 7r2 are autornorphic representations of GLn(AK). Define 
where MK denotes the set of places of K, and nl,, (resp. nz,,) denotes the 
local components of ,nl (resp. n2) at the place v of K. If the complement of 
SM(nl, n2) is finite and nl, n2 are unitary cuspidal automorphic represen- 
tations, then it is known by the strong multiplicity one theorem of Jacquet, 
Piatetski-Shapiro and Shalika [JS], [JPSh], that nl - n2. In [DR2, page 
4421 D. Ramakrishnan considered the case when the complement in MK of 
SM(rl, n2) is no longer finite, and made the following conjecture: 
C.S. Rajan 
167 
Conjecture 7.2 (D. Ramakrishnan) Let nl , 7r2 are unitary cuspidal au- 
tomorphic representations of GLn(AK). Let T be a set of places of K of 
Dirichlet density strictly less than 1/2n2. Suppose that for v $! 
T ,  nl,, z 
 IT^,,. Then n1 2 n2. 
In ([DRl]), D. Ramakrishnan showed that the conjecture is true when 
n = 2. In analogy with GL1 and motivated by the analogous Theorem 4.3 
for 1-adic representations, we conjecture the following, which clarifies the 
structural aspects of strong multiplicity one, and is stronger than Conjec- 
ture 7.2. We refer to [La, page 2101 for the following notions. Let H be 
a reductive group over K. Let C denote the conjectural Langlands group 
possessing the property that to an 'admissible' homomorphism 4 of C into 
Langlands dual L~ of H, there is 'associated' a finite equivalence class of 
automorphic representations of H (AK) and conversely. This association is 
such that at all but finitely many places v of K ,  the local parameter $,, 
which can be considered as a representation of the local Deligne-Weil group 
W(K,) into H, should correspond via the conjectural local Langlands cor- 
respondence to the local component n, of n, where .rr is an element of this 
class. 
Suppose .rr is an isobaric automorphic representation of GLn(AK) such 
that the local components n, are tempered. The image H(n) := &(C) 
will be a reductive subgroup of GLn(C). Consider now two irreducible 
automorphic representations nl and 7r2 of GL,(AK), such that the local 
components are tempered. In analogy with Theorem 4.3, we can make the 
following conjecture: 
Conjecture 7.3 
a) Suppose that the connected components of H(nl) 
and H (n2) are not conjugate inside GLn(C). Then S M  (nl , n2) is of 
density zero. 
b) Suppose that H(nl) is connected and acts irreducibly on the natural 
representation Cn. Suppose that S M  (nl , n2) has positive upper den- 
sity. Then there exists an idele class character x of finite order such 
that for a11 but finitely many places v of K ,  71-2,, N (nl 8 x ) ~ .  
In particular for GL2, the above conjecture says the following: suppose 
I 
nl is a cuspidal non-dihedral automorphic representation and n2 is not 
I, 
a cuspidal non-dihedral automorphic representation of GL2(AK). Then 
SM(nl, n2) is of density zero. Morever suppose nl , n2 are irreducible, cus- 
pidal, non-dihedral representations of GL2(AK) such that the local com- 
ponents of n1 and 7r2 coincide for a positive density of places of K. Then 
there exists a Dirichlet character x of K, such that 7r2 N nl 8 X. 

168 
An Algebraic Chebotarev Density Theorem 
C.S. Rajan 
169 
The methods of [Ra2], prove that the above conjectures imply Ramakr- 
ishnan's conjecture. We give now a result, the proof of which mimics the 
proof for the corresponding statement for finite groups Lemma 4.2, but us- 
ing deep facts from analytic number theory. This result was independently 
observed by D. Ramakrishnan. Let us say that an automorphic representa- 
tion .;rr of GL, (AK) satisfies the weak Ramanujan conjecture [DR4], if for 
v 4 S, we have 
Weak Ramanujan conjecture: lav(.;rr)l 5 n . 
V v g S .  
Here we have assumed that for v $ S, the local component xu is an un- 
ramified shperical representation of GLn(Kv), and by av(x) we mean the 
trace of the corresponding paremeter matrix belonging to GL(n, C ) .  It 
had been shown in [DR4], that for a cuspidal automorphic representation 
on GLn(AK), there is a set of places of density at least 1 - l/n2 where the 
weak Ramanujan conjecture is satisfied. 
Theorem 7.4 ([Ra2]) Suppose 
and x2 are irreducible, unitary, cusp- 
idal automorphic representations of GLn(AK), unramified outside a finite 
set of places S of K and satisfy the weak Ramanujan conjecture. Then 
Conjecture 7.2 is true. 
References 
[De] 
P. Deligne, Formes modulaires et repre'sentations 1-adiques, Sem. 
Bourbaki, 1968-69, exp. 355, SLN 179 Springer-Verlag, (1977), 
139-172. 
[DS] 
P. Deligne and J.-P. Serre, Formes modulaires de poids 1, Ann. Sci. 
Ecole. Norm. Sup. 4e sbrie, 7 (1974), 507-530. 
[JS] 
H. Jacquet and J. Shalika, Euler products and the classification of 
automorphic forms, I and II, Amer. J. Math. 103 (1981), 499-558 
and 777-815. 
[JPSh] H. Jacquet, I. Piatetski-Shapiro and J. Shalika, Rankin-Selberg con- 
volutions, Amer. J. Math. 105 (l983), 367-464. 
[LO] 
J. Lagarias and A. M. Odlyzko, Effective versions of the Cheb- 
otarev density theorem, Algebraic Number Fields, ed. A. Fkohlich, 
Academic Press, 1977, 409-464. 
[La] 
R. P. Langlands, Automorphic representations, Shimura varieties 
and motives, Ein marchen, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 33 2 (1979), 
Amer. Math. Soc., 205-246. 
[Mi] 
J. S. Milne, Motives over finite fields, Proc. Symp. Pure Math., 55 
(1994), Part 1, Amer. Math. Soc., 1994, 401-460. 
[Ral] C. S. Rajan, On strong multiplicity one for 1-adic representations, 
Internat. Math. Res. Not. 3 (1998), 161-172. 
[Ra2] 
C. S. Rajan, Refinement of strong multiplicity one for automorphic 
representations of GL(n), to appear in Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 
[DRl] D. Ramakrishnan, Pure motives and autmorphic forms, Proc. 
Symp. Pure Math. 55 2 (1994), Amer. Math. Soc., 411-446. 
[DR2] D. Ramakrishnan, Appendix: A refinement of the strong multiplic- 
ity one theorem for GL(2), Invent. Math. 116, (1994), 645-649. 
[DR3] D. Ramakrishnan, Recovering modular forms from squares, to ap- 
pear in Invent. Math. 
[DR4] D. Ramakrishnan, On the coeficients of cusp forms, Math. Res. 
Lett. 4 (1997), 295-307. 
[Rib] 
K. Ribet, Galois representations associated to eigenforms with 
Nebentypus, SLN 601 Springer-Verlag, (1977), 17-52. 
[Serl] J.-P. Serre, Quelques applications du the'or6me de densite' de Cheb- 
otarev, Publ. Math. IHES 54 (1982), 123-201. 
[Sera] J.-P. Serre, Proprie'tb conjecturales des groupes de Galois mo- 
tiviques et des repre'sentations I-adiques, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 
55 (1994), Part 1, Amer. Math. Soc., 377-400. 
[SerS] J.-P. Serre, Abelian 1-adic representations and elliptic curves, 
W. A. Benjamin Inc., 1970. 
[Sh] 
J. Shalika, The multiplicity one theorem for GL(n), Ann. of Math. 
100 (1974), 171-193. 
[Tall 
J. Tate, Endomorphisms of abelian varieties over finite fields, 
Invent. Math. 2 (1966), 134-144. 
[Ta2] 
J. Tate, Classes d'isoge'nie des varie'te's abe'liennes sur un corps finis 
(d'aprets T. Honda), Skminaire Bourbaki 21 (1968/69), Exp. 352. 
[Wa] 
J. C. Waterhouse, Abelian varieties over finite fields, Ann. Sci. 
Ecole Norm. Sup., 2 (1969) 521-560. 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL 
RESEARCH, HOMI BHABHA 
ROAD, MUMBAI - 400 005, INDIA. 
E-mail: rajan@math.tifr.res.in 

B. Ramakrishnan 
171 
Theory of Newforms for the - 
MaaB Spezialschar 
B. Ramakrishnan 
Abstract 
The Saito-Kurokawa conjecture asserted the existense of an isomor- 
phism between a subspace (called the Mad spezialschar) of the 
space of Siegel modular forms of degree 2 and the space of elliptic 
modular forms. This conjecture was proved first by A. N. Andrianov, 
H. Mad and D. Zagier and the proof involves three correspondences 
involving Jacobi forms and modular forms of half-integral weight. A 
generalization along these lines was carried out by the author in col- 
laboration with Manickam and Vasudevan, in which we proved the 
conjecture for odd square-free levels (restricted to the space of new- 
forms). For this purpose, the theory of newforms along the lines of 
Atkin-Lehner was developed in the Mad spezialschar. This article 
is aimed at giving a report of this work. 
1 Introduction 
The epoch making works of H. MaaB [9], 
A. N. Andrianov [2] and D. Zagier 
[14] established a 1-1 correspondence between certain subspace (called the 
MaaB spezialschar) of Siegel modular forms of degree 2, weight k and the 
space of elliptic modular forms of weight 2k - 2 for the group SL2(Z). 
This correspondence was conjectured (independently) by H. Saito* and N. 
Kurokawa [8]. It is natural to ask for a generalization of this correspondence 
for higher levels and from the remarks made in the book of M. Eichler and D. 
Zagier [4, p.61, it seems that M. Eichler proved a generalized correspondence 
in which the level of the elliptic modular forms was left open and this 
work was not published. In this direction, the author [ll], in a joint work 
with Manickam and Vasudevan established the correspondence in which 
the level is an odd square-free natural number. Since the correpondence 
'The author came to know from Professor Saito that his conjecture was made in a 
private communication to Professor Andrianov. 
is about Hecke eigenforms, for higher levels one should consider only the 
subspaces having a basis of Hecke eigenforms (this subspace will be called 
the space of newforms). The proof given by Andrianov - Maafi- Zagier is a 
combination of three correspondences: the first one is the natural projection 
map from the Siegel modular forms to Jacobi forms; the second one is the 
Eichler-Zagier map between Jacobi forms and modular forms of half-integral 
weight; the third and final one is the Shimura correspondence (modified 
by W. Kohnen) between modular forms of half-integral weight and elliptic 
modular forms. Our proof also goes along these lines, generalizing the three 
parts to higher levels. 
In a survey article [12], the author explained briefly about the gen- 
eralization of the Saito-Kurokawa conjecture aiming at giving an exposi- 
tion on the Eichler-Zagier correspondence (the second part in the proof). 
This Eichler-Zagier correspondence has been generalized by the author [lo] 
in a joint work with M. Manickam to Jacobi forms of general index and 
level. In this article, we concentrate mainly on Siegel modular forms and 
present the main ingrediants in obtaining the theory of newforms for the 
Maal.3 spezialschar. 
2 
Notations 
Let k, N E N. The notations for the various spaces involved in the corre- 
spondence are given below: 
S k  ( N )  
- The space of all holomorphic cusp forms of weight 
k and level N. 
Skflj2(4N) - The space of all holomorphic cusp forms of weight 
k + 1/2 for the group ro(4N). 
S:+,~,(~N) 
- Kohnen's + space consisting of forms in 
Skop (4N), whose n-.th Fourier coefficients 
vanish whenever (- l)k = 2,3(mod 4) ( 2 /N) . 
Sk (rt(N)) 
- The space of all holomorphic Siege1 cusp forms of 
weight k for the Siegel modular subgroup l?;(N). 
Ji?(N) 
- The space of all holomorphic Jacobi cusp forms of 
weight k, 
index m for the Jacobi group I?O(N)~. 
For precise definitions we refer to [I, 4, 5, 61. One has the Petersson 
inner product defined in these spaces and further the Hecke theory (though 
not complete) has been studied in all the spaces mentioned above. For 
a cusp form f of integral or half-integral weight, a(f; n) denotes the n-th 
Fourier coefficient of f and in the case of Jacobi forms, c(n, r) denotes the 
(n, r)-th Fourier coefficient. For a complex number z, we write e (2) instead 

B. Ramakrishnan 
173 
Theory of Newforms 
(2) The spaces J:YPyneW 
(M) and S:;~T (I'o ( 4 ~ ) )  
are Hecke equivari- 
antly isomorphic. The cowespondence is given as follows. 
3 Newform theory for the Maaa spezialschar 
and the generalized Saito-Kurokawa corre- 
spondence 
c(n, r)e (nr + rz) H x 
c(n, r)e (IDIT) , 
(3.3) 
O<D,rEZ 
D
E
~
~
 
(mod 4) 
where D = r2 - 4n. 
In this section, we shall discuss briefly about the connection between Siegel 
modular forms and Jacobi forms and further report the theory of new- 
forms for the M a d  spezialschar in order to complete the generalized Saito- 
Kurokawa descent. Before proceeding further, first we shall mention the 
results of Kohnen and the collaborative work of the author for the sake of 
completeness. 
(3) "Strong multiplicity 1 " theorem holds i n  J;yP'neW 
(M) . 
Let F E Sk(ri(N)). We shall first give a brief outline of the natu- 
ral connection between Siegel modular forms and Jacobi forms. For this 
purpose we consider the Fourier expansion of F in the following form: 
F(r, z,rl) = 
A(n, r, m)e(nr + rz + mr'). 
(3-4) 
n,r,mEZ 
r2 <4nm 
Theorem 3.1 (Kohnen) Let M be an odd square-free natural number 
(1) The space S:+l12(r~(4~)) can be decomposed a s  follows: 
We say that a function F E Sk (ri(N)) satisfies the MaaS relation if the 
Fourier coefficients A(n, r, m) of F satisfy the following relation. 
+ new 
(2) The space Skill2 (ro(4M)), called the space of newforms, has a basis 
of normalized Hecke eigenforms (with respect to all Hecke operators 
defined on the + space). 
(The basis elements of S:;;;(~O(~M)) 
are called newforms.) If f ,  g E s::;;(~o(~M)) 
are newforms, then 
a(f; n) = a(g; n) for almost all n would imply that f = g. 
Let S,*(r; (N)) C Sk (Fi(N)) be the subspace of Sk 
(I'g(N)) consisting of 
forms F which satisfy the MaaS relation. This subspace will be called the 
MaaB " Spezialschar" .t 
Let F E Sk(ri(N)). Then, F can be written as follows. 
(3) The spaces s::;; 
(ro ( 4 ~ ) )  
and S2;Cw (M) are Hecke equivariantly 
isomorphic, via some linear combination of the modified Shimura 
maps. 
F(T, z,#) = 
A(n, r ,  rn)e(nr + r t  + mr') 
Theorem 3.2 (Manickam-Ramakrishnan-Vasudevan) Let M be an 
odd square-free natural number. 
(1) The space JLY(M) is decomposed as follows. 
The last expression of F is called the Fourier-Jacobi expansion of F because 
the coefficients 4, 
that appear in the expansion are in fact holomorphic 
Jacobi cusp forms of weight k, index m and level N. That is, we have, 
4m E J:Z(N). In this way one has a natural map from Siegel cusp forms 
J : y  (M) = @ J L Y ~ , ~ ~ ~  
(d) 1 UJ (r) , 
rd(M 
r,d_>l 
t1n his paper, H. MaaB used this german word for the subspace and later on it is 
often referred to in the literature in the same manner. 
where UJ(r) is the Hecke operator. 

174 
Theory of Newforms 
B. Ramakrishnan 
175 
to Jacobi cusp forms. F'rom the above observation, we get a map from 
Sk(ri(N)) to JLyP(N), given by the projection map F I-+ Q1. In order to 
get the reverse ;nap, Eichler and Zagier defined an operator, denoted by 
Vm (m is a positive integer), which when applied on Jacobi cusp forms of 
index l produce Jacobi cusp forms of index em, preserving the weight and 
the level. It is defined as follows: 
d
k
(
 
) 
e(nr + rz), 
(3.7) 
where c4(n,r) denotes the (n,r)-th Fourier coefficient of Q. Thus, one 
knows how to get Jacobi forms of arbitrary index from a Jacobi form of 
index 1. Now consider the function 
where Q is a Jacobi form in J;YP(N). From the fact that Q is a Jacobi 
form, it can be checked easily that F transforms like a Siegel modular 
form, except for the symmetric property with respect to r and 7'. But 
from the Fourier expansion of the function QIVm, it follows, surprisingly, 
that the Fourier coefficients of F are symmetric with respect to T and 7'. 
Moreover, since our function F is obtained from a Jacobi form of index 1, 
it further satisfies the MaaS relation (3.5), which implies that F belongs to 
S;(ri(N)). Thus, the association F I+ Q1 gives an isomorphism between 
S;(I'i(N)) and J;T(N). Since the operator Vm commutes with Hecke 
action, it is seen that this isomorphism commutes with Hecke action. In the 
following section, we shall study the theory of newforms in the Maai3 space. 
3.1 Newforms in S:(ri(M)) 
F'rom now onwards, we shall assume that M is an odd squarefree natural 
number. We shall denote by V the map from JEYP(M) to S; (I?~(M) 
defined 
by (3.8). The inverse map is nothing but the projection map via the Fourier- 
Jacobi expansion. First let us show that the map V is Hecke equivariant. 
Let IIY and IIY denote respectively the Hecke algebra generated by 
the Hecke operators in the space of Siegel modular forms and Jacobi forms 
(restricted to the corresponding spaces of cusp forms). It is known that 
IIg is generated by the Hecke operators Ts(p), Ts(p2), p ,(M and Us(p), 
plM. Similarly, the Hecke algebra IIY is generated by the Hecke operators 
T j  (p), p jlM and UJ(p), pJ M. The Hecke operators for the primes p AM 
are already known in the literature (see [I], [4]). When plM, the Hecke 
operators Us(p) and UJ(p) will be defined in the sequel (these are intro- 
duced in [ll]). 
Let F E Sk (I'i (M)) and let p be a prime dividing M. Then the Hecke 
operator Us(p) is defined as follows: 
FIUs(p)(r, 2,~') = 
A(np, rp, mp)e(nr + rz + mr'), 
(3.9) 
n,m>l,rEZ 
r2<4nm 
where we write 
It is easy to verify that the operator Us(p) preserves the MaaB space 
Si (ri(M)). In terms of the matrix representation it is given by 
Let Q E JLYP (M). For pl M, the Jacobi Hecke operator Uj(p) is defined by 
where c4(n, r) denotes the (n, r)-th Fourier coefficient of Q(T, z). Now, using 
the Fourier expansions of the Hecke operators Us(p) and UJ(p) for (M, and 
the Vm operator, and further using the definition of the mapping V given 
by (3.8), it can be easily checked that 
where Q E J;Y(M) and pl M. 
Let p ,/'Me 
Put T&@) = Ts(P)~ - Ts(p2). Let Q E J L y ( M )  and let 
4 1 ~  
= F E s;(~;(M)). 
Put Fl =  FIT^(^) and Fz = FIT&@). Since V is 
an isomorphism, there exist Ql and 42 in J ; y P ( ~ )  
, 
such that Fl = 4,Iv 

176 
Theory of Newforms 
and F2 = 4 2  Iv. 
Now, using the Fourier expansions of Fl and F2, it can be 
easily seen that 
Therefore, we have the following theorem. 
Theorem 3.3 ([I 11, Theorem 6) The map V : J;T(M) + S;(ri(M)) 
is Hecke equivariant in the following sense:. 
where T E II?, 
and q : IIY -+ IIY is a Hecke algerbra homomorphism 
given by 
We put 
s;'"'~ 
( r i  (MI) = 
s; ( r i  (r)) 1 us (d) . 
Define S;'neW (I?: (M)) to be the orthogonal complement of ~ ; ~ " ' ~ ( r i  
(M)) 
in S;(ri(M)) with respect to the Petersson scalar product. Then the 
isomorphism V gives the following theorem. 
Theorem 3.4 ([ll], Theorem 7) 
(b) s ; ' ~ ~ ~  
(I?; (M)) is Hecke equivariantly isomorphic to J;y'neW 
(M) . 
(c) S;'new(ri(M)) has a basis of eigenforms with respect to all Hecke 
operators and the "multiplicity 1 " theorem is valid in S;'neW 
(ri(M)). 
3.2 Saito-Kurokawa descent 
In this section, we discuss briefly the first step towards the generalization of 
the Saito-Kurokawa descent for higher levels by using the newform theory 
explained in the previous section. 
Let F E S;'new(I'i(M)) be a newform in the MaaD space and let 
F I~s(e) = XtF for all e > 1. Then the Andianov zeta function (referred to 
as the Spinor zeta function) ZF (s) defined by 
has an Euler product expansion 
where 
Let 4 be the newform in J ; ~ l n e w ( M )  
corresponding to F via the iso- 
morphism V .  Also let pp be the eigenvalues for 4 with respect to the 
I 
Jacobi Hecke operators. Then, from (3.15), one gets expressions for Xp and 
A; 
(= X: - Xp2) in terms of p,. 
Using these relations, it is possible to 
, 1 
factor Q,(P-~) and hence we have the following Euler product expansion 
for ZF (s) : 
where f is the newform in S;it2(M), which corresponds to 4 through the 
combination of Eichler-Zagier and Shimura-Kohnen maps, and Lf (s) is the 
Dirichlet L- function associated to f. 
Thus, we have the following theorem. 
P 
Theorem 3.5 ([ll], Theorem 8) Let M be an odd square-free positive 
integer. 
Then, there is a bijective correspondence between the spaces 
S;ynew 
(I'i (M)) and S;;T2 
(M), commuting with the action of Hecke 

178 
Theory of Newforms 
operators. If F and f are corresponding Hecke eigenforms in the respective 
spaces, then the correspondence is given by 
where Zg(s) = (fl,,, 
(1 - #-1-s)-' 
(1 - #-2-$)-') 
ZF (s) . 
Remark 3.6 The above theorem is the first step towards getting a gen- 
eralized correspondence between Sigel modular forms and elliptic modular 
forms for higher levels. From the author's recent work with M. Manickam, 
it is possible to extend this method to some more cases. The work in this 
direction is in progress. 
References 
[I] A. N. Andrianov, Quadratic forms and Hecke operators, Grundl. Math. 
Wiss. 286 Springer-Verlag, 1987. 
[2] A. N. Andrianov, Modular descent and the Saito-Kurokawa conjecture, 
Invent. Math. 53 (1979), 267-280. 
[3] A. 0. L. Atkin and J. Lehner, Hecke operators on ro(m), Math. 
Annalen 185 (1970), 134-160. 
[4] M. Eichler and D. Zagier, The theory of Jacobi forms, Progr. in Math. 
55, Bikhaiiser, 1985. 
[5] H. Klingen, Introductory lectures on Siegel Modular Forms, Cambridge 
Studies in Advanced Mathematics 20, Cambridge University Press, 
1990. 
[6] N. I. Koblitz, Introduction to Elliptic Curves and Modular Forms, 
Graduates Texts in Mathematics 97, Springer-Verlag, 1984. 
[7] W. Kohnen, Newforms of half-integral weight, J. reine angew. Math. 
333 (1981)) 32-72. 
[8] N. Kurokawa, Examples of eigenvalues of Hecke operators on Szegel 
cusp forms of degree two, Invent. Math. 49 (1978), 149-165. 
[9] H. Maall , ~ b e r  
eine Spetialschar von Modulformen tweiten Grades 
I, 11, III, Invent. Math. 52 (1979), 95-104; Invent. Math. 53 (1979), 
249-253; Invent. Math. 5 3  (l979), 255-265. 
B. Ramakrishnan 
179 
[lo] M. Manickam and B. Ramakrishnan, On Shimura, Shintani and 
Eichler-Zagier correspondences, To appear in Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 
[Ill M. Manickam, B. Ramakrishnan and T. C. Vasudevan, On the Saito- 
Kurokawa descent for congruence subgroups, Manuscripts Math. 81 
(1993), 161-182. 
[12] B. Ramakrishnan, On the Eichler-Zagier map, to appear in the confer- 
ence proceedings of the "International Symposium on Number Thoery 
and Related Topics, 1998" held at Yonsei University, Seoul, South Ko- 
rea. 
(131 G. Shimura, On modular forms of half-integral weight, Ann. of Math. 
97 (1973), 440-481. 
[14] D. Zagier, Sur la conjecture de Saito-Kumkawa (d'apr; H. MaapJ, 
SCminaire Delange-Pisot-Poitou 1979-80, Progr. in Math. 12 (1980), 
Birkhaiiser, 37.1-394. 
MEHTA RESEARCH INSTITUTE 
OF MATHEMATICS 
AND MATHEMATI- 
CAL PHYSICS, 
CHHATNAG 
ROAD, JHUSI, ALLAHABAD 
211 019, INDIA. 
E-mail: ramkimri.ernet.in 

Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis* 
M. Ram Murty 
1 P6lya and Turdn conjectures 
The Liouville function X(n) is defined as (-I)"(") where R(n) is the total 
number of prime factors of n counted with multiplicity. It is a completely 
multiplicative function and it is easy to see that 
for Re(s) > 1. If we define 
then, by partial summation, we have 
Based on numerical data, Pdlya [Po] conjectured that 
for all x > 2. It should be noted that Pdlya's conjecture implies the Rie- 
mann hypothesis. Indeed, by a well-known theorem of Landau, the integral 
expression in (1.3) converges to the right of Re(s) > a0 where a0 is the first 
real singularity of ((2s)/((s). For Landau's theorem, see for example, [EM, 
Theorem 10.4.2, p. 1321, where the proof is given for Dirichlet series with 
non-negative coefficients. However, the proof also works, mutatis mutandis, 
for Dirichlet integrals of the form 
I 
M. Ram Murty 
181 
where S(t) is of fixed sign for t sufficiently large. In the case under discus- 
sion, ((s) has no real zeros in 112 < s < 1, and so the first real singularity 
is at s = 1/2 coming from the pole of C(2s) on the numerator. Thus, 
((2s)/((s) is regular for Re(s) > 1/2 which implies that there are no zeros 
of C(s) in Re(s) > 1/2 since ((2s) is regular and non-vanishing in that 
region. 
Even if we have S(x) 5 0 for x sufficiently large, a similar argument 
allows us to deduce the Riemann hypothesis. Unfortunately, Haselgrove 
[Ha] has shown that S(x) changes sign infinitely often and so the P6lya 
conjecture is false. The smallest counterexample is x = 906,150,257 for 
which S(x) = 1. 
It is to be noted that the estimate 
for any 6 > 0 (where the implied constant may depend on 6 would also 
allow us to deduce the Riemann hypothesis. Indeed, (1.4) implies that the 
integral expression in (1.3) is regular for Re(s) > 112. Thus, ((2s)/((s) 
is regular in that half-plane and by the same reasoning, we deduce the 
Riemann hypothesis. In fact, it is not hard to show that (1.4) is equivalent 
to the Riemann hypothesis. 
Our goal in this paper is to formulate automorphic generalizations of 
the Pdlya conjecture and (1.4) and then investigate when we can expect 
them to be true. 
There is a related conjecture of TurAn [TI, namely that the sum 
for x sufficiently large. This too has been disproved by Haselgrove [HI. 
Below, we shall also investigate modular analogues of the T u r h  conjecture. 
In an appendix by Nathan Ng, we present some numerical evidence related 
to the modular versions of the Pdlya and TurAn conjectures. 
Acknowledgement I would like to thank Michael Rosen for his com- 
ments on preliminary version of this paper. I also thank Nathan Ng for 
doing the computations recorded in the Appendices. 
'Research partially supported by NSERC and a Killam Research Fellowship. 

182 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
I 
M. Ram Murty 
183 
2 Modular analogues of P6lya's conjecture 
where L(s, f )  = C;=, 
af (n)/ns and L(s, fX) = C;==, af (n)A(n)/nS. Since 
Let f be a normalized eigenform of weight k and level N and trivial neben- 
typus. Let us write 
as is easily seen by examining Euler factors, we deduce the identity 
f (z) = C a ( n ) n y  e(nz) 
where e(z) = e2"iz, as usual. Then, 
which is of independent interest. Thus, from the previous equation, we 
have 
It is easy to prove the following: 
Now suppose that af(n) are real and consider the hypothesis 
Lemma 2.1 Let 
F(m, n) = C G(m/d, nld). 
Then, writing the left hand side of (2.6) as an integral via partial summa- 
tion, we find that the right hand side of (2.6) converges for Re(s) > 00 where 
a0 is the first real singularity of L(2s, ~ ~ m ~ ( f ) ) / ( ( ~ s ) ~ ( s ,  
f). Since L(s, f )  
has infinitely many zeros on Re(s) = 112, and because L(2s, sym2 (f ))/~(2s) 
doesn't vanish in the half-plane Re(s) > 112, we deduce that this singularity 
must occur in the half-plane Re(s) > 112. This leads to: 
We can apply Lemma 2.1 to deduce that 
Theorem 2.2 Suppose that L(s, f )  # 0 for 112 < s 5 1 and that 
ord L(s, f )  5 1. 
s=1/2 
Now, let us observe that from (1.1), 
1 
if n is a square 
0 
otherwise. 
din 
Then, 
Sf (4 := C a, ( n ) W  
n s z  
changes sign infinitely often. 
Then, 
Proof Let us first consider the case L(1/2, f )  # 0. If Sf (x) is of constant 
sign for x sufficiently large, then 
by (2.2). Interchanging summations, using (2.1) and observing that X is 
completely multiplicative, we find that 
is regular for Re(s) > a where a is the first real singularity of the right 
hand side of (2.6). By hypothesis, L(s, f) does not vanish for any real s 
between 112 and 1. Also, C(2s) has no real zeros between 1/4 and 1 and the 

184 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
I 
M. Ram Murty 
numerator is regular by a celebrated theorem of Shimura [Sh]. Thus, the 
right hand side of (2.6) is regular for Re(s) > a with a < 112. We also know 
that L(2s,sym2(f)) does not vanish on Re(s) = 112. Thus L(s, f )  has no 
zeros for Re(s) 2 112 which is a contradiction. This deals with the case 
L(1/2, f )  # 0. If now, L(1/2, f )  = 0, and s = 112 is a simple zero, then 
C(2s)L(s, f )  is non-zero at s = 112. Thus, L ( S s , ~ ~ m ~ ( f ) ) / ( ( 2 s ) ~ ( s ,  
f )  
is regular for Re(s) 2 112. But this is a contradiction since L(s, f )  has 
infinitely many zeros on Re(s) = 112. 
0 
It is easy to give examples of f which satisfy the hypothesis of Theo- 
rem 2.2. 
Thus, the modular analogue of P6lya's conjecture is false in general. A 
necessary condition for it to be true is that L(1/2, f )  = 0 for then the right 
hand side of (2.6) will have a singularity at s = 112. 
It is quite possible that if E is an elliptic curve with large Mordell-Weil 
rank, then 
S E ( ~  
= C a(n)X(n)lJ;E 2 0 
nsz 
for all x sufficiently large. 
Gonek [Go] and Hejhal [He] have independently conjectured that for 
Riemann zeta function, we should have 
where the summation is over zeros of the zeta function. If we suppose that 
all the zeros of L(s, f )  are simple (apart from the zero at s = 1/2), then 
the analogue of the above is 
Murty and Perelli [MP] have shown that almost all zeros of L(s, f )  
are simple if we assume the Riemann hypothesis for L(s, f )  and the pair 
correlation conjecture for it. For the discussion below, we do not need an 
estimate as strong as the above estimate. If r is the order of the zero at 
s = 112, what is actually needed is that the order of every zero on the 
critical line have order 5 r - 1 and one would need a similar estimate for 
Theorem 2.3 Assume the Riemann hypothesis for L(s, f )  and suppose 
that L(s, f )  has a zero at s = 112 of order r. Suppose further that all 
zeros of L(s, f )  on Re(s) = 112 are of order 5 r - 1 apart from s = 112 
and that the analogue of (2.10) is satisfied. Then, 
where p,-1 is a polynomial of degree r - 2. 
Here is an indication of the proof. For the sake of simplicity we shall 
suppose all zeros of L(s, f )  apart from s = 112 are simple. The sum 
can be written for c > 1, 
by Perron's formula. We will choose T = Tj with T~+oo along an appro- 
priate sequence that doesn't coincide with any ordinate of a zero of L(s, f). 
Moving the line of integration to the left and picking up the residues arising 
from the zeros of L(s, f ), we obtain 
where C denotes the semi-rectangular path beginning at c + iTj to a + iTj 
and then to a - iTj ending at c - iTj. The horizontal and vertical integrals 
are easily estimated by the functional equation. For the sum over zeros one 
can use 
+ 
or the more general (2.10), which is a modular analogue of a conjecture of 
i 
9 
Gonek [Go]. Breaking up the sum over the zeros into dyadic intervals of 
type [U, 2U] we obtain an error term of 
In fact, one can prove the following. 

186 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
3 Modular analogues of the Turh conjecture 
If we expect that 
sf (x) = C af (n)A(n) - cx112(log x)'-~ 
n<_x 
for r > 4, then by partial summation we deduce that 
as x -+ oo, for some constant c > 0, so that the sums 
for sufficiently large x. Unlike the Turan case, these sums are not partial 
sums of the corresponding series at the edge of the critical strip. They have 
the disadvantage of being the partial sums of the series at the center of the 
critical strip. It is not difficult to show that these series actually converge 
at the center of the critical strip (see for example, [KM]). 
Thus, we see that if the modular analogue of the P6lya conjecture is 
true, then so is the modular analogue of the TurAn conjecture. 
4 Automorphic analogues 
Let L(s, n) be an automorphic L-function on GL(n). If n is self-dual, then 
it is reasonable to ask if 
&(x) = C an(n)A(n) > 0. 
n s x  
Certainly the Riemann hypothesis for L(s, s )  follows from 
since an easy calculation shows that 
The above reasoning suggests that if there is a high-order zero at s = 112, 
then the analogue of the P6lya conjecture should be true for a function 
which is "primitive" in the sense of Selberg. It would be interesting to test 
the conjecture for automorphic forms of higher dimension. 
M. Ram Murty 
5 
Certain sums of Fourier coefficients 
In this section and the next, we indicate an approach to proving a quasi- 
Riemann hypothesis. To this end, we will need some estimates on averages 
of Fourier coefficients of modular forms. We use the notation m - M to 
mean M 5 m 5 2M. We will need to consider sums of the form 
for j fixed. We will prove that 
Theorem 5.1 W e  have 
where the implied constant is independent of M. 
Proof We have 
and the inner sum is by an estimate of Rankin [Ra], o ( ( M / ~ ) ' / ~ )  from 
which we easily deduce the stated estimate. 
0 
The interest in knowing the asymptotics of such sums is due to the 
following: 
Theorem 5.2 Suppose that 
then L(s, f )  has no zeros for Re(s) > 314. 
Remark We say a few words about the hypothesis in Theorem 5.2. Firstly, 
if V = 1, then the hypothesis holds by Theorem 5.1. If V is bounded then 
the same is true. If V = X, then the sum is jmt af (m) which is clearly 
me. If we write k = dt in the inner sum and interchange the sums, we 

188 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
I 
can estimate the inner sum by Theorem 5.1 to get an upper bound of 
o ( ~ ' x ' / ~ v ~ / ~ ) .  
This means that the hypothesis is satisfied for V _< x1l4. 
In fact, if even we can replace the above upper bound by O ( ~ ' X ' / ~ V ~ / ~ - ~  
) 
for some small 6 > 0, then we will be able to deduce some quasi-Riemann 
hypothesis for L(s, f ). Thus, the hypothesised estimate (which can be 
i 
viewed as a generalization of Theorem 5.1) seems to lie deeper. We make 
some further remarks about it in the final section. 
6 Proof of Theorem 5.2 
We will apply the method of Vaughan to study sums of the form 
I 
where a(n) = a (n). Vaughan's identity can be stated in the following way. 
It is based on the formal identity: 
= ( F  + (AIB - F))(l - BG) + AG 
= F + A G - B F G + ( A / B - F ) ( l - B G ) .  
Suppose now we are given two Dirichlet series 
, 
and write 
Set 
Then, we have 
M. Ram Murty 
where 
al(n) = c(n) for n 5 U 
= 0 otherwise 
which is the essence of Vaughan's identity. In the case of interest, A(s) = 
C(2s) and B(s) = [(s) so that 
where 
al(n) = X(n) ifn 5 U 
Thus, we can write 
as S1 + S2 + S3 + S4 with appropriate notation. We now suppose that 
the a(n) are the coefficients (normalized) of our eigenform f .  By Cauchy- 
Schwarz and Rankin-Selberg, we easily deduce that S1 << U. We can write 
The inner sum can be estimated trivially by 0((z/d)'12). 
This gives 
S2 << x ~ / ~ + ' v ' / ~ .  
For S3, we have 

190 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
i 
By Theorem 5.1, the inner sum is ~((x/t)'/~t", so we get easily S3 << 
( u v ) ~ / ~ + ' .  
Finally, for S4, we have 
this can be re-written as 
By hypothesis, the inner sum is << ( ~ / m ) ~ l ~ m '  
so that we get S4 << 
x1+'/&. 
We choose V = x1j2 and U = X-o 
get a final estimate of 
1 
x ~ / ~ + ' .  
Thus, L(s, f )  has no zeros for Re(s) > 314. 
7 Concluding remarks 
It is clear that the obstacle in proving a quasi-Riemann hypothesis is really 
the estimation of the sum S4. It is interesting to note that if the sum 
are positive, then one can get the following estimate for S4: 
which is 
which by Theorem 5.1 gives a final estimate of xl+ '/v2l3 which would give 
a quasi Riemann hypothesis. 
M. Ram Murty 
8 Appendices: by Nathan Ng 
8.1 Modular analogues of Polya's conjecture 
Let E be an elliptic curve. The coefficients of its L-series will be denoted 
a(n). The normalized coefficients will be denoted aE(n) where aE(n) = 
a(n) /n . The Liouville function is denoted X(n) where X(n) = ( - I)"(") and 
R(n) is the total number of prime factors of n (counted with multiplicity). 
Let SE(x) = En<, 
aE (n)X(n) be the generalized Polya sum. 
Note In the tables, only the integer part for SE is given. We write S for 
SE (n - lo6) in the tables below. 

192 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
8.1.3 E3 : y2 - 63y = x3 + 351x2 + 56x + 22 (rank(E3) = 6) 
i 
M. Ram Murty 
8.2 
Modular analogues of Turan's conjecture 
Let E be an elliptic curve. The coefficients of its L-series will be denoted 
a(n). The normalized coefficients will be denoted a ~ ( n )  
where a ~ ( n )  = 
a(n)/ni. The Liouville function is denoted X(n) where X(n) = (-I)"(") and 
R(n) is the total number of prime factors of n (counted with multiplicity). 
Let TE(x) = En<. 
- ae ( n ) ~ ( n )  
/n 4 be the generalized Turan sum. 
Note In the tables, only the integer part for TE is given. We write T for 
TE(n lo6) in the tables below. 

194 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
t 
I 
M. Ram Murty 
I 
References 
[EM] J. Esmonde and M. Ram Murty, Problems in Algebraic Number The- 
~f 
ory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 190 (1999), Springer-Verlag. 
[He] D. Hejhal, On the distribution of log 1<'(1/2 +it)\, in Number Theory, 
Trace Formulas, and Discrete Groups, (Oslo, 1987), 343-370, Aca- 
demic Press, MA, 1989. 

196 
Some Remarks on the Riemann Hypothesis 
[Go] S. Gonek, On negative moments of the Riemann zeta functions, Math- 
ematika, 36 1 (1989), 71-88. 
[Po] G. Pdya, Verschiedene Bemerkungen zur Zahlentheorie, Jahresbericht 
der deutschen Math.-Vereinigung 28 (1919), 31-40. 
[Ha] C.B. Haselgrove, A disproof of a conjecture of Pdya, Mathematika 5 
(1958), 141-145. 
[KM] V. Kumar Murty, Modular Elliptic Curves, in Seminar on Fermat's 
Last Theorem, ed. K. Murty, CMS Conference Proceedings, 17 Amer. 
Math. Soc., 1995. 
[MP] M. Ram Murty and A. Perelli, The pair correlation of zeros of func- 
tions in the Selberg class, Internat. Math. Res. Not. 10 (1999), 531-546. 
[TI P. TurAn, On some approximative Dirichlet polynomials in the theory 
of the zeta function of Riemann, Danske Vid. Selsk. Mat .-Fys. Medd., 
24 17, 36 (1948), (see also his Collected Papers.) 
On the Restriction of Cuspidal 
Representations to Unipotent Elements 
Dipendra Prasad and Nilabh Sanat 
1 Introduction 
Let G be a connected split reductive group defined over a finite field IFq, 
and G(IFq) the group of IFq -rational points of G. For each maximal torus 
T of G defined over IFq and a complex linear character 0 of T(IFq), let 
R:(B) 
be the generalized representation of G(IFq) defined by Deligne and 
Lusztig in [DL]. It can be seen that the conjugacy classes in the Weyl 
group W of G are in one to one correspondence with the conjugacy classes 
of maximal tori defined over IFq in G ([Ca,3.3.3]). Let c be the Coxeter 
conjdgacy class of W, and let Tc be the corresponding maximal torus. 
Then by [DL] we know that ?rs = (-l)"~g~(B) (where n is the semisimple 
rank of G and 8 is a character in "general position") is an irreducible 
cuspidal representation of G(IF,). The results of this paper generalize the 
pattern about the dimensions of cuspidal representations of GL(n, IFq) as 
an alternating sum of the dimensions of certain irreducible representations 
of GL(n, IFq) appearing in the space of functions on the flag variety of 
GL(n, IFq) & shown in the table below. 
dim(Stn,,) - dim(Stn,n-l)+ 
dim(Stn.n-2) - -. + 
n 
dimension of 
cuspidal represent ation 

198 
Restriction of Cuspic'al Representations.. . 
Here 
is an irreducible representation of GL(n, F,) appearing in the 
space of functions on the flag variety of GL(n, F,); St,,, is the Steinberg 
representation, and 
is the trivial representation of GL(n, F,) . We are 
using the well known formula for the dimension of a cuspidal representation 
of GL(n, IF,) as (9-1) . . . (9"-l- 1). We could easily check that this equality 
remained true for characters of all unipotent elements too for these small 
values of n by looking into character tables. The aim of the paper is to give 
a generalization of this phenomena for all groups simple modulo center. 
An irreducible representation p of G(IFq) is called unipotent if it arises 
as a component of RF(1) for some T. If T is a split torus then RF(1) = 
1
n
d
~
~
~
~
 
(1) where B is a Borel subgroup containing T, defined over IFq . It 
. .. 
G(F,) 
is well-known that EndG(Fq) (IndB(Fq 
) (1)) can be identified with the group 
algebra C[W]. Therefore the irreducible representations of G(IFq) occur- 
G(F ) 
ring in IndB(F:),(l) are in one to one correspondence with the irreducible 
representations of W over @. It is known ([Stn,l4]) that the exterior pow- 
ers of the reflection representation of W, to be denoted by E throughout 
this paper, are irreducible and mutually inequivalent. Let Xi be the irre- 
G(F ) 
ducible component of IndB(,;) (1) corresponding to the i-th exterior power 
representation of the reflection representation of W. 
By [Lull it is known that if G is a classical group, then it can have at 
most one unipotent cuspidal representation. The groups of type A, do not 
have any unipotent cuspidal representation; groups of type B,, C, have 
exactly one if and only if n = s2 + s for some integer s 2 1 and D, have 
one if and only if n is an even square. Thus groups of type B2 = C2, and 
Dq 
have unique unipotent cuspidal representations, and in these cases they 
occur as a component of RFc(1), where c is the Coxeter conjugacy class 
of the corresponding root systems. Let us denote these unipotent cuspidal 
representations by nu,. 
Let G = G, be either Span, S 0 2 n + l  (n 2 2), or the split orthogonal 
group in even number of variables SO2, defined over IF,. For each partition 
n = TI + 7-2 + . . - + rk + s (0 5 s < n) we have the standard parabolic 
subgroup P defined over IFq with Levi subgroup L defined over IF, and 
isomorphic to GL,, x GL,, x -.. x GL,, x G,. For G = Sp2,, or S02n+l 
take the partition n = 1 + + 1 + 2, with the corresponding Levi subgroup 
(Gm)n-2 x Sp4, or (G,)n-2 
x So5. We know that Sp4 and So5 have a 
unique unipotent cuspidal representation nu,. Extend the representation 
nu, trivially across (Gm(lFq))n-2 = 
to construct a representation 
of (q)n-2 x Sp(4,1Fq), or (U$)n-2 x S0(5,1Fq), as the case may be. We 
abuse notation to denote this representation of Levi subgroup L(IFq) again 
G P  ) 
by nu,. Let p = Indp(F~)(iiuc)7 
where iiuc is the representation of P(&) 
Dipendra Prasad and Nila bh Sana t 
199 
obtained by composing nu, with the natural homomorphism from P(IFq) 
to L(IFq). By [Lu1,5] we know that EndG(Fq) (p) can be identified with 
@[W (Bn-2 )] . Therefore the irreducible representations of G(Fq ) occurring 
in p are in one to one correspondence with the irreducible representations 
of W(Bnb2). Let pi be the irreducible component of p corresponding to 
the i-th exterior power representation of the reflection representation of 
W(B,-2). 
Similarly, when G = SO2, (n > 4), take the Levi subgroup 
L E (Gm)n-4 x So8. We know that S0(8,1Fq) has a unique unipotent 
cuspidal representation nu,. Let p be constructed as above. It follows by 
[Lu1,5] that Endcpq) (p) can be identified with C[W (B,-4)]. 
Let pi be 
the irreducible component of p corresponding to the i-th exterior power 
representation of the reflection representation of W(Bn-4). We state our 
main theorem below. 
Theorem 1.1 Let G be a split classical group, and let O, denote the char- 
acter of a representation n. With the notations as above, we have the 
following 
(a) ForG(Fq) =GL(n+ l,IFq) (n 2 0), 
Let G be a split exceptional simple algebraic group. Let (P, 4) be a 
pair of parabolic subgroup in G containing a fixed Borel subgroup B with 
Levi decomposition P = MN, and a unipotent cuspidal representation 4 
of M(IFq). The irreducible components of ~ n d ~ ~ ~ ~ ( $ )  
are in one to one 
correspondence with the irreducible representations of the Weyl group W' 
of the quotient root system which is a root system of simple group of rank = 
r(G) - r(P), where r(G) and r(P) denote the semisimple ranks of G and 
P respectively. Denote by $i the irreducible components of 1ndZ[2! (4) 

200 
Restriction of Cuspidal Representations.. . 
corresponding to the i-th exterior power representation of the reflection 
representation of W'. 
Theorem 1.2 With the notations as above, 
(i) if G is a simple algebraic group of type E6, E7, then, 
where $ runs over all the unipotent cuspidal representations of M(lFq). 
(ii) If G = G2, then same as in (i) except that the term corresponding 
to P = G has instead of all the 4 unipotent cuspidal representations 
of G2 (IFq ) , only 3 which can be specified as G2 [- 1] + G2 [e] + G2 [B2] 
following Carter's notation [Ca, 13.91. 
(iii) If G = F4, then same as in (a) except that the term corresponding 
to P = G has instead of all the 7 unipotent cuspidal representations 
of G2 (Fq ) , only 4 which can be specified as F4 [B], F4 [02], F4 [i], F4 [-i] 
following the notations in [Ca, 13.91. 
(iv) If G = Es, then same as in (a) except that the term correspond- 
ing to P = G has instead of all the 13 unipotent cuspidal repre- 
sentations of E8(pq), only 6 which can be specified as E8[c](i = 
1, . . . ,4), E8[6], E8 [e2] fo~~owing 
the notations in [Ca, 13.91. 
To illustrate the theorem 1.2 we take the case of G = E7. The Levi 
subgroups of E7 which have unipotent cuspidal representations are Lo I 
(Gm)7, Ll 2 SO8 X (Gm)3, L2 
E6 X G ,  and L3 = G. 
The quotient root system arising from Lo is the root system of type 
E7, and 4 = 1 is the unique unipotent cuspidal representation of (Fq *)7. 
G(F ) 
Hence, di = Ti is the irreducible component of Ind,(F:)(l) corresponding 
to the i-th exterior power representation of the reflection representation of 
W(E7). 
  he quotient root system arising from L1 is of type C3. Let $ = a,, 
be the unique unipotent cuspidal representation of SO(8, IFq). Let gi[D4] be 
the irreducible component of ~ndg, (4) corresponding to the i-th 
-
A
.
 ' 
exterior power representation of the reflection representation of W(C3) for 
i = 0,1,2,3. 
The quotient root system arising from Lz = E6 x G m  is of type Al. 
Let $' = E6[e] and 6" = &[e2] be the two unipotent cuspidal represen- 
tations E6 (Fq). Let &[&] and #[E6] be the irreducible components of 
Dipendra Prasad and Mabh Sanat 
201 
~
n
d
~
(
~
~
 
P2 (F, ) (4') and 1 n d ~ $ ~ )  
(4') respectively corresponding to the i-th exte- 
rior power of the reflection representation of of W(A1) for i = 0,l. 
When L = L3 = G, we have two unipotent cuspidal representations of 
E7(Fq) denoted by E7[C] and E7[-C] as in [Ca,13.9]. Then, by theorem 1.2 
we get, 
The proofs of above theorems will appear elsewhere. It uses the theory 
of symbols and non-abelzan Fourier transforms as given in [Lu~]. 
References 
[Ca] R.W. Carter, Finite Groups of Lie Type, Wiley Interscience, 1985. 
[DL] P. Deligne and G. Lusztig, Representations of reductive groups over a 
finite field, Ann. of Math. 103 (1976), 103-161. 
[Lull G. Lusztig, Irreducible Representations of Finite Classical Groups, 
Invent. Math. 43 (1977), 125-175. 
[Lu2] G. Lusztig, Characters of Reductive Groups over a Finite Field, Ann. 
of Math. Studies 107 (1984), Princeton University Press. 
[Stn] R. Steinberg, Endomorphisms of Linear Algebraic Groups, Memoirs 
of AMS 80 (1968). 
MEHTA RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE 
OF MATHEMATICS 
AND MATHEMATI- 
CAL PHYSICS, 
CHHATNAG 
ROAD, JHUSI, ALLAHABAD, 
INDIA-21 
1019. 
E-mail: dprasad@mri.ernet.in 
MEHTA RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE 
OF MATHEMATICS 
AND MATHEMATI- 
CAL PHYSICS, CHHATNAG 
ROAD, JHUSI, ALLAHABAD, 
INDIA-21 
1019. 
E-mail: nilabh@mri.ernet.in 

Nonvanishing of Symmetric Square 
L-functions of Cusp Forms Inside the Critical 
Strip 
Winfried Kohnen and Jyoti Sengupt a 
This announcement is a brief description of results. The details will be 
published elsewhere. 
1 Introduction 
Let f be a normalized cuspidal Hecke eigenform of integral weight k on 
the full modular group SL2 (Z) and denote by D j (s) (s E @) the symmetric 
square L-function of f completed with its archimedean I?-factors. As is well- 
known [7,8], Dj(s) has a holomorphic continuation to @ and is invariant 
under s ct 2k - 1 - s. Note that by [3], D j (s) (up to a variable shift) also 
is the standard zeta function of a cuspidal automorphic representation of 
GL(3), and so by [4] zeros of Dj(s) can occur only inside the critical strip 
k - 1 < Re(s) < k. According to the generalized Riemann hypothesis, the 
zeros of Dj(s) should all lie on the critical line Re(s) = k - 4. 
The last statement of course is far from being settled. On the other 
hand, it turns out to be comparatively easy to prove non-vanishing results 
for D j (s) on the average. For example, in 161 Xian-Jin Li used an approxi- 
mate functional equation for an average sum of the Dj(s) to show that for 
any given s with k - 1 < Re(s) < k, s # k - i, ((s - k + 1) # 0, there are 
infinitely many different f such that D;(s) is not zero. 
In the present note, using a different approach we will prove that given 
any s with k - 1 < Re(s) < k, Re(s) # k - $, then for all k large enough 
there exists a Hecke eigenform f of weight k such that Dj(s) # 0. For the 
proof we use a "kernel function" for D j  (s) as given by Zagier in [8] and 
then proceed in a similar way as in [5], where a corresponding result for 
Hecke L-functions was proved. 
W. Kohnen and J. Sengupta 
2 Notation 
For s E @ we usually write s = a + it with a, t E R. 
3 Statement of result 
Let k be an even integer 2 12 and let Sk be the space of cusp forms of 
weight k with respect to the full modular group I?l = SL2(Z), equipped 
with the usual Petersson scalar product ( , ). For f (z) = En,, 
a(n)e2""' 
( z  E 71: = upper half plane) a normalized Hecke eigenform in Si (recall that 
normalized means a(1) = I), we denote by 
the symmetric square L-function of f ,  where the product is taken over all 
rational primes p and a,, b, are defined by 
By [7,8], Df 
(s) has a holomorphic continuation to C, 
and the function 
satisfies the functional equation 
Let {fk,~, . . . , fk,gk } (gk = dim Sk) be the basis of normalized Hecke 
eigenforms of Sk. 
Theorem 3.1 Let to E IR and 0 < c < f. Then there exists a positive 
constant C(to, r )  depending only on to and r such that for k > C(to, c) the 
function 
9 k 
1 
C Cfk,., fk,.) 
.= 1 
D;k," ( 4  
does not vanish at any point s = o + ito, k - 1 < o < k - $ - c, k - $ + c < 
o < k. 
Corollary 3.2 Lets E @ befied with k - 1  < o < k, o # k- $. Then for 
all k large enough there exists a normalized Hecke eigenform f in Sk such 
that D;(s) # 0. 

204 
Non vanishing of Symmetric Square L-functions 
References 
[I] N. Abramowitz and I. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions, 
Dover, 1965. 
[2] T. Apostol, Introduction to Analytic Number Theory, Springer, 1976. 
[3] S. Gelbart and H. Jacquet, A Relation between automorphic represen- 
tations of GL2 and GL., Ann. Sci. E.N.S. IV ser. 11 (1978), 471-542: 
[4] H. Jacquet and J. A. Shalika, A con-vanishing theorem for zeta func- 
tions of GL,, Invent. Math. 38, (1976/77), 1-16. 
[5] W. Kohnen, Non-vanishing of Hecke L-functions associated to cusp 
forms inside the critical strip,. J. of Number Theory 67 2 (1997), 182-189. 
[6] X.-J. Li, On the poles of Rankin-Selberg convolutions of modular forms, 
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 348 3 (1996), 1213-1234. 
[7] G. Shimura, On the holomorphy of certain Dirichlet series, Proc. Lon- 
don Math. Soc. 31 (l975), 75-98. 
[8] D. Zagier, Modular forms whose Fourier coeficients involve zeta- 
functions of quadratic fields, in Modular Functions of One Variable 
VI (ed. J.-P. Serre and D. Zagier), SLN 627 Springer-Verlag, (1976), 
105-169. 
UNIVERSITAT 
HEIDELBERG, 
MATHEMATISCHES 
INSTITUT, IM NEUEN- 
HEIMER FELD 288, D-69120 HEIDELBERG, 
GERMANY 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, 
TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL 
RESEARCH, 
HOMI BHABHA 
ROAD, MUMBAI 400 005, INDIA 
E-mail: sengupta@math.tifr.res.in 
Symmetric Cube for GL2 
Henry H. Kim* and Freydoon shahidit 
This article is in connection with a talk given by the second author 
at the International Conference on Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups, L- 
functions, and Automorphic Forms, Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, December 28, 1998 through January 1, 1999. At the time of the 
conference all we had was [KSh2] in which, using an idea of Kim [Kil],[Ki2] 
and the machinery of Eisenstein series [Ll], [L4], [Shl], [Sh2], we proved the 
holomorphy of symmetric cube L-functions for GL2. Striking as this result 
was (see the introduction of [KSh2]), we were still far from the existence of 
symmetric cube of an automorphic form on GL2 as one on GL4. Since this 
is now accomplished in [KShl], using the same general machinery and ideas, 
but completely different L-functions, we find it more appropriate to report 
on this new development rather than a result which is now an immediate 
corollary. The second author would like to thank Professors M. S. Raghu- 
nathan and Venkataramana for their invitation and hospitality during the 
conference and the rest of his month visit to Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research in the winter of 1999. 
1 New instances of functionality 
We recall the definition of modular forms [S]. If fj denotes the upper half 
plane of complex numbers z for which Im(z) > 0, and given a positive 
integer N, rN is the principal congruence subgroup 
then a modular form of weight k with respect to I', rN c I' c SL2(Z) is a 
holomorphic complex function f on fj* = u Q u {ioo), satisfying 
'Partially supported by NSF grant DMS9610387 
t~artiall~ 
supported by NSF grant DMS9970156 

206 
Symmetric Cube for GL2 
for everv 
where k is an integer, k 2 0. If k is even, then Equation (1.1) is equivalent 
to 
f ( r  z)(d(r - z))g = f(z)(dz$, 
i.e., f (z)(dz) ? is a differential form on \ 5, justifying the term "form". 
The function f is called a cusp form if f vanishes on all the cusps, i.e., 
the set Q U {im). 
We may basically assume r = ro(N) = {TIC - 0 (mod N)). Then 
f (z) = C ~,,e'"~"" 
Assume a1 = 1 and that f is an eigenfunction for all the Hecke operators. 
Theorem 1.1 (Deligne 1973) la,l < 2p%. 
Suppose k = 0, i.e., we are interested in functions on r \ 5. There are 
- - 
no non-constant holomorphic forms. But we relax the condition to assume 
f is real analytic, given as an eigenfunction for A = -y2 (a? 
+ z), 
ax2 
ay2 
Note that holomorphic means s = f 
1. We assume f is also an eigenfunc- 
tion for all the Hecke operators, is bounded, and vanishes on all cusps, 
normalized with a1 = 1. Then 
with 
satisfying 
7 
'as z + +m. 
The function f is called a Maass form and 
Conjecture 1.2 (Ramanujan-Petersson) la,l j 2p-1/2. 
Henry H. Kim and fieydoon Shahidi 
Moreover, if Xl ( r )  = a ( l  - s2), either s E (-1,l) or s E iR 
Conjecture 1.3 (Selberg) XI (I?) > a, ie., s E iR 
There is a well-known way of realizing f as an irreducible subrepre- 
sentation of L2(GL2 (Q)Ab \ GL2 (AQ)), using adeles of Q (cf. [GI). More 
generally, one wants to study L2 (GL2 (F)& \ GL2 (AF )) for an arbitrary 
number field F, where we are considering those which transform according 
to a fixed character of F* \A;, 
center of GL2(AF). We will further assume 
that they are infinite dimensional which amounts to being cuspidal, i.e., for 
each cp in the subrepresentation 
for almost all g E GL2(AF). If rr is such a constituent, then rr = @,T, 
as v runs over all the places of F ,  and for almost all finite places v, T, 
is parametrized by a conjugacy class {t,) = {diag(a,, P,)) C GL2(@). 
The representation rr, is then induced from a pair of unrarnified (quasi)- 
character pvl and p,z of F,*, the completion of F at v. Then a, = pu1(w,) 
and P, = pU2(wv), where a, is a generator for the maximal ideal P, of the 
ring of integers 0, of Fu. The absolute value at v is normalized so as to 
satisfy lwvl = qll, where q, is the cardinality of O,/P,, . 
The Ramanujan-Petersson Conjecture then requires la,l = IPv( = 1, i.e. 
rr, is tempered, where Selberg demands similarly that s = 2sWl = -2sm2 
be pure imaginary, i.e., each rr, 
= Ind(1 leml, 1 Ism2) is also tempered. 
Theorem 1.4 (Kim-Shahidi [KShl]) 
a) If v < m, then 
qc5/34 5 la,( and 1PU1 < q:/34 
1
5
1
 
< - < j + 0.004). 
(7 
34 
b) If v = oo, then IRe(svi)l 5 5/34; i e . ,  
Let us now look at some examples of Langlands functoriality which ap- 
pear in the process of proving the theorem. They are extremely important. 
Consider the map 

Symmetric Cube for GL2 
or more generally 
Langlands [L2] predicts the existence of a map 
This is very important, because it allows us to multiply automorphic forms 
on two different GL-groups. Of course we have the usual addition n1 H 7r2 
which is the usual induction from a parabolic subgroup with Levi compo- 
nent GL, (AF ) x GLn(AF ) to GLm+,(AF ), of the representation n1 8 n2. 
We can therefore operate with automorphic forms as if they are Weil 
group representations and the result would be the global Langlands corre- 
spondence. 
The map must be functorial in the sense that, if nl, corresponds to 
{tl,) C GL,(C) 
and Tau corresponds to {tau) c GLn(C), then 
In fact, more generally, the map p, must respect the local Langlands corre- 
spondence of Harris-Taylor [HT] and Henniart [He]. More precisely, if pl, 
and pa, are representations of Deligne-Weil group which parametrize n1, 
and n2,, respectively, then pl, 8 p2, must parametrize nl, IBn2,, and there- 
fore (p, (nl , n2)), = nl, El n2,, where n1, 
n2, corresponds to plv @ p2,. 
Let us call p, (xl, nz), satisfying these properties, the functorial product of 
nl and ~
2
.
 
Theorem 1.5 (Kim-Shahidi [KShl]) Suppose m = 2 and n = 3. Then 
p, exists and is functorial except possibly at places 4 2  for which nl, is 
extraordinary supercuspidal while 7r2, is a supercuspidal representation of 
GL3(Fv) defined by a non-normal cubic extension of F,. In this case, II, = 
(nlv IXI n2,) 8 q . det, with q at most a quadratic character of F,* and II = 
8,IIv = p* (nl , n2). Moreover, ll is an isobaric (cf. [JS], [L2]) automorphic 
representation of GLs (AF ) . More precisely, there exist (unitary) cuspidal 
representations a, of GLni(AF), 1 5 i < r, Gin, = 6, quch that II = 
ol I33a2B.-.Ha,. 
Remark For the last statement one needs the weak Ramanujan conjec- 
ture for GL(2) and GL(3) which is proved in [Ra]. Assuming this conjecture 
for all GL groups, the fact that ll = a1 H 
- 
a,, must be true for all m 
and n. 
Henry H. Kim and fieydoon Shahidi 
209 
Here is a sketch of how Theorem 1.4 follows from Theorem 1.5. 
Proof (of Theorem 1.4) Take a cusp form n1 = n on GL2(AF). Let 
7r2 = Ad(n) be the Gelbart-Jacquet lift [GJ] of n. This is a cuspidal repre- 
sentation of GL3 (AF), if n is not monomial, whose unramified components 
are given by 
(Ad(4)v * {diag(avP,l, 1, ff,lPU)), 
whenever 7rv is given by {diag(a, , P,) ) . Let It = nl E17r2. Then an argument 
using L-functions shows that II = al EEI 02, where a1 = 7rl = n and a 2  
is an automorphic form on GL4(AF). Suppose nu is unramified. Then 
az,, corresponding to {diag(a:Pl1, a,, P,, a l 1 E ) ) .  The worst situation 
. 
happens if 0 2  is a cuspidal representation of GL4(AF). Then by results 
1
1
 
of Luo-Rudnick-Sarnak [LRS]: la:/?;' 
1 and (p?a;' 1 5 q?-". 
But lavl = 
1
1
 
- ( I - A )  
--- 
1
1
 
lPlll and therefore 
< qz-n or qv 
51 5 [av[ and IP,I < q,6 
51. 
1
1
 5 
But - - - = 
Similarly at the archimedean places. 
6 
51 
34' 
0 
Corollary 1.6 ([KShl]) a 2  8 w, = Sym3 
(n), i. e., symmetric cubes exist. 
It is functorial everywhere. Moreover, it is cuspidal unless either n or Ad(n) 
is monomial, i.e., there exist non-trivial grossencharacters q and 77' such 
that Ad(n) @ q r Ad(n) or n 8 q' 
n. 
This is very important. We must therefore recall what sym: is. This 
time consider the map 
defined by action of GL2(C) on symmetric tensors of rank 3. In other 
words, if P(x, y) is a homogeneous cubic form in two variable, sym3(g), 
g E GL2 (C), is the matrix in GL4 (C) which gives the change of coefficients 
in P(x, y), if we consider the form P, (x, y) = P((x, y)g). It is a homomor- 
phism and therefore a 4-dimensional irreducible representation of GL2 (C) , 
called the symmetric cube representation of (the standard representation 
of) GL2(C). 
Y 
Similar maps can be defined for any m and it is very important to define 
i 
1 
Sym" 
The map sym: was established by Gelbart-Jacquet [GJ] in 1978. 
Since then, many experts have been interested in getting sym:. There are 
serious and important applications. For example sym; has been very im- 
portant to Langlands-Tunnel and therefore Wiles' proof of Fermat's last 
problem. We expect similar influence when Wiles' program starts seriously 
for Siegel modular forms of rank 2. In fact, the image of sym3 lies ir- 
reducibly inside GSp(4,C) and will allow us for example to study Siegel 

210 
Symmetric Cube for GL2 
modular forms of weight 3 as images of modular forms of weight 2 under 
sym: and so on . . . . 
As yet another example, let n be a positive integer and consider the 
natural embedding of 
We expect a map 
such that if n = @,nu E A U ~ ( S O ~ , + ~  
(AF)) and for unramified places v, a, 
corresponds to {t,) C Spz,(C), then for each such v, i, (n), corresponds to 
{i*(tv)) C GL2n(C). 
Definition An automorphic representation ll = @II, 
of GL2n(A~) is 
called a weak lift of an irreducible automorphic representation n = @nu 
of SOanfl(AF), if at almost all unramified places v, ll, corresponds to 
i(t,). We usually require that for every v = oo, Il, = i,(n,) according to 
local Langlands correspondence [L3]. 
Theorem 1.7 (Cogdell-Kim-Piatetski-Shapiro-Shahidi 
[CKPSS]) 
Let n be an irreducible globally generic cuspidal automorphic representation 
of S02,+1 (AF). Then n has a weak lift to GL2,(AF ). 
Remark 'This can also be approached using the trace formula (Arthur). 
But one needs the fundamental lemmas for regular and weighted orbital 
integrals of classical groups. 
Remark There is another case of functoriality obtained by Kim which 
when combined with sym? leads to existence of sym:. In a joint work we 
have obtained important applications and better estimates. That will be 
discussed in another occasion. 
It is therefore clear that functoriality requires that every homomorphism 
p between two L-groups 
p : L
~
l
 
--+ L
~
2
 
of connected reductive algebraic groups over a number field F, should lead 
to a map (in loose terms) 
so that if K = awnv E Aut(Gl(AF)), then for each unramified v, (p,(n)), 
corresponds to {p(t,)) c L ~ 2 ,  
if nu corresponds to {t,} c L ~ l .  
Henry H. Kim and fieydoon Shahidi 
211 
We finally point out how these new cases are proved. One applies an 
appropriate version of converse theorems of Cogdell-Piatetski-Shapiro [CP] 
to L-functions obtained from the method of Eisenstein series initiated by 
Langlands [Ll], [L4] and developed by Shahidi [Shl], [Sh2], . . . . In the case 
of GL2 x GL3, one needs to prove that the triple L-functions for n1 @ 7r2 @ a 
on GL2(AF) x GL3(AF) x GLk(AF), k = 1,2,3,4, where a is an irreducible 
cuspidal representation of GLk(AF), are nice. In view of this converse 
theorem, this means that when twisted by a highly ramified (at a finite set 
of finite unramified places of F) grijssencharacher of F, they are: 
1) entire, 
2) are bounded in vertical strips of finite width, and 
3) satisfy a standard functional equation. 
The machinery of Eisenstein series allows us to consider these L-functions 
as coming from triples (G, M, n), where G is a connected reductive group 
and M a maximal Levi subgroup, both defined over F (cf. [Shl], [Sh2]). 
Here n is a globally generic cuspidal representation of M = M(AF). In 
the case at hand, G is the simply connected group of either type A4, D5, 
E6, or E7 (cf. [Sh2]). The derived group of M is isomorphic to SL2 x SL3, 
SL2 x SL3 x SL2, SL2 x SL3 x SL3, or SL2 x SL3 x SL4, respectively. n is 
closely related to nl 8 
7r2 @ a. 
In a general setting including these cases and using the machinery of 
Eisenstein series [L4], [Shl], [Sh2], 1) follows from an important and cru- 
cial observation of Kim [Kill, [Ki2], 2) is proved in Gelbart-Shahidi [GSh] 
(subtle), and 3) follows from the general theory [Shl], [Sh2]. 
A good amount of local analysis is necessary and theory of base change 
[AC] is required to prove the lift is functorial. 
References 
[AC] 
J. Arthur and L. Clozel, Simple algebras, base change, and the 
advanced theory of the trace formula, Ann. of Math. Studies 120 
(1989). 
[CP] 
J.W. Cogdell and 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, Converse theorems for 
GL,, J. reine angew. Math. 507 (1999), 165-188. 
[CKPSS] J. Cogdell, H. Kim, 1.1. Piatetski-Shapiro, and F. Shahidi, On 
lifting from Classical Groups to GLN, preprint. 

Symmetric Cube for GL2 
S. Gelbart, Automorphic forms on adde groups Ann. of Math. 
Studies 83, (1975). 
S. Gelbart and H. Jacquet, A relation between automorphic forms 
on GL(2) and GL(3), Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. 11 (1978), 
471-542. 
S. Gelbart and F. Shahidi, Boundedness of automorphic L- 
functions in vertical strips Journal of AMS, (to appear). 
M. Harris and R. Taylor, On the geometry and cohomology of 
some simple Shimura varieties, preprint . 
G. Henniart Une preuve simple des conjectures de Langlands pour 
GL(n) sur un corps p-adique, Invent. Math. 139 (2000), 439-455. 
H. Jacquet and J. Shalika, On Euler products and the classi- 
fication of automorphic forms 11, Amer. J .  Math. 103 (1981), 
777-815. 
H. Kim, Langlands-Shahidi method and poles of automorphic L- 
functions: Application to exterior square L-functions, Canad. J. 
Math. 51 (1999), 835-849. 
H. Kim, Langlands-Shahidi method and poles of autornorphic L- 
functions 11, to appear in Israel J. Math. 
H. Kim and F. Shahidi, Functorial products for GL2 x GL3 and 
functorial Symmetric Cube for GL2, preprint. 
H. Kim and F. Shahidi, Symmetric cube L-functions for GL2 are 
entire, Ann. of Math. 150 (1999), 645-662. 
R. Langlands, On the functional equations satisfied by Eisenstein 
series in SLN 544 Springer-Verag, (1974). 
R. Langlands, Automorphic representations, Shimura varieties, 
and motives Ein Marchen in Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 33, Part 
I1 (1979), AMS, 205-246. 
R. Langlands, On the classification of irreducible representations 
of real algebraic groups, in Representation Theom and Harmonic 
Analysis on Semisimple Lie groups, Mathematical Surveys and 
Monographs (P. J. Sally, Jr and D.A. Vogan ed.), 31 (1989) AMS, 
101-170. 
R. Langlands, Euler Products, Yale University Press, (1971). 
Henry H. Kim and F'reydoon Shahidi 
213 
[LRS] 
W. Luo, Z. Rudnick and P. Sarnak On the generalized Ramanujan 
conjecture for GL(n), Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathe- 
matics 66, Part 2 (1999). 
[Ra] 
D. Ramakrishnan, On the coefficients of cusp forms, Math. Res. 
Lett. 4 (1997), 295-307. 
[Shl] 
F. Shahidi, A proof of Langlands conjecture on Plancherel mea- 
sures; Complementary series for p-adic groups, Ann. of Math. 
132 (1990), 273-330. 
[Sh2] 
F. Shahidi, On the Ramanujan conjecture and finiteness of poles 
for certain L-functions, Ann. of Math. 127 (1988), 547-584. 
[sl 
G. Shimura Introduction to the Arithmetic Theory of Automor- 
phic Functions, Princeton University Press, (1994), . 
HENRY H. KIM, DEPT. OF MATH. SOUTHERN 
ILLINOIS 
UNIVERSITY, 
CARBONDALE, 
IL 62901. 
E-mail: henrykim@math.siu.edu 
FREYDOON 
SHAHIDI, 
DEPT. OF MATH., PURDUE 
UNIVERSITY, 
WEST 
LAFAYETTE, IN 47906. 
E-mail: shahidi@math.purdue.edu 

L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite 
Characteristic* 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
We will describe the emerging theory of L-functions and modular forms 
in the setting of function fields over finite fields. Instead of the more familiar 
complex valued L-functions of Artin and Weil attached to function fields, 
or complex valued automorphic forms of Jacquet-Langlands and Weil (or 
p-adic or mod p objects of Serre, Swinnerton-Dyer, Katz) or motives of 
Grothendieck, our focus will be on different objects with values in finite 
characteristic: not in finite fields, but in huge fields which are analogues 
of complex numbers. This theory seems to be quite rich in its structure 
and at the same time challenging in that it is not yet well-understood even 
conjecturally. 
Our plan is to give a quick introduction to (1) Basic underlying objects: 
Drinfeld modules and higher dimensional motives, (2) Analogues of Rie- 
mann and Dedekind zeta functions: arithmetic of special values, (3) Char- 
acter spaces and general L-functions: analytic properties and zeros, (4) 
Modular forms and L-series, (5) Connections with classical function field 
case, (6) Results on Galois representations. 
1 Basic objects 
1.0 The bottom level objects are: A complete non-singular curve X over 
a finite field IFq of characteristic p, a point oo on it, the ring A of functions 
on X with no poles outside oo, the function field K of X, its completion 
K, 
and the completion C, 
of an algebraic closure of Kw. The simplest 
case, as well as the case where the analogies work the best, is that of 
the projective line, the usual point at infinity, the polynomial ring IFq [t], 
the rational function field IFq (t), the laurent series field IFq ((lit)) and the 
corresponding C,. 
The classical counterparts for A, K ,  Kw and C, 
are 
Z, Q, $ C respectively. Note that A (Z respectively) is a Dedekind ring 
discretely embedded in K, 
(B respectively) with compact quotient. 
'Supported in part by NSF grants 
214 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
1.1 Let us motivate the introduction of the next level basic objects by ask- 
ing for objects giving rise padic Galois representations, for p E Spec(A), 
rather than 1-adic representations for 1 E Spec@). So instead of the mul- 
tiplicative group, elliptic curves, abelian varieties, which provide us with 
natural abelian groups, i.e., Z-modules, with interesting Galois actions on 
their 1"-torsion; we look for interesting A-modules, so that we can look 
at @-torsion. Because of the linearity of p-power map in characteristic p, 
the additive group (or its power) already provides good enough interesting 
candidate. 
In characteristic zero, Z or Q works as a canonical base. Here we have 
to decree A as a base, so we look at A-field L, y : A -+ L (or A-scheme S, 
7 : A -+ r(s, os)). 
Then the basic object 'Drinfeld A-module over L of rank r (a positive 
integer)' is just a non-trivial embedding p : A v EndL(Ga) = L{F} (which 
sends a E A to a polynomial pa E L{F} in Frobenius), such that 
degF pa = T deg a 
(such an equality is automatic for some positive integer r) and ?(a) being 
the constant term of pa. (Over S, we will be looking at a line bundle 
(locally free sheaf of rank 1) CIS with p : A -+ Ends(C) having degree and 
constant term conditions as above and with unit leading coefficient). 
If the kernel of 7 is 0, p is said to be of generic (zero or infinite 
being possibly confusing terminology) characteristic, if the kernel is g (e.g., 
L = Alp), then p is said to be of characteristic p. (So we can imagine the 
reduction theory over finite A-fields easily). 
May be the simplest example is when A = IFq [t], so that one can arbi- 
trarily specify the image pt of the generator t (for general A one needs to 
satisfy compatibility conditions to get a ring homomorphism) : The Carlitz 
module corresponds to the choice pt = t + F. This is a rank one module of 
generic characteristic with 'good reduction' everywhere. 
Morphism 4 : p + p' over L is just 4 E L{F} satisfying 4p = p'4. 
1.2 For an ideal I, define I-torsion to be 
AI := {z E C, 
: pi(z) = 0, for all i E I}. 
So we can form the Tate module leading to 'padic cohomology7 realization. 
For K, c L, we can define exponential e = e, to be an entire function 
(i.e., everywhere convergent power series) e : C, -+ C, 
satisfying e(az) = 
pa(e(z)) (to be compared with en' = (ez)"). Its kernel A is A-lattice 
(projective A-module discrete in oo-adic topology) of rank r over L (i.e., 
Gal(K,&,/L)-stable) and leads to 'Betty cohomology' realization. 

216 
L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteristic 
Deligne, using analogy with 1-motives, defined 'de Rham cohomology ' 
realization to be dual of ~ie(p#) 
where p# is the universal additive extension 
O + G , + p # + p + O .  
There are appropriate comparison isomorphisms relating these realiza- 
tions, leading for example to cycle integration map, periods, quasi-periods 
etc. 
1.3 Riemann hypothesis for p over finite fields L (extension of Alp) is 
almost built in the formalism: The absolute values 'of roots of the charac- 
teristic polynomial of ql := #L-th power F'robenius map on the v-adic Tate 
module are all 9:". 
So these are 'pure motives' of weight l/r. 
Note that one crucial difference is [C, : K,] 
is infinite, in contrast to 
the [C : R] = 2, so that one can have lattices of any rank, in contrast to the 
classical case and hence weights are not restricted to be half-integral. In the 
rank one situation, classical analogues are multiplicative group (or elliptic 
curve with complex multiplication), so the kernel of the exponential also 
gives analogue ii of 27ri. In rank 2, classical analogue would be an elliptic 
curve and for higher ranks we do not have good classical analogue. This 
is why Drinfeld could use rank n Drinfeld modules to study Langlands 
conjectures over function fields for GLn, for any n, rather than for just 
n = l,2. 
1.4 Postponing discussion of this for now, we just mention that for Carlitz 
module K(A,) are good analogues of UC,) (with the Galois group (A/a)* 
analogous to (Z/n)*) and for general A, adjoining all torsion of suitably 
normalized rank one p to K (together with the constants in q), 
we get its 
maximal abelian extension tamely ramified at oo explicitly. To get the full 
maximal abelian extension (analogue of Kronecker-Weber theorem) one has 
to just repeat this trick with another choice of oo and take the compositum. 
The Carlitz part (for IFq [t]) of this explicit global class field theory of Hayes 
was done much before Lubin-Tate's local theory. 
1.5 Drinfeld modules are one dimensional objects. The higher dimen- 
sional theory was initiated by Stuhler, Gross, Anderson. Stuhler, Drinfeld, 
Laumon etc. developed the moduli point of view for Langlands conjec- 
tures, whereas Greg Anderson developed very useful arithmetic theory of 
concrete (non-commutative) linear algebra type individual objects, coined 
't-motives', boiled down from Drinfeld shtukas. 
For simplicity, we will focus on A = IF, [t]. Basically, n-dimensional t- 
module E over L is a certain embedding of A into EndL(G:), 
which is a 
ring of n cross n matrices with entries in L{F), where at the tangent level 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
217 
eigenvalues of the matrix corresponding to a are all $a); i.e., at the Lie 
level the matrix is y (a) Inxn 
+ N, where N is a nilpotent matrix. Morphisms 
are t-equivariant morphisms of algebraic groups. 
The dual notion is that of t-motive M (M := HomL(E,Ga) is the 
t-motive corresponding to E), which is a left L{t, F)-module (this is a 
non-commutative ring: tl = It, t F  = Ft, but Fl = P F ,  for 1 E L) free 
and finitely generated as L{F}-module and with (t - y(t)jn MIFM = 0. 
Morphism is then just a L{t, F)-linear homomorphism. The dimension is 
the L{F)-rank and the rank is the L[t]-rank. 
In general, the exponential e~ : Ck + C& corresponding to a t-motive 
can fail to be surjective, in contrast to the Drinfeld module situation and the 
conditions for the failure of the uniformizability are not well-understood. 
1.6 Purity has also to be enforced: M is pure if it is free and finitely 
generated as L[t]-module and there is a L[[l/t]]-lattice W in M((1lt)) such 
that Fs W = t9 W, with s, g > 0. If the top degree (in F) coefficient of the 
matrix corresponding to t is invertible, then M is pure. For pure motives, 
Riemann hypothesis is again built in with weight equal to dimension over 
rank. 
There is a natural notion of tensor products of t-motives: we take tensor 
products over L[t] and let F act diagonally. Ranks multiply and weights 
add in a tensor product. 
1.6.1 For example, the n-th tensor power of the Carlitz module (to be 
compared with Tate twist motive Z(n)) then turns out to be 
where N = (nij) is the nilpotent matrix with n,,,+l = 1 for 1 5 i < n 
and the other entries zero; and E = (eilj) is the elementary matrix with 
en,l = 1 and the other entries zero. This is a pure, uniformizable t- motive 
of rank 1 and dimension n. (This shows that if we need tensor powers of 
Drinfeld modules, we need to generalize to higher dimensions and also allow 
the addition of nilpotent matrices at the tangent level). 
1.7 Anderson then gives simple constructions for the realizations of a t- 
motive M: The Betti realization is HomA(Kernel(eM), K) (if we want it to 
commute with the tensor products, we need to tensor with the differentials). 
The gadic realization is HornA, (T,(M), K,). The de-Rham realization is 
FM/(t - ~ ( t ) )  
FM, with i-th piece of the Hodge filtration being the image 
of (t - y(t))'M r l  F M  in it. All these abstract objects thus become concrete 
objects involving matrices with entries being polynomials or power series in 

218 
L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteristic 
Fkobenius with coefficients in various fields. The thorough analysis of the 
resulting formalism has not been carried out yet. 
2 
Zeta functions: Special values 
2.1 
Let us start with the simplest case: the zeta function for A = F, [t]. 
Instead of Artin-Weil's zeta function XI+, Norm(1)-s E @ (for Re(s) > I), 
which turns out to be a rational function in u := qTS even for general A 
and is just 1/(1 - qu) for our case A = Fq[t], Carlitz considered a rich 
transcendental function CA(s) := CnEA+ 
n-' E K ,  for s E W (note that 
there is no pole at s = I), where A+ stands for set of monic polynomials. 
So instead of using norm, which retains only the degree information, we 
retain the whole polynomial, sacrificing (only initially as we will see) for a 
smaller domain. 
2.2 
Carlitz proved analogue of Euler's evaluation of the Riemann zeta 
values at positive even integers: For 'even' m i.e. for m a multiple of 
q - 1, [ ~ ( m )  = -Bmifm/(q - l)n(m), where n(m) = np pmp E IF', 
[t] with 
m, = C Lm/ N ~ r m ( p ) ~ j  
is an analogue of factorial function (for example 
because of its analogous prime factorization above) and B, 
E F,(t) is 
analogue of Bernoulli number, defined by a similar generating function: 
z/e(z) = C Bmzm/II(m). 
2.3 David Goss showed that if the defining sum is grouped according 
to the degree, then it becomes a finite sum for a negative integer s and 
hence [(s) E Fq[t] then and it is zero precisely at negative 'even' integers 
in analogy with Riemann zeta function. Since the sums are finite, the 
Fermat's little theorem leads to Kummer congruence on the zeta values at 
negative integers leading to padic interpolations of zeta, once we remove 
an appropriate Euler factor at p. 
2.4 
Using the concrete description of Cmm above, Anderson and I showed 
that for any positive integer m, <(m) is a (canonical co-ordinate of) loga- 
rithm (for Cmm) of an (explicitly constructed) algebraic point, which is a 
torsion point of Cmm precisely when m is 'even'. There is also analogous 
padic result. An analogue of Hermite-Lindemann theorem on exponen- 
tial and logarithm, proved in this setting by Jing Yu, then implied that 
<(m) is transcendental for all m and that <(m)/iim and cp(rn) are also 
transcendental if rn is not 'even'. 
The canonical co-ordinate of logarithm (exponential respectively) for 
Cmm turns out to be a deformation of the naive rn-th multilog (m-th Bessel 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
219 
function respectively) and the other co-ordinates involve analogue of hyper- 
geometric function that I had defined and studied. 
2.5 
By taking relative norms, we can define relative (Dedekind type) zeta 
functions Z(s). For abelian, totally real (i.e., split at co) extension of degree 
d, Goss (and myself in a little more generality) proved that 2(s)/irdS is 
algebraic. 
Classically counterpart of this was proved by Siegel, without the 'abelian' 
hypothesis, but such a result is not expected for extensions which are not 
totally real. On the other hand, in our case similar result holds for (non- 
totally real) galois extensions of degree a power of p. Classically, all the 
values at negative integers are zero in the non-totally real case and in our 
case such is not a true as the possibilities for the ramification at oo are 
much more varied. In fact, Siegel's result is derived from a corresponding 
result at negative integers via the functional equation for the Dedekind zeta 
function. 
2.6 
In our case, no such functional equation is known in absolute or rela- 
tive case. So we get two distinct analogues of Bernoulli numbers: one from 
zeta values at positive (even) integers and one from negative integers. The 
following analogues of Kummer-Herbrand-Ribet theorems suggest a closer 
connection between these two families nonetheless: 
(Goss-Okada): If for an even k between 0 and qdeg(~) - 1, the k-th 
component of the (p-part of the) class group of the ring of integers of 
K (A,) is non-zero,'then p divides Bk. 
(Goss-Sinnott): For k between 0 and qdeg(d - 1, the k-th component 
of the (p-part of the) class group of K(A,) is non-zero if and only if g 
divides <(-k) (if <(-k) is zero, one replaces it by '/3(k)' obtained from it 
by throwing some known trivial factors contributing to the zero). 
Note that in our case, s + 1 - s does not interchange 'even' to 'odd'. 
F'urther the fact that parities are off with the classical counterpart is linked 
with the failure of reflection principle (spiegelgungsatz). Also, the well- 
known properties of Bernoulli numbers split up: Bm's satisfy analogues 
of von-Staudt and Sylvester-Lipschitz theorems, whereas <(-k)'s satisfy 
Kummer congruences as mentioned before. 
2.7 I have defined analogues of Gauss sums for function fields by mixing 
Carlitz-Drinfeld cyclotomic theory (which yields analogue of additive char- 
acter) with traditional cyclotomic theory of constant field extensions (which 
yields analogue of multiplicative character). They satisfy analogues of the- 
orems of Stickelberger, Gross-Koblitz, Hasse-Davenport, Weil. Also I have 

220 
L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteristic 
defined analogues of gamma function (generalizing the gamma function for 
Fq [t] of Goss obtained by interpolating the factorial mentioned above) and 
established functional equations, some connections with periods of Drinfeld 
modules and t-motives of Chowla-Selberg type etc. 
But these two ingredients which come up classically in functional equa- 
tions have not yet fit to give any kind of functional equation type result. 
2.8 Classically the orders of vanishing of zeta function at negative integers 
are linked with the nature of gamma factors in the functional equation. 
The following examples that I gave show that underlying theory of orders 
of vanishing (this will make sense in setting of the next section) has to be 
quite different in our case: If q = 2 and A is hyper-elliptic of genus g, then 
the order of vanishing of CA at negative integer -s is always expected to 
be one by naive analogy. But if (and seems only if) the sum of the base 
2 digits of s is more than g it is two (i.e., there is extra vanishing with ,f3 
mentioned in 2.6 also being zero, so that 2.6 implies non-vanishing of class 
group components for every p). There are examples for other q, as well as 
examples of extra vanishing for the relative zeta functions even when the 
base is IFq [t], where the analogies usually work the best. 
The exact orders of vanishing in general or the arithmetic significance 
of the leading terms is not yet understood even conjecturally. 
2.9 
Finally we just mention that developing the analogies with theory 
of partial differential equations of KdV type, Anderson introduced soliton 
theory in function field arithmetic and proved many interesting results on 
zeta and gamma values producing, for example, an interesting new analogue 
of cyclotomic units and Vandiver conjecture. 
3 Zeta functions: Analytic theory 
In this section, to avoid technical complications, we assume that oo is a 
place of degree one. Let .?r be an uniformizer at oo (eg. l / t  for Fq [t] case). 
3.1 To extend the domain of the zeta function, for a monic n, we want to 
define ns for a larger space of exponents s. Classically 
where the first term represents the absolute value and the second term is 
of the absolute value one. Goss defined, for s = (x, y) E S, 
:= C& x Z,, 
ns .- . - 
E CC where (n) := nadeg(") is the one-unit part of n and 
hence can be raised to the padic power. 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
Note that the usual integers j sit in S, 
as (n-j, j). 
This exponent space of Goss is a small piece of the character space: 
We have n = ~ - ~ ~ g ( ~ ) ( n ) .  
So the image x E C& of n-' determines the 
homomorphism on the cyclic group T" and keeps track of the degree. On 
the other hand the one-unit group is isomorphic to the product of countably 
many copies of Z,. 
A small piece of the resulting huge endomorphism group 
of the one-units is cut out by choosing them to be of the form (n) + (n)y 
for y E Z,. 
- 
We have (nlnz)s = nIn$, nsof s1 - nSonsl. On a Z p  x Z,, we also have 
(nsO)sl = nsOs1. Here we add (multiply respectively) the exponents by 
multiplying the C& components and adding (multiplying respectively) the 
i 
Z, components. 
3.2 
To make sense of s-th power of an ideal, note that ( ), from the monic 
elements of K& to the uniquely divisible group of one-units, has a unique 
extension to ideals, since the ideals modulo the principal ideals generated 
by monic elements is a finite group. So we define IS as xdeg(') ( 1 ) ~ .  
3.3 In a p-adic situation, Goss uses the exponent space 
using the usual decomposition n = Teichmuller (n)(n)p. 
3.4 We can then define zeta and L-functions with values in finite charac- 
teristic by replacing the exponentiation of norms with complex numbers in 
the classical definitions with the ideal exponentiation defined above. 
For example, for a Drinfeld module (or t-motive) p over a scheme S, 
Goss defines the L-function as 
L(p/S, s) := n Det (1 - Frob, ~ o r m ( z ) - ' [ ~ ~  
(pz))-l, 
I 
where the product runs over the closed points z of S, the pz is a reduction 
of p at z, Norm(z) = p["z:Alp] if z is over a prime p of A and v # p. The 
determinant is known to be a polynomial (with A-coefficients) independent 
I 
ofv. 
3.5 Goss defines entire function f (s) = f (x, y) on S, 
to be a continuous 
family of C,-valued 
entire power series in x-' parametrized by Z,, 
uni- 
formly convergent on bounded subsets of C, 
and with f ( x d ,  - j )  being 
polynomials in x-' with algebraic coefficients (all in a finite extension). 
Goss (in the case of S a field) and Taguchi-Wan (for general S, with 
A = Fq [t]) showed that the L-function defined above is then a ratio of two 

222 
L-func tions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteris tic 
entire functions. For p over a finite extension L of K ,  if the top coefficient 
of p is in Oi, 
then the L-function is entire. The technique used by Taguchi 
and Wan is Dwork's theory of L function of F-crystal and it provides a 
F'reedholm determinant expression for it. There is also a corresponding 
padic result. 
3.6 As for the distribution of the zeros of the zeta function is concerned, 
Daqing Wan proved the following version of 'Riemann hypothesis' for the 
case A = IFp [t]: For any given y, if [(x, y) = 0, then x is real i.e., x lies in 
K, 
(rather than in its infinite extension C, 
where it can lie a priori). 
I noticed that such a statement can be reduced to an optimization prob- 
lem solution stated (with inadequate proof) by Carlitz. Using this, my 
student Javier Diaz-Vargas gave a simpler proof in the case of IFp [t]. For a 
non-prime q, the breakthrough came with Bjorn Poonen's proof of Carlitz 
assertion for q = 4. Helped by it, Jeff Sheats, a combinatorist at Ari- 
zona, completely proved the Carlitz assertion and this version of Riemann 
hypothesis for IFq [t] . 
The implications of these results on the zero distributions are not yet 
well-understood. 
4 Modular forms and L-series 
4.1 Automorphic forms considered by Weil, Jacquet, Langlands, Drinfeld 
are basically Gvalued (or F-valued for any characteristic zero field F ,  since 
in the absence of archimidean places no growth conditions needed and all 
arise from those over Q by tensoring) functions 4 on G(K)\G(A)/KZ(K,), 
where G = GL2 say. 
4.2 Goss considered C,-valued 
modular forms on Drinfeld upper half- 
plane R := C, - K, 
(compare 
= C - R) in the rank 2 situation 
which we will focus on. (We replace R by Rf-l := PT-l(C,) 
minus all 
K,-rational 
hyper-planes, for the general rank r situation). 
Put Im (z) := InfZEK,Iz-xI. Then Irn (yz) = JDet (y)ll~z+dl-~Im 
(z) 
for y E GL2(K,). 
The sets R, := {z E S1 : Im (z) 2 c) give open 
admissible neighborhoods of oo (not to be confused with the place oo of K )  
in the rigid analytic topology. R is connected but not simply connected. 
Let e denote the exponential for the Carlitz module, i.e., corresponding 
to A = %A. Then q,(a) 
= l/e(iiz) is a uniformizer which takes a neigh- 
borhood of oo to the neighborhood of origin and since it is invariant with 
respect to translations from A, it can be used for q,-expansions 
(analogues 
of q = e2"iz-expansions). 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
223 
4.3 Modular form of weight k (nonnegative integer), type m (integer mod- 
ulo q - 1 (or rather the cardinality of Det (I') c I$)) for r is f : R + C, 
satisfying f (yz) = (Det ( ~ ) ) - ~ ( c z  
+ d)-k f (z), for y E I' and which is rigid 
holomorphic and holomorphic at cusps. 
Since dq, = -qkdz (in contrast to dq = cqdz), the holomorphic differ- 
entials correspond to double-cuspidal forms. 
4.4 
Coefficient of Fi in pa (where a is fixed) is a modular form of weight 
qi - 1, where one considers the coefficient as a function of the lattice A 
corresponding to p. eg., if we write rank 2 Drinfeld module for IFq[t] as 
pt = t + g F  + AF2, then as A + A/\, (g, A) + (A1-qg, A'-q2h)) as we can 
easily see from the commutation relation Fl = P F .  In fact, j := gq+l /A 
is a weight 0 modular function parameterizing the isomorphism classes of 
these Drinfeld modules. (Compare the elliptic curve situation). Also note 
that if A vanishes, we get a degeneration of the Drinfeld module to rank 
one. This corresponds to the fact that A is a cusp form. 
As an analogue of Dedekind product formula into cyclotomic factors: 
Ernst Gekeler proved 
for the A as above. 
For A = lFq [t] and I' = GL2 (A), the algebra of modular forms of type 
0 is C,[g, A] and the algebra for all types is C,[g, h] here h is a Poincare 
series of type 1 and weight q + 1 defined by Gekeler. We have hq-l = -A. 
Eisenstein series E(*)(z) = Ch,bEA(az + b)-* are of weight k and type 
0. 
For the rest of this section, we will focus only on A = Fq[t] situation 
which is developed more than the general case. 
4.5 
Hecke operators can be defined as usual, but now they are totally 
multiplicative: we have Tpn Tp = T,~+I + qdTPn-~T, as usual, but the 
qd = 0 now! 
We have T,E(~) = P*E(*) and TpA = Pq-I A, where p = (P) for 
monic generator P. So the eigenvalues do not determine the form (this 
happens even in weight two). Multiplicity one fails and Hecke action is not 
semi-simple. 

224 
L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteristic 
Because of this total multiplicativity, we can associate 
but then this Dirichlet series is indexed by a E A whereas the 9,-expansions 
are indexed by n E Z and the usual connection C cnqn H C cnnbS does not 
make sense. (The arithmetic meaning of the 9,-expansion 
coefficients is not 
understood even for the Eisenstein series. For Eisenstein series associated to 
totally real fields, the q,-expansion 
has not been understood : This is one 
reason why we have not yet been able to imitate Siegel's proof mentioned 
in 2.5 and remove the abelian hypothesis there). 
4.6 There are other ways to attach L-functions to f due to the work of 
Drinfeld, Schneider, Teitelbaum, Gekeler and Goss which we now describe: 
Let z be co-ordinate on Q. Let 
U := {P E Q : 9-' < Iz(P)l < q, lz(P) - A1 > 9-', for A E F,}. 
Then translates U(y) of U by y E GL2(K,/GL2(0,) 
give a special rigid 
covering of R. Associated to it we can define an infinite homogeneous tree 
7 with q + 1 edges leaving every vertex, where the opens U(y)'s correspond 
to its vertices and the overlapping annuli correspond to the edges. Drin- 
feld constructed this as tree of norms and it is also the usual Bruhat-Tits 
building for PGL2 (K,). 
Modular form of weight k and type m for I? gives rise to a I?-invariant 
harmonic cochain (i.e., function c on (oriented) edges e of 7 such that 
C,,, c(e) = 0 and c(e) = -c(e-)) cf of weight k and type m (i.e., with 
values in V(l - k, 1 - m)). Here V is the standard two dimensional rep- 
resentation of GL2(C,) and V(n, i) := (Det )% 
@ symn-' (V*) (essentially 
space of homogeneous forms in two variables X and Y of degree n - 1) and 
V(-n, -2) := Hom(V(n, i), C,). 
In fact, cf(e) is given on the basis by 
Res, (f) ( x ' Y ~ - ~ - ~ )  
= Resezif (z)dz, 
where the residue is in the annulus corresponding to e. The Eisenstein 
series have zero residues, but for k 2 2, the residue map is an isomorphism 
between the space of cusp forms of weight k and type m for a group I' 
and the space of harmonic cochains of weight k and type m for I?. In fact, 
the inverse process is integration: A harmonic cochain c gives rise to a 
'measure' (we will not go into the technicalities of this integration theory) 
pc on Pk_ (which can be identified naturally with the set of ends of 7) 
and f ( z )  = Sp dpc (x) / (z - x) for the cusp form f . 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
225 
4.7 Once we have this integration theory, we define the L-functions as 
usual by Mellin transforms: J tS-ldpCf . Goss defines a two variable (s E 
S,) L-function as before by exponentiating positives and also a one variable 
(s E Z,) by exponentiating one units. These take values in the representa- 
tion space above. So for weight 2, we have C,-valued 
L-function. 
For A = IF, [t] and the full modular group, We have a functional equation 
Lf (s) = (-l)'-m~f (k - s). 
We also have the formula 
for the coefficients of q,-expansion 
f (z) = C aj&. 
Special values and links to the arithmetic of 9,-expansion 
need to be 
investigated further. 
4.8 The existence of this finite characteristic valued L-function and such 
L-function defined by Goss for Grossencharacters (which can be thought 
of as GL1-automorphic forms with finite characteristic values)' suggests 
that there might be C,-valued 
automorphic (or modular) L functions 
attached to C,-valued 
representations. Such representations are not well- 
understood so that it is not known whether for some good class of such 
automorphic adelic representations, we can imitate Langlands type local 
component definition of L-functions. 
5 
Relations with characteristic 0-valued 
theory 
5.1 Both the double coset space in 4.1 used in the definition of the 
automorphic forms (zero characteristic valued) and R in 4.2 used in the 
definition of modular forms (finite characteristic valued) are linked with 
7. In fact, Drinfeld set up a natural bijection between harmonic cochains 
on 7 of weight 2 with values in F and F-valued automorphic forms which 
transform like a special representation at component at m. Analyzing this 
correspondence together with Teitelbaum's correspondence mentioned in 
4.6, Gekeler and Reversat showed (at least for A = IF, [t], there seem to be 
some technical difficulties in general) that double cuspidal modular forms 
of weight two, type one, and with IFp-residues (such forms generate over C, 
those with C,- 
residues, i.e., the usual C,-space 
of such modular forms) 
are the reductions mod p of the automorphic cusp forms special at m. 

226 
L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteristic 
For higher weights and ranks the connection between the modular forms 
versus the automorphic forms is not well-understood. 
5.2 At the usual L-functions level, Goss had earlier observed a congruence 
relation between classical and finite characteristic versions: If 
then W/pW S Alp and the Teichmuller character w : (Alp)* -+ W* 
satisfies wk(a mod p) = (ak mod p) mod p, so that we get that mod 
p reduction of Artin-Weil L-function L(w-", u) E W(u) is essentially the 
mod p reduction of the finite characteristic zeta (appropriately matching 
the Euler factors) value at negative integer s. Combined this together 
with the fact that Artin-Weil L-functions are polynomials, Goss deduced 
integrality and vanishing statements for the finite characteristic zeta values 
at negative integers. 
6 Galois representations 
We will just list some major results in this area: 
6.1 Drinfeld modules were introduced by Drinfeld as objects analogous 
to elliptic curves (more so in rank 2) for attacking Langlands conjectures 
for GL, over function fields. For GL2, the cohomology of moduli spaces of 
Drinfeld modules of rank 2 realized the Langlands correspondence between 
'special' Galois representations and automorphic representations 'special' 
at infinity. Deligne and Drinfeld also settled the local Langlands conjec- 
tures in this case (and Laumon-Rappoport-Stuhler in GL, case). Relaxing 
the heavy dependence on oo in the nature of Drinfeld modules, Drinfeld 
introduced the more general objects called shtukas and settled the Lang- 
lands conjectures for GL2 for function fields. Flicker-Kazdan announced 
GL, Langlands conjectures over function fields modulo the Deligne's conjec- 
ture on Lefschetz formula for non-compact varieties after sufficient twisting 
by Frobenius power. But there seem to be gaps/mistakes in the applications 
of trace formula in characteristic p: Even though the Deligne's conjecture 
was proved by Pink, the Langlands conjectures in this case did not follow. 
The work of Drinfeld, together with earlier work of Deligne, Grothen- 
dieck, Jacquet-Langlands had settled the famous Shimura-Taniyama-Weil 
conjecture in this case: If we take a non-isotrivial elliptic curve over K 
with Tate reduction at oo (j non-constant implies it has some pole, say at 
oo) and with geometrical conductor loo, then it occurs upto isogeny in the 
jacobian of the curve which is the moduli of the rank two Drinfeld modules 
Dinesh S. Thakur 
227 
with the level I structure. We can then attach a finite characteristic L- 
function to it, by applying the procedure in 4.7 to the weight 2 cusp form 
obtained by the pullback of the invariant differential on the elliptic curve. 
Using shtukas and trace formulas, Lafforgue has recently proved Ramanu- 
jan-Peterson conjecture for cuspidal automorphic representations for GL, 
over function fields for n odd. 
Very recently (June 99), Lafforgue has announced the proof of GL, 
Langlands for function fields, using moduli of Shtukas. 
6.2 For Drinfeld modules over finite fields, the analogue of Tate isogeny 
theorem and Honda-Tate theorem was proved by Drinfeld (and Gekeler). 
For Drinfeld modules of generic characteristic, the analogue of the Tate 
conjectureJFaltings theorem was established by k a g a w a  and Taguchi. 
Taguchi also proved the semisimplicity of the Galois representation on the 
Tate module, for both finite and generic characteristic Drinfeld modules. 
6.3 Classically, there is a well-known theorem of Serre on the image of 
Galois representation obtained from torsion of elliptic curves. Pink showed 
that if p has no more endomorphisms than A, then for a finite set S of places 
v # oo, the image of Gal(KseP/K) in nvEs 
GLn(Av) for the corresponding 
representation for rank n Drinfeld modules is open. Note that this is weaker 
than Serre type adelic version, but much stronger (unlike the classical case) 
than the case of one prime v, because we are dealing with all huge pro-p 
groups here, so the simple classical argument combining p-adic and I-adic 
information to go from the result for one place to the result for finitely 
many places does not work). 
6.4 Taguchi proved that a given L-isogeny class contains only finitely 
many L-isomorphism classes, for L a finite extension of K. 
6.5 Poonen showed that unlike the situation of Elkies theorem that elliptic 
curve over Q has infinitely many super-singular primes, here there are rank 
two Drinfeld modules over IFq [t] with no super-singular primes at all. At a 
much simpler level, note that analogue of the Shafarevich finiteness theorem 
that there are only a finitely many isomorphism classes of elliptic curves 
over a number field with good reduction outside a finite set S of places is 
also false, as the examples pt = t + aF + F2, with S containing oo, show. 
Acknowledgement This paper is basically a written account of the talk I 
gave at the International Conference on Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups, 
L-functions and Automorphic Forms, held at Tata Institute of hndarnental 

228 
L-functions and Modular Forms in Finite Characteristic 
Research during December 1998-January 1999. I thank the organizers T.N. 
Venkataramana and M.S. Raghunathan. 
The following books contain detailed references to most of the results 
mentioned in this paper. 
References 
[GI 
D. Goss, Basic structures of function field arithmetic, Ergebnisse 
der Mathematik, Springer-Verlag, (1996). 
[GHR] D. Goss, et a1 (Editors), The Arithmetic of Function Fields, Pro- 
ceedings of the Ohio-state conference (lggl), Walter de Gruyter, 
(1992). 
[Gel 
E.-U. Gekeler, Drinfeld modular curves, SLN 1231 Springer- 
Verlag, (1986). 
[GPRG] E.-U. Gekeler et al, Drinfeld modules, modular schemes and 
applications, Proceedings of Alden-Biesen conference (l996), 
World Scientific Pub. (1997). 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, 
TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL 
RESEARCH, 
HOMI BHABHA ROAD, MUMBAI 400 005, INDIA 
DEPARTMENT 
OF MATHEMATICS, 
UNIVERSITY 
OF ARIZONA, TUCSON, 
AZ 85721, USA 
E-mail: thakur@math. tifr .res.in and thakur@math.arizona.edu 
Automorphic Forms for Siegel and Jacobi 
Modular Groups 
T . C . Vasudevan 
1 Introduction 
Our aim in this lecture is to give an exposition of the following celebrated 
theorem of Siegel. 
n n+l 
Theorem 1.1 Let h = 
+ 2 and let fl , f2, . . . , f h  be Siegel modular 
forms of degree n and weights kl, k2,. . . , kh respectively. Then there exists 
an isobaric relation, 
not all of whose coeficients vanish, the summation extending over all inte- 
gers ui 2 0 with the property ~ f = ~ u ~  
k, = pkl k2 . . kh where p is an integer 
depending only on n . 
There is an analogue of the foregoing result of Siegel for Jacobi forms; 
this is a recent theorem due to H. Klingen which states the following. 
n n+l 
Theorem 1.2 Let h = 
+ n + 2. Then any family of distinguished 
Jacobi forms cpl, cp2,. . . , cph of weights kl, k2,. . . satisfies an algebraic equa- 
tion 
A(cpl,cp2,. .- ,cph) = 0 
which is an isobaic polynomial with res to kl, k2,. . . , kh and of total degree 
pklk2 . - kh where the integer p depend only on n. 
As consequences of Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 we have 
Definition 1.3 Let 
modular forms of equal weight and degree 
Q n = {  
The elements of Qn are called modular functions of degree n. 

230 
Automorphic Forms for Jacobi Modular Groups 
Theorem 1.4 Let fl, f 2 , .  . . , f, be s algebraically independent elements of 
n n+l 
Q, where s = v. 
Then any f E Q, satisfies an algebraic equation of 
the form P(f, fl,. . . , f,) = 0 of bounded degree with respect to f (bounded 
in the sense that the degree of f over C( fl , . . . , f,) 
depends on the choice 
of fl,... ,fs ). 
The elements tl, . . . , t, in a commutative ring containing C as a sub- 
ring, are algebraically independent if the monomials nl,,,,t:', 
Ui € N are 
linearly independent over C . 
Theorem 1.5 The field Q, is an algebraic function field of transcendence 
degree 
over C i.e., every modular function of degree n is a ratio- 
nal funciton of 
+ 1 special modular functions. These functions are 
algebraically dependent but every n(n + 1)/2 of them are independent. 
The existence of 
algebraically independent modular functions 
in Q, has been established by C.L. Siegel, Satake, Christian, Mumford, 
Andreotti and Grauert. 
Definition 1.6 A Jacobi function is a quotient of two Jacobi forms of equal 
type. 
n n+l 
Theorem 1.7 Assume that s = 
+ n. Asusme that fl,. . . , f, are 
algebraically independent Jacobi functions. 
Then any Jacobi function is 
algebraic over the field C(fl,. . . , f,) of bounded degree (bounded in the sense 
that the degree off over C(fl , . . . , f,) depends on the choice of fl, . . . , f,). 
Theorem 1.8 (Klingen) There exist 
+n Jaco bi functions of degree 
n which are algebraiclaly independent. 
Remarks 1.9 
1 7 2 8 ~ ~  
1. Ql is a rational function field generated by j = 
A = g2 = 60G2, 
A = gi - 27g:,g3 = 140G3 
G k  is the Eisenstein series of weight 2k given by 
T.C. Vasudevan 
231 
2. The field Q:! is a rational function field generated over C by the alge- 
braically independent Siegel modular functions 
3. However, Q, is non rational if n 2 i ([2]). 
A basic tool to prove all these kinds of results is the so called Dimension 
formula. In this lecture we aim at deriving the Dimension estimate for the 
space of Siegel Modular Forms of degree n, the method is essentially due 
to Hans Maass [3]. 
2 Siegel modular forms 
The Siegel upper half plane degree n 2 1 is the set of symmetric n x n 
complex matrices having positive definite imaginary part: 
F,, 
is a complex analytic manifold of dimension w. 
The real symplectic 
group Sp,(R) acts on 31,: if M E Sp,(R), M = ( :) 
then the map 
is an analytic automorphism of 3Cn. This action is also transitive, i.e., 
The group I?, 
:= Sp,(Z) is called the Siegel modular group of degree n. 
Siegel has proved that there exists a fundamental (domain Fn for the action 
of l?, 
in 31,. In fact 
(Y is "Minkowski reduced" if Y = (yij) then 
Fn = { Z = X + iY E 3Cn 
(i) 1 det(CZ + D) I > 1, 
(ii) Y is Minkowski reduced, 
(iii) If X = (xkc) then = f 5 xkc 5 f 

Automorphic Forms for Jacobi Modular Groups 
(iii) for1 < i < n,if[= (:) 
with (fi, f i + l , 7  fn)=l thentfYf> yii)- 
f n 
The set of Minkowski reduced matrices is a fundamental domain for the 
action of n x n unimodular matrices on the space of n x n positive definite 
real matrices. 
Let Z E 3Cn and let dZ = (dzkL) denote the matrix of differentials. Then 
dv = 11 
(dzkt dykt)/ det Yn+' 
l<k<L<n 
is an Sp,(R)-invariant volume element in ?in. 
Let M E I?, 
and 
j(M, Z) := det(CZ + D), M = (: 
g) . 
j(M, Z) satisfies, 
for MI, M2 E I', . 
Let k E Z. A Siegel modular form of degree n and weight k is a complex 
valued function of defined on an satisfying the conditions: 
(i) f is holomorphic. 
(ii) f ( M  < Z >) = j(M,Z)kf(Z) VM E rn. 
(iii) f is bounded in the fundamental domain (for n = 1). 
(according to M. Koecher, the last condition is automatically valid for 
n > 1). 
Any such f has a Fourier expansion 
where the summation is only over n-rowed semi integral T 2 O(tii E 
Z, 2tij E Z), and u(TZ) denotes the trace of the matrix TZ. 
Facts. 
(i) Every Siegel modular form is bounded in the Siegel's fundamental 
domain. 
T.C. Vasudevan 
233 
(ii) Every Siegel modular form of negative weight vanishes identically. 
(iii) Each Siegel modular f is identically zero if nk is odd. 
(iv) Let M,* denote the @-vector space of Siegel modular forms of degree 
n and weight k. The dimension of M,* is finite. In fact there exists a 
constant d, depending on n such that 
dim ~
,
k
 
5 d, kn(*+ ')I2. 
Examples: Siegel-Eigenstein series 
Let k > n + 1 and Ek(Z) = &c,D) 
det(C2 + D)-' where the summation 
is over a complete set of representatives {C, D) of second rows of matrices 
M = ( g g) E I?, 
with respect to the equivalence relation (C1, Dl) - (C, D) 
if and only if there exists a unimodular matrix U such that (Cl, Dl) = 
U(C, D). The series converges uniformly and absolutely in N,. 
Theorem 2.1 (H. Maass) There exists a constant d, depending on n 
such that 
dim ~
,
k
 
5 dnkn("+l)I2. 
Proof We will first prove the following Lemmas. 
Lemma 2.2 Let f E M,k and let 
Assume that a(T) = 0 for all T with o(T) < 
where 
s, = 
sup 
u(Y-1). 
Z€FnZ=X+iY 
Then f ~
0
.
 
Lemma 2.3 Let s, = sup o(YW1). Then s, is finite and sl < - .  . < s,. 
ZEFn 
Definition 2.4 (The Siegel operator $) Let 

234 
Au tomorphic Forms for Jacobi Modular Groups 
Let us write Z = (fi i) 
with X > 0, and Zl E 
We define Siege1 
operator 4 as 
We call f a cusp form if r,b(f) = 0. We note that 4 is a linear mapping of 
M: 
of M:-l 
whose kernel is the space of cusp forms. For a cusp form f ,  
one has the Fourier expansion 
f (2) x a ( ~ )  
exp 27rio(TZ). 
T>O 
Moreover, there exist constants Cl (n) , C2 (n) > 0 such that 
det ( f (2) I < Cl exp(-c2 (det Y)'/"), vz E H,. 
Proof (of Lemma 2.2) We use induction on n. In the case n = 1, we 
know that f vanishes identically for k < 0 and that if k > 0, k f (mod 2). 
Also, using the following the dimension formula for M,k for k even, 
[A] + 1 if k f 2 (mod 12) 
dim M: = [A] - 1 if k E 2 (mod 12) 
we find that if a(t) = 0 for 
[&I + 1 if k $ 2  (mod 12) 
o < t <  [A] - 1 if k 1 2  (mod 12) ' 
then f i 0. Now sl = 2 and [A] < & I: Asl. The lemma follows for 
v3 
n = 1. 
Let us suppose that the lemma is true for (n - 1) instead of n. Let 
f E M,k satisfy the assumption in the lemma. Now 
is a modular form of degree (n - 1) for which ao(Tl) = 0 since a(Tl) < 
asn-' (We note that ao(Tl) = a ( 2  E) and s,-1 5 s,). By induction 
hypothesis then f I 4 
0. f reduces to a cusp form. Let us now assume 
that f (2) = &>Oa(T) exp 2aio(TZ) E M,* is a cusp form satisfying the 
condition that 
ksn 
a(T) = 0 for all T with o(T) < -. 47r 
T. C. Vasudevan 
235 
Let $(Z) = det Y 5 f (2). It can be shown that $(Z) is invariant under r,. 
Also ( +(Z) (+ 0 as det Y + oo. Then I $(Z) I takes its maximum at some 
point Zo E F,. Let M = I  $(Zo) I and let Z = Zo +WE(") 
where w = E + iq 
is to be chosen suitably later. Let t = exp2~iw, 
where X is so chosen that 2 = 1 + [%I. Now 
If T is such that o(T) > 9 
then 
nX 
ks, 
nX - ks, 
ks, 
a(T) - - > - 
- - - - 
- [-]-1>-1 
27r 
47r 
27r 
4lr 
47r 
i.e., o(T) - 
2 0 (since o(T) is an integer) . 
Now we choose w = [ + iq such that q 1 -v where v > 0 and also such 
that Z = Zo + WE(") 
E Hn. NOW 
I t I =  exp(-27rq) < exp 27rv = p > 1. 
In I I < p, g(t) is holomorphic and by the maximum modulus principle, 
But 
I g(t) 1=1 f (2) I exp(WY)) 
where Y = Yo + qE(,). 
On the other hand, 

236 
Au tomorphic Forms for Jacobi Modular Groups 
k 
k 
h(q) = Xns - - log det Y + - log det Y. 
2 
2 
1 
Also, 1 < p = exp(-2nq) implies that exp 27rq = < 1 (or) q = 
log f < 
P 
O. Now h(0) = 0 and 
i.e., h(q) is an increasing function of q. Thus h(r)) < 0 since q < 0. Thus 
M < M exp h(q) < M and this is absurd. Thus f r 0. 
Proof of Theorem 2.1 We use the fact that the number of T 2 0 with 
o(T) = m is at most (1 + m)"(4m + I)"("-')/~ < cmn+l)I2 where C is a 
- 
constant depending on n along with Lemma 2.2. 
Remark 2.5 Theorems 1.1, 1.4 and 1.5 follow from Theorem 2.1. For 
detailed arguments, one can refer to the book of Hans Maass [3]. Theo- 
rems 1.2, 1.7, 1.8 have been established by H. Klingen [I] (see page 3). 
Acknowledgement I was introduced to Siegel Modular Forms in 1974 
by Prof. S. Raghavan to whom I dedicate this transcript. 1 am greatly 
indebted to Prof. M.S. Raghunathan for extending me this rare privilege 
of taking part in this conference. 
References 
[I] H. Klingen, Automorphic Forms and Functions with respect to the Ja- 
cobi group, Math. Annalen 306 (1996), 675-690. 
[2] D. Mumford, On Kodaira dimension of Siegel modular variety, SLN 
Springer-Verlag, 1995. 
[3] H. Maass, Lectures on Siegel Modular Forms and Dirichlet Series, SLN 
21 6 Springer-Verlag. 
Restriction Maps Between Cohomologies of 
Locally Symmetric Varieties 
T.N. Venkataramana 
1 Introduction 
A Theorem of Lefschetz on hyperplane sections says that if X is a smooth 
projective variety then all the cohomology (with Ccoefficients) of X in 
degree less than the dimension of X restricts injectively to that of a hyper- 
plane section Z of X. 
There is a certain class of smooth projective varieties which are quotients 
of Hermitian symmetric domains, whose fundamental group r is arithmetic. 
These varieties S(r) (we will loosely refer to them as Shimura varieties) have 
a large number of correspondences. Suppose Z c S(r) is a subvariety of 
such a Shimura variety; suppose that all the cohomology of S(r) in degrees 
not exceeding the dimension of Z restricts injectively to that of Z, perhaps 
after moving the cohomology classes by the correspondences mentioned 
earlier. We will then say that Z satisfies a "weak Lefschetz Property". 
In this paper we will show (Theorem 3.4, Section 3) that if the Shimura 
variety S(r) = r\D, is a quotient of the unit ball D in @R by a cocom- 
pact arithmetic subgroup r of automorphisms of D, then every smooth 
subvariety Z of S(r) satisfies the weak Lefschetz property. This proves a 
conjecture of M. Harris and J-S. Li on the Lefschetz properties of subvari- 
eties of Shimura varieties covered by the unit ball in @R . 
We also obtain a criterion for (all the translates by correspondences of) 
a cohomology class on a compact Shimura variety S(r) to vanish on a sub- 
Shimura variety SH(r) (see Theorem 3.2, Section 3, for a more general 
statement). The proof of the criterion (2) of Theorem 3.2 is based on (1) 
of Theorem 3.2 (Section 3) which says essentially that if SH(r) v S ( r )  
is a Shimura subvariety, and P v 2 is the associated imbedding of the 
compact duals Y and X of SH(r) and S ( r )  respectively, then the cycle 
class [PI is contained in the G(Af)-span of the cycle class [SH(l?)]. In 
Theorem 3.2 (Section 3), we give a more general formulation. Here G is the 

238 
Cohomologies of Locally Symmetric Varieties 
reductive Qgroup associated toeh Shimura variety S(I') and Af the ring 
of finite adeles over Q. 
The criterion of Theorem 3.3 can be used to prove nonvanishing of cup- 
products of cohomology classes a, a' of degrees m, m' with m + m' 5 n, 
where S(T) = I'\D, and D is the unit ball in @ (see Theorem 3.4). 
The details of the proofs will appear elsewhere. In the present paper, 
we will give only a brief outline of the proofs . This paper is an expanded 
version of a talk given by the author at the "International Conference on 
"Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups, L-Functions and Automorphic Forms" 
held at TIFR during December 28, 1998 - January 1, 1999. 
2 
Preliminary notation: definition of the 
restriction map and of cycle classes 
Notation 2.1 Let G be a semisimple algebraic group over Q. Write G as 
an almost direct product of Qsimple groups Gi(l 5 i 5 r): 
Assume that Gi(lW) is noncompact for each i 5 r. Let At be the ring of 
finite adeles over Q Under the assumption on Gi, the closure of Gi(Q) 
in Gi(Af) is a non-discrete totally disconnected locally compact group. 
Denote by Gf the closure of G(Q) in G(Af ). 
dfn 
Let K C G be a compact open subgroup. Then I' = KnG(Q) c G(R) 
is called a congruence arithmetic subgroup of G(Q). If K is small enough, 
then I' is torsion-free. 
Notation 2.2 Let K, 
be a maximal compact subgroup of G(R). We will 
make the simplifying assumption that G(R) is connected (then so is K,, 
because G ( 4  is a product of K, 
with a Euclidean space). Let go, to be the 
Lie algebras of G(R) and K,, 
respectively. With respect to the Killing form 
on go, we have the orthogonal decomposition (the Cartan decomposition) 
Form the quotient X = G(R)/K,. 
There is a G(1W)-invariant metric on X 
which coincides with the Killing form on po identified as the tangent space 
to X at the identity coset eK,. 
If n = dimpo, then the connectedness 
n 
of K, 
implies that K, 
acts trivially on the nth exterior power A g o  of 
PO. Thus K, 
preserves any orientation on PO. Fix an orientation on go. 
Ranslating by G(R), we obtain a G(R)-invariant orientation on X. 
If I' c G(Q) is a torsion free congruence arithmetic subgroup, we then 
obtain that S(r) = I'\X is a manifold covered by X and is also orientable; 
the orientation on X descends to one on S(r) (note that the same conclusion 
holds even if only the image of I' in the group Gad = Glcentre is torsion- 
free; we will use this remark later in Section (1.9)). 
Definition 2.3 (The Compact Dual 2) Let g, l, p be the complexifi- 
cations go @ @,to @ @ and po 63 @ respectively. One has the imbedding 
go v g induced by the imbedding G(R) C G(@). Let g, v g be the real 
subalgebra of g given by 
gu = =o @ ipo 
and let Gu c G(C) be the (connected) subgroup with Lie algebra 8,. Then 
Gu is a maximal compact subgroup of G(@). Clearly Gu > K,. 
The 
quotient 2 = G,/Kw is called the compact dual of the symmetric space 
X = G(R)/K, . The restriction of the negative of the Killing form on g, 
to the tangent space igo at the identity coset eKw of 2 is a K,-invariant 
metric on 2. Under this metric, 2 is a compact symmetric space. 
As in Notation 2.2, we sp;! that 2 is also orientable with an orientation 
preserved by G,. Thus Hn (X, C) is one dimensional. Let wc be a generator 
of ~ " ( 2 ,  
c): 
H~(W,C) = C W ~ .  
Definition 2.4 (Harmonic Forms on 2) Under the metric on 2 
defined in Definition 2.3, the space of Harmonic forms on 2 (by a T h e  
orem of Cartan) may be identified with 
n 
In particular, ~ " ( 2 ,  
@) = HornK, (A g, 0. 
Definition 2.5 (The Matsushima formula) Assume that the group G 
is anisotropic over Q. If K c G(Af) is small enough, then I' = K n G(Q) 
is a torsion free cocompact subgroup of G(1W). From now on, assume that 
I' is torsion-free. 
In Notation 2.2 we defined a G(R)-invariant metric on X = G(R)/K,. 
We thus get a metric on S(I') = r\X. By the Matsushima-Kuga formula 
([B-W], Chapter (VIII)) the space of harmonic forms on the compact man- 
ifold S(r) under this metric may be identified with 

240 
Cohomologies of Locally Symmetric Varieties 
Here Cm(r\G(R))(0) is the space of smooth functions in I'\G(R) killed by 
the Casimir of g. 
Taking direct limits on both sides of Equation (2.2) as 
vaires through 
congruence arithmetic subgroups of G(Q) we obtain 
Note that if I?' c I' is a congruence arithmetic subgroup of finite index 
there is a natural covering map S(rl) = rl\X onto S(r) = I'\X 
whence 
there is a natural injection i(r, I") HW(S(I'), 
@) into H'(S(I"), C). Thus 
in Equation (2.3), the direct limit is taken with respect to these injective 
maps i(I',rl). Denote by Cw(G(Q)\G(R) x Gf) (or by C") 
the space of 
functions f on the product G(R) x Gf which are left invariant under the 
action of G(Q) , such that for y E G f ,  the function x I+ f (x, y )  is smooth 
on G(R), and such that there exists a compact open subgroup K of Gf 
such that for all x E G(R), all y E h and all k E K, we have 
On C" (G(Q)\G(R) x G ) the group G acts by right translations and the 
Casimir of g also operates. In Equation (2.3), C" (G(Q)\G(R) x G f )  (0) is 
the space of functions in Cw annihilated by the Casimir of g. 
Definition 2.6 Define H'(ShoG) = 1 3  HW(S(I'), C). Note that Gf acts 
by right translations on the right hand side of Equation (2.3). Moreover 
Equations (2.1) and (2.3) show that by identifying C with the space of 
constant functions on G(Q)\G(R) x Gf , we get an imbedding of algebras 
Ftom now on, we will always view elements of ~ ' ( 2 ,  
C) as elements of the 
direct limit 
H'(ShOG) = 1% HW(S(r), 
C). 
Recall that a complex vector space W on which Gf acts by linear trans- 
formations is said to be smooth if for every vector w E W, the isotropy G, 
of G at w, is open in G f .  The G -module W is admissible if for every 
compact open subgroup K of Gf, the space wK of K-invariant vectors in 
W is finite dimensional. 
T.N. Venkataramana 
241 
Proposition 2.7 (Structure of H'(ShOG) is a module over Gf)) 
(I) The Gf -module H'(ShOG) is smooth and admissible. 
(2) The Gf -module H'(ShOG) is an algebraic direct sum irreducibel rep- 
resentations 7rf of G f ,  each occurring with a finite multiplicity m(r f )  : 
(3) The space of Gf-invariants in H'(ShOG) is precisely the cohomology 
group H'(Z,@) of the compact dual 2. 
(4) If K C Gf is a compact open subgroup such that I' = K n G(Q) is 
torsion-free, then the space of K-invariants in H'(ShOG) is 
H'(s~"G)~ = Hw(S(r), C). 
Proposition 2.7 is essentially well known (see [Cl], (3.15); there the 
proposition is stated with G replaced by G(Af ) but the proof for G is 
identical to that for G(Af )). 
Definition 2.8 (Submanifolds of S(r) and the Restriction map) 
Assume that G/Q is anisotropic. Let I' be a torsion-free congruence 
arithmetic subgroup of G(Q). Let K be the closure of I' in G(Q). By 
Proposition 2.7, we have the inclusion 
In particular, wo E H" (G , C) C Hn (S(I') , C) . Hence for every torsion-free 
I', WG generates Hn(S(r), C). 
Let M be a compact orientable manifold-of 
dimension m 5 n. Let 
j = j(r) : M -+ S(r) be an immersion. Let M be a universal cover of M, 
set A = (M). Thus A acts properly discontinuously on 
and M is the 
quotient of 
by A. The map j induces a homomorphism j, : A + I' of 
fundamental groups. Given a congurence arithmetic subgroup I" LI', 
let 
A' = jyl (I"). As in Definition 2.5, we have a direct system He(A'\ M, C) of 
cohomology groups as I" varies through congruence subgroups of I'. Define 
where the limit is taken over all the subgroups K" c I?. Note that 

242 
Cohomologies of Locally Symmetric Varieties 
where again, the direct limit is over the congruence_s_ubgroups r' of I'. 
- 
The map j : M + S(I') induces an immersion j : M + X and hence 
induces immersions j(rr) : A'\G -+ I'\X = S(rr). Thus the system 
{j(rr) : r' c I?) of maps induce a homomorphism 
on the direct limits. Now Gf acts on H'(ShOG). For each g E Gf, consider 
the composite 
j,* = j* o g : H'(ShoG) -+ H0(S&). 
We thus get a map 
Res = 11 ji : H'(ShOG) -+ n H0(S&). 
9EGf 
We refer to this map n j; as the restriction map from H'G to S&. 
Definition 2.9 (The Cycle Classes [MI and [GI) Recall that M is an 
orientable m-dimensional manifold and that it maps immersively into S(r). 
If A, A' are as in Definition 2.8, then we get an isomorphism 
of one-dimensional spaces. Thus we get from Equation (2.4), that 
H ~ ( S K )  = iq 
H ~ ( A I \ G ,  
C) 
is one-dimensional. 
Let WZ be a generator of Hm(S&) = Hm(M, C). Now 
Hence for all a E Hm(S(I'), C) we have j*(a) = X(a)wg, where X(a) 
is a linear form on Hm(S(I'),C). Since S(I') is a compact orientable 
manifold, Poincard duality implies that there exists a cohomology class 
p E Hn-m(S(I'), C) such that 
where wc (as in Notation 2.2) generates ~ n ( W , c ) .  We will denote /3 by 
[MI and refer to [MI as the cycle class associated to M. 
The map j : M -+ S(r) also induces a homomorphism j* : H" ( a ,  C) v 
Hm (S(I'), C) + Hm (M, 4. Therefore we get a linear form on H ~ R ,  
C) 
defined by 
j*(a) = X(a)wM for all a E H ~ ( ~ , C ) .  
T.N. Venkataramana 
243 
The orientability of 2 and Poincard duality for ~ ' ( 2 )  
imply the existence 
of a class 
E H"-"(Z) 
such that 
. . A  
aA/3 = X(a)wc for all a E H ~ ( ~ , C ) .  
We denote the class 
by [GI and will refer to [GI as the dual cycle-class 
associated to M. Note that 
and that 
[GI E H " - ~ ( Z ,  Q c H"-~(S~OG). 
Definition 2.10 (The special cycles [SH(I')]) Let H be a semisimple 
algebraic group defined over Q such that (as in Notation 2.1) all its @ 
simple factors are non-compact at infinity. Let j : H + G be a morphism 
of @algebraic groups with finite kernel. 
We assume that the maximal compact subgroup K ,  of G(R) is so cho- 
sen that HZ = jil (J,) is a maximal compact subgroup of H ( 4 ,  where 
jR : H(R) -+ G(R) is the map induced from j. Thus one may form 
the symmetric space Y = H(R)/K:. 
We also assume that the Cartan 
involution 0 on G(R) (whose fixed points are K,) 
is chosen so that if 
bo = Lie(H) L, go = Lie(G), then 0 leaves bo stable. Thus we may write 
Clearly bo n to is the Lie algebra 
of KZ, and the above decomposition 
is a Cartan decomposition for bo. 
Thus the map jR : H ( 4  -+ G(R) induces an immersion 7 (even an 
imbedding) of Y into X. Let I' C G(Q) be a torsion-free congruence arith- 
metic subgroup of G(Q). Now A = jil (r) C H(R) may not be torsion-free; 
however, the action of A on the symmetric space Y = H ( R ) / K ~  factors 
through to the image h of A in H(R)/centre = Had and 
is torsion-free. 
Thus (see the end of Notation 2.2) SH(I') = A\Y is still a manifold covered 
by Y and jR : H(R) -+ G(R) induces a map j = j ( r )  : SH (I') -+ S(I') = 
r\X. Note that the map j(I') is an immersion. 
From now on, we assume that H (It) is connected. Then by Notation 2.2, 
Y has an H(R)-invariant orientation and SH(r) = A\Y is a manifold 
covered by Y, with a natural orientation (see the end of Notation 2.2). 
Applying Equation (2.5) of Definition 2.8 (replace G by H there), we see 
that 
Hm(ShOH) = 1 9  Hm(Ar\Y, @) = @wH 

244 
Cohomologies of Locally Symmetric Vaieties 
where the direct limit iz over all the congruence subgroups I?' of 
, A' = 
j -' (T) and WH E H m  (Y, @) is a generator. Here m = dim Y = dim(ponho) 
and Y = H , / K ~  is the compact dual of Y ( and H, = Lie subgroup of 
H(@) with Lie algebra to n Bo @ i(po n bo) = Bu ) . Thus the cycle class 
[SH (r)] may be defined, as in Definition 2.9 (with w g  replaced by wH). 
Define the linear form Xo : Hm(Z, C) + C by the equation 
h 
j*(a) = Xo(a)wH for all a E Hm(Z,@). 
Here, : 9 + 2 is the imbedding induced by ju; H, += G, which in turn, 
is induced by jc : H(@) -t G(@), and 
: Hm(X, @) + H ~ P )  
= CwH is 
the pullback map. By Poincare duality for He(.@, there exists an element, 
denoted [?I, in H " - ~ ( Z )  such that 
Lemma 2.11 Let [SH(r)] be the dual cycle class as in Definition 2.9. 
Then 
The proof is immediate from the definitions (note: w y  = WH, in Defini- 
tion 2.9). 
Definition 2.12 (Hermitian Symmetric Domains) In this section we 
will assume that the group G/Q is such that X = G(R)/K, 
is a Hermitian 
symmetric domain. Thus the complex tangent space p at the identity coset 
eK, 
splits p+ @ p- where p* is the holomorphic (or antiholomorphic) 
tangent space to X at eK,. 
The restriction of the Killing form n to p0, 
defines an element of (sym2 (g~;))~-. Hence the Killing form may also be 
thought of as an element of (sym2 p*) Km, where p* is the dual of p. Now 
p C p+ @ p- and since the connected component Z of indentity of K, 
acts 
by a nontrivial character of g+ , it follows that sym2 (p+)* has no invariants 
under K, 
(Similarly sym2 (p- ) * has no K,-invariants) . Thus 
Thus n defines an element of 
We denote this element by L. 
The real dimension n of X is 20, where D is the complex dimension 
of the Hermitian symmetric domain X. Then LD defines a closed form of 
T.N. Venkataramana 
245 
degree 2 0  on the compact dual 2 and generates ~
~
~
(
2
,
 
C) = Hn(z,C). 
Note that upto scalar multiples, L is the Kahler form on 2 associated to 
the Kahlerian metric on 2 = G,/K, 
induced by n. 
Definition 2.13 (Subvarieties of S(r)) Let X be a Hermitian symmet- 
ric domain as in Definition 2.12. Let r c G(Q) be torsion-free; assume that 
G is anisotropic over Q. Then S ( r )  = r \ X  is known to be a smooth projec- 
tive variety ([B-B]); moreover it is known that the G(R)-invariant metric 
<, > on X defined to Notation 2.2 is Kahlerian and that the associated 
(1,l)-form (the Kahler form) on S(r) is a multiple of L. 
Let M be a smooth projective variety of (complex) dimension d (and 
real dimension 2d) and let j = j(r) : M += S ( r )  be a morphism of pro- 
jective varieties which is an immersion (as in Definition 2.8). Since L is 
(proportional to) a Kahler form on S(F), it follows ([G-HI) that its pullback 
j*(L) to H2(M, @) is a Kahler form on M (with respect to the restriction 
of <, > to M). Consequently 
j* ( L ~ )  generates H ~ ~ ( M ,  
C) = C. 
(2.6) 
1 
1 
We take w,- (see Definition 2.9) to be j*(Ld). 
3 Statements of Theorems 3.2-3.6 
Notation 3.1 Let G be a semisimple group defined and anisotropic over 
Q, satisfying the hypotheses of Notation 2.1. Let g c G(Q) be a torsion-free 
congruence arithmetic subgroup, let n = dim X, X = G(R)/K,. 
Assume 
that G(R) is connected. Let j : M += S ( r )  be an immersion, M an m- 
dimensional orientable manifold as in Definition 2.8, and Res = n 
j,' : 
Hb(ShOG) + He(S&) the restriction map as in Definition 2.8. 
We have then 
Theorem 3.2 
(1) Let Vr C Hn-"(ShOG) be the @-span of Gf-translates 
of the cycle class [MI E Hn-m(S(I')) c Hnem(ShOG). Then the 
h 
space of Gf-invariants in Vr is spanned by the dual cycle class [MI E 
~n-m(W). 
(2) Let w E He(ShOG) be such that Res(w) = 0 (Res is the restriction 
map defined in (1.7)). Then the following cup product (in He(ShOG)) 
i 
h 
, 
vanishes : WA[M] = 0 . 

246 
Cohomologies of Locally Symmetric Varieties 
Proof Since (by Proposition 2.7) Hn-m(ShOG) is a (possibly infinite) 
direct sum of irreducible GI-modules, it follows that so is the submodule 
Vr . Now Vr is a cyclic G -module with a cyclic vector [MI E Hn-m (S(r)). 
Therefore the space of GI-invariant linear forms on Vr is of dimension at 
most one. The complete reducibility of Vr now shows that the space of 
GI-invariants in Vr is also of dimension at most one. Write 
where W is a direct sum of non-trivial irreducible Gf-modules occurring 
in Vr: Denote temporarily by q the projection of [MI to v:'. 
Clearly q 
G 
G 
generates Vr 
: Vr 
= Cq. 
If a E Hm(Z), then v ct ahv defines a Gt-invariant linear form on 
Hn-m(S(I?)) and hence on Vr. Since W has no GI-invariant linear forms, 
it follows that 
ahv = ahpr(v) for all a E ~ " ( 2 )  
where pr : Vr -+ Cq is the G I-equivariant projection. In particular 
a h [ M ]  = ahq for all a E Hm(Z). 
It follows from the definition of the cycle classes [MI and [GI, that 
aAq = ah[M] = a h [ Z ]  for all a E ~ ~ ( 2 ) .  
By Poincare duality for ~ ' ( z ) ,  
the cup-product pairing 
is nondegenerate, whence we get q = [GI. 
This gives (1) of Theorem 3.2. 
Fix g E G I. Let K' C K ngKg-l be an open subgroup which is normal 
in K .  Write I" = K' n G(Q) C I?, and let (in the notation of Definition 2.8) 
A' = j;l(rl). We get an immersion j ( F )  : A'\% -+ r t \ X  = S(rl). Let 
Write K as a disjoint (finite) union of cosets of 
It can easily be proved that 
T.N. Venka taramana 
247 
Suppose Res(w) = 0, w E H0(S(r)). Then in particular jii,-, (w)) = 0. 
By the Gysin exact sequence we get 
i.e., gwhBi(&) = 0, ( i  = 1,2,. . . , r). Taking the sum over all i, and using 
Equation (3. I), we get 
g w ~ [ M ]  
= 0 for all g E GI. 
Therefore 
for all g E GI. Now by using (1) of Theorem 3.2 and taking a suitable 
linear combination of {g[M]; 
g E G I) we obtain from Equation 3.2 that 
This proves part (2) of Theorem 3.2. 
0 
Suppose now that H is a semi-simple algebraic group over Q such that 
H(R) is connected, and such that H satisfies the hypotheses of Notation 2.1. 
Let j : H + G be a morphism of Qalgebraic groups with finite kernel, so 
that the conditions of Definition 2.10) hold. We have then the special cycles 
as in Definition 2.10, and the map 3 : 9 -+ 2 of compact duals of Y and 
X respectively. We then have 
Theorem 3.3 
(1) Let Vr be the Gf -span of the cycle class tr = [SH(r)] 
in Hn-"(ShOG). 
Then the space of Gf -invariants in Vr is spanned 
by the dual cycle class [PI. 
! 
(2) If Res; H'(ShOG) -+ n 
H'(ShOH) is the restriction map, and 
I 
Res(w) = 0 then WA[P] = 0. 
Proof Theorem 3.3 is immediate from Theorem 3.2 and Lemma 2.11. 
0 
We will now assume that the symmetric space X = G(R)/K, 
is an ir- 
reducible Hermitian Symmetric domain. Take for M a smooth projective 

248 
Cohomologies o f  Locally Symmetric Varieties 
variety of dimension d (of real dimension 2d), mapping immensively into 
s ( r )  = r \ x :  
j = j ( r )  : M -+ S(l?). 
Now Equation (2.6) of Definition 2.13 shows that the dual cycle class 
[GI-# 
0. (We assume that S ( r )  is compact, as before). 
Theorem 3.4 
(1) Let X be an irreducible Hermitial symmetric domain 
and j : M + S(r) an immersion of a smooth projective variety M .  
Suppose [G] is a multiple of L ~ - ~ ( D  
= dim(X)). Then the restric- 
tion map 
Res : Hm(ShoG) + 
Hm(S&) 
9EGf 
is injective for all integers m < d = dim M (i.e., M satisfies the weak 
Lefschetz property). 
(2) Let j : M -+ S ( r )  be an immersion, with d = D - 1. Then M satisfies 
the weak Lefschetz property. 
(3) Let X be the unit ball in CD and l? c AutX = G a cocompact (con- 
gruence) arithmetic subgroup. Let j : M + S(r) = l?\X be an 
immersion. Then M satisfies the weak Lefschetz property. 
(4) Suppose that G(R) = SU(n, 1) (upto compact factors) and that H (R) = 
SU(k, l)(k 5 n) upto compact factors with G, H Q-algebraic semisim- 
ple groups. Suppose j : H -+ G is a morphism of algebraic groups, 
such that j : Y + X is a holomorphic map of Hermitian symmetric 
domains. Then for all m < k, the restriction map 
Res: Hm(ShoG) -+ n 
Hm(ShoH) 
9EGf 
is injective. 
(5) The same conclusion as that of (4) holds if (G, H )  are, upto compact 
factors, the groups (SO(n, 2), SO(n - 1,2)) 
Remark Part (4) in Theorem 3.4 was conjectured by Harris and Li and 
proved by them modulo a "base change conjecture" (see [H-L]) . 
Proof 
1. By the criterion (2) of Theorem 3.2, if m < d and w E 
h 
Hm (ShOG) is such that Res(w) = 0, then WA [MI = 0. By assumption 
[GI = L
~
-
~
 
(upto nonzero multiples). Therefore wh LD-d = 0. How- 
ever, L is (upto multiples) a Kahler class on the variety r \ X  = S(r). 
T.N. Venkataramana 
249 
Then Lefschetz's hyperplane section Theorem says that w = 0 if 
m < d. This proves (1). 
2. If X is the unit ball in CD, then 2 is the projective space PD(C) and 
for any M as in (2) of Theorem 3.4, [GI E H ~ ( ~ - ~ ) ( P ~ )  
= C L ~ - ~ .  
Thus (1) of Theorem 3.4 applies (we are using here the fact that 
H ~ ~ ( P ~ ( @ . > )  
= CLi (0 5 i 5 d)). 
3. If X is irreducible, then ~
~
(
2
,
 
C) = C (as can be easily proved by 
noting that K, acts irreducibly on p+). Therefore [GI E H2 ( 2 ,  C) 
is a nonzero multiple of L. Now (1) applies. 
4. Now (4) is a special case of (3), and (5) follows from (2). 
0 
Definition 3.5 (Cup Products) Assume G is as in Notation 3.1. We 
consider the diagonal imbedding of G in G x G. Note that if N is a manifold 
, and wl, w2 are cohomology classes on N, then the restriction of wl 8 w2 
(a class on N x N) to the diagonal N is the cup-product w1hw2 on N. We 
view the compact dual 2 as being imbedded diagonally 2 x 2, 
and denote 
by [A(*)] the d u d  cycle class in 
(where n = dim 2). 
Theorem 3.6 
(1) Let wl, w2 E H'(ShOG) be such that gwlAw2 = 0 for 
all g E Gf . Then 
(WI 8 w~)A(A[?]) = 0. 
(2) Let X be the unit ball in CD and wl E Hm(ShOG), 
w2 E Ilm' (ShOG), 
with wl # 0, wg # 0 and m + m' < D. Then there exists g E Gf such 
that 
Proof (I) is immediate from (2) of Theorem 3.2. 
To prove (2) we use (1) of Theorem 3.6. In the case when X is the unit 
ball in CD, we have 2 = PD(@). Therefore there exist complex numbers 
Q, ~ 1 , .  
. . ,CD such that 

250 
Cohomologies of Locally Symmetric Varieties 
(because the cohomology of 
is generated by L). Suppose wl, w2 are as 
in (2) of Theorem 3.6, with gwlAw2 = 0 for all g E Gf. Then by (1) of 
Theorem 3.6, we get 
Use equations (3.3) and (3.4) and compute the Kunneth components of 
both sides of (3.4): 
In particular, we may take k = D - m in Equation (3.5). Then D - k = m 5 
D - m' by assumption. By Lefschetz's Theorem on hyperplane sections, 
w l ~ ~ D - k  
# 0 and W ~ A L ~ - ~ '  
# 0. 
This contradicts Equation 3.5. Hence Theorem 3.6 follows. 
We will now assume that I' c SU(D, 1) is a (torsion-free) congruence 
arithmetic subgroup with compact quotient. Thus S(r) = I'\X (X = unit 
ball in e D )  is compact. Assume that H1 (S(l7)) # 0 (by a Theorem of 
Kazhdan (see [K]) there exist (many) arithmetic subgroups of SU(D, 1) 
with this property). Let M be a smooth projective variety of dimension 
d ( 5  D) , and j : M + S(I') a morphism of varieties which is an immersion. 
Theorem 3.7 With the foregoing hypotheses, there exists a finite covering 
M' of M such that the Hodge components 
for all p, q 5 dim M = d. 
Proof By Hodge symmetry, we may assume that p + q 5 d. Fix p,q. 
It is enough to produce a finite cover M' such that Hp,,(Mt) # 0. Now 
H1*O(S(r)) # 0 by hypothesis. Then (2) of Theorem 3.6 ensures that there 
exists a finite cover S(I") = F'\X such that 
Indeed, let wl E H1yO(S(r)), w2 E Hot1 (S(I')), with wl # 0, w2 # 0. then 
by (2) of Theorem 3.6, 391% 
- - . , gp E Gf and hl , . . . , h, E Gf such that 
T.N. Venkataramana 
Since p + q < dim M = d, (3) of Theorem 3.4 ensures that 
Res : Hp7q(Sh0G) -+ n HPfq(S&) 
g E G f  
is injective. Now (1) and (2) prove that HP7Q(M1) # 0 for some suitable 
M'. 
0 
References 
[B-B] W. Baily and A. Borel, Compactifications of Arithmetic Quotients of 
Bounded Symmetric Domains , Ann. of Math. 64 (1966), 442-528. 
[B-W] A. Bore1 and N. Wallach, Continuous Cohomology, Discrete Sub- 
groups and Representations of Reductive Groups, Ann. of Math. Stud- 
ies 94 (1980), Princeton University Press. 
[C] L. Clozel, Motifs et Formes Automorphes in Automorphic forms and 
Shimura Varieties, Ann Arbor, 1, Perspectives in Math. 10 (1990). 
[H-L] M. Harris and J-S. Li, Lefschetz properties for subvarieties of Shimura 
Varieties, J. of Algebraic Geometry, 1998. 
[K] D. Kazhdan, Some applications of the Weil Representation, J .  Analyse 
Math. 32 (1977), 235-248. 
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, 
TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL 
RESEARCH, HOMI BHABHA 
ROAD, MUMBAI 400 005, INDIA 
E-mail: venky@math.tifr.res.in 

