 
Smart Logic Academy © All copy right reserved  
 
Slide 1 
 
 
 
8051 is the 8-bit microcontroller originally developed by Intel in the mid-80s. A typical 8051 
microcontroller also known as Intel MCS-51 and here are the configuration of that particular 
microcontroller 
 
RAM 128 bytes  
ROM 4 Kbytes  
2 16 bit timers  
1 serial port  
4 input-output port 
8-bit data width  
16-bit address width 
  
Since 8051 is 8-bit microcontroller it can read-write and process 8 bit of data. There are a bunch 
of manufacturers like Atmel, NXP, Texas Instruments who manufacturer their own versions of 
8051 microcontrollers. Irrespective of manufacturers internal hardware design i.e internal 
architecture of 8051 microcontroller remains more or less the same. Here a diagram shows the 
architecture of 8051 in block diagram style. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Smart Logic Academy © All copy right reserved  
 
Slide 2 
 
Central Processing Unit is the heart of microcontroller mainly contains ALU and CU. ALU stands 
for the arithmetic logic unit as the name suggest it used to perform arithmetic and logical 
operations. CU nothing but a control unit responsible for all the timing of communication process 
between CPU and other peripherals. 
  
Program memory is also known as code memory is a read-only memory used to store the CPU 
instructions. A program written into the memory will retain even if the power is down or the 
system is reset. The data memory is also known as Random Access Memory or RAM is responsible 
for storing the value of variable temporary data and immediate result for the proper operation of 
the microcontroller. RAM is a volatile memory and generally organized as a register and user 
accessible memory locations. 
  
Input-output ports provide microcontroller a physical connection with the outside world. These 
ports can be configured as an input port or output port.  Input provides a gateway for passing 
data from the outside world to the microcontroller with the help of sensors and output port 
allows the microcontroller to control external devices like motor, LED etc. 
  
The oscillator is used to generate a clock signal. Clock signal allows the operation inside the 
microcontroller and other parts to be synchronous. The clock generator is an integral part of 
microcontroller architecture and the user has to provide additional timing circuitry in the form of 
a crystal.  
  
Timer hardware is used to generate delay and the same hardware can be used to count external 
event on T0 and T1 pin of the microcontroller. 
  
serial port used for serial communication between the microcontroller and other serial devices 
Interrupt control block, this block is used to control external and internal interrupt in 8051 
microcontrollers. 

 
Smart Logic Academy © All copy right reserved  
 
Slide 3 
 
 
 
Program memory, data memory, timer, serial port, input-output ports, interrupt control block 
and CPU all interface together through the system bus. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Smart Logic Academy © All copy right reserved  
 
Slide 4 
 
 
 
New generation microcontroller like P89v51RD2 microcontroller from manufacturer NXP 
formerly known as Philips contains more advanced features like 1 Kbytes of data RAM and 64 
Kbytes of code memory, number of the timers, SPI and watchdog timer like features.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Smart Logic Academy © All copy right reserved  
 
Slide 5 
 
 
 
Even more advanced 8051 microcontroller like CC2541 microcontroller from Texas Instrument 
contains advanced features like analogue comparator, op-amp, ADC and USB like facilities. Even 
more advanced features like AES and DES encryption system and RF module.  
 
 
 
 

