VOX GRAECA 
A GUIDE TO 
THE PRONUNCIATION OF 
CLASSICAL GREEK 
BY 
w. SIDNEY ALLEN 
I, • 
Professor Emeritus of Comparative Philolog;! 
in the Universiry of Cambridge 
Third edition 
The right o/Ihe 
U"i",s;ty of Cambridge 
10 print Dnd sell 
ul1 nlam"" flf books 
M'OS granled by 
He",y VIII in 15J4. 
The University htu p";n'~1 
and published conlimlOws/y 
siner H84. 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
CAMBRIDGE 
NEW YORK 
NEW ROCHELLE 
MELBOURNE 
SYDNEY 

Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge 
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 IRP 
32 East 57th Street, New York, NY 10022, USA 
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia 
© Cambridge University Press, Ig68, Ig74 
© 3rd edition, Cambridge University Press Ig87 
First published 
Ig68 
Second edition 
Ig74 
Reprinted 
Ig8I 
Third edition 
Ig87 
Printed in Great Britain 
by the University Press, Cambridge 
British Library cataloguing in publication data 
Allen, W. Sidney 
Vox Graeca: a guide to the pronunciation 
of classical Greek. - 3rd ed. 
I. Greek language - Pronunciation 
I. Title 
481'.52 
PA267 
Library rif Congress cataloguing-in-publication data 
Allen, W. Sidney (William Sidney), IgI8--
Vox Graeca: a guide to the pronunciation of 
classical Greek. 
Bibliography. 
I. Greek language - PronunciatIon. 
I. Title. 
PA267·A4 
Ig87 
481'.52 
8&--31063 
ISBN 0 52 I 33367 9 hardcovers 
ISBN 0 52 I 33555 8 paperback 
UP 

Je ne croy pas qu'il y ait personne qui ne 
voye queUe misere c'est de ne rien com-
prendre en cette Langue que par les yeux. 
(C. LANCELOT, Nouvelle Methode pour apprendre 
faciLemmt La Langue Grecque) 


CONTENTS 
Foreword to the third edition 
Foreword to the second edition 
Foreword to the first edition 
Abbreviations 
Phonetic Introduction 
(i) Syllable, vowel and consonant, I. (ii) Conson-
ants, 2. (iii) Vowels, 4. (iv) Accent, 6. (v) Speech 
and writing, 8. 
page ix 
Xl 
Xll 
XVll 
I CONSONANTS 
12 
(i) Voiceless plosives, 14: 
(a) unaspirated, 15: 
~, 
16; 
)(,17; 
'koppa',17; 
(b) aspirated, 18: 
development to fricatives, 23; <1»8, X8, 26. (ii) Voiced 
plosives, 29. 
(iii) Labio-velars, 32. 
(iv) Nasals, 
33: [1)],35· (v) Liquids, 39: A,40; P,41. (vi) 
Fricatives ((J), 45. (vii) Semivowels, 47: 'digamma', 
47; [y], 51. (viii) The aspirate [h1, 52. (ix) Con-
sonant-groups represented by single symbols, 56: 
(a)~,56;(b);and~,59. (x)~~/(J(J,60: 'sampi', 60. 
2 VOWELS 
62 
(i) Simple vowels, 62: 
II, 62; 
E, 0, 63; 
L, 65; u, 
65; 'I and EL, 69; 
(a) and OU, 75. 
(ii) Diphthongs, 
79: 
ilL, 79; 
IIU, 79; 
EU, 80; 
OL, 80; 'diphthongs' 
before vowels, 81. (iii) 'Long' diphthongs, 84. 
3 VOWEL-LENGTH 
89 
'Hidden quantity', 9 I. Loss oflength-distinctions, 
93· 
4 VOWEL-JUNCTION 
96 
'Hiatus', 96. 'Correptio epica', 97. 
Crasis and 
synaeresis, 98. 
o"VVi~T)o"IS, 99. 
Elision, 
100. v 
E<pEAKVO"T1KOV, 102. Prodelision, 102. 
Vll 

CONTENTS 
5 Q.u ANTITY 
page 104 
Quantity and length, 104. Syllabic division, 105. 
'Correptio Attica', 106. Quantity and duration, 
I 10. Resolution and contraction, I 12. The ques-
tion of ' ictus' , 
I 14. 
6 ACCENT 
116 
Accentual marking, 124. 
The change to a 
stress-accent, 130. Stress in classical Greek, 131. 
APPENDICES 
A 
I The pronunciation of Greek in England 
140 
2 The oral accentuation of Greek 
149 
B 
I Selected quotations from ancient grammarians 
and other writers 
162 
2 Chronology of sources 
167 
C 
The names of the letters of the Greek alphabet 
169 
Index of Greek technical terms, etc. 
174 
Select Bibliography 
I 75 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED PRONUNCIATIONS 
177 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Fig. 
1. The organs of speech 
xx 
2. Classical Attic vowel-systems 
62 
3· Development of Attic long vowels and 
'short' diphthongs 
78 
4· Development of the' long' t-diphthongs 
86 
5· Types of vowel-junction 
98 
6. Incidence of' correptio Attica' 
I I I 
7· The epitaph of Sicilus 
I 19 
8. Development of the traditional English pro-
nunciation of Greek vowels and diphthongs 
147 
Plate. 
Early and late Attic inscriptions 
facing p. 70 
Vlll 

FOREWORD TO 
THE THIRD EDITION 
The need for a further reprinting of this book provides the 
opportunity for 
making a 
number of additions 
and 
amendments. 
In the foreword to the first edition I referred to the desider-
atum of a 'New Meisterhans' to provide fuller documentation 
of the Attic inscriptional material; and in a supplementary note 
to the second edition I mentioned that the Harvard dissertation 
of Leslie Threatte raised hopes that this need might be met in 
the near future. These hopes have since been amply fulfilled by 
the publication In 1980 of Part I (Phonology) ofThreatte's The 
Grammar tif Attic Inscriptions. As a result it is now possible to 
describe a number of phonetic changes with greater detail and 
accuracy than hitherto, and a majority of the revisions make 
reference to this work. In this respect at least the present edition 
may be considered more definitive than its predecessors. 
Since the second edition there has also appeared the work by 
Sven-Tage Teodorsson, The Phonemic System tif the Attic Dialect 
400-340 B. c. (1974), which was followed by his The Phonology 
oj Ptolemaic Koine (1977) and The Phonology oj Attic in the Hellenistic 
Period (1978) (= Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia 32, 
36, 40). Teodorsson's extensive collection of material is of 
particular value in regard to orthographic variation; but his 
interpretation of the variants is often surprising, leading as it 
does to the conclusion that by the mid-4th century B.C. the 
vowel system of Attic was already virtually that of modern 
Greek. Teodorsson gives more weight to relatively infrequent 
'progressive' variants than to more numerous 'conservative' 
forms, taking the view that the latter represent the speech of 
only an educated minority. He has to recognize, however 
(1977, p. 256), that this was the standard of Attic administration 
and of the Attic Koine adopted by peoples ou tside Attica: only 
thus is he able to explain the fact (p. 257) that' some of the 
phonological changes that had already taken place in Attic 
IX 

FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 
before Alexander were accomplished only one or two centuries 
later in Egypt'. No one would deny the existence oflinguistically 
conservative minorities or the tendency of orthographies them-
selves to be conservative; but it is possible to overvalue the 
evidence of occasional variants, which may have a number 
of explanations, including dialectal influence; and some of 
Teodorsson's arguments are of dubious validity. This is not 
the place for a detailed critique of his views; but I find myself 
largely in agreement with the opinions of C. J. Ruijgh in his 
review of Teodorsson's first-mentioned book, in Mnemosyne 3 I 
( I 978), pp. 79-89. 
I have also now added an appendix on the names of the letters 
of the Greek alphabet, to provide a parallel and a historical 
background to the similar appendix in the second edition of Vox 
Latina. 
I am grateful to the C.U.P. for agreeing that the total amount 
of material additional to the first edition now makes it desirable 
to incorporate it in the main text, rather than relegate it (as in 
the second edition) to supplementary notes at the end. * I have 
in particular revised the section on stress in classical Greek to 
take account of my more recent thinking on this question. The 
discussion inevitably requires rather greater technicality than 
is general in this book; but since it does not significantly affect 
the practical recommendations (cf. pp. I 14 f., 138 f.), it need not 
unduly concern the less theoretically inclined reader. The 
chapter on quantity has also been extensively recast. 
Cambridge 
November 1¢4 
W.S.A. 
* Forewords to the previous editions are reprinted unamended, but two 
additional points call for mention. In the discussion of types of evidence in the 
foreword to the first edition (p. xiii) there should be included under (3) represen-
tations of foreign words in Greek; further evidence is also provided by Indo-
European comparisons. And for dialectal variation in modern Greek (p. xiv, n. 
6) Thumb's information may now be usefully supplemented by that of Newton 
(see Bibliography). 
As in previous editions, works appearing in the Bibliography are referred to by 
the author's name only, with an identifying letter where necessary; and the two 
more frequently cited works of the present author simply by VL (Vox Latina) and 
AR (Accent and Rhythm). 
x 

FOREWORD TO 
THE SECOND EDITION 
Since this book first appeared a number of further studies 
relevant to Greek pronunciation have been published or have 
come to my attention, and the need for a reprinting has 
provided an opportunity for taking account of these. In the 
meantime there has also appeared my Accent and Rhythm 
(C.U.P. I973), which suggests a reinterpretation of various 
'prosodic' phenomena (such as syllable, length, and quantity) 
and further develops the ideas on stress in classical Greek briefly 
mentioned on pp. I20 if. of the present work. References to 
Accent and Rhythm are abbreviated as AR. 
In order to save expense and at the same time to avoid 
changes in pagination, the new material has been added as a 
supplement rather than incorporated in the main text (which 
remains unchanged, with a few minor corrections). An obelus 
in the margin indicates the existence of a relevant supple-
mentary note. 
The Select Bibliography has also been revised and enlarged. 
Cambridge 
February 1974 
Xl 
W.S.A. 

FOREWORD TO 
THE FIRST EDITION 
In its purpose, principles, and general arrangement, the present 
book forms a companion volume to Vox Latina (Cambridge, 
1965), to which there are several cross-references (abbr. VL). 
It does not, however, assume a prior reading of the earlier book, 
and a certainlmount of duplication on some of the more 
general topics is thus inevitable; in particular, the Phonetic 
Introduction is repeated, though with some modification. A 
select bibliography is added (apart from detailed references in 
text and notes, which, though more numerous than in VL, are 
limited to the most relevant studies) ;1 as in VL, the classificatory 
arrangement of the contents makes an alphabetical index 
superfluous-the items most likely to be consulted in such an 
index would be the individual Greek letters, and full references 
to the detailed discussion of these are given in the summary of 
recommended pronunciations; straightforward statements of 
classical or recommended values are further picked out by 
underlining in the text. 
As in the case of Latin, there prevailed until quite recent years 
a peculiarly English pronunciation of ancient Greek, which has 
now been generally superseded by a reform which approximates 
to that of the original language, but seldom transcends the 
limitations of native English speech-habits. In some cases there 
are practical pedagogical advantages in replacing the correct 
rendering by a more familiar sound; but it is desirable in such 
cases that the proper value should be known-and this usually 
is known within limits as narrow as those which apply to our 
phonetic reconstruction of Latin. 
In general the conclusions agree with those of Sturtevant's 
Pronunciation of Greek and Latin, and particular attention is paid 
to any points of difference. A book intended not only for the 
1 Works appearing in the bibliography are elsewhere referred to by author's name 
only, with an identifying letter where necessary. 
Xll 

FORE WORD TO THE FIRST EDITION 
academic scholar but also for the general reader and student 
is not the place for presenting the results of new and possibly 
controversial lines of research; it did, however, seem reasonable 
to incorporate a revised description of the Greek tonal accent, 
which rationalizes rather than contradicts previous accounts; 
and also to refer briefly to the results of a study, recently 
published elsewhere, on stress in ancient Greek, a subject which 
has hitherto been virtually ignored but which may be par-
ticularly relevant to certain metrical phenomena. 
In making practical recommendations, realism has seemed a 
better counsel than perfection, and, with one exception, no 
revolutionary proposals will be found. The exception concerns 
our English treatment of the Greek accents, where the balance 
of argument seemed to favour the abandonment of present 
practice and the adoption of one which enjoys wider acceptance 
and better historical precedents. Such a recommendation is, 
of course, only made after detailed historical, analytical, and 
practical discussion. 
The results of any historical study are only as valid as the 
evidence upon which they are based; and a major portion of 
the book is therefore taken up with the presentation and 
evaluation of this. The principal types of data employed in 
phonetic reconstruction are: (I) statements by contemporary 
or near-contemporary grammarians and other writers, (2) 
word-play of various kinds, contemporary etymologies, and 
onomatopoeia, (3) representations in other ancient languages, 
(4) subsequent developments, (5) spelling conventions and 
variants, (6) the internal structure of the language itself, 
including its metrical patterns. These are the same classes of 
evidence as were used for Latin; but in one respect the two tasks 
of reconstruction are very different. Variations in Latin are 
largely a function of the time-dimension (early-classical-
late), and the time-span of the language is relatively short. At 
any given period of its life one can say without gross inaccuracy, 
and more particularly of the written language, that' Latin is 
Latin is Latin' regardless of where it is found. The end of its 
life as a vernacular language is marked by a process of fission 
Xlll 

FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION 
into a number of progressively diverging dialects which quite 
soon acquired the status of distinct languages; and the tech-
niques of comparative linguistics often enable us to utilize 
this diversity to establish the etat de langue immediately prior 
to fission. 
Greek, on the other hand, presents a very different picture. 
At the time of our earliest records it is already far advanced in 
the process of divergence,2 being represented by a number of 
widely differing dialects-all certainly recognizable as Greek,3 
but some of them very unlike one another, even at the same 
period; as Meillet (p. 79) has commented, 'it must have been 
difficult for Greeks from different cities, speaking different 
dialects, if not to grasp the general sense, at least to understand 
one another exactly'.4 For example, an unsophisticated Attic 
visitor to Gortys in Crete might well have perused the famous 
Law Code without it being clear to him that, if he were 
unfortunate enough to be caught in adultery and remain 
unransomed, his captors could do with him 'as th~ pleased '-in 
the words of the Code, E1T1 TOIS eAOVO"I ej..lE\l Kpe66al oneil XCI AELOV"C"L. 
In some cases, moreover, as Meillet also observed, written forms 
might conceal yet further differences in speech-6, for example, 
in the Cretan Kpe66al probably stood for a sound unfamiliar to 
Attic ears. 
Later a single form of speech, the 'Koine', becomes domi-
nant, and the other dialects, with rare exceptions (as Lac-
onian), gradually die out. The survivor follows the normal 
processes of linguistic change,S including 'borrowing', but 
does not itself branch out into a series of new languages-
some dialectal variation has of course occurred,s but it is rela-
tively slight compared with that of the Romance field, and 
there is a generally accepted norm. 
2 Even Mycenaean, in spite of its early date, comes nowhere near to representing 
an undifferentiated' Proto-Greek'. 
• Cf. Herodotus, viii. 75: TO 'EAATlVIKOV loY ollal1l6v TE Kal oIl6yAc..xraov. 
• Greek sources themselves, however, scarcely refer to the question of mutual 
(un)intelligibility: as an isolated exception Mr J. B. Hainsworth draws my attention 
to Pausanias, ix. 22. 3 (referring to Corinna). 
• So far as the coUoquiallanguage is concerned: we are not here concerned with the 
artificialities of the' Katharevusa'. 
• The phonetic details are best studied in Thumb, Part I. 
XIV 

FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION 
In a much simplified diagram7 the patterns of development 
in Latin and Greek, from their earliest attested stages, may be 
contrasted as follows: 
Latin --<CC;IE=::: -
~---------------
Greek 
~--------------
In describing the pronunciation of ancient Greek a choice 
thus has to be made not only of time but also of place; and, not 
surprisingly, it is fifth-century Attic that we select as the goal 
of our inquiry--though, as an aid focusing upon this point 
in the continuum, we shall often have occasion to refer to other 
dialects and to earlier and later stages of Attic. It is not of 
course suggested that literature of other periods and dialects 
should not be read aloud--but it is assumed that it will be 
read approximately as it would have been by a fifth-century 
Athenian; in the case of later literature this is inevitably an 
artificial procedure, but the differences between fifth- and 
fourth-century Attic are in any case negligible, and for phonetic 
purposes both may be included under the cover-term of 
'classical Greek'. For later stages a reasonable amount of in-
formation is given, so that the purist who is so inclined may 
take the necessary precautions to a void anachronism; such 
information may also be of interest as providing links with the 
modern language. In one case, however, rather more attention 
has been paid to a non-Attic form of speech in its own right-
namely the Homeric 'dialect', for the reason that an Attic 
rendering in some respects fails to account for certain metrical 
7 E.g. disregarding phenomena of convergence in Greek, which may have been 
particularly marked in the period preceding elimination of dialects in favour of the 
Koine; cf. Chadwick, p. 4. 
xv 

FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION 
peculiarities; it is not proposed that a 'Homeric' pronunciation 
should be attempted, but sufficient explanation is given to make 
these phenomena intelligible. 
For the Attic inscriptional material I have relied primarily 
on the examples in Meisterhans-Schwyzer, cross-checked in the 
CIA; but as the SEC, inter alia, bears witness, a mass of new 
material is now available, which often provides better examples 
and evidence for more accurate dating of phonetic changes. I 
have in some cases been able to incorporate such findings, but 
until we have a 'New Meisterhans' the exploitation of much 
of the newer material is a time-consuming and haphazard 
business. 
With regard to inscriptional evidence in general, it should be 
mentioned that a change of sound must commonly have 
antedated its first indication in spelling, let alone the general 
adoption of a new spelling; for, as English orthography most 
eloquently demonstrates, spelling tends to conservatism and to 
fossilization by grammarians. For this reason, and also because 
many changes are likely to have been resisted longer in actual 
speech in the more literate circles of the community, it is to the 
less well educated of ancient scribes that we are indebted for 
much of our knowledge of pronunciation. 
I am grateful to the Syndics of the Cambridge University 
Press for encouraging me to undertake this further study; to 
John Chadwick for reading the whole of it in draft and sug-
gesting a number of improvements; and to Professor Homer A. 
Thompson and the American School of Classical Studies at 
Athens for the photographs facing p. 70 and permission to 
reproduce them. 
Cambridge 
January 1967 
XVI 
W.S.A. 

ABBREVIATIONS 
I. Journals, series, etc. 
AC 
AJA 
AL 
ArchL 
BCH 
BSOAS 
BZ 
CHL 
CIA 
CIL 
CJ 
CP 
CQ. 
CR 
DAWB 
GG 
GL 
HSPh 
ICPS 
ICS 
IG 
IGA 
JA 
JHS 
KZ 
MF 
MH 
L' antiquite classique 
American Journal rif Archaeology 
Acta Linguistica 
Archivum Linguisticum 
Bulletin de correspondance helUnique 
Bulletin rif the School of Oriental and African Studies 
By;:;antinische Zeitschrift 
Commentationes Humanarum Litterarum (Societas 
Scientiarum Fennica) 
Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum 
Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum 
Classical Journal 
Classical Philology 
Classical Q.uarterly 
Classical Review 
Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften ;:;u Berlin 
Grammatici Graeci (Teubner, I867-I91O: 
repro I965) 
Grammatici Latini (Teubner, I 857-I 880) 
Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 
International Congress rif Phonetic Sciences 
Illinois Classical Studies 
Inscriptiones Graecae (Berlin) 
Inscriptiones Graecae Antiquissimae (ed. Roehl) 
Journal Asiatique 
Journal rif Hellenic Studies 
( Kuhns Zeitschrift = ) Zeitschrift fur vergleichende 
Sprachjorschung 
Le M aftre Phonetique 
Museum Helveticum 
XVll 

NTS 
PhW 
REG 
RhM 
RIL 
RL 
SbAWB 
SbAWW 
SC 
SEG 
SIFC 
TAPA 
TCLP 
TLP 
TPS 
WSt 
rClS 
ZPh 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Norsk Tidsskrift for Sprogvidenskap 
Philologische Wochenschrift 
Revue des etudes grecques 
Rheinisches Museum fur Philologie 
Rendiconti dell'Istituto Lombardo (Cl. di Lettere 
eSc. Mor. eStor.) 
Richerche linguistiche 
Sitzungsberichte der k. Preuss. Akademie der Wissen-
schaJten zu Berlin, phil.-hist. Kl. 
Sitzungsberichte de k. Akademie der Wissenschaften 
zu Wien, phil.-hist. Kl. 
Studii Clasice 
Supplementum Epigraphicum Graecum 
Studi italiani di filologia classica 
Transactions qf the American Philological Association 
Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague 
Travaux Linguistiques de Prague 
Transactions qf the Philological Society 
Wiener Studien 
rale Classical Studies 
Zeitschrift fur Phonetik 
2. Editions of grammatical and technical works 
C 
M. Consbruch (Hephaestion, Enchiridion, cum commentariis 
veteribus. Teubner, 1906). 
H 
A. Hilgard (Scholia in Dionysii Thracis Artem Grammati-
cam = GG, I. iii) 
A. Hilgard (Theodosius, Canones; Choeroboscus, Scholia 
in Theod. Can., i = GG, IV. i. Choeroboscus, Scholia, 
ii = GG, IV. ii). 
K 
H. Keil (GL, I-vii) 
L 
A. Lentz (Herodianus Technicus = GG, III. ijii) 
M 
H. S. Macran (Aristoxenus, Harmonics. Oxford, 1902) 
S 
R. Schneider (Apollonius Dyscolus, Scripta minora = GG, 
II. i) 
XVlll 

ABBREVIATIONS 
U 
G. Uhlig (Dionysius Thrax, Ars Grammatica; Supplementa 
Artis Dionysianae vetusta = GG, I. i) 
G. Uhlig (Apollonius Dyscolus, De Constructione = GG, II. 
ii) 
UR H. Usener & L. Radermacher (Dionysius of Halicar-
nassus, Opuscula, ii. Teubner, 1904-29) 
WI 
R. P. Winnington-Ingram (Aristides Quintilianus, De 
Musica. Teubner, 1963) 
XIX 

Fig. I. The organs of speech. 
B 
Back of tongue 
N 
Nasal cavity 
E 
Epiglottis (drawn over 
P 
Pharynx 
windpipe when swallowing) 
S 
Soft palate (velum), 
F 
Food-passage 
in lowered position 
G 
Gums (alveoli) 
T 
Tongue-tip 
H 
Hard palate 
U 
Uvula 
L 
Larynx, with' Adam's apple' 
V 
Vocal cords (glottis) 
M 
Middle of tongue 
W 
Windpipe 
[After Ida C. Ward, The Phollltics of English] 
xx 

PHONETIC INTRODUCTION 
(i) Syllable, vowel and consonant 
In any extended utterance, in any language, there is an 
alternation of sounds having more and less acoustic power, .or 
'sonority', so that a diagrammatic representation of the 
utterance would comprise a succession of high and low points. 
These points would occupy various levels on a scale of sonority, 
but it is only their relative positions compared with preceding 
and following sounds that are immediately relevant. 1 The 
number of SYLLABLES in an utterance generally corresponds 
to the number of high points. The sounds which habitually 
occur at these points are termed VOWELS, whilst those which 
habitually occur at low points are termed CONSONANTS. 
Some types of sound, however, may occupy either high or 
low points relatively to their neighbours; such sounds are 
classified as vowels in their former (' nuclear') function, but are 
generally termed SEMIVOWELS, and classified with the conson-
ants, in their latter (' marginal') function. Many languages em-
ploy different symbols to indicate this distinction of functions 
(thus English y and w for the consonants corresponding to 
the vowels i and u); in classical Greek, however, the marginal 
function of 1 and v is very restricted, much more so than in 
English or Latin, and no special symbols are used to indicate it. 
Finally, two successive vowel-sounds may occur as indepen-
dent syllabic nuclei, the necessary margin being created by 
some diminution of energy between them, even though they 
may have the same degree of inherent sonority, as e.g. in oy50oS, 
t.li, inscr. a6rjvaa (though this situation is less common in Attic, 
being often resolved by 'contraction' into a single syllable, as 
, Ael1va). 
1 It should also be mentioned that we are at present concerned only with the inherent 
sonority of the sounds, ignoring such' prosodic' factors as stress, pitch, and duration, 
which also contribute to overall prominence (cf. Jones (a), §§208 If.; Gimson, 
pp. 216 If.). 

PHONETIC INTRODUCTION 
An alternative approach to the definition of syllable, vowel, 
and consonant is discussed in detail in AR, pp. 40 ff. This is the 
'motor' theory developed by Stetson (see Bibliography), which 
approaches the problem from the standpoint of the physiology 
of the syllabic process rather than its acoustic results. Whilst 
much of the detail of Stetson's experimentation has been 
considered suspect, the theory nevertheless provides a powerful 
theoretical model for the explanation of such' prosodic' features 
as length, quantity, and stress, and helps towards an under-
standing of various metrical phenomena. 
Briefly the main features of the theory are as follows. The 
syllable is generated by a contraction of one set of chest muscles, 
which superimposes a 'puff' of air on the larger respiratory 
movement (' like a ripple on a wave '): the syllable is conse-
quently termed by Stetson a 'chest-pulse'. The action is of 
'ballistic' (as opposed to 'controlled') type, which means that 
the 'release' is followed by a period of free movement, and 
terminated by an 'arrest'. The arrest may be effected either by 
the contraction of an opposed set of chest muscles or (or mainly) 
by a complete or partial closure in the mouth which blocks the 
egress of air. The release may also be assisted by means of an 
oral closure, which causes a rise in air pressure and so effects 
a more energetic release when the closure is relaxed. 
The outflow of air during the free movement (the 'peak' of 
the syllable) normally sets the vocal cords in vibration, and the 
glottal tone thus generated is modified in various ways by oral 
filtering, giving rise to the different vowel sounds; and the 
various types of oral closure associated with the arrest of the 
syllabic movement, or with assisting its release, give rise to the 
different consonants. 
(ii) Consonants 
A primary classification of consonants is into the categories of 
VOICED and VOICELESS. Voiced sounds involve an approxi-
mation of the two edges of the vocal cords, so that when air 
passes through them it sets up a characteristic vibration, known 
2 

CONSONANTS 
technically as 'glottal tone' or v 0 ICE; voiceless sounds involve 
a clear separation of the cords, so that no such vibration occurs. 
The difference may be exemplified by the English (voiced) z 
and (voiceless) s. If the ears are closed, the vibration of the 
former can be clearly heard by the speaker; the vibration can 
also be felt by placing a finger on the protuberance of the 
thyroid cartilage (' Adam's apple'). 
Sounds may be further classified according to the position or 
organ involved in their articulation. Thus LABIAL (or B.I-
LABIAL) involves the articulation of the two lips (e.g. English 
P), LAB IO - DEN TAL the articulation of the upper teeth and 
lower lip (e.g. English f), DEN TAL the articulation of the 
tongue-tip and upper teeth (e.g. English Ih), ALVEOLAR the 
articulation of the tongue-tip and upper gums (e.g. English I), 
PALATAL the articulation of the mid-part of the tongue and 
the hard palate, VEL A R the articulation of the back of the 
tongue and the soft palate or 'velum' (e.g. English k). 
If the speech-organs form a complete closure, during which 
air is prevented from passing until the closure is released, the 
resulting sound is termed a STOP. Stops are further subdivided 
into PLOSIVES and AFFRICATES. English has the plosives p, b 
(bilabial, voiceless and voiced), I, d (alveolar), and k, g (velar). 
For affricates, see under fricatives below. 
If the vocal cords are left open for a brief period after the 
release of a stop, producing an audible type of 'h-sound' 
immediately following, the stop in question is described as 
AS PIRA TED: there is clear aspiration of voiceless stops, for 
example, at the beginning of stressed initial syllables in English. 
In French, on the other hand, the vocal cords are approximated 
almost simultaneously with the release, and the result is a 
relatively UNASPIRATED sound. 
Consonants other than stops are broadly classifiable as 
CONTINUANTS, and may be of various types. If the tongue or 
lips form a closure, but air is allowed to escape via the nasal 
passages (by lowering the velum), the result is a NASAL 
consonant (sometimes, as in VL, referred to as a nasal slop on 
account of the oral closure). In most languages the nasals are 
3 

PHONE TIC INTRODUCTION 
all inherently voiced; English has the nasals m (bilabial), n 
(alveolar), and as ng in sing (velar). 
If the organs are not completely closed, but if the channel 
between them is so narrow as to cause an audible effect as the 
air passes through it, the resulting sound is termed a FRICA-
TIVE. English examples arejan"d v (labio-dental, voiceless and 
voiced), dental as in thin (voiceless) and then (voiced), sand z 
(alveolar), and 'palato-alveolar' as in ash or passion (voiceless) 
and pleasure (voiced); a voiceless velar fricative is heard in 
Scottish loch. The ASP I RAT E, h, is sometimes called a 'glottal 
fricative'. A fricative effect is also produced by the gradual 
release of a stop, and it is this which characterizes the affricates; 
English examples are palato-alveolar as in chest (voiceless) and 
jest (voiced). 
If one side of the tongue forms a closure, but the other side 
permits air to flow freely,2 the result is a LATERAL consonant, 
such as the English I. Such sounds are sometimes classed with 
the r-sounds as 'liquids' (see p. 39 f.). 
(iii) Vowels 
Variations of vowel-quality are effected primarily by the raising 
of different portions of the tongue's surface towards the palate, 
and by different degrees of such raising resulting in different 
degrees of aperture between tongue and palate. Vowels may 
thus be classified according to (a) how far FRONT or BACK 
they are articulated (i.e. involving more forward or more back-
ward areas of the tongue and palate), and (b) how CLOSE or 
OPEN they are (i.e. involving greater or lesser raising of the 
tongue): the terms HIGH and LOW are also commonly used. 
The relations of the vowels to one another may then be 
conveniently represented in terms of a two-dimensional dia-
gram. When so represented they tend to fall into a quadrilateral 
or triangular pattern,3 such as: 
2 Alternatively there may be a central closure, with air-flow on both sides. 
• Such patterns are actually based on a mixture of auditory, acoustic, and 
articulatory criteria: cf. P. Ladefoged, Preliminaries to Linguistic Phonetics, pp. 67 fT. 
4 

VOWELS 
Front 
Back 
r--------"7 U 
Close 
Open 
a 
Vowels intermediate between front and back are referred to as 
CENTRAL, and vowels intermediate between close and open as 
MID (the so-called 'neutral' vowel of standard southern British 
English, as at the end of sofa or finger, is a mid central vowel). 
Associated with the features already mentioned are various 
degrees of lip-R 0 U N DIN G; generally speaking back vowels are 
associated with rounding and front vowels with its absence 
(lip-spreading). Thus the English u and i in e.g. put, pit are 
respectively close back rounded and close front unrounded. 
Sometimes, however, rounding is associated with a front vowel 
and spreading with a back vowel~thus the French u and 
German ii are front rounded vowels, whilst back unrounded 
vowels occur in some languages. 
Vowels are normally articulated with the nasal passages 
closed (by raising the velum), but if they are left open the result 
is a NASALIZED vowel (as e.g. in French on, transcribed 
phonetically as 5). 
DIP H THO N G S are formed by articulating a vowel and then, 
within the same syllable, making a gradual change of articu-
lation (or 'glide ') in the direction of another vowel. Most 
commonly, but not inevitably, the first element of a diphthong 
is more open than the second. Thus the diphthong of English 
high involves a glide from a towards i, of how from a towards u, 
and of hay from e towards i. Considerations of the phonological 
structure of a language sometimes make it appropriate to 
interpret a diphthong as a combination of a vowel and a 
semivowel (y or w). 
In many languages vowels fall into two degrees of LENGTH, 
5 

PHONE TIC INTRODUCTION 
LONG and SHOR T. By and large the difference corresponds to 
a greater as opposed to a lesser duration-but not invariably 
so. Other features, notably differences of tenseness and quality, 
may be at least as important (they are, for example, in dis-
tinguishing the so-called 'short' vowel of English bit from the 
so-called 'long' vowel of beat) . 
Length may also be related to the syllabic process. A chest 
arrest (see above), being a relatively slow movement, involves 
a continuation of the vowel whilst it takes effect-and so may 
be associated with long vowels. An oral arrest, on the other 
hand, is a relatively rapid movement and so is associated with 
short vowels (if the vowel were prolonged, it would give time 
for the chest arrest to intervene, and the oral articulation would 
not then provide the arrest: cf. p. 9 I) . 
Short vowels may also be associated with a type of movement 
in which the release of the following syllable overtakes the arrest 
of the preceding, rendering it effectively unarrested: for further 
details see AR, pp. 62 ff. 
Differences of quality may be correlated with differences of 
duration because the shorter the duration the less time there is 
for the organs to move from their 'neutral' position to the 
'optimal' position for a particular vowel. 
(iv) Accent 
In addition to the vowels and consonants of which a word is 
constituted, a particular segment of the word (e.g. syllable or 
vowel) may be characterized by a superimposed feature which 
sets it off against the other segments not so characterized. Such 
a feature is referred to as an ACCENT, and is sometimes said to 
have a 'culminative' function, as forming, so to speak, the 
phonetic climax of the word. 
The accent may be either FIXED or FREE. The former type 
is exemplified in such languages as Czech, Icelandic, or 
Hungarian, where the accent normally falls on the first syllable 
of each word; Armenian, where it falls on the last syllable; or 
Polish, where it mostly falls on the penultimate. The Latin 
6 

ACCENT 
accent is also fixed, though it is regulated by a more complex 
formula (cf. VL, p. 83). The free accent is typical, for example, 
of English or Russian, where it is not bound to a particular place 
in each word;4 and this freedom of location makes it capable, 
unlike the fixed accent, of differentiating the meanings of 
otherwise identical words: thus e.g. English import (noun), import 
(verb);5 forbears, forbears (and four bears); Russian muka 
'torment', mukd 'flour'; plOlu 'I weep', plalu 'I pay'. 
Physically the accentual feature may be manifested in either 
of two ways, by variation in the PITCH of the voice ('MELODIC 
accent') or by STRESS ('DYNAMIC accent'). Stress, however, 
though primarily effected by an increase in muscular effort, is 
a complex phenomenon, in which factors of pitch and duration 
may also play an important role. 
It is essential to distinguish melodic accent from INTONA-
TION. The former refers to the pitch-patterns operative within 
individual words, whereas 'intonation' refers to the pitch-
pattern operative over the whole clause or sentence. However, 
there may be, and there usually is, considerable interaction 
between these two patterns; thus the pitch-pattern of a given 
word may vary greatly in accordance with the pitch-pattern of 
the sentence (as also of other words in the environment) ; such 
an effect is sometimes referred to as a 'perturbation' of the 
word-melodics. 
The term 'melodic' in this connexion should also, strictly 
speaking, be distinguished from 'TONAL', since the latter is 
often used in linguistics with a specialized connotation, referring 
to languages 'having lexically significant, contrastive, but 
relative pitch on each syllable', as e.g. Chinese (K. L. Pike, Tone 
Languages, p. 3).6 
• When grammatical considerations are taken into account, however, as in 
transformational-generative phonology, the English accent is very largely predictable 
by rule--though the rules are of great complexity: see especially N. Chomsky & 
M. Halle, The Sound Pattmz rif English. 
S More often, however, English spelling also masks differences of vowel (s) as between 
homographic verbal and nominal forms, e.g. in the first syllable of convict, in both 
syllables of present-and in all four of anaryses. 
• Cf. E. Fischer-Jorgensen, AL, 6 (1950), pp. 54 f. 
7 

PHONETIC INTRODUCTION 
(v) Speech and writing 
In the study of a 'dead' language there is inevitably a main 
emphasis on the written word. But it is well to remember that 
writing is secondary to speech, and, however much it may 
deviate from it, has speech as its ultimate basis. The written 
symbols correspond, in a more or less complete manner, to 
phonological or grammatical elements of speech; and, as Andre 
Martinet has pointed out, 'vocal quality is directly r~sponsible 
for the linearity of speech and the consequent linearity of 
script'.7 It is therefore in a sense misleading to speak of written 
symbols as being pronounced-rather it is the other way round, 
the symbols representing spoken elements. But when, as in the 
case of ancient Greek, our utterances mostly involve reading 
from a written text, the traditional terminology of' pronouncing 
letters' may reasonably be tolerated, and is in fact maintained 
in this book. 
In ancient Greek, as in modern European languages, the 
correspondence is between symbols (letters) and phonological 
elements, and is much more regular than in some languages, 
such as English or French or Modern Greek (or Irish or 
Tibetan), which notoriously use different symbols or combi-
nations of symbols to indicate the same sound. 
It is sometimes stated that an ideal writing-system would 
have a symbol for every sound-that it would in fact be a kind 
of 'visible speech'. Since, however, the number of sounds in a 
language is infinite, and the 'same' sound probably never 
precisely recurs, this requirement is quite impracticable. It is 
also unnecessary, as alphabets from earliest times have recog-
nized. The number Of symbols can be reduced to manageable 
proportions without any resultant ambiguity by a process which 
has long been unconsciously followed, though its theoretical 
basis has only been worked out during recent decades. 
What is required is not one symbol per sound, but one symbol 
(or combination of symbols) per PHONEME. A 'phoneme' is a 
class of similar sounds that are significantly different from other 
7 A Functional View of Language, p. 25. 
8 

SPEECH AND WRITING 
sounds, e.g. the class of t sounds in English tin, hat, etc., or the 
class of d sounds in din, had, etc. The (voiceless) t phoneme and 
the (voiced) dphoneme are different phonemes in English, and 
so require distinct symbols, because tin has a different meaning 
from din, hat has a different meaning from had, etc.; in technical 
terminology, the members of the d and t phonemes are in 
'parallel distribution '-i.e. they can contrast significantly with 
one another, and with members of other phonemes, in otherwise 
identical immediate environments, such as (-)in, ha(-), etc. 
On the other hand, the fact that an initial t in English (as 
in tin) is more strongly aspirated than a final t (as in hat) is not 
responsible for any difference of meaning, since the two varieties 
occur only in different environments, and so cannot contrast 
with one another-they are in 'complementary' and not 
parallel distribution. They are thus both members (or 'allo-
phones') of the same t phoneme; only one symbol is required to 
write them, since the difference in sound is predictable from 
their environment, i.e. initial or final position as the case may 
be. It should be noted, however, that the phonemic distribution 
of sounds varies from language to language; in a language such 
as Hindi, for example, aspirated and unaspirated t sounds 
belong to separate phonemes, since the occurrence of one or the 
other is not predictable from environment and they may 
contrast significantly (e.g. slit' seven', slith 'with '). 
The number of phonemes in a language varies; the number 
of consonants, for example, varies from 8 in Hawaiian, through 
24 in English and 32 in Sanskrit, to 55 in the East Caucasian 
Tabasaran and 80 in the West Caucasian Ubykh. Latin, 
according to different analyses, has from 15 to 18 consonant 
phonemes in native words, and classical Greek from 14 to 18.8 
In languages with very large consonant systems the number of 
vowel phonemes tends to be correspondingly small (I or 2 in 
some Caucasian languages), since numerous environmental 
(allophonic) variants are needed for each vowel phoneme in 
• Depending on whether the I) sounds (see p. 39) are established as a separate 
phoneme, whether 1 and v in their non-syllabic function are treated as consonants 
(pp. 47 If., 81 If.), and whether the rough breathing is treated as a consonant or as 
a modification of the vowel (p. 53). 
9 

PHONETIC INTRODUCTION 
order to provide additional cues for the recognition of some of 
the otherwise very fine consonantal distinctions. The analytical 
segmentation into discrete phonemes in fact masks much of the 
complexity of actual speech. Human language has been evolved 
for use in less than perfect acoustic conditions, and to this end 
possesses a high degree of inbuilt 'redundancy'; so that even 
in a language like English the distinction between e.g. cat and 
pat depends not simply upon the consonantal difference but 
largely also upon variation in the transitional phases of the 
following vowel-to the extent that the wrong vowel-variant is 
liable to cause misinterpretation of the consonant and, con-
versely, the correct vowel-variant may induce identification of 
the consonant even if the latter is deleted.9 
This' phonemic' principle, then, is an economic principle, 
reducing redundancy and employing the minimal number of 
symbols that is consistent with the unambiguous representation 
of speech.1o And the post-Eucleidean spelling of Greek (see p. 
17) comes reasonably near to being phonemic. The principal 
shortcomings are (a) in the vowels, failure to distinguish 
between short and long ex, I and v (but see pp. go ff.); and (b) 
in the consonants, the use of special symbols (' monographs ') 
to represent some combinations of two phonemes, viz. 5, ~, I.jJ 
(pp. 56 ff.). 
\Vhen indicating particular sounds in a phonetic notation it 
is customary to enclose the symbols in square brackets, e.g. [th] 
to represent the initial sound of English tin; phonemic symbols, 
on the other hand, are conventionally set between obliques, e.g. 
/t/ for the phoneme which includes the initial sound of tin and 
the final sound of hat. In a book intended primarily for the 
• Cf. Carol D. Schatz, 'The role of context in the perception of stops', Lang~age, 30 
(1954), pp. 47 If. 
10 The possibility of further reduction by 'morphophonemic' methods (cf. Allen, 
Sandhi, pp. 16 f.; E. P. Hamp, CP, 62 (1967), p. 44; also p. 39 below) is here ignored 
to avoid undue technicality. 
Transformational-generative grammar dispenses with an autonomous phonemic 
level of statement, and represents its phonological component in terms of sets of 
'distinctive features'. Whatever the validity and value of this method, however, in an 
integrated grammar, it would lead to an intolerable and unnecessary complication in 
the present work--quite apart from the fact that there is as yet no general agreement 
on the inventory of' features'. 
10 

SPEECH AND WRITING 
classical and general reader rather than the technical linguist 
and phonetician it has seemed desirable to keep phonetic 
symbols to a minimum. Partly for the same reason the conven-
tions of the International Phonetic Alphabet have in some 
cases been modified in the direction of (for English classical 
readers) more familiar forms-e.g. by the use of [y] instead of 
[j] for the palatal semivowel, and by the use of the macron 
instead of the colon for vowel-Iength.ll In any case, regrettably 
or not, the IPA has no canonical status; it is not in fact true 
(as stated by one reviewer of VL) that 'the use ofIPA symbols 
is standard '-certainly not, for instance, in the U.S.A.; what 
matters is not so much the shape of the symbol as the definition 
of its value. 
Note: Where English equivalents are given for Greek sounds, 
the reference, unless otherwise stated, is to the standard or 
'Received Pronunciation' (RP) of southern British English. 
The choice of this form of English as a basis of comparison is 
made on purely practical grounds. It is impossible to cite 
examples that will be equally applicable to all nationalities and 
dialects of English; one must perforce select a standard, and 
'RP' is by far the best documented and most familiar of such 
standards. 
11 In discussing the Greek vowel-systems and their development there are positive 
advantages in using the same basic symbols, with appropriate diacritics, for all mid front 
vowels and for all mid back vowels (rather than e.g. IPA [e:], [e:]). 
I I 

CHAPTER I 
CONSONANTS* 
Before discussing the individual consonant-sounds in detail it is 
necessary to emphasize that wherever the normal spelling writes 
a double consonant, it stands for a correspondingly lengthened 
sound. l This is most clearly seen from its effect on the quantity 
of a preceding syllable, the first syllable of e.g. IlTlTOS or MEO 
being always 'heavy' (see p. 104) although the vowel is short. 
And potentially the distinction between single and double 
consonants may be responsible for differences of meaning, as in 
oppOS 'rump' beside opos 'mountain', or EKOAUlTTOIJEV 'we 
concealed' beside EKKOAUlTTOIJEV 'we reveal'. In English double 
consonants are pronounced as such only when (as in EK-
KOAUlTTOIJEV) they are divided between separate words or 
elements of a compound word~e.g. hip-pocket, leg-glide, disservice, 
unnamed (distinct from unaimed). In other contexts the written 
double consonants have no function except to indicate that the 
preceding vowel is short-e.g. in sitting, shilling, penny, copper. 2 It 
is, therefore, the compound type of word in English that pro-
vides the model for the pronunciation of double consonants in 
Greek. 
In early Greek inscriptions the double consonants are written 
single (cf. VL, p. 11); but at Athens the double writing makes 
its appearance by the end of the 6 c. B.C. 
In pure Attic dialect the geminate C1C1 does not occur except 
in compounds such as C1VC1C1ITEiv (from C1W-C1ITEiv). For in some 
words, where various other dialects have C1C1, Attic (like Ionic) 
has simplified this to C1: e.g. EC10VTOI, KaTE8iK0C1ov, IJEC10S beside 
• An asterisk after a term indicates that it is explained in the phonetic introduction. 
I Inscriptional spellings often show doubling of the first consonant of a group, 
particularly if this is C1 (e.g. 5 c. B.C. Attic ~aA1C1C1Ta); but such doubling is not 
distinctive; its purpose is uncertain, and it may be intended only to show that the group 
is divided between two syllables. 
2 In Middle English long vowels were generally shortened before two consonants (cf. 
wisdom beside wise); and in Early Modern English double consonants between vowels 
were simplified. Since, however, the double writing served to indicate the shortness of 
the vowel, it was retained and further extended to words which originally had a single 
consonant (as peni, coper). 
12 

VOICELESS PLOSIVES 
Lesbian EO"O"OVTOI, KOTE5IKOO"O"OV, 
~EO"O"OO";3 and in other words, 
where most other dialects have 0"0", Attic (like Boeotian) shows 
TT: e.g. y'AWTTO, 
TETTOPES, 
TTPCrrrEIV beside Ionic y'AwO"O"o, 
TEO"O"EPES, TTpT]o"o"EIV. But, like many literary languages, literary 
Attic was subject to influences from outside the restricted 
area of the spoken dialect, most particularly from Ionic. And 
one of the most characteristic features of this influence is the 
substitution of forms with 0"0" for the TT of 'pure' Attic as ex~ 
emplified by the inscriptions.4 In fact in tragedy, and in prose 
works up to and including Thucydides, the TT of Attic is almost 
entirely avoided. Even though normal Attic grammar was used, 
and Attic phonology generally adopted, it seems that the TT was 
felt as something of a provincialism by contrast with the 0"0" of 
most of the rest of the Greek-speaking world-all the more to 
be avoided as a characteristic of the speech of the' cruo!3o\C;,.noi'; 
and even false Ionicisms (notably r,O"O"acr6ol as against Attic 
r,TTacr6ol and Ionic Eo"o"ovcr6O\) were liable to be perpetrated in 
avoidance of this shibboleth. 
Although the Attic forms came more and more to gain 
literary acceptance (and not only in comedy and oratory, where 
local forms would be particularly appropriate) ,5 it was not long 
before the influence of the Koine began again to reinforce the 
claims of the general Greek 0"0". Thus, whereas Xenophon had 
favoured the TT forms, already in Aeneas Tacticus (4-3 C. B.C.) 
one finds 78 cases of 0"0" as against 24 of TT; and, in spite of the 
3 Inscriptional forms are rendered, as in the original, without accents or breathings, 
or distinction of final s; current word-divisions are however employed. 
• From the beginning these show TT except in non-Attic names such as (5 c. B.C.) 
haAIKapVaaalol. In the 4 c. there begin to appear a few forms with aa: e.g. in 338 one 
instance of6aAaaaa (but 6aAaTTa still general in the 3 c.), and towards the end of the 
century the Koine word (3aalhlaaa, which is always so written. Otherwise Attic 
inscriptions continue to show TT up to the time of Augustus. The 6aAaaaa example, 
however, is in a decree containing an oath required by Philip of Macedon from members 
of the League of Corinth after Chaeronea, and Threatte (p. 538) suggests that the form 
is due to the' international character' of the text. Other 4 c. -aa- forms are found in 
contexts of poetic diction. 
Even after Augustus -TT- forms continue to appear in some words: e.g. q>VhaTTEIV 
beside eaAaaaa C. A.D. 150. 
• In oratory Pericles is said to have been the first to adopt the TT forms (Aelius 
Dionysius, fro 2g8 Schwabe), allegedly for reasons of euphony (cf. Plato Comicus, fro 
30 Kock: eawaas 1'1l1aS tK TWV a(Ylia TWV Evpm(Sov, with clear reference to Medea, 
476 f.). See also Stanford, pp. 7 f., 53 f. 

CONSONANTS 
artificial revival of TT by the' Atticists', the Koine itself shows 
few examples of it (most notably ';TTaa-6cn; note also modern 
Greek TIlTTOKI from Attic TIlTTOKIOV) ; indeed, even the Atticists 
were liable to overlook an occasional crcr when their attention 
was concentrated on other matters. 
The TT of pure Attic is part of an isogloss having its probable 
point of origin in Boeotian (which even has e.g. IlETTW, EIfIO-
CPITTaTO beside Attic IlEcrov, ElfIllcpicrOTO). This TT does not derive 
directly from the crcr shown by other dialects; but both TT and 
crcr are separate developments from an earlier more complex 
sound, and this fact has given rise to some speculation about 
the nature of the sounds which they represent. The matter is 
discussed in more, detail below (pp. 60 f.). 
The value of orthographic yy is separately discussed under 
y = [I)] (pp. 35 ff.), and that of pp under p (pp. 41 ff.).6 
(i) Voiceless* plosives* 
In Greek, as in a number of modern languages, there were two 
distinct varieties of voiceless plosive, unaspirated* (TT, T, K) and 
aspirated * (cp, e, X). Their distinctiveness is demonstrated by 
minimally different pairs such as TT6pos/cp6pos, mhoS/TTaeOS, 
AEKOS/AExos. Similar oppositions are found in Sanskrit and the 
modern languages derived from it (e.g. Hindi kana' one-eyed' / 
khana 'to eat'), and there extend also to the voiced plosives 
(e.g. Hindi bat' thing' / bhat 'cooked rice'). Both aspirated and 
unaspirated plosives are indeed also found in English; the 
initial t of top, for example, is clearly aspirated, but the t of 
stop is not. Here, however, the contrast is not distinctive-it 
is not' phonemic' but merely' allophonic' (see p. 9); for the 
two varieties never occur in identical environments, the non-
aspiration being a special characteristic of the position after s 
(unlike in classical Attic, where e.g. both crTEVW and a-6Evw 
occur). 
6 Note, however, that RP provides no model for a double [r] sound (the difference 
between e.g. four elms and four realms is comparable with that between an ocean and a 
notion: cf. pp. IOI f.). 

VOICELESS PLOSIVES 
The two varieties were categorized by the Greek gram-
marians as (ypollllo) ~I\Mv ('smooth, plain', i.e. unaspirated) 
and Soo-v (' rough', i.e. aspirated). The expected Latin trans-
lation of these terms would be (littera) Lenis and aspera (as in the 
case of spiritus Lenis / as per translating TTVeVllo IVIMv /Soa0 for the 
'smooth' and' rough' breathings). But in fact the Latin terms, 
as found e.g. in Priscian, are tenuis and aspirata; and tenuis is still 
occasionally encountered as a term for the voiceless unaspirated 
plosives in modern works of a conservative kind. 
(a) Unaspirated* 
The fact that aspirated and unaspirated plosives were distin-
guished in Greek means that aspiration must be suppressed in 
the latter if confusion is to be avoided; such a pronunciation 
comes more readily to native speakers of e.g. French than to 
those of English or German, where voiceless plosives, more 
particularly in initial position, are generally aspirated. Apart 
from the evidence of its differential function, the unaspirated 
pronunciation of n, T, K in Greek is strongly suggested by the 
term IVIA6v, and further supported by statements that those 
consonants are 'smooth' 'which occur without the expulsion of 
breath' (tPs.-Aristotle, De AudibiLibus, 804 b, 8-11)7 or 'which 
gently propel the air' (t Aristides Quintilianus, De Musica ii. I I, 
p. 76 WI.; cf. ti. 20, p. 41). 
All this evidence is comparatively late, but the same pro-
nunciation is indicated for a very early period by the operation 
of what is termed 'Grassmann's Law',8 whereby the first of two 
originally aspirated syllable-initials in a word loses its aspira-
tion. In the case of an initial vowel, a form such as (present) exc:.u 
[ekho] involves loss of the initial aspiration [h] (' rough 
breathing') by comparison with (future) E~c:.u [hekso], where 
there is no aspirated consonant following. The same law as 
applied to an initial voiceless plosive produces contrasts of the 
7 Texts of references marked thus (t) are given on pp. 162 fr. 
8 Mter its discovery in 1862 by the mathematician and linguist Hermann 
Grassmann. 

CONSONANTS 
type (gen. sing.) "pIX6s: (dat. plur.) epl~i. Thus,. is to e as zero 
is to [h ]-in other words,. stands for [t] as e stands for [th] , 
i.e. ,. is unaspirated, and is therefore appropriately described by 
the same term (\jJIAOV) as the 'smooth breathing'. 
Finally the unaspirated pronunciation is entirely in accord-
ance with related forms in Sanskrit: thus e.g. lTcrn1P = Skt. pitd 
where p and t are known from the ancient Indian phonetic 
treatises to have been unaspirated9 (Sanskrit in fact also has its 
own version of Grassmann's Law, giving alternations such as 
(pres.) budhyate: (fut.) bhotsyati). 
The voiceless unaspirated plosives, like the other plosive 
classes, occur with bilabial* (IT), dental* ("), and velar* (K) 
articulation. They are described by Dionysius ofHalicarnassus, 
for example, as being produced respectively 'from the ex-
tremities of the lips', 'by the tongue being pressed against the 
front of the mouth at the upper teeth', and 'by the tongue 
rising to the palate near the throat' (t De Compositione Verborum 
xiv, p. 56 UR). 
't' The description of the dentals as being produced 'KaTa ,.ovs 
IlE'TEOOpOVS 656voas' is rather imprecise and could possibly refer 
to an alveolar* rather than a purely dental contact. But modern 
Greek shows a dental pronunciation, and in relatively ancient 
times this receives support from transcriptions into Prakrit 
(Middle Indian) on coins of the Greek kings of Bactria and 
India in the 1 and 2 c. B.C. For in Prakrit (as in Sanskrit and 
the modern Indian languages) there is a characteristic 
distinction between dental consonants (romanized as t etc.) and 
'retroflex' consonants (t etc.), the latter being articulated with 
the inverted tongue-tip on the gums behind the upper teeth. 
When English words containing alveolar plosives are spoken by 
Indians or borrowed into modern Indian languages, the English 
sounds in question are normally rendered by the Indian 
retroflexes: thus e.g. Eng. station becomes Hindi s/esan. But the 
Greek ,., e, 5 regularly appear as Prakrit dentals and not 
• The Sanskrit grammarians describe the aspirated and unaspirated plosives as 
'mahiipriiF]a' and 'alpapriirJa', i.e. 'having big/little breath' respectively: cf. Allen, 
pp. 37 f. 
16 

VOICELESS PLOSIVES 
retroflexes-e.g. Evukriitidasa, Agathukreyasa, Diyamedasa = Ev-
KPCXTi50v, 'AyaeOKASoVS, t.lo~';50v; they are therefore likely to 
have been true dentals, as e.g. in French, and not alveolars as 
in English. 
x As in many languages, the precise point of articulation of 
the velar series may have varied to some extent according to 
the following vowel, i.e. further forward before a front* vowe} 
and further back before a back* vowel. Such variation would, 
of course, be non-distinctive and so, by phonemic principles, 
would not demand symbolization, but would be liable to be 
indicated if, by historical accident, a symbol happened to be 
available (cf. VL, pp. 14 f.). Thus in the oldest Attic inscriptions 
one finds before the vowel ° the symbol 9 (K61T1TCX), which had 
represented the Semitic uvular plosive [q] (' qiff): e.g. 
(pre-550 B.C.) ev5190cr, but cxv50K15ecr. This practice, however, 
ceased at an early date, and with the official adoption of the 
Ionic alphabet in the archonship of Eucleides (403-2 B.C.) the 
sign no longer existed (except as a numeral = go,10 where it 
retained its original alphabetical position between 1T = 80 and 
p = 100, with various later shapes, as e.g. <=I, G, 4). It survived 
in the west Greek alphabet, and thence as the Q. of Latin (cf. 
Quintilian, i. 4· g). 
There is no evidence in ancient times for the' palatalized' 
pronunciation of K as [kY] before front vowels which is normal 
in modern Greek. 
K occurring at the end of the preposition EK seems to have been 
assimilated to the type of consonant which followed, i.e. voiced * 
or aspirated (cf. Threatte, pp. 579 fr.). Hence we regularly find 
in 5 c. Attic inscriptional spellings of the type ey ~V3CXVTIO, ey 
5eAcpov, ey501 (= EK5~), ey A1V5o, eyAeyev (= EKAsyelV), and, less 
regularly, e.g. ex 6eTOV (= EK 
a"T~>V), ex cpvAecr. The latter 
practice, however, ceases at the beginning of the 3 c. B.C., and 
EK also becomes normal before voiced initials from the I c. B.C. 
The writing of EK before both voiced and aspirated consonants 
is likely to be normative rather than phonetic Uust as in English 
we generalize the use of s for the plural, even after voiced 
10 See further p. 47, n. 85. 
17 

CONSONANTS 
sounds, e.g. in dogs, where it is pronounced [z]; this normative 
spelling is regular in our texts, but probably misrepresents the 
actual pronunciation, viz. as [eg] before voiced 11 and [ekh] 
before aspirated consonants (other than X).12 
(b) Aspirated* 
The evidence for this category is required primarily to show that 
in classical Attic the sounds written cp, e, X were aspirated 
plosives, like the ph, th, kh of Sanskrit and the modern Indian 
languages (and similar to the initial p, t, k of English or 
German), and not fricatives* as in modern Greek (where 
cp = labio-dental* [f] as in English joot, e = dental [9] as in 
English thin, and X = velar [x] or palatal* [cs] like the German 
, ach' and 'ich' sounds respectively). There is no doubt that at 
a later date the aspirated plosives did develop to fricatives (see 
pp. 23 ff.), and so the main task will be to prove that this had 
not happened as early as the 5-4 c. B.C. 
The earliest evidence from ancient descriptions lies in the use 
of the term 50cru, as against \jJIMv for the unaspirated series (see 
p. 15). It is first found in the passage from the De Audib. cited 
above,13 where the sounds to which it applies are described as 
'expelling the air immediately with the sounds' ;14 but the use 
of the term may well go back further than this. An interesting 
point about the choice of the terms 50cru and \jJIMv is that the 
same binary opposition is found in non-technical, material 
uses-e.g. Hdt., iv. 175, where a wooded ridge is contrasted 
with the treelessness of the rest of Libya; similarly iii. 32 
contrasts a lettuce-stalk with and without its leaves, and iii. 108 
II Other than p-but in fact as an initial this was probably voiceless (see pp. 4[ f.). 
Before (1[( the K seems to have been lost altogether (thus EO'K\JPOV = 8c: ~KVpoV, 329 B.C.), 
but was also analogically restored (hence e.g. 8c:(1[(aAEVW). 
12 See p. 27. 
13 The terms Sacnrn,s and 1ji1,,6T11S are indeed found in Aristotle, Poetics, [456 b, but 
the passage is probably an interpolation. 
14 The words used are' eV6Ews lolETa T6":w cp66yywv'. If the work is of early authorship 
(? Straton), lolETa with the genitive should mean 'with', not (as Sturtevant, p. 77) 
'after', and this might be interpreted as implying simultaneous breath, i.e. friction. But 
the use of the adverb eVeEWS makes this interpretation improbable (the genitive is found 
with lolETa meaning 'after' in Byzantine Greek). 
18 

ASPIRA TED PLOSIVES 
the presence and absence of fur on an animal. In all such cases 
it is a 'privative' opposition, contrasting the presence with the 
absence of an additional discrete feature, rather than one 
inherent quality with another; Dionysius (De Compo xiv, p. 57 
UR) does in fact refer to the category of Bacrea as having' TT]V 
TOU 1TVeV\laTOS npoo8ljx"IIv'. Such a terminology would be 
eminently appropriate to the opposition of aspirated and 
unaspirated consonants, but hardly to the distinction betwee~ 
fricative and plosive, i.e. between incomplete and complete 
closure of the organs. Moreover, the same terminology is 
employed to distinguish the 'rough' from the 'smooth' 
breathing15 (cf. p. 15), and there is no doubt that this is a 
privative opposition of the aspirate [h] to zero (see pp. 52 ff.). 
The grammatical tradition divides the consonants into two 
primary categories, TJ\licpwva and acpwva, corresponding to con-
tinuants· and plosives respectively; thus e.g. Dionysius Thrax, 
Ars Gramm., p. I I U, 'TJ\licpwva \lev ecrTlv OKTW· 3~If'A\lVpcr ... 
acpwva Be ecrTlv Mea, ~yBKlTT6cpX'. In Aristotle, Poetics, I456b 
the latter are described as 'having contact' (\lETa lTpocr~oAfis) 
like the former, but as not being pronounceable without a 
vowel. The allocation of cp, 6, X to the category of acpwva is 
a fair indication of their plosive, non-fricative nature, since 
fricatives would be classifiable with cr as TJ\licpwva, being con-
tinuants and so 'independently pronounceable'. The same 
allocation is found even at a much later date in e.g. Aristides 
Quint. (De Mus. ii. I I, p. 76 WI), who further speaks of the 
Bacrea as being pronounced 'evBo6ev EK cpapvyyos'-which would 
be a commendable description of aspirates but completely 
inappropriate to fricatives, since these do not involve any 
difference in glottal activity but only in oral aperture. 
Other clear evidence comes from the language itself. When 
a final voiceless unaspirated plosive (IT, T, K), as in e.g. OUK or 
elided Crrr', KaT', stands before an aspirated vowel (i.e. initial 
[h]), it is changed to cp, 6, X; which can only mean that cp, 6, 
X here stand for aspirated [ph], [th], [kh],I6 and not for 
.. E.g. Suppl. Artis Di01!),sianae, p. 107 U. 
18 Mention may here be made of the forms ouaeis, oveEv, 1I1l6eiS, 1I1l6ev etc. which 

CONSONANTS 
fricativesP In such cases a spelling of the type Kae' ";~EpCXV, with 
the aspiration also marked on the following vowel, is, strictly 
speaking, redundant, since the aspiration is transferred to the 
consonant; it is a normalizing tradition originating in Byzantine 
practice, but is not general in those inscriptions which otherwise 
indicate the rough breathing (see p. 52), just as it is not in 
compounds such as Kae,,~eplos. A similar transfer of aspiration 
is found in crasis, e.g. Tfj ";~EP<;X -+ 61i~EP<;X, Kai OlTc.us -+ xC:mc.us 
(note also, with intervening p, the compound lTpo-650s-+ 
cppov50s: cf. p. 43); but here the Byzantine tradition also omits 
the original vowel-aspiration and marks the combination by 
the sign KOpc.uviS, having the same shape as the apostrophe (and, 
in modern printing, as the smooth breathing). In the case of 
compounds and established formulae the effects of elision and 
crasis do not of course necessarily prove the aspirated, non-
fricative nature of cp, e, X for the 5 c. B.C., but only for the period 
of formation; but the continuation of this pronunciation is 
indicated by the same effects in the case of independent words. 
Further indications for an early period are provided by 
Grassmann's Law (see p. 15), which proves that at the time of 
its operation the relationship between the values of e.g. e and 
T was the same as that between [h] and zero, i.e. presence and 
absence of aspiration. The law applies particularly clearly to 
verbal reduplication. Reduplicative syllables normally repeat 
the initial consonant of the root-e.g. lTE-lTc.u-Ka; but if the 
root-initial is cp, e or X, the reduplicative initial is IT, T or K-e.g. 
lTE-cpevy-a, Ti-e,,-~I, KE-xv-~al. The important point here is that 
the reduplicative initial is a plosive, which would not be expected 
if the root-initial were a fricative (roots beginning with cr, which 
is a fricative, form their reduplicative syllables with initial cr, 
replace ouSEis etc. in Late Attic and the Koine (though ouSel1[a etc. remain unchanged). 
This presumably indicates a devoicing and aspiration of the final consonant of elided 
ouSt: it is improbable that (as Threatte, p. 472, suggests) the 6 here stands for a ~oiced 
aspirate [dh], since such a consonant would be quite isolated in Greek (and indeed in 
all IE languages other than Sanskrit and possibly Armenian). The -6- forms first appear 
and become normal in inscriptions in the 4 c. B.C., but are again replaced by the -5-
forms in the I c. B.C. (as in Modem Greek Sev). 
11 The fricative pronunciation of a comparable junction of plosive+h as in e.g. 
[gouO;Jrn] for Gotham, N.Y., is a 'spelling pronunciation', based on the non-junctional 
value of the digraph th in English (contrast [got;Jrn] for Gotham, Notts.). 
20 

ASPIRATED PLOSIVES 
[h] or zero: e.g. O'E-aTlP-O, i-crr11-l.\l, E-crrcxA-I.\OI). Evidence for the 
continuation of the aspirated plosive pronunciation into the 5 c. 
B.C. and later is provided by occasional new recurrences of this 
type of dissimilation, as revealed by inscriptional spellings-e.g. 
4 c. 0pKe6EWp0O' beside oPXe6Ewp0O'. Similar indications are given 
by occasional assimilations such as late 5 c. hEXOV for Ex0v, with 
extension of aspiration to the initiaPS (for details see Threatte, 
pp. 455 if.). 
. 
Further evidence comes from the procedure of 'expressive 
doubling' of consonants (as in e.g. 'familiar' mo, 'hypocor-
is tic ' l1IKKOO, 'imitative' TTOTTmJ3w). For when the doubled 
consonant is cp, 6 or X, the resulting form shows TTCP, T6, Kx-e.g. 
a-rrcpOs, Ti"T61), KaKXCqW. Such a spelling indicates that the 
lengthening of these consonants consisted in a stop* element (TT, 
T, K), which would not be appropriate if the original sound were 
a fricative but entirely so if it were a plosive: thus [ph, th, 
kh] -+ [pph, tth, kkh]. Here again, however, the proof only 
refers to the time at which the doubling took place, and in many 
cases this must have been long before the 5 c. B.C. Similar 
evidence is provided by the apocopated forms of prepositions, 
as in Hom. KCm CPO:AOPO, where the assimilation of the final 
consonant to the following initial produces a stop. 
When in Attic the nasal v was followed by the fricative 0', the 
nasal was generally lost or assimilated to the fricative-thus e.g. 
cruv + O'ITEiv -+ C7VO'O'ITEiv, 
cruv + O'TEAAEIV -+ C7VcrrEAAEIV. 
Inscrip-
tions show that this was not simply an ancient feature inherited 
in compounds, since they also apply it at the junction of separate 
words-e.g. 5 c. B.C. EO' O'OV151, E O'TEAEI (= EV O'TTJA1J). This, 
however, does not occur before cp, 6, X, but the v is either retained 
or changed in type (to 1.\, Y before cp, X: cf. p. 33) in the same 
way as before an unaspirated plosive: thus e.g. TTlI.\ CPUA11V 
(376 B.C.) as TEI.\TTOAIV (416), hlEPOYXPEI.\OTOV (410) aSToYK11pUKO 
(353). This treatment contrasts with that of modern Greek, 
where before the now fricative cp, 6, X a final v is lost in the same 
)8 It does not alfect the significance of such evidence that spellings of this type may 
indicate not so much phonetic assimilation as an analysis of aspiration as applying to 
a sequence rather than to individual sounds (theoretical discussions by Z. S. Harris, 
Language, 20 (1944), pp. 181 If.; Allen, BSOAS, 13 (1951), pp. 939 If.; H. M. Hoenigs-
wald, Phone/ica, II (1964), p. 212). 
21 

CONSONANTS 
way as before 0' and other continuants-e.g. acc. sing. TO cpiAO 
as TO O'OvylCx and unlike e.g. TOV 1TCXTEpO (= [tombatera]). 
Some further confirmation of the plosive value of cp in classical 
times is perhaps provided by the presumably onomatopoeic 
1TOlJcp6AV~, 1TOIJCPOAV3EIV, for the sound of bubbling; and by the 
surely deliberate use of 1T and cp in Pindar's description of a 
volcano (Pyth. i, 40 ff.; esp. 0.1.1.' Ev 0PCPVOIO'IV 1TETpOS cpolvlO'O'o 
KVAIVOOIJEvO cpA6~ ES (3a6Eiov cpepEI 1T6VTOV 1TA6:Ko O'Vv 1TOT6:y~). 
Finally, when in e.g. Attic tragedy a short vowel is followed 
by a group comprising a plosive followed by a liquid, the 
syllable containing the vowel may be treated as light (see 
further pp. 106 ff.). It is, therefore, highly significant that the 
same option exists in the case of cp, e, X + liquid, as e.g. Sophocles, 
D.C., 354-5, ... KoolJElwV A6:6p<;x 10: TOVO' ExP';0'6T) ... The same 
is also true of voiceless plosives with nasals, and here again the 
option also exists in the case of a form such as O'Ta61J6S, whereas 
it does not where a fricative (0') is followed by a nasal as in e.g. 
K60'1Jos. 
The evidence thus seems conclusive that in 5 c. Attic cp, e, X 
represented plosives (as 1T, T, K) and NOT fricatives (as 0', or as cp, 
e, X in modern Greek). 
The continuation of the plosive pronunciation into a later 
period is shown by the fact that Latin renders Greek cp at first 
as a simplep, later as ph (e.g. Pilipus, Philippus), but never in 
classical Latin times asJ, which would have been appropriate 
for a fricative pronunciation. The fact, on the other hand, that 
e.g. Latin Fabius is rendered in Greek as <l>O(3IOS is no counter-
indication even for the period of such transcriptions; for Greek 
had no other way in which to represent the LatinI, and in such 
circumstances it would be quite normal to represent it by the 
symbol for the nearest available sound in Greek, even though 
this were still a plosive [ph]. For although fricatives and aspir-
ates are not identical, they are phonetically (and often histori-
cally) related-in fact the ancient Indian phoneticians apply 
the same term19 both to the air-stream of the fricatives and to 
the aspirated release of the plosives. There is an exact parallel 
,9 i4man, lit. 'heat, steam, vapour', glossed in this use as viiyu, 'wind'; cf. Allen, 
p.26. 
22 

ASPIRATED PLOSIVES 
to this in modern times, when unsophisticated speakers of an 
Indian language like Hindi borrow English words contain-
ing anf; for, having no fricative [f] in their own speech, they 
substitute for it the aspirated plosive-thus e.g. Englishfilm is 
rendered by philam. It was presumably in such a context that 
Cicero ridiculed a Greek witness who could not pronounce the 
first consonant of the name Fundanius (tQuintilian, i. 4. 14). 
However, there is no doubt that, as modern Greek shows, 
the aspirated plosives did eventually change to fricatives. Evi-
dence is sometimes quoted which would suggest that the be-
ginnings of such a change could be traced to the 2 c. B.C. As 
mentioned above, the Greek grammarians generally agree in 
allocating q>, 6, X to the same category of Cxq>c.>va as 1T, T, K, 13, 
5, y, and not to the category of TlI.lIq>c.>va (as a). Sextus Empiricus, 
however, (Adv. Gramm. = Math. I 102) mentions that 'some 
people' classify q>, 6, X with the TJlliq>c.>va; he is himself writing 
in the 2 c. A.D., but Diogenes Laertius (vii. 57) seems to attribute 
a system of only six Cxq>c.>va (1T, T, K, 13, 5, y) to the Stoic Diogenes 
Babylonius of the 2 c. B.C., thereby implying a classification of 
q>, 6, X as TJlliq>c.>va. But other evidence is against so early a 
development, and the classification may simply be a Stoic 
aberration. It is true that Plato in the Cratylus (t 427 A) classes 
q> with a in a category of 'nveVllaTWST)'; but he is here mainly 
concerned with the needs of his' gestural' theory of the origin 
of language,20 and the classification provides no grounds for 
assuming a fricative pronunciation of q> (cf. also p. 22 with 
note). 
With one problematic exception (Fedra in CIL 12, 1413: cf. 
Schwyzer, p. 158) the first clear evidence for a fricative 
pronunciation comes from the I c. A.D. in Pompeian spellings 
such as Dafne ( = £lCxq>VT)), and is particularly compelling in view 
of the form lasfe: Aaaq>T) (= Ma6T)). For the interchange of 
dental and labial is only likely to take place in the case of 
fricative articulations, [8] and [f], which are acoustically 
rather similar (compare the substitution of Cockney [f] for 
RP [8] (th), or the Russian substitution of<lJ for Byzantine and 
20 Cf. Allen, TPS, 1948, p. 5 I. 

CONSONANTS 
modern Greek 6). From the 2 c. A.D. the representation of <p 
by Latinfbecomes common, and Latin grammarians have to 
give rules when to spell withf and when with ph.2l In the 4 c. 
Wulfila renders Greek <p and 6 by Gothic f and p (e.g. 
paiaufilus = ge6<plAOS) ;22 X is normally rendered by k, but in any 
case Gothic probably had no [x] (velar fricative) except as a 
non-syllable-initial allophone of h. 
It is possible that in some quarters the labial <p may have 
developed its fricative pronunciation earlier than 6 or X; for in 
the inscriptions oftheJewish catacombs in Rome from the 2-3 c. 
A.D. <p regularly appears as!, but 6 appears as th and X as ch or 
c. This in itself would not be conclusive proof of a plosive 
pronunciation for 6 and X, since Latin had no sign for a dental 
or velar fricative (though the alveolar* s might occasionally 
have been expected for the dental) ;23 but in Greek inscriptions 
from the same source X tends to be confused with K (e.g. 
XLTe = Kehal) and 6 with T (e.g. e6c..>v = h(;)v, napTevoa = nap-
6evos), whereas no such confusion is found in the case of <p and 
n. 24 These features may of course be dismissed as peculiarities 
of the dialect of the Jewish community; however, such a phased 
development as these inscriptions suggest is not improbable in 
a more general context, since labial plosives in a number of 
languages show a greater tendency to lose their stop articulation 
and develop to fricatives than do plosives of other series. In 
Ossetic, for example, (an Iranian language spoken in the 
Caucasus) Old Iranian t and k have developed initially to the 
aspirated plosives [th] and [kh]; but Old Iranian p has gone 
beyond the [ph] stage to give a fricative [f], e.g. (western 
dialect) fidt£ 'father' from Old Iranian pitii,25 as against kt£nun 
(= [kh;mun]) 'to do, make' from Old Iranian kunau-. 26 
2. Thus Caper, GL, vii, p. 95 K; Sacerdos, GL, vi, p. 451 K; Diomedes, GL, i, 
p. 423 K . 
•• The Gothic letter-forms in question, on the other hand, are not derived from the 
Greek; but this need not be for phonetic reasons . 
•• As in the form Apollopisius = -Pythius found in the Nottu Tironeanae: cf. also p. 26 . 
•• Cf. H.J. Leon, TAPA, 58 (1927), pp. 210 If . 
•• Armenian has gone a stage further, with hayr from Indo-European pater, and 
Celtic still further with (Old Irish) athir . 
•• Cf. H. Pedersen, Die gemeinindoeuropiiischen u. die uorindoeuropiiischen Verschlusslaute 
(Dan. Hist. Filol. Medd., 32, no. 5), p. 13· 
24 

ASPIRATED PLOSIVES 
On the fricative pronunciation of cp it should finally be noted 
that none of the evidence enables us to say with certainty 
whether at a particular period it was a bilabial· fricative 
(phonetic symbol [~]),27 though this may well have been an 
intermediate stage in its development to the labio-dental. 
I t may be that a scholarly pronunciation of cp, e, X as plosives 
continued for some time in the schools. A Demotic Egyptian text 
of the 2 c. A.D. containing some Greek transliterations shows 
that Greek cp and X there represented Egyptian ph and kh, and 
not the fricatives f and IJ; and in the Coptic writing devised in 
the 3 c. A.D. by Egyptian Christians largely on the basis of the 
Greek alphabet, cp, e, X are used to represent aspirated plosives 
or a combination of plosive and h. Elsewhere, both the Armenian 
and Georgian alphabets, formed around the 5 c. A.D., use symbols 
based on Greek X to represent their aspirated plosive k' [kh] and 
not their fricative x [x]; moreover, Greek words borrowed early 
into Armenian also show k' and not x for X (e.g. k'art = XaPTTls); 
only after the 10 c. does Armenian x or s begin to appear for 
Greek x. There is even possibly some evidence that the plosive 
pronunciation continued in the schools up to the time when the 
Glagolitic alphabet was formed in the 9 c. for the writing of Old 
Church Slavonic. 
However, there is little doubt that generally speaking the 
fricative pronunciation was well established in the Byzantine 
period. In such circumstances the earlier grammarians' des-
criptions of the cp-e-X and IT-T-K series as 5acru and IflIAOV re-
spectively will of course have become meaningless; and the 
Byzantine commentators make various unconvincing attempts 
to explain them as applied to fricatives. Perhaps the most 
ingenious is that of an anonymous treatise nepi lTpoO''tI5lCw 
inserted between two of the prefaces to the scholia on the 
grammar of Dionysius Thrax in the Codex Vaticanus gr. 
14-the editor of which rightly comments, 'multa eius auctor 
hariolatur'.28 The term 5acru, this author suggests, is used 
17 Such sounds occur in e.g. Japanese (as in Fuji, or jirumu = Eng. jilm); in the 
Ewe language of Mrica they contrast significantly with labio-dental [f]---e.g. [cpu] 
'bone': [fu] 'feather'. 
18 A. Hilgard, Scholia in Diorrysii Thracis artem grammalicam ( = Grammalici Grata, I. iii), 
p. xxvi. 

CONSONANTS 
metaphorically from the' thicket' (MCTOS) of trees on a moun-
tain, since when the gusts of wind blow upon it they produce 
just such sounds, whereas no such effect is produced in 'un-
wooded' (1.jIIAOTEpOS) country! (tScholia in Dion. Thr., p. 152 H). 
In some of the Greek dialects other than Attic the develop-
ment of the aspirated plosives to fricatives seems to have 
occurred in quite early times. In the case of <p and X we can 
hardly expect literary evidence for this, since an Attic trans-
cription of [f] or [x] could hardly use other than the symbols <p 
and X (cf. p. 22). But in the case ofe, the change to a dental 
fricative [9] as in modern Greek might be approximately 
represented in Attic by the alveolar fricative CT; and we do in 
fact find Laconian speech so represented in Attic writers-e.g. 
val TOO CTIW, napCTEve in Aristophanes, aV~OTOS in Thucydides. In 
the 4 c. B.C. spellings of this kind appear inscriptionally at 
Sparta (but the early CTIOOV = eeoov in the text of Aleman may 
be due to later grammarians). CT for e is also reported as a 
Laconian feature by Apollonius Dyscolus (De Constr., p. 54 U). 
It remains open to question whether the CT in these cases 
represents a dental [9] or whether in fact this had already 
changed in Laconian to the alveolar [s] which seems to be 
attested in its modern descendant Tsaconian. At an earlier 
period, however, if the form Fopcpala found on a 6 c. ivory relief 
in the sanctuary of Artemis Orthia at Sparta is not simply an 
error, it would indicate a value [9] for e and [f] for <p.29 
The places of articulation for the aspirated plosives <p, e, X are 
the same as for the unaspirated n, T, K (see p. 16). 
Note on ~8, X8 
These combinations call for some comment in view of sug-
gestions that they do not mean what they appear to mean, i.e. 
a succession of two aspirated plosives. Apart from inherited 
groups of this type (e.g. in 6<peaA~6s, EXep6s), a labial or velar 
plosive is regularly aspirated by assimilation when it comes to 
stand before the -&r,- suffix of the aorist passive, e.g. in EAei<p&r,v 
(from Aeinw), e!iepx&r,v (from !iepKo~al); in inscriptions the 
2. Cf. pp. 23 f. above, and R. Arena, Glotta, 44 (1966), pp. 14 If. 
26 

ASPIRA TED PLOSIVES 
preposition E1< is also often assimilated to ex before an initial 
aspirated plosive (see p. 17), which gives rise to the additional 
combination Xq> in e.g. ex q>vAsa and compound exq>o[PTlaavTI] 
(329 B.C.). The reason given for doubting the straightforward 
interpretation of these groups is that it would be impossible to 
pronounce an aspirated plosive when followed by another 
plosive-e.g. 'Combinations like q>66vos ... X6wv . .. constitute a 
physiological impossibility in any actual language' .30 This a 
priori dogma, frequently repeated in older works and even in 
some reputable modern ones,31 has no basis whatever in reality. 
Any phonetician will confirm and demonstrate the possibility 
of such sequences, and one can hear them as a normal feature 
of a number of living languages-as e.g. Armenian alot'k' 
[ayothkh] 'prayer', or Georgian p'k'vili 'flour', t'it'k'mis 
'almost', or Abaza (N.W. Caucasian) ap'q'a 'in front'. In fact 
there is a rule in Georgian that if a plosive consonant is followed 
by another located further back in the mouth, it must have the 
same kind of articulation as the following consonant-thus, if 
the second is aspirated, so must the first be (otherwise dissimilar 
groups can occur, as e.g. t'bilisi 'Tiflis' with voiceless 
aspirated followed by voiced unaspirated plosive) ;32 sequences 
of aspirated followed by unaspirated plosive are also common 
in modern Indian languages, e.g. in Hindi participial forms 
such as likhtii 'writing', iibhtii 'rising'. 
There is thus no phonetic improbability whatever about the 
first consonant of the groups q>6 and X6 being aspirated as well 
as the second. What has usually been suggested by the objectors 
to such groups is that the writing with q> and X was a mere 
convention for unaspirated TT and K; but it is difficult to see how 
such a convention could have come about, since in the 
geminate groups TTq>, T6, KX (see p. 21), where the first element 
certainly was unaspirated, the spelling with TT, T, K is normal ;33 
30 A. N. Jannaris, Historical Greek Grammar, p. 58. 
31 E.g. Lejeune, p. 59; Lup~, pp. 17 f, 3 I. 
3' Cf. H. Vogt, 'Structure phonemique du georgien', NTS, 18 (1958), pp. 5 fr. 
33 The occasional writing of e.g. Iacpcpw for Iarr~ is readily explainable as a graphic 
doubling after the analogy of other (unaspirated) geminated forms. The isolated ex 
XaAKI50cr (445 B.C.) beside usual EK X. of the same period could be a simple error, as 
ex AEa~v. Eustathius (on If. xii, 208) observes' &vT}p yap "EAAllV ou 511TACqEI Ta 5aaea'. 

CONSONANTS 
and even if such a convention were established, we should 
expect to find numerous misspellings based on the presumed 
actual pronunciation, whereas in fact there are only an insig-
nificantly few (and non-Attic) examples-e.g. (7 c. Phocis) 
crmhTov. That an actual change in this direction may have taken 
place at a later date in Egyptian and I talian Greek is suggested 
by writings with ne, K6 in papyri from the end of the 2 c. B.C., 
and by transcriptions into Latin, Demotic and Coptic. Modern 
Greek developments, however, suggest that this change was not 
general. Alternatively it has been suggested (cf. Threatte, p. 
571) that the aspirates had 'lenis' (lax) articulation, and that 
it is this feature rather than the aspiration that is indicated by 
writing the first element of such groups as cp or X. The same 
explanation has been proposed for the pre-Eucleidian writing 
of cpa, xa (for later \fI,~: see p. 60).34 
The pronunciation of the aspirated plosives should present 
no difficulty for English speakers, since models are available in 
the voiceless plosives of English, when these begin a stressed 
initial syllable (as in pot, table, etc.), particularly if they are 
emphatically pronounced. Some special effort is required in 
non-initial positions, and here it should be remembered that 
the aspirated plosive is one sound and not two, as may be seen 
from the fact that the preceding syllable in a word like aocpoc; 
is regularly light and not heavy;35 for the cp belongs entirely to 
the following syllable (i.e. [so-phos]) and so is quite different 
from the pronunciation of English words like saphead, fathead, 
34 But Greek descriptive terminology (see pp. 29 If.) does not fit in with this 
suggestion. For 1T etc. are voiceless and tense; and if 'I' etc. were voiceless and lax, these 
would be 'intermediate' between 1T etc. and ~ etc. (the latter being voiced and lax), 
as having one feature of each of the other series. 
3. A total of five exceptions from the whole of extant Greek literature (e.g. trochaic 
Oq>IV once each in Homer and Hipponax) may point to an occasional pronunciation 
which is of little statistical importance compared with the overwhelming general 
agreement of the evidence. Ancient authorities vary in their explanation of Oq>IV in II. 
xii, 208; according to a scholiast on Hephaestion, for example, (p. 291 C) the heavy 
quantity is due to the aspiration (SICx -niv C7q>oop6T11Ta Toii lTIIEVllaTOS), and according 
to Marius Victorinus (GL, vi, p. 67 K) is caused by lengthening of the '1'; but the author 
of the treatise nepHpllTlvelas (255; Rhet. Gr., iii, p. 317 Spengel) suggests that the syllable 
is in fact light, so that this would be a 'meiuric' line, deliberately used for elfect. 
W. Schulze, Quaestiones Epicae, p. 431, comments, 'rem in suspenso relinquere tutissimum 
est'. 

ASPIRATED PLOSIVES 
blockhead, where the plosive and the [h] are divided between 
separate syllables.36 
However, there is a difficulty which most English speakers 
are likely to experience-namely, of clearly distinguishing the 
voiceless unaspirated plosives from the aspirated, both in 
speaking and hearing; and the result of an attempt at the 
correct pronunciation may thus only be confusion. There is 
consequently some practical justification, as a pedagogical 
device, for pronouncing the aspirated plosives, in the Byzan-
tine manner, as fricatives; if this solution is adopted, however, 
care must be taken to pronounce the X as a velar fricative (i.e. 
as in loch), and not, as often heard, indistinguishably from K37 
(with consequent confusion between e.g. Kpovos and Xpovos). 
(ii) Voiced* plosives 
In his classification of the category of consonants termed acpe.:>va 
(cf. p. 19) Dionysius Thrax (tArs Gramm., pp. 12 f. U) describes 
the series 13, S, Y as 'intermediate' (Ilee-a) between the aspirated 
and unaspirated; Dionysius of Halicarnassus (De Compo xiv, 
pp. 55 f. UR) similarly refers to them variously as Ilee-a, KOIVO:, 
rniKolva, IlETpla, and IlETa~u. This terminology was continued by 
the Latin grammarians as media (a term still sometimes found, 
like tenuis, in current works: cf. p. 15). 
There is no doubt that the sounds represented by 13, S, Y were 
voiced. They do not combine in groups with voiceless sounds 
(thus e.g. here.:> but AEhEKTal), and are regularly rendered by 
voiced sounds in other languages-e.g. Latin barbarus, draco, 
grammatica. The question then arises why the Greeks described 
.8 The fact that in some early forms of the Greek alphabet (as at Thera) cp and X 
are represented by Trh and Kh is of no significance; it is simply a matter of a digraph 
being used for a single sound, where no special single symbol had been inherited (a 
single symbol was, however, available for modified use as [th], in the Semitic so-called 
'emphatic' dental plosive 'lit'); one may compare the case of the aspirated plosives 
in modem Indian languages, where Hindi, for example, (using a Sanskritic script) has 
single symbols, but Urdu (using a Perso-Arabic script, which has not inherited such 
symbols) employs the unaspirated consonant-symbols combined with h; even the 
Sanskrit script has to use a conjunct character for the dialectal (h of Vedic. 
37 There is of course no need to follow modem Greek practice in pronouncing a palatal 
fricative [er] before front vowels. 
29 

CONSONANTS 
them as 'middle'. It has been suggested by Sturtevant (p. 86), 
following Kretschmer, that they were in fact voiced aspirates, 
rather like the bh, dh, gh of Sanskrit; but there is no evidence 
whatever for this, and, as Sturtevant has to recognize, trans-
criptions of Greek names on Indian coins show no such equiva-
lence (610~"SOU, for example, is represented simply as Diya-
medasa and not Dhiyamedhasa). 
Whilst accepting that these consonants were normal voiced 
plosives, the attempt has been made to justify the Greek 
terminology as meaning that the voiced series was' indifferent' 
to the opposition ofaspiratejnon-aspirate found in the voiceless 
series38-but this is probably to attribute too great a sophisti-
cation to Greek phonological theory.39 More probably the use 
of such terms as ~EO"a simply indicates the writers' perplexity 
when faced with phenomena which were not describable 
within their favourite binary framework-in H. Ammann's 
expression,40 a 'Verlegenheitsausdruck '. The truth is that 
European phonetics was slow to discover the nature of' voice', 
i.e. glottal vibration, as a distinctive feature of consonants-
though it had been familiar to the Indians from earliest times;41 
it remained completely unnoticed though the middle ages, and 
only began to be recognized in the nineteenth century, largely 
through the impact of Indian teaching. Aristotle does indeed 
observe (Hist. An. iv. 9, 535a) the function of the larynx in 
distinguishing vowels from consonants, but the matter is taken 
no further either by him or by later writers. 
There seems no reason to doubt that in classical times the 
value ofl3, 5, y was that of voiced plosives, much as the English 
b, d and 'hard' g, with places of articulation as for the 
corresponding voiceless sounds (see p. 16). 
It is of course well known that in modern Greek these sounds 
have generally become fricatives, viz. [v], [~], [y]. But there is 
no reason to believe that this development had taken place until 
a8 Thus H. M. Hoenigswald, 'Media, Neutrum und Zirkumflex', in Festschrift 
A. Debrunner (1954), pp. 209 If. 
a. Cf. N. E. Collinge, 'The Greek use of the term" middle" in linguistic analysis', 
Word, 19 (1963), pp. 232 If. 
40 Glotta, 24 (1935), p. 161. 
41 Cf. Allen, pp. 33 If. 

VOICED PLOSIVES 
a much later period. None of the philosophers or grammarians 
classifies 13,5, Y as TJllicpwvo (cf. p. 19), which they would have 
done had they been fricatives; and in the Cratylus (t 427 A) Plato 
specifically refers to the 'constriction' and 'pressure' of the 
tongue in pronouncing 5 as well as T. Other evidence is similar 
to that for the plosive (and against the fricative) pronunciation 
of the aspirates (see pp. 21 f.). Thus there is no loss of nasal 
consonants before 13, 5, Y as there is before the fricative a, or as 
before the modern Greek sounds (e.g. acc. sing. TO YCtIlO); an<;l 
assimilation is found in inscriptional TEll f30AEV, lTAllY YEa (late 
5 c., = Ti)v f3ovAliv, lTATJV Yiis) just as in e.g. TEll lTOAIV, TOY 
KllpVKO. In Attic tragedy and comedy a syllable containing a 
short vowel before a group consisting of 13, 5, or Y plus p may 
be scanned light in the same way as before the groups IT, T, or 
K plus p--which is also suggestive of a plosive value (see further 
pp. 106 ff.). 
Amongst minor pieces of evidence may be mentioned the 
presumably alliterative lTiVEIV Koi f3lvEiv in Aristophanes, Frogs, 
74042 (cf. 'wine and women'), which is effectively so only if both 
initials are of the same, i.e. plosive, type. It seems likely also that 
Greek 13 still represented a plosive in the time of Cicero, who 
(tFam. ix. 22. 3) identifies the pronunciation Off3lvEi with that 
of the Latin bini. 
In the Jewish catacombs of Rome, inscriptions of the 2-3 c. 
A.D. regularly represent the Latin consonantal u (which was by 
then a fricative [v]) by the Greek 13 (e.g. f3l~IT); this, however, 
is not necessarily evidence for a fricative value off3, since, even 
if 13 were still a plosive in Greek, it was nevertheless the closest 
Greek sound to the La tin [v]. 43 
There is some evidence in non-Attic dialects (Boeotian, 
Elean, Pamphylian) for a fricative development of these sounds 
from the 4 c. B.C. In some of these cases (and on Egyptian 
papyri) we find omission ofy between vowels of which the first 
is a front vowel (e.g. oAloa = 6Aiyos); this is at first sight 
suggestive of the modern Greek development ofy to [y] (via 
.. Cf. Clouds, 394: ~povnl KallTopS" olloiw . 
.. cr. H.J. Leon, TAPA, 58 (1927), p. 227· 

CONSONANTS 
a voiced palatal fricative44), but the modern pronunciation 
applies only to the position before front vowels (e.g. ecpaye). This 
particular phenomenon is occasionally found in Attic from the 
late 4- c. B.C. (e.g. OA10pX10l); but it does not seem to have been 
a standard pronunciation; in fact Herodian (i, p. 14-1; tii, 
p. 926 L) specifically states that Plato Comicus treated it as 
a barbarism in attributing it to the demagogue Hyperbolus. 
When Wulfila established his orthography for Gothic in the 
4- c. A.D., he adopted the Greek 13, 5, Y to represent Gothic 
phonemes which in some cases were pronounced as voiced 
fricatives; but, in the absence of a phonemic contrast between 
voiced fricatives and plosives in Gothic, this need not indicate 
a fricative pronunciation for the Greek. Similar considerations 
apply to the rendering by symbols based on 13,5, y of Armenian 
sounds which were probably voiced aspirates.45 In the 9 c. A.D., 
however, the Cyrillic alphabet adopted 13 for the fricative [v], 
and used a modified letter for the plosive [b] (cf. Russian B, 6), 
which is positive evidence for the fricative value of the Greek 
letter at that time. 
It is not possible to establish with certainty at what precise 
period the fricative pronunciation of 13, 5, Y developed. But 
certainly it had not done so in classical times.46 
(iii) Labio-velars 
Before leaving the plosive consonants, it may be mentioned that 
in Proto-Greek, and still preserved in Mycenaean, there was a 
series of LABIO-VELARS, i.e. velar plosives with simultaneous 
lip-rounding (as e.g. Latin qu: cf. VL, pp. 16 ff.). The Mycen-
aean symbols (which do not distinguish between voiced and 
.. Cf. Armenian Diozln = 1l.IOYw"S (II c.) etc.; similarly in some modern Greek 
dialects . 
•• Cf. Allen, ArchL., 3 (1951), pp. 134 f. Only from c. 10 c. A.D. is Greek fl sometimes 
rendered by Armenian v: similarly Y by I (= voiced velar fricative from c. 8 c.); but 
spellings with b, g could simply represent learned transcriptions; there are occasional 
renderings of Greek 5 by Arm. fricative r . 
•• Evidence from non-literary papyri suggests fricative pronunciations from about 
the I c. A.D., but only in particular environments (especially intervocalic); and here 
foreign influences may account for the development (cf. F. T. Gignac, 'The pro-
nunciation of Greek stops in the papyri', TAPA, 101 (1970), pp. 185 If.). 
32 

LABIO-VELARS 
voiceless, aspirated and unaspirated) are transcribed with q; 
in all other dialects the labio-velars have been replaced by 
labials or (before front vowels) dentals47-e.g. Myc. re-qo-me-
no = leiqu omenoi (cf. AE\'TT6IJEV01), -qe = _qUe (cf. TE), -qo-ta = 
_qU hontas (cf. -<p6vTf)s), su-qo-ta-o = sugU otaon (cf. O'vj300Tf)s). 
(iv) Nasals 
Greek has two special symbols for nasal consonants, IJ and v. 
The values of these are clearly described by Dionysius of 
Halicarnassus (t De Comp. xiv, xxii, pp. 53, 103 UR) as respec-
tively bilabial [m] (' the mouth being firmly closed by the lips') 
and dental [n] (' the tongue rising to make contact with the 
edges of the teeth'), the air in both cases being 'partially 
expelled through the nostrils'. There is a third nasal sound in 
Greek, namely the velar [I)]; but, having no separate symbol, 
this is generally represented by y, and is discussed in more detail 
below. 
At the end of a word, before an initial vowel or a pause, only 
the dental nasal v occurs. But before initial plosives other than 
dentals, this is frequently replaced in inscriptions by a nasal of 
the same class as the initial (i.e. by bilabiallJ or velar y) if the 
two words are closely connected in sense. Before initiallabials, 
in the case of the preposition ev48 there are rather few exceptions 
to this practice in the 5 C. B.C. (and indeed up to the Christian 
era)-e.g. EIJ TTOAE1: it is also common in the article (TOV, TT)V, 
T(;)V), OTav, Eav, and in other forms before IJEv and TTep, par-
ticularly from the mid-5 C. to the end of the 4 C. Before initial 
velars it is principally found in ev and the article forms-e.g. 
ey KVKA01, TOY ypalJlJCXTEa. Examples of its occurrence in looser 
combinations of words are TETTapOIJ TTOSOV, hlEpoy XpEIJCXTOV 
( = TETTCxpWV TTOSWV, IEpWV XPT)IJCxTwv)-and even O'TEO'alJ TTpocrllE 
( = O'TTiO'av TT.). 49 
These spellings clearly indicate that, at least in the closer 
., Aeolic, however, generally has labials even before front vowels . 
• 8 Likewise f;vv/avv, but this is in any case infrequent. 
•• There are rare cases of assimilation across punctuation: thus ... 00S DCpEIAovcnll' 
'PIAOOTlIIOO ... ( = oiS' 6qlelAOV<1IV' <ll ... ; late 4 c.). 
33 

CONSONANTS 
combinations, the assimilation of ~ or y (= [I)]) was normal in 
speech of the 5 c. The exceptions which write e.g. ev lTOAEl, in 
the manner of our MSS50 and texts, are readily explained as 
analogical spellings Gust as in English we invariably write in 
even in e.g. in between, where it is commonly pronounced as 
[im]). The assimilative spelling (i.e. with ~ or y) is of course 
normal in compounds of cruv- and Ev-, e.g. cru~l3aivc.u, EYKAivc.u, 
though even in such cases inscriptions occasionally show the 
analogical forms. 
This assimilation of a final v seems also to have been normal 
before other types of initial consonant, the assimilation here 
being complete; thus inscriptions show e.g. Ea aavlBl, TOA AOYov, 
Ep po[BOI ( = Ev 'P6B~) ; before initial a followed by a consonant, 
the final v is lost altogether by simplification-hence e.g. E 
aTeAEl. 51 A close parallel to this situation survives in modern 
Greek, where the v of e.g. TOV, T11V, Bev is assimilated in 
pronunciation to the class of a following plosive, but is lost 
altogether before other consonants (or in other words, has been 
fully assimilated, and the resulting double consonant simplified, 
as regularly in the modern language: thus e.g. TOV Myov -+ TOA 
Myo(v) -+ TO Myo). 
We conclude, therefore, that words showing a final v in our 
texts, when followed by a word with which they were closely 
connected in sense, assimilated it in pronunciation to the 
following initial consonant, either partially or fully, and were 
pronounced with [n] only when the initial itself was a dental 
plosive or nasal (i.e. T, 15,6, or v). 
It is of course possible that in artificially careful or formal 
speech the assimilation may have been avoided (rather as some 
speakers of English use the' strong' form of the definite article 
the even before consonants). And assimilation will never have 
been normal between words which were not closely connec-
ted; so that Dionysius of Halicarnassus (De Compo xxii, p. 103 
UR), discussing a verse of Pindar containing the sequence 
KAVTCxv 
lTE~lTETE, finds it a harsh juxtaposition on account 
.0 But examples of the assimilative spelling are found on some papyri. 
&) Also rarely the unsimplified form E]a CTrEAE[I (but cf. p. 12, n. I). 
34 

NASALS 
of the difference in class between the final dental v and the 
initial bilabial n. 
We have already mentioned that, in addition to the dental 
and bilabial nasals, there was in Greek, as in, for example, 
English and Latin (VL, pp. 27 f.), a velar nasal sound, occur-
ring before velar plosive consonants, where it is represented 
by y-e.g. CxyKvpa, EyxoS, EyyliS. Varro identified this with the 
sound of the n in Latin angulus etc., which was clearly a velar 
nasal (described by Nigidius Figulus as 'inter litteram n et g' and 
as not involving contact with the (hard) palate). 52 The use of n to 
indicate this sound, as in Latin, is understandable enough, since 
the velar pronunciation is automatic before velar plosives; and 
similar spellings with v are found in Attic inscriptions (regularly 
before 5 c., e.g. c. 550 evyva).53 But the normal Greek spel-
ling with y for [I)] is on the face of it remarkable, since it is as 
though we were to write e.g. English ink, jinger as igk, jigger. 54 
There is nothing in the nature of a velar plosive that would 
account for the nasalization of a preceding plosive; so that 
the only logical explanation for such spellings would be if y 
had this nasal [I)] value in some other environment where it 
was phonetically intelligible; from such a context the writing 
with y could then have been transferred to other positions 
(on the principle, familiar also to some modern schools of 
phonology, that a given sound must always be allotted to the 
same phoneme). 
The most obvious candidate for providing such an environ-
ment is the position before a following nasal, that is, ifYIl and/or 
yv were pronounced [I)ffi], [I)n] (like the ngm, ngn in English 
hangman, hangnail), as in the case of Latin magnus etc. (VL, 
pp. 23 ff.). 
There is in fact a tradition, preserved in Priscian (tGL, ii, 
p. 30 K) as ascribed by Varro to Ion (probably of Chi os), that 
the [I)] sound represented by y in ayxvpa etc. had a special 
name in Greek, and that this name was aYlla; since the Greek 
.2 Cf. also Marius Victorinus in GL, vi, pp. 16, 19 K . 
• 3 Similarly before labials, e.g. c. 550 OAVVlTlOVIKO: cf. Threatte, pp. 588--94' 
•• The Greek practice was adopted by Wulfila for Gothic, but scribes occasionally 
replace the g by n. 
35 

CONSONANTS 
names of letters are otherwise related to the sounds they 
represent, such a name makes sense only if it is pronounced 
[al)ma], that is, if the y is pronounced [I)] in the position 
before the nasal 1-1.55 
This hypothesis further explains certain anomalies in the 1st 
pers. of the perfect passive; consider, for example, the following 
forms: 
(a) Present 
( i ) AEY -01Ja! 
(ii) cp6eyy-0lJal 
(b) 3rd sing. perf. 
AEAE1<-Tal 
ecp6eYK-Tal 
(e) 1st sing. perf. 
AEAeY-lJal 
ecp6eY-lJal 
In the forms of (a) and (b), verb (ii) differs from verb (i) in 
having a nasal [I)], represented by y, preceding the final 
consonant of the root; but in (c) both verbs have parallel 
forms-which, if y here = [g], would mean that verb (ii) has 
lost its nasal. This situation would be explained, however, if the 
y of YI-I were pronounced [I)] ; for the original form will then have 
been ecp6eyylJal, where YYIJ = [l)l)m], which is phonetically 
simplified to [I)m], written YIJ: so that the nasality is not then 
lost. There would be a close parallel to this in the Latin spelling 
of the combination of con + gnosco as cognosco, etc. (VL, p. 23). 
The change of [g] to [I)] in AEAeYlJal is exactly parallel to that 
of [b] to [m] in e.g. TETpllJ-lJal from Tpi~(i.). 
Such an interpretation of the evidence is not accepted by all 
scholars. It has been suggested that in e.g. AEAeyIJal the Y could 
have been pronounced [g], the spellings ecp6eYIJai (and OylJa) 
etc. representing a purely graphic simplification for ecp6eyYlJal, 
OyylJa (with yy pronounced as [l)g]).56 But it is surprising that 
the simplified spellings are so consistent, particularly as, on this 
supposition, they are phonetically ambiguous; and also that 
such simplification should take place only in the case of this 
group. Such a hypothesis, of course, simply accepts and fails to 
explain the [I)] value ofy in the sequences YK, YX, yy. On the 
practical side, its acceptance would involve some difficulty for 
the modern reader, since it would mean differentiating i:rl 
pronunciation not only between e.g. AEAeyIJal with y = [g] and 
ecp6eyIJai with y = [I)g] (where the latter but not the former has 
•• Cf. B. Einarson, CP, 62 (1967), p. 3 and n. I J. For other possible explanations 
of the name l'xylla see Lupalj, pp. 21 f. 
•• Cf. Lejeune, p. 125, n. 5. 

NASALS 
a nasal in the present), but also between e.g. eiAT)YlJol with [g] 
and EA';AeyIJOI with [IJg], where both have a nasal in the present 
(Aay)(CxvCU, EAEyxCU).57 The argument ofL. Lupa§ (SC, 8 (I966), 
p. I I) that a group [IJm] is improbable in view of the 
elimination of [nm] (as in O'VVIJCXXlo -+ C7V1J1J., etc.) is irrelevant; 
a difference of treatment would be entirely in accordance with 
the much higher frequency of occurrence, and so 'redundancy', 
of dental over velar in Greek (as in most languages), involving 
greater phonetic instability: one may compare the case of 
Sanskrit, where, for example, a junction of the type [n + j] -+ 
[i'ij], with assimilation of dental to palatal, but [IJ + j] remains 
[IJj]·58 
On the balance of the evidence, as well as on practical 
grounds, the pronunciation [IJm] is recommended for YIJ in all 
cases. Surprisingly, however, there is no cogent evidence for 
yv = [IJn], so that in this respect the Greek situation appears 
to be the reverse of the Latin.59 
As mentioned above (pp. I7 f.), the preposition Ex was pro-
nounced as [eg] not only before voiced plosives but also before 
other voiced consonants; in the case of an initiallJ, however, 
as e.g. ey lJaKeSOVIOa, it will be apparent from the foregoing dis-
cussion that its probable pronunciation was [eIJ] and not [eg]. 
One cannot of course exclude the possibility mentioned by 
Sturtevant (p. 65) that some Greeks may have affected a 
'spelling pronunciation' for YIJ, based on the more general value 
of Y = [g]; so that the current practice in this country of 
pronouncing it as [gm] need not be condemned outright. But 
even for such speakers grammatical analogies are likely to have 
induced a pronunciation [IJm] in words like Eql6eylJo1; and the 
subsequent development of e.g. npCrylJo to colloquial modern 
Greek np<llJo is more readily explained on the basis of a 
pronunciation with [IJm]. 60 
., Being in the one case (D.Eyxw) an integral part of the root, but in the other an 
• infix' characterizing the present. 
5. Cf. Allen, • A note on "instability"', MF, 1960, pp. 27 f.; Sandhi, p. 86. 
59 Cf. R. L. Ward, Language, 20 (1944), pp. 73 If. Spellings such as ayyvovalOCF for 
'AyvovalOS (Threatte, pp. 531,561) are too isolated to be significant. 
I. In the similar and earlier development of ylyvol1QI, ylyvWaKW to ytV0l1Q1 etc. 
(Attic from c. 300 B.C.) there may be special considerations connected with the 
preceding y (and perhaps I). 
37 

CONSONANTS 
The peculiarity of the Greek convention in rendering [IJ] 
before velar plosives by y leads one to consider its adequacy. 
According to Varro, the adoption of this convention was also 
proposed by Accius for Latin (VL, pp. 27 f.), which would have 
involved writing e.g. aggulus, agcora for angulus, ancora; but it 
is easy to see that this would have led to phonetic ambiguity, 
since in Latin both [lJg] and [gg] occur (e.g. angeris, aggeris). 
Once looks, therefore, for the possibility of similar ambiguity 
in Greek; and a possible source presents itself. Voiceless plosives 
in Greek become voiced before other voiced plosives; thus the 
preposition ex (see above) is inscriptionally written ey before j3 
and B, and also, which is relevant to our inquiry, before y, as 
e.g. in ex+ yovos -+ eyyovoa. 
This example, meaning' offspring, descendant', indicates the 
possible ambiguity of the digraph yy. For here it has the value 
[gg]; but in Eyyev,;s 'innate, native, kindred' the preposition is 
not ex but Ev, and so the pronunciation is [lJg]. The situation 
is, however, largely saved by maintaining the spelling ex in the 
former case; thus, in the 5-4 c. B.C., against 27 Attic inscrip-
tional examples of the spelling eyyovoa we find 50 examples of 
EKYovoa; from c. 300 B.C. eyyovos is abandoned, but reappears 
in the 2 c. A.D. and also occurs as a MS variant with EKYOVOS 
in literary texts.61 Similarly EKrPO:CPEIV is the normal spelling for 
the word meaning 'to copy' or 'to delete', since a spelling 
II The situation with regard to EyyovOS in the special sense of' grandson' is puzzling. 
It is sometimes assumed to be the same word, but it appears in literature relatively late 
(e.g. Dion. Hal., Ani. Rom. vi. 37; cf. Plutarch, Per. 3) and seems to have been formally 
distinguished from ~OVOS = 'offspring'; this is expressly stated by various late sources, 
e.g. E!Jm. Gud.: EyyOVO 610: .wv 6uo YY CTil.lalVEI .0: .Wa .wv .oowv· [OTE 6e] 610: 
.00 K ypacpE"Tal ~ova .0: i61a .OOa. But as a result of the two possible values of yy, 
confusion of the two spellings was evidently common (and is in fact commented upon 
by Eustathius, 1460, 18); thus in the N.T., whereas the Codex Bezae has Eyyova for 
'grandchildren' in I Tim. 5. 4, other MSS have ~ovo; and in an inscription of Ephesus 
(c. 85 B.C.) the same ambiguity probably leads to the writing of acyeypal.lllfllOVa for 
tyy. = tv-yo (cf. G. Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscr. Gr.', no. 742,29 and note); conversely 
in Samos (c. 305 B.C.) evyovola for tyy. = lK-y. (Dittenberger, no. 333, 25). 
As regards colloquial speech, however, modern Greek eyyov6<; and eyy6vI (with 
[I)g]) suggest that, unless they are based on 'spelling pronunciation', the word for 
'grandson' was a compound of tv and not lK (cf. W. Schulze, KZ, 33 (1895), p. 376; 
Schwyzer, p. 3 17), or at least a contamination of~ovos and tyyEvT,S, leading in either 
case to a pronunciation with [I)g] even in antiquity. 

NASALS 
eyypaq>Elv could be interpreted as 'to write in, inscribe'; in an 
inscription of c. 303 B.C. eyyp<X\¥ocrllol is found alongside 
EKypOIjJOcrllOI, both in the sense of' to copy', 62 and an Arcadian 
inscription of the 3 c. B.C. has the form EyypOq>ETW in the sense 
of'to delete'. 63 Such forms are, however, rare, although before 
13 and S (where no ambiguity can arise) ey is regular in Attic 
inscriptions until the I c. B.C. 
The writing ofyy for [gg] also survives in II. xx, 458 Kay y6w 
(from KaT(a) y6w) , though even here some good MSS have KCn<: 
y6w (see note in Leaf's edn.).64 
A strictly phonemic solution to the spelling of the Greek [I)] 
sound would require a special symbol for it (i.e. its recognition 
as a distinct phoneme).65 But it is hardly surprising that the 
Greeks did not attempt this; for ambiguities were few and 
avoidable by 'analogical' or 'morphophonemic' writing; and 
compared with [n] and [m] the occurrences of [I)] were limited 
to a few contexts-it could not, for instance, occur initially or 
before a vowel. In fact no European languages employing the 
Greco-Roman alphabet have found it necessary to augment it 
for this purpose--English, for example, writes n for [I)] before 
velars and ng elsewhere (with some phonetic ambiguity in e.g. 
RP longer, linger, Bangor beside banger, hanger, etc.-apart from 
the 'soft' pronunciation in danger etc.); special symbols are 
found only in the Old Germanic Runic and Old Celtic Ogham 
systems of writing. 
(v) Liquids* 
This peculiar title is generally applied at the present day to 
sounds of the [1] and [r] type. It derives from the Latin term 
02 Dittenberger, no. 344,61. 
03 E. Schwyzer, Dial. gT. exemp. epig. po/iOTa', no. 668, 14. 
o. For further discussions of these matters cf. L. J. D. Richardson, 'Agma, a forgotten 
Greek letter', in Herma/hnw, 58 (1941), pp. 57 If., and 'Double gamma as true 
"double-gOO in Greek', in TPS, 1946, pp. 156 If . 
•• Cf. B. E. Newton, LingUfl, 12 (1963), p. 155. It could not be considered as an 
allophone of the /g/ phoneme since, as we have seen, both [I)g] and [gg] occur; in 
most cases it could be treat~d as an allophone of the /n/ phoneme (viz. before velar 
consonants), but to do so in the case of the sequence [I)m] (YII), though theoretically 
39 

CONSONANTS 
liquidus, which in turn is used by the Latin grammarians to 
translate the Greek liyp6S.66 The Greek term is applied by 
Dionysius Thrax to the four consonants A, \.I, v, p (Ars Gramm., 
p. 14 U) ;67 scholiasts' explanations of the word are various, but 
the most general opinion seems to be that it means' fluid', in 
the sense of 'unstable', with reference to the values of these 
consonants for quantitative metrical purposes, since many 
groups consisting of plosive + A, \.I, v or p leave a preceding 
syllable containing a short vowel of 'doubtful' or 'common' 
quantity, as in e.g. TICXTp6s, "I'8<VQV (see further pp. 106 ff.)-and 
this condition of the syllable is also referred to as vyp6s. In Latin 
this applies only to I and r, and since m and n are in any case 
classifiable as 'nasals', the term 'liquid' has come to have its 
more restricted, current meaning; in this sense it remains a 
useful term, since a class-definition of these sounds in articu-
latory terms is a somewhat complex matter.68 
A There are no useful descriptions of this sound by the 
grammarians. Dionysius of Halicarnassus simply mentions that 
it is produced by the tongue and palate, and that, by contrast 
with p, it is soothing to the ear and the sweetest of the continuant 
sounds (De Compo xiv, pp. 53 f. UR). But from comparison with 
cognates in other languages, and from its value in modern 
Greek, we may safely say that it was a lateral* [I] sound; and 
unlike English or Latin (VL, pp. 33 f.), there is no evidence that 
in Attic it was under any circumstances' dark' or 'velarized' 
before consonants; it was thus probably a 'clear' [I] in all 
contexts, and so more similar to that of French than ofEnglish.69 
possible in the absence of a sequence VI-', would be phonetically perverse, since it would 
imply that the following labial consonant was responsible for the velar quality . 
•• Terentianus Maurus, however, translates the Greek word by udus or uuidus (GL, 
vi, pp. 350, 362 K: cf. Allen, pp. 31 f.). 
67 With an alternative term a\JE'Ta~OAOS (explained as not changing when stem-final 
in noun and verb inflexion). This term is translated as immulabilis by Marius Victorinus 
(GL, vi, p. 6 K), but is not generally adopted; it does not appear in the Armenian version 
of Dionysius . 
•• Cf. R. Jakobson, C. G. M. Fant & M. Halle, PrelimilUlries 10 Speech AIUl(ysis, 
pp. 19 If . 
•• Dialectally, however, there is evidence of' dark' variants in some contexts. Old 

LIQUIDS 
p Dionysius of Halicarnassus describes this sound as being 
pronounced by 'the tip of the tongue rising to the palate near 
the teeth' and' fanning' or 'beating' out the air (t De Compo xiv, 
p. 54 UR); the MSS read either Crn0PPliTl30UO"l1S or CrnoppcrrTl-
30UO"l1S (cf. also p. 56 UR), but it makes little difference to the 
meaning, and Plato clearly refers to the tongue as being' least 
static and most vibrant' in the production of this sound (tCrat., 
426 E). What is being described is clearly a trilled, alveolar [r] 
sound, as e.g. in Italian or some Scottish pronunciations, and' 
not as in southern English, where it is more retracted and less 
strongly articulated (with single tap, friction, or neither). One 
may further note the use of the sound in the presumably 
onomatopoeic p~elV, Pl13elV, 6:pp~elv for the snarling of dogs 
(cf. VL, p. 32).70 
Generally speaking [r] is a voiced sound, but in certain 
environments in classical Attic it seems to have been voiceless. 
What we are actually told by the grammarians is that p was 
aspirated at the beginning of a word, and that when a double 
pp occurred in the middle of a word the first element was 
unaspirated and the second aspirated (e.g. tHerodian, i, pp. 
546 f. L). These descriptions are followed in the Byzantine 
practice of writing initial p and medial pp, and are supported 
at an earlier period by Latin transcriptions such as rhetor, 
Pyrrhus; still earlier occasional evidence is found in inscriptions 
using h, as Corcyra phoFalO"I, early Attic [qlp]eaph\O[ (c. 500) and 
on the Themistocles ostraka several examples of qlpea(p)phloO" 
(Threatte, p. 25). But one also finds Boeotian hpaqlO"a[FolSol 
(= pa\fJct>SC;», and the transcription hi in e.g. Armenian hietor 
Armenian distinguished both a dark I and a clear I; the former occupies the position 
of h in the alphabet, and tends to be used to transcribe h in Greek words, more 
particularly in the vicinity of non-front vowels. This may well reflect an Asiatic Greek 
peculiarity; modern Cappadocian Greek shows developments of a labial or velar nature 
in such contexts (e.g. aj3yo < eXhOyO, 6oy6 < 6o"ll6S) , and Hesychius has the perhaps 
significant gloss Kapva nOVTIKa for both /lhapa and cruap6:; cf. A. Thumb, 'Die 
griechischen Lehnworter im Armenischen', B<;, 9 (1900), pp. 388 If. 
,. Armenian distinguishes both a rolled f and a fricative r (cf. Allen, TPS, 1950, 
pp. 193~7), of which the former occupies the position of p in the alphabet (though 
there is much variation in the rendering of p in Greek words). 

CONSONANTS 
(similarly in Coptic and Demotic Egyptian). As Sturtevant (p. 
62) has suggested, we may probably interpret this variation as 
meaning that the aspiration neither preceded nor followed the 
[r], but was simultaneous with it, i.e. that the sound was a 
'breathed' or voiceless [r] (all aspiration in Greek, unlike 
Sanskrit, being voiceless). Dialectal support for such a value has 
been seen in the modern Tsakonian development of [si-] from 
Laconian ()J_,71 though this also suggests a fricative pronunci-
ation of p.72 
Such a sound is found as a distinct phoneme in e.g. modern 
Icelandic hringur 'ring' (contrasting with voiced [r] in ringur 
'gust'); but in Greek it was merely a contextual variant, or 
'allophone', since initial p was regularly voiceless. The only 
exception of which we are told by Herodian is in the name 
'P&pos and its derivatives (loc. cit.; cf. also Choeroboscus, Schol. 
in Theod., ii, p. 43 H) ; the reason for this exception may be that 
the following syllable begins with p, but another word pexpos 
is also cited by ascholiast on Dionysius Thrax (p. 143 H) as 
Aeolic meaning EIlj3pvoV or j3pe<pos, and the non-aspiration is here 
explained as being due to the dialect (of which 'psilosis' is a 
characteristic feature). If the reason does lie in the p of the 
second syllable, we should of course also expect to have voiced 
initial p (and not p) in the rare reduplicated forms of the type 
pepV1Twllello (Od. vi, 59), pepi<p6m (Pindar, Fr. 318).73 In the case 
of the double pp it may be, as the grammatical tradition has it, 
that only the second element was aspirated, i.e. that the 
geminate began voiced and ended voiceless; but this rule could 
be artificial and based on the pattern of e.g .. AT6is, ~CX1T<pW, 
B6:Kxos (cf. p. 21), which are specifically mentioned in this 
connection by Choeroboscus (p. 44 H). 
71 Cf. M. Vasmer, KZ, 51 (1923), p. 158. 
72 Note also, on e.g. coins of the' Indo-Scythian' Kusan dynasty (from early 2 c. 
A.D.), the representation of Iranian (Bactrian) s, in a script of Greek origin, by the 
symbol 1>, which has been assumed to derive from P with a superscript breathing: cf. 
R. Gobi in F. A1theim & R. Stiehl, Finan:::geschichte der Spatantike, p. 183. 
73 Boeckh does in fact write peplq>6al. This word has a rough breathing, however, 
in all mss ofChoeroboscus (cf. Sommerstein, p. 47, n. 61, where 'Papas, papas are also 
discussed). In fact both this and pepVTIoo~eva are analogical formations, since there are 
no roots originally beginning with T (these are from WT- and ST- respectively: see further 
Lejeune (b), pp. 122, n., 181, n.). 

LIQUIDS 
Apart from initials and geminates, it is also reported that p 
was aspirated (i.e. probably voiceless) after aspirated plosive 
consonants, i.e. in the groups cpp, 6p, XP (thus tChoeroboscus, 
Schol. in Theod., i, p. 257 H; cf. ii, p. 44 H, and Schol. in Dion. 
Thr., p. 143 H). 74 This peculiarity is further supported by Latin 
transcriptions such as Prhygia, Trhepto, Crhysippus. Conversely it 
helps to explain the development whereby, for example, 
TETp-hnTos becomes TEepl1TTTOS and TTpO-OpO becomes CppovpO:, 
since the p in these words will first have become aspirated (de. 
voiced) before an aspirated vowel (which then loses its aspira-
tion in the compound: i.e. pi, po -+ fH, po), and this in turn 
will have required that the preceding plosive be aspirated. 
It should be emphasized that the voiceless pronunciation of 
p in certain environments is a purely allophonic matter (cf. 
p. 9), and no confusion can therefore be caused if p is always 
pronounced with its voiced value, as e.g. in modern Greek. 
There is a historical reason for the aspiration of p when initial 
and double in many cases. With few and disputed exceptions, 
initial p in Greek does not correspond to initial r in related 
languages; where the latter have initial r (as e.g. English red, 
Sanskri t rudhira~, La tin ruber), Greek shows a so called 'pro-
thetic' vowel before it (thus epv6p6s). When Greek does have an 
initial p, it generally derives from an original consonant-group, 
viz. sr or wr; thus e.g. pEW beside Sanskrit sravati (cf. English 
stream), and PE3w beside English work. Before vowels an original 
s gives Greek [h] (' rough breathing') e.g. ETTTO: beside Latin 
septem; original sr may therefore be expected to give p. This 
argument would not apply to wr, since original initial w 
normally gives smooth breathing, e.g. oT50 beside Sanskrit veda 
(cf. English wit); but presumably a contrast between aspirated 
and unaspirated initial p would rarely if ever have been 
significant,75 and the aspirated form became standardized.76 
,. Cf. the voiceless pronunciation ofr (and /) after the aspirated allophones of English 
voiceless plosives (see p. 28), e.g. in pray, please. 
7' A case in point might have been poo( 'streams' and poa( 'pomegranates' (with 
Herodian's accentuation), if the latter, a borrowing from some unknown language, had 
originally unaspirated p. 
76 If Grassmann's Law (see pp. 15,20,54) ever applied to p, no trace of it survives; 
43 

CONSONANTS 
The medial pp also derives from these same consonant-
groups; but since, after short vowels, a simplification of such 
groups to single p would here alter the quantity of the preceding 
syllable, the result is a geminate. As in the case of initial p, the 
geminate is aspirated on the model of the original sr group (e.g. 
eppevacx), even when it derives from an original wr , as in e.g. apP11Toc; 
(cf. Latin verbum, English word). The usual practice in modern 
texts is to indicate the aspiration of the single initial p, but not 
generally of the medial geminate pp; in fact, of course, the 
indication of the rough breathing on initial p is as superfluous 
as on the geminate, since it is automatic in virtually all cases. 
The geminate pp also survived to a considerable extent even 
in initial position after a final short vowel in continuous speech, 
as is shown by its effect in metre. This is general in the dialogue 
of Attic tragedy (e.g. Eur., EI., 772: Tivi ppueJ.liil) and comedy 
(e.g. Ar., Frogs, 1059: Ta PP';J.lCXTCX), and optional in epic (e.g. 
II. xii, 159: ~eAecx ppeov; xxiv, 343: eiAETo 51: ppa~50v). Texts in 
such cases generally show single initial p, but spellings with pp 
are occasionally found in inscriptions. In epic gemination is also 
often extended to initial A, J.l and v (e.g. II. xiii, 754: ope"i 
(V)VICpOEVTI), which in some but by no means all cases derive 
from an original group (cf. English snow). 77 
Conversely, where geminate pp would be expected after 
initial e of the syllabic augment or reduplication, single p is 
occasionally found by analogy with the present-tense forms, e.g. 
in epic and in tragic lyrics; ofEpe~e in II. ii, 400, Choeroboscus 
(Schol. in Theod., ii, p. 44 H) comments that it is 'Ella TO J.lETpOV'. 
Inscriptions generally show pp in such cases, but practice varies 
in compounds (e.g. CXTTOp(p)CXIVOVTCXI, 431/418 B.C.).78 
It remains to mention that in some cases Attic pp corresponds 
to pa of many other dialects, including Ionic. Attic maintained 
thus e.g. I.-E. swedh- (cf. Skt. svadh4) -
'FEea<; -
FEea<; -
Ella<;, but srobh- (cf. Lith. srebiu, 
Lat. sorbeo) -
~Ew. The situation is thus similar to that of\!- (see p. 68, n. 15). 
77 Outside Attic there are a few examples to suggest that the groups sl and s + nasal 
gave an aspirated (voiceless) consonant~e.g. Aegina Maflov = haflwv; but in these 
cases, unlike ~, it was the unaspirated form that became general. On the development 
of original sw see p. 48. 
78 See further Lup3.'j, pp. 24 f.; Threatte, pp. 519 If. 
44 

LIQUIDS 
per where er represented the initial of a grammatical element, 
e.g. f'>';TOP-C71, K66cxp-C71s, eerTICXp-erCX1; also in some borrowed words 
(e.g. j3vpercx) and proper names (e.g. neperrus). But even some 
words of non-Attic origin showed the Attic change to pp--
e.g. in inscriptions xeppoveeroer for XeperoVT)eros regularly from 
45 I B.C.; and the Attic form of nepere<povT) is <l>eppe<pCXTTcx. In 
literature, the Ionic per is general in tragedy and prose up to 
Thucydides (but even here one finds occasional forms with pp, 
as TIoppw(6ev), 6eppIS). Thereafter the pp forms become more 
common, but Koine influence soon tends to restore per; the· 
restoration, however, was never complete, the verb 6cxppeiv, for 
example, remaining normal alongside the noun 66:peroS.79 This 
dialectal feature of Attic was perhaps felt to be less provincial 
than the TT discussed above (pp. 12 fr.) since it was shared not 
with Boeotian but sporadically with various other dialects. 
(vi) Fricatives* 
There was only one fricative phoneme in classical Attic, namely 
er (s). It is fairly clearly described by Dionysius of Halicarnassus 
as being produced by an elevation of the tongue to the palate, 
with the air passing between them and producing a whistling 
or hissing sound (crVPIYIJCX) around the teeth (De Compo xiv, p. 
54 UR). This seems to suggest a sibilant sound not unlike that 
of English alveolar S;80 the description would not in itself 
entirely exclude a 'hushing' as opposed to a hissing sound (i.e. 
[s] as English sh), but other languages which have both types 
of sound represent the Greek er by their [s] and not by their 
[s]-thus, for example, on Indian coins Dianisiyasa = t.lOvveriov, 
and similarly in Coptic. 
Whilst er in most environments was a voiceless [s], there was 
also a voiced [z] allophone in the position before voiced 
consonants. For the position before 6 this is suggested by the fact 
that 'A6,;vcxs+6e is written cx6evcx3e (= 'A6,;vcx3e, 445 B.C. etc.), 
7. See further Lupa!j, pp. 37 f.; Threatte, pp. 534 If. 
80 The modern Greek sound is rather more retracted. 
45 

CONSONANTS 
with the special symbols = [zd] for 0"5 (see further pp. 56 ff.).81 
For the position before other voiced consonants direct evidence 
is not citable before the second half of the 4 c. B.C., when 0" before 
IJ is sometimes written as S82 (which became [z] at this time) 
or as O"s (e.g. ev5EO"SIJOVO"); but since it would not have been 
possible to indicate a [z] pronunciation earlier, it is entirely 
possible that 0" already had this value in such contexts at an 
earlier period. The case of 0"5 makes it virtually certain that the 
same applied before other voiced plosives, and a reflection of 
this is perhaps seen in the confusion of the forms nEAOcrylKOV 
and nEAOPYIKOV (inscr. 439 B.C.; cf. also Ar., Birds, 832, and 
the Codex Laurentianus of Thuc., ii. 17) ;83 the inscriptional 
spelling TTEAOsYIKOV appears at Argos in the late 4 c. 
At later periods the voiced pronunciation of 0" before voiced 
consonants is attested by transcriptions of Greek words in 
languages possessing symbols for both [s] and [z], e.g. Gothic 
praizbwtairei = '!TPEO"[3VTEPIOV, Armenian zmelin = O"IJIAiov; and it 
remains a characteristic of modern Greek. Before vowels, 
however, and generally at the ends of words, there is no 
evidence that 0" was pronounced other than voiceless [s] in 
Attic, and care should be taken to avoid the intervocalic and 
final pronunciation as [z] which is found in English-thus 
[300"IAeVC;, 1J000"0, '!TWC; are not to be pronounced like Basil, muse, 
pose;84 English cosmic, lesbian, on the other hand, provide correct 
models for the pronunciation of 0" in KOO"IJOC;, MO"[3oc;. 
For fricative developments in late Greek see pp. 22 ff., 
30 ff. 
On 0"0" see pp. 12 ff. 
81 a6 is retained in transparent compounds such as lTpoa6exOllQl on the analogy of 
lTpOS etc. and the main word in other environments (cf. e.g. EKaw3w, not ~~-); note, 
however, Boeot. 61030Toa = t.loo60TOS. Note also the use ofa3 for (a)a6 referred to on 
P·58. 
82 ZII- for ~II- in the Palatine Anthology is also supported by its alphabetical position 
(cf. R. Merkelbach, Clotta, 45 (1967), pp. 39 f.). 
83 Cf. Threatte, pp. 557 f. The same' rhotacistic' development in the group [zg) is 
seen in Latin mergo beside Lithuanian ma.:g6ti; cf. also Eretrian IIlpyoa = M{ayos. For 
phonetic discussion cf. M. Grammont, Traitl de Phonetiqui', pp. 205 f. 
84 As in modern Greek, however, final s may have been voiced before voiced initial 
consonants of closely connected words: cf. Argos hOl3 6f (= oTS 6f, 6 c.) as modern 0 
yvl6s IIOU = [0 yoz mu) etc. 

CONSONANTS 
(vii) Semivowels* 
This term is here used in its modern sense, referring to sounds 
of the type of English w andy, and not in the sense of the Greek 
TJllicpwva or the Latin semivocales (see p. 19 and VL, p. 37, n. I). 
Although these are not generally reckoned as independent 
phonemes in classical Attic, some discussion of them is necessary 
in connection with other features. 
[w] 
(r, 'digamma'). In early Greek this sound existed as an 
independent phoneme; in the Cyprian and Mycenaean (Linear 
B) syllabaries there are signs for wa, we, wi, wo, and most of the 
dialects show epigraphic evidence in the form of a special letter , 
of which the most common shape is of the type F. This was a 
differentiated form of the Semitic' waw', which in the form Y 
was adopted for the vowel [u]. From the place ofF in the Latin 
alphabet, which is based on a West Greek model, it is evident 
that it retained its Semitic position (whereas Y, Latin v, was set 
at the end). This is also shown by Greek alphabets appearing 
in Etruscan inscriptions, and by a partial alphabet on an early 
Corinthian votive tablet (? 6 c. B.C.: IGA, 20, 13), where it 
appears between E and Z; and by its later use (normal from 
late 2 c. B.C.) as a numeral = 6.85 In this use it develops various 
forms, e.g. epigraphic C, Fi and MS C, G, cr , S, so ultimately 
(c. 7-8 c. A.D.) coinciding with the cursive ligature for CTT 
S5 An intennediate stage is seen in its use as a paragraph-index in a 5 c. Locrian 
inscription (IG, [x. i. 334), to which Dr Chadwick has drawn my attention. On the 
earliest uses of alphabetic numerals in Greek see L. W. Daly, Contributions to a history 
of alphabeti;;ation in antiquiry and the Middle Ages (= ColI. Latomus, go, [g67), pp. [[ f., 
with further refs. 
The same alphabetical place is occupied by the Georgian letter having the phonetic 
value [v], which, in the old texts, also has the same numeral value and, in the xucuri 
(' ecclesiastical ') script, could well be derived from a Greek form. The place and 
numeral value are also followed by a derivative in the Cyrillic script of Old Slavonic 
(but with an arbitrary phonetic value [dz)); and also perhaps in Gothic (with a value 
[kW)). Of the other Greek 'rnlaTHlo' (ef. pp. [7,60), derivatives of9 were taken over 
with the original position and numeral value by Georgian (but with a phonetic value 
[i)), by Cyrillic (with a phonetic value [c), as still Russian'!), and by Gothic (but 
with no phonetic value); in Annenian the derivative occupies its original alphabetical 
position, but has a numeral value goo and a phonetic value OJ. A derivative of rr 
was taken over with its original numeral value by Cyrillic (but with a phonetic value 
[e)) and by Gothic (but with no phonetic value). 
47 

CONSONANTS 
(' aTiYlJo '), with which it is thereafter confused. 86 The original 
name of the letter in Greek was probably FaU (like TaU after the 
Semitic 'taw'), though this is attested only by a statement in 
Cassiodor(i)us that Varro so called it.87 Later it became known 
as 5iyolJlJo, on account of its shape, as described, for example, 
by Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Ant. Rom. i. 20: 'wamp yCxlJlJo 
51TTOis ElTl lJiav 6p6r,v E1TI3EVYWIJEVOV Tois lTAayiolS '). 
In Attic, however, [w] was lost as an independent phoneme 
at an early date (though the fact that Attic has e.g. 5epll, K6pll 
shows that in some environments it survived for a time in this 
dialect, since otherwise we should expect Attic ex after p; for its 
preservation cf. Arcadian 5EPFo, KOPFO). The sound remained as 
the second element of diphthongs (cf. p. 5), but was there 
treated as an allophone of the vowel v and so written ;88 before 
vowels the v in the digraphs au, EV stands for a geminate [ww] 
(cf. pp. 8 I ff.), with the consequence that the syllable is 
generally heavy; its consonantal value reappears in the modern 
Greek pronunciation of au, EV as [av, ev] before both conson-
ants and vowels ([af, ef] before voiceless consonants-e.g. 
OVT6s = [aft6s]; thence [ap, ep] before a-e.g. 50VAE\jJO from 
(E)50vAEVao) : cf. p. 80. 
In some words initial [w] resulted from an original consonant-
group sw, and in such cases the expected result would be an 
aspirated or voiceless [w] (cf. pp. 4- I ff.), as in the northern 
English pronunciation of who This is attested in Pamphylian 
FhE = E (cf. Sanskrit sva-), Boeotian FhEKo50IJOE ( = 'EK05t'W'P). In 
Attic, the [w] having been lost, only the aspiration (' rough 
breathing ') remains, as e.g. in ,;5Vs (cf. Sanskrit sviidt14, English 
sweet). 
Though F is only of historical interest so far as Attic is 
concerned, it should be noted that it plays an important part 
in the metre of non-Attic poetry. Thus in Homer an original 
•• Resulting sometimes even in a majuscule form IT' . 
• 7 The 'VAV' of this source is Ritschl's conjecture for 'VA' of the MSS. Nevertheless, 
the name VAV is supported by some other sources: cf. A. E. Gordon, TIlL Letter Names 
of tIlL Latin Alphabet, p. 46 and n. 67· 
•• f survives in the spelling of the diphthong au in an Attic inscription of C. 550, 
afVTap: cf. Threatte, p. 23. 

SEMIVOWELS 
F accounts in some 2,300 cases for absence of elision (e.g. II. i, 
30: wi (F)oiK~), in some 400 cases for 'positional' quantity when 
the preceding word ends in a consonant (e.g. II. i, 108: eTnas 
(F)enos), and in some 160 cases for absence of' epic correption' 
(see p. 97) in the second half of the foot (e.g. It. vii, 281: Kai 
(r)iSIJEV ernavTEs). The initial group SF also accounts in a number 
of cases for' positional' quantity when the preceding word ends 
in a short vowel (e.g. Od. i, 203: 00 TOI ETI S(F)T)POv; Od. ix, 236: 
tilJeis Se S(F)eloavTes, cf. Corinthian 6 c. SFEVla = llelviov). Even 
an initial [h] may have the same effect where it derives from 
an original sw, notably in the case of the 3rd pers. pronoun-e.g: 
erne eo II. v, 343 etc., and possessive nooel4> Il. v, 71 etc.-but 
also cpiAe awpe II. iii, 172 (cf. Sanskrit svasura~, German Schwaher) ; 
in such cases it stands for a double aspirated (voiceless) F (cf. 
pp. 41 ff.), thus erne '(rF)eo etc.89 
In many cases later editing has tended to obscure the original 
presence of a F by emendations of various kinds; thus in II. iii, 
103, oioeTE apv', with hiatus indicating Fapv', is preserved only 
in one papyrus, whereas all the MSS have oioeTe S' apv' (for 
the form cf. Cretan FapEV, and still modern Tsaconian vanne). 
This can be seen also in the alternative devices adopted to 
maintain quantity in syllables preceding a medial SF of the root 
meaning 'to fear'; thus vowel-lengthening in the reduplicated 
present SeiSllJEV (for SeSFllJEV) and in the adjective 6eovS,;s (for 
6eoSF';S), but consonant-doubling in the aorist eSSeloa (for 
eSFeloa) and in the adjective aSSees (for aSFees). 
But there are numerous cases also where the metre does not 
permit the restoration of an etymologically expected F; as 
Chantraine comments (i, p. 153), 'Le F est un phoneme en 
train de disparaitre au cours de l'histoire de la langue epique' 
(it may be noted that it is a less viable feature of Ionic than 
Aeolic); and as a consequence (p. 157), oil est impossible de 
restituer systematiquement Ie F dans I'Iliade et dans I'Odyssee 
et les philologues qui pratiquent cette restitution donnent du 
texte et de la langue une image inexacte'. The relevance of 
It Note also, with preceding final consonant, II. xxiv, 154 Os a~EI probably standing 
for Os (' r') a~EI (parallel to Os a' a~EI in 183): cf. A. Hoekstra, Homeric Modification of 
Formulaic Prototypes, p. 43. 
49 

CONSONANTS 
'digamma' to Homeric metre was first discussed by Richard 
Bentley in 1713;90 but the attempt by Richard Payne Knight 
a century later to apply the restoration in practice led to 
ludicrous excesses. Later studies have been based on more 
scientific principles, but the reader is not advised to attempt 
any such reconstruction in reciting Homer; in pronouncing 
the text as it stands he will at least be approximating to its 
rendering by classical Attic speakers. 
The ancients conside~ed the digamma as a peculiarly Aeolic 
letter, and F is in fact encountered in the texts of the Lesbian 
poets. I t is preserved in an actual book MS only in one instance, 
viz. initially in the 3rd pers. possessive FOlen ( = olen) of Sappho, 
A. 5,6 (Oxyrhyncus Papyri, ed. Grenfell & Hunt, I, vii; Plate II), 
but it is attested for both this and the pronoun (cf. p. 49) by 
citations and statements in later authors, notably Apollonius 
Dyscolus (though copyists tend to read the unfamiliar letter as 
E or r). It has also been preserved in the initial group FP with 
a spelling j3 (e.g. Sappho, E. 5, 13 j3poSa for FPoSa = poSa) ; and 
perhaps intervocalically as v in Aleaeus, D. 12, 1291 avcnov 
( = CrrT]v) with light first syllable. 
Apart from Aeolic, the grammarians show an awareness of 
digamma as a feature also of Laconian and Boeotian ;92 and in 
these cases also there is occasional textual evidence. Initial 
digamma in both Alcman and Corinna is regularly respected 
for metrical purposes ;93 one certain example of the letter 
survives in a book papyrus of Aleman (FCxvCXKTa in 1 (1),6),94 
and it is represented by v in avelpolJeval (i (i), 63: light first 
syllable). This feature of Laconian also survives in the MSS of 
Aristophanes' Lysistrata, where TTapevlS~v (156) probably = 
TTapaFIS~v and y' aSV (206) probably = FaSV. For Corinna and 
other Boeotian fragments of uncertain authorship about a 
90 Cf. R. Pfeiffer, Hislory qfClassieal Seholarshipfrom 1300 10 1850, p. 157. 
91 References for Sappho and Alcaeus are to Lobel & Page, Poelarum Lesbiorum 
Fragmenta. 
92 See D. L. Page, Aleman, The Parlhendon, p. 110, n. 
93 For further details see Page, Aleman, The P., pp. 104 ff.; Corinna, pp. 46 ff.; 
E. Lobel, Hermes, 65 (1930), pp. 360 f., from which works most of the information in 
this paragraph is derived . 
•• References for Aleman and Corinna are to Page, Poelae Meliei Graeei. 
50 

SEMIVOWELS 
dozen examples appear in papyri, including two of the aspirated 
form where it is in fact expected (cf. p. 48), viz. 1 (654), col. 
iv, 23 F.Cx60IlT]95 (= ;;601l01): cf. col. iv, 7 F&60[. 
Finally, in the rare presumed cases of' synizesis '96 of the vowel 
v in Attic (as 'Epl\NWV Eur., I. T., 931 etc.), one may perhaps 
have an example of a front rounded semivowel (like that in e.g. 
French nuit) : cf. pp. 65 ff. 
[y] 
During the classical Greek period this is not attested as a 
separate phoneme in any of the dialects. It may just have been 
in Mycenaean (thus after w in me-wi-jo, for? [me(i)wyos], = 
IlEiwv; less certainly in initial position),97 but most of the 
occurrences of the symbols for [ya, ye, yo] simply indicate an 
automatic' glide' following a front vowel (e.g. i-jo-te = tonES ;98 
cf. Cyprian we-pi-ja = ETTEO, and the Pamphylian spelling 6110 
for 610, etc.). 
In Attic, as in other dialects, the sound remained as the 
second element of diphthongs, but (in parallel with the case of 
[w]) was there treated as an allophone of the vowel I and so 
written. Before vowels the I of the digraphs 01, 01, and probably 
EI, generally stands in classical Attic for a geminate [yy] (like 
the Latin intervocalic i: cf. vi, p. 39, and pp. 8 I ff. below). 
A [y] sound may also arise by synizesis of the vowel I, as 
Soph., O.C., 14660vpavig, inscr. (4 c.) "ITU6~v: cf. also Homer 
AtyV1TT~ Od. iv, 229 etc., and ".OTVO probably for ".OTVI,g Od. 
v, 215 etc.99 A similar synizesis is sometimes assumed for E in the 
•• Reading I.l rather than v with Lobel, op. cit., p. 360, and w. Cronert, RhM, 63 
(1968), p. 175. A photograph is reproduced in Berliner Klassikertexte, v. 2, Tafel vii . 
•• Used here in its modern sense of the reduction ofa vowel to a semivowel (but see 
P·99)· 
.7 See further F. W. Householder, 'Early Greek -j-', Glolta, 39 (1960/1), pp. 179 ff. 
9. In cases such as gen. si. -o:jo, however, the j could stand for [yy 1: cf. pp. 81 ff . 
•• In epic and inscriptional hexameters such occurrences mostly involve the position 
between heavy syllables in proper names, which could otherwise not be accommodated. 
It is noteworthy that the further extension of this practice does not have the effect of 
rendering a preceding syllable heavy 'by position' (cf. pp. 104 ff. )-with ovpav!9 
contrast e.g. Latin abj;,te; cf. also Pind., Pyth. iv, 225 yew3v beside Latin gen~ (VL, 
pp. 38, 41, 80). I t may be significant that the vast majority of cases involve the groups 
dental or alveolar + 1 (cf. L. Radermacher, SbAWW, 170 (1913), ix, 28), and it might 
be that these could be pronounced as single' palatalized' consonants (like e.g. Spanish 
if). But synizesis in Greek remains no more than a 'Notbehelf' (Radermacher, op. cit., 
P·27)· 

CONSONANTS 
common monosyllabic treatment of E + vowel or diphthong 
(e.g. 6~s, 1TOA~S, Hom. TeVx~, ,,;~~s, yvwO'~I); but there are 
scarcely any examples in any type of verse where such a mono-
syllabic E + short vowel results in a demonstrably light syl-
lable, so that some form of diphthongal contraction rather 
than synizesis proper could be involved (see further, p. 99); an 
exceptional example is Pindar, Pyth. i, 56 oihc:.u 5' 'Iepc:.uvi 6~s 
6p6c:.uTTJp 1TEAOI (dactylo-epitrite metre), where 6~s must be 
light-giving rise to various conjectural emendations. 
In no case in classical Greek does consonantal [y] enter into 
contrast with vocalic [i] in the manner of[ w] in some dialects, 100 
where phonemic contrast could be established for e.g. (Arc.) 
disyllabic KOPFa 'maiden' beside trisyllabic Kopva 'walnut-tree', 
or (Hom.) monosyllabic' FE (e) beside disyllabic UE. 
(viii) The aspirate* [h] 
The existence of this phoneme in classical Attic is clearly 
established. In pre-Eucleidean inscriptions it is represented by 
a special letter, H (earlier 8). There are admittedly quite 
frequent omissions; but some of these are due to the fact that 
even before 403 B.C. H was beginning to be used in its Ionic 
value of[~] (see p. 73) ; and the more significant fact is that false 
writing of H is rare. After 403 B.C. H often continues to appear 
in the word opos, and the phonetic distinction between this and 
opos is cited as an example by Aristotle (t Soph. El., 177 b).101 
In Magna Graecia the sound continues to be indicated in 
inscriptions by the' half-H' sign ... , and this was adopted by the 
Alexandrian grammarians as a superscript diacritic (later '),102 
though originally only to distinguish aspirated from otherwise 
homophonous unaspirated words, asOPOI; the complementary 
-I (later') was also introduced to indicate non-aspiration. 
100 Unless, of course, one treats the second elements of diphthongs as /y / and /w / 
(see pp. 5, 80, 94, n. 8), thereby producing contrasts of the type alC1)(p6s: alC7Tos: cf. 
L. Lup~, SC, 6 (1964), pp. 99 f. 
101 There is, however, some doubt about this example. It has been suggested that 
Aristotle wrote not cpo<; but 6p6s (,whey'), which would be distinguished from CPO<; 
by accent and not by breathing: cf. AR, p. 3, n. 2. 
102 It is occasionally found in Attic inscriptions from 1 c. A.D. and later (Threatte, 
P·97)· 
52 

THE ASPIRATE 
The fact that Greek words borrowed into Latin are written 
with h (e.g. historia) indicates that the aspirate continued to be 
pronounced in Hellenistic times, and forms in other languages 
point to its retention up to at least the beginning of the Christian 
era, e.g. in Coptic and Syriac and in astronomical terms such 
as horii ( = wpo) in Sanskrit. 
Whilst the symbol H in its consonantal value dropped out of 
general use after the introduction of the Ionic alphabet, the 
presence of initial aspiration continued to be indicated by the 
substitution of the aspirated <p, 6, X for unaspirated finalTI, T, 
K before words beginning with the aspirate (cf. pp. 19 f. )-e.g. 
Ka6 EKOCTTOV ( = Ka6' EKOCTTOV). Even allowing for the conservative 
spelling of stereotyped phrases, practice in this respect testifies 
to the retention of initial aspiration until about the 2 c. A.D. The 
loss of [h] seems in fact to be roughly contemporaneous with 
the development of the aspirated plosives to fricatives (see 
pp. 23 ff.), and the two developments could well be connected, 
since it has been found that 'as a rule, languages possessing 
the pairs voiced/voiceless, aspirate/non-aspirate, have also a 
phoneme /h/' .103 That [h] had been lost, as in modern Greek, 
by the 4 c. A.D. is indicated by its frequent omission or mis-
placement in Gothic transcriptions. 
As to the precise value of this phoneme in classical Attic, there 
is no reason to think that it was very different from our own 
h, i.e. a pure voiceless aspirate, or 'glottal fricative' , since forms 
such as Ka6TII.II;pIOS based on K<XT(a) 1'l1 .. U;Pav show that it was 
identified with the aspirate element of the aspirated plosives at 
an early period, whilst the name TIveVlJO 'breathing' given to 
it by the grammariansl04 supports the same value for a later 
period. 
Admittedly, when the Greeks adopted the Semitic script, 
they did not choose the Semitic glottal fricative symbol' he' (E) 
for the sound, requiring this for vocalic use, but instead 
103 R. J akobson, Selected Writings, 1, p. 528. R. Hiersche has pointed out, however 
(Gnomon,44 (1972), p. 760), that this rule does not extend to psilotic dialects of Ionic, 
which have aspirated plosives but no aspirate. 
104 Cf. also the description in Schol. in Dion. Thr., p. 142 H: • EK TOO 8WpaKD<; 1l£T0: 
lTOAA Tis Tfis oPI1Tis EKcpepolJivov'. 
53 

CONSONANTS 
employed the Semitic '!:Jet', which represented a more con-
strictive type of fricative. One of the Indo-European origins of 
the Greek aspirate, viz. y (as in the relative os beside Sanskrit 
ya~) could have developed to [h] through the prehistoric stage 
of a palatal fricative [Cf] ;100 but already at the time of the oper-
ation of Grassmann's Law (see pp. 15,20) the Greek phoneme 
must have developed its purely aspirate value. 
It is well known that the Greek aspirate, like the Latin h, did 
not prevent elision or crasis, nor have any effect on positional 
quantity (cf. VL, p. 43).106 This has led some scholars to assume 
that it must therefore have represented no more than a 
simultaneous feature of the vowel, that is, probably a voiceless 
voweP07 This, however, does not necessarily follow; the Greek 
grammarians admittedly classify the aspirate as a npoC7<t>5ia, like 
the accent, rather than as a consonant, but this classification 
may well reflect its structural function rather than its physical, 
phonetic nature. The consonantal function of English h is 
indicated by the fact that e.g. howl takes the indefinite article 
a like fowl, and not an like owl. But there is nothing to prevent 
the same type of sound functioning as a consonant in one 
language and as a 'prosody' in another, particularly when, as 
here, the sound has no inherent oral articulation but rather 
conforms to that of the following vowel. 108 Certainly the 
argument for' voiceless vowels' in Greek is not so cogent as to 
recommend the attempt at such sounds in practice. 
So far we have considered the aspiration only as a feature of 
initial position. In compound words, however, one has to 
consider the possibility of aspiration of the second member, 
thereby giving rise to medial aspiration, or 'interaspiration' as 
it is commonly called. When the first member ends in a voiceless 
plosive, this is of course an established fact (e.g. ecpopw from 
106 But the comparable Armenian change of cI. [y] to mod. [h] in historical times 
(e.g. Yoyn 'Greek' = mod. [hun J etc.) shows no evidence of any such intermediate stage. 
108 C. J. Ruijgh. however (Etudes du grec mycenien. pp. 53 f.). suggests otherwise for 
Mycenaean. 
101 E.g. A. Thumb, Untersuchungen iiber den Spiritus Asper im Griechischtn, p. 68. 
108 Cf. Gimson, p. 186, 'it may be regarded as a strong, voiceless onset of the vowel 
in question'. 
54 

THE ASPIRATE 
rn(l) +opW), the aspiration having become a feature of the 
plosive. But the situation is less clear where the first element ends 
in a vowel or in a consonant which has no aspirated counterpart. 
In such cases the aspirate does not generally appear in Attic 
inscriptions which otherwise indicate it, but it is occasionally 
found-e.g. evhOPKOV, 'TTophe5pol, 'TTpOcrhEKETO (= 'TTpocrllKETw). 
Latin transcriptions show considerable variation, and this may 
have been a feature of Greek speech itself; the presence of 
aspiration in such forms could well have depended upon the 
extent to which the two elements of the compound were still 
recognized as such by the speaker. 109 Similar consideratio~s 
may well have applied to the aspirate at the beginning of words 
in closely connected speech, when preceded by a consonant, 
and this would further help to explain the phenomena of elision 
etc. referred to above yo Apart from compounds (and 
exclamations as ruoi), interaspiration is attested for Attic only 
in the word TOWS 'peacock', a borrowing of uncertain origin, 
which is specifically mentioned by Athenaeus (397 E ff., citing 
Trypho and Seleucus as authorities). 
It will be remembered that the aspirated plosives were 
described as 5ocrV, and the unaspirated as 1jJ1AOV (p. 15); in 
discussing the pure aspirate [h] the grammarians adopted the 
same terminology, calling it not merely 'TTVeVIJO but more 
specifically and pleonastically 'TTVeVIlO 50crV (' spiritus asper', 
'rough breathing'), and then referring to its absence by the 
self-contradictory 'TTveVlJO 1jJ1AOV (' spiritus Lenis', 'smooth breath-
ing'). This terminology was encouraged by the use ofa specific 
sign for the latter by the Alexandrians as a device for directing 
attention to the correct reading in forms like opos. It does not, 
however, justify the assumption sometimes made that the 
'smooth breathing' was something more than the absence of 
the' rough' breathing, more specifically a glottal stop (as e.g. 
at the beginning of German words having an initial vowel, or 
intervocalically in Cockney and some Scottish pronunciations 
lot An indication of this perhaps survives in a statement attributed to Herodian (ii, 
p. 48 L) suggesting that the adjective q>fAhrnOS was pronounced with aspiration, but 
not the proper name. 
110 Cf. J. Soubiran, L' elision dans la polsie latine, p. Ito. 
55 

CONSONANTS 
of words like butter, water). Indeed such an assumption is almost 
certainly ruled out by the fact that unaspirated initial vowels 
in Greek permit elision and crasis, which would be highly 
improbable if they were preceded by a stop articulation. 
(ix) Consonant-groups represented by single sYJDbols 
(a) 
~ There is fairly clear evidence that at quite an early 
period the symbol I, later Z, had come to represent the sequence 
[zd], as is stated by the grammarians (e.g. tDionysius Thrax, 
Ars Gramm., p. 14 U; cf. Dion. Hal., De Compo xiv, p. 53 UR), 
rather than [dz] as it is often pronounced by English classical 
scholars. Internal indications of this are seen in the following 
facts: (I) The com bina tions ' AeTjvos + tiE, 6vpos + tiE (wi th -tiE as 
in OTKOVtiE) are represented by , AeTjV03E , 6vpo3E (cf. pp. 45 f.); 
(2) In most dialects, including Attic, a nasal is regularly lost be-
fore the fricative a; thus, whereas the v of avv is preserved before 
the stop ti in e.g. aWtiEal.10S, it is lost in aVO'ToaIS. The same 
loss is regularly found before 3, e.g. aV3v~, aV3;;v, and TTA~c..> 
beside rnAay~o, thus indicating that the sound immediately 
following the nasal was a fricative and not a stop. 
The [zd] value also incidentally adds point to the comic w 
8tirii tiEaTToTo cited by Tzetzes, possibly referring to Aristo-
phanes, Lysistrata, 940, where the MSS have zeO. 
Prehistorically the combination represented by 3 derives in 
some cases from an Indo-European sd [zd]; thus 030S 'branch' 
is cognate with German Ast, deriving from osdos (cf. also Hittite 
hasd-); i3c..> is a reduplicated present from an original si-sd-o (from 
which also derives Latin s'fdo) , related to the root sed- in the same 
way as e.g. l.1i-l.1v-c..> is related to I.1Evc..>. But more often 3 derives 
from an original dy or gy--e.g. in TTE30S from ped-yos, 0:301.101 
beside CxyIOS; and these original groups must first have developed 
though an affricate* state, e.g. [dz] (as in edge) -+ [dz] (as in 
adze) 111 (cf. Latin medius -+ Italian mezzo) ; so that the presumed 
pronunciation of these latter forms with [zd] represents a 
III This is also a probable development for the cases where Greek 3 apparently 
derives from an originaly, e.g. 3vy6v = Latin iugum. 

SINGLE-SYMBOL CONSONANT-GROUPS 
metathesis of the fricative and stop elements. However, such 
metatheses are of a particularly common type; R.P. wasp, for 
example, derives from an earlier and still dialectal waps (cf. Old 
Prussian wobse) ; and the particular change in question is closely 
paralleled e.g. in Old Church Slavonic melda from Indo-
European medhyii; an intermediate stage must here have been 
medta, which has given Russian meta 'boundary' (Russian 
meldu 'between' is a borrowing from O.C.S., being the locative 
dual of meld a). A sequence [dz] would in any case have be~n 
peculiarly isolated in Greek when it possessed neither any other 
affricates such as [ts] nor an independent /z/ phoneme ;112 in 
the sequence [zd], on the other hand, the [z] element would 
be a normal voiced variant of the /s/ phoneme as in, for 
example, l\Eaj3os (cf. p. 46). 
This having been said, it nevertheless remains probable that 
at the time when the Semitic alphabet was adopted by Greek 
the' zayin' symbol was at first applied to a still existing affricate 
type of combination; for it is difficult to see why a sequence [zd] 
should not have been represented by as instead of by a special 
sign; whereas, since voice-assimilation in Greek is normally 
regressive rather than progressive,113 Sa would not be a satis-
factory representation of [dz]; it has also been suggested that 
the affricated combination was at this early period a single 
phoneme and so preferably represented by a single symbol. 
Similar considerations apply to the Mycenaean Linear B 
writing-system, which has a special series of characters corre-
sponding in part to the 3 oflater dialects, and in part represent-
ing a voiceless sound derived from ky for which an affricate 
value of some kind is most probable. 
The value of3 as an affricate may also have survived in some 
of the Greek dialects; in some early Cretan inscriptions we 
find it used to represent a voiceless sound (? [ts]) deriving from 
0'; and forms of the letter are used with a probable value [ts] 
112 Cf. also Allen, Lingua, 7 (1958), p. 12 I, n. 40 and refs. 
113 I.e. a voiced consonant such as Idl may account for a voiced allophone of a 
preceding but not of a following Is;' Note that, for example, in the aorist of a verb 
such as Tpij3w (hP11jICI) it is the plosive that is assimilated to the following fricative and 
not vice versa. 
57 

CONSONANTS 
in the native Oscan and Umbrian alphabets. A voiced affri-
cate value seems also to have been known to late Latin 
speakers if one may judge from such spellings as baptidiare 
for baptizare and conversely zebus for diebus. 114 
However, the metathesis of [dz] to [zd] must have occurred 
at an early date in Attic and most other dialects;115 and the 
continuation of the [zd] value up to the 5th and early 4th 
century is indicated by the use of 3 to represent Iranian zd (e.g. 
'Wpollo3T)S = Auramazda in Plato, 'ApToo30S = Artavazda in 
Xenophon).116 Later in the 4 c. we begin to find 3 replacing CI 
used for Iranian Z;117 and in Greek inscriptions there begin to 
be some confusions between 3 and CI (e.g. avO~031l0UCI 329 B.C.; 
cf. p. 46). This suggests that at some time in the 4 c. the change 
to the modern Greek value as [z] was already taking place; 
indeed it is probably referred to by Aristotle (t Met., 993 a) when 
he says that, whereas some people would analyse 3 into cr + 5, 
others consider it a separate sound which does not comprise 
already recognized elements. I t has been plausibly suggested 
by G. Nagy118 that this change does not represent a normal 
phonetic development but rather a dialectal replacement from 
the Koine Uust as CICI replaced TT). Such a [z] would presumably 
have arisen from an earlier [dz], and after short vowels at least 
the original quantitative pattern is likely to have been preserved 
by gemination, i.e. [zz] ;119 this is also indicated by its rep-
114 Cf. also M. Leumann, Mil. Marouzeau, pp. 384 ff. 
110 An Attic inscription of c. 480 has TOIC73(e) for Toicr!ie, where C73 is a geminated 
writing for voiced [zd], parallel to the frequent -<JaT- for voiceless [st] in aplcraTWV for 
'Ap(aTWV etc. Similarly !iIKaC73oITo on a 6 c. Argive inscription (Threatte, pp. 527, 
546). 
110 Attic inscriptions of the 5 c. show variation between single and double 3 in the 
forms ~(3)eI0\, ~1I3(3)avTIOI, KA~(3)o~lol-all referring to places in Asia Minor.Just 
possibly this is an attempt to represent an affricate of the type [dz]; a spelling!icr would, 
by recessive assimilation, be mispronounced as [ts], and 3 as [zd], whereas a spelling 
33 = [zdzd] would at least include the required sequence [dz]. 
117 The evidence is discussed in detail by M. Vasmer, /zsledovanie v oblasti drevne-
greleskoj fonetiki (Moscow, 1914). 
118 Greek Dialects and the transformation of an Indo-European process, p. 127. 
110 This appears from its regular prosodic value in later verse, as well as from the 
fairly common use of C73 for intervocalic 3 in Hellenistic inscriptions (Threatte, p. 
547). Gemination will, of course, only have applied to intervocalic position within 
the word. Cases are found of short quantity before initial (but not medial) 3 in later 
poetry: this applies to all the cases mentioned by Maas, § 123. 
58 

SINGLE-SYMBOL CONSONANT-GROUPS 
resentation as ss in the early Latin borrowing massa = j..\0:30 (cf. 
VL, p. 46). 
The grammarians' statements of the [zd] value are of course 
oflate date and almost certainly reflect a grammatical tradition 
rather than a continuation of this value in current speech. 
I t remains to mention that in the texts of Lesbian poetry 
medial 3 is replaced by as (va50s = 030S, etc.; initially also 
according to the grammarians), whereas 3 is used for a result 
of synizesis in e.g. 30: from [dya] = 510:. These spellings almost 
certainly represent a later editing, based on the then gener~l 
value of 3, since they are not found in early Lesbian inscriptions; 
but they point to the preservation of the pronunciation [zd] in 
this dialect after it had changed' to [z(z)] elsewhere; and to the 
coexistence with it of some other sound (? [dz] or [z]) of local 
origin, for which at the editorial date 3 was the most appropriate 
writing. 
(b) 
; and \jI 
From grammarians' descriptions of the values 
of these letters (e.g. tDionysius Thrax, Ars Gramm., p. 14 U), 
as well as from the origins of the sounds they represent (e.g. stem 
<pVAaK- + nom. sing. -s -+ <pVAO~, stem AEITT- + fut. -aw -+ AEil.llw), 
it is clear that they stand for [ks] and [ps] respectively.120 
The symbol:I apparently derives from the Semitic' samekh', but 
the origin of t is uncertain; it is in any case surprising that 
special symbols should have been adopted for these combina-
tions when they could very well have been written as Ka, lTC", 
and are in fact so written in some early alphabets. They may 
have been introduced after the analogy of the other combina-
tion of plosive + fricative, viz. 3 for [dz], for which, as we have 
seen, there were special reasons; but it may also be noted that 
these groups do have a structural peculiarity in that they can 
occur in both initial and final position, and to this extent are 
comparable in Greek with single consonants rather than with 
other groups.121 
120 In West Greek alphabets (from which the Latin is derived) [ks] is represented 
by X, and t stands for kh. 
121 Cf. J. Kurylowicz, II Fachtagung f indogermanische u. allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft 
(lnnsbruck, Oct. 1961), p. II J. 
59 

CONSONANTS 
In the pre-Eucleidean Attic alphabet they were written as XO" 
and cpO" respectively (e.g. ESOXO"EV, CPO"ECPIO"l.la), i.e. with aspirated 
first members; and this aspiration survives when, as occasion-
ally, there is metathesis of the sounds (e.g. E ]vcrxaI.lEVoO", 
O"CPUX[E).122 It seems unlikely, however, that full aspiration was 
involved; in forms like YPO:\Vw, e~w from ypacp-, ex- + -O"W the 
grammarians in fact speak of loss of aspiration; and this is 
supported by the operation of Grassmann's Law (see p. 15: e.g. 
original Exw -+ EXW, but not e~w -+ E~W). Certainly there is no 
contrast between aspirate and non-aspirate in this position,123 
and any degree of aspiration that may have existed here 
can be ignored by the modern reader without any danger of 
confusion. 
(x) -n:/aa 
It has already been mentioned (pp. 12 ff.) that Attic in a 
number of words shows TT where most other dialects have 
O"O"-e.g. I.lEAITTa, EAO:TTWV, TETTapES. In these forms the double 
consonants in question derive from original ry, ky and tw 
respectively, which might have been expected in the first 
instance to give rise to some kind of affricate stage such as [til] 
or [ts] (as in catch or cats). This stage is probably represented 
by some early Asiatic Ionic inscriptions which show in such 
cases a special letter T (e.g. 6-5 c. B.C. EAaTovoO", TETapcx9ovTa), 
which may be derived from the Semitic' tsade' (and perhaps 
survives in the numeral symbol ~ = goo,124 now known by the 
late Byzantine name of O"al.lni < ws av ni) ;125 a similar affricate 
may also be partially preserved in Mycenaean. Such a sound 
was also evidently a feature of some non-Greek 'Aegean' 
122 They are also generally rendered in Armenian by k's, p' s. 
123 On e.g. EK-aw3w, cf. L. Lupalj, SC, 8 (I g66), p. g. 
124 If so, it tends to invalidate the derivation of this letter from Semitic; for the 
numeral value stands at the very end, after w, and not in the position of the Semitic 
tsade, between pi and q;if ( = Greek IT and 9). Earlier shapes (apart from 'T') are 1; l' 
and th. For survivals in other alphabets cf. p. 47, n . 
... Cf. Galen, Comm. in Hippoc. Epid.IIli. 5 (p. 27 Wenkebach): 'oToiimiyp6:IlIlCXTOS 
xapaKTi)p E)(WV op6lav IlECTTlv ypallllT)V, WS Evlol yp6:cpoval T(;)V ~vCII(oaiwv xapaK-n;pa'. 
It is called 'lTapcxt<Vlalla' by Schol. in Dion. Thr., p. 496 H. 
60 

TT/n 
languages from which Greek adopted certain nouns and proper 
names (cf. inscr. OA1KOpvoTswv, 6aAorrT)a). 
These facts have led some scholars126 to suppose that both the 
TT of Attic and the aa of other dialects represent different 
attempts to write such an affricate without the use of a special 
symbol; and that the pronunciation as a double plosive or 
fricative is a post-classical development, based in part at least 
on the spelling. But apart from the improbability of spelling 
influence on colloquial speech in antiquity, it is scarcely credible 
that the existence of an affricate sound would not have been 
revealed in any inscriptional spelling outside those mentioned 
above (e.g. as Ta), nor the tradition of it survive in the account 
of any grammarian. On the other hand it is perfectly feasible 
for both [tt] and [88] to develop from an earlier affricate , 127 and 
there seems therefore no need whatever to assume that the TT 
of Attic or the aa of other dialects mean anything more than 
they appear to. 
A similar dialectal distribution of initial single T and a is seen 
in a few words, e.g. Attic T,;~epov ( < Iry-), TeVTAOV (loan-word) 
beside a,;~epov, aeVTAOV of Ionic. 
,.6 Thus Schwyzer, pp. 318 f.; Grammont, p. 107. 
127 The matter is discussed in more detail in Allen, 'Some problems of palatalization 
in Greek', Lingua, 7 (1958), pp. II 3 If.; TPS, 1973, pp. 1 12 If.; A. Bartonek, Vjvoj 
konsonanticklho systlmu v ftckjch dialektech (Prague 1961; English summary, pp. 139 If.). 
6r 

CHAPTER 2 
VOWELS* 
(i) Simple* vowels 
Greek, unlike Latin (VL, p. 47), shows no evidence of any 
considerable difference of periphery between the short* and 
long* vowel-systems-though the fact that the long system has 
to accommodate more contrasts than the short could mean that 
its periphery was fractionally larger. Anticipating the presen-
tation of the evidence for the various vowel-qualities, we may 
approximately represent the classical systems as follows: 
I. ii ... ______________ ..... u 
i 
Fig. 2. Classical Attic vowel-systems. 
In terms of post-Eucleidean orthography, these sounds are 
represented in Greek letters as follows: 
a, ii a 
~ 11 
e 
E 
~ 
EI 
0 
0 
Q 
c.> 
i, i 
11 ou 
ii,ii u 
Cl 
The openness* of the long vowel is expressly mentioned by 
Dionysius ofHalicarnassus (t De Compo xiv, p. 51 UR), but there 
is no evidence for any marked difference of quality between the 
62 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
long and the short; for both lengths a represents and is 
represented by Latin a in transcriptions. I t is therefore most 
probable that the Greek, like the corresponding Latin, short 
and long vowels were similar to the first and second vowels 
respectively in e.g. Italian amare. The nearest English approxi-
mations are (acoustically) the short [ A] in RP cup, and the long 
[3] infather, though the latter is too retracted in quality. For 
the short vowel the [re] of RP cap is decidedly inaccurate. 
In this respect the Greek and Latin short vowels are very 
different from those of Sanskrit, and of the Indo-Aryan 
languages up to the present day; for whereas the long ii of 
these languages is a fully open vowel, the Indians themselves 
have recognized from ancient times that their short a has a 
much closer* quality.1 One result of this is that the Greek short 
a may be transcribed by the long Indian ii (as in the Sanskrit 
astronomical term iipoklima- = ern6KA1\.la); conversely a short 
Indian a may be represented by a Greek mid* vowel-thus 
!3pa\.lEVal = briihma1]a-, with e for a, in the Greek translation of 
an edict of Ashoka recently found at Kandahar.2 These facts 
provide a further indication that the Greek short open vowel 
was not markedly dissimilar in quality from the long. 
E, 0 
There is no reason to think that the sounds represented 
by these letters were ever other than short mid vowels, front* 
and back* respectively, i.e. rather like the vowels of English pet 
and German Gott. 3 The view that they were of a specially close 
mid quality, i.e. [~], [Q], as in French gai, beau, is probably 
mistaken (cf. pp. 72, 89 f.). In modern Greek e (together with 
al) is if anything rather more open than the vowel of English 
pet, being approximately [~] ; and 0 (together with w) is midway 
between the vowels of English pot and port, i.e. approximately 
[Q] (though less fully back). 
The fact that Greek e commonly transcribes Latin l (KO\.lET10V 
etc.: VL, p. 49) is evidence only that, as known from other 
sources, the Latin vowel was a peculiarly open one, and so was 
I Cf. Allen, pp. 57 f. 
2 Cf. L. Renou, JA 1964, pp. 152 f. 
3 The vowel of English pot is decidedly less accurate, being fully open rather than 
mid. 

VOWELS 
as near to Greek E as to I. Conversely, the representation of 
Greek E by Latin l, in, for example, Philumina = <t>IAOV\lEvl1 
suggests only that the Latin l was about as near as l to the Greek 
E; in fact most of such examples involve words in which E is 
followed by a nasal (cf. also e.g. Artimisia = 'ApTE\.llaia), and in 
this environment it is not uncommon for the pronunciation of 
vowels to be somewhat closer than elsewhere; evidence of this 
is seen in some Greek dialects, notably Arcadian, in which e.g. 
-\lEVOS becomes -\lIVOS, Ev becomes iv. Thus the E in Greek words 
of this type may, even in Attic, stand for a specially close variety 
of [e] which would then be particularly near to the Latin l. 4 
In a similar manner, the representation of Greek 0 by Latin 
i1 in e.g. amurca = Cx\lOPYl1/' inscr. empurium = E\l1TOPIOV (cf. also 
VL, p. 49, n.), suggests only that the Latin i1 was about as near 
as if to the Greek o. Many of these cases involve a following r, 
which in some languages has an opening effect on vowels, 
including short vowels in Latin (VL, p. 5 I) ; so that the Latin 
i1 in such words may stand for a specially open variety, which 
would be particularly near to the Greek 0.6 
The fact that Greek 0 often transcribes i1 of other languages 
is evidence only that Greek v had a value other than [u] 
(see pp. 65 ff.) and so was unsuitable--e.g. Hdt. Map8ovlos = 
Iranian Marduniya. On Indo-Greek coins of the 2 c. B.C., 
conversely, Greek 0 is represented by u OR a (e.g. Heliyu-j 
Heliya-kreyasa = 'HAIOKAEOVS), since Indo-Aryan has no short 
o (similarly Teliphasa for Tl1AECPOV in the absence of a short 
e) . 
• In Attic inscriptions from late 5 c. to mid-3 c. there are numerous examples of EI 
being written for E before other than front vowels: e.g. 6eIOIV = 6EOiv. The most likely 
explanation is that the I here represents a semivocalic glide [y 1 in the transition from 
the front vowel to a contrasting vowel (cf. Allen, Word 15 (1959), pp. 249 ff.): for other 
possible explanations see Threatte, pp. 147 ff. Threatte's favoured explanation that EI 
here = a half-close short vowel [~l seems unlikely unless it is in any case associated with 
the [y 1 glide suggested above; for the posited front-closure could not be explained by 
assimilation to a non-front following vowel-but could be explained by assimilation to 
a [y]; the same will apply to the other dialects mentioned by Threatte (and myself, 
loco cit.). See also p. 83. 
b C for y is in any case abnormal (? Etruscan intermediary). 
• This argument is, however, somewhat weakened by the fact that a similar opening 
effect is seen in some Gruk dialects (e.g. Locrian cpaPEIV). 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
L There is no strong evidence that the long and short vowels 
differed in quality, both being close front unrounded*; and the 
narrow opening of the long vowel is expressly mentioned by 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (tloc. cit.). The short I of Greek is 
thus likely to have been of closer quality than the vowel of 
English bit; certainly it was closer than the Latin i', and it is this 
that accounts for the fact that E rather than I is used to transcribe 
the Latin vowel (see above). It was thus similar to unaccented 
modern Greek I (or 1"), v, EI, 01, etc.), or French [i] as in vite. . 
The long I of Greek is most nearly represented in English by 
the vowel of e.g. bead; but for most English speakers this is a 
diphthongal* sound, with a more open starting point: more 
similar is the accented I (etc.) of modern Greek, or French [i] 
as in vive. The view that the Greek long vowel was more open 
than the short (e.g. Sturtevant, p. 3 I) is probably mistaken; 
apart from the statement of Dionysius, such a situation would 
be surprising by comparison with many other languages. There 
are indeed a number of words in which Greek 'i is represented 
by Latin e or Romance f-e.g. inscr. Chrestus = Xp'icnos, French 
creme from XPiOIlO, Italian artetico from ap6p'iTIKoS; but in many 
such cases it is to be noted that the vowel is preceded by p, and 
it is possible that in Greek, but not Latin, a long vowel in this 
position was liable to a rather opener pronunciation than 
elsewhere (cf. the early differentiation seen in e.g. Attic fern. 
IlIKpa beside IlEyaA1")). In these forms, therefore, the Greek 'i may 
well have had a specially open value; but the remaining cases 
are too few to support the hypothesis that such a pronunciation 
was normal in other environments. 7 
u The sounds represented by this letter correspond genetically 
to the back close rounded * vowels [u] and [u] of rela ted 
languages: e.g. Greek 3VYOV = Latin iugum = Sanskrit yugam; 
6OIlOS = Latinfumus = Sanskrit dhuma4; and this was no doubt 
7 In crepida from KpTl1Ti6a the correspondence La!. i = Gr. i is of little significance 
in view of the anomalous representation of 11 by I (Meillet, Esquisse d'une histoirt de la 
langue latine, p. 93, suggests an Etruscan intermediary). 

VOWELS 
the original Greek value, as is further indicated by the historical 
retention of this quality in some (non-Attic) dialects (see 
p. 69). The same symbol continues to be used with the value [u] 
even in Attic in the diphthongs au and EV (and originally ov: 
see pp. 75 f.); this quality is also presupposed by the ono-
matopoeic verbs IlVKaOlJo:J for the lowing of cattle8 (cf. Latin 
mugire) and ~pVxaollal for the roaring oflions (cf. La tin rugire) , 
and by KOKKV~ as the name of the cuckoo (cf. Latin cuculus). 9 
But a change in this value seems to have occurred in 
Attic-Ionic at quite an early date. For Ionic such a change may 
possibly be indicated by the occasional inscriptional spellings 
ao, eo for the diphthongs from the 6 c. B.C. (cf. Bartonek, p. 
113). More certainly, we have already noted that Herodotus 
found the Ionic v unsuitable as a rendering of Old Persian ii, 
and some indication of its value may be gleaned from the fact 
that it is used to represent Old Persian vi [wi] in 'YO'TacnrTlS = 
Vistaspa-. [wi] is a sequence of a back rounded semivowel and 
a front unrounded vowel; and in the absence of a consonantal 
symbol for [w] (see pp. 47 fr.), the sequence could well have 
been approximately rendered by transcribing it with a letter 
which had the value of a combination of rounded and front 
quality, in fact afrontroundedvowel, like the French u or German 
ii. At a later date the same device is seen in the use ofKV to render 
the Latin qui (e.g. aKVAAloa = Aquilius, cf. Threatte, pp. 447 f.), 
where the Latin ui probably stands for [wi] (with front rounded 
semivowel: cf. VL, p. 17); KV similarly is sometimes rendered by 
Latin qui (cf. VL, p. 52). 
When the Boeotians adopted the Attic (Ionic) alphabet and 
its values around 350 B.C., they found the v unsuitable for 
representing the genetically corresponding [u] vowels of their 
dialect, which they rendered instead by ov: e.g. TT ]Ovale.> = Attic 
8 Cf. Dion. Hal., De Compo xvi, p. 62 UR. 
• See, however, p. 142. Originally onomatopoeic worns may of course continue in 
use after phonetic changes have destroyed their imitative value, as in the case of e.g. 
English bleat since about 1600. It is to be noted that K6KKV is no longer attested in classical 
Attic as a simple representation of the cry of the cuckoo. At Arist., Birds, 505 it is 
associated with the noun K6KKV~ and (507) the sense 'Quick!' Similarly ypu and (~v) 
~u have verbal connexions in yp~w, ~~w. Cf. also p. 142. 
66 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
nveiov. A more positive indication of the Attic value of v is 
suggested from the 3 c. B.C. by the Boeotian use of this letter 
for the sound corresponding to Attic 01 (e.g. TVa a"A"Ava 
TTpo~EVVa = ToiS a"A"AoIS TTpO~EvOIS). The development of original 
[oi] in this dialect is likely to have been first to a close mid front 
rounded [Q] (rather as in French creuse: cf. p. 81: possibly 
indicated by the earlier spelling OE), and then to a fully close 
[u]; for this would be exactly parallel to an earlier development 
of the equivalent unrounded vowel [~] (= Attic EI: cf. p. 70) to 
Boeotian [i]-e.g. Exl = Attic EXEI.10 The value oflong v in Attic 
is therefore likely to have been [u] at this time. l1 
On Indo-Greek coins of the 2 c. B.C. V is represented by i (e.g. 
Dianisiyasa = l1lovvaiov); but this does not necessarily mean 
that the Greek [ii] had by then become [i] as in the modern 
language; it indicates only that Indo-Aryan had no rounded 
front vowel, and so rendered it by the equivalent unrounded 
vowel. This conclusion is also supported by the Latin evidence; 
in early borrowings and transcriptions from Greek, Latin 
speakers wrote and pronounced u (i.e. the equivalent back 
vowel) for Greek v, as in e.g. Ennius" Burrus' fornuppos (cf. VL, 
p. 52); but with the spread of Greek knowledge, the Greek 
pronunciation and letter came to be adopted, at least in 
educated circles-hence e.g. hymnus, Olympia. Clearly, whilst 
the Greek sound was not [u], neither was it [i]; and there are 
references in Latin writers to its non-existence in native Latin 
words: thus e.g. Cicero, Or. 160 and tQuintilian, xii. 10. 27. 
In the 1 c. B.C. a front close rounded value is also roughly 
suggested by Dionysius of Halicarnassus (tDe Compo xiv, p. 52 
UR), who refers on the one hand to a 'marked contraction 
around the lips' and on the other to a sound which is 'stifled 
and thin'. 
10 In the 5 c. Boeotian varies between EI (or the monograph 1-) and 1, but thereafter 
1 is regular. 
II Earlier evidence is provided by the fact that in Attic inscriptions of the earliest 
period K rather than 9 is almost invariably preferred before v, suggesting that v was 
no longer a back vowel (see p. [7). The 'belt-and-braces' spelling tc9veAvloa (for 
K9VMvloa) on an amphora of c. 570 may indicate the transitional period. The occasional 
confusion ofv and I in semi-literate inscriptions (e.g. aplCTTovlllO beside aplCTTowllO on 
ostraka of 433/2) suggests that v was by now a front vowel. Cf. Threatte, pp. 22 f., 
26[ If. 

VOWELS 
A phonetic development in Attic itself suggests that the vowel 
in question still had a rounded quality in the 2 c. A.D.; for in 
inscriptions from the end of this century we find cases of v 
replaced by ov (= [ii]: see pp. 76 ff.) under certain specific 
conditions, principally after p (e.g. xpovaov for xpvaoii) Y It is 
true that already from the 4 c. B.C. one finds the spelling 1ll.lvav 
for i'lI.Ilav; but this means only that the unrounded I [i] was 
assimilated to the following rounded v [ii] in this word, and does 
not indicate a general confusion of the two sounds (it is to be 
noted that no such change is found when the following syllable 
has no v-thus e.g. 1ll.llaEI). Similarly the substitution (rare in 
inscriptions) of J31J3Aiov for J3vJ3Aiov simply indicates an assimi-
lation of [ii] to the following [i]Y 
That the pronunciation of v had still not changed to [i] by 
the 4 c. A.D. is suggested by the fact that Wulfila found it 
necessary to adopt the Greek letter in transcribing the v of 
Greek words. 14 
We may safely say, then, that in classical times the value of 
Attic short v was similar to that of e.g. French tune, and oflong 
v to that of French ruse. 
It may be noted that, for reasons that are not in all cases clear, 
initial v is always aspirated (6).15 
Confusion ofv with I is found in Egyptian papyri of the 2-3 c. 
A.D., or even earlier, but this is probably a regional peculiarity; 
12 Threatte, however (pp. 266-7), doubts the significance of these examples. 
13 The form ~V~AOS evidently survived (though also replaced analogically by ~f~AOS), 
and this may have influenced the maintenance of ~v~Afov: see e.g. Plate facing p. 70 
below. 
14 In roman transliterations of Gothic it is commonly written as w, because in 
non-Greek words it was used for the semivowel [w 1: thus e.g. swnagoge = ovvaywyiJ, 
but Gothic waurd • word'. It is also used to represent the Greek 01, which by this time 
had evidently the same value as v (e.g. in Lwstrws = w I\Va-rPOIS): cf. p. 8 I. In 
Armenian, Greek v and 01 are both variously rendered by iu, i and u. 
16 Buck's suggestion ((a), p. 134; cf. p. 54 above) that original u- first became [yu] 
(' cf. N E unit, etc.') will hardly work; for one thing, the supposed English parallel, 
involving Middle English [u] of French origin, has a much more complex history 
(-+ eu -+ iu -+ iu -+ yii); and for another, the Greek development is not restricted to 
dialects in which [u]-+ [il]. The Boeotian development 10V (e.g. TIoV)(a = -nlxTl) 
indicates only the palatalized quality of preceding dental consonants (cf. Allen, Lingua, 
7 (1958), p. 117)· The generalization of the aspirated initial must be later than the 
operation of Grassmann's Law (e.g. ucpafvw beside Sanskrit ubhniiti): cf. p. 43, n. 76. 
68 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
and the eventual change of [ii] to [i] seems not to be general 
until around the end of the millennium. The Byzantine naming 
of the letter as V I.jJlAOV still suggests a pronunciation [ii]; for 
I.jJlAOs is commonly used by Byzantine writers as the opposed 
term to Sicp60yyoS, and so in this case to distinguish the spelling 
v from 01 (which had come to have the same phonetic value: 
cf. p. 79 on e I.jJlAOV), and not from I. 
Some dialects evidently retained the original back [u] quality 
longer than Attic. We have seen that, when the Boeotians 
adopted the Attic alphabet, they found the Attic v unsuitabie 
for representing the corresponding sounds in Boeotian, and 
instead wrote ov (which in Attic had the value [ii]: see p. 76). 
The same retention of an [u] value is attested for Laconian 
by glosses such as (Hesychius) oVSpa:iVEI· mpIKa:6a:ipEI (i.e. = 
VSpa:iVEI), J\clKwvEs. The modern Tsaconian is also often cited 
as evidence for the continued retention of [u], in view of 
forms such as [zuy6] from 3vy6v as against [ziy6s] in standard 
modern Greek (e.g. Buck (b), p. 28; Sturtevant, p. 42). But 
this can hardly be relevant, since Tsaconian also shows [u] for 
original 01, which makes it more probable that the [u] is a 
redevelopment from earlier [ii]; and this is supported by the 
occurrence of' palatalization' before the [u] in these cases (e.g. 
[sculos] = c:n<VAOS, 
[cumume] = KOlj..lOVj..Ia:I), since this can 
only be caused by a front vowel articulation. l6 
'I and €t There is little external evidence to establish positive 
values for these symbols in classical Attic. That they were 
different is shown by the fact that they later develop differently, 
the sound represented by EI soon becoming a close long front 
vowel [1], whereas the sound of 1) remains for some time in the 
I. G. P. Shipp (,lOY = Y in Modern Greek', Glotta, 43 (1965), pp. 302 If.) rejects 
the derivation ofTsak. [u) from [til, and suggests that a pronunciation IOV [yu) arose 
(with consequent palatalization of a preceding consonant) as a result of speakers of 
dialects which allegedly retained the old [u) trying to pronounce words borrowed from 
other dialects with [ti). But this will not explain the development of 01. Newton (pp. 
19 If.) assumes [ti) as the general underlying form, but recognizes that there are some 
words (common to the dialects) which require [u) (e.g. ~OV<TTa.(\, <TTovmrl). Dialectal 
details are given by M. Setatos, 'T 6 1Tp6j3~,.wa Tiis ~~o.l~TlS TOU apxa10v t~~TlVIKOU v 
Ws TO vEa tMTlVIKa', E/\/\HNIKA, 20 (1967), pp. 338 If. 
69 

VOWELS 
mid region. These developments further indicate that the sound 
of EI was always closer than that of 1). This situation is reflected 
in the transcription of Greek words in Latin, where 1) is 
represented by e until a late date, whereas EI is represented 
by f (e.g. sepia = a1)lTia, pfriita = lTElpa-n;S, and Aristfdes = 
, APICTTEi!51)S) .17 
The development of EI to [i] is revealed by occasional 
confusion between EI and I from the late 4 c. B.C., becoming 
common in the 3 c.1S But there is no such confusion in earlier 
times, and the mid value of EI is still indicated by Xenophon's 
rendering as lTapa!5Elaos of an Iranian par(i)deza- 'garden' .19 
Thus the sounds of both 1) and EI were long mid vowels in 
classical Attic, but the former was more open than the latter. 
Since they had to be accommodated on the front axis between 
open [a] and close [i] (see p. 62), they can hardly have been 
other than open mid [~] (= ,,) and close mid [~] (= EI)-i.e. 
approximately the vowels of French tete for 1) and of German 
Beet for EI. 
There is a frequently cited piece of support for the inter-
pretation of 1) as [~] in the fact that in some fragments of 
Attic comedy the bleating of a sheep is represented by 13;; 13;; 
(note also the gloss in Hesychius, !31)!3;;v' lTp6!3crrov), and this 
can hardly stand for close mid [~].20 An onomatopoeic origin is 
also probable for the verbs I..l1)KaOl..lal, !3A1)xaOl..lal, used of the 
bleating of goats and sheep.21 
In the pre-Eucleidean alphabet, [~] was not distinguished 
from short [e], both being written as E.22 In the earlier inscrip-
tions E is also written for some of the cases (a) which later show EI 
(e.g. VEaeE = vEiaeE, eval = ETval), but other cases (b) are written 
17 The original form is 'APlcrnjS"S, but this becomes obsolete by around the mid-4 
c. (et: p. 85): Threatte, pp. 372 f. 
18 The confusion in MSS has led to some words still sometimes being wrongly speit 
(as shown by historical, comparative, and inscriptional evidence): thus el and not i is 
correct in e.g. TelOW, heloa, ~(~w, ~~l~a; and i, not el, is correct in e.g. o!KT(PW. 
18 Cf. H.Jacobsohn, KZ, 54 (1927), pp. 257 If . 
•• In modern Greek the same imitation is found with the representation Ilee. 
21 An earlier value of" was probably [ie] (see p. 73); and it is of interest to note 
that the conventional imitation of sheep's bleating in the modern Thessalian dialect 
is reported as [brebre 1 (Newton, p. So) : cf. also Allen, 'Varia onomatopoetica', Lingua, 
21 (1968), pp. 1 If. (2 f.). 
22 See e.g. lTOTepIOV = lT0-nlPIOV in Plate opposite. 
70 


EARLY AND LATE ATTIC I NSCR IPTIO NS 
Cup: Athens, c. mid-7 c. B.C. 
Sapio d~l TIOT£P10V (see pp. 70 f., 73, 75) 
Library notice: Athens, ? early 2 c. A.D. 
!,u!,Aiov OUK E~evexel\crETal, Eml w~6cra~ev . 
6:VUyl\crETal 6:TI6 wpas TIPWTT)S ~EXPI EKT'1S. 
(See pp. 68, 81 and n. 51 ) 
[Courte.ry of the American School oj Classical Studies at Athens.] 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
with EI from earliest times, e.g. TelXoo- = Teixos (both classes are 
exemplified by the form errrev = ehreiv). Th~ difference between 
the two sets of cases is accounted for by the fact that those of 
class (b) were originally diphthongs (as e.g. in English eight), 
and so were appropriately written with the digraph EI (with 
TeixoS, for example, compare the related Toixos and Oscan 
feihUss = muros); those of class (a) on the other hand were the 
result of 'contraction', or of' compensatory lengthening' (for 
the loss of a consonant), of original short [e ]-thus the examples 
cited above derive from Qriginal vee0"6e, EO-VOL. Since these cas~s 
were not originally diphthongal, it was not at first appropriate 
to write them with a digraph.23 
But beginning sporadically as early as the 6 c. B.C., and 
becoming regular in the 4 c., there is a change of spelling 
whereby the cases of class (a) also come to be written with EI 
(for chronology cf. Threatte, pp. 173-90). The only possible 
interpretation of this is that classes (a) and (b) had come to have 
the same pronunciation. Theoretically this could mean either 
that the original monophthongs (simple vowels) of (a) had 
become diphthongs, or that the original diphthongs of (b) had 
become monophthongs. But since the tendency of Greek at all 
periods is to monophthongization rather than diphthongiza-
tion, only the second supposition is realistic. The fact that the 
monophthong is in some cases the product of an earlier 
diphthong [ei], comprising a mid and a close element, is one 
further indication that the resulting sound was a close mid 
vowel. 
The merging of the two classes of sound had evidently taken 
place in very early times; the fact that occasional spellings with 
E for class (a) persist even into the early 4 c. B.C. can well be 
attributed to orthographic conservatism,24 and it is virtually 
23 The spelling Ellli 'sum' « -Will) is surprising. It appears as early as the 7 c. in 
graffiti (cf. Plate facing p. 70: subgeometric cup), and is in fact the normal spelling. This 
suggests that. in spite of its origin. it was pronounced as a diphthong-perhaps by 
analogy with the second person eT ( < -~(71 and so originally diphthongal): cf. Threatte, 
p. 176. Confusion with ETIlI 'ibo' is a less likely explanation. 
2. Resulting also in occasional spellings with E for the original diphthong: e.g. 
TE)(O [ nOIOI; such spellings are infrequent, but that they occur at all is a further 
indication that the two classes merged to a monophthong rather than a diphthong: 
cf. Threatte, pp. 173. 299 If. 

VOWELS 
certain that by the 5 c. B.C. all words which are now written 
with EI had the same sound, i.e. a long close mid vowel [~]. The 
choice of the EI rather than the E spelling is hardly surprising, 
since it avoids ambiguity with E = short [e] (and, in !1re-
Eucleidean orthography, with E = long [~]). 
Incidentally, the fact that a lengthening of originally short 
[e] gives rise to a close mid long vowel [~], as in class (a), is no 
indication that the short vowel also was a close mid vowel (as 
assumed e.g. by Sturtevant, p. 34); for it is common for long 
and short mid vowels to differ in quality.25 
Since, as we have seen, the EI in some words represents 
sounds which were not formerly diphthongs, it is in such cases 
sometimes referred to as a 'spurious diphthong'. This is a 
peculiar misnomer. For one thing, EI is not a diphthong but a 
digraph; and for another, in neither class of cases does it 
represent a diphthong in classical times. The term thus reveals 
a confusion between speech and writing, and between descrip-
tive and historical statement. 'Shorthand' expressions, at least 
of the former kind, do no harm (and similar instances may be 
found in this book) provided they are recognized for what they 
are; but the case in question has sometimes led to the mistaken 
assumption of two different pronunciations of EI (and ov: cf. p. 76). 
To the above account of the value of EI an exception needs to 
be made in the cases where it is followed by a vowel. With 
regard to the later correspondence ofEI = Latin f, Priscian (GL, 
ii, p. 41 K) specifically observes, ' ... consonante sequente pro 
ei diphthongo longam i ponimus, ut NEiAOS Nilus'. Before vowels, 
on the other hand, the normal representation is bye, as in 
Achilleus, Aeneas, A lexandrea , Alpheus, Augeas, brabeum, Calliopea, 
chorea, Dareus, Decelea, gynaeceum, Medea, museum, panacea, platea, 
spondeum,26 which suggests that in this context the Greek EI 
continued until Roman times to have a mid value. Occasional 
alternative spellings with f, as Darius, could represent either a 
2. Cf. Allen, Word, 15 (1959), pp. 240 ff.; see also pp. 89 f. below. 
2. Cf.]. Tolkiehn, 'Die Wiedergabe des griechischen -El- im Lateinischen', PhW, 43 
(1923), pp. 44 ff. and 68 ff. 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
yet later Greek pronunciation or a purely graphic transfer of 
the correspondence EI = ffrom preconsonantal position. 27 Some 
early loans to Latin show a shortening of e to .e, as bal(i)neum 
and the alternatives chorea, platea. 
This peculiarity agrees with the graphic situation in Greek 
itself; for whereas before consonants EI begins to be confused 
with I in the 3 c. B.C., before vowels it begins about the same 
period, and continues for some time, to be confused with 1'1 
rather than I-which is a further indication of its continued 
mid quality in this context28 (see also p. 83 below). 
We may now return to the other long mid front vowel, [~]. 
In pre-Eucleidean spelling this sound also is represented by E. 
But with the introduction of the Ionic alphabet, 
[~] wa:s 
unambiguously represented by the letter H (1'1), which had 
earlier stood for [h] (see p. 52), but which, as a result of 
'psilosis' (' dropping of h's ') in East Ionic, had been left free 
for vocalic use.29 
The [~] of Attic-Ionic has two origins: one from an original 
e, the other from an original a; thus e.g. IJ';TTlP [m~t~r] from 
mater (cf. Doric lJa-n,p). The development of ii to [~] probably 
proceeded via a stage [re] (with the approximate quality 
of the English vowel in bad), intermediate between [a] and 
[~]. This stage may perhaps be represented by some Ionic 
inscriptions of the Cyclades, where H was at first used only to 
represent the vowel arising from original a, as e.g. in 90PTl (from 
21 A converse transfer might possibly account for the puzzling instances of EI = i 
before consonants, as in hypoUnwa, tenesmos, hypogeson, cyperum, and occasional edyllium, 
Helotes, Perithow, Polyclelw. It seems doubtful whether the comment ofF. O. Weise, Die 
griechischen Wiirter im Lattin, p. 37, is relevant (' ... charakteristisch ist, dass fast durchweg 
vor oder hinter dem in Frage stehenden Vokale eine Liquida steht '), since one would 
expect opening to apply only in the case ofa preceding p (cf. p. 65). 
I. The change to [i] here is probably datable to the 2 c. A.D., when the writing with 
1] ceases, and Herodian (ii. pp. 4[5 If. L) finds it necessary to pronounce on the 
orthography of words ending in -IOS!-EIOS etc.; but an earlier change, due to 
assimilation, is found in the case of lEI, which develops via [ii] to simple [i] (e.g. 
VYla = \ry'IEla) from the [ c. B.C.; an even earlier assimilative development of [~] 
to [i] is seen e.g. in Attic XV-IOI beside Ionic XEIAIOI. For further details cf. Threatte, 
pp. [66, [go If., 202 If. 
I. The [h] value survived in the West Greek alphabet, whence Latin H. Since the 
same alphabetical position was maintained for both values, the Latin-derived Gothic 
h has the same numeral value (8) as the Greek 1] (and its Old Georgian derivative 
standing for fey]). 
73 

VOWELS 
korwa) = Attic KOP1), whereas E continued to be used for the 
vowel derived from original e, as e.g. in ave6EKEV = Attic 
Cxve&r,KEV (from -the-). 30 But in Attic no such distinction 
is found, the vowels of both origins being represented by H, so 
that we must assume a single pronunciation as [~].31 
Boeotian, like Attic, had two mid front long vowels [~] and 
[~]. But the distribution of these did not correspond to that of 
Attic; for as earlier [~] had closed to [1] in Boeotian (see 
p. 67), so [~] had closed to [~]. Consequently, when the Attic 
alphabet was adopted for Boeotian, one finds e.g. Boeotian 
lTCXTElp corresponding to Attic lTCXTr,p. The [~] of Boeotian was 
the result of monophthongizing the diphthong [ai], so that 
Boeotian has K1) corresponding to Attic Kol, etc. It is thus 
clear from the Boeotian spellings that Attic 1) still had the 
value [~] in the first half of the 4 c. B.C. 
When, at the end of the 4 c., Attic [~] also began to close to 
[1], it is possible that [~] too may have tended to become closer. 
Its representation bye on Indian coins of the 2 c. B.C., however, 
(as well as in Latin: cf. p. 70) shows that it remained a mid 
vowel, and had not yet become [1] as in modern Greek. In the 
I c. B.C. Dionysius of Halicarnassus (t De Compo xiv, pp. 5 I f. 
UR) still distinguishes between 1) and I, and the fact that he 
describes the former as more euphonious suggests that he is 
referring to their sound and not simply to their graphic form. 
Confusion between 1) and 1 in Attic inscriptions begins around 
150 A.D.,32 but some confusion with E also continues to be 
found. 33 In some areas the mid value of the Koine 1) may have 
30 On the Cycladic Ionic practice see further A. L. Eire, lnnovaciones del jonico-atico 
(vocalismo) (= Acta Salmanticensia, filos. y tetras, 60 (1970)), p. 18; and R. Arena, 'La 
lettera 8 nell'uso greco piiI antico', RIL, 102 (1968), pp. 3 If. 
31 In an article' On the dual pronunciation of Eta' (TAPA, 93 (1962), pp. 490 If.), 
R. W. Tucker has suggested that, in spite of the spelling, Attic distinguished the two 
vowels in pronunciation until the 4 C. B.C. But his argument is dubious, being based 
on the assumption that otherwise, in the choruses of Attic tragedy, the poets would not 
have known when and when not to substitute the Doric ex for the Attic 1). For further 
discussion see Bartonek, pp. 104 If.; Threatte, TAPA, 100 (1969), pp. 587 If. 
32 Startling but quite aberrant is the 5 c. B.C. aelva aplC:r apTE~lIa on the slate of a 
schoolboy signing himself as 61l.1oo06evla (sic): cf. SEC, 19, no. 37; E. Vanderpool, AJA, 
63 (1959), pp. 279 f. and Plate 75, fig. I I; Threatte, p. 165. 
33 Even at Athens the (I) pronunciation may have remained non-standard for some 
time after 150: cf. Threatte, p. 166. 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
been preserved even longer, since, whereas the Gothic spelling 
of Wulfila confuses EI and I as ei, " is still represented as e. Still 
later, Old Armenian commonly renders" bye or e, whereas EI 
and I are rendered by i; and the Old Georgian alphabet gives 
different phonetic values to the letters derived from" and I 
([ey] and [i] respectively).34 In the Old Slavonic alphabets, 
however, both Cyrillic and Glagolitic, no phonetic distinction 
is made between the letters derived from H, " and I, I, their 
distribution being purely a matter of orthographic convention. 
wand ou The early development of the sounds represented by 
these symbols was largely parallel to that of" and EI. That is, 
at one stage they had the values of a long open mid back [Q] 
and close mid back [(I], to which approximate equivalents 
are provided by the vowels of English saw and French cote 
respectively. 
The evidence is derived mainly from the internal structure 
of the system; the value of w as an open mid vowel incidentally 
fits its use in the probably onomatopoeic !3pwll&cr6ol (of don-
keys: cf. English (hee-) haw) 35 and KpW3EIV (of crows: cf. English 
caw).36 
In the pre-Eucleidean alphabet [Q] was not distinguished 
from short [0], both being written as O. In the earlier inscrip-
tions 0 is also written for some of the cases (a) which later show 
ov (e.g. IlIcr6oVTO = IlIcr6oOvTo, EAeOO"av = eAeovO"av),37 but other 
cases (b) are written with OY from earliest times, e.g. (pr. 
n.) O"lTov5\a0" (both classes are exemplified in aKOAov60VTO = 
Co<oAov6oOvTo). The difference between the two sets of cases is 
accounted for by the fact that those of class (b) were originally 
.4 It is noteworthy that in modern Pontic Greek" is still represented by E in many 
categories and contexts (cf. D. E. Oeconomides, Lautlthre des Pontischtn, pp. 1 1 If.) . 
• 5 Cf. the w of Apuleius' Ass (Met. iii. 29), which is evidently considered more 
appropriate than the close mid Latin 0 U. L. Heller, C], 37 (1941-2), pp. 531 If., and 
C], 38 (1942-3), pp. 96 If.). 
'6 Also in ~wKo:a6cXl, in its original sense of the roaring of camels; an alternative 
representation of the element of nasali ty is seen in the form W~6:3EIV (cf. F. Bancalari, 
SIFC, 1 (1893), p. 93). 
'7 See also 6aplo = 9aplov in Plate facing p. 70 . 
75 

VOWELS 
diphthongs (of a type similar to, but more back than, that of 
English [ow), and hence were appropriately written with the 
digraph OY (with the above examples compare the cognate 
cl"'TTeV5w, KEAeveos) ; those of class (a) on the other hand were the 
result of the contraction, or compensatory lengthening, of an 
original short [0 ]-thus the cited examples arise from original 
~lae60VTO, EA66vaav. Since these latter cases were not originally 
diphthongal, it was not at first appropriate to write them with 
a digraph. 
But over a period 6-4 c. B.C. there was an increasing ten-
dency, which finally became regular practice, to write the cases 
of class (a) also with OY.38 The clear interpretation of this is that 
classes (a) and (b) had come to have the same pronunciation, 
and so could be written in the same way; which means (cf. p. 
7 I) that the original diphthong, [ou], comprising a mid and a 
close element, had come to be a long close mid vowel [(>], 
identical in quality with the vowel arising from contraction or 
compensatory lengthening. 
The merging of these sounds was certainly complete by the 
5 c., though, as in the case of the corresponding front vowel, 
there are examples of conservative spelling, and occasional 
spellings with 0 for the original diphthong (cf. p. 7 I, n. 24): 
e.g. CTTTo510a. 39 As in the case ofel (see p. 72), the ou representing 
a vowel of non-diphthongal origin is sometimes referred to as 
a 'spurious diphthong'. 
The fact that the lengthening of an original short [0] gave 
rise to a close mid long vowel [(>] in class (a) is no indication 
that the short vowel also was a close mid vowel (cf. p. 72). 
We have seen that the Boeotians found the Attic u unsuitable 
to represent their own [u] vowels, and used instead the Attic 
digraph ou. This most probably indicates that by the mid 4 c. 
the earlier Attic [(>] had become a fully close [ii],40 as it certainly 
38 For chronology of the change in spelling see Threatte, pp. 238-259, 350 f. 
3. Relatively more frequent than E for original fl, presumably because original au 
was less common: cf. Threatte, pp. 350 f. 
40 The proof is not, however, absolute, since even an [Q] quality would have been 
the nearest to Boeotian [u]. 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
had by Roman times (thus e.g. Thiicjdides, and conversely 
'POVcplVOS). It does not seem possible to determine just how long 
before 350 B.C. this change took place; it need not have been 
close to this date (as Sturtevant suggests); the fact that 0 
continued to be written for OY until about this time does not 
necessarily indicate a continuing mid value, since it may be no 
more than a conservative spelling. It could be that the change 
to [ii] took place during the classical period; but since the date 
cannot be fixed, it would clearly be unjustifiable to adopt 
different pronunciations for different authors! In adopting a 
single pronunciation for OV, it seems preferable to choose the 
later [ii] rather than the earlier [9]; for if we are wrong, at least 
we shall be doing nothing worse than, say, pronouncing 
Aeschylus as Demosthenes might have done; whereas, if we 
adopt the other alternative, we may be giving an author a 
pronunciation which he had never received in antiquity.41 
Structural considerations make it more probable that the 
change from [9] to [ii] was quite early. We have already 
discussed the change of original back [u] to front [ii], for which 
a period 7-6 c. B.C. has been plausibly suggested (Bartonek, 
p. 
I 15). This shift had the effect of reducing the long 
vowel phonemes on the back axis from four fa, Q, 9, ii/ to 
three fa, Q, 9/, which would be in accordance with a gen-
eral tendency to reduce the number of distinctions on this 
relatively short axis.42 Even if we do not go so far as to follow 
M. S. Ruiperez43 in envisaging the change of [ii] to [u] as 
actually pressured by 'overcrowding' on the back axis, it 
seems unlikely that, once this change had taken place, the 
opportunity would long have been resisted of increasing the 
41 In favour of the early (6- 5 c.) development of [Q] to [til cf. Schwyzer, p. 233. 
An argument against a change earlier than about mid-4 c. is suggested by Ruijgh 
(Mnem. 31 (1978), p. 88). Up to that time, as already mentioned, the spelling 0 could 
be used for OY: but there are virtually no Attic alternative spellings AO, EO for the 
diphthongs AY, EY-as might have been expected, in Ruijgh's opinion, if the value of 
the OY vowel were [til (such spellings are common in Ionic: cf. p. 66). This negative 
evidence, however, is not conclusive, and I tend here to follow the views of other 
scholars, including Teodorsson (1974, pp. 291 f.) . 
•• Cf. A. Martinet, Economie des changements phonetiques, pp. 98 f. 
.3 Word, 12 (1956), pp. 67 If. 
77 

VOWELS 
acoustic distance between [Q] and [<)] by shifting the latter 
to [ii].44 
Pre-Se. 
Se. 
4e. 
3e. 
2e. ; c'-ll·c. 
2 c. 
3e. 
Greek 
Be AD 
Modem 
i 
a 
'j 
i 
ii-ii 
• 
1 
i 
-
~--I 
1 
II 
~ 
i 
1 
9 
0 
au 
i? -ii 
u 
<Xl 
al 
i 
e 
au 
au 
.* 
av 
eu 
** 
ev 
01-(101) 
(1~)-ii 
* 
1 
01 
I 
• See pp. 68f. 
•• See pp. 80; 94, n. 8. 
Fig. 3. Approximate chronological development of Attic long vowels and 
'short' diphthongs (excluding pre-vocalic position). 
The clear recommendation, therefore, is to pronounce ov in 
all cases as a long close back vowel [ii], i.e. as accented ov in 
modern Greek, or as e.g. in English pool or French rouge . 
.. See, however, Bartonek, p. 114. The fact that, whilst short [u] followed its long 
partner to [til, short [0] did not shift to [u], would be explained by the fact that in 
the short vowel-system there was no contrast of open and close mid vowels. [u] in fact 
remained a gap in the system (see p. 62) until in late Greek the distinction between 
long and short vowels was abolished (cf. pp. 93 f.). 

SIMPLE VOWELS 
Whilst it is possible that the open mid vowel [Q], relieved 
of the necessity to avoid confusion with [Q], may then have 
moved up into a rather closer position, there is no actual 
evidence for this, and one is therefore advised to pronounce it 
as the vowel in RP saw. 
In pre-Eucleidean spelling [Q]' like [Q] and the short [0], had 
also been represented by O. But with the introduction of the 
Ionic alphabet, [Q] came to be unambiguously represented by 
the letter Q (later termed W IlEya as distinguished from 0 IlIKp6v) •. 
(ii) Diphthongs* 
The diphthongs of classical Attic are represented by the di-
graphs ai, av, EV, and 01. 
CIt corresponds to a diphthong [ai] (as in English high) in 
related languages (e.g. ai6w: Lat. aedes), and this value is 
confirmed up to Roman times by transcriptions into and from 
Latin (e.g. palaestra, KaIC:rap). 
At a later period a monophthongal development took place, 
giving a quality [~]; this is first revealed by spellings with e 
from about 125 A.D., and especially after 150 (cf. Threatte, 
pp. 294 ff.). The use of e rather than 1) in this'value is no doubt 
due to the fact that the value of 1) had already closed to [~], 
which soon after closed further to [1] (see p. 74) ; so that the new 
[~] vowel could then be approximately represented only by 
spelling with the short vowel-symbol e (e.g. KITe = KeiTal).45 The 
monophthongal pronunciation is also confirmed for this period 
by a specific statement of Sextus Empiricus (Adv. Gramm. 116) 
that the sound of ai, like that of el, was' simple and uniform'. In 
Byzantine times the identical values of al and e led to the latter 
being distinguished as 'e IVIAOV' (cf. p. 69). 
ClU 
similarly corresponds to a diphthong [ au] (as in English 
how) in related languages (e.g. aV~w: Lat. augeo) , and this value 
•• Conversely at is found for E, and this is reflected in the Gothic use of ai for [e I, 
e.g. taihun 'ten'. 
79 

VOWELS 
also is confirmed by transcriptions into and from Latin (e.g. 
glaucus, KAOVSIOS). 
EU 
There is no evidence that in classical Attic this digraph 
meant anything but what it appears to, namely a diphthong 
[eu]. There is no parallel for such a diphthong in English RP, 
though something like it may be heard in the Cockney 
pronunciation of el(l) in words such as belt, bell. It is to be noted 
that it is a genuine diphthong, i.e. a glide from [e] towards [u], 
and not, as is commonly heard· from English speakers, a 
sequence of semivowel and long vowel like the [yii] in English 
neuter (cf. p. 146 and VL, p. 63). 
In both ov and EV the v preserved its original quality as a back 
[u], i.e. it was not fronted to [ii] as elsewhere (cf. pp. 66 ff.). 
Neither ofthese diphthongs developed to monophthongs;46 but 
at a later date, which cannot be certainly determined,47 the 
second element (which could alternatively be analysed as a 
semivowel /w /: cf. p. 5) developed a fricative pronunciation 
[v]; so that in modern Greek the value of these digraphs is 
[av] and [ev] (or [af] and [ef]: see p. 48) .48 This development 
could well be connected with the change of 13 [b] to [v] (see 
pp. 30 ff.)-but the date of this also is uncertain.49 
OL 
Here also a diphthongal pronunciation is clearly indicated 
at least until Roman times (e.g. Phoebus, poena: cf. VL, p. 62). 
The most obvious interpretation would be as [oi] in e.g. English 
toy, coin; but in some Greek dialects there is evidence which 
seems to suggest that, by a process of assimilation, the first 
element of the diphthong had been fronted, giving something 
•• Gothic au for [0] is presumably by analogy with ai for [e]. 
47 The Jewish catacombs at Rome still indicate a diphthongal value in the 
2-3 c. A.D . 
•• Similar developments have occurred independently in modern Greek dialects: 
thus in S. W. Rhodes IlCryOVAO 'cheek' -+ *[maulo]-+ *[mawlo]-+ [mavlo]; and 
parallel developments occur even with l-dipthongs: thus in Zakynthos 136151 'ox' -+ 
[v6yai], i3oT]6aw 'I help' -+ [vox9ao] (Newton, p. 65). 
•• See further p. 94, n. 8. 
80 

DIPHTHONGS 
of the type [oi],50 approximately as in FrenchJeuilie. There is 
no direct evidence for this pronunciation in Attic; it might, 
however, make rather more plausible the confusion reported by 
Thucydides (ii. 54) as to whether the oracle had said AOIIlOS 
'plague' or AIIlOS 'famine', since [oi], being entirely a front 
diphthong, would be nearer than the mixed [oi] to the sound 
[1J. 
At a later date 01 became confused with v; thus (c. 240 A.D.) 
lTOlavE'VIc..>VQ = nvav.,51 indicating a pronunciation [\1] for 
both,52 following a development attested for Boeotian at a much 
earlier period (see pp. 66 f.). As in the case of Boeotian also, an 
intermediate stage in the development was probably [9] (cf. 
VL, pp. 52, n. 2; 62); the closure of [9] (0 [\1] would then 
be parallel to the earlier Attic change of [~] to [1] (see pp. 67, 
70 ).53 
'Diphthongs' before vowels 
In prevocalic position all the above digraphs are perhaps 
better considered as representing a sequence of short vowel 
(fal, lei, or lof) and semivowel Uyl or Iw/), these latter 
being generally double and so creating heavy quantity in the 
syllable (cf. VL, pp. 38 ff.). The same would apply to VI (prior 
to its monophthongal development to 054), which in the Attic 
6. Cf. Sturtevant, p. 51, n. 48. 
61 Earlier also avvyTlaETCXl = avOly. on a notice from the library of Pantainos: cf. 
SEG, 21, no. 500; Hesperia, 5 (1936), p. 42, and see Plate facing p. 70 above. The library 
was dedicated to Trajan (cf. SEG, 21, no. 703); such a notice could of course well be 
later than the foundation, but the graphic style is appropriate to the late I c. or early 
2 c. A.D. (cf. M. Burzachechi, Rendic. Lineei, ser. viii, 18 (1963), pp. 91 f.). 
6. This pronunciation is also probably reflected in late Latin squinum for earlier 
schoenum < Gk. axoivoc; (e.g. Isidore, Orig. xvii. II; cf. Forcellini s.v., and p. 66 above). 
63 For an intermediate development of 01 to [9] as a stage towards the confusion of 
01 and v cf. S. G. Kapsomenos, 'Das Griechische in Agypten', MH, IO (1953), pp. 
248 If. (255 f.). For the confusion in papyri see also F. T. Gignac, 'The language of the 
non-literary Greek papyri', Proc. XII In/. Congo of Papyrology (= Amer. St. in Papyr9logy, 
vol. 7, 1970), pp. 139 If. (141). 
6. Beginning with 66s for vl6s in the 6 C. B.C. (e.g. hexameter ending evSIKO hvoa). 
Fern. participles in -via were preserved until the 4 C. B.C. This development seems to 
have been peculiarly Attic, as explicitly stated by Herodian (see Threatte, p. 338), and 
later vl6s at least was restored. 
81 

VOWELS 
dialect only occurred before vowels, 55 thus [iiyy]. 56 
Indications of these values are perhaps given by dialectal 
spellings such as Arg. cx6avanal and Cor. EVFapxoa;57 and they 
are supported by the fact that in Attic verse the double [yy] 
semivowel may occasionally be reduced to a single [y], giving 
light quantity to the syllable-thus e.g. yepal6s, 5eii\a!os, with 
light middle syllable in both tragedy (lyric) and comedy, and 
light initial syllable frequently in lTOIW, TOIOiiTos. A reduction of 
[ww] to [w] is also seen in Pindar (Pyth. viii, 35) Ixvelic.uv with 
light middle syllable. Similar reductions are found in Homer 
(e.g. in oTos II. xiii, 275, etc.; xa~aleVval xvi, 235; vl6s iv, 473); 
and since a diphthong cannot be shortened in the same sense 
as a monophthong, the so-called 'epic correption' of a final 
diphthong before an initial vowel (cf. p. 97) is simply another 
such instance of short vowel followed by a single semivowel 
(note the two treatments of 01 in II. iii, 1]2 ai50i6s Te ~oi eaal). 
In some cases the reduction led eventually to complete loss of 
the semivowel, as in the Attic doublet lToeiv, and lT6a, aToa 
beside Ionic lToifl, Doric aTOla.58 Similar doublets are also 
found in the text of Homer-e.g. Od. vi, 292 v&el beside ix, 
222 vaiov; and alongside the genitive -010 (= [oyyo]) on the 
one hand, and the contracted -ov on the other, one must re-
store -00 (or perhaps [oyo]) in e.g. II. xv, 66; xxii, 3 I 3 (MSS 
'1i\lov, aypIOV).59 
•• Preconsonantal VI was generally monophthongized prehistorically to ii (e.g. Attic 
dimin. (X66~hov, Hom. optat. SalVino). Note, however, Hom. 1T~TJ6vi, Lesbian TViSe 
(= TijSe) etc. (by contraction ofvY) . 
•• Note that VI is no' to be pronounced as a sequence of semivowel [w] and long vowel 
[i] as in English we (cf. VL, p. 42); such a pronunciation, though often heard, is 
disproved by the fact of elision before vl6s (as well as by the development to 6), and 
by the light first syllable of e.g. (Svia (where [dw] would create heavy quantity: cf. 
P·49)· 
67 The inserted I and F may alternatively be considered simply as automatic glides 
(which are therefore not normally indicated) following a vocalic element I, V (as in e.g. 
Arg. SaIJIIOPYOI, Ion. yapvfovro); but phonetically this makes little difference . 
•• There is also ample inscriptional evidence. a6r)vala develops via a6r)vaa to 
contracted a6r)va, which is regular after 300 B.C. For details of these developments see 
Threatte, pp. 27D-94, 324-33. The vowel-lengthening in Attic D.aa, &el, &e-r6s, KAaelV 
etc. (beside e.g. Hom. D.alTJ) has not been certainly explained . 
•• Failure to recognize this has led to false emendations in e.g. Ii. v, 2 I (6:S~qleloii 
KTalJfv()lo, for 6:~qleoii restorable as 6:~qleo(I)O); vi, 34 (KCXKOIJTJX6:vov 6KPVoEaaTlS, 
for -ov KPV- restorable as -0(1)0 KpV-). 

DIPHTHONGS 
The usual pronunciation of the digraphs ai, au, 01, ev, VI, 
before vowels was thus probably [ayy], [aww] , [oyy], [eww], 
[iiyy], with approximate phonetic parallels for the first three 
in English phrases such as high yield, bow-wave, toy yacht (and for 
the 'reduced' forms ray], roy] in e.g. my own, coyote). 
We have seen (p. 72) that the long close mid front vowel [~] 
el was slower to develop to a close [1] before vowels than before 
consonants or pause. This could well be the result of a delayed 
development of pre vocalic el in earlier times; this always derives 
from a previous 'diphthong' (probably to be interpreted as 
[eyy]), and it is possible that the monophthongal development 
was here slower than for preconsonantal [ei]. The earlier value 
seems to survive in Homer, in view of doublets such as Te;\ew 
beside Te;\elw, XaAl<eos beside XaAI<EIOS, which are most readily 
explained as standing for a reduced variant [ey] beside [eyy] , 
as in the case of e.g. [oy] beside [oyy] (the omission of I in Te;\ew, 
XCx;\l<eOS, etc. would be due to the fact that a [y] glide was 
automatic after a close or mid front vowel; in Attic, with further 
loss of the single [y], the vowels in these words contracted, 
giving Te;\&, Xa;\I<OVS, etc.). The same type of reduction is, 
however, also attested for Attic from the 5 c. B.C., and becomes 
particularly common in the 4 c.; it is revealed in inscriptions, 
as in the text of Homer, by writings without I, e.g. lepea, 5wpea 
for tepela, 5wpelCx; after the 4 c. one or other of the variants tends 
to be generalized (mostly el); in the case of n;\eiwv, el is regular 
before long vowels, and e in the neuter n;\eov, whilst practice 
varies before short vowels in other forms of the word.eo 
These developments are most easily understood if one as-
sumes that in the classical period el before vowels, unlike before 
consonants (see p. 71), stands for [eyy],61 in which only later 
10 For full details of inscriptional evidence see Threatte, pp. 302-23. 
II There is a comparable situation in Boeotian, where 01- v [til preconsonantally 
(see p. 67), but rarely prevocalically: thus e.g. jXlIW'TVa = Bo\(,),.ois. Sanskrit also 
provides a parallel, e.g. in the verb meaning 'lie': in the athematic form of the 3 sing. 
pres. (ending -tel this appears as iete (= Kei,.<Xl), but in the thematic forin (ending -ate) 
it appears as Jayate, with which in turn one may compare the Hom. 3 plur. impf. 
KEIa-ro -
~o. 

VOWELS 
does the [ey] portion develop to monophthongal [~] (with the 
second [y] then becoming an automatic glide). An approximate 
phonetic parallel is provided by an English phrase such as 
hay-yield; the' reduced' variant, as in 1TAEOV, is approximately 
represented by e.g. play on.82 
In view of the general parallelism between the development 
of EI and OU, one might wonder whether a similarly delayed 
development applied to ou before vowels. Certainly at some 
early period the value seems to have been [OWW] , since a 
reduced form [ow] is found in, for example, Attic OKO,,83 beside 
Hom. OKOU,,; and the Attic c:,T6s (gen. sing. of ovs) beside Hom. 
OVaTOS represents a contraction of OaTOS which in turn pre-
supposes an intermediate stage oraTOs. But where prevocalic 
ou survives, there are no indications that by classical times its 
pronunciation was other than in preconsonantal position, i.e. 
[ii]. 
(iii) 'Long'diphthongs 
A particular problem is presented in Greek by a series of 
diphthongs, commonly known as 'long' diphthongs, which 
were partly inherited and partly created by contraction, and 
in which the first element is represented by a long vowel as 
opposed to the short vowel of the diphthongs so far considered. 
Where the second element is I , such 'long' diphthongs are 
relatively common-thus aI, 111, WI; but there are also rarer cases 
of Attic au (e.g. Ta\rr6), 11V (e.g. 11vPEe"V), and wu (1Tpc.lVS&V Ar. 
Birds, 556). Modern texts tend generally to follow Byzantine 
practice in writing the I subscript-thus <jX, 1), '+l. 
In the position before a vowel these might present no 
difficulty, since they could be considered simply as representing 
long vowels followed by a semivowel, i.e. [ay] etc.-thus e.g. 
in PQwv, K(1)w, 1TaTp<;lOS, or when a final 'long diphthong' is 
12 For further details of variations in the 'diphthongs' before vowels see Lup~, 
pp. 47 tr . 
• 3 There was no need to indicate the [w], since this was an automatic glide after 
a close or mid back vowel. 

LONG DIPHTHONGS 
followed by an initial vowel (e.g. Tij/Tc;l opvI61).64 But a problem 
does arise where they more certainly represent true diphthongs, 
i.e. in the position before a consonant or pause. For diphthongs 
in Greek cannot strictly be distinguished as 'short' and 'long'; 
for accentual purposes they all have the same value of 2 'morae' 
(time-units), as for a-long simple vowel. A diphthong consists 
of a continuous glide from one vowel quality to another within 
the bounds of a syllable, and the only manner in which two 
types of diphthong might be. distinguished durationally in 
Greek is by a different placing of the point of maximal 
change-one might, for example, hypothesize that in al the 
glide accelerated at about the 1 stage, whereas in Cf. it was 
delayed until about the i stage. Something of this kind seems 
to have occurred in Old Indian, where the diphthongs iii, iiu 
were distinguished from ai, au; but we know that in this case 
there was also an important difference in quality between the 
starting points ii and a (cf. Allen, pp. 62 ff.); and it seems 
unlikely that a purely durational distinction would remain 
viable for very long in the absence of some such concomitant 
factor. 
We know of no such qualitative distinction in the case oflong 
and short Attic a; c.p may have been more readily distinguished 
from 01 if, as we have mentioned, the value of the latter was in 
fact [oi]; and in historical times TJ could have been distinguished 
from EI by the fact that the latter represented a monophthong 
[~J. But it seems that the Greeks themselves did not find the 
distinctions easy to maintain. The narrowest of the 'long' 
I-diphthongs (i.e. involving the closest similarity of first and 
second elements) was TJ, and in some words this had already 
become monophthongal, to coincide with EI, by the early 4 c. 
B.c.65-thus e.g. KAEis for Old Attic KA';'S (similarly AElTOVPYEiv for 
~arlier ATJT-). The same development occurs, less rapidly, in 
64 Cf. Ion. TTl acppo6\TTl\ (= Tij • Acppo61TlJ) etc., where the prevocalic \ is omitted, 
presumably as = [y] and thus automatic after a front vowel (it is maintained before 
consonants and in T<i» . 
•• The change could possibly have been earlier, but it would be masked by the 
pre-Eucleidean spelling of both e and 11 as E. 

VOWELS 
inflexional endings (e.g. dat. sing. 130VAEI, 3 sing. subj. EIlTEl),66 
but is reversed from c. 200 B.C. by an analogical restoration of 
the 1] from other cases and persons,67 the levelling being perhaps 
encouraged by the further change ofEI = 
[~] to [1] (cf. p. 70),68 
producing anomalous paradigms of the type gen. [-es]: dat. [-1]. 
Sc. 
I 
4c. 
I 
3c. 
I 
2c. 
-* 
II (EI-HI)-~ (EI)-- I 
"-
Inflexional'\ il (HI) 
~ (H) 
91 (01-+-01) 
ii (0) 
il (AI) 
i (A) 
• See p. 86, n. 68. For values indicated in italic see discussion on pp. 841 Epigraphic 
spellings after the earliest refer to innovations, disregarding conservative 
retentions. 
Fig. 4. Development of the' long' I-diphthongs. 
But the' long' diphthongs were evidently no longer viable, 
and about the same time a new development supervenes 
whereby they lose their second member, q. TJ ~ being replaced 
by 0: 1] w; both the diphthongal and monophthongal forms are 
reflected in the Latin loans tragoedus, comoedus from Tpay~56s, 
KWI.1~66S, but later r(h)apsodus, melodus (hence also the difference 
in e.g. English tragedy and rhapsody). In the latter part of the 
2 c. B.C. the grammarian Dionysius Thrax (ep~~!) clearly states 
that in the verbal forms l3o~s and l3o~ the written I-element 
was not in fact pronounced (tArs Gramm., p. 58 U); and in the 
I c. A.D. Quintilian implies that in a form such as ATJC1Tij the I 
•• Also in augmented syllables (e.g. Elpe6r) = DpEeT,) . 
• 7 Cf. A. S. Henry, CQ, N.S. 14 (1964), pp. 240 If . 
•• I know of no certain confusion between El < 1) and I until Roman times, but it 
seems improbable that El < 1) remained for any appreciable time diphthongal and so 
failed to share in the change of [~l to [i]: cf. also Threatte, pp. 368 If. 
86 

LONG DIPHTHONGS 
was in both cases purely orthographic (ti. 7. 17). The various 
developments are summarized in the table above (Fig. 4.).69 
A similar development in the' long' v-diphthongs is shown 
from the I c. B.C. by forms like EcrroV for eav.ov.70 
There remains the practical question of what pronunciation 
to recommend for the 'long' diphthongs of classical Attic. It 
would be possible, and perhaps not far from correct, to 
pronounce 'I> as [oi] in boy (cf. the Latin rendering by oe)-
provided that 01 were distinguished as [oi]; and to pronounce 
1J as [ei] in hay-provided that EI were distinguished as [~], 
without any diphthongization. But both of these provisos are 
somewhat doubtful offulfilment by the average English classical 
scholar; the above pronunciations of the 'long' diphthongs can 
therefore hardly be recommended; and there would in any case 
remain the problem of distinguishing Cf. from at. 
The simplest solution seems to be one which is in fact 
quite widely adopted, namely to anticipate developments by 
two or three centuries and to pronounce Cf. 1J 'I> as a 11 w, i.e. 
without their diphthongal element. This admittedly confuses 
the' long' diphthongs and long vowels-but the cases of real 
ambiguity are relatively few; and the practice has at least some 
precedent in antiquity. 
Since single [y] tended to be lost in Attic (see p. 83), it would 
also be reasonable to give the same pronunciation to prevocalic; 
Cf.1J'I> (cf. p. 84)· 
It should be noted that the I-element of the 'long' diphthongs 
is currently written adscript and not subscript in combination 
with capitals; thus the AI of"AI511S (as currently indicated by 
the placing of the breathing and accent) is a 'long' diphthong71 
•• Fbr inscriptional evidence see Threatte, pp. 352-83; and for further discussion 
Allen, 'Long and short diphthongs', in Studies offered to Leonard R. Palmer, pp. !}-16. 
7. The augmented syllable TlV-, however, is replaced from the 4 c. B.C. by the' short' 
diphthong EV-, as also '1'- is replaced by 01- in augmented forms of the verb OIKOOOllfiv: 
cf. Threatte, pp. 383-5. The Modern Greek aorist Tlupa (TlVpa) , pron. [ivra], must 
therefore be a dassicizing formation (the usual form in any case is I3P11Ka 
[vrika] < eVPTJKa). 
71 However, though cited by Leumann (Lat. Laut- u. Formenlehre, p. 69), the 
romanized form Hades is not citable as evidence, being' latinate' rather than Latin; 
the word seems, rather surprisingly, to occur nowhere in any form in Latin literature 

VOWELS 
(as e.g. in ~Sel) and, if the above recommendation is adopted, 
must be pronounced [aJ and not [aiJ as is commonly heard. 
I n the case of the 'long' u-di ph thongs, au and flU may be 
pronounced as au and ev with little risk of ambiguity, whilst the 
isolatedwu may be pronounced very approximately as English 
owe. 
(at any rate up to the Renaissance); in English it first appears (with variants such as 
Aides) around 1600 as a direct borrowing from Greek. 
In Greek itself a5[ov occurs beside al50v on a defixio of?4 c. B.C., but this may be 
a graphic error (Threatte, p. 359). In Old Church Slavonic, where en is rendered by 
t, -AI5TJS appears as ad;;. 
The accentual marking -AI5TJS (as also epClI~, KA';IS, ';15Eol1al, TWI5E, etc. when written 
with I-adscript) is in fact anomalous by comparison with e.g. TJVPTlI1Q1: cf. Allen, 
op. cit. (p. 87, n. 69), p. II, n. I I. 
88 

CHAPTER 3 
VOWEL-LENGTH 
The orthographic situation in Attic is very different from that 
of Latin (VL, pp. 64 ff.), since the introduction of the Ionic 
alphabet provided the means of distinguishing between long 
and short vowels in the mid series. Thus short e is distinguished 
from long 11 [~] and el [~], and short 0 is distinguished from long 
w. 
It may be pointed out that there is no good reason for 
considering the short e as being specially related to either the 
long 11 or e!. It is often assumed that 11 is the long equivalent 
of e, so that the long mid vowel would be more open than 
the corresponding short (unlike the more common case, as 
represented in Latin (cf. VL, p. 47), where the long vowel is the 
closer).1 The assumption of a correspondence e: 11 seems to arise 
from a confusion of descriptive phonology with either historical 
or graphic considerations. Historically (i.e. going back to 
'Proto-Greek' or to Indo-European) e and 11 are derivable from 
an original correspondence e: e, which is reflected, for example, 
in grammatical alternations of the type lTClTepes: lTcrnlP, Ti6e1lEV: 
Ti6111l1, or qlavEvTEs:eqlcXv11v. Graphically, el is liable to be ex-
cluded from consideration as being a digraph, thus leaving 
only Tl; and this factor no doubt explains the statement of Sextus 
Empiricus (Adv. Gramm. J J 5) that' both (e and Tl) have the same 
value; Tl when shortened becomes e, and e when lengthened 
becomes Tl'. 2 From a purely descriptive standpoint such an 
assumption is open to contradiction. There are certainly in-
herited alternations of the type just mentioned, but an e: el alter-
nation is seen in e.g. eCTTi: eilli, qlavEvTES: qlavels, resulting from the 
fact that the Attic compensatory lengthening of [e] produces 
not [~] 11 but [~] EI. Similarly the temporal augmentation of an 
1 Cf. Buck (a), p. 92; Heffner, p. 209. 
2 Additionally, of course, El had by then long had the value [iI, and 1] was a close 
mid [~] (cf. p. 74). 
89 

VOWEL LENGTH 
initial E admittedly produces" in inherited forms such as Hom. 
i'ja (cf. Sanskrit iisam, < I.-E. eS7!l < e-es-7!l) and is extended e.g. 
to i;yElpa; but descriptively there are a number of cases of the 
type Exw:ETxov. Moreover, when the Greeks came to name the 
letters E and 0, on the principle stated by Herodian (ii, p. 403 
L) that 'nCXv ovo~a ~ovoavAAaj3ov ~CXKpoKaTaA"KTEiv SeA-EI', the 
results in Attic were 'ET' and 'ou', i.e. '[~]' and (originally) 
'[Q]' (e.g. Athenaeus, 453d, quoting Callias, 5 c. B.C.; Plato, 
Cratyius, 426 C, and 4 c. inscriptions; Plutarch, Mor. 384 ff.).3 
There is thus in fact a rather better case for considering EI [~] 
as the long vowel corresponding to E, and this would seem to 
reflect the intuitions of native speakers. But phonetically Attic 
E [e] probably lies midway between classical " [~] and EI 
[~], 
and there seems nothing to be gained by setting it in a special 
relationship with either. On the back vowel axis the situation 
is rather different, since the change of [QJ ov to [u] meant that 
W came to be the only long mid back vowel, and so migh t 
reasonably be considered as corresponding in classical times to 
the short o. 
In the case of[~] and [Q], Attic had utilized the fact that original 
[ei] and [ou] had become monophthongal (see pp. 71 ff., 75 ff.) 
to provide a means of indicating length by the digraphs EI and 
OY. In the case of [~], East Ionic had utilized its psilosis (see 
p. 73) to provide a symbol (H) indicative of length; and even 
a non-psilotic dialect such as Attic had found it more important 
to indicate length than the aspirate. In the case of [Q] a 
modification of a , viz. Q (or in some of the islands 0) was devised 
to distinguish the long vowel. 
But in the case of the open and close vowels [a], [i], [u] (-+ [ii]) 
no such distinctions were inherited or devised, and these vowels 
are consequently known as 5ixpova, i.e. 'of two lengths'. The 
Alexandrian grammarians did invent superscript signs - and v 
• Herodian (ii, p. 390 L) notes that (as a result of the Attic change [~]-+ [ill the 
pronunciation of the name of the letter E had by his time become [i] (we similarly, 
as a result of the change of Old and Mid. Eng. 
[~] to modern [i], now call the 
corresponding roman letter' [i]'). Already in classical times the name of 0 will have 
become [11]. 
go 

VOWEL LENGTH 
to indicate long and short, and these are occasionally used in 
papyri (more particularly of dialect texts, and especially to 
indicate ex = Attic ,,), but they never became a normal part of 
the orthographic system. The reason for this difference of 
treatment could well be, as suggested by I. Fischer,4 that the 
grammatical utilization of the length distinction was much less 
in the case of these than of the mid vowels, where one finds 
contrasts of the type ev.,,6Es, ev."er,s, OA,,6Eis; TO, TW, Toil, etc. In 
the case of the open and close vowels such contrasts are rare: 
e.g. as between present and imperfect in IKETEVOIlEV /tK-, 
u13pi30llEV /013-. Contrasts of [a] : [a] which had existed in Proto-
Greek were largely destroyed in Attic by the change of [a] to 
[~] ,,; thus whereas, for example, Arcadian has a contrast 
Ia-rCrrcxI/Ia-rCrrcxI as between indicative and subjunctive, the 
corresponding Attic forms are ia-rCrrCXI/ia-ri;TCXI. Such few con-
trasts as are found in the case of the open and close vowels 
are lexical rather than grammatical (e.g. 6vllwS"s 'spirited' / 
'thyme-like'), and, particularly if one takes account of differ-
ences of accent, are no more numerous than true homonyms 
(as e.g. TEAOS 'end', 'tax', etc.); the context will III any case 
seldom have left room for ambiguity. 
'Hidden quantity' 
In open syllables (i.e. ending in a vowel: see p. 104), the length 
of vowel symbolized by cx, I, or v can be deduced from the 
positions occupied by the syllable in verse; for if the syllable is 
heavy the vowel must be long, and if it is light the vowel must 
be short. But metre is of no assistance in the case of closed 
syllables, since they are heavy regardless of vowel-length. For 
this reason long vowels in such syllables are sometimes said to 
have' hidden quantity', and their existence must be discovered 
by other than metrical evidence.:; 
• SC,3 (1961), pp. 29 If.; cf also Ruiperez, Word, 12 (1956), p. 76. 
S In 'motor' terms, 'hidden quantity' is a feature of syllables which could be 
described as 'hypercharacterized' (cf AR, pp. 66 f), since the long vowel permits chest 
arrest of the syllable, and the following consonant is therefore redundant from the point 

VOWEL LENGTH 
In Latin there are a number of more or less general rules 
about such' hidden' length (VL, pp. 65 ff.) ; vowels are always 
long, for example, before ns and nJ; generally also in certain 
morphological categories (as the -x- perfects and -sco presents), 
and by 'Lachmann's Law' (actus etc.). But there are no such 
rules applicable to Greek; and since the qualities of short and 
long a 1 v did not greatly differ, the distinction is not reflected 
in later developments as it was in some cases in the Romance 
languages. Our knowledge of' hidden quantity' in Greek is thus 
somewhat haphazard. It is on the whole uncommon, but some 
indication may be given of the types of evidence available for 
its detection. 
(a) As a result of the change of [~] EI to [i], EI came often to 
be used in inscriptions (more particularly after about 100 B.C.) 
and in papyri instead of (long) I, thereby indicating the length 
of the latter: thus e.g. PElljJOI, lTPOcrEPPEIIlIlEVc.>V are found in 
papyri from Herculaneum (and therefore pre-79 A.D.), indi-
cating a long vowel for the stem of the verb PilTTc.>. But after 
about 100 A.D. this evidence becomes valueless since EI then 
begins to appear for short 1 also. 
(b) Under certain circumstances (viz. after p, I, E) an original 
long 0 was preserved or restored in Attic, whereas Ionic showed 
a development to 11. Since, therefore, Attic lTpcl-nc.>, ewpo~, have 
corresponding forms in Ionic lTpT]crcrc.>, eWp11~, we know that the 
o of the Attic words was long.6 
(c) The internal analysis of a word, or a comparison with 
cognate forms, may indicate vowel-length. Thus the vowel of 
pilTTc.> may be inferred as long, on the basis of comparison with 
pllTT], where, in an open syllable, the length is known from verse; 
similarly q>pITTc.> on the evidence of e.g. q>plKi in Homer, and 
c:nVIjJIS on the evidence of EvcnVq>OVTI (N icander, Alexiph., 375). 
of view of the ballistic movement, and probably has to be articulated by a controlled 
action. There is a widespread tendency for such syllables to reduce their -ve ending 
by shortening the vowel (-ve), so that the consonant takes over the arresting role; thus 
in Greek (by 'Osthoff's Law') *yvwvTES -+ YV6VTES, etc. The various reductions of the 
'long diphthongs' (see pp. 84 If.) represent an aspect of the same tendency: see further 
AR, pp. 222 f. 
• An awareness of this criterion is already shown by Herodian (ii, p. 932 L). 

HIDDEN Q.U ANTITY 
On the other hand we should expect the I of lTilnu> to be short, 
since 1TI- is a reduplicative syllable as in e.g. 8t8U>1l1 (but see (e) 
below). 
In (Ion.) &crcrova long vowel may be inferred from the fact 
that it derives from an original OyXlov; for a vowel is normally 
lengthened by compensation for the loss of v before cr (cf. 1TClcro 
from lTOVT!O). 7 
(d) Accentual evidence may be of value in so far as a 
circumflex can only occur on a long vowel: thus in the case of 
e.g. 6CxTTOV, IlCxAAOV; conversely, in a word like K;;PV~, q>oivl~ it 
indicates that the v and I are short (in spite of Kr,piiKoS, q>oiviKO~). 
But one would normally prefer to have other evidence to 
confirm the accentual tradition. 
(e) Some cases are specifically mentioned by the gram-
marians-notably in the abstracts of Herodian's work lTepi 
8lXpovu>v (ii, pp. 7 ff. L). Thus the long vowels are confirmed 
for IlCxAAOV, 6errru>v (also EAaTTU>v). Short vowel is confirmed for 
K;;PV~ and long vowel for 6wpa~. Since 3 stands for a consonant-
group [zd] (see pp. 56 ff.), the preceding syllable is always 
closed and can therefore conceal vowel-length; long vowel is 
here expressly mentioned for e.g. Kpa3U>, XOIl<l3e, CxA<l3WV. 
Long vowel is also confirmed for PllTTU>; and in one passage 
(ii, p. 570 L) Herodian confirms our expectations about the 
reduplicative syllable of lTIlTTU> (slTEI8r, 01 exvo811TAocrlocrlloi Cxm) 
j3poxeios 6eAovcriv apxecr6ol); elsewhere, however, (p. IO L) he 
classes it with PIlTTU> as having a long vowel, and this is 
confirmed by frequent spellings with el. In fact there could well 
have existed both forms, lTtlTTU> the original, and lTIlTTU> an 
analogical form based on semantic and contextual association 
with PIlTTU> (cf. e.g. Il. i, 591 ff.; Plato, Rep., 617 E, 619 E). 
In modern Greek there are no phonemic distinctions of 
vowei-length; duration has become merely an allophonic fea-
ture, accented vowels being generally longer than unaccented, 
regardless of their origins. It is not easy to determine just when 
this loss of the length-distinction came about. We have seen 
7 The expected form would be aaov; but aa is probably introduced on the pattern 
of6c3:aaov. 
93 

VOWEL LENGTH 
(p. 79) that the monophthong resulting from 01 came often to 
be written as E; but this need indicate no more than the quality 
of the monophthong in the absence of any other appropriate 
symbol (cf. Sturtevant, pp. 39, 103). The appearance of EI for 
short 1 in the 2 c. A.D. need be no more than a graphic reflex 
of the use ofl (= [I]) for EI. Thus, whilst these phenomena could 
result from a loss oflength-distinctions, they need not do so, and 
cannot therefore be relied upon as evidence. More suggestive 
is the confusion of 0 and cu, which becomes common from the 
2 c. A.D. (mainly in private texts: cf. Threatte, p. 387); but since 
such confusion begins as early as the 4 c. B.C. (Threatte, 
pp. 223 ff.), it could again indicate a convergence of quality 
rather than duration, in which the considerations mentioned on 
p. 90 may be relevant. 
It seems probable that the development is linked with the 
change from a pitch to a stress accent, of which duration became 
a subsidiary function. Such a role of duration would be favoured 
by the elimination of diphthongs and the reduction of the 
long-vowel system to the same dimensions as the short. A 
movement towards these conditions had begun to accelerate 
around 100 A.D., and, with the possible exception of the v-
diphthongs (see pp. 79 f.), was complete by about the middle 
of the 3 c.s On other evidence (see pp. 130 f.) the change 
to a stress accent could be dated to around this period. It 
seems, therefore, that the loss of distinctive vowel-length may 
also be placed most probably in the 2-3 c. A.D. D 
The various apparently unconnected changes which took 
place in the long-vowel and diphthongal systems during the 
8 Even if the phonetic change of the v-diphthongs to [av], [ev 1 had not yet taken 
place, the other developments mentioned would tend to isolate them and so favour the 
phonemic structuring of them as JawJ, lewJ (cf. pp. 5, 80), thereby paving the way 
for such a change; Gothic and Armenian evidence is difficult to interpret but could 
reflect an analysis in these terms (ef. Sturtevant, pp. 54 f.; H. Jensen, Altarmenische 
Grammalik, § 28). 
• In non-literary papyri the loss of length distinctions and interchange of vowels in 
unaccented syllables from the 2 c. B.C. suggests the elfects of stress; but this could be 
a peculiarity of Egyptian speech (cf. Gignac, p. 142 of article cited p. 81, n. 53 above; 
also C. M. Knight, 'The change from the Ancient to the Modem Greek accent', JPhil 
Cambridge), 35 (1920), pp. 51 If. (56 If.)). 
94 

LOSS OF LENGTH DISTINCTIONS 
preceding centuries could be viewed, according to one theory, 
as part of a long-term 'conspiracy' aimed at this ultimate 
revolutionary outcome (cf. Allen, TPS, 1978, pp. 103 ff.); or, 
in terms of an analogy from the field of topology, as an 
exemplification of' catastrophe theory', whereby a number of 
minor, local discontinuities in the relevant manifold build up 
to a state in which a major, 'catastrophic' change can take 
place.lo 
A summary of developments involving the Greek long vowels 
is given on p. 78.11 
10 See further Allen, 'The development of the Attic vowel system: conspiracy or 
catastrophe?' in Studies in Mycenaean and classical Greek presented to John Cluulwick ( = Minos 
xx-xxi, Salamanca, 1987). 
\I The essence of some of the vowel-changes discussed in the preceding pages is neatly 
incapsulated in an inscription recently observed on a calque at Ano Kufonisi in the 
Cyclades: nOAITE (= 1Tw?eiTal, 'For Sale'). 
95 

CHAPTER 4 
VOWEL-JUNCTION 
The simplest form of junction between the final vowel of one 
word and the initial vowel of the nextl involves the juxta-
position of the vowels in question without any modification of 
their length, quality, or syllabic function-as e.g. in Hom. avw 
w6eO'KE, \.IT, iO\.lEV, TCrxu".a VTrE!<, ae~eTo tepov. Such a pronunciation 
is generally known by its Latin title of hiatus (VL, p. 78); 
corresponding Greek terms (xaivelv, XaO"\.I'!>Sia) do not occur 
until the Roman and Byzantine periods; amongst various other 
descriptive names is oVyKpOUo"lS 'collision'. This juxtaposition 
does not exclude the possibility, indeed probability, that where 
the first of the two vowels was of close or mid quality it was 
followed by a semivocalic [y], [w], or [w] transitional glide (in 
the case offront, back, and front rounded vowels respectively)-
thus e.g. Hom. Ti(y)oo..ues, o(w)E)'vW, oV(w)eo"o"l; similarly 
in the case of diphthongs, e.g. Hom. E\.IEVal(y)aya\.los, Ti\.l11O"OV 
\.Iol(y)ulov (which might equally well be considered as rep-
resenting [-ayya-] etc.: cf. pp. 8 I ff.). In the case of 'long 
diphthongs' it is simply a matter of the diphthongal element (I) 
becoming consOl~antal [y] (cf. pp. 84 f. )-thus e.g. Hom. 
C)TI"WPIVC;> EvaA\YKIOV, O"Kalij eyxos represent [ -Qye-], [ -~ye-] 
respectively. 
This type of junction is found commonly in Homer. 2 In Attic 
verse, however, it is practically confined to interjections, 
interjectional vocatives as Trai, and interrogative Ti (also, in 
comedy, mpi and ()T!, and the unitary phrases ev-oTSa/-imh, 
\.I11Se-/ovSe-eTs/-ev).3 This limitation is not confined to verse; 
Maas observes (p. go) that it applies also to the prose of e.g. 
Isocrates, 'and dominates great parts of it almost without a 
1 Under' vowels' are included ror this purpose diphthongs (unless specifically stated) 
and aspirated initial vowels and diphthongs (ef. p. 54). 
• Even when one discounts those cases where it is due to an original F (cf. pp. 48 f.). 
3 cr. A. C. Moorhouse, CQ, N.S. 12 (1962), pp. 239 If. 
g6 

VOWEL-JUNCTION 
break until the late Byzantine period' ; Plato shows a progressive 
tendency to restrict hiatus to 'prepositive' words,4 and this is 
a general rule in Demosthenes; it applies also to some of the 
works of Aristotle. Epigraphic evidence is not very enlightening 
since, as can be seen from metrical inscriptions, the writing often 
indicates a hiatus where it was not so pronounced (e.g. 4 c. 
B.C. 'IT ]crrpI0'6e<TTlecpeO'oO' = 'ITcrrpis 6' E<TT' "EcpeO'os); in general, 
however, the more' official' and less' popular' the nature of the 
text, the more does it tend to indicate hiatus, and this could 
well correspond to a more deliberate style of speech quite 
apart from graphic convention. For Attic details see Threatte, 
pp. 418 ff. 
The avoidance of hiatus by conscious choice of words or 
word-order would only have been feasible to a limited extent; 
and we have now to consider the various other ways in which 
vowel-junctions were realized. 
One such mode involves a shortening of a long vowel at the 
end of the first word, as e.g. in Hom. 'ITAcXyx6rt E'TTEi, ov6e mu 
"EKTWp. This is a feature that perhaps goes back to Indo-
European, since it is also attested in Vedic;5 it is commonest in 
Homer, and is therefore termed 'correptio epica' (more generally 
the principle is stated as 'vocalis ante vocalem corripitur') ; the rarer 
non-epic instances are in any case largely confined to 
dactylic/anapaestic rhythms, as e.g. Euripides, Hec., 123 03w 
, Ae"v(;)v. 
Under this category are also generally listed the cases in-
volving a diphthong, giving light quantity in e.g. Hom. Koi 
av01TIOV, w6pa 1.101 ewrne, KA06II.1EV 6:pYVp6TO~'. But a diphthong 
as such cannot be 'shortened' (cf. p. 82), and all that is implied 
here is the treatment of its second element as a consonant 
(semivowel) before the following initial vowel: thus, in the 
above examples, [-aya-], [-oye-], [-ewa-]. I t is the same process 
as is seen in the cases involving' long diphthongs' (6'ITwplv~ Ev. 
etc.), which, though usually so classified, are not really cases of 
• 'I.e. article, prepositions, monosyllabic conjunctions, pronouns, etc.' (Maas, 
p.84)· 
$ Cf. Allen, Sandhi, pp. 35 If. 
97 

VOWEL-JUNCTION 
hiatus.6 There are also examples where the [y] element of a 
'long diphthong' is lost, and the first element does then undergo 
the epic shortening: thus e.g. in lTEIP9: ElJeio = [-a,e-], lThplJ 
bTl = [-e,e-], oUTe T,!> aAA,!> ElTEl = [-o,a-] ... [-o,e-]. Both treat-
ments are seen in II. i, 30 -f)IJETEP<t> Evl OiK,!> Ell • Apyel, with [-Qye-] 
and [-o,e-]. 
------------------il Hiatus 
Disyllabic 
COTTeptlo cplCa 
Monosyllabic 
(avva1.0ICpij) 
-1 
Contraction 
~ 
(a) Marked 
(KpCialS) 
Combination 
( avvaipEalS) 
(b) Unmarked -avvll'laIS 
l 
(i) Coalescence 
I 
Elision 
(ii) Loss------------1 
. 
(8MIfIIS) 
ProdehslOn 
( aopalpEalS) 
Fig. 5. Types of vowel-junction. 
Even these instances of what is sometimes called 'weak 
hiatus' involve no reduction in the number of syllables. But by 
far the more common case involves a reduction of the two 
juxtaposed syllables to one. Such a treatment is termed by the 
Greek grammarians OVVaAoup,,;, lit. 'blending'. It is traditionally 
divided into cases where (i) there is a coalescence of the two 
vowels, and (ii) a loss of one of them. Considering class (i) first, 
a subdivision is made into cases where the coalescence is (a) 
marked and (b) unmarked in writing. 
Class (a) is then further subdivided under the heads ofKpO:o"ls 
and ovvaipeo"lS according to whether a process of vowel-
contraction is involved (as e.g. 1Jr, ow ---+ IJ&V, TO: (llTAa ---+ ecrmAa, 
• Dr Chadwick points out that light quantity is proportionally much more common 
for final en, 01 than for long vowels in Homer; which could mean that this, rather than 
an Indo-European inheritance, gave rise to the other cases of' correptio epica', by a 
process of analogical extension. Other proponents of this view (which he rejects) are 
listed by L. E. Rossi, 'Lapronuntiatio plena: sinalefe in luogo d'elisione', Omllggio a Eduard 
Framkel, pp. 229 If. (234 and n. 13). 
98 

VOWEL-JUNCTION 
Koi eyw -+ K&yW, ~Ol EO"TI -+ ~OVO"TI)7 or, more rarely, viz. where 
the second vowel is I or v, simple combination into a diphthong 
(as e.g. TO t~6-T\OV -+ eol~Crr\Ov). In either case coalescences of 
class (a) are generally marked in the current (originally Alex-
andrian) system by the KOpwvfS 'crook', 8 which is identical 
in form with the emoO"TpoCj>os (see p. roo below).9 
Class (b) has the traditional title of awi3T]0"IS,10 and differs 
from class (a), as we have mentioned, by not being specially 
marked in writing~thus e.g. ~" ei8EvOI. In modern terminology 
'synizesis' is often used in the sense of a reduction of the firs·t 
vowel of a sequence to a semivowel (as e.g. [u] -+ [w] in 
colloquial English How do I look? -+ trisyllabic [haudwailuk]: 
cf. p. 5 r) ; but this is probably not so in the Greek cases classified 
under (b). For on the one hand there is no 'lengthening by 
position' (see p. 104) of a preceding syllable-thus the first 
syllable of the first word in eTTEi OV (Od. iv, 353) remains light, 
whereas one would expect such syllables normally to be heavy 
in Homer if the junction implied [epyii] (cf. pp. 49; 5 r, n. 99); 
and conversely the syllable resulting from the junction is heavy, 
even if the initial syllable of the second word would normally 
be light~thus Eur., Or., 599 el ~" 6 Ket-eVO"os (cf. p. 52). It is 
therefore more probable that awf3T]0"1S implies coalescence to a 
long vowel or a diphthong as in the case of class (a)Y The 
separate classification and the absence of any specific indication 
in writing are presumably due simply to the fact that the result 
of the coalescence was in these cases a sound or combination of 
sounds which did not occur in other than junctional contexts~ 
e.g. a 'rising' diphthong rea] in Ar., Thesm., 476 ~" &At-T]V (cf. 
7 In Attic especially, however, the normal rules of vowel-contraction are frequently 
overridden by a tendency (complete in the case of a- except when preceded by w) to 
maintain the quality of the initial vowel: thus e.g. 6 av,;p -+ AvTtP (beside internal 
lTEI60a -+ lTEl6w; cf. Dor. wvTjp), TO aV-r6 -+ TCxlrr6 (cf. Ion. TW\rr6), TO TtP4lov-+ 
6ftP4lov (beside internal S.,M.,TE -+ S.,AWTE). 
• Apart from the indication given, in the case of crasis, by the vowel-changes and 
reductions involved; in inscriptions, however, these indications are uncommon after 
c. 480 B.C., especially in public texts: cf. Threatte, pp. 427 If. 
o It was not, however, originally identical with the' smooth breathing' (see p. 52). 
10 Also referred to as avveK~VI1o"IS. 
\I With a possible exception in the rare cases where a final 1 is involved, as II. xvii, 
324 K1')PVl<I 'H1TVTISt;l (but see Leaf's edn for other explanations); cf. also Maas, p. 73. 
99 

VOWEL-JUNCTION 
p. 5). There is thus no purely phonetic reason for separating 
class (b) from class (a); but it must be recognized that in the 
case of class (b) we can do little more than guess at the nature 
of the resulting combination in the light of general phonetic 
probability (rather as in the case of similar phenomena in Latin: 
VL, p. 81; cf. Schwyzer, p. 401). 
The words involved in junctions of class (i) are mostly in close 
grammatical connection with one another (notably where 
the first word is a 'prepositive'), though not exclusively so. 
Junctions of class (ii), however, are not subject to any such 
limitation. They are known in Greek by the title of 6Ai'V1S or 
EKeA1'V1S (occasionally also KOVCPI0"\l6s), and involve the loss of 
either the first or the second vowel of the sequence. The former 
loss is by far the more common, and is widely known by the term 
'elision' (based ultimately on ex6AI'VIS, which is sometimes 
restricted to this sense) .12 In literary texts the loss of the vowel 
at the end of the first word is indicated, apart from its absence, 
by the sign c!m6aTpOcpOS;13 in inscriptions, however, the vowel is 
frequently written even where, as in metrical texts, it is known 
to have been elided (cf. p. 97). Elision in Greek is restricted 
basically to short vowels, and even of these v is never elided, 
whilst elision of I is primarily a feature of verbal endings. 
Apparent elision of a diphthong is seen in e.g. !30VAO\l' eyw 
(Il. i, 
I 17: primarily in verbal endings of epic, lyric, and 
comedy); but this most probably represents a loss of [y] 
from the sequence [-aye-] etc. (as in the case of the 'long 
diphthongs': see above), with consequent elision of the [_a];14 
.1 The tenn arrOKOm; is also used, though this has rather wider connotations. In 
modem usage' apocope' is applied to the special sense of preconsonantal vowel-loss, as 
e.g. in Hom. Karr lriSIOV (for KaTa 1T.). 
II I.e. II c!rn6crr~ 1Tpoa~la. The English fonn apostroplu is due to its adoption 
via French, and its current pronunciation as four syllables is due to a confusion with 
the rhetorical device arroo-rp0'l"'l. The scholia explain the term variously as referring 
to the' bent' shape of the sign (like KOpwvls) or to its function as 'averting' hiatus (e.g. 
Selwl. in Dion. Thr., p. 126 H); the latter explanation seems the more probable. 
.. There is a close parallel to this in Old Indian (where coalescence rather than elision 
is the general rule); for example, a sequence such as vai asiiu implies a junction-forn' 
vayasiiu, from which they (which we know from the ancient authorities to have been 
weakly pronounced) is then dropped, giving in classical Sanskrit a hiatus-form vii asiiu; 
but in the Vedic hymns the words occasionally go on to coalesce, giving ajunction-fonn 
viisiJu (cf. Allen, Sandhi, pp. 37 fr.). 
100 

VOWEL-JUNCTION 
the same would apply to the occasional elision of 1.101, TOI, 
aOIY; 
It is possible that the transition from a consonant to a 
following vowel was perceptibly different in Greek according to 
whether the two sounds belonged to the same or different 
words-as e.g. in the English distinction of a notion (with 
'internal' transition) and an ocean (with' external' transition) .16 
A statement in Herodian regarding the' attachment' of con-
sonants to vowels (tii, pp. 407 f. L) seems to refer to writing 
rather than pronunciation (cf. pp. 105 f. )-but this could well 
have a phonetic basis, and a scholium on Dionysius Thrax (tp. 
156 H) clearly refers to a difference of pronunciation as between 
e.g. EaTl N6:~los and EaT IV Cx~IOS.17 Herodian's statement continues 
with a rule which, if phonetically interpreted, would mean that, 
when a final vowel was elided, a preceding consonant 
nevertheless retained its original characteristics, so that there 
was an internal type of transition to the initial vowel of the 
following word.1s This may have been a contributory factor in 
Hegelochus' famous mispronunciation ofyaAT'lv' OpOO19 as YaAfiv 
ope';), i.e. with external instead of internal transition, in Eur., 
Or., 279 (cf. Ar., Frogs, 303),20 particularly as it resulted, 
according to the scholia, from a shortness of breath on the part 
of the actor. 21 Further support for a difference in transitions 
might be claimed from cases (though many are disputed) where 
.6 Sommerstein (p. 166, n.) shows that elision of -al and -01 was not a feature of 
careful Attic speech. 
II Cf. D.Jones, 'The Hyphen as a Phonetic Sign', ZPh, 9 (1956), pp. 99 If.; 
J. D. O'Connor & O. M. Tooley, 'The Perceptibility of Certain Word-boundaries', In 
Honour of Daniel Jones, pp. 171 If.; P. Delattre, Comparing tM Phonetic Features of English, 
French, German and Spanish, pp. 36 If. 
17 See further Stanford, pp. 145 f. and id., Ambiguiry in Greek. Literature, pp. 42 f. 
18 Unless, of course, there were a natural pause at this point (indicated by 
punctuation or change of speaker), where elision must have been an artificial extension 
of normal speech-habits (as also the transfer of aspiration in e.g. Soph., EI., 1502: OP. 
&»,' ~pcp'. AI. vcpT]yoii). 
It The accentuation of the elided word is uncertain (cf. B. Laum, Das altxandriniscM 
Ak.ztntuations~sttm, pp. 420 If.). 
to Cf. Stanford, op. cit., pp. 51 f. 
2. A simpler explanation of Hegelochus' slip, however, would be as follows. Elision 
is a characteristic only of continuous speech; if, therefore, a pause were made after the 
v, the hearer would interpret this as indicating non-elision-and so not as yaAT]v(a) 
but as yaAT]V (cf. AR, p. 227). 
10I 

VOWEL-JUNCTION 
a breach of Porson's Law seems to be admitted if an elision is 
involved,22 as also from the rather greater toleration of a 
diaeresis in the middle of a trimeter if it is 'bridged' by an 
elision. 
Where it was desired to avoid both hiatus and elision, the 
device was available, in the case of -I and -e of certain 
grammatical categories, of adding the so-called v EcpeAKVaTIKOV23 
(alias 'paragogic v'), as e.g. in dat. plur. lTacw, 3 sing. E50~ev. 
The precise source of this is uncertain, but it seems to be 
primarily of Attic-Ionic origin (N.B. not in Herodotus) and has 
presumably spread from forms in which alternants with and 
without v were originally inherited (a parallel alternance with 
S is seen in e.g. lTOAAclKIS beside Hom. lTOAAclKI). 24 This use of v 
was much extended; the Byzantine rule that it should be used 
only before a vowel or pause had only a limited basis in practice; 
in inscriptions it appears almost as often before consonants as 
before vowels,25 and in poetry this provides a means of creating 
heavy quantity (e.g. EaTIV 6aAcxC1C1cx). 
Much rarer than elision is the process of 'prodelision', in 
which it is the short initial vowel of the second word that is lost 
after a final long vowel or diphthong-as e.g. in ,; \IOS. This is 
more specifically referred to as acpcxipeC1IS (though, like CxnOKO-rn;, 
this term in Greek also has wider connotations). The process 
mainly applies to initial e of tragedy and comedy. It is not 
always possible to determine whether a junction involves 
prod elision or coalescence; for example, MSS vary between 1-111 
22 Cf. s. 1. Sobolevskij, Eirtne, 2 (1964), p. 50: 'vox elisa tam arte sequenti 
adhaerebat ut unum cum eo vocabulum faceret'. 
23 This term was originally applied to the final vowel, which was described as 
BpeAKVaTIKOV TOU v, i.e. 'attracting v'; but the transfer of the epithet to the v itself is 
already found in Byzantine sources (e.g. Schol. in Dion. Thr., p. 155 H). 
24 For another suggestion, based on the analogical extension of junctura I alternants, 
see J. Kurylowicz, 'L'origine de v BpeAKVaTIK6v', Milanges ... P. Chantraine, pp. 75 If. 
(e.g. plur. ~Aeyov+o,- ..... ~Aeyo+O'- (cf. pp. 34, 56 above) -
~ov+T(etc.)-, whence 
by analogy sing. ~AeyE+O'- ..... EAEYEV+T(etc.)-). 
26 Threatte (p. 642) notes that ~50~EV always has -vat all periods; and this is 
increasingly the case with rnEIfI1iCPl3EV and ~paI.lI.lCnwEV (A. S. Henry, 'Notes on the 
language of the prose inscriptions of Hellenistic Athens', CQ, n.s. 17 (1967), pp. 257 If. 
(283 f.)). 
102 

VOWEL-JUNCTION 
's and the' crasis' form lJ'lis-where the point is purely graphic, 
since the pronunciation will be the same in either case; some 
phonetic difference is involved, however, as between e.g. xpr;-
creal 'TEP'Il and xpr;crea-rEP'Il (Ar., Peace, 253-Brunck and Bekker 
respectively), as also between IJtl 'SIKeiv and the' synizesis' form 
IJtl aSIKeiv (Eur., Hec., 1249; Aesch., Eum., 85). In a case such 
as AEyW· '1Ti Toihov (Soph., Phil., 591) prod elision is supported 
by the fact that the junction occurs across a pause, where elision 
commonly occurs but not coalescence. 
For ease of reference, the various types of vowel-junction are 
classified in Fig. 5 on p. 98, which, from top to bottom, displays 
the classes in the order in which they have been discussed. 
103 

CHAPTER 5 
QUANTITY 
Quantity and Length 
Under the heading of vowel-length we have already considered 
a category which in Greek has intimate connections with 
quantity. But the latter is a property of syllables and not of vowels, 
and a clear distinction must be maintained between the two. 
The rules of quantity are readily deduced from metrical 
usage, and are fully discussed by the Greek grammarians (e.g. 
Dionysius Thrax, Ars Gramm., pp. 17 ff. U; Hephaestion, 
Enchiridion, pp. 1 ff. C). If a syllable contains a long vowel, it 
is always' heavy', as e.g. the syllables of A1lyv.> or lTAfiKTpov. But 
ifit contains a short vowel, its quantity depends upon the nature 
of the syllable-ending. If it ends with a vowel (' open' syllable), 
the syllable is 'light', as e.g. the first syllable ofAe-yv.>; but if it 
ends with a consonant ('closed' syllable), the syllable is heavy, 
as e.g. the first syllable of AE1<-TOS. 
The Greek grammarians did not distinguish in their termino-
logy between length and quantity, but applied the terms 'long' 
and 'short' to both vowels and syllables. One consequence 
of this was an assumption that only a syllable containing 
a long vowel could be 'naturally' (' <pverel ') long (i.e. heavy); 
but since some syllables containing short vowels also functioned 
as heavy ('long' in Greek terminology), they were considered 
as being so only '6eem', i.e. 'by convention' or 'by position' 
(according to one's interpretation of this term). These categories 
are translated by Latin natura (= <pverel) and positu/ positione 
(= 6eerEl). In the Middle Ages the doctrine became even more 
confused; for instead of syllables being referred to as 'long by 
position', the short vowels in such syllables were said to be 
lengthened 'by position'.1 This error continued through the 
Renaissance, and is still unfortunately encountered in some 
1 Cf. R. Hiersche, 'Herkunft und Sinn des Terminus" positione longa"', Forschungen 
und Fortschritte, 31 (1957), pp. 280 If. 
104 

QUANTITY 
modern handbooks. It can be minimized by adopting the 
terminology of the ancient Indian grammarians, who used the 
terms' long' and' short' to apply to vowel-length, but' heavy' 
and' light' to apply to syllabic quantity (though even they were 
not altogether immune from laxity of expression and consequent 
confusion) .2 The crucial point is that a closed syllable con taining 
a short vowel is heal!)l, and there is no question of the vowel 
becoming long. 
Apart from the evidence of metre and grammarians' statc-
ments, the quantitative equivalence of 'naturally' and 'posi-
tionally' heavy syllables is seen, for example, in the rhythmic 
patterns of comparative and superlative adjectives; thus a word 
such as O'o-cpos, with light first syllable, takes a long vowel (giving 
heavy second syllable) in the comparative O'o-cpw-Tepos; but 
OO-I-IOS, with heavy first syllable, takes a short vowel (giving light 
second syllable) in OO-I-IO-Tepos; the relevant point here is that the 
latter pattern applies also to a word like Arn-Tos, comparative 
Arn-To-TEpOS, although the vowel of the first syllable is short. 
Syllabic division 
In order to determine whether a syllable is open or closed, and 
so whether a syllable containing a short vowel is light or heavy, 
it is of course necessary to establish the point of division between 
successive syllables. For this purpose the following rules apply: 
(i) Of two or more successive consonants, at least the first 
belongs to the preceding syllable (i.e. this syllable is closed, as 
in AEK-TOS, TIAT;K-TPOV, O:PK-TOS); this rule also applies to double 
consonants, e.g. c5:A-AOS, TIAr,T-Tc.v. (ii) A single consonant be-
tween vowels belongs to the following syllable (i.e. the preceding 
syllable is open, as in AE-yc.v, Ar,-yc.v). 
The statements of these rules by the grammarians are 
somewhat misleading, since they tend to confuse speech with 
writing and to incorporate rules which apply more properly to 
• Cf. Allen, pp. 85 If. The terms 'heavy' and 'light' have also sometimes been used 
by Icelandic grammarians to refer to vowels which in Old Icelandic were respectively 
long and short. 

Q.U ANTITY 
orthographic word-division (at the ends oflines).3 In particular 
they have a rule that any group of consonants which can occur 
at the beginning of a word (as e.g. KT in KTiiIlO) is allotted 
in toto to the following syllable even when it occurs in the 
middle ofa word-thus e.g. Ti-KTW (cf. tHerodian, ii, p. 393 L); 
but this is quite contrary to the phonetic division in Greek,4 
which is TiK-TW, giving heavy quantity for the first syllable.5 
These rules do not necessarily mean that the division be-
tween syllables takes I?lace at exactly the points indicated,6 
but they are adequate for the practical purpose of establishing 
quantitative values. 
'Correptio Attica' 
In stating the rules of syllable-division, we have so far omitted 
the special cases where a plosive consonant (TITK, <paX, j3By) is 
followed by a liquid (p, A) or a nasal (v, Il). In such cases, with 
restrictions which we shall discuss, the consonant-group may 
either be divided, like any other, between preceding and 
following syllables (thus, for example, TICrr-p6s, giving a heavy 
first syllable), or it may belong as a whole to the following 
syllable (thus TICx-Tp6S, giving a light first syllable); both types 
of division are seen in e.g. Soph., Ant., 1240 KeiTol BE VEK-p6s mpi 
ve-Kp<';). 
3 For details of Attic inscriptional practice see Threatte, pp. 64 If. 
• Though it would be generally applicable e.g. to the Slavonic languages. 
• The Greek rules are taken over by Latin grammarians (e.g. Caesellius Vindex, in 
Cassiodor(i)us, De Orthog., GL, vii, p. 205 K); but in Latin inscriptions, to a greater 
degree than in Greek, they tend to be disregarded when they conflict wi th the 
pronunciation. The more general principles still provide a framework for the house-rules 
of modern prin ters (see e.g. H. Hart, Rules for Compositors and Rraders at the University Press, 
Oxford, 36th edn, pp. 64 f.: • As a rule, divide a word after a vowel, turning over the 
consonant. .. Generally, whenever two consonants come together put the hyphen 
between the consonants'); exceptions such as divid-ing are parallel to the common Greek 
practice of grammatical division as in e.g. lTpoa-iiKfV (cf. F. G. Kenyon, Palatography 
of Greek Papyri, pp. 31 f., and Herodian, ii, p. 407 L). 
Whilst the Greek and Latin rules had at least an underlying phonetic basis in these 
languages, they are often at odds with English pronunciation, and phonetic 
formulations for English are therefore unwise (as e.g. F. H. Collins, Authors' and Printers' 
Dictionary, 8th rev. edn, under division of words: • avoid separating a group of letters 
representing a single sound' -a rule which is then followed by the example des-sert, 
where ss = [z] i). 
• Cf. A. Rosetti, Sur la thiorie de la syllable, pp. II If. 
106 

CORREPTIO ATTICA 
The point is that liquids and nasals involve a degree of 
occlusion of the air-stream which is intermediate between that 
of plosives (where it is maximal) and vowels (where it is 
minimal).7 A syllable which begins with a single consonant 
followed by a vowel (as e.g. the second syllable of iTO:-TOS or 
iTO:-pos) involves a diminuendo of occlusion-or, in more pos-
itive terms, a crescendo of aperture (and sonority). But there 
is also a (more gradual) crescendo of aperture in a sequence 
plosive + liquid-or-nasal + vowel, so that this too may begin a 
syllable; alternatively it is possible for the plosive to end the 
preceding syllable, and the liquid or nasal to begin the next, as 
in the case of other types of group. In 'motor' terms, the group 
plosive + liquid or nasal can function like a single consonant in 
assisting the release of the syllable because the pressure built up 
during the articulation of the plosive can be released during that 
of the liquid or nasal without interference from the latter (owing 
to their relatively open aperture). 8 
This situation was duly observed by the Greek grammarians, 
who accordingly classified the liquids and nasals together as 
liypO: 'fluid, liquid' (see p. 40) as opposed to the &cpc..lva: 'mute' 
i.e. plosives (e.g. t Hephaestion, Ench., p. 5 C), and described 
the preceding syllable in such cases as KOIVTi 'common' (Latin 
anceps 'doubtful'). The optional treatment does not, however, 
apply where the plosive ends one grammatical element (word, 
or part of complex word) and the liquid or nasal begins another: 
thus in e.g. EK llO:xllS or EKAIiTWV the first syllable can only be EK 
and therefore closed and heavy9-a point that was also noted 
in antiquity (tHephaestion, Ench., p. 6 C). 
In the earliest period of the Greek language groups of the type 
7 From the acoustic standpoint cf. T. Tarn6czy, Word, 4 (1948), p. 71: 'The 
oscillograms of nasals and of sounds like Land R exhibit many traits similar to those 
of vowels'; J akobson, Fant & Halle, Preliminaries 10 Speech Anarysis, p. 19: 'The so-calied 
liquids ... have the vocalic as well as the consonantal feature.' From the articulatory point 
of view, liquids 'combine closure and aperture, either intermittently or by barring the 
median way and opening a lateral by-pass' (ibid., p. 20); nasals involve, like plosives, 
complete occlusion of the oral passage, but allow the passage of air through the nose. 
8 For such a treatment in languages other than Greek and Latin (English and 
Icelandic) cf. AR, pp. 57 f., 69 f. 
• Cf. VL, p. 90. 

Q.U ANTITY 
plosive + liquid or nasal were regularly divided between 
syllables, giving a heavy preceding syllable even though it 
contained a short vowel; this is seen from the fact that in the 
formation of comparative and superlative adjectives (cf. p. 
105) such syllables have the same rhythmic effect as those of the 
type AE1rTos-i.e. the comparative of lTlKPOS is lTIKpO-n:pOS (as 
AE1rTOTepos), and not lTIKPWTEPOS (as crocpwTepos).1O In this respect 
prehistoric Greek resembles prehistoric Latin,l1 though not the 
earliest form of literary Latin (VL, p. 89 f.). This treatment is 
still the dominant one in Homer, where a light syllable is found 
only before the groups plosive + p or voiceless plosive + A, and 
then almost only metri gratia, where a word could not otherwise 
be accommodated in the metre (as e.g. &cpposh", - lTpoKeil.leva). 
On the other hand, in the weak position of a foot (cf. pp. 131 ff.), 
heavy quantity is rarely obtained by a word-final short vowel 
followed by an initial group of these types; thus here again the 
grammatical division between words has an effect on the 
phonetic division. 
The more general occurrence of light syllables before plosive 
+ liquid is a characteristic of the spoken metres of Attic tragedy 
and comedy, and is consequently known as 'correptio Attica'. 
Since it is particularly common in Aristophanes, this treatment 
presumably reflects a feature of the spoken language of the time. 
In Attic, moreover, the treatment is extended to all combina-
tions of plosive + liquid, as well as to the groups voiceless 
plosive + nasal. But even here the tendency to light quantity is 
restricted where the group consists of the combination voiced 
plosive + A; such groups are accordingly referred to by J. 
Schade, whose dissertation De correptione Attica (Greifswald, 
1908) is the basic source of statistics on this matter, as 'con-
iunctiones graves' (together with voiced plosive + nasal, 
which never permits light quantity-i.e. ~A, yA, yv, YI.I, Sv, Sl.l). 
10 Cases such as tpv6pWTIpos, tl1llETpWTIPOS, eV-rEK\lC;>Tcrroc; are later formations. 
KEV6TEPOS, on the other hand, is due to the earlier form KEVF6s with heavy first syllable 
(cf. Ion. KElv6s). 
11 Where the closed nature of such syllables is revealed by the vowel-quality of the 
middle syllable in a word like intlgra, which follows the pattern of e.g. inflc-ta and not 
that of infi-cit. 
108 

CORREPTIO ATTICA 
The different tendencies regarding syllabic division displayed 
by the different groups of consonants both in Homer and in 
Attic presumably reflect different degrees of crescendo of 
aperture in the group (see above); it would thus appear that 
p was less occlusive than A, and A less occlusive than v or !-I-SO 
that the degree of crescendo is greatest in the groups plosive + p 
and least in the groups plosive + nasal. 12 In addition the 
distinction between voiced and voiceless plosives is also signifi-
cant, probably because, as is commonly found, vowels tend to 
be somewhat longer before voiced than before voiceless sounds 
(cf.Jones (c), pp. 52 f.; Heffner, pp. 209 f.), and so would tend 
in Greek to favour heavy quantity (the usually tenser 
articulation of voiceless plosives might also tend to emphasize 
the crescendo). In Attic comedy syllables containing a short 
vowel are seldom heavy before 'light' groups (i.e. other than 
'coniunctiones graves'), and never light before medial 'heavy' 
groups. 
On the basis of Schade's figures one may compare comedy 
with tragedy in regard to their overall treatment of the groups 
plosive + liquid or nasal. In the trimeters and tetrameters of 
Aristophanes the following figures are found for non-final 
syllables containing a short vowel followed by groups of these 
types: 13 
(a) light syllable: 
(b) heavy syllable: 
Approximate ratio al b: 
In the trimeters of tragedy the following figures are found for 
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides respectively: 
(a) 214, 
(b) 
66, 
alb: 3'25, 
1,1 18 
493 
2'251 I 
12 Cf. P. Delattre, 'L'aperture et la syllabation phonetique', The French Review, 17· 5 
(1944), pp. 281 If. 
\3 (a) includes weak position only, i.e. excludes strong position in resolved feet; (b) 
includes strong position only, since heavy quantity is indetenninable in weak position. 
109 

QU ANTITY 
The much higher ratio a/ b in comedy reflects a greater tendency 
than in tragedy to allot groups of the type plosive + liquid or 
nasal to the following syllable. The rather surprisingly high 
ratio for Aeschylus as compared with the other tragedians is 
probably only apparent; for, as D. L. Page has pointed out,14 
if one excludes the' heavy groups', the two noun-stems 1TCXTp-
and TEKV- account for over half of the examples of heavy 
quantity in Sophocles; and if these are discounted, Aeschylus 
and Sophocles show similar ratios. 
Before a 'heavy' consonant-group light syllables are found 
only when the vowel is separated from the group by a gram-
matical boundary, as e.g. be YAWO'O'av (Aesch., Ag., r629), 
eI3ACXO'TE (Soph., El., 440) ;15 before an initial' light' consonant-
group word-final syllables ending in a short vowel are always 
light in Attic, even in tragedy, as also in most cases is the 
syllabic augment. 16 
The degrees of incidence of 'correptio Attica' may be 
summarized (excluding rare exceptions) by the diagram 
opposite, which takes comedy as its central axis, and displays 
along different dimensions the roles of the various factors-
dialect/ genre, voice (of plosives), occlusion/aperture (ofliquids 
and nasals)-on which the incidence depends. 
Quantity and duration 
Quantity, like vowel-length (see p. 6), should not be considered 
as a simple matter of duration. As is recognized by Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus (t De Compo xv, p. 58 UR), the heavy syllable 
O'1TA';V is actually of greater duration than ii, which, however, 
is also heavy; similarly the light first syllable of 656s is of less 
duration than that of O'Tp6q>os, which, however, is also light. 
Such variations in duration were discussed by' the ancient 
puelJlKOi, who were concerned primarily with their relevance to 
music, and they adopted the convention of considering a 
14 A new chapter in the history of Greek Tragedy, pp. 42 f. 
15 An isolated exception is Aesch., Supp., 761 (!3v!3;'ou in 2nd foot). 
J8 For exceptions see Page, op. cit., p. 24 and n. 25. 
r ro 

QUANTITY AND DURATION 
:Il .., 
<i 
u ·0 
'" > 
.., 
;. 
O§ 
15:: 
"C .., 
u ·0 > 
[=:J Never 
~ 
At grammatical divisions only 
I22J Metri gratia 
~ 
Predominantly 
~ 
Seldom not 
II 
II' Heavy groups '. 
Fig. 6. Incidence of' correptio Attica'. 
u .s.. 
~ 
consonant as equivalent in duration to half a short vowel; a 
short vowel was said to occupy a 'primary measure' of time 
(XP6vos npC;)TOS) ; and a long vowel or diphthong was treated as 
equivalent to two such measures. On this basis there would be 
a continuous scale of duration from e.g. the four measures of 
CTTTAr,V to the one measure of 6, and there would be no reason 
for drawing a distinction between 'heavy' and' light' at any 
particular point in the scale (indeed the' light' syllable CrTpO-
would have a i-measure more than the' heavy' syllable 00-). But 
as is noted by Choeroboscus in his commentary on Hephaestion 
(p. 180 C), the I.IETplKOi and ypal.ll.laT1KOi used the same term 
Xp6vos npwTos to express the quantitative value of a light 
syllable, a heavy syllable being then considered as equivalent 
I I I 

Q.U ANTITY 
to 2 X.TI. Such a relationship between heavy and light is based 
on the common metrical equivalence of one heavy and two light 
syllables. In modern terminology the X.TI. is generally rendered 
by the Latin 'mora', a term first so applied by Gottfried 
Hermann.17 
Thus quantity is not concerned so much with the duration 
of a syllable as a whole (though, in general, heavy syllables will 
have been of greater duration than light), but rather with the 
nature of the syllabic ending. One might usefully adopt in this 
connection the terminology of Stetson's' motor phonetics' (cf. 
pp. 2,6), and state simply that the movement of a light syllable 
is 'unarrested', whereas that of a heavy syllable is 'arrested' 
(by the chest-muscles in the case of a long-vowel ending, by the 
oral constriction in the case of a consonant ending, or by a 
combination of the two in the case of a diphthongal ending, 
according to Stetson, p. 7, n.). Stetson (p. 46) further points out 
that a releasing consonant 'never adds to the length of the 
syllable and it actually accelerates the syllable movement'. 
Resolution and contraction 
Since duration provides an unsatisfactory basis for the definition 
of quantity, it is also unacceptable as an explanation of the 
metrical equivalence in Greek of one heavy and two light 
syllables. 
It is essential at this point to distinguish between two quite 
different types of' equivalence', which are often confused (cf. 
AR, pp. 60 f.). In one the basic element consists of the two light 
syllables (as in dactylic hexameters,18 and in the other the basic 
element consists of the one heavy syllable (as in iambics and 
trochaics).1t is sometimes convenient to refer to that part of the 
foot which in its basic form comprises a heavy syllable as the 
'strong position', and the other part, which in its basic form 
17 Earlier by Petrus Ramus, Grammatica Latina, 3rd edn (Paris, 1560), Lib. I, Cap. 
3, but in the more general sense of a pause, lengthening. 
18 The final foot of a hexameter is basically not a spondee but a trochee (i.e. a 
catalectic dactyl): for arguments see AR, pp. 301 ff. The spondee alternative here arises 
only by the principle of' indifference' at end of line. 
I 12 

RESOLUTION AND CONTRACTION 
comprises one or two light syllables, as the 'weak position'. 
The substitution of two light for a basic heavy syllable (i.e. in 
the strong position) is generally referred to as 'resolution', and 
that of a heavy for a basic two light (i.e. in the weak position) 
as 'contraction'. 
Unlike the light syllables in weak position, those arising by 
resolution in strong position are subject to more or less stringent 
constraints on the incidence of word-boundaries, and an ex-
planation of the phenomenon involves rather numerous techni-
calities, which are treated in some detail in AR, pp. 316 ff. (cf. 
p. 137 below). The rationale of metrical contraction (discussed 
in AR, pp. 255 ff.) is also far from obvious, but one possibility, 
based on an idea proposed by G. Nagy (Comparative Studies in 
Greek and Indian Meter, pp. 49 f.), may be summarized here. It 
is suggested that the substitution has its origin in the well-known 
process of vowel-contraction (Tll-laE"TE -+ TII-lCrrE, etc.). Though 
this process was carried further in Attic than in other dialects, 
some vowel-contractions in Homer must go back to an early 
period, since the metre sometimes precludes their expansion 
(into the uncontracted forms), even in formulae (cf. Chantraine, 
pp. 27 ff.). The uncontracted Homeric forms, however, tended 
to be misunderstood in later times, as may be seen from the 
phenomenon of'diectasis' (cf. Chantraine, pp. 75 ff.). The 
Homeric opaw, for example, contracted in Attic to opw: but the 
metre demanded three syllables in Homer, and to meet this 
requirement Attic reciters (ignorant of any such form as opaw) 
simply' stretched' the vowel of the contraction to give the opow 
of our texts-which is historically non-existent. 
The proposed explanation assumes that there was a pre-
decessor of the Homeric hexameter of purely dactylic form; 
and that later, in certain words of the poems, vowel-contrac-
tion produced spondaic sequences. It seems likely that the con-
tracted forms were first admitted in composition to the 
strong position of the foot metri gratia, and then extended in re-
citation to the weak position. Subsequently, in Nagy's words, 
this substitution 'extended beyond the original confines 
of the formulas that generated it' (i.e. to cases not arising 
113 

QUANTITY 
from vowel-contraction), 'so that new formulas with spondee 
instead of dactyl are admitted' (loc. cit)-an example of the 
process whereby metrical patterns develop' their own dynam-
ics and became regulators of any incoming non-traditional 
phraseology' (op. cit., p. 145). 
If this explanation is correct, then the term' contraction' for 
the metrical substitution is also very appropriate from the 
standpoint of historical phonology. 
The question of 'ictus' 
We have discussed so far the determinants of quantity in Greek, 
and have seen that it functions as a rhythmic factor both in the 
language and in metre. We have, on the other hand, seen that 
the primary characteristic of quantity is unlikely to have been 
duration; and since Greek verse is based on quantity, its 
rhythms also are unlikely to have been based purely on 
time-ratios. These suppositions are further supported by the fact 
that in iambics and trochaics a heavy syllable may occur in 
some of the same positions as a light; and in dactylics and 
anapaestics may be substituted for two light only in a particular 
(viz. 'weak') position of the foot (see p. 113 above). For neither 
the possibility of the former nor the restriction of the latter 
equivalence seems compatible with a purely durational rhyth-
mic basis.19 One must therefore seek some other characteristic 
of quantity which could on the one hand account for a heavy 
syllable being sometimes rhythmically equivalent to a light; 
and on the other hand for a spondee, which comprises two 
elements of the same quantity, to be rhythmically equivalent 
to either a specifically 'falling' (trochaic or dactylic) foot, or a 
'rising' (iambic or anapaestic) foot. One characteristic which 
seems to meet this requirement is' stressability'; in other words, 
it seems possible that heavy syllables were liable to bear stress 
in the language-but that not all such syllables were stressed; 
that light syllables tended to be unstressed; and that verse-
1. Forthe former cf. A. M. Dale, WSI, 77 (1964), p. 16: 'long anceps must have been 
distinguishable from the neighbouring longs, or the clarity of the rhythm would suffer'. 
"4 

THE Q.UESTION OF ICTUS 
rhythm was based on the alternation of stressed and unstressed 
syllables, i.e. that an 'ictus' fell on the strong position of the foot, 
which was normally constituted by a heavy syllable.20 
This question of stress in classical Greek will be taken up in 
more detail in another connection (pp. 131 ff.). 
20 On 'resolution' see pp. J J 2 If. and J 37. with further reference to AR. 
I 15 

CHAPTER 6 
ACCENT* 
It is generally acknowledged that the accent of ancient Greek 
was basically one of pitch (i.e. 'melodic ') rather than of stress. 
From the time of Plato (e.g. Grat., 399 A) we find two primary 
categories of accent recognized by the Greeks themselves, to 
which are generally applied the opposed terms 6~vs ('sharp, 
acute ') and j3apvs (' heavy, grave '). If 6~vs in this context meant 
'loud', l3apvs would mean 'quiet '-which it does not; indeed, 
as Sturtevant points out (p. 94), it tends to mean the opposite, 
being applied to sounds which are both low and loud, as e.g. 
in l3apvl3pellETllS as an epithet of Zeus; and a passage in the 
Phaedrus (268 D), referring to music, indicates that Plato 
understood these terms as applying to features of pitch. Sim-
ilarly from a passage in the Rhetoric (1403 b) it is clear that 
Aristotle considered accentuation as a type of apllovia, whereas 
loudness is referred to as IlEye60s (with Ileyas and IlIKpOS as its two 
poles). The actual terms used to denote accentuation in Greek 
are themselves suggestive of its nature: for To:cns or TOVOS (lit. 
'stretching ') may be taken to derive their meaning from the 
string-tension whereby the pitch of a musical instrument is 
varied, the 'sharp' accent being commonly associated with 
E1rhacns ' tigh tening , , and the ' heavy' with avealS ' slackening'-
terms which are in fact also applied to stringed instruments 
(e.g. Plato, Rep., 349 E); and the common term 7Tpoa~Sia, of 
which the Latin accentus is a literal translation, is a clear 
reference to the musical nature of the Greek accent (being so 
called' quia 7Tpoa~SeTal Tais aVAAaj3ais', as a Latin grammarian 
explains) .1 
It may also be significant that the rules relating to the position 
of the accent in Greek (unlike Latin: cf. VL, p. 85) concern 
primarily the vowel elements, i.e. precisely those elements 
which are 'singable' in the sense of permitting variations of 
I Diomedes, GL, i, p. 431 K. 
116 

ACCENT 
pitch; thus, for example, the accentuation of q>oivl~ (as com-
pared with q>aivw) indicates that in the final syllable only the 
short I vowel is relevant for accentual purposes, and not the 
(heavy) quantity of the syllable VI~ as a whole. 2 
A more general indication of the nature of the Greek accent 
is given by the phonological studies of the Prague school, which 
suggest that stress is normally characteristic of languages in 
which the accentual unit is the syllable (as e.g. Latin), but pitch 
of languages in which the accentual unit is the 'mora' (as ip 
ancient Greek: cf. pp. III f., 122).3 
The melodic nature of the Greek accent is further supported 
by its close parallelism to that of Vedic, which was unmistakably 
described by the Indian phoneticians in terms of 'high' and 
'low' pitch,4 and of 'tense' and 'lax' vocal cords. 5 In spite of 
numerous divergences, the Greek and Vedic accentual systems 
must be derived from a common Indo-European origin-
witness, for example, their close agreement in part of the 
nominal paradigm: 
Greek 
Vedic 
Nom. sing. 
TTcrnlP 
pitd 
Voc. sing. 
TTCl-rEP 
pitar 
Acc. sing. 
TTCXTepa 
pitaram 
Dat. sing. 
TTCrrpi 
pitre 
Dat. plur. 
TTCrrpCxCrt 
(loc.) pitt~u 
Remnants of this original system are still found in some modern 
Baltic and Slavonic languages (notably Lithuanian and Serbo-
Croat);6 but it is Vedic that preserved it most faithfully, and 
J. Kurylowicz has therefore commented that' Pour comprendre 
l'accent grec il suffit de partir d'un etat a peu pres vedique'. 7 
2 Cf. Choeroboscus, Schol. in Theod., i, pp. 364, 384 f. H. 
3 Cf. Trubetzkoy, p. 179 (' Die Dilferenzierung der Prosodeme geschieht in sil-
benzahlenden Sprachen durch die Intensitat, in den morenzahlenden durch die 
Tonhohe'); R.Jakobson, TCLP, 4 (1931), pp. 166f. The considerations mentioned 
on p. 154 may also be relevant. 
• For a discussion of the metaphorical use of the terms 'high' and 'low' in relation 
to pitch in western antiquity see C.Jan, Musici scriptores Graeci, pp. 58 f. and 143 If. 
S Cf. Allen, pp. 87 If. 
• The melodic accents of certain modern Scandinavian and Indian languages 
(Swedish, Norwegian; Panjabi, Lahnda) are of secondary and independent origin. 
7 L' accentuation ,us [angues indo-turoplennes2, p. 7. 
117 

ACCENT 
It is the high pitch that is generally considered in 
antiquity as the accent of the word, in the sense of being the 
'culminative' feature which occurs in one and only one syllable 
of the word; all other syllables have the low pitch, which might 
therefore be considered as a merely negative feature, i.e. 
absence of high pitch.8 Thus the high pitch is sometimes referred 
to as the KVPlOS T6vos, i.e. 'the pitch proper', and the low pitch 
as crVAAOI'IK6s, i.e. 'inherent in the syllable'. 
There seems to be supporting evidence also from some 
surviving fragments of musical settings of Greek texts. The 
musical writer Aristoxenus observes that there is a natural 
melody of speech based on the word-accents (t Harm. i. 18, p. 
I 10M) ; but in singing, according to Dionysius ofHalicarnassus, 
this melody is subordinate to the requirements of the music. 
Dionysius mentions the choral lyrics of Euripides as displaying 
this most clearly, and cites an example from the Orestes (140-2: 
t De Compo xi, pp. 41 f. UR); it so happens that a choral 
fragment of this play (338~44), with a musical setting that may 
be the original, has been preserved on papyrus; it is badly 
mutilated, but it tends to support Dionysius in so far as there 
is little correlation between the linguistic accents and the music; 
this, as]. F. Mountford has commented, is not surprising, since 
'if the same melody were sung to the strophe and antistrophe 
of a choral ode, it would frequently happen that the rise and 
fall of the melody would be contrary to that of the pitch accents 
of the words; for strophic correspondence did not extend as far 
as identity of accentuation'. 9 
8 The ancient Indian authorities refer to the comparable accents in Vedic as udiilta 
, raised' and anudiilta 'unraised'. 
• In New Chapters in Greek Literature (ed. Powell & Barber), p. 165; cf. also 
E. K. Borthwick, CR, N.S. 12 (1962), p. 160; E. Pohlmann, WSt, 79 (1966), p. 212. 
It has, however, been suggested by E. Wahlstrom (Accentual Responsion in Greek strophic 
poetry, CHL, 47 (1970), p. 8) that it is 'dangerous to generalize from the compositional 
practice of a notoriously avant-garde composer like Euripides'; and from an accentual 
analysis of passages from the lyric poets he seeks to show that there is a tendency to 
accentual responsion between stanzas, which is particularly marked towards the ends 
of lines and so suggests that the poet was taking the musical setting into account. But 
the agreement between stanzas is not complete, and Wahlstrom recognizes (p. 22) that 
'it would have been an inhumanly difficult task to compose large-scale poetry which 
responded perfectly both accentually and metrically and which in addition was good 
literature' . 
118 

ACCENT 
I 
II 
6 - aov 
li'\s 
qlaf· -
VOV,· 1.111 - 5Ev 
6 -
~c..lS 
IN ~V-
4 
II 
...:1 __ 
_ 
J:. ~ ---
~ ~-
~ 
~8@. Jl P P I a E? P J Fj. It' P il 
'll"oV-- 'll"pOs 6 - ~I - yov 
W - Tl 
T6 
3i'jv, 
T6 n - Ms 
, 
I 
6 xp6 - vos an- - al 
-
ni. 
Fig. 7. The epitaph ofSicilus, from the Aidin inscription. 
[GouTtev of Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Wiesbaden.] 
119 

ACCENT 
The case appears to be different, however, with the musical 
inscriptions from Delphi (probably late 2 c. B.C.); in these there 
is a tendency to agreement between the music and what we 
believe to have been the melodic patterns ofspeech. lO The same 
applies to the epitaph of Sicilus, found at Aidin, near Tralles 
in Asia Minor, in I883. This inscription (not earlier than 2 c. 
B.C., and probably I c. A.D.) was in better condition than any 
other musical fragment, and the notation survived intact; 
the stone was brought to Smyrna, where it disappeared at the 
time of the fire in I922 (but was reported in I957 as having 
reappeared). The epitaph is reproduced on p. I I9 in facsimile 
and in a modern musical transcription (both after O. Crusius, 
Philologus, 52 (I894), pp. I60 ff.)Y 
So far as the high pitch is concerned, a syllable which would 
bear the acute accent is nearly always marked in th~ musical 
inscriptions to be sung on a higher note than any other syllable 
in the word (note the treatment of e.g. oAcus, oAiyov, Xpovos in 
the Aidin inscription) .12 Regarding the range of variation 
between low and high pitches in speech, there is a well-known 
statement by Dionysius of Halicarnassus (t De Compo xi, pp. 
40 f. UR) to the effect that' the melody of speech is measured 
by a single interval, approximately that termed a "fifth", and 
does not rise to the high pitch by more than three tones and 
a semitone, nor fall to the low by more than this amount'. This 
statement is generally understood in its most obvious interpre-
tation, but an alternative suggestion13 merits notice-namely 
that the interval of a fifth may refer not to the total range but 
rather to the variation from a mean. 14 Dionysius does not always 
express himself clearly, but this interpretation would save the 
10 Cf. Pohlmann, Griechische Musikfragmente, pp. 17 If. 
11 A photograph appears in BCH, 48 (1924), p. 507. 
I2 On the apparently contradictory (first word) OOOV cf. R. P. Winnington-Ingram, 
Mode in Ancient Greek Music, p. 38; it is also possible that eaTl is intended rather than 
anI. 
13 J. Carson, ]HS, 89 (1969), pp. 34 f. 
.. The passage continues by contrasting the melody of music, as employing various 
intervals up to an octave. This would, however, not necessarily conflict with the above 
interpretation, provided that one assumed Dionysius here to be referring to variation 
from the central note of the two-octave' Greater Perfect System'. 
I20 

ACCENT 
latter part of his statement from tautology; and the total range 
then implied need not be excessive, at least if, as it appears, it 
is intended as a maximum. Descriptions of the melodic range 
of Norwegian, for example, average around a sixth,U; but these 
are generally based on a more or less formal rendering, and 'in 
everyday speech the size of the interval can vary greatly, from 
nothing to an octave, according to the age, sex, temperament, 
and emotional state of the speaker; whether he is speaking 
quickly or slowly, with or without strong emphasis and ac-
CG1 ding to the position ofthe word in the sentence. The length of 
the word can also influence the size of the interval. '16 
I t is probable that similar considerations applied to the 
melodic range of Greek. It is also certain that the changes of 
pitch in speech were more gradual than in singing; one would 
expect this from experience of modern languages having a 
melodic accent, and it is expressly stated by Aristoxenus 
(tHarm. i. 8 f., pp. 101 f. M), who distinguishes between con-
tinuous change (O"wE)(ils) and interval-change (8IaO"T11~ClTIKil), 
and points out that a speaker who employs the latter type 
of intonation is said to be singing rather than speakingY The 
graduality of pitch-change in one context at least is confirmed 
by the evidence of Old Indian; for we know from the ancient 
Indian phoneticians that in Vedic the syllable immediately 
following a high pitch did not bear a level low pitch, but a 
falling glide, starting at a high pitch and finishing low, to which 
they gave the name svarita 'intoned' .18 Since such a glide was 
automatic in this context, it is to be considered structurally 
(as by the Indians) simply as a variant of the low pitch; the fact, 
therefore, that it is not specially indicated in Greek does not rule 
out the likelihood of its existence in this language also; and 
support for it is also to be seen in certain tendencies of the 
15 See e.g. R. G. Popperwell, The Pronunciation qf Norwegian, pp. 151 f.; E. Haugen 
& M.Joos, 'Tone and intonation in East Norwegian', Acta Philol. Scand., 22 (1952), 
pp. 41 If. 
10 Popperwell, op. cit., p. 169. 
17 Aristides Quintilianus, however, (De Mus. i. 4, pp. 5 f. WI) recognizes an 
intermediate style for the reading of poetry. 
18 Described by some authorities as a 'praua1Jl1', lit. 'downhill slope' (cf. Allen, p. 88). 
121 

ACCENT 
musical fragments 19 (e.g. the second syllable ofoACAls in the Aidin 
inscription) . 
In Greek, as well as in Vedic, when a syllable contained a 
long vowel or a diphthong, the high pitch could occur on either 
the first or the second mora. In the former case the falling glide 
would occur on the second mora, i.e. the second mora bore a 
variant of the low pitch. The combination of high and low 
(falling) pitch in the same syllable was specifically noted by 
Greek writers, and given such various names as Shovos, 6~v­
I3cxpvs, oVlJlfAEKTOS, or lTEPICJTT~lJevOS (though this last migh t refer 
to the accent-mark rather than the accent itself). Phonetically 
the two elements probably fused, so that the' compound' accent 
was probably identical with the falling glide which occurred on 
a long vowel or diphthong in the syllable following a high pitch, 
and the Indian writers use the same term svarita for both (cf. 
also the musical treatment of AVlfOV, 3i)v, OlfCXITei in the Aidin 
inscription) . 
In addition to the above categories we also find references in 
a number of writers (including Aristotle, who does not specifi-
cally mention the compound accent) to a IJEO'OS 'middle' accent. 
There is little agreement as to what was meant by this; it has 
been variously interpreted by modern scholars as referring to 
the glide which followed a high pitch (either in the same or in 
the following syllable), to the compound accent as a whole,20 
to a variant of the high pitch on final syllables marked with a 
'grave' (see below), and in more general terms to all levels of 
pitch intermediate between the lowest and the highest. In this 
connection we may also consider in some detail the continuation 
of Dionysius' statement on the melodies of speech: 
OV IJTJV CrnCXO'CX AE~IS 'Ii Kcx6' Ev IJOPIOV Myov TCXTTO~" Elf! TT)S cxi.JTi)s 
AEyETCXI TCxO'eCAlS, OAA' ,; IJEv Elf! TT)S 6~eicxs, ,; S' Elf! Ti)S I3cxpeicxs, 'Ii 
It Cf. R. L. Turner, CR, 29 (1915), p. 196. There is some musical evidence also for 
a tendency to rising pitch in the syllable preceding a high pitch; but 'the tendency to 
fall from the accented syllable is distincdy stronger ... than the tendency to rise to it' 
(R. P. Winnington-Ingram, Symbolae Oslomsts, 31 (1955), p. 66). 
2. Thus also by a number of Byzantine grammarians, who suggest, however, that 
the term ~~ 
is primarily a musical rather than a grammatical term; cf. Pohlmann, 
WSI, 79, pp. 206 f. 
122 

ACCENT 
5' E'TT' CxlJcpoiv. TC;:)V 5e CxIJCPOTEpaS TCxS TOC1E1S Ex0vO"wv al IJEv KaTCx lJiav 
O"VAAa[3"v O"Vvecp6apIJEvOV EXOVO"I TC;; 6~ei TO [3apv, as 5" mplO"'TTc.v-
IJEvas KaAoVlJev· al 5e Ev e-rEP<;X Te Kat e-rEP<;X Xc.vptS EKOTepOV ecp' EavTOV 
TT,V oiKeiav CPVAOTTOV cpVO"IV. Kat Tais lJev 51O"VAAo[3ols ov5Ev TO 51Cx 
IJEO"OV Xc.vpiov [3apVTTlTOS TE Kat 6~VTTlTOS· Tais 5e 'TTOAVO"VAA0[30IS, 
';AiKOI 'TTOT' Cxv Wo"IV, ,; TOV 6~vv TOVOV ExovO"a lJia Ev 'TTOAAais Tais 
CxAAalS [3apeialS EvEo"TIV. 
For this passage the following interpretation is proposed: 'Of 
course, not every word21 is spoken with the same pitch-patter~, 
but one on the high pitch, another on the low, and another on 
both. Of those which have both, some have the low combined 
with the high in one syllable, and these we call circumflex; 
whereas others have each of them on different syllables and 
maintaining their own quality. In disyllables there is no 
intermediate position between low and high; but in polysyl-
lables, of whatever length, there is a single syllable containing 
the high pitch amongst a plurality of low pitches.' 
Thus for Dionysius, if there is only one low-pitched syllable 
contrasting with a high, it is simply to be classed as low, even 
if it has a variant form; but if there is more than one low, all 
except presumably the lowest occupy TO 51Cx IJEO"OV Xc.vpiov (and 
it could be these that some other writers describe by the term 
IJEO"OS). In other words, in his statement about disyllables 
Dionysius is speaking structurally, whilst in his statement 
about polysyllables he is speaking phonetically; but the general 
picture is consistent with a speech-melody which gradually 
rises towards the high pitch, whether by steps or glide, and 
then returns to the low. 
Whilst elements preceding the high pitch are generally 
irrelevant to the location of this pitch, there are (unlike in 
.. The long periphrasis for' word' is rendered necessary by the fact that Greek has 
no word which unambiguously means' word' (cf. e.g. Herodian, ii, p. 407 L: Ell ~vi 
~pEl Myov, i\yow Ell I1IGr Ae~EI). AE~IS by itself can refer to an utterance of any length, 
and therefore requires the restriction here made to a single' part of speech' (clearly 
based on the definition of Dionysius Thrax, Ars Gramm., p. 22 U: M~IS ani ~pos 
V,OxIC7TOV "Toil Ka"TO: C1Vv"Ta~IV Myov; cf. Priscian, GL, ii, p. 53 K, and the modern 
definition of the word as a 'minimal free form '~e.g. L. Bloomfield, Language, 2 (1926), 
p. 156; B. Bloch & G. L. Trager, Outline of Linguistic Ana(ysis, p. 54). 
123 

ACCENT 
Vedic) restrictions placed upon its location by the elements 
which follow it. For this purpose the Greek accent may be 
considered essentially as a 'contonation', comprising the high 
pitch and the falling pitch which immediately follows it; this 
contonation may be either monosyllabic (in the case of the 
compound accent) or disyllabic ;22 but in either case not more than 
one vowel-mora ( = short vowel) may follow the contonation. 23 
Accentual marking 
In inscriptions there is virtually no indication of accent,24 and 
we have no reason to think that any system of marking was in 
general use in classical times. Native speakers naturally knew 
the position and nature of the accent, since it was part of their 
everyday speech; there would thus be no more need for them 
to indicate it in writing than in the case of the Norwegian or 
Swedish melodic accent, or the English or Russian stress-accent; 
the relatively few cases of ambiguity would nearly always be 
resolved by the grammar or sense of the context (e.g. TOIlOS 
noun: TOIlOS adj. -cf. English imprint noun: imprint verb; N or-
22 This distinction is reminiscent of the Norwegian accents often so named (cf. 
Haugen & Joos, op. cit.); on 'oxytone' words see below. 
23 For this purpose the final 'diphthongs' a\ and 01 are generally to be considered 
as comprising a short vowel and a consonanty (see also pp. 81 f., 97); cf. M. Lucidi, 
RL, I (1950), p. 74. Lup3.§ (p. 180) objects to this formulation on the grounds that one 
would have to consider long vowels other than in final syllables as comprising only one 
mora (e.g. in a word such as ilv6pwlTos). But this objection assumes that the falling 
tone necessarily occupied only one mora; and it is clear from p. 121 above that this 
is not envisaged-and indeed would be phonetically most improbable; the fall is 
envisaged as occupying the whole of the following syllable (just as the svarita in Vedic): 
cf. also AR, p. 238. 
For other formulations of the rule see AR, pp. 236 If. 
On final diphthongs in relation to the rule see further AR, p .. 238 with n. 2. 
2. Cf. Threatte, p. 97. There is just one clear example from Athens of c. 220 A.D., 
on a fragment of the Sarapion monument, where the word oT (,for himself') bears a 
circumflex (and rough breathing) straddling the digraph, in the medical precept: 
"Epya Ta6(e) I=p[ov], ... lTpclTov .... 
Kal v60v lii~a\ Kai oT lTpOlTap ii TC¥ a[PTtYl1v 1 
(cf. 'Physician, heal thyself'). The purpose here could be to disambiguate the poetic 
form, or for emphasis. Cf. J. H. Oliver (with P. Maas) in Bull. Hist. Med. 7 (1939), pp. 
315 If. (drawing on p. 319); a few other cases (including some possible Attic examples) 
are cited by A. Wilhelm, SbAWB, 1933, pp. 845 f. 
124 

ACCENTUAL MARKING 
wegian 'hjelper 'help(s)': vhjelper 'helper'). The use of accent-
marks in Greek may have arisen partly as a result of a decline 
in the oral tradition of epic poetry (so that Greek speakers 
themselves required guidance in the pronunciation of un-
familiar forms), and partly from the needs of teaching Greek 
as a foreign language. The tradition of such marking seems to 
have started at Alexandria around 200 B.C., and is generally 
associated with the name of Aristophanes of Byzantium. At first, 
to judge from papyri, it was used sporadically and mostly to 
resolve ambiguities. 
From the beginning the high pitch on a short vowel was 
rendered by the acute accent-mark, as in e.g. Ae~al; the same 
mark was also used when the high pitch occurred on the second 
mora ofa long vowel or diphthong, as in e.g. (optative) A';~at; 
but when it occurred on the first mora of a long vowel or 
diphthong, thereby creating the 'compound' accent (mono-
syllabic contonation), this was marked with the circumflex25 
accent-mark, as in e.g. (infinitive) Af\~al. 
In one early system of marking, every low pitch was indicated 
by the grave accent-mark-e.g. eE6Soopos; but such a practice 
was clearly uneconomical and, inelegant,26 and was later re-
placed by the current (Byzantine) system whereby only the 
high and compound pitches are indicated (by the acute and 
circumflex symbols). The grave symbol was, however, then 
substituted for an acute where this occurred on a final mora 
(' oxytone' words), except in the case of interrogatives (e.g. Tis) 
or when followed by an enclitic or a pause-thus e.g. ayae6S 
faTlY, eaTlv ayae6S', but ayaeos Tallias. 27 There has been much 
discussion about what this substitution implies from a phonetic 
point of view, but no clear decision has been reached-e.g. as 
'6 = 1TEP1CTTTW~VOS, • bent round'. There is a Byzantine tradition that this term 
originally referred to the shape of the mark, having been substituted for the term 
6~vj3apvs by Arist. Byz. upon changing the mark from" (a combination of acute and 
grave) to ~ in order to avoid confusion with the consonant 1\; but there is reason to 
doubt the authenticity of this story. 
'6 Cf. Herodian, i, p. IO L; Schol. in Dion. Thr., pp. 153 and 294 H. 
27 For early accentual practice see B. Laum. Das alexandrinischL Akzentuations~tem; 
W. Schubart, Das Buch bei den Griechm und Riimern3 , pp. 75 f. 
125 

ACCENT 
to whether it implies a full or partial lowering of the pitch,28 
or is merely a graphic peculiarity.29 
We have seea that in other types of word a high pitch was 
probably followed by a falling pitch to complete the contona-
tion. In Vedic, when the high pitch occurred at the end of a 
word, the falling pitch was carried by the initial syllable of the 
next word. But, as compared with Old Indian, words in Greek 
were more autonomous units from a phonetic point of view, 
and it is likely t~at such an extension of the contonation across 
word-boundaries would there have been anomalous. An 
exception would be understandable in the case of enclitic 
combinations, since the enclitic lacked any accent of its own, 
and formed a single phonetic unit with the preceding full word: 
thus in e.g. aya60s ECTnv the first syllable of EC7T1V could carry the 
falling glide; similarly, in combinations such as c5:v6pc..moi TIVES, 
SClpov eCTnv, a second contonation is required because otherwise 
there would be a breach of the rule that a contonation may 
not be followed by more than one mora. There are, however, 
restrictions on the extent to which the limiting rule can 
operate, as e.g. in KOACls TIWS, KOAOV TIVOS, KOAClv TIVWV, where 
the rule is breached but it is impossible to add a secondary 
accent to the main word; the same applies to e.g. oiiTw TIWS, 
since the second syllable of oiiTw carries the falling glide and 
so cannot receive a secondary accent; and in e.g. OTKOi TIVWV 
the rule is breached on account of the long vowel in the final 
syllable of the enclitic. In the last case it is usual to say that 
the length of final vowel in enclitics is irrelevant; but it may 
simply be a case of an accentual pis aller, just as the absence 
of secondary accentuation in KOACls TIWS, oiiTw TIWS, etc.30 
•• The grammarians use the term KOll.li3e<al, or Tprnovaa els j3apeiav (cf. Herodian, 
i, pp. 10 and 551 L; Apollonius Dyscolus, Pron., p. 36 S) . 
• t The fact that the grammarians seem sometimes to assume a high pitch in such 
cases is not necessarily evidence against a phonetic modification, since they may well 
be speaking in relative terms, whereby even a lowered variant would still be classified 
as high. On the 'grave' accent see further AR, pp. 244 fT., 269 fT.; Sommerstein, 
pp.16of. 
30 In cases like llEYaAOI TlveS (and e.g. lTaiSOIV Tlvoiv) the rather surprising secondary 
accent on the enclitic may have arisen by a misunderstanding: for further discussion 
(including also the question of 'proclitics') see AR, pp. 241 f., 248 f.; Sommerstein, 
pp. 162 f; Lupalj, pp. 172 fT. 

ACCENTUAL MARKING 
In non-enclitic contexts, e.g. aycx60S TOllioS, a high pitch on 
aycx66s could not be followed by a fall, and the contonation 
would be incomplete. The importance of the fall is further 
shown by the fact that in enclitic combinations a high pitch 
may not be immediately followed by another high pitch: thus 
we have e.g. IlEYO:AOI TIVES, not IlEYO:AOi TIVES, since the latter 
accentuation would deprive the full word IlEy6:Aol of the falling 
glide, which thus seems to have been an essential adjunct of the 
high pitch. 31 The system as represented by Vedic, therefore, 
would have broken down in Greek when an 'oxytone' wort! 
was followed by another full word ;32 the anomalous situation 
might be resolved by some modification of the high pitch-but 
it must be admitted that the nature of the modification is 
unknown, and there seems little point in making mere guesses.33 
Interrogatives and pre-pausal forms are of course inherently 
special cases, and it may well have been, as the marking and 
31 On the problem of'synenclisis' (succession of enclitics) see Vend ryes, pp. 87 If.; 
AR, p. 244; Sommerstein, pp. 164 f. The 'Homeric' enclitic accentuation I\aj.lm TE etc. 
(well attested in papyri and MSS, and by a number of grammarians, but generally 
'corrected' by modern editors) is not really an exception, since the first syllable in such 
cases contains a short vowel followed by a liquid or nasal; such consonants can carry 
a tonal movement in the same way as vowels (Popperwell, op. cit., §442, comments 
on them as 'prolonging the vowel glide' in Norwegian); in Indo-European (and still 
in Lithuanian) such combinations were structurally equivalent to diphthongs; thus the 
falling tone can occur on the liquid or nasal, so that the accentuation of I\aj.lm TE etc. 
was originally equivalent to that of e.g. eTTa TE. The same treatment is, however, further 
and wrongly extended to heavy syllables in general, e.g. ~pcl ae (cf. Vend ryes, §92). 
32 Oxytones in such cases are referred to as 'enclinomena'. 
33 The foregoing account of the Greek accentual system, and of the implications of 
the grave accent-mark, is based on Allen, 'A Problem of Greek Accentuation' (In 
Mtmory of J. R. Firth, pp. 8 If.); but its essentials are already implicit in C. Lancelot's 
remarkable Nouvelle Methode pour appreruire faciLnnent La Langue grecque (1st edn, Paris, 
1655; citations from 9th edn, 1696), p. 22: ' ... apres avoir releve la voix sur une syllable, 
il faut necessairement qu'elle se rabaisse sur les suivantes; ... on ne Ie figurejamais que 
dans Ie discours, sur les mots aigus ... qui dans la suite changent leur aigu en 
grave, ... pour montrer qu'il ne faut pas relever la derniere, laquelle autrement porteroit 
jusques sur Ie mot suivant, & feroit Ie mesme elfet qu'aux Enclitiques, qui est de les 
unir avec Ie mot precedent'; cf. p. 547: ' ... ils ne l'elevent pas tout a fait, parce que 
cet etevement paroistroit tellement au respect du mot suivant, qu'il sembleroit l'unir 
a soy, ce qui ne se peut faire qu'aux Enclitiques.' The formulation of the limiting rule 
as stated on p. 124 above is also foreshadowed by Lancelot, p. 548: ' ... Ia derniere 
syllable qui suit Ie Circonflexe, ne peut estre longue par nature: parce que cette derniere 
syllable ayant deja este precedee d'un rabaissement, qui est dans Ie Circonflexe mesme, 
elle ne peut avoir deux mesures ... ' 
127 

ACCENT 
grammarians' statements suggest, that here a final high pitch 
would be permitted without a following fall. As Apollonius 
Dyscolus comments on Tis, the oxytone accent has not a 
distinctive but an interrogatory function (Pron., p. 28 S: OU yap 
EvEKa 8lacrroAt;S TO Tis 
6~VvETat aAA' 
EvEKa 
lTEVCYEWS). 
The 
pre-pausal acute would be a feature of the terminal sentence-
or clause-intonation rather than of the word-contonation; in 
Trubetzkoy's terms (p. 2 I 5), 'the acute on final syllables was 
not an accent in the true sense, but an externally conditioned 
raising of the last syllable of a word: this raising occurred before 
a pause if the word contained no other high mora'. 34 Though 
a rising intonation in non-interrogative sentences is not a 
normal feature of English, it may be noted that in Norwegian 
'Sentences which contain ordinary, definite, decided statements 
end on a rising melody ... There is, consequently, a pronounced 
rise in pitch within the last word of the sentence. Should the 
sentence end in a Tone Group, the rise in pitch can be even 
greater.'36 Interrogative sentences in Norwegian also end on a 
rising pitch-pattern, so that' Norwegian often strikes foreigners 
as an unending series of question marks'. 36 The evidence seems 
to indicate that the sentence-intonation of ancient Greek was 
somewhat similar in effect to that of Norwegian, a language 
having a system of melodic accentuation comparable with that 
of Greek. 
We probably have sufficient knowledge to achieve a rough 
approximation to the melodic pattern of isolated Greek words 
(including enclitic combinations); but, quite apart from the 
particular problem of the 'enclinomena', we know virtually 
nothing about 'melodic syntax', i.e. the way in which such 
34 Elsewhere (InJroduction to the principles of phonological description, p. 38, n. I) 
Trubetzkoy cites the case ofGanda, where the rising pitch occurs 'only in interrogative 
verb-forms and this has nothing to do with word phonology, but rather: belongs in the 
field of sentence phonology'. R. Vltan (Working Papers in Language Universals (Stanford), 
1 (1969), p. 54) notes in the course of a study of interrogative systems in some 79 
languages that, although accentual information is scarce, some 20 of these are known 
to have' fortis stress or sentence stress, high pitch, rising contour, or a combination of 
stress and high pitch on the question-word. These languages are evenly distributed.' 
For further discussion of interrogatives see AR, pp. 251 If . 
•• Popperwell, op. cit., §454. 
3. Ibid., §455. 

ACCENTUAL MARKING 
patterns interacted with one another and with clause- and 
sentence-intonations in continuous speech. To judge from what 
we find in living tonal and melodically accented languages, 
these interactions may be extensive and complex. Given the 
melodic patterns of the word-isolates in such languages, it is of 
course possible to derive the melodic sentence-pattern from 
them-but the latter is not usually a simple summation of the 
former. 37 The author has listened to a number of recordings, 
recent and less recent, of attempted melodic-accentual recita-
tions of ancient Greek, and, whilst some are less objectionable 
or ridiculous than others, has found none of them convincing·; 
and, as W. G. Clark commented on such efforts over a century 
ago, the less gifted exponents of this practice' may fancy that 
they rep rod uce it when they do nothing of the kind'. 38 
The carefully considered advice is therefore given, albeit 
reluctantly, not to strive for a melodic rendering,39 but rather 
to concentrate one's efforts on fluency and accuracy in other 
aspects of the language. For further discussion see App. A2. 
These practical difficulties, however, should not be allowed 
to obscure the fact that the melodic accent was one of the most 
characteristic phonetic features of ancient Greek; and the 
accent-marks of our current texts may be generally considered 
as a faithful indication of the word-melodics;40 quite apart 
from the statements of grammarians, and, less reliably, the 
manuscript traditions, they are supported in principle by the 
evidence of Vedic and other languages, and in their detailed 
location by the pronunciation of modern Greek, where, with 
37 As examples of the intricacy of these relations one may consult Haugen & Joos, 
op. cit. and in particular A. E. Sharp, 'A tonal analysis of the disyllabic noun in the 
Machame dialect ofChaga', BSOAS, [6 ([954), pp. [57 ff. 
38 Journal if Philology, i. 2 ([868), p. 108. On the difficulties encountered and the 
training required for competence in tonal phonetics cf. Pike, Tone Languages, pp. [8 ff., 
and my further comments in Didaskalos, 2.3 (1968), pp. 152 ff. (also AR, p. 75). On 
the perceptual side note the wide variation in pitch transcription as revealed by 
P. Lieberman, 'On the acoustic basis of the perception of intonation by linguists', Word, 
21 (1965), pp. 40 ff. 
31 Aficionados of the melodic method may however profitably study the recordings 
by Prof. Stephen Daitz-e.g. The Pronunciation and Reading if Ancient Greek (2 cassettes), 
publ. Jeffrey Norton, Inc., N.Y./London: 2nd edn 1984. 
40 The main doubts concern 'proclitics': see e.g. Vendryes, pp. 63 ff. 
129 

ACCENT 
explainable exceptions, the marked syllables now bear a stress.41 
I t is misleading to speak, as in an address given to the Classical 
Association,42 of 'the complex Byzantine rules of Greek 
accentuation '-the current marking-system is indeed based on 
an early Byzantine development of Alexandrian principles; 
but, far from being complex, it is a laudably economical 
representation of the phonetic facts: and the facts themselves, 
like the rules which govern them, are as ancient as the other 
elements of the language. 
The change to a stress-accent 
The eventual change from a melodic to a stress-accent in Greek 
cannot be precisely dated. It seems clear that it had taken place 
by the latter part of the 4 c. A.D., since Gregory Nazianzen 
composed hymns in metres based on stress-accentuation (as well 
as in 'quantitative' metres); and there are indications of the 
transition to a stress-accent in interior elements of an anony-
mous early 4 c. Christian hymn (Pap. Amherst, ed. Grenfell & 
Hunt, I. ii). In the late 2 c.-early 3 c. there are similar 
indications in the hymns of Clement of Alexandria. But there 
is no convincing earlier evidence.43 
In this connection it is customary to cite certain accentual 
peculiarities in the choliambics (scazons) ofBabrius as indica-
tive of stress (paroxytone accentuation at the end of the line). 
Babrius' date is uncertain, but probably around the 2 c. A.D.,44 
when the transition could well have been in progress, at least 
in some areas. But Babrius cannot be used as evidence for this; 
the argument is based on a misinterpretation of the choliambic 
rhythm, and the accentual peculiarities can be better explained 
.. The fact that syllables marked with the' grave' are also stressed need not imply 
the presence ofa high pitch on such syllables in ancient Greek (cf. p. 125), since this 
could simply represent a generalization from pre-pausal position (a not uncommon 
process: cf. e.g. Allen, Sandhi, p. 27; H. Reichelt, Awestisches Elemmtarbuch, p. 86). 
42 Proceedings, 1964, p. 17. 
4. See also p. 94, n. 9 above . 
.. 2nd half of I c. A.D. according to L. Herrmann, AG, 18 (1949), pp. 353 fr.; 35 
(1966), pp. 433 fr. 

THE CHANGE TO STRESS-ACCENT 
in terms of a melodic accent. 45 Similar accentual tendencies in 
the epic hexameters of Nonnus, however, may legitimately be 
interpreted as an indication of stress, since the rhythm is quite 
different; and, since Nonnus is dated around the 5 c. A.D., this 
explanation of his accentual peculiarities is most probable. 
The question of stress in classical Greek 
The classical Greek accent was, as we have seen, melodic. It is, 
however, improbable that Greek words and sentences had no 
variations of stress. This has often been recognized, but there 
has been a tendency to assume that any such element of stress 
must have been connected with the high pitch, since pitch is 
frequently an important factor in the complex phenomenon of 
stress-accentuation. But, for one thing, it is not necessarily high 
pitch that is involved in such cases-in different languages it 
may be high, low, or changing pitch (cf. AR, pp. 74 ff.); and 
for another, stress is not conversely a necessary feature of 
melodic accentuation; so that it is possible for a language 
having a melodic accent to have also a stress-patterning that 
is quite unconnected with this accent. 46 
Moreover, any connection of stress with high pitch seems to 
be ruled out by the fact that in classical Greek there is no 
correlation of the accent with any metrical stress or 'ictus', 
whereas when later the accent changes to a dynamic type, it 
does play an increasing and ultimately exclusive role. One result 
of this change is that readings of ancient Greek verse by modern 
Greek speakers, which commonly stress the accented syllables 
and make no distinctions of vowel-length, thereby deprive the 
verse of any element of regular rhythm. For ancient Greek we 
could postulate a connexion of stress and accent only if we 
assumed the dynamics of its verse to have been as irregular as 
those of modern Greek readings, and its' rhythms' to have been 
conveyed solely in terms of relative time-ratios. Some difficulties 
•• For details cf. Allen, TPS, 1966, pp. 138 If.; To Honor ROTTUln Jakobson, i, pp. 58 If . 
• 6 For such a situation, in general conditions not unlike those of Greek, see e.g. 
C. M. Doke, The Southern Bantu Languages, pp. 43 f. 

ACCENT 
inherent in the latter assumption have already been mentioned 
on pp. 114 f., and modern-language metrical studies tend to 
underline its improbabilityY The most likely conclusion, we 
have suggested, is that the' strong' positions of the feet, i.e. those 
which are normally filled by a heavy syllable, tended to bear 
a metrical stress or 'ictus'. 
This, of course, does not mean to say that Greek verse was 
basically stressed verse, like English for example, with stress as 
its structural principle. From a structural point of view it was 
quantitative (i.e. based on alternation between different types 
of syllable-structure), and certain of its features can only be 
accounted for in these terms (e.g. the admission of' anceps' only 
at one place in the iambic or trochaic metron). We are 
suggesting only that there was superimposed on this an element 
of dynamic reinforcement. 
Since Greek metrical patterns, unlike those of classical Latin, 
were, so far as we know, evolved specifically for Greek, it is likely 
that they represent, in Meillet's terms, 'a stylization or 
normalization of the natural rhythm of language'. So it is 
probable that any such patterns of metrical reinforcement 
would tend to agree rather than conflict with any similar 
patterns in speech. If this were so, then one might expect that 
particular syllabic word-patterns would tend to be placed in 
particular relationships to the strong/weak positions of the 
verse, even though their purely quantitative structure might 
qualify them for other placings. And conversely, if one were to 
discover a strong tendency of this type, it would suggest the 
presence, in both verse and speech, of some factor additional 
to quantity-whatever the nature of that factor might be. In 
spite of the already expressed opinion that classical Greek verse 
was probably marked by a dynamic ictus, let us avoid 
prejudging the phonetic issue so far as speech is concerned and 
for the present refer to the factor simply as 'prominence'. 
n Cf. S. Chatman, A Theory !if Meter, p. 43: ' I do not deny that time is the medium 
through which meter flows, or even that length itself is a component of" stress"; what 
I do deny is that the mind has some elaborate faculty of measuring and identifying time 
spans and that this is what it does in meter.' The habit of attributing such a faculty 
to the' delicate ear of the ancients' is criticized by Stetson, Bases of Phonology, p. 7 [. 

STRESS IN CLASSICAL GREEK 
For the purpose of investigating any such correlations, the 
most secure data-base would seem to be that of serious spoken 
verse (epic hexameters; tragic iambics and trochaics), as against 
lyric on the one hand, where linguistic patterns may have been 
affected by musical dynamics, and comedy on the other. It is 
likely that such non-functional patterns as we are seeking would 
be phonetically less strongly marked than, say, the accentual 
stress of a language like Latin or modern Greek. The possibility 
of an investigation of this kind therefore depends upon our 
authors having sought to match the regular strong/wea~ 
patterns of their verse with such relatively subtle variations of 
prominence in the spoken language. It is notorious that Greek 
comic verse does not display the same degree of metrical 
constraint as tragedy (one may mention the not uncommon 
neglect of the caesura and of' Porson' s Law', and the frequency 
of resolved feet, including the admission of anapaests in all but 
the last, and most significantly of a dactyl in the fifth, with 
consequent reversal of the rising quantitative pattern even in 
the cadence of the line) : cf. AR, pp. 31 1 f. One cannot therefore 
agree with B. E. Newton (Phoenix, 23, p. 368) that it would be 
'exceedingly odd' if our evidence were found in tragedy but not 
in comedy 'which one would have expected to reproduce as 
closely as possible the speech rhythms of the market place'. The 
point is simply that comedy, as exercising less care in the 
placement of words relatively to the metre, is less likely to 
produce regularity of rhythm; in this repect comedy is indeed 
more' natural' and less' artificial' than tragedy-but for the 
same reason less valuable as evidence, since it cannot be 
expected to reveal such regular correlations between metrical 
and linguistic prominence. 
We might further expect constraints of the type we are 
seeking to be found more particularly in the latter part of the 
line, the' coda', where rhythmic regularity is most commonly 
to be found in the metrics of many languages (note, for example, 
the attention devoted to agreement of stress-accent and strong 
position in the last two feet of the Latin hexameter): cf. AR, 
pp. 106, 337. 
133 

ACCENT 
A study of the relationship between word-placement and 
strong position in a corpus of Homeric and tragic verse48 in fact 
reveals that the preponderant tendencies can be stated in terms 
of a single formula. The study was based on the portions of the 
lines following the main caesura (or diaeresis in trochaics), and 
the category 'word' was extended to include word + appositive 
combinations, where' appositive' includes prepositive and post-
positive elements in general, not just the traditional' enclitics' 
(thus e.g. rrepi 1TCwrwv, fhrrJTois yap count as one word each). 
The resultant formula is as follows, where S = strong positions 
offeet, -/0 = heavy /ligh t syllable: 
From this formula may be derived the particular syllabic 
word-forms and their predominant placement. To derive these 
forms one works from right offormula (end of word) to left, with 
optional switching from upper to lower row of syllables and vice 
versa, but with the proviso that restrictions on sequences oflight 
syllables in verse preclude movement from (0), indicating an 
optional syllable, to 00. 
In interpreting the formula it is to be noted that it assumes 
the application of the traditional 'law of indifference' ,49 
whereby at the end of a line of verse a heavy syllable in ter-
minal weak position is treated as light, and a light syllable in 
terminal strong position is treated as heavy. Thus a hexameter 
may end with a word(-end) -- (placed .§- because it is equi-
valent to -0 (= catalectic dactyl), and an iambic trimeter or 
catalectic trochaic tetrameter may end with a word(-end) 00 
(placed 03) because it is equivalent to 0- (cf. AR, pp. 296--303). 
What we have so far referred to as 'preponderant tendencies' 
in fact turn out to approach complete regularity-that is to 
say, there are very few exceptions to a word of a particular 
U First discussed in TPS, 1966, pp. 107 If., and further developed in AR, 
pp. 274-334 (to which interested readers may refer for detailed analysis of the data) . 
•• E.g. Aristides Quintilianus, De Musica i. 21, p. 44 WI (1f<XIIT0s IJhpov TT)V 
TEAElrraiav a6lCx~pov an~v6I1E6a); cf. Hephaestion, Ench., p. 14 C. 
134 

STRESS IN CLASSICAL GREEK 
quantitative pattern being placed in a particular relationship 
to the strong positions of the verse coda. It is of course true that 
many types of word, simply by reason of their quantitative 
structure, can onlY occur in certain places relatively to the strong 
and weak positions, and so do not provide positive evidence: 
this applies to all words where a syllable is flanked (on either 
or both sides) by one or two light syllables. The crucial evidence 
is provided, therefore, by words containing heavy syllables only 
(or a succession of more than-two light syllables in the case of 
, resolved' feet). And here the nature of the forms which are not 
derivable from the formula is significant: they include, for ex-
s 
ss 
S 
s 
s 
s 
s 
SSS 
ample, --, 000, -00, 00-, 0--, 00-, 0--, ---, 00--, -000, etc. 
( 
. 
d· bl 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
) Th 
as agamst enva e --, 000, ---, 000-, etc.. 
ese non-
derivabilities reflect, inter alia, the constraints of Porson's Law 
in iambics and trochaics (cf. AR, pp. 304-12), the rules of 
resolution (see e.g. West, pp. 86 f.), and of 'Naeke's Law' in 
hexameters. This last law, which is virtually without exception 
in Callimachus, allows of some exceptions in Homer; but these 
involve principally the placement of words or combinations of 
pattern (0 )~- ending with the 4th foot, where there is clear 
evidence of a 'faute de mieux' principle at work (cf. AR, pp. 
286-91). Another less common exception is the placement 
~ooso in iambics, but here there are special contraints on the 
nature of the final two syllables (cf. AR, pp. 323 f.). 
If, then, we assume that a very strong preference for placing 
particular syllables of words in particular relationships to the 
strong positions indicates that the syllables in question possess-
ed some kind of inherent phonetic 'prominence', we can de-
duce from the formula certain rules describing the incidence of 
such prominence in Greek words: 
I. Prominence applies to an element constituted by either 
(a) one heavy syllable or (b) two light syllables. 
2. Words (or word-like sequences) longer than an element 
have internal contrasts of prominence/non-prominence. 
3. If the final syllable of a word is heavy, it is prominent. 
135 

ACCENT 
4. If the final syllable is light, the next preceding element 
is prominent. 
5. 
A preceding element separatedOO from the prominent 
element is also (secondarily) prominent. 
It remains to consider what the phonetic parameter of this 
prominence might be. Of possible candidates, high pitch is 
already preempted for the accent; length is already preempted 
as an independent phonemic variable; and the superimposition 
of either of these on the redundantly prominent syllable would 
conflict with their existing significant roles. Of the three 
common prosodic parameters (cf. AR, p. 6) this then leaves only 
the dynamic, i.e. stress. 
This conclusion may be strengthened by an analogy outside 
Greek.01 We migh t consider the pa tterns of assumed prominence 
expressed in the Greek formula as a kind of typological 
'fingerprint' of that type of prominence. And if it were possible 
to find a matching fingerprint in a language where the phonetic 
nature of the prominence was established, we should have 
quite a strong typological argument for concluding that the 
prominence in Greek was of the same nature. In VL, pp. 124-5 
(supplementary note to p. 91) a restatement was proposed for 
the rule governing the placement of the Latin accent, in terms 
of' matrices' comprising either one heavy or two light syllables. 
The rule may be stated in a formula of the type used above, 
with the same rules of derivation, where A denotes the location 
of the accent: thus (for words of three or more syllables): 
( ... )~(o)~ 
where A corresponds to the traditional markings ~ and ~v, as 
e.g. in niimfna, nomtnfbus. We could extend this formula to take 
account of secondary accentuation in longer words, where it is 
60 I.e. by a heavy or by one or two light syllables, of which the fin;t and last, though 
themselves elements, are not separated from the (primarily) prominent element. 
61 The following ideas form the subject of a paper contributed to the Festschrift jor 
Henry Hoenigswald (Tiibingen, (987). 

STRESS IN CLASSICAL GREEK 
likely that the part of the word preceding the main accent was 
treated as a word for purposes of secondary accentuation (e.g. 
indtligentia, miseric6rdia: cf. AR, p. 190).52 The extended formula 
would then be: 
( ... )~(o)~~(o)~ 
It will be seen that this Latin A-formula differs from the Greek 
S-formula only in respect of the final syllable-a fact accounted' 
for by the irrelevance of final quantity in the Latin accentual 
system. 53 Structurally, therefore, the S-elements of Greek cor-
respond closely to the A-matrices of Latin, and a strong typo-
logical probability arises that they were both marked by the 
same kind of prominence. In the case of Latin it is generally 
agreed to have been stress, and it would be a rather odd 
coincidence if the Greek prominence factor were of a quite 
different kind. The exact correspondence of the disyllabic 
stress-matrices and disyllabic strong positions may then further 
suggest a phonetic explanation of the phenomenon of resolution 
(cf. AR, pp. 316 ff.).54 On the other hand any formula that 
might be devised for the (melodic) accentual rules of Greek would 
be of a quite different nature. 
Other languages with a known stress accent, having similar 
rules to those of Latin, are Arabic and Indo-Aryan. In the 
former, and in modern forms of the latter (e.g. Hindi), final 
syllables also may be accented, but only if they are 'hyper-
characterized' (p. 91, n. 5)), i.e. ending in -vc or VCCS5 (there 
are a few such cases also in Latin as the result of historical 
•• Cf. the statement by D. A. Abdo (On SIms and Arabic Phon%[g, p. 73a) on 
secondary accentuation in Arabic: • Starting from the segment immediately preceding 
the stressed vowel, apply the rule once more to any segments that again meet its 
structural description. The vowel stressed in the second application receives secondary 
stress' . 
• 3 Whether the parallel of the • indifference' of final quantity in Greek metrical 
systems is more than fortuitous is probably beyond conjecture. 
•• It is assumed that in a disyllabic matrix the peak occurs on the first syllable and 
the cadence on the second, thus 00, which corresponds to a monosyllabic matrix " where 
both peak and cadence occur within the same syllable. For a full discussion, including 
parallels in English, see AR, pp. 170--7, 191-9,316 ff . 
•• For fuller discussion cf. Allen, ICS, viii.l, pp. 1-10. 
137 

ACCENT 
sound-changes, such as nostras < *nostriitis, ilUnc < *illince, but 
no synchronic rule: so laudas, etc.'. One result of the accentual 
rules in both Latin and these other languages is that the place 
of the accent in a given word is invariable, regardless of context. 
In this respect the rules for the placement of words in Greek 
verse differ in an important way. For the quantity, and so the 
placing, of a Greek final syllable ending in -vc will depend on 
whether the next word begins with a vowel or a consonant: thus, 
for example, the word vfjcxs placed v~cxs E~acxs at Il. i. 306 but 
V1'l~s TE lTpolT~acxs at ii. 493. This suggests the possibility that in 
many Greek words the patterns of prominence may have varied 
with context. This, however, is hardly a matter for surprise. In 
Greek, unlike the other languages mentioned, we are dealing 
with redundant, non-accentual patterns, and syntagmatic varia-
tions in these would be no more peculiar than such variations 
in the melodic (intonational) patterns of words in a stress-
accented language like English.56 These considerations, to-
gether with the probable relative weakness of any such 
patterns of stress in classical Greek, would explain why they 
were completely ousted by the strongly stressed word-accentual 
patterns of the later language. 
In the absence of factual evidence for the above conclusions, 
it is not recommended that they should be applied to the 
•• Cf. AR, pp. 295 f.: •... the generation of sentences, whether at the grammatical 
or phonological level, does not take place syllable by syllable, nor even word by word; 
relatively long stretches of utterance are prepared in advance, and the relationship of 
the earlier to the later elements in actual phonation is taken account of just as that of 
the later to the earlier. To take a grammatical example: in Latin the gender concord 
of an attribute must be determined in advance of the actual utterance of a postponed 
noun-e.g. H et hie quidem Romae, tamquam in tanta multitudine, habitus animorum 
fuit"'; and phonologically' the principle is clearly demonstrated by the phenomenon 
of .. spoonerism", which presupposes the preparation of the second element of the 
metathesis before the phonation of the first ... There is therefore nothing unreasonable 
about assuming for Greek a stress-patterning which, in certain types of word, may show 
a binary variation dependent on context, such context being limited to the immediately 
following word. It implies simply that the pattern of chest-pulses and arrests is prepared 
in .. blocks" longer than a single word: and whilst in colloquial speech there would no 
doubt be changes of mind resulting in prosodic .. errors" just as in grammatical 
anacolutha, this is hardly relevant to the types of utterance represented in more formal 
poetry'. 

STRESS IN CLASSICAL GREEK 
practical reading of Greek prose (on this see pp. 149 ff.). And 
as regards the reading of verse, if one follows the common 
practice of reciting with a stressed verse-ictus, the findings of this 
study comfortingly suggest that, particularly in the coda of each 
line, one is also very close to a natural reading, though in the 
earlier portions one may be introducing various degrees of 
artificiality, since the exceptions to the S-formula are there 
considerably more numerous: whether the Greeks themselves 
preferred nature or artifice to predominate in such cases 
remains an open question, since we lack the kind of evidence 
that is available for the similar question in Latin (cf. VL, 
pp. 126 f. (supp. note to p. 94); AL, pp. 335 ff.). 
Readers wishing to study further the problem of constraints 
on the metrical placement of words in Greek may well consult 
the recent work by A. M. Devine & L. D. Stephens, Language 
and Metre (A.P.A., American Classical Studies 12: Chico, Cal., 
1984). Though I have reservations about the rhythmic role 
proposed for duration in a language where (as noted above) 
length is an independent variable-just as they have typological 
reservations regarding my own proposals~their ingenious ap-
proach to an exhaustively generalised theory (including the 
question of resolution) is of absorbing interest and an important 
contribution to continuing debate. 
139 

APPENDIX A 
I. The pronunciation of Greek in England 
In 1267 it was remarked by Roger Bacon that there were not 
five men in Latin Christendom acquainted with Greek 
grammar. In 1311 the Council of Vienne recommended the 
appointment of two teachers of Greek in each of the principal 
cities ofItaly; a Greek school was in fact opened in Rome, and 
money was collected for the founding of a chair at Oxford. l In 
1325 lectures on Greek were given in the University of Paris, 
but the language suffered under the suspicion of heresy, and 
the numerous treatises on Aristotle listed in the 13 and 14 c. 
catalogues of the Sorbonne show no evidence of acquaintance 
with the Greek text. In 1360 Petrarch could still count only 
eight or nine Italians who knew Greek. 
The teaching of the language did, however, grad ually progress 
in Italy in the 14 and 15 c., and was accelerated by the increased 
migration of Byzantine sc;holars after the destruction of 
Constantinople in 1453. But the pronunciation used and taught 
by these scholars was naturally that of their current mother-
tongue, i.e. virtually that of modern Greek. Amongst charac-
teristic features of this pronunciation the following may be 
noted: 
13,5, y (as well as cp, 6, X) 
pronounced as fricatives; 
3 pronounced as a single sound [z]; 
K, X, y, A, v palatalized before front vowels; 
TT, T, K voiced after nasals; 
v in cxv, EV 
pronounced as [v] or [f]; 
exl 
pronounced as a monophthong [e]; 
and, above all, the single value [i] accorded to I, fl, v, EI, 01, VI. 
As Roger Ascham was later to complain, though with regret-
1 On the introduction of Greek into England, including some earlier occasional 
instances, see Ch. 2 of J. C. Collins, Greek bifluence on English Poetry. 

THE PRONUNCIATION OF GREEK IN ENGLAND 
table subjectiveness and exaggeration, 'all sounds in Greek are 
now exactly the same, reduced, that is to say, to a like thin and 
slender character, and subjected to the authority of a single 
letter, the iota; so that all one can hear is a feeble piping like 
that of sparrows, or an unpleasant hissing like that of snakes'. 
It was not long before doubts arose in the minds of some 
scholars as to the validity of the then current pronunciation of 
ancient Greek. In particular, the values of the vocalic letters 
and digraphs were seen to conflict with the principle enunciated 
by Quintilian (i. 7. 30), 'sic scribendum quidquid iudico, 
quomodo sonat'; on the assumption that the ancients followed 
this precept, their pronunciation must evidently have been 
different from that of the Byzantines. The assumption is not 
altogether valid (Quintilian was in fact careful to add' nisi quod 
consuetudo obtinuerit '), and it led to some erroneous 
conclusions, but it at least provided a starting point for the first 
essays in reconstruction of the ancient pronunciation. 
The earliest suggestions towards a reform date from 1486, in 
the work of the Spanish humanist Antonio ofLebrixa (Antonius 
Nebrissensis); and they had as yet, according to his own 
statement, no support in Spain or elsewhere-indeed he com-
plains that the only effect of his teaching was to turn former 
friends into enemies when their errors were revealed. In a 
further treatise of 1503 he argues, inter alia, that 1) was a long 
vowel corresponding to E in the same way as w to 0; that 3 stood 
for 0"5; and that 13, like <p, was not a fricative but a plosive, since 
13, <p and 11" were recognized by the ancients as belonging to the 
same order. He later composed a fuller statement of principles 
(probably first published in 1516), including a list entitled 
, Errores Graecorum " which refers to most of the characteristics 
mentioned above; his orthographic criteria, however, also 
misled him into rejecting the monophthongal pronunciation of 
OU. 
The next reformer known to us is the great printer, Aldus 
Manutius, who in 1508 mentions the erroneous pronunciation 
of the digraphs, and later refers to a number of other points 
discussed by Antonio. Like the latter, he assumes ou to 
141 

APPENDIX A 
represent a diphthong, and so is content to posit a value [u] for 
v (citing in support Latin cognates and borrowings, as sus, 
Thule, and conversely 'PWIJVAOS) ; but, to his credit, he is the first 
to cite the now notorious !3ii !3ii (for the cry of a sheep) as 
evidence for a pronunciation' be be' as against the current' vi 
., 
Vl . 
The monophthongal pronunciation of the digraphs is further 
criticized in a statement by Jerome Aleander, probably dating 
from about 1512, and he also comments on the confusion oflong 
and short vowels and the neglect of the rough breathing. 
The reforming movement culminated in the publication in 
1528 of Erasmus' dialogue De recta Latini Graecique sermonis 
pronuntiatione, of which the following are amongst the most 
important conclusions. The value ofT) as an open mid vowel [~] 
(' between 0 and E ') was deduced from the fact that on the one 
hand it is represented by the Latin e and on the other hand often 
arises from original Greek o. On the basis of Latin renderings 
with ii, the value of ov was established as [ii ]-though Erasmus 
conjectures that, from the evidence of the spelling, it must once 
have had a diphthongal value (' Ov vero arbitror priscis fere 
sonuisse, quod Batavis sonat senex, frigidus', i.e. as Dutch oud, 
koud). The value ofv is correctly assumed to be [ii], i.e. as the 
'u Gallicum', though some of the arguments are invalid (e.g. 
'idem arguit quod Galli vulgo SVE1V dicunt "tuer", id est 
mactare, usurpata voce Graeca ');2 Leo (the pupil in the 
dialogue) ventures to suggest as further evidence against the 
current [i] pronunciation the fact that in ancient Greek the 
cuckoo was called onomatopoeically K6KKV~, 'quae in Seem 
cantus non i sonat sed u Gallicum '-a suggestion that is 
dismissed by Ursus, the teacher, with jestingly exaggerated 
caution:3 'Qui scis an avis haec non eodem modo canat apud 
Graecos quo apud nos?' On the basis both of orthography and 
of Latin transcriptions the diphthongal values of au and ev 
are correctly stated, as also of 01 ('Jam 01 diphthongum evi-
2 Actually from Latin tulare. 
3 But none the less wise in principle: Eudynamis honorala, often referred to as the 
• Indian cuckoo', has a call that is well represented by the vernacular name koil. 
142 

THE PRONUNCIATION OF GREEK IN ENGLAND 
denter audire licet in lingua Germanorum, quum nominant 
Caesarem', i.e. Kaiser); but EI is also assumed to have had 
a diphthongal value, 'quam evidenter audis quum nostrate 
lingua dicis ovum', i.e. as Dutch ei. 
Some difficulty arises in the case of 01; it is agreed to be a 
diphthong, but is then compared with the pronunciation of 
French oi ('01 diphthongus Gallis quibusdam est familiarissima, 
quum vulgari more dicunt mihi, tibi, sibi', i.e. moi, toi, soi. 'Hic 
enim audis evidenter utramque vocalem 0 et i'). Already in the 
12-13 c. French oi had come to have the value [w~]; in the 15 c. 
the modern pronunciation [wa] appeared in vulgar speech,~ 
and by specifying' vulgari more' Erasmus presumably intends 
to refer to this value. In either case the phonetic comparison is 
not a good one. 
With regard to the consonants, Erasmus recognizes the value 
of 3 as equivalent to a5, and rightly criticizes the tendency of 
Dutch speakers to give a voiced value to a between vowels (e.g. 
by pronouncing 1J0vaa as [miiza]). !3 is correctly identified as 
a plosive, like the Latin b, for which the phonetic equation 
bini = !3IVEi is cited (cf. p. 3 I), but the treatment of the aspirates 
is erratic; <p is admirably distinguished from the Latin f 
('primum quia in f labium inferius apprimitur superioribus 
dentibus, deinde quod spiritu leniore profertur, veluti studio 
vitandi Graecam aspirationem, quae est in <p, cujus so no labiis 
utrisque diductis spiritus vehementior erumpit ... in <p magis 
stringuntur labia prius quam erumpat spiritus'), but a fricative 
value seems to be assumed for X, and is specifically stated for 
e (' quam feliciter exprimunt Angli in initio quum sua lingua 
dicuntfurem', i.e. as th in thief). 
Erasmus, however, like his predecessor Aleander, did not go 
so far as himself to adopt a reformed pronunciation. His 
unreadiness to practise what he preached was also later shared 
by the humanist Martin Crusius, who wrote in 1596: 'Graeca 
• This pronunciation was, however, still not favoured amongst educated classes in 
the 16- 1 7 c., and was not fully accepted until after the Revolution (see M. K. Pope, 
From Latin to Modern French, §S2S). [w~l still survives dialectally and in Canadian and 
Creole French. 
143 

APPENDIX A 
ego vulgari modo, sicut et tota hodie Graecia, pronuntio. Satis 
mihi est, si auditores moneam de erudita pronuntiatione vetere. 
Graecia earn hodie non intelligeret' (Crusius had learned 
modern Greek, but in conversation with Greeks he spoke 
ancient Greek-with, of course, a modern pronunciation).5 
The practical application of the principles of reform was due 
primarily to two young Cambridge scholars, John Cheke and 
Thomas Smith, who in r 540 were elected Regius Professors 
respectively of Greek and of Civil Law. The opposition to these 
reforms, academic, religious, and political, has been described 
elsewhere in connection with the pronunciation of Latin (VL, 
p. I04), and it was not until Elizabeth's accession that they 
could proceed unhindered. 6 
The reforms ofCheke and Smith, though not directly derived 
from Erasmus' dialogue, follow very much on the same lines; 
Cheke expressly bases his findings on onomatopoeia, cognates 
and borrowings from Greek to Latin and vice versa, and the 
statements of ancient authors. In most cases he exemplifies the 
reconstructed pronunciation by reference to English key-words 
containing approximately the sound in question; thus the value 
of 11 is equated with that of English ea in e.g. bread, meat, great, 
heat (in all of which in the r6 c. ea = open mid [~]); that of CAl 
is equated with the vowels of moan or bone, i.e. open mid [Q]. 
The values of av and EV are correctly identified with those of 
aw and ew in English claw,Jew, which were then still diphthongal 
[ au] and [eu] respectively. As evidence for the pronunciation 
of au Cheke incidentally cites Aristophanes' use of cxV cxV to 
represent the barking of a dog, concluding 'ne canes quidem 
tam crassi sunt ut pro au au" aJ aJ" sonent'; Smith, on the other 
hand, though he arrives at the same conclusion, recognizes that, 
whereas' au au' may be the sound made by Molossian hounds, 
'aJ aJ' is heard from Maltese terriers (one is reminded of the 
S Cf. M. Faust, 'Die Mehrsprachigkeit des Humanisten Martin Crusius', Homentlje 
a A. Tovar, pp. 137 If. 
o An astonishing and isolated reaction appeared as recently as 1955 in an article by 
F. Elliot, 'Greek in our schools' (Greece & Rome, 2nd ser., 2, pp. 82 If.), which asserts 
the originality of the modern Greek pronunciation! 

THE PRONUNCIATION OF GREEK IN ENGLAND 
conventional French' gnaf gnaf' as against German' hau hau '), 
and he therefore declines to accept this particular onomato-
poeia as evidence. 7 
Like earlier reformers, Cheke interprets ov as a diphthong, 
and Smith compares it with that of e.g. gown, which had the 
approximate value [au] or [AU]. EI is similarly misinterpreted, 
and Smith compares it with the sound in neigh; but it is doubtful 
whether by the 16 c. there remained any distinction between 
this and the diphthong of e.g. pay, though there seems to have 
been considerable variation in pronunciation, with something 
like [rei] as the mean-in another work, on English spelling, 
Smith himself admits that there was only a minimal difference 
and that there was much confusion; alternatively he identifies 
the value of EI with that of English pay as spoken by 'feminae 
quaedam delicatiores '-i.e. in a 'refayned' pronunciation. 
In a number of cases 16th-century English could not provide 
very close approximations to the ancient Greek vowels and 
diphthongs. The short and long open vowels of e.g. man, mane 
were already tending to a closer value in the region of[re] , and 
so were not exact renderings of the Greek o. There was indeed 
a long close [I] vowel, deriving from Middle English [e], as in 
e.g. green; but, probably through the influence of spelling, the 
Greek long 1 is identified instead with the i of English bite, 
which by the 16 c. had already developed a diphthongal value 
[;li]-a point about which Thomas Gataker complains in the 
next century. The Greek v [ii] had no exact counterpart in 
English; for the long vowel an approximation was found in the 
diphthongal [iu] of words such as duke, lute, rebuke; but for the 
short vowel no such approximation was possible, and it was 
probably confused with the long. 8 The statements on 01 are 
confusing (as in the case of Erasmus); both Cheke and Smith 
cite English key-words such as boy, toy, coy, but then proceed to 
equate these with the French toi etc.; it is thus not clear how 
the Greek 01 was in fact pronounced by English speakers in the 
, Cf. J. L. Heller, C], 37 (1941~2), pp. 531 f. 
• An erroneous comparison by Smith with the u of e.g. muddy (in fact [u)) was 
evidently not adopted, since this would have resulted in a modern value [A) for the 
traditional English pronunciation of Greek, which is not the case. 
145 

APPENDIX A 
16 c.-there may well have been wide variation, since there is 
evidence that English words spelt with oi or try were at that time 
variously pronounced with [oi], [ui], and possibly other values. 
With all their imperfections, the 16th-century reforms re-
sulted in something like an approximation to what we now 
believe to have been the classical Attic values, and the practical 
application of the so-called 'Erasmian' pronunciation soon 
spread from England to the continent.9 But, by an irony of 
linguistic history, the reforms could hardly have come at a less 
opportune time so far as English speakers were concerned. For 
in the 16 c. the' Great English Vowel-shift', which characterizes 
the development from Middle to Modern English, and which 
was to transform the values of the long vowels and diphthongs, 
had only just begun. The English pronunciation of Greek 
developed as a sub-dialect of English pari passu with the changes 
in the pronunciation of English itself-so that by the 19 c. it 
bore little relation to the classical values or those of the 
16th-century reformers. The same key-words continued in most 
cases to apply, since English spelling remained basically 
unchanged-but with completely altered values. 
On p. 147 these changes are set ou t chronologically (though 
the division into centuries must of course be considered as only 
approximate) ; where no change is indicated, the value remains 
unaltered. The following points should be noted in connection 
with the asterisked items: 
* Though probably no distinction was made in practice 
between long and short v in the 16-17 c., the change of the 
diphthong [iu] to a consonant-vowel sequence [yu] in the 18 c. 
made it possible to distinguish the short vowel by pronouncing 
it as [yu]. The change of [eu] to [iu] in the 17 c. incidently leads 
Gataker to complain of confusion between €V and v. 
** The diphthongal pronunciation of English ai, ay and ei, 
ry was preserved in careful speech and learned words until the 
late 17 c., and this was evidently adopted for the pronunciation 
• The earlier, Byzantine pronunciation is sometimes referred to as 'Reuchlinian', 
after Johannes Reuchlin (1455-1521), who was largely responsible for the introduction 
of Greek studies to Germany, and employed the pronunciation he had learned from 
Greek-speaking teachers in Italy and elsewhere. 

~ 
..., 
a 
a 
1 
i 
u 
0 
E 
" 
0 
(0) 
al 
EI 
01 
au 
EU 
ou 
Classical 
Key-words 
16c. 
Value in 
Value in 
value 
Present-day 
classical 
Byz. and 
according to 
cited by 
E •• glish 
17 c. 
18 c. 
English 
Attic 
Mod. Gk 
16c. 
English 
value in 
value 
reformers 
reformers 
key-words 
a 
} 
a 
MAN 
OIl 
(often a when IItIStrused) 
a 
ii 
i 
i 
ei 
MANE 
J 
BIT 
i 
i 
BITE 
ai 
ai 
-
• 
DUKE 
iu 
yu· 
e 
MEN 
e 
i 
MEAT 
i 
, 
i 
0 
} 
0 
HOP 
0 
q 
0 
9 
~ 
~ 
BONE 
OU 
ai 
e 
al 
PAY 
} 
aei -- •• 
(al 
ai) 
• 
} 
ei 
NEIOH 
e/(; • 
1 
01 
01 
BOY 
••• 
01 
au 
av 
au 
CLAW 
au 
q 
eu 
ev 
eu 
PEW 
eu 
lu 
yir 
il 
u 
oU,1i 
OOWN 
au or AU 
au 
au 
---
-
On asterisked items see pp. [46, [48. 
Fig. 8. Development of the traditional English pronunciation of Greek vowels and diphthongs. 

APPENDIX A 
of Greek 01 and EI. Various renderings were probably current, 
but it is unlikely that the two diphthongs were effectively 
distinguished from one another; and once the diphthongal 
pronunciation had been abandoned for English itself, a model 
no longer existed for the Greek, which thereafter became 
confused with the only other English i-diphthong, viz, the [~i] 
of English bite, resulting in an identical pronunciation ofi, 01 
and EI. In English itself the normal development of 16 c. [rei] 
etc. was to 17 c. [~], 18 c. [~], present-day [ei]. 
*** In the 18 c. the pronunciation of English oi, try was 
generally standardized as [oi], the spelling being no doubt a 
contributory factor;lO at least from this period, therefore, the 
[oi] pronunciation was probably normal for Greek 01, replacing 
whatever variants had previously been in use. 
The strange pronunciation of Greek resulting from the Great 
Vowel-shift was in general use in English schools and univer-
sities until quite recent years, and is still often heard from those 
who (like the author) were brought up in this traditionY As 
regards the consonants, <p and e were, not unreasonably (see p. 
29), pronounced as fricatives, but X was generally pronounced 
as a plosive [k] and so confused with K, since southern English 
10 The 16 c. variant lui] developed via [Ai] to present-day [ail, as preserved e.g. in 
dialectal pronunciations of boil. 
II It also survives, for example, in the borrowed nous (17 c.), and in 19 c. learned 
derivates and constructions, as seismic, deictic, pleistoceTl£, kaleidoscope. Acoustic is generally 
now pronounced with the middle syllable as 'coo' and not' cow' -correctly (and, at least 
in part, independently of the 'new' pronunciation of Greek) since it is a 16-17 c. 
borrowing via French acoustique, and its Early Modern English rendering with [ii] would 
normally remain unchanged, as in the case of other French loans such as (17 c.) soup, 
group. The 'cow' pronunciation of this word could be due either to display of ' learning', 
or to more ordinary ignorance (on the analogy of e.g. house, mouse, where ou = Middle 
English [ii], which is diphthongized in Modern English); the diphthongal pronunci-
ation of a French loan such as couch is due to its having been borrowed in the Middle 
English period (similarly in rout, and the military pronunciation of the originally 
identical route; the more normal pronunciation of the latter is due to a later 
re-borrowing). The title of the philosophical journal Nous is, however, generally 
pronounced as 'noose'. Something of an oddity is the pronunciation of the Kantian 
noumenon = VOOVl-IfIIOv. English dictionaries prescribe 'nowm-' (though nowadays most 
philosophers say' noom- '), but German dictionaries' no-ilm-'. When Kant borrowed the 
term he presumably intended the u to represent the Greek ou (as in German akustisch 
beside English acoustic), and this has been misunderstood by English lexicographers 
(and many philosophers). 
On the value of English ou, ow, and their developments cf. C. A. Reinhold, Neuenglisch 
ou (ow) und seiTl£ Geschichtt ( = Palaestra, 189). 
148 

THE PRONUNCIATION OF GREEK IN ENGLAND 
provides no model for a fricative [x]. Though Erasmus, 
following the statements of ancient authorities, had cor-
rectly established the classical value of 3 as [zd], this was mis-
interpreted (as commonly on the continent) as [dz] in medial 
position; in initial position this unfamiliar combination was 
generally replaced in England by simple [z]. 
Thus, by the 19 c., a new set of reforms was needed if the 
English pronunciation of Greek were to approximate once more 
to that of the classical original. The first systematic programme 
of reform was sponsored by the University of Wales, in a 
pamphlet on 'The restored pronunciation of Greek and 
Latin', by E. V. Arnold and R. S. Conway, published by the 
Cambridge University Press in 1895; a 4th revised edition 
appeared in 1908, with minor changes to conform with the 
recommendations of a committee of the Classical Association 
(of which Conway was also a member). This was on the whole 
an accurate reconstruction, and approximations were given by 
means of keywords in English, Welsh, and French. For practical 
reasons a fricative pronunciation was recommended for <p, e, X. 
For no evident reason a value [dz] was recommended for 3, in 
spite of the fact that, as the authors themselves recognized, 'in 
the 5 c. B.C. 3 had a sound like English zd'-and this pronun-
ciation is still often persisted in even by those who know better. 12 
It is basically the recommendations of this pamphlet which 
are generally followed in English schools and universities at the 
present day. 
2. The oral accentuation of Greek13 
An important characteristic of Byzantine and modern Greek is 
the replacement of the original melodic accent by a stress on 
the same syllable; the distinctions of vowel-length are lost, and 
duration becomes simply a concomitant feature of the accent. 
Erasmus clearly recognizes the confusion to which this may lead 
12 The Teaching of Classics (Cambridge, 1961) correctly recommends' As zd, not as 
liz; ancient grammarians make this very plain' (p. 221). 
13 This section is based on an article under the same title published in Didaskalos, 
2.2 (1967), pp. go If.; c( also TPS, 1966, pp. 108 If. 
149 

APPENDIX A 
in pronouncing ancient Greek; and he points out that a raising 
of pitch need not induce lengthening-'vel ab asinis lice bat hoc 
discrimen discere, qui rudentes corripiunt acutam vocem, imam 
producunt'; but he nowhere makes a clear distinction between 
pitch and stress, and there is little doubt that~ ifhe had actually 
used his reformed pronunciation, he would himself have con-
tinued to replace the melodic accent by the stress familiar from 
most modern European languages-though, misled by the 
Latin grammarians (cf. VL, pp. 83 fr.), he may well have 
imagined it to be melodic. 14 So far as the English reformers are 
concerned, there is no reason to believe that their recommen-
dations included any change in regard to accentuation. There is 
no mention of it in the extensive correspondence between Cheke 
and Smith on the one hand and the Chancellor on the other, 
nor in the Chancellor's edict of 1542; Cheke does indeed point 
out that we should adhere in all respects to the pronunciation 
of the ancients, and mentions the position of the accent as a case 
in point-but no criticism is made of the nature of the accent in 
current practice. It is highly improbable, therefore, that the 
, Erasmian' pronunciation of Greek made any change in the 
existing Byzantine system of stressing the accentually marked 
syllables. 
The subsequent history of oral practice in this respect is 
independent of other factors in pronunciation, and is therefore 
discussed as a separate issue. 
The Byzantine system of stressed accentuation, which re-
spected the original position of the accent, has continued in 
use in most countries up to the present day. But in 1673 there 
was published at Oxford an anonymous treatise De poematum 
cantu et viribus rhythmi, identifiable as the work of the Dutch 
scholar Isaac Vossius, formerly tutor in Greek to Queen Chris-
tina of Sweden, who had received an honorary degree at 
Oxford in 1670 and a canonry of Windsor in 1673. He was 
evidently a man of eccentric ideas, and Charles II was once 
moved to observe, 'He is a strange man for a divine; there is 
.4 He does in fact follow the Latin writers in attributing the same kind of accent to 
Greek and to Latin. 

THE ORAL ACCENTUATION OF GREEK 
nothing he will not believe if only it is not in the Bible'. In 
his Oxford treatise Vossius argued that the accent-marks of 
Greek had nothing whatever to do with the original pro-
nunciation; and this doctrine paved the way for a well-named 
Dissertatio Paradoxa some eleven years later by one Heinrich 
Christian Henning (self-Latinized as 'Henninius '), a doctor 
of medicine from Utrecht.Is Accepting Vossius' rejection of 
the traditional accents, Henning went on to claim that 
in view of the close relationship of Greek and Latin, and 
particularly of their metrical structures, the Greek accentual 
system must have been the same as that of Latin-' ergo ut, 
Latine pronunciamus ita et Graece erit pronunciandum '. 
The Latin system is, as we know, governed by the so-called 
'penultimate' rule (cf. VL, p. 83), whereby a stress-accent falls 
on the penultimate syllable if it is of 'heavy' structure, and 
on the antepenultimate if the penultimate is 'light'; according 
to Henning, therefore, Greek also was to be pronounced 10 
conformity with this rule, i.e. as if it were Latin.I8 
Henning's remarkable doctrine found acceptance both in 
Holland and in England, where it seems to have been well 
established by the early 18 C.17 (though the older system 
survived in some quarters until about the middle of the 
century),18 and the' Henninian' pronunciation is now general 
.5 EI\I\HNIIMOI OPSWIAOI seu Graecam Linguam non esse Pronunciandam secundum 
Accentus, Dissertatio Paradoxa: qua Legitima et Antiqua Linguae Graecae Pronunciatio et 
M odulatio tkmonstratur . 
• 1 Henning classifies accentual systems as 'rational' or 'conventional' according to 
whether or not they follow this rule; to the former category are assigned Latin, Ancient 
Greek, and Arabic; all modem European languages are classified as 'conventional', 
though Spanish and Italian are singled out as being more 'rational' than the others, 
and English as being particularly' irrational'. 
17 In the case of Greek proper names and loans some independent encouragement 
may have come from their occurrence in Latin (but note e.g. Shakespeare's Andr6nicus). 
For an apparent adoption of this practice by some English scholars long before the time 
of Henning see AR, p. 273. 
18 Metam6rpkosis is still heard, though generally replaced by the latinized metamor-
pk6sis. Mr Christopher Logue has drawn my attention to the occurrence of the two 
competing pronunciations of this word in successive lines of Pope's Sandys's Ghost (c. 
1716): the penultimate verse ends, 'A strange Metamorpk6sis', and the final verse begins, 
'A Metam6rpkosis more strange'. 
The normally unlatin accentuation of idla is also probably due to Greek (the word 
is expressly recognized as Greek from its first appearance in the early 16 c., and the 
pronunciation is frequently reinforced by a latinate spelling idata). 

APPENDIX A 
both in the Netherlands and South Africa and in Great Britain 
and the Commonwealth. Elsewhere Henning's conclusions, 
after some considerable initial successes, were sooner or later 
rejected as resting upon false premisses, and the Byzantine 
system consequently prevails, for example, in Germany, 
Italy, the Slavonic countries, Scandinavia, and Hungary. The 
Henninian system survived in the U.S.A. until the early 19 
c., but later succumbed to the German influence in classical 
studies there. 19 
Thus the words Aav6clvEI, &v6pumos, TEAa~wv, for example, 
are pronounced by English and Dutch scholars with stress on 
respectively the initial, middle, and initial syllables, but by 
German and American scholars with stress on respectively the 
middle, initial, and final syllables. It is interesting to note that, 
even in countries where the native language has a melodic 
system of accentuation (as e.g. in Yugoslavia and Norway), the 
Greek accent is nevertheless rendered by stress; in Norwegian, 
moreover, stress tends to correlate with low pitch, so that the 
result is a reversal of the ancient Greek melodics. Most French 
speakers follow neither the Byzantine nor the Henninian 
system, but pronounce Greek, like French, with a weak final 
stress. 
One result of accepting the views of Vossius and Henning 
was that the original accents came to be omitted from a number 
of Greek texts printed in England in the 18 c.-' as if a gale from 
the Netherlands had stripped the letters of a superfluous 
foliage' ;20 support was lent to this practice by the attack upon 
accents in Richard Dawes' Miscellanea Critica, first published in 
1745; and in 1759 it was adopted as the official policy of the 
Oxford University Press. The practice was, however, deplored 
by many scholars, including John Foster, fellow of King's 
.9 I am particularly grateful to the following scholars for assisting me in a survey 
of current European practice: Dr A. Bartonek (Univ. ofBmo); Prof. Simon Dik (Univ. 
of Amsterdam); Prof. I. Fischer (Univ. of Bucharest) ; Dr P. Ilievski (Univ. of Skopje) ; 
Prof.J. Kurylowicz (Univ. of Krakow) ; Prof. M. Lejeune (Centre nal. de la recherche 
scientifique, Paris); Prof. G. Lepschy (Dept. ofItalian Studies, Univ. of Reading) ; Prof. 
E. Lienard (Univ. Libre de Bruxelles); Prof. Hans Vogt (Univ. of Oslo). 
20 I. Errandonea, Emerita, 13 (1945), p. 90. 

THE ORAL ACCENTUATION OF GREEK 
College, Cambridge, whose admirable essay On the different nature 
if Accent and Q.uantiry was first published in 1762. Later, in his 
edition of the Medea (1801), Porson also insisted upon the 
importance of accentuation, and urged the reader to persist in 
its study' scurrarum dicacitate et stultorum irrisione immotus'; 
the influence of so great a scholar was probably decisive in 
ensuring that the Greek accents were thereafter respected in 
English printed texts. 
Most English scholars at the present day would recognize the 
inaccuracy of the Henninian, 'latinizing' pronunciation as a. 
rendering of the original Greek; but many are prepared to 
defend it against its rival on practical, pedagogical grounds. 
Two main arguments are generally adduced in its defence, both 
dating from the times of Vossius and Henning. 
First, it is said, the type of pronunciation used for Greek prose 
in most other countries in any case requires the adoption of a 
different system, based on quantity, in reading Greek verse; 
whereas the latinizing accent, being already, as they say, 
'according to quantity', is immediately suited to this purpose. 
But just how true is this? A hundred lines of Greek iambics, for 
example, chosen at random, showed the following figures of 
agreement between the verse-ictus and the marked accent in 
each of the six feet: 
50. 
55· 
The agreement admittedly averages well below 50 %. For the 
latinizing accentuation ofthe same passage, figures of agreement 
with the verse-ictus are as follows: 
35· 
72 . 
37· 
2. 
Certainly there are some notable differences in the distribution 
of these figures amongst the various feet-but the overall 
difference is insignificant. A sample of epic hexameters proved 
rather more favourable to the latinizing accent, but even 
so agreement averaged only around 60%.21 In fact, as G.]. 
21 For further discussion cf. AR, pp. 280 If. 
153 

APPENDIX A 
Pennington had already noted in 1844,22 'the Latin can no 
more claim to be read according to quantity than the Greek ,-
indeed a sample from the Aeneid averaged no more than 
55 %. The most, then, that can be said for the Henninian pro-
nunciation in this connection is that it is based upon the 
same general principles as the verse-ictus, i.e. that its location 
is regulated primarily by syllabic quantity. 
The second argument concerns the distinctions of vowel-
length. In Byzantine and modern Greek the effect of the stress 
accent has been to suppress the independent distinction between 
long and short vowels, all stressed vowels being of rather longer 
duration than unstressed, regardless of their original values. A 
similar effect is commonly encountered in current pronuncia-
tions of ancient Greek by Russian and I talian speakers, for 
example, in whose native languages there is a similar linkage 
of stress and duration; and one of the objections made by the 
Henninian 'reformers' against the traditional accentuation in 
England was that it tended to lengthen accented short vowels 
and, more particularly, to shorten unaccented long vowels. 
As a matter of general linguistic typology,23 it is probably true 
that if a language has a free stress-accent (which is consequently 
capable of distinctive function-as e.g. modern Greek pino 'I 
am hungry': pino 'I drink'), it tends to eschew phonemic 
distinctions of vowel-length. This does not apply, however, to 
languages with a fixed stress-accent; Finnish, Hungarian, and 
Czech, for instance, which generally have a primary stress-
accent on the initial syllable, nevertheless maintain distinctions 
of length even in polysyllabic words-e.g. Hungarianfelszaba-
ditds 'liberation' (the acutes in Hungarian indicate length, not 
stress).24 And indeed present-day RP English, in spite of its 
'free' stress-accent, provides numerous models for the pronun-
22 An Essay on the Pronunciation of the Greek Language, p. 183. 
23 Cf.Jakobson, Selected Writings, i, p. 624; TeLP,4 (1931), p. 182; Trubetzkoy, 
Scritti in onore di A. Trombetti, p. 160. 
24 Modern Icelandic, which also has an initial stress-accent, has lost its former 
phonemic distinctions of vowel-length (replacing these by qualitative differences), but 
there are clear phonetic differences in the duration of vowels and diphthongs according 
to syllabic structure. 
154 

THE ORAL ACCENTUATION OF GREEK 
ciation of stressed short vowels and unstressed long vowels25 
(the latter more particularly in complex and compound words). 
As early as 1804, W. Mitford (An Inquiry into the principles of 
Harmony in Language, p. 279) had pointed this out in connection 
with the pronunciation of Greek, citing as examples of an un-
stressed long [1] such words as increase (noun), colleague, thirteen, 
etc., and the compounds heartsease, sweetmeat; and in 1852 
J. S. Blackie (The Pronunciation of Greek,. Accent and Quantiry, pp .. 
56 f.) observes that English speakers show no tendency to 
lengthen the first vowel in visible or to shorten the [1] 
of housekeeper; those who claimed that such changes were a 
necessary corollary of stress in English, says Blackie, 'had got 
their ears confounded by the traditional jargon of teachers in-
culcating from dead books a doctrine of which they had no 
living apprehension'. No doubt there were English speakers of 
Greek who did exhibit some of the tendencies complained of by 
the Henninians, but their performance must have been due to 
carelessness or perversity26 rather than to any irresistible con-
straints of the English language. The effort required to maintain 
the correct values is certainly no greater than is called for in 
avoiding neutral vowels or in pronouncing double consonants 
in words like 6oAoaao, or Latin corolla. 
As English (RP) models for unstressed long vowels, both pre-
and post-accentual (and often combined with stressed short 
vowels), we may add a few other examples to those cited by 
earlier writers, which readers will be able further to augment 
for themselves :27 
O' The typological rule can be saved (as by Jakobson; cf. also Jakobson & Halle, 
In Honour if Daniel Jones, pp. 96 fr.) by treating English (cf. p. 6) as having primarily 
distinctions of tenseness rather than length. 
o. It seems to have been deliberately taught in the Westminster School pronunciation 
introduced by Richard Busby (headmaster 1638-95), whose pupil Dryden even writes 
ElipEKa (Religio Laici, 43). That it still survived there in the next century is shown by 
a letter from W. Cowper to Wm Unwin in 1785, to which Professor E. J. Kenney has 
drawn my attention: 'They that read Greek with the accents, would pronounce the 
e in 'l'IAec.> as an fl. But I do not hold with that practice, though educated in it. I should 
therefore utter it just as I do the Latin wordfilio, taking the quantity for my guide'. 
In other words, he was brought up to stress and lengthen the accented vowel Of'l'lAEw, 
but rejects this in favour of the Latinizing stress on the first syllable: he will of course 
have pronouncedfilio (wrongly, in the traditional manner) with a short first vowel (cf. 
VL, p. 105). 
07 Cf. also Gimson, p. 14I. 
155 

(for w): 
(for a) : 
APPENDIX A 
audition, mor6nic, record, landlord, 6utlaw, backwater, 
m6uth-organ. 
carb6lic, partisan, placard, br6adcasting, telegraph (note 
also the distinction maintained between short [a] 
in laggard [lregad] and long [a] in blackguard 
[blregad]) . 
(for ov) : 
rheumatic, slide-rule, bUs-route, pea-shooter. 
(for 1), approximately) : wayfarer. 
Unstressed diphthongs, of course, provide no problem, since 
there is no possibility of confusion-for Greek ai, au compare 
English midnight, sundowner, etc. (most English speakers will also 
tend to diphthongize EI, in which case models are provided by 
e. g. sandpaper, 6perate). 
The pattern of stress on short vowels in English, even before 
single consonants (e.g. batter, bitter, bitter, bUtter, butler, bullet), is 
so common that no one can take seriously the objection that in 
speaking Greek it must lead to a lengthening of the vowels in 
question. It is, on the other hand, true that long vowels and 
diphthongs in English more commonly occur in stressed than 
in unstressed position; in the terminology proposed by 
G. F. Arnold, 28 they belong to the class of 'fortes', in the sense 
of being 'normally rhythmically strong'. But, as we have seen, 
departures from the norm are far from rare,29 and the unstressed 
08 • Stress in English Words', Lingua, 6 (1957), pp. 221 If. and 397 If. 
O. Stress in English is a very complex phenomenon, and in such cases the syllables 
in question are probably best considered, as by Arnold, as bearing' non-tonic strong' 
rather than weak stress, i.e. as being contrasted with the accented syllable not so much 
by their weaker force of articulation as by their bearing a non-prominent (non-nuclear) 
pitch (Arnold, op. cit., pp. 224 f.). This does not of course alfect our argument, but it 
may provide an additional explanation of how English speakers are able to maintain 
vowel-length in • unstressed , position (cf. p. 155, n. 25 above). It has been noted by 
J. Ondnlckova (Linguistics, 83 (1972), p. 62) that in Czech also pitch-contrasts are most 
strikingly utilized in cases of the less common pattern of stress/length relationship. 
For a discussion of the possible physiological basis of the tendency for stress to 
correlate with length (and conversely) see AR, pp. 80 f., 169 f., 185, 191 If. 
The less common pattern, with stress on a light syllable followed by an unstressed 
long vowel, might be compared with the so-called' Scotch snap' in music, whereby the 
accented notes are shortened and the unaccented lengthened. It is perhaps of interest 
to note that this is also a characteristic feature of Bohemian and Magyar folk-
music-and that both the Czech and Hungarian languages (cf. p. 154) frequently 
display this less common pattern (e.g. Cz. kabat, Hung. bardt, with initial stress but long 
second vowel). 

THE ORAL ACCENTUATION OF GREEK 
pronunciation of these vowels in Greek involves little more than 
a greater frequency of occurrence. 
A further point may also be made with regard to the objection 
that this practice must lead to the replacement of unstressed 
long vowels by the corresponding short. The English vowels 
most similar to E, 0, a, viz. [e), [0], [A), are also 'fortes' in 
Arnold's sense, and so, when they occur in unstressed position, 
also involve a deviation from the 'normal' pattern, thereby 
requiring some degree of attention in speaking Greek; and they 
are therefore in any case not natural substitutes for unstressed 
11, w, o. (It is interesting to note that no one has ever objected 
to the unstressed pronunciation of E, 0, a, occurring in the second 
syllables of e.g. WEIlOS, QVOIlO, 6CxvaTos, although, as we have just 
seen, these are also deviant from the' normal' English pattern 
in the same way as the unstressed long vowels~the reason 
being, one suspects, that most English speakers tend to replace 
them by the more familiar' lenes '30 [i) and [;})!) Short [i) in 
English is admittedly a lenis, but most English speakers will 
make a considerable difference of quality between this and long 
[i), so that any tendency to shortening of the latter in unstressed 
position is unlikely to lead to confusion of Greek i and 1. There 
is a tendency to shorten pre-tonic English [til, as e.g. in 
rheumatic, but, since there is no short [u] in Greek, no confusion 
can arise here either. 
There is thus no real problem for English speakers in 
pronouncing words like avepWlTOS or TJAiKOS with a stress on the 
accented syllable and correct vowel-length. Moreover, if the 
arguments of the objectors to this practice were valid, they 
would equally apply to words like KOAWS, lTpC.:lTOPXOS, where the 
Henninian pronunciation should, according to them, produce 
changes in vowel-length which the non-Henninian, Byzantine 
rendering avoids. In fact the only considerable difficulty arises 
in words like lTol5iov, since English does not provide models for 
short stressed vowels in hiatus~but ambiguity in such cases is 
exceedingly rare, and in any case the Henninian pronunciation 
30 I.e.' normalry rhythmically weak'. 
157 

APPENDIX A 
can hardly claim an advantage, since in addition it precludes 
the making of any distinction between e.g. Bios and f1'ios, or 
between TIIWV 'fat' and TI'iwv 'having drunk'. 
The prevailing English habits in regard to Greek accentua-
tion led Blackie (op. cit., pp. 50 f.) to comment in the following 
terms: 
'They neglect the written accents which lie before their nose, 
and read according to those accents which they have borrowed 
from Latin! ... And, as if to place the top-stone on the pyramid 
of absurdities which they pile ... they set seriously to cram their 
brain-chambers with rules how Greek accents should be placed, 
and exercise their memory and their eye, with a most villanous 
abuse of function, in doing that work which should have been 
done from the beginning by the ear! If consistency could have 
been looked for from men involved in such a labyrinth of 
bungling, there would have been something heroic in throwing 
a wa y the marks altogether from their books and from their 
brains, as well as from their tongue; certainly this procedure 
would have saved many a peeping editor a great deal of trouble, 
and many a brisk young gentleman riding up in a Cambridge 
"coach" right into the possession of a snug tutorship in Trinity, 
would have travelled on a smoother road.' 
In fact the Committee on Greek Accentuation set up by the 
Classical Association in 1926, having resolved by a majority of 
8: 3 that they 'cannot recommend any general attempt in 
teaching to give an oral value either by pitch or stress to the 
traditional signs of Greek accent', proceeded, by a smaller 
majority of 6: 5, to recommend that 'where no oral value is 
given to the signs of accent the use of these signs in writing Greek 
be not insisted on in Schools or Universities' (Proc., 26 (1929), 
P·46). 
So long as we pronounce Greek as we do, it would be hard 
to deny the logic of these conclusions. But it remains none the 
less deplorable that our students and future scholars should 
remain in ignorance of one of the most characteristic features 
of Greek (and deprived of a valuable aid to the learning of its 
158 

THE ORAL ACCENTUATION OF GREEK 
modern form), for no better reason than that we persist in an 
oral rendering of the language which does not reflect its native 
structure at any time in its history. What then is one to 
recommend? We have already rejected as impracticable any 
general attempt at a melodic rendering, enthusiasm for which 
in some cases tends to be in inverse proportion to phonetic 
experience. It will by now have become apparent that the 
author favours a return to the pre-Henninian, Byzantine 
system, thereby abandoning the Dutch alliance and conforming 
to the more general practice of the scholarly world, secure 
moreover in the knowledge that our native speech-habits afford 
us an advantage over most other countries in the ability to 
combine a free stress-accent with a proper regard for vowel-
length.31 It has to be admitted that such a pronunciation still 
does not help in determining when to write an acute and when 
a circumflex accent; bu t once the position of the accen t is known, 
the rules which govern this choice can be very simply and briefly 
stated, and the exceptions are not intolerably numerous. 
We have already mentioned what is often claimed as a 
pedagogical advantage of the Henninian system-namely that 
it is based primarily on quantity, and so does not require the 
separate learning of this concept in order to 'scan' verse, i.e. to 
read it with a metrical rhythm. But most students will already 
be familiar with the general concept of quantity from Latin, so 
that its application to Greek prose32 (where in any case, as we 
31 It is interesting to find that Lancelot, writing at a time when Vossian views had 
considerable support in France, saw no particular difficulty even for French speakers 
in the type of pronunciation recommended: thus (op. cit., p. 549), ' ... quelques-uns 
ont cru qu'il seroit peut-estre utile, au moins pour un temps, de ne plus marquer aucun 
accent, puisqu'ils ne servent qu'a nous accoutumer a une fausse prononciation, et a nous 
faire prendre souvent pour long ce qui est bref, ou pour bref ce qui est long. Je croy 
neanmoins qu'on se peut relever de cet inconvenient sans en venir a cette extremite, 
pourvu qu'on suive la veritable prononciation que j'ay marquee au I. Livre, qui est 
d'autant plus facile que je l'ay toute rapelle a celie de nostre langue ... , qui n'est ni 
rude, ni difficile, mais qui enferme ... une utilite qui se fera bien-tost sentir a ceux qui 
prendront quelque soin de s'y appliquer.' 
32 In fact most English scholars, in their Henninian pronunciation of Greek prose, 
ignore the Attic rules of quantity where they are different from those of Latin, stressing 
a word such as Ihexvos, for instance, on its middle syllable-i.e. treating it as heavy 
instead oflight (cf. pp. 106 ff. above and TPS, 1966, p. 134, n. 3), as was actually done 
by Lucilius (cf. A. Gellius, xviii. 7. 2). 
I59 

APPENDIX A 
have seen, the rhythmical patterns are very different even on 
a Henninian basis). And even if this limited advantage were as 
real as ii. is im:!ginerl to be, the author at any rate would feel 
that to treat it as decisive would be to let the metrical tail wag 
the linguistic dog. 
I t would be unrealistic not to acknowledge the external 
difficulties inherent in any change, since the Henninian system 
is at present, and has long been, almost universal in this country. 
But the prevalence and antiquity of a bad habit is no argument 
for its continuance; the reform involved is considerably simpler 
than was required by the 'new' pronunciation of vowels and 
diphthongs-with the reservation that we should then have to 
learn the accent as the Greeks themselves did, and as we have 
to when learning a modern language like Russian, as an integral 
part of each word. 
Select bibliography for Appendix A 
Bywater, I. The Erasmian Pronunciation of Greek and its Precursors 
(O.V.P. 1908). 
Clarke, M. L. Greek Studies in England 1700-1830 (C.V.P. 1945), 
Appendix II. 
Dobson, E.j. English Pronunciation 1500-1700 (2 vols, O.V.P. 1957). 
Drerup, E. Die Schulaussprache des Griechischen von der Renaissance bis zur 
Gegenwart (St. z. Gesch. u. Kultur des Altertums, Erganzungsb. 
6, 7: Paderborn, 1930, 1932). 
Errandonea, I. 'iErasmo 0 Nebrija?', Emerita, 13 (1945), pp. 65 fr. 
Hesseling, D.-C. & Pernot, H. 'Erasme et les origines de la pronon-
ciation erasmienne', REG, 32 (1919), pp. 278 fr. 
Kukenheim, L. Contributions a l'histoire de la grammaire grecque, latine et 
hebraique a l'epoque de la Renaissance (Leyden, 1951). 
Postgate, j. P. A short guide to the accentuation of Ancient Greek (London, 
1924), Ch. IV. 
Sandys,j. E. A History of Classical Scholarship (3 vols, C.V.P. 1903-8). 
Stoll, H. A. 'Erasmisches und Reuchlinisches Griechisch?' (Renais-
sance und Humanismus in Mittel- und Osteuropa, ed. j. Irmscher 
= DA WB, Schr. d Sektion f. 
Altertumswissenschaft, 32 
(1962), i, pp. 89 fr.). 
The relevant writings of Erasmus, Cheke and Smith are collected in 
S. Havercamp, Sylloge altera scriptorum qui de Linguae Graecae vera et recta 
160 

APPENDIX A 
Pronunciatione commentarios reliquerunt (Leyden, 1740). The writings of 
Erasmus and Cheke are now available in Scolar facsimile reprints 
(European Linguistics 148rrIJOO, ed. R. C. Alston, nos. 1 (1971) and 
2 (1968) respectively); and there is a critical edition of the former by 
M. Cytowska (= Opera Omnia Desiderii Erasmi, I. 4: Amsterdam, 
1973) . 

APPENDIX B 
I. Selected quotations froID ancient gralDlDarians 
and other writers 
(Editions oj grammatical and technical works are riferred to by editors' 
initials only; Jor Jurther details see abbreviations on pp. xviiif). 
Ps.-Aristotle, De Audibilibus, 804 b (see p. IS). 
IjIIAai 0' 
EiO"i ... 00"m yiyvoVTal xwpis Tt;s TOV lTVEV~aTos EKl3oAt;S. 
Aristides Quintilianus, De Musica ii. II, p. 76 WI; i. 20, 
p. 41 WI (see p. IS). 
TOVTWV oe TO: ~ev 1ipE~aiws lTpoCxyoVTa TOV 
aEpa ... KEKATlTal \jJ\Aa-Twv 
~EVTOI yE aq>wvwv TO: 
~ev ElTIlTOAt;S 
KIVOVVTa TO 1TVEv~a IjIIAO:. 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, De Compositione Ver-
borum xiv, p. 56 UR (see p. 16). 
. .. alTO TWV XEIAWV Cxi<pwv, 
OTav TOV o"To~aTos lTIEcr6Mos TOTE lTpol3aAM~EVov EK Tt;S apTTlpias 
TO 1TVEv~a MO"1J TOV OEo"~OV Cx\lTOV-Tt;S yAWTTTlS Cxi<P'll Te;> o"TO~aTl 
lTpOo"EPEIOO~I:vflS KaTO: TOVS 
~ETEWPOVS 656vTas, ElTEIS' ll1TO TOV 
1TVru~aTOS CxTIOPPI1Tl30~EvTlS Kai T;'V OIE~OOOV miTe;> KO:TW lTEpi TOVS 
656vTas alTOOIOOVO"TlS-Tt;S yAWTTTlS Cxvlo"Ta~EVTlS TIpOS TOV ovpavov 
EyyVS TOV q>O:pvyyoS Kai Tt;S apTTlpias VlTTlXOVO"TlS Te;> lTVEV~aTI. 
Quintilian, i. 4. 14 (see p. 23). 
nam contra Graeci aspirare 
F ut q> solent, ut pro Fundanio Cicero testem, qui primam eius 
litteram dicere non possit, irridet. 
Plato, Cratylus, 427 A (see p. 23). 
. .. wO"lTEP yE 010: TOV q>iKai 
TOV ljIi Kai TOV O"iy~a Kai TOV 3t;Ta, OTI 1TVEV~aTWOTl TO: ypO:~~aTa, 
lTCxvTa TO: TOlaVTa ~E~i~TlTal aVTois 6vo~~wv, oTov TO IjIVXPOV Kai 
TO ~EOV Kai TO O"Eiecr6al Kai OAWS o"Elo"~OV. Kai OTav lTOV TO q>vO"woes 
~1~t;Tal, lTaVTOXOV EVTaOOa WS TO lTOAV TO: TOlaVTa ypo:~~aTa 
ElTIq>EPEIV q>aivETal 6 TO: 6vo~aTa TISE~EVOS. 

SELECTED QUOTATIONS 
Scholia in Dian. Thr., p. 152 H (see p. 26). 
MEAo:j3e 5e To:VTO: 
Ta OVOllaTO: E1< lleTO:CPOpas TOOV avello:iwv 1TVevllclTwv, & 1TVEOVTO: ev 
Tois opecrt Mael IlEv 
VAllS 
lTPOO'KPOIJOVTO: 
IlEYO:V -lixov cmo-
TeAovalv, ulTo\fll6vpi30vai 5e ev Tois \fIIAOTEPOIS opealv ijyovv 
Cx5ev5pols i'l OAly05ev5pOlS. 
Dionysius Thrax, Ars Grammatica, pp. 12 f. U (see 
p. 29). 
IlEao: 5e TOVTWV Tpio:, j3 Y 5. IlEao: 5e eiPTlTO:I, em Tc;,y 
IlEv \fIIAOOV eaTI 5O:aVTepo:, TOOV 5e 5o:aEwv \fIIAOnpo:. 
Plato, Cratylus, 427 A (see p. 31). 
Tiis 5' o:V TOV 5EATO: 
aVlllTlEaeWS Ko:i TOV To:V Ko:i 6TIepeiaews Tiis YAWTTllS Ti}v !)VVO:lllv 
Xpr,aIIlOV cpo:iveTO:I ,;yr,ao:aeO:I lTpOS TtlV llillllalV TOV 5eallov Ko:i Tiis 
aTaaews. 
Cicero, Fam. ix. 22. 3 (see p. 31). 
Cum loquimur terni, nihil 
fiagiti dicimus, at cum bini, obscenum est. Graecis, quidem, 
inquies. nihil est ergo in uerbo; quando et ego Graece scio, et 
tamen tibi dico, bini; idque tu facis, quasi ego Graece, non 
Latine dixerim. 
Herodian, ii, p. 926 L (see p. 32). 
nAclTWV IlEVTOI ev 'Ympj3oA,!> 
51ElTO:I~e Ti}v exvev TOV y xpiialv wS j3apj3o:pov, AEyWV oliTws' 
o 5' ov yap ";TTiKI3ev, w MoipO:I cpiAO:I, 
CxAA' (mOTe IlEv xpeill 51TlTWIlTlV AEyelv, 
ecpO:O'Ke 51lTWllllv, OlTOTe 5' elmiv 5eol 
oAiyov oAiov. 
Dian. Hal., De Camp. xiv, p. 53 UR; xxii, p. 103 UR (see 
p. 33). 
TO 5e Il TOV Ilev aTollO:ToS ToiS xeiAeal lTIeaeEVTOS, TOV 5e 
1TVeVllaTOS 51a TOOV pw6wvwv llepI30IlEVOV-TOV Ilev yap v mpi TOV 
ovpo:vov yiveTO:I 0 -lixos Ko:i Tiis YAWTTllS CiKpOIS ToiS 050val 
lTpoaO:VIO"TO:IlEvllS Ko:i TOV lTveVllaTOS 51a TOOV pw6wvwv llepI30IlEVOV. 
Priscian, GL, ii, p. 30 K (see p. 35). 
. .. quod ostendit Varro 
in primo De Origine Linguae Latinae his uerbis: 'ut Ion scribit, 
quinta uicesima est litera, quam uocant "agma", cuius forma 
163 

APPENDIX B 
nulla est et uox communis est Graecis et Latinis, ut his uerbis: 
aggulus, aggens, agguila, iggerunt. in euismodi Graeci et Accius 
noster bina g scribunt, alii n et g, quod in hoc ueritatem uidere 
facile non est. similiter agceps, agcora.' 
Dion Hal., De Compo xiv, p. 54 UR (see p. 41). 
TO 01: p Tiis 
yAWTTT)S OKpas CrnopprTTl3ovO"T)S TO "lTVEO\la Kai "lTPOS TOV oupavov 
eyyvs TWV 656vTc.uV cXvlO"Ta\lEvT)S. 
Plato, Cratylus, 426 E (see p. 4 I). 
Ewpa yap, ol\lal, TT]V 
YAWTTav EV TOVTctl 1;KIO"Ta \lEVOVO"av, \lO:AIO"Ta 01: o"EIO\lEVT)V. 
Herodian, i, pp. 546 f. L (see p. 4 I ) . Top 0PXO\lEVOV AE~Ec.uS 
oa01ivEcr6at 6EAEI, po, pavis, po~, Xc.upis TOO 'Papos (eo"TI 01: ovo\la 
Kliplov) Kai Xc.upis TWV E~ aVTOO-To p, ECxv OIO"O"OV YEvT)Tal EV \lEO"D 
AE~EI, TO \lev "lTPWTOV \IIIAOOTal, TO 01: OEVTEPOV oaO"VVETat olov 
O"Vppa"ITTc.u . 
Choeroboscus, Scholia in Theodosii Canones, i, p. 257 H 
(see p. 43). 
Kavwv yap EO"TI v 6 AEyc.uV em TO p \lETa TWV OaO"Ec.uv 
oa01i EO"TI Kai \lETa TWV \IIIAWV \IIIMv Eo"TIV. 
Aristotle, Soph. El., 177 b (see p. 52). 
. .. Eimp \IT] Kai TO opos 
Kai opOS Tij "lTpOO"ctloiC;X AEX61:v O"T)\laiVEI ETEpOV. OAA' Ev \lev Tois 
YEypa\l\lEVOIS TO aUTO TO OVO\la, OTav EK TWV aVTWV O"TOIXEic.uv 
yEypa\l\lEvOV i5 Kai WO"aVTc.uS (KCxKEi 0' f)0T) "lTapaO"T)\la "lTOIOOVTat), Ta 
01: <p6eyyO\lEVa OU TaVTO. 
Dion. Thr., Ars Gramm., p. 14 U (see pp. 56, 59). 
°ETlo1: 
TWV O"V\l<pwvc.uv OmAa \lev EO"TI Tpia· 3 ~ \II. OmAa 01: EipT)Tal, OTI EV 
exaO"TOV aliTwv EK OVO O"V\l<pWvc.uv O1iYKEITat, TO \lev 3 EK TOO 0" Kai 
0, TO 01: ~ EK TOO K Kai 0", TO 01: \II EK TOO "IT Kai 0". 
Aristotle, Met., 993a (see p. 58). 
oi \l1:v yap TO 3a* EK TOO 0" 
Kai 0* Kai a <paO"iv Elval, oi OE TIVES ETEpOV <p6oyyov <paO"iv Elval Kai 
olieEva TWV yvc.upi\lc.uv. 
• Restored after the commentary of Alexander Aphrodisiensis (MSS <7\.10, \.I). 

SELECTED QUOTATIONS 
Dion. Hal., De Compo xiv, pp. 51 f. UR (see pp. 62, 65, 67, 
74) . 
mlTwv oe TWV lJaKPWV TTCIAIV euepc.uvOTaTOV IJEv TO 0, (hov 
EKTeiv1lTol' AEYETOI yap avOlYOIJEVOV Te TOO O"TOIJOTOS hri TTAeiO"Tov 
Koi TOO TTVeVlJaTOS avc.u epepOIJEVOV TTpOS TOV oupOVOv. oeVTepov oe TO 
1l, OIOTI KCrrc.u Te mpi T"V ~aO"IV Tlis YAWTT1lS Epeioel TOV Tixov CxAA' 
OUK avc.u, Koi IJETpic.uS exVOIYOIJEvOV TOO O"TOlJaTOS. TpiTOV oe TO c.u------hl 
0' TiTTOV TOVTOV TO V' mpi yap aUTa Ta xeiA1l avO"TOAlis YIVOIJEv..,S 
6:~loMyov TTviyeTol Koi O"TEVOS EKTTiTTTel 6 ?iXOS. eO"XaTov oe TTaVT~V 
TO I' mpi TOUS 656VTOS Te yap 'Ii KpoOms TOO TTVeVlJaTOS yivETOI 
IJIKPOV CxvOlYOIJEvOV TOO O"TOIJOTOS Koi OUK ETTlAOIJTTPWOVTc.uV TWV 
xelAWV TOV TiXOV. 
Quintilian, xii. 10. 27 (see p. 67). 
. .. iucundissimas ex 
Graecis litteras non habemus, uocalem alteram, alteram con-
sonantem ... quas mutuari solemus quotiens illorum nominibus 
utimur ... ut in Zephyris . .. 
Dion. Thr., Ars Gramm., p. 58 U (see p. 86). 
. .. ola Tlis q. 
0lep6oyyov, TTpOaypOepOIJEvOV TOO I, \.1" avVEKepc.uVOV\J.EVOV OE, olov 
~ow ~o~s ~o~. 
Quintilian, I. 7. 17 (see p. 87). Idque iis praecipue qui ad 
lectionem instituentur, etiam impedimento erit; sicut in Graecis 
accidit adiectione i litterae, quam non solum datiuis casibus in 
parte ultima adscribunt sed quibusdam etiam interponunt, ut 
in I\HIITHI, quia etymologia (sc. < A1li3c.u) ex diuisione in tris 
syllabas facta desideret earn litteram. 
Herodian, ii, pp. 407 f. L (see p. 101). 
(nepi 6p60ypoepios) niXv 
aVlJepc.uvov lJeTO~U ovo epc.uv1lenc.uv Ev Evi \.1Epel Myov t;yow €v IJI~ 
AE~el Tci> ETTlepepO\.1EvC{) epc.uVTtEVTI awaTTTEToI-Eav rupe6Wo"l ovo 
\.1EP1l Myov t;yov ovo AE~eIS, ou avvCxTTTeTol TO aV\.1epc.uVOV Tci> ETTI-
epepOIJEVC{) 
epc.uVTtEVTI, exAM Xc.upis eVpiO"KETaJ TO aV\.1epc.uVOV Tiis 
TTP01lYOV\.1EV1lS 
AE~ec.us Koi Xc.upis TO 
epc.uvliEV Tlis ETTlepep0\.1Ev1lS, 
olov vTTep 'ATTOAAc.uviov-oei TTpoa6eivol Xc.upis TWV l:x0VTc.uv EK-
6AlIj.IIV· ETTi TOVTc.uV yap TO O"V\.1epc.uVOV Tci> ETTlepepOIJEvC{) epc.uVTtEVTI 
awCxTTTETOI, olov KaT' 'ATTOAAc.uviov. 

APPENDIX B 
Scholia in Dion. Thr., p. 156 H (see p. 101). 
'YTTOOIOC'TOA" 0' 
~C'TIV ft TTpoC',,!>oio ft Tlee~evr, \JTTO T"V OIOC'TOA"V, olov 
eC'TIV,a~los, 
ivo ~" C'WTW~EvWS avayvovS a~cpll3oAiov TC;> CcKOVOVTI E~TTOI"C'1J, TOU 
v TTij ~Ev OOKOUVTOS TEAOS elvOi TOU EC'TIV, TTij oE \JTTOAO~l3o~EvOU apx" 
TOU Na~los. EI OE TIS eiTTol cm apKei TO TTVeu~o TOU cpwv"eVTOe; els 
OlcXyVWC'IV TOU EC'TIV a~los, CcKovC'eTol cm apKei ~Ev, aAAa TTpOS TOV 
avayIVWC'KOVTO, ou ~EvTOI ye 0" C'U~I3O:AAETOI TC;> CcKOVOVTI' 6 yap 
CcKOVWV OVx 6p~ TO TTVeu~o TOU a~IOS. 
Herodian, ii, p. 393 L (see p. 106). 
TO. crV~cpwvo TO. EV apxij 
AE~ews ruPIC'KO~evO, Koi Ev TC;> 
~EC',,!> EW rupe6WC'lV, Ev C'UAA"lVel 
rupiC'KOVTOI, olov Ev TC;> KTii~O TO KT Ev apxij AE~ews EC'Tiv, aAAa Koi 
Ev TC;> ETIKTOV rupe6MO Ev TC;> ~EC',,!> TO K Koi TO T 6~ou EC'TIV. 
Hephaestion, Enchiridion, p. 5 C (see p. 107). 
(nepi KOIVils) 
f1e0Tepos OE 
~C'TI TPOTTOS, cnov I3poxei ft 
I3POXUVO~EV,,!> CPWV"evTI 
ETTlCPEPTlTOI Ev Tij e~ils C'UAAOl3ij crV~cpwvo ovo, WV TO ~Ev TTPWTOV 
acpwvov EC'TI, TO OE oruTepov Vrpov, olov cmAov, OKpOV. 
Hephaestion, Ench., p. 6 C (see p. 107). 
'Ew ~MOI Ev Tij 
TTPOTEP<t' C'UAAOl3ij TeAIKOV ~ TO acpwvov, Tiis OE OEUTEPOS apKTIKOV TO 
VrPOV, OVKhl yiveTOI KOIV" C'UAAOI3", aAAO CxVTIKpUS ~aKPO:, we; TTOpa 
, AAKOi,,!>, «EK ~' EAO:C'OS aAyEWV». 
Dion. Hal., De Compo xv, p. 58 UR (see p. I 10). 
o~oAoyeiTOi 
0" I3poxeio elvOi C'UAAOI3", ilv TTOlei cpwvi'jev 
ypO:~~o I3poxv 
TO 0, we; AEYETOI 606s-Tphov ETI 
ypO:~~O Tij aUTij C'UAAol3ij 
TTpOC'Te6TJTW ... Koi 
yevEcr6w 
C'TPOCPOS' 
TPIC'iv 
aVTTl 
TTpocr6"KOlS 
CcKOUC'ToiS 
~aKPOTEpO yev"C'eTOI Tiis 
I3POXUTCxTTlS 
~EvOUC'O ETI 
I3poxeio-O 0' aUTos MyoS Koi ETTi Tils ~aKp&S. ft yap ~K TOU 11 
yIVO~evr, C'UAAol3" 
~aKpa T"V CPVC'1V OVC'O TeTTO:pwv ypo~~CxTWV 
TTpOcr6TJKOIS TTopau~TleeiC'o TplWV ~Ev TTpOTaTTO~EVWV, EvOS OE VTTO-
TaTTO~EvOU, Kae' ilv AEyETOI C'TTA"V, ~ei5wv av O"TTOU AEYOITO elvol 
Tils TTpOTEPOS EKeiV1)S Tils ~ovOypo~~CxTOU. 
Aristoxenus, Harmonics i. 18, p. 110 M (see p. 118). 
AEyeTol yap 0" Koi AOYWOES TI 
~EAOS, TO 
C'UYKei~evov EK TWV 
166 

SELECTED QUOTATIONS 
Trpoa~5lwv TWV Ev Tois 6volJaalv' cpvalKOv yap TO E1TITE!VEIV Kai 
CxvIEval Ev T4l 5IaAEyEa601. 
Dion. Hal., De Compo xi, pp. 41 f. UR (see p. 118). 
TelS TE AE~EIS 
Tois IJEAEalV VTrOTclTTEIV o~loi Kai ou Ta IJEAf] Tais AE~Ealv, WS e~ 
CiAAWV TE TrOAAWV 5fiAOV Kai lJelAlaTa EK TWV Eup\'TTi50v IJEAWV, 0: 
TrETrOiT)KEV TI]V 'HAEKTpav AEyOvaav Ev 'OPEcrn:l TrpOS TOV xopov' 
aiya aiya, AEUKOV ixvos opj3UAf]S 
Ti6ETE, 1Jr, KTV1TEiT" 
Crn01TPO I3Ch' EKEia', Crn01TpO IJOI KoiTas. 
Ev yap 5r, TOVTOIS TO «aiya aiya AEUKOV» ecp' £VOS cp6oyyov 
IJEA~5EiTal, KaiTol TWV TplWV Ae~Ewv 8<elaTT) j3apeias Te TelaEIS exel 
Kai 6~Eias-etc.-Kai TOO «Ti6ETE» j3apVTEpa IJEv ti TrpWTf] yivETal, 
5uo 5' a! IJET' a\miv 6~VTovoi TE Kai OlJocpwvol-etc. 
Dion. Hal., De Camp. xi, pp. 40 f. UR (see p. 120). 
51aAEKTOV IJEv ow lJeAOS £Vi IJETpeiTal 51aaTTJIJCXTI T4l AeyOIJEv~ 51a 
TrEvi"e ws eyYlaTa, Kai OlrrE ETrlTeivETal 1TEpa TWV TPIWV TOVWV Kai 
tilJlToviOV ffii TO 6~v 0('tT' CxviETOI TOO xwpiov TOVTOV TrAEOV eTrl TO 
l3apu. 
Aristoxenus, Harm. i. 8 f., pp. 101 f. M (see p. 121). 
BVo 
Tives elalv I5EOI KIVTJaeWS, ;; Te avvexr,s Kai ti 5IaaTT)IJCXTIKTJ-Tr,v IJEv 
ow avvExfi AOYIKr,V Elva! cpalJEV, 51aAeyOIJEvwv yap tilJWV OlrrWS 1'1 
cpwvr, KlvEiTal KCXTa TOTrOV waTE 1Jf]5alJoO 50KEiv iaTaa6al. KCXTa 5e 
TT,V ETepav flV 6vOIJelsOIJEV 5IaaTT)IJCXTIKr,V EvavTiwS 1TSCPVKE ylyvea601' 
oAAa yap iaTaa6ai Te 50Kei Kai TrCxvTes TOV TOVTO cpalVolJEVOV 1TOIEiv 
OVKETI AEyEIV cpaaiv OAA' ~5EIV. 
2. Chronology of sources 
Aelius Dionysius 
Apollonius Dyscolus 
Apuleius 
Aristides Quintilianus 
Aristotle 
ft. c. I 17 A.D. 
1st half of 2 C. A.D. 
born c. 125 A.D. 
? 3 C. A.D. 
384-322 B.C. 

APPENDIX B 
Aristoxenus 
Athenaeus 
Caesellius Vindex 
Caper 
Cassiodor(i)us 
Choeroboscus 
Cicero 
Cyril (St) 
Diogenes Babylonius 
Diogenes Laertius 
Diomedes 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus 
Dionysius Thrax 
Etymologicum Gudianum 
Eustathius 
Galen 
Hephaestion 
Herodian 
Herodotus 
Hesychius 
Ion of Chi os 
Marius Victorinus 
Nigidius Figulus 
Pausanias 
Plato 
Plato Comicus 
Plutarch 
Priscian 
Quintilian 
Sacerdos 
Seleucus 
Sextus Empiricus 
Straton 
Theodosius 
Trypho 
Tzetzes 
Varro 
Wulfila 
168 
ft. c. 318 B.C. 
ft. c. 228 A.D. 
2 C. A.D. 
2 C. A.D. 
c. 490-585 A.D. 
ft. C. 600 A.D. 
10&-43 B.C. 
born c. 826 A.D. 
ft. C. 155 B.C. 
? early 3 c. A.D. 
4c. A.D. 
I C. B.C. 
born c. 166 B.C. 
c. 1100 A.D. 
2nd half of 12 c. A.D. 
131-201 A.D. 
mid-2 c. A.D. 
2nd half of 2 C. A.D. 
c. 490-425 B.C. 
5 c. A.D. 
ft. c. 450 B.C. 
4c. A.D. 
1 C. B.C. 
2 C. A.D. 
427-348 B.C. 
ft. c. 425 B.C. 
C. 4&-120 A.D. 
5-6 C. A.D. 
c. 35-95 A.D. 
3-4 C. A.D. 
1 C. B.C.-A.D. 
ft. C. 200 A.D. 
ft. c. 280 B.C. 
ft. c. 400 A.D. 
I C. B.C.-A.D. 
C.1110-1180A.D. 
11&-27 B.C. 
C. 311-383 A.D. 

APPENDIX C 
The names of the letters of the Greek alphabet 
At various points in the main text there have been incidental 
discussions of the names of some of the letters; but a short overall 
treatment of this subject may be found useful. I take as a basis 
the post-Eucleidian (Ionic-derived) Attic alphabet (see p. 17), 
and begin by simply listing the letters with their names in the 
4th century B.C. (and earlier in the case of all but the non-
epichoric:=, 't', and Q).l 
A O:Aq>o. B I3i'\To. r yalJlJo. l:J. BEATo. E ET. Z 3i'\TO. 
H nTO. e 6i'\TO. I [C>TO. K K6:nno. 1\ MI3Bo. M IJO. 
N vO. := ~Ei. 0 00. n mi. P pC>. L O"iYlJo. 
T TaO. Y 0. <D q>Ei. X XEi. 't' \¥Ei. Q w. 
On the obsolete 9 (Konno) and F (BiyolJlJo) see pp. 17 and 47 
respectively. 
The Greek alphabet was developed, by around 800 B.C., 
from a Semitic (Phoenician) model in which basically only 
consonants were represented (cf. P. K. McCarter, The Antiquiry 
of the Greek Alphabet and the early Phoenician scripts) ; and the order 
and in many cases the names of the Semitic letters are reflected 
in the Greek. It is thought that a majority of the Semitic 
symbols were derived, directly or indirectly, from Egyptian 
1 Athenaeus (Deipn. 453) preserves the following lines from the iambic prologue to 
a so-called ypa~~CXTIKi1 Tpay,!>S(a by Callias, in which apparently a chorus of 24 women 
represented the letters of the alphabet. I cite these from the text in Poetat Comici Graeci, 
edd. R. Kassel & C. Austin, vol. IV, p. 39: 
(TO &Acpa,) j3fjTa, y6:~~a, SEATa, &00 yap El, 
3fjT', i'jTa, &iiT', l6'lTa, K6:-rrna, Mj3Sa, ~O, 
vii, ~ei, TO OV, lTei, ~, TO aiy~a, TaU, (TO) V, 
lTap6v (TO> cpei (TO> Xei T£ Ti;> cpei £Is TO W. 
Works of the comic writer Calli as are attested from 446 to 431 B.C. (cf. Kassel & Austin, 
p. 38) ; but doubts have been expressed about the identity of this writer with the author 
of the 'alphabet play'; and in spite of a possible explanation mentioned by 
J. M. Edmonds, The Fragments of Gruk Comedy, vol. I, p. 177 n., these doubts are 
strengthened by the occurrence of:::, '1', and Q, which are very rare in Attic inscriptions 
before 403 (cf. Threatte, p. 44). 
169 

APPENDIX C 
hieroglyphs, on the acronymic principle. To take one example: 
the hieroglyph for' palm of hand' was a stylized picture of the 
object, the Semitic name for which was kaf; this symbol would 
therefore have been adopted to stand for the consonant K, with 
subsequent simplification of form (cf. Ullman, ch. II). 
A number of the Semitic names ended in consonants non-
occurrent at word-end in Greek, and in such cases Greek 
modified them by adding a final ° vowel-thus ~fiTO for Sem. 
blt, etc.-in the same way as the exclamations' st!', 'pst!' were 
conventionalized as aiTTo, I.jIIiTTO.2 
We may first consider the Greek consonant-letters and their 
names. The Semitic languages have no class of aspirated 
consonants like Greek, but in the case of the dental there was 
an 'emphatic' (probably pharyngalized) (, as in modem 
Arabic; and the symbol for this (Sem. name tlt) was adopted 
for the Greek dental aspirate e, with the name 6iiTO (cf. p. 29, 
n. 36). For the other Greek aspirated plosives symbols, and 
names, had to be invented, namely <1> (cpei) and X (xei) , of which 
the origins are disputed; their names were no doubt formed 
by analogy with mi for n, which continued the Semitic name 
pl. 
Of the letters indicating consonant -grou ps, the Greek Z [zd], 
earlier [dz], later [z] (see pp. 56 ff.), derives from the Semitic 
letter named zayin, whose position it occupies; the name may 
be by analogy with ~fiTO and flTO. On :=: and If see pp. 59 f. ; 
their names, ~ei and lVei, follow the pattern ofn, <1>, and X. See, 
however, note on aiYlJo below. 
About the end of the 4th c. B.C. the phonetic value of el 
changed from a close mid vowel [~] to a fully close vowel [1], 
and the resulting confusion of el and I in spelling has led, through 
manuscript traditions, to some words being occasionally 
misspelt even in modem texts (see p. 70, n. 18). This phonetic 
change of course affected the letter names 1Tei, ~ei, cpei, Xei, lVei, 
and these are now commonly spelt and pronounced as 1Ti, fI, 
cpi, Xi, lVi, perhaps (like other late names: see below) through the 
medium of Greek teachers of the Renaissance (cf. p. 140). 
• Forms like warr, ql~<XTT66pcrr are examples of unmodified onomatopoeia (cf. AR, 
pp. 204 f.). 
170 

THE NAMES OF THE LETTERS 
Though the name of" derives from a Semitic lamd, the earlier 
and correct classical Greek form is i\aj3Scx, not the later i\al-lj3Scx. 
The name I-IV for M, of which the Semitic name was mem, is 
presumably by analogy with vii (Sem. nun),3 perhaps too with 
an ear to I-I~c.> etc. (Ionic also had the name 1-1&, like p&.) The 
name aiYl-lcx for I may be a derivation from the onomatopoeic 
verb ai3c.> (cf. p. 45).4 
Some of the Semitic letters redundant to the consonantal 
needs of Greek were utilized in various ways to provide symbols 
for the vowels. A, E, and 0 were taken from the Semitic letters 
named' alf (glottal plosive), he (glottal fricative: cf. p. 53), and 
'ayn (voiced pharyngal fricative) Tespectively. The criterion of 
selection was evidently the quality of the vowel in the Semitic 
name: in the case of' ayn it is possible that the initial pharyngal 
consonant induced a back quality of the following a which the 
Greeks could identify with their o-sounds (cf. Gelb, p. 292, n. 
5; H.Jensen (trsl. G. Unwin), Sign, symbol and script, 3rd edn., 
p. 457, n. I; A. Schmitt, Der Buchstabe Him Griechischen, p. 36; 
W. H. T. Gairdner, The Phonetics oj Arabic, p. 48). The Greek 
I is taken from the Semitic semivowelyod; and whilst the other 
Semitic semivowel waw at first survived in its consonantal value 
and original position in early Greek (see p. 47), another form 
of the same letter was used for the Greek vowel Y and placed 
after the other Semitic-derived letters. For A and I there was 
already a limited precedent for vocalic use in Semitic. 
The Greek H, taken from the Semitic ~et (voiceless pharyngal 
fricative), was at first adopted in a consonantal value for the 
aspirate [h] (see pp. 52 f.); but as a resultofpsilosis in East Ionic 
it became redundant in this use and was then available to 
represent at first the vowel [re] (between [~] and [a]), which 
had developed from earlier [a] in Attic-Ionic5-a use still 
• Similarly the occasional ~ for:. 
• An alternative suggestion, first made by Isaac Taylor (e.g. Tiu History of tlu 
Alphabet, II, pp. 97-lmz; tacitly adopted by L. M.Jeffrey, Tiu Local Scripts of Archaic 
Greece, pp. 25-8), is that the names and values of the Semitic sibilants were transposed-
zayin with tsade (cf. p. 60), giving, with some corruption, the Greek names am. and lfiTa; 
and samekh (cf. p. 59) with !in, giving the names alYlla and ~ei. The letter am. (shaped 
M) was used instead of I in some dialects. 
• This change probably took place around 900 B.C. (cf. Bartonek, p. 101); soon after 
17 1 

APPENDIX C 
attested in Cycladic Ionic inscriptions (see pp. 73 f.) even until 
the 5 c. B.c.-and then the long open mid vowel 
[~] with 
which it later merged. 6 In parallel with the length distinction 
thereby indicated, by E and H, on the front-vowel axis, the 
Ionic alphabet introduced a similar distinction on the back 
axis by inventing the sign Q for the long open mid vowel in 
opposition to 0, and this was placed at the end of the alphabet 
(cf. pp. 79, go). 
The names of the Greek vowels were partly derived from 
Semitic-CxAcpa, f)Ta,7 i(;na from 'a!j, Mt,yod. The name eT for E 
could derive from the Semitic name he, but equally it could 
simply represent the lengthened form of the short vowel [e], 
viz. [~] (cf. p. go); and this is made the more likely by the 
non-Semitic name OV, at first pronounced [<)], later [11] (see pp. 
75 ff., go), for the corresponding back vowel 0. Similarly the 
vowel Y was named simply from the long form of the vowel-
sound at first pronounced [u], later [ti] (cf. pp. 76 f.); but since 
all initial v were aspirated in Greek (excluding psilotic 
dialects), the Attic name in fact was probably v (like poo for P: 
for further evidence cf. Liddell & Scott, Greek-English Lexicon, 
gth edn, s. v. Y). The newly created letter Q was also named from 
its sound, viz. W [Q] (cf. pp. 75 f.). 
For reasons connected with phonetic changes in later Greek, 
some of these names were altered in post-classical times and the 
later forms tend to be used in current parlance. In the 2nd c. 
this a new [a] vowel arose by the lengthening of short [a] vowels to compensate for 
the simplification of certain consonant groups, e.g. acc. plur. fern. TO:S from earlier Tavs 
(as still attested, for example, in Cretan inscriptions). 
• It seems strange that a letter named fjTO [h~ta] should be used, with psilosis, to 
represent the sound [re] but not, at first, the sound [~]. It is possible, however, that the 
original Ionic name of the letter was not in fact [h~ta I but [hreta] (or in psilotic dialects 
[reta 1). For the pharyngal fricative lJ [h I is liable to cause opening of close or mid vowels in 
its vicinity (cf., on Arabic, Grammont, pp. 214 f., and on Circassian, Trubetzkoy, p. 87; 
Allen, Lingua 13 (1965), pp. 116 f.). The Semitic name I;Zt would then have been 
pronounced approximately [hret], the vowel of which was identifiable by th- Ionians 
with their [reI rather than their [H 
7 Earlier, in its consonantal value (see above), fjTO: but already in the mid-5 c. B.C., 
before the official adoption of the Ionic alphabet, Attic inscriptions begin to use H in 
its vowel value (and to omit it for the aspirate)-so the name fjTO (unaspirated) may 
then already have been in competition with fjTO. 

THE NAMES OF THE LETTERS 
A.D. the diphthong 01 developed to a monophthong of the same 
quality as e (cf. p. 79), with consequent confusions of spelling. 
Byzantine grammarians therefore distinguished them as ('Ii) 01 
5icp60yyoS and (TO) e IfJIA6v ('plain e'). Similarly the diphthong 
01 developed to a monophthong of the same quality as v [ii] (cf. 
pp. 68 f., 81), and these were distinguished as ('Ii) at 5icp60yyoS 
and (TO) Ii IfJIA6v (by Byzantine times the aspirate had been lost 
in pronunciation, so this spelling and pronunciation are 
appropriate as against the classical li). 
In the 2-3 c. A.D. the distinction of long and short vowels 
disappeared in pronunciation, and consequently 0 and w began 
to be confused in spelling. In differentiating between them 
grammarians evidently did not find the names oli and w 
sufficiently distinctive, and they came to be referred to as 0 
~IKp6v and w ~Eyo respectively.8 In addition of course the name 
oli for 0, pronounced as [ii] (see above), had long been 
inappropriate to the sound: the same also applied to the name 
eT for E, pronounced as [1] by the 3 c. B.C. (cf. p. 90, n. 3). 
8 In the Crarylus, arguing against the 'conventionalist' theory of language, Plato 
introduces a reductio ad absurdum in the idea of things being given the opposite of their 
actual names (433 E), and cites as an example: bTl Ilfv c!> vVv alllKpOv llEya KaMiv, 
bTl 6£ cIlllEya alllKpOv. But this collocation is a mere coincidence and not a pun on 00 
llEya (though the Venetus is misled into writing w llEya). Elsewhere in the same dialogue 
(420 B) 0 and Q are referred to as ou and 00, and at 393 D Plato expressly states that 
E, Y, 0, and Q are peculiar in being named by their sound alone. At the end of the 
1st century A.D. we still find in the Book of Revelation ·Eyw dill TO aA'jla Kal TO w-not 
00 llEya in the best MSS: this is confirmed by a citation in Clement of Alexandria, Strom. 
IV.25. § 157, around A.D. 200, and metrically guaranteed by Prudentius' hymn Cathem. 
ix (A.D. 405), line II: 'alpha et Q cognominatus, ipse fons et clausula' (trochaic 
tetrameter catalectic). H. B. Swete, The Apocalypse if St. John, p. 10, notes that the 
author may well have had in mind the similar expression found in Jewish works, as 
in 'Adam transgressed from the' Aleph to the Taw' (the latter being the last letter of 
the Hebrew alphabet: cf. above on the placing of Greek Y). 
173 

Index of Greek technical terms, etc. 
aylJO 35 f. 
a510:<popos 134 
alJETo:j3oAOs 40 
CxvEO"IS 
I 16 
arrOKOlT'; 100 
arrOCTTpo<P'; 100 
arr6o-rpo<pos 99 f. 
a<pOlpEo"lS 102 
a<pwvov 19,23, 107 
j30pvs I I 6 ff. 
ypOIJIJcrTlKOI I I I 
50crus 15, 18,25 f., 55 
5IoO"T1lIJcrTIK'; (KiVTJo"IS) 121 
51yoIJIJo 47 
5iTovos 122 
51<p6oyyoS 69, 173 
5iXpovos 90 
eT 90, 172 
EKeAI'fIIS 100 
rniO"TJlJo 47 
tlTiTOO"IS I 16 
~<PEAKVcrrIKOV 102 
e 'fIIMv 69, 79, 173 
foO 47 
l'J1J1<pwvov 19, 23 
6eO"EI 104 
6Ai'flIS 100 
KOIV'; 
(o"vAAOj3,;) 107 
KOlTlTO 17 
Kopwvis 20, 99 
KOV<PIO"IJOS 100 
Kpao"lS 98 
Kliplos (TOVOS) 118 
Mj350 171 
AE~IS 123 
IJEPOS (Myov) 123 
iJEO"OS 29, 122 f. 
IJETPIKOi I I I 
o IJIKPOV 79, 173 
6~vj3opvs 122, 125 
6~vS 116 ff. 
ov 90, 172 
lTOPaKVlO"IJO 60 
lTEplO"lTWIJEVOS I 22, I 25 
lTVeVlJO 15, 53 
lTVEVIJcrTw51lS 23 
lTpoO"c.p5io 54, I 16 
pv6IJIKOI I 10 
O"olJlTi 60 
crriYlJo 47 f. 
crVYKPOVO"IS 96 
O"VAAOj3IKOS (TOVOS) 118 
crVlJlT AEKTOS (TOVOS) I 22 
o"vVOipE<YIS 98 
O"VVOAOI<p'; 98 
o"vVEK<PWVllo"IS 99 
O"VVEX';S (KIVTJo"IS) 121 
O"VVI:~llo"IS 99 
TO:O"IS I 16 
TOVOS 116 
V 172 
liypos 40, 107 
Ii 'fIIMv 69, 172 
<pVo"EI 104 
XOO"IJc.p5Io 96 
'filMS 15, 18, 25, 69, 173 
W IJEYO 79, 173 

Select Bibliography 
(General: Jor Appendix A see pp. 160 f) 
(Where more than one edition of a work or more than one work by an author 
are listed, riferences in the text, unless otherwise specified, are to the first 
mentioned. ) 
Abercrombie, D. Elements oJGeneral Phonetics. Edinburgh, 1967. 
Allen, W. S. Phonetics in Ancient India (London Oriental Series, i). 
O.U.P. 1953 (3rd imp. 1965). 
Vox Latina. 2nd edn C.U.P. 1978. [abbr. VL] 
Accent and Rhythm (Cambridge Studies in Linguistics, 12). C.U.P. 
1973. [abbr. AR] 
Bartonek, A. Development of the long-vowel system in ancient Greek dialects 
(Opera Univ. Purkynianae Brunensis, Fac. Philos., 106). Prague, 
1966. 
Blass, F. Pronunciation of Ancient Greek (trsl. W.j. Purton). C.U.P. 
1890 . 
Brosnahan, L. F. & B. Malmberg. Introduction to Phonetics. Cambridge, 
1970. 
Browning, R. Medieval and Modem Greek. London, 1969. 
Buck, C. D. (a) Comparative Grammar oJGreek and Latin. Chicago, 1933 
(8th imp. 1962). 
(b) Greek Dialects. Chicago, 1955 (2nd imp. 
1961 ) . 
Chadwick, j. The prehistory oj the Greek language (Cambridge Ancient 
History, rev. edn, vol. II, ch. xxxix). C.U.P. 1963. 
Chantraine, P. Grammaire homerique. 2 vols, Paris, 1948, 1953 (3rd imp. 
1958, 1963; 5th imp. vol. i, 1973). 
Garde, P. L' Accent. Paris, 1968. 
Gelb, I.j. A Study oJ Writing. 2nd edn Chicago, 1963 (4th imp. 1974). 
Gimson, A. C. An Introduction to the Pronunciation of English. London, 
1962 (2nd edn 1970). 
Grammont, M. Phonetique du grec ancien. Lyon, 1948. 
Heffner, R.-M. S. General Phonetics. Madison, 1950 (yd imp. 1960). 
jones, D. (a) Outline of English Phonetics. 9th edn Cambridge, 1960 
(5th imp. 1972). 
(b) The Pronunciation of English. 4th edn C.U.P. 
1956 (3rd imp. 1963; paperback 1966). 
(c) The Phoneme. 2nd 
edn Cambridge, 1962 (3rd edn 1967, repr. 1976). 
Lejeune, M. (a) Traite de phonetique grecque. 2nd edn Paris, 1955. 
(b) Phonetique historique du mycenien et du grec ancien. Paris, 1972. 
Lupa§, L. Phonologie du grec attique. The Hague, 1972. 
175 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Maas, P. Greek Metre (trs!. H. Lloyd-Jones). O.U.P. 1962 (2nd edn 
1966). 
Meillet, A. Aperfu d'une histoire de La Langue grecque. 7th edn Paris, 1965 
(8th edn 1975). 
Meisterhans, K. [-Schwyzer, E.]. Grammatik der attischen Inschriften. 
3rd edn Berlin, 1900. 
Newton, B. E. The Generative Interpretation of DiaLect: a Study of Modern 
Greek PhonoLogy (Cambridge Studies in Linguistics, 8). C.U.P. 
1972. 
Palmer, L. R. The Greek Language. London, 1980. 
Postgate, J. P. A short guide to the accentuation of Ancient Greek. Liver-
pool/London, 1924. 
Pring, J. T. A Grammar of Modern Greek on a phonetic basis. London, 
1950 (7th imp. 1963). 
Raven, D. S. Greek Metre. London, 1962 (2nd edn 1968). 
Schwyzer, E. Griechische Grammatik, i (Handbuch der Altertums-
wissenschaft, II, i. I). Miinchen, 1938 (3rd imp. 1959). 
Sommerstein, A. H. The Sound Pattern of Ancient Greek (Philological 
Soc. Pub!. 23). Oxford, 1973. 
Stanford, W. B. The Sound of Greek (Sather Lectures, 1966). 
Berkeley/C.U.P., 1967. 
Stetson, R. H. Motor Phonetics. Amsterdam, 1951. 
Sturtevant, E. H. The Pronunciation of Greek and Latin. 2nd edn 
Philadelphia, 1940 (2nd imp. Groningen, 1968). 
Teodorsson, S.-T. The Phonemic System of the Attic DiaLect 4Da--340 B.C. 
(= Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia, 32). Stockholm/ 
Goteborg/Uppsala, 1974. (See also p. ix) 
Threatte, L. The Grammar of Attic Inscriptions, I: Phonology. Berlin/ 
New York, 1980. 
Thumb, A. Handbook of the Modern Greek VernacuLar (trs!. S. Angus). 
Edinburgh, 1912 (also repr., with' Language' for 'VernacuLar', 
Chicago, 1964). 
Trubetzkoy, N. S. GrundZiigeder PhonoLogie (= TeLP, 7). Prague, 1939 
(also trs!' J. Cantineau, Principes de PhonoLogie. Paris, 1949; and 
C. A. M. Baltaxe, PrincipLes of PhonoLogy. Berkeley, 1969). 
Ullman, B. L. Ancient Writing and its Irifluence. New York, 1932 (repr. 
M.I.T. 1969). 
Vendryes, J. TraiU d' accentuation grecque. Paris, 1904 (3rd imp. 1938). 
Vilborg, E. A tentative grammar of Mycenaean Greek (Goteborgs Uni-
versitets Arsskrift, lxvi. 2; Studia Graeca et Latina Gotho-
burgensia, ix). Goteborg, 1960. 
West, M. L. Greek Metre. O.U.P. 1982. 

SUMMARY OF 
RECOMMENDED PRONUNCIATIONS 
(' English' rifers to the standard or 'received' pronunciation oj Southern 
British English. Asterisks indicate less accurate approximations.) 
ci 
As first a in Italian amare 
* As vowel of English cup 
(N.B. not as vowel of cap) 
a 
As second a in Italian amare 
* As a in EnglishJather 
~ 
As a 
ttl 
As in English high (before vowels see pp. 
81 ff.) 
ttU 
As in English how (before vowels see pp. 
81 ff. 
au 
As ttU 
~ 
As English b 
Y 
( I) As English 'hard' g 
(2) Before K, X, y, 1.1 (but see p. 37): as n in 
English ink or ng in song 
5 
As French d 
* As English d 
E 
As in English pet 
El 
As in German Beet 
EU 
See p. 80 
~ 
[zd] as in English wisdom 
'I 
As in French tete 
n 
As 'I 
'lU 
As EU 
9 
As t in English top (emphatically pronounced) 
* (but see pp. 28 f.) As th in English thin 
177 
FOT 
discussion 
see page(s) 
79 f. 
84 ff. 
29 ff. 
29 ff. 
16, 29 ff. 
63 f. 
69 ff. 
56 ff. 
69 ff. 
84 ff. 
84 ff. 
18 ff. 

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED PRO NUN CIA TIONS 
For 
discussion 
see page(s) 
i 
As in French vite 
* As in English bit 
65 
i 
As in French vive 
* As in English bead 
65 
)( 
As French 'hard' c, or English (non-initial) 
k, ck, or 'hard' c (on EK see pp. 17 f.) 
15 ff. 
A 
As French I, or English I before vowels 
* As English I in other contexts 
40 
IL 
As English m 
33 
v 
As n in French or *English net (on end of 
word see pp. 33 ff.) 
33 
; 
As x in English box 
59 f. 
o 
As in German Gott 
* As in English pot 
63 f. 
OL 
As in English boy, coin (before vowels see 
pp. 81 ff.) 
80 f. 
ou 
As in English pool or French rouge 
75 ff. 
11: 
As French p, or English (non-initial) p 
15 ff. 
p 
As Scottish' rolled' r( on initial, post-
aspirate, and double see discussion) 
41 ff. 
a 
(I) As s in English sing, or ss in less, lesson 
(2) Before (3, y, 5, 1-\: as English z (N.B. but 
not elsewhere) 
".. f. 
aa 
As aa 
12 ff., 60 f. 
't 
As French t 
* As English (non-initial) t 
15 ff. 
't't 
As 't't 
12 ff., 60 f. 
u 
As in French lune 
65 ff. 
ii 
As in French ruse 
65 ff. 
UL 
See pp. 80 ff. 
~ 
As p in English pot (emphatically pronounced) 
*(but see pp. 28 f.) Asjin Englishjoot 
18 ff. 
X 
As c in English cat (emphatically pronounced) 
* (but see pp. 28 f.) As ch in Scottish loch 
18 ff. 
178 

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED PRONUNCIATIONS 
For 
discussion 
~ 
As ps in English lapse 
w 
As in English saw 
'!> 
Asw 
DOUBLE CONSONANTS 
See discussion 
A C C E N T S 
See discussion 
see page(s) 
59 f. 
75 ff. 
84 ff. 
12 
127[.,149 
Discussions of POST-CLASSICAL PRONUNCIATIONS appear 
on the following pages: 23 ff., 30 ff., 53, 58 f., 68 f., 70, 72 {:, 
74 f., 78 (Table), 79 ff., 85 ff., 93 ff., 130 f., 172 f. 
179 

