Limita&ons of the Interpreter 
 
Next up, we're going to work with another fun, popular dataset, which is a significant 
earthquakes dataset. So go to Kaggle and search for ‘significant earthquakes’ and download 
the csv. It is a dataset containing the date, time and location of earthquakes with magnitude 
5.5 or higher from 1965-2016. 
 
 
What I'm most interested in are location of the earthquakes, i.e., latitude and longitude, 
because I want to generate a map showing the locations of the earthquakes. 
 
 
I'm going to go ahead and upload the csv to ChatGPT. 
 
 

We have columns like date, time, latitude, longitude, magnitude. Specifically, what I want to 
do in this section is generate a map plot. So I prompt it with: “give me a map plot of the 
earthquakes location”. 
 
Code Interpreter responds with a scatter plot: 
 
Each point on the map corresponds to the geographical location of an earthquake. 
 
But Code Interpreter also responds with: 
 
Please note that this is a simple plot and does not provide detailed geographical information 
such as country boundaries or physical features. If you need a more detailed geographical 
plot, we might need to use more specialized libraries such as Geopandas or Basemap, which 
unfortunately are not available in this current environment. 
 
This does give us a rough geographical view as you can see the shape of the world, but it's 
using such a big marker that it doesn't really give us much information. 
 
The current environment doesn't support interactive geospatial libraries like Geopandas or 
Basemap. The problem we're running into is that this is not a complete Python environment. 
It won't do everything that you can do in the real world of Python locally on your machine. 
This is one of the limitations. 
 
What we can do, especially if you are a developer, is tell it, " give me the full code with 
specialized libraries for me to run it on my own." 
 
Now it gave me the code that I could use to plot earthquake locations around the world.  

 
 
It also tells me the required libraries I need and how to install them. 
 
 
 
So I will copy and paste the code into Google Colab (you can use other IDEs like Jupyter). 
 
Install the libraries: 
 
 
And next copy the code into Google Colab. You would probably have to upload the csv file 
into Google Colab too. 
 
 

 
 
And I get a much better plot of the earthquake locations when I run the code: 
 
 

 
 
So you can see that most of the earthquakes occur in the ‘Pacific Ring of Fire’. 
 
Now the main take away here is not about analysing the earthquake locations, but 
understanding that when you try more advanced things in the code interpreter, at some point, 
it will say, "I can't do that." And then you can ask it to give you the code to run it on your 
own. 
 

