Arabic Sociolinguistics 


Arabic Sociolinguistics 
Reem Bassiouney 
Edinburgh University Press 

© Reem Bassiouney, 2009 
Edinburgh University Press Ltd 
22 George Square, Edinburgh 
Typeset in ll/13pt Ehrhardt 
by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Stockport, Cheshire, and 
printed and bound in Great Britain by CPI Antony Rowe, Chippenham and East bourne 
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN 978 0 7486 2373 0 (hardback) 
ISBN 978 0 7486 2374 7 (paperback) 
The right ofReem Bassiouney 
to be identified as author of this work 
has been asserted in accordance with 
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 

Contents 
Acknowledgements 
viii 
List of charts, maps and tables 
x 
List of abbreviations 
xii 
Conventions used in this book 
xiv 
Introduction 
1 
1. Diglossia and dialect groups in the Arab world 
9 
1.1 Diglossia 
10 
1.1.1 Anoverviewofthestudyofdiglossia 
10 
1.1.2 Theories that explain diglossia in terms oflevels 
14 
1.1.3 The idea of Educated Spoken Arabic 
16 
1.2 Dialects/varieties in the Arab world 
18 
1.2. 1 The concept of prestige as different from that of standard 
18 
1.2.2 Groups of dialects in the Arab world 
19 
1.3 Conclusion 
26 
2. Code-switching 
28 
2.1 Introduction 
29 
2.2 Problem of terminology: code-switching and code-mixing 
30 
2.3 Code-switching and diglossia 
31 
2.4 The study of constraints on code-switching in relation to the 
Arab world 
31 
2.4. 1 Structural constraints on classic code-switching 
31 
2.4.2 Structural constraints on diglossic switching 
42 
2.5 Motivations for code-switching 
59 
2. 5. 1 Motivations and discourse functions of classic code-switching 
59 
2. 5.2 Motivations and discourse functions of diglossic switching 
71 
2.6 Conclusion 
85 

Vl 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
3. Language variation and change 
88 
3.1 Introduction 
89 
3.2 Language variation and change 
90 
3.2.1 Social class approach 
90 
3.2.2 Social networks approach 
92 
3.2.3 Third wave approach to variation studies: community of 
practice 
93 
3.3 Methodology 
94 
3.4 Sociolinguistic variables 
97 
3.4.1 Ethnicity 
97 
3.4.2 Religion 
103 
3. 4. 3 Urbanisation 
111 
3.4.4 Social class 
114 
3.4. 5 Other factors 
116 
3.5 Levelling 
117 
3.5.1 Diglossia and levelling 
119 
3.5.2 Levelling and language change 
120 
3.6 Conclusion 
122 
4. Arabic and gender 
128 
4.1 Introduction 
128 
4.2 Approaches to language and gender 
129 
4.2.1 The deficit theory and Lakoff's contribution to the study of 
language and gender 
130 
4.2.2 The dominance theory 
131 
4. 2. 3 The difference theory 
132 
4.2.4 Third wave approach to variation studies: community of 
practice theory 
133 
4.3 Women in the Arab world: framing and background information 133 
4. 3.1 Diversity in education 
134 
4. 3. 2 Diversity in urbanisation 
134 
4. 3. 3 Economic diversity 
135 
4. 3. 4 Diversity in traditions and religious practices 
135 
4.3.5 Honour and modesty 
137 
4. 4 Politeness in relation to gender 
138 
4.5 'Mister master': names, status and identity 
142 
4. 5.1 Names and why they are hidden 
148 
4.6 When a chicken crows like a cock: women narrators 
149 
4. 7 Language variation and change in relation to gender 
155 
4. 7.1 An overview of studies on language variation in relation to 
gender 
155 
4. 7.2 An overview of linguistic variation in relation to gender in 
the Arab world 
158 

CONTENTS 
Vll 
4.8 
Projection of identity in the speech of educated women and men 
in Egypt: evidence from talk shows- a case study 
162 
4.8.1 Description of data 
163 
4.8.2 Categorising the data 
163 
4.8.3 Detailed description ofthe data 
167 
4.8.4 Conclusion 
185 
4.9 
The symbolic use of language 
186 
4.10 Gender universals re-examined 
190 
4.11 Conclusion 
193 
5. Language policy and politics 
198 
5.1 
The power oflanguage 
199 
5.2 What is language policy? 
200 
5.2.1 Language ideologies 
201 
5.2.2 Language practices 
204 
5.2.3 Language planning 
205 
5.3 
Nation and state 
206 
5.3.1 The relation between nation and language 
206 
5.3.2 The Arab nation 
207 
5.4 Countries with SA as the official language 
210 
5.5 
French versus British patterns of colonisation and their relation 
to language policies 
210 
5.5.1 Frenchpatternsofcolonisation 
212 
5.5.2 British patterns of colonisation 
236 
5.6 
Language policies in other parts of the Arab world 
254 
5. 7 The role oflanguage academies in the Arab world 
256 
5.8 
SA, politics and the aching nation: a case study 
258 
5. 9 Linguistic rights and political rights 
263 
5.10 English and globalisation 
267 
5.11 Conclusion 
268 
General conclusion 
273 
Bibliography 
276 
Index 
299 

Acknowledgements 
This work is the product of years of investigation in both sociolinguistics in 
general and Arabic sociolinguistics in particular. Two semesters of research-
leave from the University of Utah and Georgetown University have helped 
me focus more on this book. I would like to thank both universities for this 
research period. 
Professor Jean Aitchison has been and will remain a constant friend and a 
great scholar. I thank her for drawing my attention to Edinburgh University 
Press. Dr Mahmoud Hassan will also remain a teacher, a friend and a model of 
integrity. Thank you also to Professor Y asir Suleiman for suggesting the title 
Arabic Sociolinguistics instead of Arabic and Society and for being an inspiring 
scholar. I would like also to thank the two anonymous reviewers who read my 
proposal and made useful recommendations. Thank you to the reader of the 
manuscript, whose suggestions were very useful and insightful, and whose 
knowledge of the field is exemplary. I am very lucky to have such a reader. 
Needless to say any oversight is my responsibility. 
I have benefited in one way or another from discussions and exchange of 
ideas, not necessarily about linguistics, with a lot of colleagues and friends. 
Among those, in alphabetical order, are: Ahmed Dallal, Marianna Di Paolo, 
Mushira Eid, Gail Grella, Oive Holes, Joe Metz, Carol Myers-Scotton, Karin 
Ryding, Keith Walters, Kees Versteegh and Malcah Yaeger-Dror. 
There is nothing as satisfying as having students who are interested 
and engaged in the topics one teaches. My students in many ways helped 
me clarify my ideas in fruitful and stimulating class discussions. I thank 
them. 
The team at Edinburgh University Press are a delight to work with. Nicola 
Ramsay and Sarah Edwards are both extremely dedicated and efficient. James 
Dale has been enthusiastic about the book, friendly, resourceful and efficient. 
Thanks also to Fiona Sewell my copy-editor for her diligent work. 
Thanks to all my family, whose support and belief in me were my main 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
IX 
incentive always, especially my parents Nour El-Hoda and Alnned Refaat. It 
becomes clearer over time that without moral support from people who care, 
the journey is aimless. 
This book is dedicated to Mark Muehlhaeusler. 

Charts, maps and tables 
Chart 3.1 Fixed independent variables 
Chart 3.2 Flexible independent variables 
Chart 4.1 Binary approaches to gender studies 
Chart 4.2 Construction approaches to gender studies 
Chart 5.1 The education system in Egypt 
Map 1.1 
The Arab world 
Table 1 
Pronounciation of the letters of the Arabic alphabet 
in Modem Standard Arabic 
123 
124 
195 
195 
244 
20 
xiv 
Table 2 
Transliteration scheme of the Library of Congress 
xvi 
Table 2.1 Relation between code choice and speaker's role 
84 
Table 4.1 Diversity in literacy rates 
135 
Table 4.2 Strong palatalisation in female speakers in Cairo, by 
social class 
160 
Table 4.3 Use of /q/ by male and female Cairene speakers, by 
social class 
161 
Table 4.4 Categorisation by use ofMSA variables 
164 
Table 4.5 Male speakers 
170 
Table 4.6 Female speakers 
170 
Table 4. 7 Number of interruptions and overlaps initiated by 
women and men 
185 
Table 4.8 Languages and varieties used in Morocco and their 
gender associations 
187 
Table 5.1 Countries with Arabic as the joint or sole official language 
211 
Table 5.2 Language of instruction by subject and educational cycle: 
Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia 
233 
Table 5.3 Weekly hours per language in primary and secondary 
education: Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia 
234 

CHARTS, MAPS AND TABLES 
Xl 
Table 5.4 Weekly hours/periods per language in primary and 
secondary education: Lebanon and Syria 
235 
Table 5.5 Weekly hours/periods per language in primary and 
secondary education: Egypt, Sudan and Palestinian 
Territories 
253 

Abbreviations 
LANGUAGES AND VARIETIES 
CA 
CB 
ECA 
ESA 
ICA 
LCA 
MB 
MSA 
SA 
SCA 
SYCA 
TCA 
Classical Arabic 
Christian Baghdadi Arabic 
Egyptian Colloquial Arabic 
Educated Spoken Arabic 
Iraqi Colloquial Arabic 
Lebanese Colloquial Arabic 
Muslim Baghdadi Arabic 
Modem Standard Arabic 
Standard Arabic 
Saudi Colloquial Arabic 
Syrian Colloquial Arabic 
Tunisian Colloquial Arabic 
OTHER ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS 
ace 
accusative 
adj 
adjective 
adv 
adverb 
asp 
aspect 
conj 
conjugation 
CP 
projection of a complementiser 
def 
definite 
dem 
demonstrative 
det 
definite article 
EL 
embeddedlanguage 
f 
feminine 

ABBREVIATIONS 
X Ill 
fut 
future tense 
gen 
genitive 
H 
high, highly valued 
1m perf 
imperfect tense 
indef 
indefinite 
ind 
indicative 
juss 
jussive 
L 
low, lowly valued 
loc adv 
locative adverb 
m 
masculine 
ML 
matrix language 
n 
noun 
neg 
negative marker 
nom 
nominative 
NP 
noun phrase 
par 
particle 
part 
participle 
pass 
passive 
perf 
perfect tense 
pi 
plural 
poss par possessive particle 
pp 
prepositional phrase 
pr 
pronoun 
prep 
preposition 
pres 
present tense 
rei 
relative pronoun 
sub 
subjunctive 
sg 
singular 
v 
verb 
voc 
vocative 
1 
first person 
2 
second person 
3 
third person 

Conventions used in this book 
TRANSCRIPTION 
This book uses the following symbols shown in Table 1 to transcribe examples 
and other linguistic data. The table illustrates the pronunciation of the letters 
of the Arabic alphabet in Modem Standard Arabic. 
Table 1 
Pronounciation ofthe letters of the Arabic alphabet in Modern 
Standard Arabic 
I 
Jlala: 
j 
{J 
j;. 
z 
0 
m 
y 
b 
.) 
r 
t 
r 
• 
h 
..:. 
t 
j 
z 
t 
g 
.J 
w I u I u: 
.!, 
() 
c.)" 
s 
...... f 
<i 
y I il i: 
(! 
j lg* 
..;. f 
~ q 
c: 
h 
(..)"' s 
~ k 
... 
-a 
t 
X 
u:.. 4 
J 
l 
.. 
J 
J 
d 
.J.. 
! 
~ 
m 
Note: 
*In Egypt, g is accepted as the MSA pronunciation of the letter I! in addition toj. 
This study uses a broad kind of transcription. However, it should be noted 
that the data used in this book is mainly spoken data. Thus there is consider-
able variation within that data. For instance, the same word could be pro-
nounced by the same speaker first with a long vowel and then with a short one 
in the same stretch of discourse. It is important for sociolinguists to capture 
the performance of speakers, rather than the idealised way in which words and 
phonemes are 'supposed' to be pronounced. Thus, the aim of transcribing the 
data is not to idealise but to render actual pronunciation. 
Within the examples, a forward slash denotes a short pause, while two 
slashes denote a long pause. 

CONVENTIONS USED IN THIS BOOK 
XV 
GLOSSES 
For the benefit of students and researchers who are not necessarily specialised 
in Arabic, or in all dialects of Arabic, most examples are glossed, except those 
in which the structure is not highlighted. 
In the glosses, whenever verb forms are fully analysed, the gloss follows the 
translation for verbs in the perfect (which has a suffix conjugation in Arabic), 
whereas the gloss precedes the translation for the imperfect (which has a prefix 
conjugation), while the mood marking of the verb - if present - is glossed in 
its natural location at the end of the verb unit. 
However, the glossing of examples is related to the context of the example, 
and is not always detailed. If the example is intended to demonstrate how indi-
viduals switch between two varieties, or languages, and if this demonstration 
concentrates on specific morpho-syntactic variables (such as demonstratives, 
negation, tense, aspect, mood marking and case marking) then the glossing is 
detailed as in the example below from Chapter 2: 
(76) ka:na 
1-gahd!!:. 
mustanfaran .fi 
muwa:gahati mufkila:ti 
To be-3msg-
det-effort-
exerted-ace m facing-gen 
problems-
perf 
nom 
gen 
l-ams 
det -yesterday 
'All efforts were exerted to face the problems of the past.' 
If, on the other hand, the example is used to demonstrate an argument which 
is more related to content, then the glossing is more basic, as in the following 
example from Chapter 4: 
(56) ya rabbi dafwa min ?alb fumru mafaqad if- 'Jamal wala il-?ima:n hi:k' 
Voc God/ prayer from heart never neg lost the hope nor the-faith in-you 
'Oh God. This is a prayer from a heart that never lost hope or belief in 
you.' 
Thus, the glossing is not consistent but changes with the change in the nature 
of the analysis of the data. However, all abbreviations and symbols are listed 
above. 
Now note this last example, from Chapter 4: 
(58) 
·~J UlS J .. ~ 
~~ [IJj ~ 
0 _,u1J:! '1 1.,ns •. w'~ .:~y.w ~J Jl.lll .~ ~ 
.w.. 
~4.1 ~~ '1 U.) ~ 
[Jj!i Uf. ~'"i ,.S.~ J1i J .. .:.tiJ...,...- J IJ~~~ ~ 
J.Ji .. ~ 
iJS.I r.l J .. ~~l 
laqad 
daxaltu 
ha:oa ad-da:r 
wa 
hiya mugarrad gudra:n/ 
Already enter-
this 
the-house and she only 
walls 
lsg-perf 

XVI 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
ka:nu: 
be-3m pi-
perf 
Ia: 
yuwa:fiqu:n fa! a zawa:g 
Jabi: kum minni: I 
neg 3mpl-agree 
on 
marriage father-
from-me 
yours 
wa 
kuntu 
wa~i:dat 
Jabawayyil 
and 
be-lsg-perf lonely 
parents-mine 
wa 
lam 'lakun folia: ~a/ fazaraftuhuma: 'lafga:ran wa xu¢ 
rawa:t 
and neg lsg-be peasant/ plant-lsg-they trees-ace and vegeta-
bles 
wa 
qa:la 
gaddukum 
li-Jabi: kum/ 
kay fa 
and 
say-3msg-perf grandfather-
to-father-
your-pi 
your-pi 
how 
tatazawwag 
bint 
'larmala 
Ia: 
fa: 'lila !aha: I 
2msg-marry 
girl 
widow 
neg 
family to-her 
'I had come to your grandfather's house when it was just walls. They 
did not approve my marriage to your father. I was an only child and I 
was no peasant then. Since then, I have planted trees and vegetables. 
Your grandfather then asked your father how he can marry a mere 
widow with no family.' 
This example is, in fact, from a novel written in Egypt about Egyptians. I tran-
scribe it as an Egyptian would read it; with the g rather than the j. 
PERSONAL NAMES, TITLES AND TOPONYMS 
This book employs the transliteration scheme of the Library of Congress to 
transcribe names and titles. This facilitates the search for these materials in 
Library catalogues, where the same conventions are used (Table 2). 
Table 2 
Transliteration scheme of the Library of Congress 
I 
a 
~ 
dh 
.J,;, 
~ 
() 
m 
y 
b 
.) 
r 
t 
' 
• 
h 
...::.. 
t 
j 
z 
t 
gh 
.J 
w/u 
.!:.. 
th 
!>' s 
...... 
f 
<i 
y/I 
[ 
j 
JJ. 
sh 
..:; 
q 
( 
~ 
(..)"' 
~ 
~ k 
• -ah 
t 
kh 
u"' 
<;I 
J 
I 
" 
, 
~ 
d 
.J.. 
~ 
f" 
m 
r.S 
-a 
Place-names, or proper names of prominent persons for whom there is a 
common equivalent in English, are excepted from this rule; hence, I refer to 

CONVENTIONS USED IN THIS BOOK 
XVU 
Jamal <Abd al-N~ir as 'Nasser', and to al-Q!.Ids as 'Jerusalem' Lesser histori-
cal figures, however, are given in full transliteration, in order to preserve the 
original form ofthename, e.g. Salamah Musa. 
CITING AT ONE REMOVE 
I don't give bibiliographic details of sources I mention as cited in another 
work, e.g. for Silverstein (1998) cited in Woolard (2004), I give source details 
for Woolard but not for Silverstein. 


Introduction 
The earth speaks Arabic. 
Egyptian catchphrase 
This Egyptian catchphrase has always intrigued me. Of course it shows the 
amount of pride Egyptians and perhaps all Arabs take in their language. But 
what I find fascinating is the word 'Arabic' What does' Arabic' here refer to? Is 
it the Standard Arabic used in newspapers? The Oassical Arabic ofthe Q!rr'an? 
The colloquial Arabic ofEgypt?1 Or is it the Gulf Arabic of Saudi Arabia? For 
the layperson, there is only one language called' Arabic' For the linguist, there 
are at least three different varieties of Arabic in each Arab country, and some 
linguists even claim that there are at least five different levels of Arabic in each 
country, not counting the different dialects of each country. 
This is the first problem that one encounters in analysing this catchphrase. The 
other problem that one encounters is why, if' Arabic' is the inherent language of 
the earth, are Arabs so keen on teaching their children foreign languages. Why is 
it that in North Africa French is still a crucial instrumental language? And why 
is it that at the time that all Arabs are defending their language as the main source 
of pride and identity they are also mastering English and French? The answers 
to all these questions are not clear cut. Language's symbolic nature has always 
been important in any community and/ or nation. Before proceeding with what 
this book discusses, I would like to refer to specific incidents that the reader may 
find interesting and that in general terms show the importance of Arabic socio-
linguistics and the relationship between language and society. 
Years ago, when I was still working in the UK, I was asked by an organisation 
to become a simultaneous translator in a forum that discusses security issues in 
Iraq. The forum had Iraqis from different sects and factions. There were Shiites, 
Sunnis, Kurds and Christians, as well as British politicians. I started translating 
from Arabic to English. The Iraqis would usually express themselves in Arabic, 

2 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
whether Standard, Iraqi or both, and I would simultaneously translate what 
had been said into English. While I was interpreting, a female politician started 
speaking in a language that I did not recognise. I was then at a loss, thinking that 
perhaps she was speaking a dialect oflraqi that I was not familiar with. I stopped 
translating and waited until she finished. Once she had finished, a colleague of 
hers started translating what she had said into Iraqi Arabic. After he did that, 
I then translated his Iraqi Arabic into English. It took me minutes to realise 
that she was a female Kurdish politician and her colleague who was translat-
ing for her was also Kurdish. During the break, which I was very glad to have, 
the female Kurdish politician approached me in a friendly manner and started 
addressing me in Iraqi Arabic. For an outsider it may seem impractical and a 
waste of time that she should speak Kurdish first to an audience that was mostly 
not Kurd, and then her colleague should have to translate, and then I have to 
translate. For a sociolinguist, this is perhaps expected. I asked her why she had 
not spoken' Arabic' since she was so fluent, and she said confidently that she was 
Kurdish and by speaking Kurdish, she was making a political statement. 
Her statement was indeed appealing, and it alludes to the power and sym-
bolic significance of language choice. The relations between language and 
politics, and language and identity, are worth investigating. This is exactly 
what I do in Chapters 2 and 5 of this book. 
Later, still while I was working in the UK, I came across a young 
Moroccan woman working in the Foreign Office. She was a second-generation 
Moroccan, and I was happy to discover that her parents were keen on teaching 
her' Arabic' and that she spoke' Arabic' fluently. And indeed she did- except 
that she spoke Moroccan Arabic. We decided to meet for lunch, and she 
started complaining to me in Moroccan Arabic about her Moroccan husband, 
who did not understand her. Apart from knowing the general topic of discus-
sion, I did not understand much of what she said, nor did she understand my 
Egyptian Colloquial Arabic (ECA), nor even my attempts at speaking Modem 
Standard Arabic (MSA). We basically, after five minutes, reached a deadlock. 
It was clear that we both had to switch to English to understand each other. 
It was also clear that the Moroccan woman was exposed to neither ECA nor 
MSA. She was fluent only in Moroccan Arabic. Had the woman been exposed 
to ECA or any other dialect and not specifically MSA via the media, TV and 
satellite channels, our communication would have been much easier. The 
dialects are sometimes mutually unintelligible, and while educated speakers 
have developed sets of strategies for communicating across dialect boundaries 
that include using resources from MSA, someone who knows only a dialect of 
spoken Arabic will be likely not to understand an educated speaker of another 
dialect or be able to make herself or himself understood, especially if one of the 
speakers comes from North Africa and the other does not. Speakers ofECA 
have an advantage, but only if their interlocutor has watched a lot of television 
in a country that broadcasts programmes from Egypt. Thus, after this incident 

INTRODUCTION 
3 
I could understand the fear that Arabs have of losing their grip on MSA and 
thus losing their concept of the nation. This will again be discussed in detail 
in Chapters 1 and 5, although there are many implications of this story that 
merit more investigation, especially the role of vernaculars in inter-dialectal 
communication and not just that ofMSA. 
A third event that left its impact on me was when I was invited to give 
a lecture at Cairo University about language choice and code-switching. 
Egypt, like any other country in the world, has more than one dialect spoken 
within it, the most prestigious one being the Cairene dialect for Egyptians. 
After I finished the lecture, a male student came to me to congratulate me on 
giving a very good lecture. He was speaking to me in perfect Cairene Arabic. 
We started a conversation, and he then told me that he comes from upper 
Egypt (al-$afi:d), which has a distinct dialect/dialects characteristically dif-
ferent from Cairene Arabic phonologically, semantically and even morpho-
syntactically. I then asked him how he spoke Cairene Arabic so fluently, and 
he seemed a bit embarrassed and said to me 'I speak Cairene Arabic to you. 
I can never speak it to my mother. Ifl speak Cairene Arabic to my mother, 
she will call me a sissy and possibly kill me!' Knowing how powerful upper-
Egyptian women are reputed to be, I feared he might be right. Note that 
speakers of non-standard language varieties are expected or even compelled to 
master prestige varieties. In Egypt, for a person from upper Egypt this would 
be Cairene. However, the survival of an upper-Egyptian dialect amidst all the 
pressure from a highly centralised Egypt for all Egyptians to speak Cairene 
Arabic is indeed worth investigating. The survival of a dialect which may be 
less prestigious but which carries its own 'covert prestige' (cf. Trudgill1974) 
will be discussed in detail in Chapter 3 of this book. 
I recall that throughout my childhood in Egypt I was fascinated and con-
fused by the way women were addressed. We were living in the second floor of 
an eight-storey building. Our first-floor female neighbour, who was a middle-
aged woman with a husband and four children, was always addressed by the 
caretaker as '~agga laila', 'Laila who had made the pilgrimage', thus her first 
name was always used with the title '~agga' Our third-floor neighbour, on the 
other hand, was always referred to as 'fummi sa:mi~ ', 'mother of sa:miJ:t', and 
never by her first name. The reason why one neighbour maintained her first 
name although she still had sons and another lost it is still beyond me. But it 
also shows that the linguistic situation of the Arab world, especially that per-
taining to women, is complicated, as will be made clear in Chapter 4. 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
My book is called Arabic Sociolinguistics. Therefore, in this section I will explain 
what sociolinguistics is and why Arabic is important. I will start with the latter. 

4 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Arabic is the sole or joint official or national language of twenty-three 
countries, ranging from Morocco in the north to Sudan in the south and 
from Mauritania to Yemen. Native speakers of Arabic total about 300 million. 
Arabic has always been important to western linguists. However, Arabic vari-
ationist sociolinguistics flourished after Ferguson's article about diglossia in 
1959. In this article, he drew the distinction between the standard language 
and the different vernaculars of each Arab country. In subsequent years, 
Arabic variationist sociolinguistics research has tended to concentrate on 
relating variation in language use to demographic factors like education, age 
and sex/gender, and more recently on issues related to language and identity 
and its ethnic and nationalistic manifestations (cf. Suleiman 2003: 1).2 
In addition, Holes (2004: 8) states that 'the earliest definite textual evidence 
we have for the existence of a distinct language identifiable as Arabic is an 
inscription on a tombstone found at Nemara in the Syrian desert. This has 
been dated to AD 328- recent by the standards of Semitic languages.' He also 
suggests that a spoken language may have existed before that. 
In the next paragraphs I will define the term sociolinguistics and the main 
themes that sociolinguists are concerned with as well as the tasks of sociolin-
guists. I will briefly touch on the problems of terminology in the field. After 
that I will highlight the contents of this book as well as the limitations of this 
work. The last section is devoted to the organisation of the book. 
There are two kinds of linguistic analysts: those concerned with universals 
and what languages have in common, and those who look for differences 
between individuals in relation to a community of speakers. The former are 
theoretical linguists and the latter are sociolinguists (Shuy 2003). According to 
Gumperz and Hymes (1972) theoretical linguists analyse linguistic competence 
while sociolinguists analyse communicative competence. Communicative 
competence is defined by Gumperz as the ability of the individual to 'select 
from the totality of grammatically correct expressions available to him, forms 
which appropriately reflect the social norms governing behaviour in specific 
encounters' (1972: 205). 
Sociolinguistics, according to Crystal (1987: 412), is 'the study of the inter-
action between language and the structures and functioning of society' The 
field of sociolinguistics has developed vastly within the last fifty years (cf. 
Paulston and Tucker 2003). Now the field 'examines in depth more minute 
aspects oflanguage in social context' (Shuy 2003: 5). 
According to Hymes (2003: 30), 'diversity of speech has been singled out 
as the hallmark of sociolinguistics' Sociolinguistics entails relations other 
than social and grammatical structures that can be studied qualitatively. 
Sociolinguists all agree that no normal person and no normal community is 
limited to a single way of speaking, nor to unchanging monotony that would 
preclude indication of respect, insolence, mock seriousness, humour, role 
distance etc. 

INTRODUCTION 
5 
In studying language in society and the ways in which linguistic resources 
and access to them are unequally distributed, sociolinguists give evidence of 
how patterns of linguistic variation reflect and contrast social differences. In 
studying responses language users have to instances of language use, they 
demonstrate the reality and power of affective, cognitive and behavioural 
language attitudes. In analysing how language users create links between 
language varieties and users, institutions, or contexts, they uncover language 
ideologies that create social realities. These are only some of the things that 
sociolinguists are concerned with. The list is indeed very long. 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS AS A 
FIELD OF STUDY 
Sociolinguistics is in fact a recent field of study, as was said earlier. This may 
be because, as Labov puts it, it is a field that depended to a large extent on the 
development of technology. According to Labov nothing could be achieved 
until the field developed a clearer way of presenting phonological structure, 
which required the development of tape recorders, spectrograms, sampling 
procedures, and computers to process large quantities of data (in Shuy 2003: 
5). However, such a claim is only true for variationist sociolinguists, not 
the many who have studied language policy, code-switching and language 
ideology. The interest in the differences in ways people speak is very old, 
and Arabic linguistics as a field may be traced back to KhaiU ibn Al)rnad (d. 
between 776 and 791), if not before (cf. Bohas et al. 2006). Khalil ibn Al)rnad 
was an Arab philologist who compiled the first Arabic dictionary and is cred-
ited with the formulation of the rules of Arabic prosody. 
In fact, at the beginning of the twentieth century, there was a great inter-
est in dialectology (see Chapter 5). Linguists of the colonising powers started 
becoming interested in the dialects and the linguistic situations of the colo-
nised countries. Because of the existence of colonies for countries like France, 
the UK, the Netherlands and Portugal, linguists started describing multilin-
gual situations, language contact and creolisation (cf. Whiteley 1969; Houis 
1971). However, until1961, the term 'sociolinguistics' was not listed in the 
Webster new international dictionary (Shuy 2003). 
Issues of terminology are not entirely resolved even now (cf. Shuy 2003). 
How do we define a community? What is a social class? What is the difference 
between code-switching and borrowing? Or even questions related purely to 
Arabic, like: what is educated spoken Arabic? Is there a pure Standard Arabic? 
These are not easy questions to answer. 
To give an example of such problems of defining terms, the variationist 
linguist Labov objected to the term 'sociolinguistics' as early as 1965. Until 
1965 there was no name agreed upon to define the field; should it be called 

6 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
linguistics, since this is indeed a way of examining language? Or should 
it be called language and culture, sociology of language, or language and 
behaviour?3 
In spite of the imprecision of sociolinguistic terms in genera~ as a field of 
study it has yielded insights into the way people use language that are unprec-
edented in their significance, as will become clear in this book. It is sociolin-
guistics that has helped us understand each other more as well as acknowledge 
differences and similarities between us and others - whoever this 'us' is and 
'others' are. 
AIMS OF THE BOOK 
This book provides an up-to-date account of major themes in Arabic socio-
linguistics. It discusses trends in research on diglossia, code-switching, 
gendered discourse, language variation and change, and language policies in 
relation to Arabic. In doing so, it introduces and evaluates the various theo-
retical approaches, and illustrates the usefulness and the limitations of these 
approaches with empirical data. Note that a significant number of the theo-
retical approaches introduced are based on or inspired by western, especially 
Anglo-American work, on sociolinguistics. The reasons for this will be dis-
cussed in detail in the next section. The book aims to show how sociolinguistic 
theories can be applied to Arabic, and conversely, what the study of Arabic can 
contribute to our understanding of the function oflanguage in society. 
This book addresses both students and researchers of Arabic and linguis-
tics. The book will not require any knowledge of Arabic, nor will it focus nar-
rowly on a single Arabic dialect, or a single group of Arabic dialects; instead, 
it summarises the present state of research on Arabic in its various forms. 
The book, also, does not require knowledge of sociolinguistics or linguistics, 
though knowledge of both is of course an asset in reading this work. 
There are inevitably crucial topics that cannot be covered in this book but 
that definitely need to be addressed. Thus, pidginisation and creolisation, 
though mentioned in passing in this book, deserve a book by themselves, 
although studies in the topic are still developing (cf. Versteegh 2001). Also, 
with the large number of Arab immigrants in different parts of the Arab 
world, one has to acknowledge the unique and interesting status of Arabic in 
the diaspora (cf. Rouchdy 1992). Finally, Arabic as a minority language in dif-
ferent parts of the world is again a topic of interest and has been discussed by 
Versteegh (2001) and Owens (2007). 
One problem that I encountered in writing this book is dividing it into 
chapters. This has sometimes been done forcibly, since language variation and 
change are related to gender, and gender is related to politics, while politics 
is related to diglossia, and diglossia is related to code-switching. Since there 

INTRODUCTION 
7 
has to be a division somewhere, I have had to divide the book into different 
chapters. 
ORGANISATION OF THE BOOK 
The framing of the book is crucial though not symbolic in itself. Each chapter 
starts with a discussion of classic work conducted on the west and then moves 
on to the Arab world. This is not because I believe that work conducted on the 
Arab world is subordinate to work conducted on the west but because of other 
reasons. First, a great number of works published in the western world about 
the Arab world adopt the classic theories that I discuss, even though these 
theories were applied first in the west. This is not wrong in any way as long as 
theories are modified and adjusted to explain the situation in the Arab world. 
Second, the aim of the book is to help scholars and students to begin thinking 
about how and why matters oflanguage in the Arab world are not always like 
matters oflanguage in the west. This cannot be done unless I shed light on the 
essential theories of western linguists. Lastly, as a matter of practicality, since 
the book does not assume prior knowledge oflinguistics or Arabic, as was said 
earlier, although knowledge of both is an asset, it is necessary to familiarise 
the reader with the groundbreaking research in the west before discussing the 
Arab world. 
The book is divided into five chapters. The first chapter presents a bird's-
eye view of the linguistic status quo of the Arab world. This is achieved by 
introducing the reader first to the diglossic situation in the Arab world and its 
implications, then to the different approaches to the grouping of dialects in 
the Arab world. 
The second chapter examines diglossic switching and code-switching as 
a single phenomenon. In this chapter I give an overview of theories of code-
switching that concentrate on assigning structural constraints on switch-
ing, thus answering the question of how switching occurs, and theories that 
examine the motivations for switching - why people switch. The chapter 
refers to studies done by a number of linguists as well as two studies con-
ducted by myself. 
In Chapter 3, I highlight three crucial theories in examining variation: the 
social class theory, the social networks theory and the third wave approach to 
variation studies. I first shed light on methods used in quantitative variation 
research and problems related to them. Then I concentrate on specific vari-
ables that trigger language variation and change, and finally I discuss diglossia 
and levelling. 
In Chapter 4, I concentrate on gender, starting with different theories that 
examine the relation between gender and language, as well as gender uni-
versals and postulates about gender in general and gender in the Arab world 

8 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
in particular. I also examine the speech of educated women in Egypt in this 
chapter and how they at times challenge the gender universals. 
The final chapter deals with the relation between language policies and poli-
tics in the Arab world. I examine some case studies and the political/historical 
factors that influence language policy, as well as the relation between language 
policies and language ideologies. The status of Arabic and foreign languages in 
the education system of countries in the Arab world is highlighted. Linguistic 
rights are also discussed. 
What I try to do throughout is to provide empirical data from my own 
research, in addition to data from other studies, to help explain the phenom-
ena discussed. Thus there is in most chapters a section on data analysis. 
When discussing Arabic sociolinguistics, Owens mentions that studies may 
still lack the feel of a coherent entity, and his explanation for this is as follows: 
'Arabic covers sociolinguistic landscapes whose only coherency at times 
appears to be the almost accidental fact that the language used in each part 
happens to be Arabic' (Owens 2001: 463). 
Indeed, writing a book about Arabic sociolinguistics is a challenging task. 
Arabic sociolinguistics has proven to be a vast field and one that has not yet 
been completely discovered. It is therefore unavoidable that there has to be a 
selection and focus on particular issues, topics and studies and not others. 
NOTES 
1. The phrase is spoken in colloquial Egyptian Arabic. Still, it is not clear Egyptians mean col-
loquial Egyptian by 'Arabic'. 
2. It is worth mentioning that there is still a large amount of work done on issues oflanguage 
policy and planning, descriptions of linguistic situations in various countries, Arabisation, 
debates about the proper role of second or foreign languages, and corpus planning, especially 
technical vocabulary. These issues will be discussed in Chapter 5. 
3. It is noteworthy, however, that Labov's objections to the term at the time were of a differ-
ent nature. He did not want a hyphenated label for what he did; in other words, he did not 
want to be rnarginalised by a label in just the way that sociolinguists has been for some time, 
especially in the USA. 

CHAPTER I 
Diglossia and dialect groups in the 
Arab world 
Mustafa is still Mustafa. He did not change. He still has two tongues in 
his mouth, two hearts in his chest. A tongue that speaks for him and a 
tongue that speaks against him. A heart that speaks for him and a heart 
that speaks against him. When he speaks sincerely his words are in 
colloquial. A colloquial that was the only variety he knew and used in 
narration before. But once he starts speaking what they dictate to him, 
then he speaks in the language of books, and his words become comic! 
Muhra, Mustafa's ex-wife, in Qjsmat al-ghurama, ('The debtor's share') 
by Yiisuf al-Q!lld (2004) 
This extract from the novel Qjsmat al-ghurama, ('The debtor's share') reflects 
the tension and ambivalent feelings Egyptians have towards both Modern 
Standard Arabic (MSA) and Egyptian Colloquial Arabic (ECA). Perhaps it 
also reflects the tension that exists in all Arab countries, where people speak 
one language variety at home and learn a different one in school, write in 
one language and express their feelings in another, memorise poetry in one 
language and sing songs in another. Whether doing this is practical or not is a 
moot point. However, as a linguist, one knows that most linguists would agree 
that whenever one has more than one language or variety at one's disposal, it 
is indeed a good thing. Muhra, Mustafa's ex-wife, summarises the dilemma of 
the Arab world neatly when she says that Mustafa still has 'two tongues in his 
mouth, two hearts in his chest' What this means exactly is that Mustafa, like 
all Egyptians and all Arabs, lives in a diglossic community. Diglossia is what I 
would like to discuss in the first part of this chapter. 
This chapter is divided into two parts: the first part deals with issues relat-
ing to the vertical (diglossia) and the second deals with issues related to the 
horizontal (national varieties/groups of dialects). However, note that the 
focus in this chapter is the linguistic facts. I do not examine, in this chapter, 

IO 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
the complex ways language attitude and exposure to other varieties might 
influence inter-dialectal comprehensibility or inter-dialectal conversation. 1 In 
section 1.1 I discuss the concept of diglossia as analysed by Charles Ferguson 
and others and the developments that have occurred in the evolution of this 
concept until the present day. I will also differentiate between MSA and 
Oassical Arabic (CA) (sections 1.1.1-1.1.3). In section 1.2 I discuss the 
growing realisation by a number oflinguists that the 'standard' variety is not 
necessarily the same as the 'prestige' variety in Arab speech communities. 
Finally I give concrete examples of different dialects in the Arab world and 
compare and contrast them in real contexts (sections 1.2.1-1.2.2). 
1.1 DIGLOSSIA 
1.1.1 An overview of the study of diglossia 
The twenty-three countries in which Arabic is an official language have been 
described as diglossic speech communities, i.e. communities in which two 
varieties of a single language exist side by side. The official language is usually 
MSA 2 but there is usually at least one prestigious vernacular that is spoken in 
each country. 
1. 1. 1.1 Ferguson's contribution to the study of diglossia 
The following is Ferguson's definition of diglossia: 
Diglossia is a relatively stable language situation in which, in addition 
to the primary dialects of the language (which may include a standard 
or regional standards), there is a very divergent, highly codified (often 
grammatically more complex) superposed variety, the vehicle of a large 
and respected body of written literature, either of an earlier period 
or in another speech community, which is learned largely by formal 
education and is used for most written and formal spoken purposes but 
is not used by any sector of the community for ordinary conversation. 
(Ferguson 1972 [1959]: 345) 
According to Ferguson, diglossia is a different situation from one where there 
are merely different dialects within a speech community. In diglossic com-
munities there is a highly valued H (high) variety which is learned in schools 
and is not used for ordinary conversations. That is to say, no one speaks the H 
variety natively. The L (low) variety is the one used in conversations. 3 Most 
importantly, Ferguson claims that the crucial test for diglossia is that the 
language varieties in question must be functionally allocated within the com-
munity concerned (Fasold 1995: 35). Ferguson stresses that both Hand L have 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
I I 
to be in 'complimentary distribution functionally' (Boussofara-Omar 2006a: 
630). According to him, diglossia is a relatively stable phenomenon. Ferguson 
implies that if a society is changing and diglossia is beginning to fade away this 
will have specific signs: mixing between the forms of H and L, and thus an 
overlap between the functions ofH and L (Ferguson 1972 [1959]: 356).4 
Ferguson proceeds by exemplifying situations in which only H is appropri-
ate and others in which only Lis appropriate (1972 [1959]: 236). According to 
him, the following are situations in which H is appropriate: 
1. Sermon in church or mosque 
2. Speech in parliament, political speech 
3. Personalletters 
4. University lecture 
5. News broadcast 
6. Newspaper editorial, news story, caption on picture 
7. Poetry 
He also gives situations in which L is the 'only' variety used: 
1. Instructions to servants, waiters, workmen and clerks 
2. Conversation with family, friends and colleagues 
3. Radio soap opera 
4. Caption on political cartoon 
5. Folk literature 
Ferguson's definition has been criticised and discussed extensively even by 
Ferguson himself (Ferguson 1996 [1991]), although it is only fair at that stage 
to note that he was describing a general linguistic situation; he did not set out 
to describe Arabic diglossia as language standardisation. He was describing 
diglossia cross-linguistically as it relates to issues of standardisation. He, as he 
acknowledged, was giving an idealised picture of the situation. Q!Iestions that 
arose from his definition of diglossia are summarised below. 
How far apart or how close together should the Hand L be for a language 
situation to be called 'diglossia'? This question was posed by Fasold (1995: 
50ff.), who claimed that there are no absolute measures that could specify the 
distance between HandLin a diglossic community. Britto (1986: 10-12, 321) 
considered the same question and argued that Hand L must be 'optimally' 
distant, as in Arabic, but not 'super-optimally', as with Spanish and Guarani, 
or 'sub-optimally', as with formal-informal styles in English.5 
Is there only one H? Ferguson spoke only about a distinction between H 
and L, without distinguishing the two different kinds of H such as exist in 
the Arab world, where there is a distinction between CA and MSA, although 
one has to note that this distinction is a western invention and does not cor-
respond to any Arabic term, as will be clear in this chapter. However, CA is 

12 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
the religious language of the Q!Ir'an and is rarely used except in reciting the 
Q!Ir'an, or quoting older classical texts, while MSA could be used in a public 
speech, for example. Ryding, in her book A reference grammar of Modern 
Standard Arabic (2005:7), mentions that both MSA and CA are referred to as 
'al-luga al-fu~ha:' (lit. 'the language of the eloquent'), 'the standard language' 
This, in a sense, creates a shared past and present. She argues that there are 
few structural inconsistencies between MSA and CA. The main differences 
between both are stylistic and lexical rather than grammatical. However, she 
posits that the journalistic style of MSA has more flexible word order, coinage 
of neologisms and loan translations from western languages. For example, 
journalistic-style MSA uses the i¢a:fa construction (genitive 'of construc-
tion') to create neologisms for compound words or complex concepts. Bateson 
(1967: 84) posits that there are three kinds of changes between MSA and CA. 
MSA is characterised by having a simpler syntactic structure, by being differ-
ent in lexicon because of modem technology, and by being stylistically differ-
ent due to translations from other languages and the influence ofbilingualism. 
However, these differences were not taken into account by Ferguson. 
What happens in countries where more than one language is in everyday use, 
such as in Tunisia, where some people are also fluent in French? In such coun-
tries the term 'diglossia' is too narrow for the type of situation which exists. 
How much switching can there be between Hand L? Ferguson considered only 
to a very limited extent the fact that there can be switching between both varieties 
(Hand L) in the same stretch of discourse. Again, this is because he did not set 
out to reflect the realistic situation in Arab countries but rather to give an idealised 
picture of diglossia. A number of more recent studies have examined switching 
between H and L in Arabic, some of which will be mentioned in Chapter 2. 
Furthermore, Ferguson did not really discuss the sociolinguistic significance 
of the competing varieties. He did not propose that social factors may have a 
part to play in the negotiation of choice of variety in a diglossic community in 
specific sets of circumstances. This may be because, as he said himself, social 
factors of this kind were not in fashion at the time the paper was written. They 
were not considered 'true science' (1996 [1991]: 60). Instead, Ferguson placed 
much emphasis on the 'external situation' in determining language choice. 
He claimed that in certain set situations H is appropriate, while in others 
L is appropriate, without taking account of the possible significance of the 
individual in negotiating (or deliberately subverting) 'socially agreed' patterns 
of language choice (and ultimately changing them). Having reviewed these 
recent reformulations and revisions to his general theory, let us now briefly 
review the contributions Ferguson made to the study of Arabic diglossia. 
Ferguson drew the attention of linguists to the existence of two language 
varieties in the Arab world, and the fact that people have different attitudes 
towards these two varieties, although the term 'diglossie' had been used earlier 
by the French dialectologist William Mar~ais with specific reference to Arabic 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
13 
(Fasold 1995: 34). The following is an anecdote narrated by Ferguson (1990: 
44). Ferguson says that he was once discussing with some Arab scholars a way 
of teaching foreigners Arabic- whether it is more useful to teach them MSA 
or one of the vernaculars used in the Arab world, like ECA, for example. One 
distinguished scholar said immediately that there was no need to teach them 
any kind of Arabic except MSA. The professor then claimed that he himself 
only used 'the correct kind of Arabic' (meaning MSA). Then the phone rang, 
and the distinguished scholar went to answer the phone. Ferguson said that he 
heard the man saying 'flonki' 6(= 'How are you (f sg)?' in Baghdadi and many 
eastern Arabic dialects). When the man came back, Ferguson could not help 
commenting 'You said you never use a kind of dialect Arabic.' 'No, I never do', 
said the man. 'You know, there was a phone call a couple of minutes ago and I 
heard you say the wordflonki.' The man nodded. 'Is that not a kind of dialect?' 
Ferguson asked. The scholar's reply was, 'Oh, I was just speaking to my wife.' 
This story neatly highlights the discrepancy between people's perceptions 
of their language use and their actual language use. Note also that the professor 
thought it acceptable to use dialect with his wife (a person who is close and famil-
iar) and that this fact did not invalidate his statement that he 'never used dialect' 
This example shows one role played by the vernacular in the Arab world, which 
is that of signalling a relationship of intimacy. Gtmlperz ( 1976) discusses the 
role of code-switching as a means of creating solidarity (see Chapter 2). 7 
Despite all the subsequent criticism of Ferguson's theory, his proposal that 
there are two poles, an H and an L, is still valid, although they both formally 
and functionally overlap, perhaps more than Ferguson suspected or was ready 
to admit. 8 Mejdell (1999: 226) posits that the H-L division still has validity. 
After Ferguson's article, linguists tried to refine his concept by proposing 
intermediate levels, but still these intermediate levels cannot be understood 
unless one presupposes the existence of two 'poles', Hand L. It may be that 
'pure H' or 'pure L' does not occur very often, and that there are usually 
elements of both varieties in any stretch of normal speech, but still one has 
to consider a hypothetical pure H or Lin order to presuppose that there are 
elements that occur from one or the other in a stretch of discourse. Ferguson 
himself did, in fact, recognise the existence of intermediate levels, but insisted 
that they cannot be described except within the framework ofH and L: 
I recognised the existence of intermediate forms and mentioned them 
briefly in the article, but I felt then and still feel that in the diglossia 
case the analyst finds two poles in terms of which the intermediate 
varieties can be described, there is no third pole. ( 1996 [ 1991]: 59) 
Ferguson certainly spurred linguists to examine diglossia, but he did not 
provide any definite answers to a great number of questions. As Walters (2003: 
103) puts it, 

14 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Our nnderstanding of these phenomena [i.e. sociolinguistic 
phenomenona] would be far less nuanced than it is today had Fergie not 
taught us to look at Arabic as he did, looking past the norm and deviation 
paradigm that too often still characterises discussions of Arabic and 
all diglossic languages. In so doing, he encouraged us to examine with 
care specific varieties and specific sets oflinguistic practices as ways of 
better nnderstanding the sociolinguistic processes fonnd across speech 
commnnities that at first glance might appear quite disparate. 
Note also that Fishman (1967) in line with Ferguson identified specific 
domains to define diglossia. For example, speech events can fallnnder differ-
ent domains, like a baseball conversation and an electrical engineering lecture. 
The major domains he identifies are family, friendship, religion, education 
and employment (see also Myers-Scotton 2006). He also claims that these 
speech events are speech-commnnity specific. 
Let us now examine models of diglossia which sought to refine and improve 
on Ferguson's ideas. 
1.1.2 Theories that explain diglossia in terms oflevels 
After Ferguson's 1959 article on diglossia, Blanc (1960), Badawi (1973) and 
Meiseles ( 1980) thought proposing intermediate levels between H and L would 
give a more accurate description of the situation in the Arab world. Thus, they 
recognised that people shift betweenH and L, especially when speaking, but often 
they do not shift the whole way, resulting in levels which are neither fully H nor 
fully L. Blanc, basing his analysis on a tape recording of cross-dialectal conversa-
tion, distinguished between five varieties ( 1960: 85): classica~ modified classical, 
semi-literary or elevated colloquial, koineised colloquia~ and plain colloquial. 
Meiseles ( 1980) distinguished between four varieties: literary Arabic or stand-
ard Arabic, oral literary Arabic, educated spoken Arabic and plain vernacular. 
Badawi, on the other hand, proposed that there are five different varieties:f~ba: 
al-tura:B 'heritage classical' ,fu~ba: al-f a~r 'contemporary classical', f a:mmiyyat 
al-mu8aqqafi:n 'colloquial of the cultured', fa:mmiyyat al-mutanawwiri:n 'col-
loquial of the basically educated', and fa:mmiyyat al-Jummiyi:n 'colloquial of 
the illiterates' Badawi based his study on the output of the Egyptian media. 
His classification is both more crucial and more problematic than the other two, 
because his labelling of varieties implies both a stylistic and a social hierarchy. 
Badawi tries to explain which levels of the spoken language are typical of 
which types of speaker and which type of situation in Egypt. 
1. fu~ba: al-tura:B 'heritage classical': This is the CA of the Arab literary 
heritage and the Qur'an. It represents the prescriptive Arabic grammar 
as taught at traditional institutions like Al-Azhar University (Egypt's 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
15 
oldest university). It is a written language, but is heard in its spoken 
form on religious programmes on TV 
2. fu~~a: al-fa~r 'contemporary classical': This is what I, as well as 
western-trained linguists, call MSA, which is a modification and 
simplification of CA created for the need of the modern age. It is 
used in news bulletins, for example. It is usually read aloud from 
texts and, if the speaker is highly skilled, may also be used in the 
commentary to the text. 
3. fa:mmiyyat al-mu8aqqafi:n 'colloquial of the cultured': This is a col-
loquial influenced by MSA which may be used for serious discussion, 
but is not normally written. It is used by 'cultured' (i.e. well-educated) 
people on television. It is also often the language used in formal teach-
ing in Egyptian universities, and it is becoming the means of educating 
students and discussing with them different topics. In other words, it 
is becoming the medium of instruction in Egyptian classrooms. 
4. fa:mmiyyat al-mutanawwiri:n 'colloquial of the basically educated': 
This is the everyday language that people educated to a basic level 
(but not university level) use with family and friends, and may occur 
on TV in a discussion of sport or fashion and other 'non-intellectual' 
topics. Cultured and well-educated people also use it when talking in 
a relaxed fashion about non-serious topics. 
5. fa:mmiyyat al-?ummiyi:n 'colloquial of the illiterates': This is the 
form of colloquial which is characterised by the absence of influence 
from MSA. On TV, it occurs only in the mouths of certain charac-
ters in soap operas, children's shows and comic situations.9 
Badawi explains that almost everyone has more than one of these levels 
at their disposal; people often shift between them in the same conversation 
(1973: 93). Illiterates and the less well-educated, however, may find it difficult 
to shift as much, since they control only one or two levels with confidence. 
It is noteworthy that, when he defines different levels, Badawi uses sociolin-
guistic factors like education. Using education as a criterion can be considered 
a problem in his description. It is not clear whether the colloquial levels are 
built on socioeconomic variables like education or are just 'stylistic registers', 
or whether they can be both. It is worth mentioning here that Blanc (1960: 
151) acknowledges the existence of 'gradual transitions between the various 
registers', while Badawi (1973: 95) says that these five levels do not have clear, 
permanent boundaries between one another, but rather fade into one another 
like the colours in a rainbow. Therefore instead of five, one could theoretically 
propose an infinite number of levels. Even in the three levels which Badawi 
defines as 'colloquial', there are no variants which are exclusively allocated 
to any one of the three. It is always a question of'more or less', with no clear 
dividing lines between the levels. 

16 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Before I conclude this section, I will shed light on a different concept from 
that oflevels, but one which is related still to diglossia, as well as the different 
dialects/varieties in the Arab world: the concept of Educated Spoken Arabic 
(ESA). 
1.1.3 The idea of Educated Spoken Arabic 
Mitchell claims that 'vernacular Arabic (meaning dialectal/ colloquial Arabic) 
is never plain or unmixed but constantly subject to the influences of modem 
times' (1986: 9). According to him, ESA 10 is not a separate variety but is 
'created' and 'maintained' by the interaction between the written language 
and the vemacular. 11 He gives the following reasons for the existence of 
ESA. First, in the modem world, educated men and women tend to con-
verse on topics beyond the scope of a given regional vernacular. Second, 
educated people want to 'share and commune' with other Arabs of similar 
educational background. They want to promote forms that are required to 
meet the pressures of modernisation, urbanisation, industrialisation, mass 
education and internationalism (1986: 8). Therefore, Arabs need a shared 
means of communication, and this is inevitably influenced by what they 
all have in common: a knowledge of the structure and vocabulary of MSA. 
This does not mean, however, that they switch to 'oral MSA', but that they 
switch to a form of language which contains shared vernacular elements as 
well as MSA. I want to clarify that understanding regional/national dialects 
is tied to daily life to a great extent, and not academic/professional life; 
hence, speakers may not have ready vocabulary for discussing technological, 
learned subjects. 
The idea of a shared ESA is important because it is concerned not just with 
the way people from the immediate community communicate, but with the 
way different Arabs from different communities communicate across com-
munity boundaries. Compare the following similar definition of ESA (from 
Meiseles): 
It is the current informal language used among educated Arabs, 
fulfilling in general their daily language needs. It is also the main means 
of Arabic interdialectal communication, one of its most important 
trends being its intercomprehensibility among speakers of different 
vernaculars, arising mainly from the speaker's incentive to share a 
common language with his interlocutor or interlocutors. (1980: 126) 
Mitchell also tries to describe some general structural rules of this shared ESA. 
For example, in MSA dual number is marked throughout: in demonstratives, 
verbs, nouns, pronouns and adjectives. In ESA, according to Mitchell, it is 
marked only in the nouns and adjectives. Negation in MSA is expressed by the 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
17 
particles lam, ian, Ia: and ma:. These are replaced in ESA by other forms used 
in colloquial varieties with some differences between the regions. 
The idea of ESA acknowledges the possibility of switching between the 
vernacular and MSA without assuming anything about intermediate styles. 
In that sense it is more inclusive and promising as a heuristic device than the 
concept oflevels. Moreover, ESA tries to account for how Arabs from differ-
ent countries manage to communicate together, rather than focusing on Arabs 
in a specific country. The idea that different Arabs from different communi-
ties modify their language when they speak together is worthy of attention 
since it is presumably a rule-governed, not a random, process. 
However, the idea of ESA poses a number of questions about the nature 
of the synchronic relationship between MSA and the different vernaculars. 
First, the term 'educated Arabs' seems vague. Is an educated Arab a merely 
fimctionally literate one or a 'cultured' one? Second, if it is still difficult for 
linguists to agree about the different levels used even in a single community, 
how much more difficult could it be to try to describe what the rules are for 
inter-communal communication? In my view, one has to try to describe the 
situation in specific countries first. Merely claiming that ESA exists does not 
help in applying the concept to the language situation in a particular country, 
since Mitchell did not manage to give a comprehensive description of how 
ESA works: that is, of exactly what people do when they switch between MSA 
and their vernacular. Parkinson (2003) also argued that although ESA is sup-
posed to be rule-governed, there are no clear rules that describe it. He claims 
that "Educated spoken Arabic may not actually be anything" (2003: 29). The 
following is Nielsen's criticism ofESA: 
ESA is a mixed variety which is very badly codified 
apart from 
very few studies (for example Eid 1982), no research has established 
what kind of rules actually govern this mixing, nor do we know 
whether or not such rules are subject to generalisations. This is not 
to say that native speakers do not know how to mix; but we have no 
reliable information establishing that the mixing is not a phenomenon 
heavily influenced, say, by personal or regional factors. (1996: 225) 
Part of the issue with ESA is the descriptive versus prescriptive notion of 
'rule' One has to be able to describe the linguistic situation thoroughly and 
meticulously before starting to specify a set of practices in a specific com-
munity or communities. One also needs to know whether there are discourse 
fimctions of ESA which govern its occurrence, and whether these functions 
differ from country to country. 
In the next sections I concentrate on national varieties. However, before I 
list the groups of dialects or varieties in the Arab world, I want to clarifY the 
distinction between a prestige variety and a standard one. 

18 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
I. 2 D I ALE C T s/v A R IE TIES IN T HE A R A B W 0 R L D 
1.2.1 The concept of prestige as different from that of standard 
There has been a growing realisation since the mid-1980s that variation in 
Arabic speech is not merely (or even mainly) a question ofH interference in L. 
According to Ibrahim (1986: 115), 'the identification ofH as both the stand-
ard and the prestigious variety at one and the same time has led to problems 
of interpreting data and findings from Arabic sociolinguistic research' This 
identification is the result of applying western research to the Arab world, 
without noting the different linguistic situation. In research in western speech 
communities, researchers have generally been able to assume that the stand-
ardised variety of a language, the one that has undergone the conscious process 
of standardisation, is also the variety accorded the most overt prestige. 
Many studies have shown that for most speakers, there is a prestige variety 
ofL, the identity of which depends on many geographica~ political and social 
factors within each country, and which may in certain circumstances influence 
speech. In Egypt, for non-Cairenes, it is the prestige variety ofEgyptian Arabic 
Cairene; for Jordanian women from Bedouin or rural backgrounds, on the other 
hand, it may be the urban dialects ofthe big cities (Abdel-Jawad 1986: 58). 
In a diachronic study conducted by Palva (1982), materials from Arabic 
dialects spoken, recorded and collected since 1914 in the Levant, Yemen, 
Egypt and Iraq were compared. Palva examined the occurrence of phonologi-
cal, morphological and lexical items in the dialects over a period of time. He 
found that certain dialectal variants gradually become more dominant than 
the 'standard' variants. For example, the glottal realisation J of the historical 
q, which is a phonological feature of several vernaculars in the area, became 
widespread and dominant rather than the MSA q (1982: 22-4). Holes (1983a, 
1983b) discusses the influence of MSA on two Bahraini dialects from a 
phonological and lexical viewpoint. Amongst other observations, he shows 
that the degree of influence of MSA on the speech of educated Bahrainis 
is dependent on the social status of the speakers. The socially prestigious 
Sunni speakers are not influenced much by the standard, while the speech of 
the low-status Shiite speakers is relatively more influenced by the standard 
(1983a: 448). 
Abu-Haidar (1991), in her study of the Muslim and the Christian dialects 
of Baghdad, posits that: 
Apart from MSA (the H variety for all Baghdadis), CB speakers 
[Christian Baghdadi] use their own dialect as a L variety in informal 
situations at home and with in-group members, while they use MB 
[Muslim Baghdadi] as another H variety in more formal situations with 
non-Christians. (1991: 92) 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
19 
It has been realised that MSA is not the only source of linguistic prestige and 
that in virtually every Arab speech community that has been examined, there is 
a dominant L which exerts influence on the other lower-status Ls in that country 
or in the surrounding region. The reasons for its influence are various, but 
principal among them are factors like the socioeconomic dominance of the city 
over the countryside (e.g. Cairo) or the influence of a ruling political group (e.g. 
the royal families of the Gulf). The dialects of these entities become a symbol of 
their power and exercise a potent influence over those who come into contact 
with them or have to interact with speakers of these dialects. This sociolinguistic 
variation between different varieties will be discussed in detail in Chapter 3. 
In the next section I introduce the five different groups of dialects that exist 
in the Arab world, in addition to both MSA and CA. I also discuss different 
approaches of classifying dialects in the Arab world. 
1.2.2 Groups of dialects in the Arab world 
1.2.2.1 Bedouin and sedentary dialects 
There is more than one choice of approach to classifying dialects. One can 
use a synchronic approach classification, which is made by measuring and 
selecting salient linguistic variables for each dialect or group of dialects (Palva 
2006: 604). This is the classification that will be adopted in section 1.2.2.2. On 
the other hand, one can also use a sociological, anthropological and historical 
approach which takes into consideration the division between Bedouin and 
sedentary dialects in the Arab world (Paiva 2006: 605). The division in terms 
of Bedouin and sedentary reflects the historical settlements in the area as well 
as the language shift and change that have been taking place. Sedentary dia-
lects could be further divided into rural and urban. 
Cities in the Arab world do not necessarily speak an urban dialect. In fact 
in a number of cities in the Arab world speakers speak a Bedouin dialect, and 
in other cities the Bedouin dialect is more prestigious than the sedentary one 
(see Chapter 3). 
Bedouin and sedentary dialects can be distinguished mainly by comparing 
and contrasting the realisation of phonological variables in both. However, 
morpho-syntactic variables as well as lexical ones are also significant. The 
realisation of the MSA phonological variable q as g has been a major criterion 
in distinguishing between Bedouin and sedentary dialects. According to Paiva, 
'Bedouin dialects have retained more morpho-phonemic categories than the 
sedentary dialects' (2006: 606). An example of this is the use of the indefinite 
marker in (tanwi:n) as in kita:bin (book) as opposed to the sedentary realisa-
tion kita:b (cf. Paiva 2006: 605 for detailed examples of differences between 
Bedouin and sedentary dialects, and V ersteegh 2001 for a historical discussion 
of dialects). 

20 
A)tABIC SOCIOLJNGUISTICS 
1.2.2.2li.<gig>,./ d;,/-
Vem.egh (2001: 145) ~s 
betw•en five giOUps <X ngional dialecu 
in the Arab v.orld:J2 
1. Dialects d the Arabian peninsula, which Oft spoken in Saudi Arabia 
and tle Gulf <fta 
2. Mesopotamian dialects, which Oft spoken in Iraq 
~. Syro-Lebanese dialects, which an spoken in Lebanon and Syria 
4. Egyptian ~ts, spoken in Egypt 
5. Magjueb dial.cu,spobn in North Africa 
Vemeeghhimself thinks that tM division can at tines be arbitrary ard ~erds 
larg.1y on &"<>gnpru..i factors (2001: 145). Tlen an, however, amunber of 
similariO.S among all tM diahcu 1hat dif&nntiate tMm from MSA and CA. 
1Ms:e s:imilarities have led to a~at deal d speculati:lnabout tM emergence 
<X dialects in tM whole Anb world(cf. Holis 2004: Versteegh2001). 
In all th. flw giOUps <X dialecu, th. MSA gbttal stop disoppeus. For 
exarnph, the MSAr" Js •head is in Syrian. northAfricanandEgypti.mArab~ 
""":s(c£. Versteegh2001: 101).l.ikewis:e tM ~tiva case in the possessive con-
struction is ~laced by an analytical possessive cOliSII'Uction. 1lrus tJ"lt~m ..,,_ 
.,., .. 
,~,(lit. 'pendef-boy~ 'tie boy's pen' is in Egyptian Arabic u-1•/•m bU.:f 
iJ-&~~l"d (lit. •pen plSS par clef-boy'). In Levantine it will be iJ-J"l"m uNf 
u-TNI•d (lit. 'pen poss par def-boy'~ and in dialects of th. Anbian P.oinsula 
it will be iJ-Jt~lt~m {;flgg iJ-&~~l"d (lit. •pen poss par clef-boy'). 1\bte that the 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
21 
possessive particle is different in the three examples of the dialects given 
above. Additionally, the MSA future aspectual marker sa-/sawfa is replaced 
in all the dialects by a different marker. In Syrian Arabic it is rab(a)-lab(a)-, 
in Egyptian Arabic it is ba-, in Moroccan Arabic it is ga-, in Iraqi Arabic it 
is rab, and in Yemeni Arabic it is .?a (Versteegh 2001: 108). Versteegh (2001: 
98) comments on the range of variability across regional dialects by positing 
that, 'It is fair to say that the linguistic distance between the dialects is as large 
as that between the Germanic languages and the Romance languages, includ-
ing Romanian, if not larger.' To some extent this postulation is exaggerated. 
However, it still alludes to the extent of differences between dialects. 
Perhaps because of these differences between dialects, Arab governments 
are in general still keen on promoting Standard Arabic (SA) as their official 
language rather than the various vernaculars; this promotion of SA as the offi-
cial language will be examined in detail in Chapter 5. 
I want to illustrate some differences between the different vernaculars 
for countries in the Arab world by giving a detailed concrete example. I 
will choose five vernaculars that belong to the five groups discussed above. 
The vernaculars chosen are: Tunisian Colloquial Arabic (TCA), part of the 
North African group of dialects; ECA, part of the Egyptian group of dialects; 
Lebanese Colloquial Arabic (LCA), part of the Levantine group of dialects; 
Iraqi Colloquial Arabic (ICA), part of the Mesopotamian Arabic group; and 
finally Saudi Colloquial Arabic (SCA), part of the Gulf Arabic dialect group. 
Note that I choose one dialect within Egypt, Cairene Arabic, and one dialect 
within Lebanon, the dialect of Beirut and so on and so forth. Thus, the exam-
ples do not represent the whole spectrum of dialects within each country but 
only give an example of the kind of differences that exist between different 
national vernaculars. 
However, before starting to compare and contrast the differences, one first 
has to show the MSA counterpart. 13 
(1) 
English 
(2) 
'I love reading a lot. When I went to the library I only found this old 
book. I wanted to read a book about the history of women in France.' 
MSA 
.?ana .?ubibbu 
1-qira: .?a ka8i:ran/ findama oahabtu .?ila 1-mak-
taba/ 
I 
1sg-love- the-
a lot/ 
when 
went-
to 
the-
ind 
reading 
1sg 
library/ 
lam .?ajid siwa 
ha:oa: 1-kita: b al-
wa kuntu 
.?uri:du 
qadi:m/ 
neg 1sg-
except this 
the-
the-
and was-1sg 1sg-want-
find 
book 
old/ 
ind 

22 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
'Jan 'laqra'la 
kita:ban fan 
tari: x 
al-mar'la fi fara:nsa/ 
that 1 sg-read- book-ace about history the-
in France 
(3) 
TCA 
'lana 
sub 
woman 
il-qra:ya 
barfa/ 
waqtalli 
mfl:t 
I il-maktba/ 
I 
asp-lsg 
the-reading When 
walked-lsg 
to-the-
love 
a lot/ 
library 
ma-lqi:ti-f ilia 
ha 1-kta:b 1-qdi:m/ u 
kunt 
nbibb 
neg-lsg-
except this-the-
the-old/ and was-lsg lsg-love 
find-neg 
book 
naqra 
kta:b 
fa/a 
tari:x 
1-mra 
fi 
lsg-read 
book 
about 
history 
the-woman 
in 
(4) 
ECA 
'lana 
ba- bibb 
il-'lira:ya 
'lawi/ 
lamma 
rubt 
fra:nsa/ 
France 
il-maktaba/ 
I 
asp-lsg 
the-
a lot/ 
When 
went-
the-library 
love 
reading 
lsg 
ma-la'lit-f 'lilla 
1-kita:b il-'ladi:m da/ 
wa na kunt 
fa:yiz 
neg-lsg-
except the-
the-old 
this/ and I was-lsg sg-part 
find-neg 
book 
'la'lra 
kita:b 
fan 
tari:x 
il-sitt 
lsg-read 
book 
about 
history 
the-woman 
(5) 
LCA 
fi 
in 
far ansa/ 
France 
'lana b-bibb 
I 
asp-lsg 
il-'lire:ya 
kti:rl lamma rebit 
f-al-maktebe/ 
the-reading a lot/ When went-lsg to-the-library 
love 
ma l'le:t 'Iilla 
hal-i-kete:b li-'ledi:m/ wz 
ken 
beddi 
neg-lsg- except this-the-
the-old/ 
and was-lsg lsg-want 
find 
book 
'le'lra 
kete:b 
fan 
tari: x 
!-mara 
lsg-read 
book 
about 
history 
the-woman 
(6) 
ICA 
b-fre:nse/ 
in France 
'la:ni bibb 
il-iqra:ya 
kulli.f/ !amman ribit 
I il-maktaba/ 
I 
lsg love the-reading a lot/ 
When 
went-lsg to the-library 
ma lige:t 
ge:r 
haoe 1-ikta:b 
il-fati:g/ u 
tfinit 
ari:d 
neg-lsg-find except this-the-book the-old/ and was-lsg lsg-want 
'laqra 
kta:b 
fan 
tari: x 
al-mar'la 
b-fransa/ 
lsg-read 
book 
about 
history 
the-woman 
in France 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
23 
(7) 
SCA 
'lana 
~ibb 
il-gra:ya 
kfJi:rl 
~i:n 
re~t 
1-mekteba/ 
I 
lsg 
the-
a lot/ 
When 
went-
the-
love 
reading 
lsg 
library 
ma lge:t ge:r 
haoa 1-kta: b il-gedi:m/ wa 
kint 
abga 
neg-lsg- except this-the-
the-old/ and was-1 sg lsg-aim-
find 
book 
(want) 
'lagra 
kta:b 
fan 
tari:x 
if-mara 
fi 
fransa/ 
lsg-read 
book 
about 
history 
the-woman 
in 
France 
I would like to mention that 'Arabic' - meaning CA, MSA and the differ-
ent varieties - is a Semitic language, and therefore built on a root and pattern 
system. The root is 'a series of typically three consonants, always occurring in 
a fixed sequence that has lexical identity' (McCarus 2007: 240). For example, 
the root k-t-b means to write; writing and so on and so forth. The word 
maktaba, which ocurs in the examples and means 'library', is derived from 
this root. Pattern is defined by McCarus (2007: 240) as 'a fixed framework of 
consonants and vowels that likewise has lexical meaning' McCarus gives the 
example of the pattern majfal, which denotes a noun of place. Although the 
root can change, the ma- and the vowel a before the consonant are obligatory. 
An example of this pattern is maktab, derived from the root k-t-b discussed 
above, and meaning 'office' Maktaba also follows this pattern. This is worth 
mentioning because it will show the similarities and differences between the 
dialects and also explain why it is sometimes easy and at other times difficult 
to comprehend the different dialects for different natives of Arabic. 
Now I will compare and contrast each clause in detail. 
(8) 
pr lsg 
v lsg imperf-ind 
det-n 
adv 
'I' 
'to like' 
'reading' 
'a lot' 
MSA 
'lana 
'lu~ibbu 
1-qira: 'Ia 
kafJi:ran 
TCA 
'lana 
n-~bb 
il-qra:ya 
barfa 
ECA 
'lana 
ba- ~bb 
il-'lira:ya 
'lawi 
LCA 
'lana 
b-~ibb 
il-'lire:ya 
kti:r 
ICA 
'la:ni 
~ibb 
il-iqra:ya 
kulli.f 
SCA 
'lana 
~ibb 
il-gra:ya 
kfJi:r 
In this clause, the personal pronoun in four varieties is the same; the exception 
is in ICA, in which it is phonologically different. The verb is lexically the same 
but phonologically different in some varieties. Note that an aspectual maker 
b- that denotes the present tense in ECA and LCA is not used in all varieties. 
This is a morpho-syntactic difference that differentiates ECA and LCA from 
other varieties. The phonological realisation of the definite article and noun 
'to read' is also different in all five varieties. The MSA q of 1-qira: 'Ia is realised 

24 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
as a q only in TCA and ICA, and is realised as gin SCA and as a glottal stop 
in ECA and LCA. Meanwhile, the adverb 'a lot' is in fact lexically different in 
MSA, TCA, ECA, and ICA. In LCA and SCA it is phonologically different 
from its MSA counterpart. 
(9) 
adv 
v lsg perf 
prep 
det-n 
'when' 
'to go' 
'to' 
'the library' 
MSA 
findama 
oahabtu 
'lila 
1-maktaba 
TCA 
waqtalli 
mfi:t 
l 
il-maktba 
ECA 
lamma 
ru~t 
il-maktaba 
LCA 
lamma 
re~t 
f-
al-maktebe 
ICA 
!amman 
ri~it 
l 
il-maktaba 
SCA 
~i:n 
re~ 
1-mekteba 
This second clause is telling in terms of varieties. The adverb 'when' is lexically 
different in most varieties. The problem of the different usage of prepositions 
between varieties is very clear. The preposition 'to' is realised differently in 
four varieties. TCA and ICA use the same preposition in that example. In fact, 
ECA and SCA do not use a preposition at all, while each of the other varieties 
uses a different one from MSA. Also the verb 'to go' is lexically different in 
all varieties from MSA. It is also phonologically different in all varieties. Once 
more, phonological differences are prominent in the realisation of the noun 
'library' with the definite article. 
(10) 
neg 
v lsg 
-neg part. 
dem 
det-n 
det-adj 
dem 
'not' 'to find' 
'but' 'this' 
'book' 
'old' 
'this' 
MSA lam 
?ajid 
stwa 
ha:oa 
1-kita:b 
al-qadi:m 
TCA ma-
lqi:-ti- f 
ilia 
ha 
1-kta:b 
1-qdi:m 
ECA 
ma-
!a 'li-t- f 
?ilia 
1-kita:b 
il-?adi:m da 
LCA 
ma 
l?e:-t 
?ilia 
ha-
1-ikete:b 
li-?edi:m 
ICA 
ma 
lige:-t 
ge:r 
haoe 
1-ikta:b 
il-fati:g 
SCA 
ma 
lge:-t 
ge:r 
haoa 
1-kta:b 
il-gedi:m 
The verb 'to find' ?ajid is realised as the jussive first person singular, with no 
mood marking (0-suffi.x), of the imperfect of wajada. The use of the jussive 
here is mandatory after the negative particle lam. The person is marked by 
the prefix ?a. The varieties/dialects, on the other hand, invariably use deri-
vations from the root 1-q-y (to find) in the first person singular perfect form, 
rather than the imperfect form as MSA does. In the perfect form the person is 
marked by the suffix -t. Thus, MSA uses a different aspect/tense for the verb 
from all the dialects. MSA uses the imperfect, while all the varieties use the 
perfect. 
Negation is also realised differently inmost of the varieties; the discontinuous 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
25 
morphemes ma-. . . -f occur only in TCA and ECA. Most of the other dialects 
use ma- only. The MSA demonstrative ha:oa: is phonologically different in 
all the five vernaculars. In fact ECA is structurally different from all other 
varieties in that the demonstrative occurs after rather than before the noun 
it modifies. The adjective 'old' is phonologically different in three varieties 
and the q is realised as a q only in MSA and TCA. In ICA it is also lexically 
different. 
(11) 
conj 
pr lsg 
v lsg perf 
v lsg imperf-ind 
par 
'and' 'I' 
'to be' 
'to want/ like' 
MSA 
wa 
leuntu 
'luri:du 
Jan 
TCA 
u 
leunt 
nflibb 
ECA 
wa 
na 
leunt 
fa:yiz [pres part] 
LCA 
wt 
ken 
beddi 
ICA 
u 
tfinit 
ari:d 
SCA 
wa 
kint 
abga 
Again, most of the differences among the six varieties are phonological, but 
there are still lexical and morphological differences in the realisation of the 
verb 'to want' In ECA, it is a participle rather than a tensed imperfect verb as 
is the case with the other dialects. In fact, it is a different lexical item in five 
varieties and only ICA shares the same lexical item with MSA, but there are 
still phonological differences between the two. Note that MSA alone requires 
a complementiser with this verb. 
(12) 
vlsgimperf n indef 
prep 
n det-n 
prep ndef 
-sub 
-ace 
'to read' 
'book' 
'about' 'history of women' 'in' 
'France' 
MSA 'laqra'la 
kita:ban 
fan 
tari:x al-mar'la 
fi 
fara:nsa 
TCA naqra 
kta:b 
fa/a 
tari: x 1-mra 
fi 
fra:nsa 
ECA 'la'lra 
kita:b 
fan 
tari: x il-sitt 
fi 
far ansa 
LCA 'le'lra 
kete:b 
fan 
tari: x !-mara 
b-
fre:nse 
ICA 
'laqra 
kta:b 
fan 
tari:x al-mar'la 
b-
fransa 
SCA 'lagra 
kta:b 
fan 
tari: x if-mara 
fi 
fransa 
The variation in prepositions is indeed apparent again in this clause. The 
preposition 'in' is realised differently in different dialects. ECA has a lexically 
different item for 'woman' from the other four varieties. There are morpho-
logical differences between TCA realisation of the first person and all the 
other varieties. Phonological differences are still apparent. 
It is noteworthy, however, that in some cases the lexical differences are not 
very difficult to reconcile. Thus for the verb 'to want', ECA uses fa:yiz, TCA 
uses n~ibb and SCA uses abga. In MSA the verb 'lahabba means 'to love'. The 

26 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
MSA baga: means 'to aim at', or 'to want' Thus although four varieties use a 
different lexical item for the verb 'to want', all the lexical items are related in 
meaning via knowledge of MSA. This indeed poses the question of whether, 
with no knowledge of MSA at all and with knowledge of only one dialect, the 
one a person speaks natively, it would still be possible for people from Tunisia 
to understand, for example, people from Egypt or the Gulf 
Using the same example, I want to show the differences between two 
Germanic languages: German and Dutch. 
(13) German 
/ch lese sehr gerne. Als ich in zur Bibliothek ging, fond ich nur dieses alte 
Buch, obwohl ich ein Buch iiber die Geschichte der Frau in Frankreich hatte 
lesen wollen. 
(14) Dutch 
Ik hou heel erg van lezen. Toen ik naar de bibliotheek ging, vond ik slechts 
dit oude boek, hoewel ik een boek over vrouwengeschiedenis in Frankrijk 
had willen lezen. 
As one can see from this example, even without knowledge of German or 
Dutch, the differences are similar to differences between the different vernac-
ulars examined above. The examples make one wonder about the differences 
between different languages and different varieties and whether terms like 
'language' and 'variety' are not political terms rather than linguistic ones. 
In this section I wanted to give examples of the different groups of varie-
ties in the Arab world. The question of whether people switch between their 
variety and MSA will be dealt with in more detail in the next chapter. 
1.3 CONCLUSION 
To conclude I would like to clarify that, first, Arabs perceive all the varieties 
discussed above as 'Arabic' Second, all the varieties above came from coun-
tries in which' Arabic', meaning SA is the sole official language. The complex-
ity of the situation arises from the fact that native speakers of Arabic do not 
distinguish between MSA and CA. For them there is only one SA, as was said 
earlier. In addition, they also use the term 'Arabic' to refer to the standard lan-
guage and the colloquials of different countries, the national varieties. In these 
matters native speakers and linguists can disagree. Left to their own devices, 
linguists could claim each of the national varieties as a separate, distinct lan-
guage. Speakers of Arabic are aware of a larger entity that somehow unites 
them: SA. The H variety of diglossia, SA, provides educated individuals with 
some of the tools they need to understand other varieties. 

DIGLOSSIA AND DIALECT GROUPS IN THE ARAB WORLD 
27 
NOTES 
1. Examples of diglossic switching are given not in this chapter but in the next one. 
2. It is important to mention at that stage that native speakers and constitutions in Arab coun-
tries do not specify what 'Arabic' refers to, but it is usually MSA. Native speakers also do 
not make a distinction between MSA and CA. For them there is only one kind of Standard 
Arabic, which is called ~ha:' 
3. Note that this Hand L labelling reflects, first, language attitudes among users and, second, 
the superposed nature of the H. Likewise, it is worth mentioning that sociolinguists may 
feel discomfort with these labels, since clear covert prestige attaches so strongly to the L 
and since the L has sometimes been the target of attempts in Egypt and Lebanon, among 
others, to be considered the national variety. This issue of territorial nationalism as opposed 
to pan-Arabism will be dealt with in detail in Chapter 5. 
4. Fishman (2002) defines diglossia slightly differently from Ferguson. For Fishman, a dig los-
sic situation is one in which the roles ofboth varieties are kept separate; there are clear group 
boundaries between both languages or varieties. The access to the H variety or language is 
usually restricted to an outsider. He gives the example of pre-World War I European elites 
who spoke French or another H language or variety, while the masses spoke a different and 
not necessarily related language or variety. In his definition the H variety or language is a 
spoken standard, while in Arabic it is not the spoken variety of any country. 
5. The question of how different the two varieties should be was perhaps not the main issue 
for Ferguson, who was more interested in the conditions which could give rise to diglossia 
in the first place. 
6. The word means literally 'what is your colour?' 
7. Gumperz is mentioned here, although he did not discuss diglossia in the Arab world, 
because his concepts of the discourse functions of code-switching will be applied to diglos-
sic switching in Chapter 2, and diglossic switching and code-switching will be studied 
within the same framework. 
8. I assume that the overlap between H and L existed even at the time when Ferguson wrote 
his article (1959), since Arabic, as any other language, is dynamic rather than static and 
unchanging. Walters (1996a), posits that the linguistic situation in the Arab world has 
always been in a state of change. 
9. In Egyptian soap operas almost all characters, even the educated ones, speak in ECA. Only 
in defined situations, like that of a lawyer in a courtroom, would a speaker use MSA or 
switch to any of the levels mentioned by Badawi. This has been the case since the beginning 
of the soap opera market in Egypt in the 1960s. 
10. The idea ofESA started to take shape with the Leeds project in 1976, which 'comprises 
unscripted, unprepared conversations and discussions based on a wide range of inter-
personal relationships' (EI-Hassan 1977: 120; see also Mejdell2006 for a full discussion of 
ESA). Note also that the data concentrated on educated speakers in Egypt and the Levant 
specifically. 
11. The H variety and MSA are in many ways associated with writing and the written language, 
including the reading aloud of written texts. 
12. The words 'dialects' and 'varieties' will be used interchangeably throughout this chapter. 
13. The MSA example does not always include case and mood endings; it is, rather, the way it 
would have been spoken by a native speaker, and I am interested in the oral performance of 
this utterance. 

CHAPTER 2 
Code-switching 
Language duality is not a problem but an innate ability. It is an accurate 
reflection of a duality that exists in all of us, a duality between our 
mundane daily life and our spiritual one. 
Najlb Mal:tfU~, Nobel Prize winner for literature 1988, 
in a letter to Luwis 'Awa<;t 
Although he is referring here to the duality between ECA and MSA - what 
Ferguson calls diglossia -
Ma]J.fU~ touches upon one of the main functions 
of language choice. He does not think that duality or bilingualism in general 
is an impairment. 1 In fact, it is an enriching ability that all humans possess 
and that enables them to express themselves differently and express their 
diverse needs. He echoes what Myers-Scotton discusses in her book Social 
motivations for code switching (1993). She refers to code-switching as part of 
the 'communicative competence' of a speaker, which is the competence that 
individuals acquire from their community and which enables them to com-
municate effectively with other members of their community. This will be 
discussed in detail below. Note that Ma]J.fU~ does not limit 'language duality' 
to a diglossic community or a bilingual one. In this chapter I will discuss code 
choice and code-switching, whether this code is a variety or a language. After 
an introduction and discussion of terminology (sections 2.1-2.3), the chapter 
falls into two main parts. The first part (section 2.4) will examine structural 
constraints on classic code-switching; switching between different languages, 
when one of the languages is a variety of Arabic (2. 4.1 ), and diglossic switching 
as a subcategory of code-switching (2.4.2). I discuss structural constraints on 
code-switching by examining different theories that can be applied to Arabic. 
I then provide a case study from my work on structural constraints on diglos-
sic switching as part of code-switching (2.4.2.1). The second part (section 
2. 5) explains the social motivations and discourse functions of switching 

CODE-SWITCHING 
29 
in relation to Arabic. The first subsection will concentrate on classic code-
switching ( 2. 5.1) and the second subsection will deal with diglossic switching 
(2.5.2). Again at the end of this section I provide a case study of motivations 
for diglossic switching from my own work (2.5.2.1). 
2. I IN T R 0 D U C T I 0 N 
Code-switching until very recently has been looked down upon for different 
reasons, in both the Arab world and the western world. In fact, in the Arab 
world switching between Arabic and a foreign language has been called by one 
Arab writer, according to Suleiman (2004: 227), 'linguistic prostitution' It can 
also be considered a form of'colonial penetration'. Before the classic article by 
Blom and Gumperz (1972) on code-switching between dialects ofNorwegian in 
Hemnesberget (aN orwegian fishing town), code-switching was considered part 
of the performance of the imperfect bilingual who could not carry on a conver-
sation in one language in different situations (Myers-Scotton 1993: 47). 
When bilinguals are asked why they switch codes, they usually claim that 
they do so to fill in lexical gaps, i.e. they do not know a specific word in one of 
their languages so they use the word from the other one. They may also claim 
that they do not have a certain word to express their feelings in one of the codes 
they have mastered, so they have to switch. But this is not always true, because 
bilinguals can switch between a word from one code and an equivalent from 
another with exactly the same meaning. And when they switch consistently, 
they usually do so for a specific purpose (Romaine 199 5: 169). If we approach 
code-switching as a discourse-related phenomenon, then we have to assume 
that it has sociolinguistic motivations. These motivations cannot be under-
stood in terms of syntactic constraints only, although syntactic constraints are 
still crucial in that they govern where switching might take place. 
The term 'code-switching' can be very broad or very narrow, as are all terms 
in sociolinguistics. It is noteworthy, however, that what Myers-Scotton calls 
code-switching does not apply just to switching between different languages, 
but also to switching between varieties of the same language. Therefore, 
according to her theory, diglossic switching is a kind of code-switching.2 She 
argues that 'varieties is a cover term for selections at all linguistic levels so that 
choices between varieties include, for example, choices of one language rather 
than another, one dialect over another, one style or register over another, and 
one form of a directive or refusal over another' (Myers-Scotton 1998b: 18). 
Arguing from a similar perspective, Gumperz defines code-switching as 'the 
juxtaposition within the same speech exchange of passages of speech belong-
ing to two different grammatical systems or subsystems' (1982a: 59). He also 
does not restrict code-switching to switching between different languages. 
Because of its greater flexibility, I think that Myers-Scotton's and Gumperz's 

30 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
definitions are more adaptable than other definitions. It is more precise to use 
the term 'code' rather than the terms 'language' or 'variety' However, there is 
still a problem of terminology that needs to be addressed in the next section. 
2.2 PROBLEM OF TERMINOLOGY: CODE-SWITCHING 
AND CODE-MIXING 
According to Mazraani (1997: 8-9), there is a difference between code-
switching and code-mixing. Code-switching usually has a discourse function, 
and is defined as a phenomenon where 'sections in one code are followed by 
sections in another one in the same conversation'. She adds that code-switch-
ing affects most linguistic levels, syntactic, morphological, phonological and 
lexical. Code-mixing, on the other hand, is defined as 'the mixing of different 
varieties within a single utterance or even within a single word' Code-mixing, 
according to her, does not have to affect all linguistic levels. 
Although Mazraani's distinction may be useful within her framework, I 
think her definitions are still on the vague side. She does not provide a clear 
definition of the terms 'sections' and 'utterance' One cannot be sure what 
the borderline is for a section or an utterance. However, other linguists like 
Myers-Scotton (1997: 24) do not distinguish between code-switching and 
code-mixing and regard this distinction as creating 'unnecessary confusion'. 
Myers-Scotton states that: 
A number of researchers associated with Braj Kachru [. .], but 
also some others, prefer to label as 'code-mixing' alternations which 
are intrasentential, although it is not entirely clear whether this 
applies to all intrasentential CS (code-switching). While I grant that 
intrasentential CS puts different psycholinguistic 'stresses' on the 
language-production system from intersentential (code switching) 
CS (a valid reason to differentiate the two), the two types ofCS may 
have similar socio-psychological motivations. For this reason, I prefer 
'CS' as a cover term; the two types can be differentiated by the labels 
'intersentential' and 'intrasentential' when structural constraints are 
considered. (1993: 1) 
Intersentential code-switching is switching across sentences, while intrasen-
tential code-switching is switching that takes place within a sentence. I think 
that it would be difficult if not impossible to consider code-switching and 
code-mixing two separate processes. The definition of code-switching by dif-
ferent linguists renders the term very inclusive and general (see the definition 
ofGumperz above and that ofMyers-Scotton 1993: 1). Therefore, I will stick 
to the term 'code-switching' to cover also what Mazraani calls code-mixing. 

CODE-SWITCHING 
31 
2.3 CODE-SWITCHING AND DIGLOSSIA 
Diglossia can, in my opinion, be studied within the framework of code-switching, 
since switching can occur not only between different languages, but also between 
different varieties of the same language, as mentioned above. So rather than use 
the term 'diglossic switching' to refer to switching between MSA and the dif-
ferent vernaculars, one can use the term 'code-switching' for that purpose.3 
As Mejdell posits, code-switching 'should be understood in a broad context to 
encompass both varieties and different languages, (Mejdell2006: 418) 
2.4 THE STUDY OF CONSTRAINTS ON CODE-
SWITCHING IN RELATION TO THE ARAB WORLD 
2.4.1 Structural constraints on classic code-switching 
In this section, I will concentrate on three theories that propose constraints on 
code-switching, with special reference to Myers-Scotton's model of a matrix 
language (ML). I will also provide examples of switching that involves differ-
ent Arabic dialects. Linguists concentrating on the Arab world have tended 
to focus on the syntactic constraints on code-switching rather than the moti-
vations for switching. Also, switching between North African dialects and 
European languages has been studied extensively, as will become clear below. 
Although Gumperz (1982a) argues that code-switching is not a random 
process, but that it depends more on stylistic and metaphorical factors than on 
grammatical restrictions, some linguists (Sankoff and Pop lack 1981; DiSciullo 
et al. 1986; Myers-Scotton 1997) have proposed that there must be gram-
matical constraints on any kind of code-switching. The question is, are these 
constraints universal? Do they apply to all language pairs? If we believe in the 
idea of universal grammar, then we might expect universal grammar to impose 
constraints on code-switching. I will examine the following theories intro-
duced by linguists to identify structural constraints on code-switching: 
1. the two constraints theory 
2. the government principle 
3. the model of matrix and embedded language. 
I will then try to explain each theory and the problems associated with it in 
relation to Arabic and other languages. 
2.4.1.1 The two constraints theory 
This theory was one of the first attempts to identify syntactic constraints 
on code-switching. Sankoff and Poplack (1981) proposed that there are two 

32 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
factors important in code-switching: the free morpheme constraint and the 
equivalence constraint. The free morpheme constraint predicts that there 
cannot be a code-switch between a bound morpheme and a lexical form 
unless the lexical form is phonologically integrated into the language of 
the bound morpheme. They appeal in their analysis to data from Spanish/ 
English code-switching.4 This constraint would predict that ftipeando, 
meaning 'flipping', is a possible form (1981: 5). In this example, -eando is 
the Spanish progressive suffix. The lexical English form (flip) is integral as 
it stands, in the phonology of Spanish. But the form *runeando 'running' is 
not possible, because the lexical form run has not been integrated into the 
phonology of Spanish. As a result, it cannot take the Spanish progressive 
suffix -eando. 
The equivalence constraint theory states that code-switching tends to occur 
at points where the juxtaposition of elements from the two languages does not 
violate a syntactic rule of either language. It will occur at points where the 
surface structure of the two languages is the same. Sankoffand Poplack (1981: 
34--5) applied this theory to Spanish, and they found that Spanish/English 
code-switching may occur between determiners and nouns, but not between 
nouns and adjectives in the noun phrase. Thus, it would be unacceptable to 
say (Lipski 1977: 252): 
(1) 
*hisfavorito spot 
'his favourite spot' 
This example cannot occur because it would violate the surface structure rules 
of Spanish. In Spanish the adjective must come after the noun, whereas in 
English it comes before. 
Moreover, Sankoff and Poplack predict possible sites for switches for pairs 
of languages which differ in basic word order, for example, SOV (subject-
object-verb) and SVO (subject-verb-object) languages. In such cases they 
predict that there will be no switches between V (verb) and 0 (object). For 
example, in Panjabi/English code-switching, there should be no switches 
between verb and object, since Panjabi is an SOV language, while English is 
an SVO language. 
Sankoff and Pop lack admit, however, that sometimes switching of this type 
can occur where there is no structural equivalence between the languages. But 
if this happens it is always accompanied by omissions, repetitions etc. Note 
the following example from German/English code-switching (Clyne 1987: 
753). The verb constituents are repeated several times. 
(2) 
Das ist ein Foto, gemacht an der beach, can be kann be, kann sein in Mount 
Martha. 
'This is a photo taken on the beach, could be in Mount Martha.' 

CODE-SWITCHING 
33 
According to Clyne, the switch to English may have been triggered by the use 
of the English noun beach. In German, unlike English, a verb governed by an 
auxiliary is sentence final; the auxiliary has to be separated from the main verb 
in declarative clauses, i.e. es kann in Mount Martha sein. In this example, there 
is violation of the equivalence constraint. 
The two constraints theory can be applied very neatly to code-switching 
between Spanish and English, because both languages have, more or less, the 
same word order, and both have the same government categories, i.e. noun, 
verb, definite article, adjective etc. However, it turns out that it is difficult to 
apply the same theory to two languages that do not share the same categories, 
for example, the pidgin Tok Pisin and English (Romaine 1995: 129). It is in 
fact hard to assign grammatical categories to a language like Tok Pisin (verb, 
article, negative marker etc.). Moreover, Berk-Seligson (1986: 328) found that 
in Hebrew/Spanish code-switching, many ungrammatical sequences, like the 
omission of the definite or indefinite article, occur because the indefinite article 
does not exist as a grammatical category in Hebrew. Besides, this theory relies on 
linear order and adjacency (surface structure of the sentence) and not on hierar-
chical order as in the theory of government, for example (Romaine 1995: 129). 5 
As for studies that involve a variety of Arabic, Nait M'barek and Sankoff 
(1988) studied Moroccan Arabic/French code-switching. They posit that 
French declarative sentences have the word order subject-verb, whereas 
Arabic allows for both SV and VS. This leads to recurrent violation of the 
equivalence constraint. 
(3) 
l'epoque 
ou 
les 
Arabes 
we#-u 
betta l' andalousie 
det-time when det Arab-pi arrive-3pl-perf to 
det-Andalusia 
'at the time when the Arabs reached Andalusia' (1988: 145) 
This acceptable example can be explained according to the two constraints 
theory, since it follows a linear left-to-right switch under equivalent word 
order from a French subject NP les Arabes 'the Arabs' to an Arabic verb we#u 
'they arrived' This is not true for the next example, in which the word order 
verb-subject is not found in French declarative sentences. 
(4) 
famor-hum jawa-k 
les 
plats 
que tu 
fais 
tft 
never-
come-
det dishes rei 
pr2sg make here 
pr3pl 
pr2msg-perf 
'the dishes that you prepare here never have the taste 
' (1988: 145) 
Additionally, in French, nouns inserted with French definite articles chal-
lenge the equivalence constraint. Nait M'barek and Sankoff also apply the 
borrowing versus switching distinction to Moroccan Arabic/French data. 
They argue that the notion of 'insertion' must be introduced to account for 

34 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
the frequent use of NP constituents with French article + French noun in an 
otherwise Arabic context. 
Bentahila and Davies (1983: 321), when discussing French and Moroccan 
Arabic switching, also examine the two constraints theory in their data. They 
suggest refinement of some other constraints like subcategorisation rules, 
combining grammatical structures with French lexicon etc. One of the prob-
lems that they find with the equivalence constraint is that it would predict 
that the order of adjective and noun has to satisfy the rules of both languages 
for a switch to be possible. In Arabic adjectives follow nouns, while in French 
they can either follow or precede the noun. According to the equivalence con-
straint, we expect a switch only in positions when the French adjective follows 
the noun. However, Bentahila and Davies find acceptable examples in which 
this is not the case. The following example is a case in point (1983: 319): 
(5) 
kayn 
un 
autre 
to be-3msg-perf indef another 
'There is another problem.' 
2.4.1.2 The government principle 
mufkil 
problem 
DiSciullo et al. ( 1986) postulate that code-switching is universally constrained 
by the government relation holding between sentence constituents. On the basis 
of data from Hindi/English code-switching, French/Italian code-switching 
and English/Spanish code-switching, they found that it is possible for speakers 
to switch codes between verbs and subjects but not between verbs and objects. 
Therefore, they tried to identify the constraints that lead to this distribution 
pattern of switches. They define government in the following way: X governs 
Y if the first node dominating X also dominates Y, where X is a major category 
N (noun), V (verb), A (adjective), P (preposition). They argue that 'if X has 
language index q and if it governs Y, Y must have language index q also' (1986: 
5). Their main claim is that within a maximal projection no switch is allowed, 
i.e. within a verb phrase or a noun phrase, for example, no switching is allowed. 
According to them, code-switching occurs only between elements that are not 
related by government. This would explain why there are no switches between 
a verb and an object in their data, since a verb governs the object. 
The idea of government is more promising than that of the equivalence 
constraint, because it can account for switching between languages with differ-
ent word orders and different distributions of categories. It also assumes that 
switching depends on hierarchical structure rather than linear structure, and can 
thus take account of a wider range oflanguages. However, this theory still has its 
limitations and cannot really be applied universally, at least for the time being. 
According to the government constraint theory, there can be a switch 
between a subject and a verb, but not within a prepositional phrase, or 

CODE-SWITCHING 
35 
between a verb and an object (Romaine 1995: 137). In the following example, 
quoted from Romaine (1995: 138), of Panjabi/English code-switching, an 
English noun is governed by a Panjabi postposition. This configuration is not 
allowed according to the government principle. 
(6) 
Family de nal 
'In the family' 
In this example, there is a switch within the preposition phrase, which is a 
maximal projection. DiSciullo et al. (1986) would have predicted that there 
could be no switch in this case, as the noun and the preposition should 
have the same language index. Sankoff et al. (1990), in a quantitative study 
of Tamil/English code-switching, found that it is precisely in object posi-
tion that switches occur. This finding again violates the government theory, 
although Sankoff et al. then dismiss these cases as borrowings. I do not, 
however, think it is acceptable to resort to explaining counter-examples as 
'borrowing' whenever one encounters a problem in one's hypothesis about 
code-switching, since borrowing and code-switching may simply be different 
labels for what often seem to be identical processes (although perhaps differ-
ent in terms of the size of the chunks oflanguage to which they are applied). I 
do not think explaining exceptions as 'borrowings' solves the problem. I agree 
with Myers-Scotton that 'borrowing' and 'code-switching' are related proc-
esses and should be accommodated within one model (1997: 163). 
Bentahila and Davies (1983) also found that French and Arabic switch-
ing happens within the verb phrase (between the verb and the object). This 
should not be possible under the government principle of DiSciullo et al. 
According to Boumans (1998), there are recurrent counter-examples, such 
as switches between determiners and nouns or between complementisers and 
complement clauses, found in data with Arabic and a European language. 
Other studies that concentrate on constraints on code-switching between 
a variety of Arabic and another language include Belazi et al. (1994) study of 
Tunisian Arabic, which found that usually in switching between Tunisian 
Arabic and French, French nouns are inserted together with the French defi-
nite article, like l 'anemie. This is also the case in Moroccan and Algerian Arabic 
(cf. Boumans 1998). The following is an example from the data ofBelazi et al. 
(7) 
c 'est 
le 
fer 
It is 
det-m iron 
'it's iron that gives . 
Arabic/French) 
qui donne. 
lli 
yi-~a:rib 
l' anemie 
rel gives. 
rel 
3msg-fight det-anaemia 
that fights anaemia' ( 1994: 226; Tunisian 
In this example, French nouns have a French definite article and Arabic nouns 
have Arabic definite articles. This is not always the case, though. 

36 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Another enlightening study, which examines code-switching between Iraqi 
Arabic and English among nniversity students in Mosul, is the one by Sallo 
(1994). He reports that he enconntered in his data cases of collocations with 
English head nouns and Arabic modifier adjectives where the adjective shows 
gender agreement with the Arabic equivalent of the nonn. Note the following 
examples (1994: 124): 
(8) 
as-sensitivity 
faliya 
del-sensitivity high-f 
'The sensitivity is high.' 
In this example the Arabic word faliya for 'high' is in fact feminine. This 
is almost assuredly because the Arabic word for 'sensitivity', bas a: siyya, is 
feminine. 
(9) 
at-temperature 
munxaji¢a 
del-temperature low-f 
'The temperature is low.' 
Again in this example the Arabic word for 'temperature', daraja, is feminine. 
Thus, the Arabic word for 'low', munxaji¢a, agrees with it in gender and is 
also feminine. 
The following example flouts the government constraint theory as explained 
by DiSciullo et al. (1986), since there can be a switch even within governed 
constituents. Note that in Iraqi Arabic possessive constructions are expressed 
with ma:l. 
( 1 0) ar-result 
ma: lti 
taleu:n 
det-result poss-f-prlsg 
3fsg-be 
'My result will be negative.' 
negative 
negative 
We have the feminine form of the possessive particle ma:l + the prononn 
suffix of the first person singular. The verb is inflected for the feminine sin-
gular: it is taku:n rather than masculine yaku:n. The Arabic nonn for 'result' 
would have been in this case nati.ja, which is a feminine nonn. 
In the reverse case, the modifying English adjective is not inflected accord-
ing to Arabic agreement rules as in the last example above. Note the use of the 
singular form of the connt nonn following numerals 11-99 in the following 
example (Sallo 1994: 120): 
(11) na:xud xamasta.f rat 
1 pi-take fifteen 
rat 
'We will take 15 rats.' 

CODE-SWITCHING 
37 
It is obvious that the nnderlying structure in these last examples is Iraqi 
Arabic rather than English. In the next section I will discuss the concept of 
an nnderlying structure or 'matrix language', as Myers-Scotton calls it, in 
detail 
2.4.1.3 Myers-Scotton's model of a matrix language 
A third theory that attempts to identify constraints on the process of code-
switching is the hypothesis that there is normally a base language during the 
process of switching. 
Myers-Scotton's view (1998b: 19-21) is that human beings are equipped 
with an innate language faculty that enables them to assess linguistic choices. 
Code-switching as defined by her (1998a: 296) is a phenomenon that allows 
morphemes from two or more codes in the same projection of a complemen-
tiser (CP), which is a more precise term than a sentence. A CP refers to a 
subordinate clause (see also Roberts 1997: 34-5). For example, in the sentence 
'I think that he will come', the CP is 'that he will come' This idea will become 
clearer later when examples are analysed. 
According to Myers-Scotton, when two languages are brought together 
by a bilingual, there is a dominant language at work. 6 Thus, one language 
should be assigned the status of what she terms 'a matrix language' The 
matrix language (ML) supplies the grammatical frame of constituents, while 
morphemes are supplied by both languages. That is to say, in code-switching, 
content morphemes from another language- the embedded language (EL)-
may appear in this grammatical frame, as well as ML system and content mor-
phemes. Myers-Scotton's hypothesis is that there is always an ML in bilingual 
communities, and there is always only one ML at a time. Thus, one has first to 
recognise the ML, then analyse a structure, and maybe later assign discourse 
fi.mctions to it. According to her, there is an affinity between structural analy-
sis and discourse fi.mctions. Both have to be analysed, and both are relevant. 
An ML is defined by 'system morphemes' There are two kinds of mor-
phemes, based on the lexical feature of plus or minus 'thematic roles' Content 
morphemes assign or receive thematic roles, like 'agent', 'experiencer', 'ben-
eficiary' etc. This category includes nonns, descriptive adjectives and most 
verb stems. System morphemes, on the other hand, cannot assign or receive 
thematic roles. This category includes inflections, determiners, possessive 
adjectives and intensifier adverbs. Thus, an ML supplies system morphemes 
which are syntactically relevant. The EL supplies only content morphemes. 
Myers-Scotton's hypothesis is that 'languages can sustain structural incursion 
and remain robust, but the taking in of alien inflections and fi.mction words 
is often a step leading to language attrition and language death' (1998a: 289). 
That is to say, she argues that as long as the system morphemes, like inflec-
tions for example, come from the ML, then the language is in no danger. 

38 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Once the inflections, and other system morphemes, come from more than one 
language, there is no one ML any more and this may lead to language change 
and language death. 
The following example, quoted from Myers-Scotton (1997: 78), will show 
how the ML theory works in practice. 
(12) (/eo) 
[si-ku-come na books z-angu] 
'(Today) 
I didn't come with my books' (Swahili/English code-
switching) 
This sentence, according to Myers-Scotton, shows not only intrasentential 
code-switching (code-switching within a sentence), but also intra-word code-
switching (code-switching within a word). I will now explain the example in 
more detail: 
si-ku-come 
one word (which is a verbal phrase) 
the verbal phrase is: 
an ML + EL consituent 
si pronoun, first person singular 
na books z-angu 
(prepositional phrase) 
na, preposition 
books, noun, English 
z- angu, possessive pronoun 
ku, tense marker denoting the past, and denoting negation 
come, verb, English 
Note that in this example, the system morphemes (pronouns, tense markers, 
negative markers and prepositions) are all in Swahili, while the content mor-
phemes (verbs and nouns) are in English. Therefore, the ML is Swahili, while 
English is the EL. 
Myers-Scotton also introduced the idea of islands in relation to code-
switching, which still falls under the ML model (1998a: 297). There are two 
kinds of islands, ML islands and EL islands. 7 Islands are generally maximal 
projections within a CP, for example a noun phrase or a prepositional phrase. 
ML islands are maximal projections within a CP with all the morphemes from 
the matrix language. These are quite expected, since one might anticipate 
finding both system morphemes and content morphemes from the ML in a 
CP However, EL islands are more complicated, since they are maximal pro-
jections that occur within a CP, and are in the EL rather than the ML. In other 
words, a hierarchical phrase from the EL is inserted into the ML. 
In a study that concentrates on the syntactic constraints on code-switching 
and applies the ML hypothesis to Moroccan Arabic/Dutch code-switching, 
Boumans (1998) finds cases which are difficult to explain under the ML 
hypothesis and even more so under the other two theories discussed above. He 
gives examples like the following (1998: 83): 

CODE-SWITCHING 
39 
(13) bef¢ 
1-xe{r-at 
ka-ne-lqa-h f 
mensa 
some 
det-
asp-1-find-
in 
student 
time-pi 
pr3msg 
restaurant 
below 
fend-na 
at-lpl 
'Sometimes I find it [a periodical] in the student restaurant below.' 
In this example both Moroccan Arabic and Dutch grammar would assign 
a definite article to mensa because the student restaurant in this example is 
identifiable by the interlocutors, but there is no article. Thus the NP is neither 
Dutch nor Arabic in structure. 
When applying the ML hypothesis to Moroccan Arabic and French, 
Lahlou (1991) had to explain some of his examples as EL islands. Note the 
following example ofEL islands: 
(14) Je devais faire 
pilote f 
l'armee 
de 
I' air 
I 
would do 
pilot 
in det-force 
of det-air 
'I was going to become a pilot in the air force.' 
(Lahlou 1991: 254; Moroccan Arabic/French) 
In this example, the determiner and the French noun l'armee can be consid-
ered an island. 
Note also the following example from Bentahila and Davies (1983): 
(15) Dak 
Ia 
chemise 
Dem det-f shirt 
'That shirt.' (Bentahila and Davies 1983: 317; Moroccan Arabic/ 
French) 
Again, the determiner and French noun can be considered an island. 
A good example in which the ML is Arabic, although the researcher did not 
apply the ML hypothesis, is the one given by Rouchdy (1992): 
(16) huwwa Ia 
yu-sammok wa 
Ia 
yu-darnik wa 
Ia 
yu-oar awit 
He 
neg 3msg-
and neg 3msg-
and neg 3msg- out 
smoke 
drink 
appear 
'He doesn't smoke and doesn't drink and doesn't go out at night.' 
(Rouchdy 1992: 48; Lebanese or Palestinian Arabic/English) 
The morpho-phonological structure of the English words is, in fact, Arabic. 
For example, yu-sammok originates from the English verb ('to smoke') but is 
inflected for tense, gender and number in Arabic. The same is true for yu-
darnik which originates from the English verb ('to drink'). Thus the system 
morphemes are from Arabic. 
A final study that applies the ML model is the one conducted by Ziamari 

40 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(2007), in which she examines the conversations of students in two French 
schools in Morocco. Ziamari argues that the ML for the students examined is 
Moroccan Arabic and the EL is French and/or English. She gives examples 
in which French and English verbs adopt Moroccan Arabic morphology. Note 
the following examples (2007: 280-1): 
(17) yetabli 
3msg- etablir 
'He will establish.' 
In this example the imperfect French verb is inflected for person, number and 
gender according to Moroccan Arabic morphological rules. 
(18) Laykiti-na 
Like-2fsg-perf-pr 1 pl 
'You liked us.' 
In this example the English verb ('to like') is again inflected for 
person, number and gender according to Moroccan Arabic morphological 
rules. 
In general, I think the ML model is the most promising of them al~ for 
a number of reasons. First, it does not rely on a specific theory of grammar 
such as government and binding theory. This means that the ML hypothesis 
is not affected no matter which theory of grammatical structure is adopted. 
This, in fact, is an essential point since syntacticians have been improving 
on government and binding theory (see Chomsky 1993). The ML theory in 
its basic framework does not rely on specific languages which happen to be 
quite similar, like Spanish and English, for example, but is capable of being 
used with languages which are quintessentially different in their content mor-
phemes and system morphemes, like Arabic and English. More importantly, 
Myers-Scotton does not claim that code-switching should be studied with 
reference to structural constraints only. In fact, she emphasises the inter-
twined role of the discourse and structural aspects of code-switching. She 
tries, in an unprecedented manner, to formulate a theory that can explain 
both the discourse fi.mction of code-switching and the structural constraints 
on code-switching. She suggests that by positing an ML, linguists can then 
start addressing the question more clearly of why people switch between 
languages, since the ML will be the basis of their hypothesis. Linguists can 
question why the EL and the ML are used when they are used and how both 
affect discourse. 
Recently Myers-Scotton has refined the ML model to make it account for 
more cases of code-switching. She proposed a 4-M model. 
According to Myers-Scotton (2004a: 1 09), the 4-M model is based on the 

CODE-SWITCHING 
41 
notion that when there is code-switching between two languages, both lan-
guages should follow the 'morpheme order principle', which posits that the 
structure of the ML is always the preferred structure. This is because lan-
guages 'participating in code switching do not have equal roles' (2004a: 110). 
There are four kinds of morphemes and not just two as posited earlier in the 
ML model. The four are listed below: 
1. Content morphemes: These have been discussed above. They are usually 
viewed as heads of the maximal projection in which they occur, and 
they give and receive thematic roles. Nouns and verbs fall into this 
category. 
2. Early system morphemes: These are called early system morphemes 
because they occur at an earlier level in language production and 
are in fact accessed at the same abstract level as content mor-
phemes. Early system morphemes rely on their heads (content 
morphemes) for information about their forms. They add seman-
tic/pragmatic information to their heads. For example, English 
determiners add specificity to their heads, and plural markers also 
add specific information to their head. 
3. Bridges (late system morphemes): Bridges are late system morphemes 
and do not occur at the same abstract level as early system mor-
phemes. However, they are still dependent on their heads, since they 
signal information between elements. They too receive information 
about their form within the immediate maximal projection in which 
they occur. Note, however, that they only connect content mor-
phemes to each other, without specific reference to the semantics of 
these morphemes. Possession or association fall into this category. 
Thus the English preposition 'of' fits this category. 
4. Outsider late system morphemes: These are different from all the mor-
phemes above because their form depends on information outside 
their maximal projection. Even though their form depends on 
information that comes from governing verbs or prepositions, they 
function across maximal projections. Case markers, affixes to nouns, 
and markers on verbs that refer to the subject of the verb (which is 
not the same maximal projection as the verb itself) all fit into this 
category (2004a: 111 ). These morphemes are crucial in determining 
the ML. 
It is difficult to understand how the 4-M model works without concrete 
examples. In section 2.4.2.1 I apply the 4-M model to my data. 
In the next section, as was said before, I consider diglossic switching as part 
of code-switching and shed light on some of the studies that try to assign con-
straints on diglossic switching as part of code-switching. 

42 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
2.4.2 Structural constraints on diglossic switching 
In the 1980s, some researchers started to tum their attention to specifying 
how speakers combine elements from the H and L systems to make 'mixed' 
forms at the word or phrase level. The focus was usually more on the 'form' of 
language rather than the motivations for switching. For example, Eid (1988), 
in a study of diglossic switching unprecedented in its detail, attempted an 
analysis of the syntactic constraints on diglossic switching between ECA and 
MSA. Her study examined switching in four syntactic constructions: relative 
clauses, subordinate clauses, tense plus verb constructions (proclitic plus verb 
construction, e.g. ~a, b- prefixes), and negative plus verb constructions (1988: 
54). She concluded that the process of switching between ECA and MSA is 
governed by rules that depend on the sentence position of the element that 
can be switched, the type of syntactic element involved at the switch, and 
the direction (ECA-+MSA, MSA-+ECA) of the switch. El Hassan (1980) 
also studied the demonstrative system in ESA, in particular the frequency of 
occurrence of standard and vernacular forms of demonstratives (MSA forms 
and different vernacular forms) in various types of cross-dialectal communica-
tion (between Arabs from different countries, Jordanians and non-Jordanians, 
Egyptians and non-Egyptians etc.). 
Linguists who concentrated on structural constraints on diglossic switch-
ing include Boussofara-Omar (1999, 2003, 2006b), Bassiouney (2003a, 
2006) and Mejdell (1999, 2006). Boussofara-Omar used political speeches 
in Tunisia as the basis of her study, and analysed her data in the light of 
Myers-Scotton's ML model and 4-M model to explain switching between 
MSA and TCA. Her data comprised seventeen public political speeches by 
the former president of Tunisia, Habib Bourguiba, delivered between the 
years 19 56 and 1968. The recordings were approximately fourteen hours. 
Mejdell's study is based on two public seminars held in Egypt. The first was 
on problems of higher education in Egypt and took place at the American 
University in Cairo. The second one was a literary seminar, discussed a 
newly published collection of short stories, and was held at the premises of a 
political leftist party in Cairo. The recording of both seminars lasted for two 
hours. Mejdell examines the possible positions and constraints on switching 
between ECA and MSA. Both studies will be referred to and exemplified in 
the next section. 
2.4.2.1 Application of the ML model and the 4-M model to MSA/ ECA 
switching: a case study 
In the following paragraphs I would like to shed light on the results of a study 
in which both the ML model and the 4-M model were applied to switching 
between MSA and ECA in different kinds of Egyptian monologues. The data 

CODE-SWITCHING 
43 
consisted of thirty hours of mosque sermons, university lectures and politi-
cal speeches. For the sake of clarity MSA will be bold, ECA will be in italics 
and morphemes that belong to both MSA and ECA, the ones I call 'neutral 
morphemes', will be in non-italic. I will use the expression 'mixed forms' to 
refer to code-switches which occur between a system morpheme and a content 
morpheme and which take place in the same projection of a complementiser. 
For example, in 
(19) al-qa4iyya di 
muhimma giddan 
det-issue 
dem-f-sg important 
very 
'This issue is very important.' 
al-qat/iyya di is a mixed form, since the MSA content and system morphemes 
in al-qat/iyya 'the issue' are followed by a system morpheme in ECA di 'this', 
and they both occur in the same projection of the complementiser, al-qat/iyya 
di muhimma giddan 'This issue is very important.' 
The data suggests that although at first glance it seems that the ML in the 
Egyptian community is ECA while the EL is MSA, Myers-Scotton's idea of 
an ML does not explain thoroughly what goes on in the Egyptian commu-
nity. The 4-M model can save some of the problematic examples discussed 
below. However, the 4-M model yields different results from the ML model. 
The 4-M model can only explain examples that do not fit the ML model by 
assuming that the ML is in fact MSA rather than ECA. Nevertheless, Myers-
Scotton's theory of 'a composite ML' has more validity in any attempt at 
explaining the situation in the Egyptian community, and perhaps other com-
munities in the Arab world, as will be clear below. 
In the data there are examples of mixed forms consisting of: 
1. a negative marker in one code and a verb in another 
2. a demonstrative marker in one code and a noun in another 
3. an aspectual marker (the b-prefix) in one code and a verb in another.8 
Negative markers, demonstratives and aspectual markers are all system mor-
phemes, as was said before. They do not assign thematic roles. All the mixed 
forms that occur in the data can be analysed as follows: 
ECA negative marker + MSA verbs 
ECA demonstrative marker + MSA nouns 
ECA aspectual marker (b-prefix) + MSA verbs. 
There are no examples of the following: 
MSA negative marker + ECA verbs 

44 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(20) lam 
yiru: b 
MSA (neg) ECA (3msg-go) 
'He did not go.' 
MSA demonstrative marker + ECA nouns 
(21) ha:?ula:?i 
r-rigga:la 
MSA (dem-m-pl) ECA (n-m-pl) 
'these men' 
MSA verbal marker (e.g. sawfa, sa-)+ ECA verbs 
(22) sa-
yiru: bu 
MSA (fut.) ECA (3pl-go) 
'They will go.' 
At first glance, one may claim that if the three markers, which are system 
morphemes, are realised in ECA, then, according to the ML hypothesis, the 
ML tends to be ECA, and the EL is MSA. The basis of switching is an ECA 
syntactic frame-structure, into which MSA lexical elements are inserted. 
One can even find examples in my data to support this view. Note the 
following: 
Negative markers: 
(23) il-?i:ma:n mif ka:fi: 
det-belief 
neg enough 
'Belief by itself is not enough.' 
System morphemes: 
il definite article ECA 
mifnegative marker ECA 
Content morphemes: 
'li:ma:n noun ('belief) MSA 
ka:fi: adjective ('enough') MSA 
In this example one finds a clear-<:ut case of one ML at work. The negative 
marker and the definite article, which are considered by Myers-Scotton as 
system morphemes, are in ECA, while the content morphemes which assign 
thematic roles, like nouns and adjectives, are in MSA. Therefore the ML in 
this example is ECA while the EL is MSA. ECA provides the frame-structure 
for the sentence, while the speaker fills in the lexical slots with MSA items. 

Demonstratives: 
(24) il-faqli 
da 
ma:dda 
det-mind 
dem-m-sg substance 
'This mind is a substance.' 
System morphemes: 
il definite article ECA 
da demonstrative marker ECA 
Content morphemes: 
faqli noun ('mind') MSA 
ma:dda noun ('substance') neutral9 
CODE-SWITCHING 
45 
Again in this example the morphemes that do not assign thematic (theta) 
roles, like the demonstratives and the definite article, are in ECA, while the 
morphemes that assign theta roles, like nouns, are in MSA. This is another 
example of the ML being ECA and the EL, being MSA. 
The b-prefix: 
(25) illi bi-taqaf 
fa/a 
ho:t/ 
il-ba}J.r 
rei asp-3fsg-fall prep 
basin/base det-sea 
'that lie on the Mediterranean' 
System morphemes: 
illi relative marker ECA 
bi- aspectual marker ECA 
fa/a preposition neutral 
il definite article 
il-muta wassi t 
det-Mediterranean 
il is a definite article. It is not clear whether the vowel preceding the article is the 
case ending of the preceding word, or the ECA realisation of the definite article. 
The definite article in this example can be considered both ECA and MSA. 
Content morphemes: 
taqafverb ('fall') MSA 
ho: 4 noun ('basin', 'base') ECA 
babr noun ('sea') neutral 
mutawassit adjective ('middle') neutral in that case because used in a collocation 
The system morphemes in this example, like the aspectual marker b-, occur 
in ECA rather than MSA, while the content morphemes like nouns, verbs 

46 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
and adjectives are from both codes, ECA and MSA. But note also that in this 
example some system morphemes are difficult to classify as belonging to one 
code rather than another. 
Apparently then (judging from the above examples), one may conclude that 
the ML in the Egyptian community is ECA, and the EL is MSA. But this 
neat distinction between system morphemes and content morphemes does 
not always seem to work. A number of examples in the data pose problems 
for the ML hypothesis, and although, as was said earlier, the 4-M model can 
explain some of them, it can only explain them by assuming that the ML is in 
fact MSA. I think these examples suggest that the situation in the Egyptian 
community is more complicated. Therefore one may have to abandon the idea 
of an ML in favour of a more sophisticated framework that can explain more 
precisely what takes place in the Egyptian community. 
Let us consider the following example that poses problems for the ML 
hypothesis: 
(26) ka:n 
fi: 
littifa:qat 
To be-3msg-perf loc-adv agreements 
'Agreements were being implemented.' 
System morphemes: 
bi- aspectual marker ECA 
bi-tunaffatJ 
asp-fsg-pass-implement 
the u-a theme in the verb tunaffao denotes the MSA passive form of the verb 
(discontinuous passive morpheme) 
Content morphemes: 
ka:n verb ('to be') neutral 
fi: dummy verb ('there is') ECA 
'littifa:qa:t noun ('agreements') MSA 
tunaffao verb ('to be implemented') MSA 
If one accepts the ML-EL hypothesis, then in this example it is difficult to 
decide what the ML is. As the aspectual marker on the verb is in ECA, one 
might expect the other ML features to be ECA also, as was the case in the 
previous examples. In this example one cannot claim that there is only one 
ML at work. But in fact, there is a discontinuous system morpheme taken 
from MSA, and one system morpheme taken from ECA. The speaker uses 
the b-prefix, which is an ECA element. However, he applies the discon-
tinuous passive morpheme u-a to a verb to passivise it, which is a quintes-
sentially MSA system morpheme. This 'internal' form of the passive is not 
available for him in ECA, in the sense that it cannot be applied to verbs 
which are exclusively part of the ECA lexicon. Such verbs passivise in ECA 
by the prefixing of it- to the suffix stem and yit- (tit- for feminine) to the 

CODE-SWITCHING 
47 
prefix stem (Holes 2004). Here are the ECA and MSA counterparts of this 
example: 
(27) ECA counterpart 
ka:n 
fi: 
'littifa'la:t 
To be-3msg -perf loc-adv agreements 
'Agreements were being implemented.' 
(28) MSA counterpart 
bi-titnaj]iz 
asp-fsg-pass-implement 
ka:nat 
huna:ka 
'littifa:qa:t tunaffao 
To be-3fsg -perf. 
adv-existence agreements fsg- pass-implement 
'Agreements were being implemented.' 
Existence is expressed in ECA by a morpheme which is historically a locative 
adverb fi: (in it), which has no morpho-semantic analogue in MSA. In MSA 
existence is expressed by yu:jad (a passive verb, 'is found') or huna:k (an 
adverb, 'there'). The example below illustrates this: 
(29) yu:jad 
rajulun 
fi 
al-bayti 
msg-pass is found man-nom 
prep det-house 
This means that there should be no possibility of switching between the two 
systems to express existence- the two systems do not overlap at this point of 
morpho-syntactic structure. In the example the ECA form has been selected. 
Similarly, as far as the verb (being implemented) is concerned, the passive 
form is expressed in MSA by structures that have no morpho-semantic ana-
logue in ECA. Here the MSA form has been selected. Oust as there should 
be no switching possible between.fi: and yu:jad or huna: k, so there should be 
none possible between tunaffao and titnaj]iz.) 
If this is the case, one cannot say that in a sentence like that quoted as 
example (26) above, the ML is ECA. The speaker obviously knows spe-
cific morpho-syntactic forms of both ECA and MSA, and uses them in this 
example. The example is also particularly interesting because it has intra-
word code-switching: in the same word we have an aspectual morpheme from 
ECA and a passive morpheme from MSA. In this example we have system 
morphemes from two different codes in the same projection of a complemen-
tiser, more specifically within the single-word verb. 
The 4-M model can save this example. If we divide morphemes into four 
types then the ML of this example will in fact be MSA. The two system 
morphemes can be classified differently: bi, the aspectual ECA marker, can 
be considered an early system morpheme, since it adds aspect to its head, 
which is the verb. Thus it adds information to its head. As an early system 
morpheme it relies on its head, a content morpheme for its form. On the 

48 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
other hand, the u-a theme in the verb tuna.lfao, which denotes the MSA 
passive form of the verb (discontinuous passive morpheme), can be consid-
ered an outsider late system morpheme. This is because its form is dependent 
on information outside its head. This information is supplied by the noun 
'littifa:qat (agreements). In that case, the ML of this clause is in fact, MSA 
rather than ECA. 
The following examples will pose problems for the ML and yield different 
results with the 4-M model: 
(30) ha:oa 
k-kala:m 
laysa ka:fiyan 
dem-m-sg det-talk 
neg 
enough-ace 
'This kind of thing is not enough.' 
System morphemes: 
ha: oa demonstrative MSA 
k assimilated definite article ECA 
laysa negative marker MSA 
-an case marker MSA 
Content morphemes: 
kala:m noun ('talk') neutral 
ka:fi: adjective ('enough') MSA 
(31) ECA counterpart 
ik-kala:m 
da 
mif kifa:ya 
det-talk 
dem-sg-m 
neg enough 
'This kind of thing is not enough.' 
(32) MSA counterpart 
ha:oa 
al-kala:m 
laysa ka:fiyan 
dem-sg-m 
det-talk 
neg 
enough-ace 
'This kind of thing is not enough.' 
In this example there are system morphemes from both codes. The MSA 
demonstrative, case marker and negative markers are used, but also the ECA 
definite article. Therefore, this example poses problems for the ML hypoth-
esis, but again the 4-M model can save this example. According to the 4-M 
model the ECA definite article k is an early system morpheme, since it adds 
specificity to its head; it adds information that is semantic in nature to its head. 
Similarly, it depends on its head for its form. Additionally, the structure of 
the clause is MSA, since in ECA the demonstrative usually follows the noun 
rather than precedes it as is the case in this example. According to the uniform 
structure principle, the ML has to provide the structure of the morphemes in 

CODE-SWITCHING 
49 
the clause. Since this is the case, then we can consider the ML to be MSA in 
this example as well. 
(33) yurfaf 
fanhu 
t-takli:f 
da 
msg-pass-lift prep-pr3msg del-responsibility 
dem-m-sg 
'And this responsibility is lifted offhis back.' 
System morphemes: 
u-a passive morpheme MSA 
fan- preposition ('from') neutral 
-hu third person pronoun MSA 
t- definite article MSA or ECA 
da demonstrative ECA 
Content morphemes: 
yurfof verb ('raised') MSA 
takli:fnoun ('responsibility') neutral 
(34) ECA counterpart 
wi yitrafof 
fannu 
t-takli:f 
da 
And msg-pass-lift prep-pr3msg 
det-responsibility 
dem-m-sg 
'And this responsibility is lifted offhis back.' 
(35) MSA counterpart 
yurfaf 
ranhu 
ha:~a 
t-takli:f 
msg-pass-lift prep-pr3msg dem-m-sg del-responsibility 
'And this responsibility is lifted offhis back.' 
The speaker uses MSA content morphemes. He also uses MSA system 
morphemes, except for the ECA demonstrative. Therefore there are system 
morphemes from both codes, MSA and ECA. Again in this example it is 
difficult to claim that ECA is the ML while MSA is the EL. Moreover, as 
with the previous examples, there are system morphemes that are difficult to 
categorise as ECA or MSA. The definite article is a case in point. The 4-M 
model would predict that the ML in this example is MSA. The passive MSA 
morpheme u-a is an outsider late system morpheme; its form depends on 
information outside its head, the verb. Also the MSA third person pronoun 
is considered an outsider late system morpheme since it refers to information 
outside its maximal projection. It refers to the person whom this responsibil-
ity is lifted off. The definite article, which is considered an early morpheme 
as explained in the earlier examples, can be either MSA or ECA. The ECA 
demonstrative da is also considered an early system morpheme, as explained 
before. 

50 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
2.4.2.1.1 Examples that pose problems for the 4-M model 
(36) i/-maw<;tu:\' da 
ka:n 
furit/ 
\'ala 
1-mu?tamar 
det-issue dem-
to be-3msg 
msg-pass 
prep 
det-<:onference 
m-sg 
-perf 
present 
il-isla:mi 
det-Islamic 
'This issue was presented to the Islamic Conference.' 
System morphemes: 
il definite article ECA 
da demonstrative ECA 
u-i discontinuous passive morpheme MSA 
fa/a preposition ('at, on') neutral 
I definite article probably MSA, but I am not sure. 
il definite article; again, the vowel of the article may in fact belong to the 
word 
preceding it (MSA), or to the article, in which case the article is ECA 
Content morphemes: 
mawr!u:fnoun ('issue') neutral 
ka:n verb ('to be') neutral 
furir! verb ('to be presented') MSA 
mu'ltamar noun (conference) by itself neutral, but the preceding article can 
make it ECA or MSA 
isla:mi adjective (Islamic) neutral 
(37) ECA counterpart 
(38) 
il-mawr!u:f da 
Jitfarar! 
fa/a 
det-issue dem-m-sg msg-pass-perf prep 
1-mu'ltamar 
det-
il-isla:mi 
det-Islamic 
present 
conference 
'This issue was presented to the Islamic Conference.' 
MSA counterpart 
ha:oa al-mawr!u:f ka:n 
qad furir! 
fa/a 
dem-
det-issue 
3msg-to qad msg-pass-
to 
m-sg 
be-perf 
present 
al-isla:mi 
det-Islamic 
'This issue was presented to the Islamic Conference.' 
l-mu'ltamar 
del-
conference 
In this last example the speaker uses an ECA system morpheme, the demon-
strative da, as well as an MSA system morpheme, the discontinuous s-stem 

CODE-SWITCHING 
51 
passive morpheme u-i, in the same CP Even with content morphemes, one 
encounters the problem that several items are shared by both codes. 
The 4-M model will consider the MSA discontinuous passive morpheme 
u-i to be the only outsider late system morpheme, which will yield the ML as 
MSA. However, there is a problem for the ML because in a pure MSA struc-
ture, one has to add the morpheme qad to the structure of the clause. Thus one 
may claim that this example violates the uniform structure principle. 
(39) ya~ni 
b-yib'la 
fi:h 
l).ima:ya 
fi: 
haoihi 
msg-
asp-3msg-
prep protection prep dem-f-sg 
means become 
'That is to say, there was protection in these places.' 
System morphemes: 
b-prefix ECA aspectual marker 
fi preposition ECA or MSA 
haoihi demonstrative MSA 
l definite article MSA 
Content morphemes: 
yafni verb ('to mean') neutral 
yib'la verb ('to become') ECA 
fi: h dummy verb ('there is') ECA 
bima:ya noun ('protection') neutral 
mana: !iq noun MSA 
(40) ECA counterpart 
1-mana:fiq/ 
det-areas 
yafni 
b-yib'la 
fi: h 
bima:ya 
fi 
1-mana:ti'l dil 
msg-
asp-3msg-
prep protection prep det-areas 
dem-f-sg 
means become 
'That is to say, there was protection in these places.' 
(41) MSA counterpart 
ha:oa yafni Janna huna:ka l}ima:ya fi: 
haoihi 1-mana:fiq/ 
dem- msg-
that 
adv 
protection prep dem-
det-areas 
m-sg means 
f-sg 
'That is to say, there was protection in these places.' 
In this example the content morphemes that occur are from both codes. 
This is expected under the ML hypothesis. The problem is that the system 
morphemes that occur are also from both codes. The b-prefix is an ECA 
system morpheme and it occurs this time with an ECA verb yib'la ('to 
become'), but the demonstrative, which is also a system morpheme, is in 

52 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
MSA. There are system morphemes from more than one code in the same 
projection of a complementiser. Besides, as with the example in (30), there 
are system morphemes that are difficult to classify as MSA or ECA, like the 
preposition ft. 
According to the 4-M model the system morphemes that occur, exclud-
ing the preposition which is used in both varieties, are all early system mor-
phemes. The ECA aspecual marker b- is lexically related to its head, the verb, 
and it also denotes meaning to its head. The MSA demonstrative is another 
early system morpheme, because again it adds meaning to its head; the noun 
mana: [iq ('places') is also dependent in its form (the feminine singular) on this 
head. The MSA definite article I is also an early system morpheme since it 
denotes meaning to its head. There is no clear ML in this example. 
Now note the following example: 
(42) ~arakit il-~aya:h 
ma-tanta~im-fi 
?ilia bi:ha 
Cycle det-life 
neg 3fsg-organise-neg except with-pr3fsg 
'Life does not function without it.' 
(43) ECA counterpart 
~arakit il-~ya:h ma-tib?a:-f 
muna:r.~ama ?ilia 
bi:ha 
Cycle 
det-life 
neg-3fsg-become- organised 
except with-pr3fsg 
neg 
(44) MSA counterpart 
~rakat 
al-~aya:h Ia tantaf?imu 
mva 
biha 
Cycle 
det-life 
neg 3fsg-organise-ind except 
with-pr3fsg 
The negation in this example is in ECA, but the verb is in MSA; although 
there is no mood marking, the vowel pattern is that of MSA. What is of inter-
est here is that the ECA counterpart of this example will in fact yield a differ-
ent structure. Thus according to the 4-M model the structure of this sentence 
is an MSA one. Since the negation here refers to ~arakit il-~aya:h, and it is 
not directly related to its immediate head tanta:r.im, then one can consider it an 
ECA outsider late system morpheme. In this example, there is a clear compos-
ite of two MLs: MSA and ECA. 
It is worth mentioning that Boussofara-Omar (2003: 40), when analysing 
data in the light of the 4-M model, found some similar problematic exam-
ples of switching between MSA and TCA. The following example is one of 
them. 
( 4 5) ma-sa-ta-qif-f 
neg-filt-3fsg-cease-neg 
'It will not cease to be.' 

The TCA counterpart would be 
(46) Mu.Jbe.f te:qif 
neg-fut 
3fsg-cease 
'It will not cease to be.' 
The MSA counterpart would be: 
(47) Lan 
taqifa 
fut-neg 
3fsg-cease-sub 
'It will not cease to be.' 
CODE-SWITCHING 
53 
The problem in this example arises from the fact that there are system mor-
phemes from TCA and MSA in the same CP The future marker sa is in MSA 
and can be considered an early system morpheme since it adds information to 
its head, while the negative marker ma-f is TCA and can also be considered 
an early system morpheme since it also adds information to its head, the verb. 
However, the tense person morpheme ta is MSA, and can be considered an 
outsider late system morpheme since it depends on information from outside 
its head, the verb; it derives its information from the subject. Boussofara claims 
that the ML in this example is TCA while the EL is MSA. But she admits that 
this is difficult to explain according to both the ML and the 4-M models. 
Note that the structure of an ECA negative marker combined by an MSA 
future marker and an MSA verb does not occur in my data. This seems to be a 
structure that occurs in Tunisia but not in Egypt. Thus the following example 
is a possible structure in Egypt: 
( 48) ma-tagif-f 
neg-3fsg-stop-neg 
'It will not cease to be.' 
However, the following combination is awkward and perhaps not possible for 
an Egyptian speaker: 10 
( 49) ma-sa-ta-qif-f 
neg-fut-3fsg-stop-neg 
'It will not cease to be.' 
ECA negation does not permit a future marker from MSA. This is evidence 
that intrasentential code-switching between MSA and different colloquials is 
dependent on the community being studied to a great extent, and to the expo-
sure of this community to MSA as well as the means of this exposure: whether 
it is in schools, clubs, televisions or the political arena. 

54 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
These examples resist interpretation within the framework of diglossia, 
and challenge ideas about syntactic constraints on code-switching. First, as 
was said before, most linguists studying diglossia have not explained cases of 
switching of this sort, and have tended to study ECA and MSA variables sepa-
rately. Although Mitchell (1986: 9) acknowledges the existence of a code that 
he calls 'ESA' (see Chapter 1 above), he does not explain the rules and patterns 
that govern it. There have been few practical attempts to study the use of these 
variables in actual data (cf. Boussofara-Omar 2003, 2006b; Mejdell 2006). 
The two constraints theory (Sankoff and Poplack 1981) and the government 
principle (DiSciullo et al. 1986) fall short of explaining the above examples. 
For example, both would predict that there would be no switching between an 
aspectual marker like the b-prefix and a verb. 11 They would predict that both 
have to be in the same code, which is not the case in many examples in my 
data. More importantly, the ML hypothesis cannot really explain this phe-
nomenon. The ML hypothesis predicts that all system morphemes will be in 
the ML, and here we see examples of system morphemes from two different 
codes being used together in the same word and not just in the same clause or 
CP The 4-M model would in fact yield opposite results. It would predict that 
MSA may be the ML for most of the examples. 
It is only fair to say that Myers-Scotton did not set off to explain diglossia 
and that most of the linguists analysing constraints on code-switching were 
more interested in switching between different languages: bilingual switching 
rather than diglossic switching. However, iflinguists argue that both diglossic 
switching and code-switching should be studied within the same framework, 
since the definitions of code-switching given at the beginning of this chapter 
render code-switching an inclusive rather than an exclusive term, then one 
would expect theories of code-switching to explain diglossic switching as well. 
The data above makes it clear that although theories of code-switching can 
help explain diglossic switching, the situation in diglossic communities is dif-
ferent in many ways and more complicated in others. This does not imply that 
one should abandon the inclusive definition of code-switching, but rather that 
within this inclusive definition, one can find a way of explaining the peculiari-
ties of the diglossic situation. I propose that there are two MLs at work here: 
ECA and MSA. I make this proposition for the following reasons. 
First, one might expect that the basis of switching in these monologues 
would be an ECA syntactic substructure, into which MSA lexical elements 
would be inserted. This is generally true in the case of the three variables 
chosen for analysis, but some examples proved to be more problematic, even 
with the 4-M model The idea of a single frame-structure (an ML) falls short 
of explaining the last examples (26, 30, 33, 36, 39) for a number of reasons. 
First, the ML hypothesis is based on the idea that there is always only one ML 
at a time. As was stated before, Myers-Scotton's main hypothesis is that 'lan-
guages can sustain structural incursion and remain robust, but the taking in of 

CODE-SWITCHING 
55 
alien inflections and function words is often a step leading to language attrition 
and language death' (1998a: 289). That is to say, once there is more than one 
ML at a time, then this is often an indicator of language death; for example, 
the taking of inflections and function words from a code other than the ML is 
a step towards language attrition and death. As was shown in all the examples 
above, sometimes there seems to be more than one ML at work. Although the 
theory of ML is indeed valid in certain cases, it does not seem to give a clear-
cut picture of what goes on in this diglossic community. 
Second, as was said earlier, the ML model claims to account for classic 
code-switching and not necessarily diglossic switching, although it has been 
applied to diglossic switching (cf Boussofara-Omar 2003, 2006). What makes 
the model difficult to apply is the fact that in some examples it is difficult 
to decide whether a certain morpheme belongs to ECA or MSA. The MSA 
definite article is (v)l, where v stands for a vowel that has no value of its own, 
the vowel quality of the article (a, i, u) changing according to its position and 
function in the sentence. The ECA article is (i)/-. It is therefore sometimes 
difficult to classify actual examples of usage (i/-) as MSA or ECA. In addition, 
some prepositions (which are system morphemes) are shared by both codes. 
(Note also that it is sometimes difficult to decide what a system morpheme is, 
since, for example, some prepositions can also assign thematic roles. But this 
problem cannot be dealt with here.) 
ECA and MSA are different codes but with a lot of shared content and 
system morphemes, and it is almost impossible at times to say whether a 
certain morpheme belongs to ECA or to MSA. Thus, it is not easy to come 
up with one ML, since it is sometimes difficult to decide which code is being 
used in the first place. I argue that the existence of two codes that are partially 
overlapping and partially distinct, as in Arabic, may cause problems for both 
the ML and the 4-M model. 
Unlike other theories, such as the two constraints theory (Sankoff and 
Pop lack 1981 ), the ML model seems to work better with languages/ codes that 
are typologically different, i.e. codes with different morpheme systems, like 
Arabic and English, or Turkish and French, than it does with closely related 
languages, like German and Dutch, or two codes from the same language, like 
ECAandMSA. 
The idea of islands, discussed earlier, seems to permitthe occurrence of system 
morphemes from the EL, under the condition that these system morphemes 
occur with content morphemes from the EL as well in a maximal projection (NP, 
PP etc.) that is still governed by the CP This condition limits the occurrence of 
islands. For instance, in example (26 ), one cannot claim that there is an EL island 
and that there is only one ML at work, which is ECA, since in the verb bi-tunaffao 
there is switching within a maximal projection, and thus this example cannot be 
explained by the idea of islands, at least not as it is currently formulated. There 
are system morphemes from both codes within this word, as discussed above. In 

S6 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
example (30), one can consider laysa ka:fiyan an EL island since it is a maximal 
projection, but ha:oa k-kala:m will still pose the same problem of two MLs at 
work within one maximal projection, since there are system morphemes from 
two different codes in the same NP Example (39) may be explained under the 
idea of islands: one may claim that haoihi /-mana: fr,q is an EL island and the ML 
is ECA. However, as was said earlier, this example still poses problems for the 
4-M model. In addition, one cannot use the idea of islands in order to explain 
examples (33) or (36), because in both there is switching between two different 
codes within a maximal projection. Therefore there is only one example that can 
be explained by using the idea of islands, and all the rest of the examples still pose 
the same problem ofhavingmore than one ML, or having a completely different 
ML according to the 4-M model. The idea of islands falls short in explaining 
these examples because it does not take into account mixed forms. Similarly, as 
was said earlier, while the ML fails to explain the problematic examples, the 4-M 
model can explain most of them. However, the 4-M model would predict that in 
the problematic examples the ML is in fact MSA. 
2.4.2.1.2 A predictable composite 
Myers-Scotton (1998a) has proposed another idea to explain some cases of 
code-switching. This is the idea of a so-called composite ML (1998a: 299). 
She posits that when there is a change in progress in a bilingual community, 
the ML is a composite, based on structures from both codes, but moving 
towards the new ML. Eventually the change in progress is completed, and a 
language shift follows, with the new code playing the role of an ML. Myers-
Scotton (1998a: 310-12) supports her hypothesis by giving evidence from 
other linguistic studies on code-switching, like the study ofBolonyai (1996). 
Bolonyai gives an example of a young Hungarian girl who lives in the USA 
with her parents, and how her ML changes from Hungarian to a composite of 
Hungarian and English, and finally the new ML becomes English. The fol-
lowing example demonstrates the use of a composite ML. 
(50) Mom, 
en 
meg-find-t-am 
a 
ket 
quarters-t 
Mom 
1sg 
perf-find-past-1sg det 
two 
quarters-ace 
'Mom, I found two quarters.' (Bolonyai 1996: 12) 
Although Hungarian is a pro-drop language, the girl uses an overt subject 
(en, 1 sg). This is an example of convergence to English. The verb, which is a 
content morpheme, is English (find), but the tense marker, which is a system 
morpheme, is in Hungarian. The word quarters-t is an English word with an 
English system morpheme (s), and a Hungarian system morpheme (t), which 
is a Hungarian case marker. There are different system morphemes from 
two different codes in the same projection of a complementiser, in fact, and 
even in the same word. Therefore the ML is a composite. In this example, a 

CODE-SWITCHING 
57 
composite ML is leading to language change, because eventually English will 
become the ML. 
Now let us consider again example (30) from my data, repeated here as 
example (51), in which the ML is a composite. 
(51) ha:oa k-kala:m laysa ka:fiyan 
'This kind of thing is not enough.' 
In this example the ML is a composite ofboth ECA and MSA, since there are 
system morphemes from both codes. The idea of a composite ML can help 
us explain what is going on in the Egyptian speech community. The problem 
with this hypothesis is that one cannot just claim that there is change in 
progress in Egypt, whether language shift or language death. The situation of 
the Hungarian girl in the USA is different from that of Egyptians in Egypt. 
There is, however, something similar in all the Egyptian monologues ana-
lysed: the speakers are all educated, and have thus been exposed to MSA. 
They are all over 40; that is to say, their exposure to MSA has been over quite 
a long time. I think there are certain system morphemes from both MSA 
and ECA which they have internalised. But again, it is quite difficult to say 
that these speakers have an ECA substructure only (an ECA ML). The ECA 
substructure may be dominant but they still make use of certain MSA system 
morphemes. Their ML is not just ECA (although it verges on it); it is a com-
posite. The fact that their ML is a composite does not necessarily mean that 
one code is changing or dying, and it does not mean that one code will take the 
place of another. Children are exposed to MSA from their first year in school 
in Egypt. MSA is, in other words, part of the average educated Egyptian's 
everyday existence12. This systematic exposure to MSA is perhaps different 
from one country to another in the Arab world, with the result that there are 
different possible forms for each community, as was clear in example (45), 
discussed above, from Boussofara-Omar's Tunisian data. Therefore language 
policies in the Arab world have an input in shaping and modifying structural 
constraints on code-switching (see Chapter 5). 
Myers-Scotton later (2004a: 116) says, about composite code-switching, 
that 'little systematic analysis of this type of CS (code switching) exists to 
date' In the next paragraphs I would like to show some forms that do and 
do not occur in relation to my data and other data as well. These forms are 
predictable in the sense that they tend to occur frequently and regularly when 
speakers switch between MSA and ECA. Thus one can posit that structural 
constraints on diglossic switching in Egypt can be explained in the light of a 
predictable composite in which system morphemes occur from both codes: 
MSAandECA. 
An MSA salient system morpheme that occurs frequently in a composite 
ML structure is the MSA discontinuous passive morpheme. This morpheme 

S8 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
is considered a system morpheme. As was clear from the examples above, the 
speakers analysed used the MSA passive form rather than the ECA one; see 
examples (26, 33, 36). In fact this was prevalent in my data. 
However, Boussofara-Omar (2006b), when discussing diglossic switching 
between MSA and TCA, analysed a number of examples in which the passive 
is realised in MSA. 
(52) Haoaya 
yuokar 
fayufkar 
dem 
3msg-imperf-pass-mention 
so 3msg-imperf-pass-thank 
'This should be mentioned and thanked for.' 
Boussofara-Omar, however, posits that in Tunisia, MSA verb stems inflected 
with MSA tense affixes tend to occur in frozen expressions, as in the example 
above (2006b: 71). This could mean that with regard to the realisation of the 
MSA passive Egypt is indeed different from Tunisia. This may also be related 
to language policies in both countries, as was said earlier and will be discussed 
in Chapter 5. One can only make tentative predictions at this stage but it is 
indeed a phenomenon worth more investigation. 
ECA salient features that occur frequently in my data include the ECA 
aspectual marker b- with MSA verbs. This aspectual marker occurs even with 
pure MSA verbs. Mejdell (2006: 389) also noted this in her study and posits 
that although 'its representation in script violates orthography, [and] its pho-
netic value is distinct', it still appears even when speakers attempt hard to stick 
to MSA. She gives the following example in which the b-prefix is affixed to an 
MSA verb (2006: 352): 
(53) b-yataga:waz-ha 
asp-3msg-overcome-pr3fsg 
'He overcomes it.' 
The verb is realised in MSA. The ECA counterpart would beyitga:wiz. 
Additionally, the following are the predictable structures discussed earlier 
that can be deduced from my data: a negative marker in ECA and a verb in 
MSA are a possible combination, while a negative marker in MSA and a verb 
in ECA do not occur together. The same is true for demonstratives: a demon-
strative in ECA and a noun in MSA are possible, but the opposite does not 
occur. 
One needs more data to reach definite conclusions about the structural pat-
terns that occur in diglossic switching, and definitely more studies are needed 
that concentrate on structural constraints on diglossic switching in the Arab 
world. 
Next, I would like to discuss studies that concentrate on motivations for and 
discourse functions of code-switching and diglossic switching. 

CODE-SWITCHING 
59 
2.5 MOT IV A TI ONS FOR CODE-SWITCHING 
2.5.1 Motivations and discourse functions of classic code-switching 
Before Gumperz (1976), Weinreich (1953: 73) claimed that people switch 
because of the environment around them and because of a certain speech 
event or situation. For example, a university lecturer is likely to use a formal 
code when he delivers a lecture because of the environment surrounding him, 
i.e. because he is in a lecture room, and he is discussing a non-personal topic. 
He is expected by the audience to speak in a formal code. If after the lecture, 
while he is walking home, a student asks him about a more personal subject, 
then the situation is different. He may take the student aside and speak in a 
different code (a less formal one). 13 Thus, according to Weinreich, the nature 
of the speech event (here 'talking about personal matters') triggers the switch 
that occurs. On this view, switching depends on the topic first and then the 
participants. These two factors together create a speech event. However, 
according to this view, participants do not exercise choice, but it is the speech 
event which determines everything. Gumperz questions these assumptions. 
According to Gumperz (1982a: 61), the speaker is not just a pawn control-
led by the situation. In fact the opposite is true: it is the speaker who manipu-
lates the situation. That is to say, the speaker, rather than the speech event, is 
the prime mover in code-switching: 'Rather than claiming that speakers use 
language in response to a fixed predetermined set of prescriptions, it seems 
more reasonable to assume that they build on their own and their audience's 
abstract understanding of situational norms, to communicate metaphoric 
information about how they intend their words to be understood.' Thus, the 
individual plays the key, creative role in code-switching. 
Gumperz's importance, in our understanding of code-switching, also arises 
from the fact that he treats code-switching as a phenomenon worthy of analysis 
and study in its own right. He introduced the distinction between situational 
and metaphorical code-switching (Blom and Gumperz 1972). Situational 
code-switching is motivated by factors external to the participants, like setting, 
topic or change in social situation (as in Weinreich above). Metaphorical code-
switching, on the other hand, is motivated by the individuals themselves, and 
is related to the individuals' perception of and presentation of themselves 
in relation to the external factors, like setting, topic or social situation. For 
example, Blom and Gumperz (1972: 434) point out that if students in the 
Norwegian fishing village ofHemnesberget choose to use the standard dialect 
(after using the non-standard one), it may be not only because the topic has 
changed, but also because the use of the standard signals the students' shared 
group membership as intellectuals. Thus, the students as individuals take 
account of the fact that all the participants in an interaction (their audience) 
share the same well-educated background, and use that group's dialect. In 

6o 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
this example, using one code rather than another has a discourse function of 
identifying the speaker with a specific social group. 
Additionally Gumperz later (1982a: 95) discusses for the first time the 'we' 
and 'they' dichotomy. There are two different codes used by speakers gener-
ally: the 'we' code and the 'they' code. The socially inclusive 'we' code is asso-
ciated with home and family bonds, while the socially distanced 'they' code is 
associated with public interactions. 
Gumperz ( 1982a: 7 5-84) identified the following functions for code-switch-
ing. According to him, people typically switch for the following purposes: 
1. quotations 14 
2. to specify the addressee as the recipient of the message 
3. reiterations and interjections 
4. to qualify a message 
5. to differentiate between what is personal and what is general. 
Romaine (1995: 161-2) summarises Gumperz's functions, and also claims that 
switching can serve the following purposes: 
6. as sentence fillers 
7. to clarify or emphasise a point 
8. to shift to a new topic 
9. to mark the type of discourse 
10. to specify a social arena. 
Safi ( 1992: 7 5), examining the speech of male and female Saudi students 
in the USA, uses Gumperz's model of functions of code-switching to analyse 
her data. Her data comprised two hours of tape recording. The speakers were 
enrolled in undergraduate and graduate courses. She had one female inform-
ant who was 28 years old and two male informants who were 19 and 33 years 
old. All informants had been in the USA for at least a year. She found that 
students switch from English to Saudi colloquial Arabic when they aim at 
arousing religious or spiritual feelings, as in the following examples: 
(54) They had a beautiful mubxara. 
'They had a beautiful incense burner.' 
(55) They used a big piece oftowb-i-kafba for decoration. 
'They used a big piece of the black dress ofthe ka\'ba.' 
In fact these switches refer to referents that have no exact equivalent in 
English, and the English equivalents do not carry the affective load that the 
Arabic ones would for Saudis or Muslims more generally. Safi also noted that 

CODE-SWITCHING 
61 
SCA is usually used as sentence fillers, as Gumperz predicts. Sentence fillers 
in SCA include words like yafni 'it means' and zayn 'good' English sentence 
fillers include 'OK' 
In a similar vein, Wemberg-Moller (1999: 238) analysed the speech of eight 
Moroccans living in Edinburgh. 15 Wemberg-Moller was interested mainly in 
first-generation immigrants ranging in age from 34 to 49. This first generation 
had lived there between 17 and 22 years. They usually had very little education 
and were manual workers. Her data was gathered in 1994 and the interviewers 
spoke Moroccan Arabic to the informants. The study gives an illustration of 
situational code-switching: an informant is describing in English a book that 
she read, which possibly, although it is not clear, was also written in English. 
While she is doing so, another informant, her mother, enters the room and 
interrupts. The first speaker gets distracted and starts speaking to her mother 
in Arabic. 
(56) SA: it's based on a girl it's like it goes through different. .it's like. .y'know 
it goes through in stages like y 'know you've got a seed time, harvest 
time. .em. 
ZA: qulha b-lfarabiyya! 
'Tell her in Arabic!' 
SA: manfra.!Ji kayjfnqulha b-lfarabiyya and those timesy 'know are sort of 
like. ..it's like a circle y'know how things change. 
'I do not know how to tell her in Arabic, and those times you know are 
sort of like. .it's like a circle you know how things change.' 
When the first speaker turns her attention back to the interviewers, she switches 
back to English. When she speaks to her mother, she speaks in Arabic. 
Wemberg-Moller (1999) even compares this study to the one done by 
Gumperz in Norway, noting that the Moroccan community in Edinburgh is 
different from the community in Norway. The former is not a well-established 
community yet. Its members use different languages for different activities. 
Thus, Arabic is used in religious activities and at home, for example, while 
English is used outside the house. In fact, excessive English at home is viewed 
with disapproval by the Moroccan immigrant community. 
Note the following example, in which the speaker compares and contrasts 
how old people are cared for in Britain and the Arab world ( Wemberg-Moller 
1999: 245): 
(57) Wledha, bnetha, awledha,. .katimfi 1- nursing home. .katimfi 1-
.lhosbitar. He look after it. .bbna fandna fayb!. .bbna fandna 
fayb!. .makaynf .kayn sbita .. limafo.allima lmra li ma-fandha-f 
oo rrajlli ma-fandu-f ~ata fi li yqablu kayimfi 1-sbitar, hum a yqablu Oat 
tmma Hat a ymut. 

62 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
'Her son, her daughter, she goes to a nursing home. She goes to hos-
pital where they take care of her [look after her]. We think that is a 
bad thing, (with us bad)16 we think that is a bad thing17 (with us bad) 
we don't have it! (it isn't there)18 
.there are hospitals. .when, for 
example, when the woman who doesn't have anything or the man who 
doesn't have even someone (something) to look after him, he goes to the 
hospital (and) they look after (him) there until he dies.' 
According to Wemerg-Moller this represents an example of metaphorical 
code-switching since there is no change in setting at all. Hospital is referred 
to twice, once as hosbitar (a wrong pronunciation of the English word) and 
once as isbitar. The English use is to refer to establishments in Britain and the 
Moroccan Arabic use is to refer to hospitals in Morocco. Also the 'we' and 
'they' dichotomy is of use here. The speaker contrasts 'our' way of life and 
'their' way oflife. The British way of life is not looked upon favourably. 
Another discourse function of code-switching mentioned by Wemberg-
Moller is that of authority and factuality. English is associated with these, as 
in the example below (1999: 254): 
(58) AA: hedi, hedi [this is, this is] important tafarafoa 
'This is important that you know it.' 
Note also that Arabic is used when speaking about something personal and 
English is used when trying to be objective, as in the example below: 
(59) AA: a rasi! a rasi! you need just somebody to cure you! 
'Oh my head! Oh my head! You just need someone to cure you.' 
Note that the postulation that English is associated with factuality and 
authority is too general to make and needs more data to prove. In addition, in 
Wemberg-Moller's study the informants were aware that the recording would 
be used for linguistic research. They in fact 'viewed the recording as an excel-
lent means by which the researcher could learn more about their language 
and dialect in particular' (1999: 254). This could have posed a methodological 
problem for the research since the code used may have been a reaction to the 
knowledge of the participants that they were being recorded by a linguist. 
Such problems are difficult to deal with and will be discussed in Chapter 3. 
In a different vein, Goffman (1981) discusses the individual as a speaker 
who plays different roles and who uses language to mark the new role she or 
he plays. Each person plays different roles with different people in different 
situations. This is what Goffinan calls 'a change in footing', i.e. a change in 
the frame of an event. By 'frame' he means it is a change in the way speakers 
perceive each other and perceive the situation. It is noteworthy, however, 

CODE-SWITCHING 
63 
that when Goffman speaks about change in footing he refers not just to the 
bilingual, but to the monolingual who uses different codes in different situ-
ations. According to Romaine (1995), code-switching is merely 'changing of 
hats', which all speakers engage in all the time. People spontaneously manipu-
late their language for their own needs, changing their attitude and style 
continuously. 19 
To sum up, Gumperz and others have emphasised the controlling role of 
the speaker, and listed speaker-initiated factors in code-switching. Although 
there have been few criticisms of Gumperz's model, it still has its limitations. 
In general, functional approaches to social phenomena necessarily represent 
incomplete taxonomies, and we could even expect them to, because in contrast 
to formal taxonomies, which begin with an assumption of comprehensiveness 
and exclusivity of categories, functional taxonomies begin with the assump-
tion that new functions may be uncovered and are generally expected to be. 
Likewise, most would assume that a switch can simultaneously serve multiple 
purposes. 
Gumperz's division of code-switching into two kinds, situational and 
metaphorical, is in practice not always easy to make, and it presupposes 
that there are different motivations for each type of code-switching. Myers-
Scotton (1993: 55) questions the viability of this division, and claims that 
there are a number of similarities between situational and metaphorical code-
switching, to the extent that they should be accounted for in one theory of 
code-switching. Auer and DiLuzio (1984: 91) also think that this distinction 
should be replaced by a continuum. One has to admit that even Gumperz 
himself moves away from this distinction (1982a) and emphasises the role of 
metaphorical rather than situational code-switching. In Discourse strategies 
(1982a: 59), the title of the chapter on code-switching is 'Conversational code-
switching', rather than 'metaphorical' or 'situational' code-switching. The 
point of emphasis in his theory is the individual in relation to codes. Gumperz 
gave credit to the individual in code-switching in an unprecedented manner. 
According to him, code-switching is a creative act with the individual playing 
the major role. However, Myers-Scotton (1993: 59-60) finds problems with 
this idea. According to her, placing a great deal of emphasis on the individual's 
creative role in code-switching may make one lose sight of the general nature 
of the process, since, in her view, code-switching is a rule-governed phenom-
enon and should be studied as such. She argues that Gumperz views each 
interaction between people in its own right: 'One must believe in the possibil-
ity of generalising across interactions in order to build explanatory theories, 
I argue. It is not at all clear that Gumperz has this belief ( 1993: 59). She also 
argues that this emphasis on the individual may 'promote individualised ad 
hoc explanations' for code-switching (1993: 62).20 
Another point which Myers-Scotton objects to is that Gumperz and others 
give lists of functions of code-switching. These lists are useful in explaining 

64 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
why people switch in a certain community, but they fall short of explain-
ing and organising motivations for code-switching in a 'coherent theoretical 
framework' (1993: 63). There is a distinction between the rhetorical sig-
nificance of code-switching, which highlights functions of switching, and 
the interactional significance of switching, which highlights motivations for 
switching. One needs a theory that can explain code-switching as a universal 
phenomenon and not as a phenomenon peculiar to one speech community 
rather than another. Also, these lists can never be exhaustive, because they are 
linked to communities and how they vary. 
In short, what seem to be lacking in Gumperz's analysis are more abstract 
tools or ideas that can account for what goes on in code-switching. His analysis 
as well as that of his successors is too descriptive, to the extent that one cannot 
make generalisations. What is needed is a theory that explains the functions 
of code-switching at a level of abstraction that applies in both bilingual and 
monolingual societies, i.e. a universal theory. 
Now, I will examine three theories that attempt to explain code-switching 
without recourse to lists of its discourse functions or motivations. I will 
concentrate on the third theory, as it is the most valid one in my opinion. 
These three theories are the accommodation theory propounded by Giles et 
al. (1987), the social arena theory of Scotton and Ury (1977), and finally the 
markedness theory ofMyers-Scotton (1993). 
Howard Giles et al. (1987) use what they term 'accommodation theory' to 
explain the social motivations for code-switching among other interaction phe-
nomena. They claim that in social interactions speakers desire their listener's 
social approval and modify their speech in the direction of the listener's code to 
get this approval. This is called 'convergence' or 'accommodation'. In some cir-
cumstances, however, the speaker may want to differentiate herself or himself 
from the listener. She or he will do this by emphasising the difference between 
them through choice of code. This is called 'speech divergence' Heller (1982: 
108-18), ina study carried out in Montreal, gaveanexampleofdivergence. She 
showed that some people in the bilingual city of Montreal found it problematic 
to communicate with other fellow citizens because they, the other fellow citi-
zens, refuse to code-switch from one language to another (English and French). 
They do this for political, national or cultural reasons. Thus, refusing to switch 
can serve an individual's purposes just as much as switching. It can convey a 
negative feeling or attitude towards a rival group, and it is one of the strategies 
used in maintaining and reinforcing boundaries between groups. 
A second model was that proposed by Scotton and Ury (1977), who use the 
idea of the 'social arena' According to them, there are three universal social 
arenas which affect code choice: identity, power and transaction. A speaker 
switches to different codes to define the interaction taking place in terms of a 
certain social arena or to keep it undefined. The first universal social arena is 
identity: a speaker switches according to the identity of the person she or he is 

CODE-SWITCHING 
6S 
speaking to, and according to her or his own identity as well. The second social 
arena is power: code-switching also depends on the power that one has over 
others, or the power that others have over one. The third social arena is transac-
tion: code-switching depends on the situation, and on the purpose of the speech 
act. A speaker may not be sure about the social arena: she or he may not be sure 
about the status of the other person, for example. In that case she or he uses a 
code which will help keep the interaction undefined. Myers-Scotton (1986: 
408) gives the example of a brother and a sister in western Kenya who were con-
versing in the brother's shop. The sister wanted to have special treatment from 
her brother, so she used their shared mother tongue. He, on the other hand, 
replied in Swahili to show her that he was treating her as a customer in his store. 
The sister chose to emphasise her identity as a 'sister' rather than her identity 
as a customer in her brother's shop. She used code choice to do so. He, on the 
other hand, did not accept the identity that she assigned herself I think to some 
extent one can say that the sister expected to have power over the brother, and, 
therefore, to receive special treatment, a better price, a better cut of meat etc. 
In the end his power as shop keeper prevailed over her power as his sister. The 
brother and sister also did not agree on the kind of transaction taking place. The 
brother wanted the situation to be that of a customer and a shop owner, while 
the sister did not want that. The brother refused to act within the social arena 
the sister assigned to him and chose another one instead. 
Myers-Scotton (1993) proposes a third theory which tries to explain code-
switching as a universal, rule-governed phenomenon. She contends that the fact 
that people switch from one code to another or from one language to another 
does not necessarily mean that this switching has a social motivation. Code-
switching in itself does not have to denote any effect, nor does it necessarily have 
any discourse function. Code-switching can be used as the unmarked variety of 
certain communities (as the normal linguistic behaviour). It can be used with 
no particular social motivation behind it; although for an outsider on this com-
munity it does carry a social message, for an insider it is the norm. Labov ( 1971: 
462) gives an example of switching with no social motivation in mind, in which 
a young African American boy switched between two different codes: Black 
English Vernacular and Standard English. The boy was describing a game of 
skelly (a New York street game). Labov found the following: 
1. Switching sites are often difficult to limit, since many items are shared 
by both systems: the Vernacular and the Standard. 
2. The speaker switches between both systems at least sixteen times 
without an apparent motivation in the same stretch of discourse. 
Labov therefore considers it unproductive to regard this as code-switching. 
Romaine, however (1995: 171), posits that this can be considered code-
switching since this kind of switching does not just occur in the USA, but in 

66 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
other places as well. She contends that this case of code-switching is similar to 
the one examined by Gumperz for Delhi, between Panjabi and Hindi (1982a: 
85). Gumperz suggests that the two codes appear indistinguishable phoneti-
cally and almost identical in syntax and lexicon as a result of convergence and 
borrowing. 
Myers-Scotton also argues that whether code-switching has a discourse 
function or a social motivation depends on both the speaker and the audience. 
Both are aware of what is conventionally expected from them in a community. 
This idea of mutual agreement concerning the expectations of audience and 
speaker is what differentiates marked from unmarked choices. Myers-Scotton 
explains what she means by markedness by proposing that 'what community 
norms would predict is unmarked, what is not predicted is marked' ( 1998b: 5). 
In other words, switching is governed by tacit social conventions. 
Myers-Scotton goes further, by proposing that an ability to switch is 
implied in the communicative competence which all individuals possess 
(1998b: 6). She compares this communicative competence to the grammatical 
competence of a language. In her theory, switching is not just a performance 
process, but a rule-governed competence which native speakers learn. In 
other words, all cognitively developmentally normal humans have the ability 
to learn how the community I communities they are part of evaluate switches, 
whether style shifts, dialect switches, diglossic switches or bilingual code-
switching, and likewise, they possess the ability to learn to perform/practise/ 
use such switches for a range of interactional purposes. 
First, Myers-Scotton differentiates between using code-switching with no 
motivation in mind, as the unmarked choice, and using it with a specific moti-
vation in mind, as the marked choice. Where the phenomenon of switching 
is unmarked, actual switches are more frequent, and the phenomenon more 
predictable (one can predict that it will happen, but not how many times or 
where, i.e. it is predictably unpredictable). 
In the following example, the speakers switch between English and Swahili. 
English is the marked choice in this case. Therefore switching to English has a 
specific discourse function, as will become clear below (Scotton and Ury 1977: 
16-17). A passenger on a bus to Nairobi and a bus conductor enter into an 
interaction. The conductor asks the passenger where he is going, to determine 
his fare. English (the marked choice) is underlined, and the rest of the interac-
tion is in the unmarked choice (Swahili). 
(60) Passenger: 
Nataka kwenda posta. 
'I want to go to the post office.' 
Conductor: 
Kutoka hapa mpaka posta nauli ni senti hamsini. 
'From here to the post office, the fare is 50 cents.' 
(Passenger gives the conductor a shilling, from which he should get SO cents 
in change.) 

CODE-SWITCHING 
67 
Conductor: 
N gojea change yako. 
'Wait for your change.' 
(The passenger says nothing until some minutes have passed and the bus is 
nearing the post office where the passenger plans to get off.) 
Passenger: 
Nattaka change yangu. 
'I want my change.' 
Conductor: 
change utapa, Bwana. 
'You'll get your change.' 
Passenger: 
I am nearing my destination. 
Conductor: 
Do you think I could run away with your change?. 
The passenger switches to English when the conversation has thus far been 
in Swahili to renegotiate the interaction. Minimally the conductor knows 
that some extra information has been implicated; it necessarily shows the 
passenger's level of education. The content of the message also carries a 
Grician implicature, which the code-switch underlines. The conductor then 
replies in English, showing his level of education and thus asserting his own 
position as equal to the passenger. English here is used as the marked variety. 
As such, it has a discourse function: it is used to express authority as well as 
anger. 
A similar example is reported by Suleiman (2004: 9), in which he describes 
his trip to Israel as a British Palestinian. He was expected to speak Arabic to 
the Israeli soldiers and policemen, whether Jewish or Druze, at checkpoints, 
since his passport indicated that he was of Palestinian origin. He in fact did 
not use Arabic, although his name and origin all prove he is Palestinian. Yet 
he decided to answer their questions only in English even when the ques-
tions were asked in Arabic. By doing so, he was refusing to acknowledge any 
bonds of solidarity or even understanding between him and them. Further, 
using Arabic would have put the soldiers in a privileged power position over 
him as a Palestinian. He was basically making it clear that they were on an 
equal footing. He appealed to the British part of his identity, which gave 
him more power over the soldiers. It could also be that he spoke English spe-
cifically to have power over the soldiers because his English was much better 
than theirs. In this case they were not on equal footing; thanks to his British 
passport and mastery of English, he was clearly in a more powerful position 
interactionally. 
As noted earlier, however, the fact that someone switches between two dif-
ferent codes does not necessarily mean that she or he wants to convey a certain 
feeling or assert her or his role. In the following example (Myers-Scotton 
1993: 123-4), two school teachers who are native speakers ofShona, a South 
African language, are conversing about the relative progress of their students. 
English elements are underlined (according to Myers-Scotton's model ofML, 
the ML in this example is Shona). 

68 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(61) Teacher: Manje zvakafanana kana nekuti uri kuita grade one manje saka 
vana vazhinji vechisikana ku-primary vanogona sitereki. Vanokasika ku-
absorb zvinhu. But as time goes on vana kuenda ku-grade {ive, six, seven, 
form one vanonoka kuita catch up mu-ma-lessons. But once they catch up 
they go ahead. 
'Now, for example, it is the same when you are in grade one now so that 
many of the girls understand much better. They hurry to absorb things. 
But as time goes on, children go to grade five, six, seven, and form one 
boys are late to catch up with lessons. But once they catch up they go 
ahead.' 
Code-switching between Shona and English is frequent, unpredictable and 
normal for the speakers in this kind of interaction. That is, it is predictable 
that there will be switches between Shona and English. The audience or 
addressee expects it as well. It does not denote any specific discourse function. 
For these speakers, code-switching is the norma~ unmarked choice. But note 
that this type of switching only occurs in certain communities between people 
who perceive one another as peers in some way. Hence it may communicate an 
important message at a more abstract level. However, it is the overall pattern 
of switching rather than the individual switches that are meaningful. 
In my English-language school, we started at the age of four to be taught 
MSA and English simultaneously. The following song was very common 
among girls at the age of eight when playing together. 
(62) One day wana wana wana ma:fl 
I saw a beautiful girl 
'lulti /aha saba:~ il-xe:r 
'la:lit li saba~ innu:r 
'lulti liha I love you 
'la:lit livery much.' 
'One day while I was walking ( lit. 'and I walking' 'And I' is repeated 
three times) 
I saw a beautiful girl 
I told her 'good morning' (lit. 'morning of blessing'). 
She answered 'good morning' (lit. 'morning of light'). 
I said 'I love you' 
She said 'very much' 
It is quite obvious that the reason why schoolgirls in an English-language 
school in Egypt switch between English and ECA in this song is simply 
because they have access to both. They form a community of bilinguals within 
their school borders. They are in fact expected to switch between both. The 
song does not have a symbolic effect on any of the participants within the 

CODE-SWITCHING 
69 
borders of the commnnity. Outside that border it does signal out the speakers 
as coming from an English-language school rather than a government school 
or a French one. 
All people, according to Myers-Scotton, are equipped with the competence 
to assess linguistic choices. All people have a 'predisposition' (1998b: 6) to see 
linguistic choices as marked or unmarked. There is perhaps an extra message 
in a linguistic choice which is sociopsychological in nature. All speakers have 
a markedness evaluator, to measure the markedness of an utterance, and cru-
cially they learn the local commnnity's ways of assessing markedness. They 
have the ability to nnderstand that marked choices will be received differently 
from unmarked choices. For speakers to have this competence, they have to 
be exposed to the use of unmarked and marked choices. Just as exposure to 
grammatical structures makes people competent in a language, so exposure 
to marked and unmarked choices makes them competent in making and 
nnderstanding linguistic choices. There is always a link between the use of a 
linguistic code and its effect in a certain situation, and this is part of learning 
a language. 
The speaker has the competence to assess all code choices as more or less 
unmarked or marked for the exchange type in which they occur. It is claimed 
that this commnnicative competence is both nniversal, in the sense that all 
people possess it, and particular, because it is developed in relation to a certain 
commnnity. That is to say, this competence is acquired through social experi-
ence in interactions in a particular commnnity. 
Within this framework, speakers as individuals make choices from their 
linguistic repertoire to achieve certain goals which are of significance to them. 
They act rationally because they have a set of choices and they presumably 
make the best choice. By 'the best choice', I mean the choice that will benefit 
the speaker most given the audience and the circumstances surronnding the 
speech event, and that involves the least effort on the speaker's part. That 
is to say, a speaker must calculate the costs and rewards of one choice over 
another (Myers-Scotton 1993: 110). 'Costs' refer to the quantity of words the 
speaker uses and the stylistic devices, and 'rewards' refer to the intentional as 
well as referential meaning she or he conveys to the listener (see also Grice's 
1975 maxims and the relevance theory of Sperber and Wilson 1986). The 
speaker makes a choice that minimises costs and maximises rewards. Thus, 
speakers choose one code over another because of the rewards they expect 
from that choice, relative to its costs. So the role of the speaker is emphasised. 
But note also that the choice made by the speaker is connected to the audi-
ence's expectations. The speaker wants to leave an effect on the audience, and 
thus maximise her or his own rewards: the audience has certain expectations 
from the speaker, and whether these expectations are met or not determines 
whether the choice the speaker has made is marked or not. That is to say, if the 
code used is expected by the audience, then the speaker is using an unmarked 

70 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
choice, and does not necessarily want to leave a particular effect on that audi-
ence. If, on the other hand, the speaker uses a code which is not expected 
by the audience then she or he is making a marked choice for the purpose of 
leaving an impact on the audience. 
Another point I want to mention about Myers-Scotton's theory is that she 
recalls the fact that speakers negotiate different identities all the time, and she 
claims that this is a major factor in code-switching, 'A major motivation for 
variety in linguistic choices in a given community is the possibility of social 
identity negotiations' (1993: 111). 
Speakers negotiate mainly in order to reach an agreement about the mode 
of the interaction. They make choices either to emphasise their position, or to 
convey their own views. 
Myers-Scotton lists five different maxims to help us understand the choice 
that people make in code-switching ( 1998b: 25): the unmarked choice maxim, 
the marked choice maxim, the exploratory choice maxim, the deference 
maxim and the virtuosity maxim. Although I agree that the idea of maxims 
that Myers-Scotton proposes is indeed more accurate and thorough than just 
assigning discourse functions to certain codes, the maxims seem to be more 
than is needed in an analysis for code-switching, since they could all fall under 
the umbrella of marked and unmarked choices. Myers-Scotton, for example, 
posits that the deference maxim and the virtuosity maxim 'complement the 
unmarked choice maxim' (1993: 148). I think one can concentrate on both the 
marked and unmarked choices by emphasising the role of both speaker and 
audience, and by doing this, one is still generating a more general theoretical 
framework. Nevertheless, I think her theory deserves attention because of the 
factors mentioned above. 
A related concept to markedness is that of indexicality, which is discussed 
in detail by Woolard (2004). Woolard explains marked choices in terms of 
indexes. Indexicality is a relation of associations through which utterances are 
understood. For example, if a specific code or form oflanguage presupposes a 
'certain social context, then use of that form may create the perception of such 
context where it did not exist before' (Woolard 2004: 88). If a code is associ-
ated with the authority of courtrooms and this code is then used in a different 
context, it will denote authority. The language of the speaker would then be 
considered an authoritative language (Silverstein 1996: 267). 
To conclude this section, I would like to say that it was quite surprising 
to find a large number of studies done on constraints of code-switching in 
relation to Arabic and few studies done on the social motivations of code-
switching. More studies are needed that concentrate on motivations and on 
different parts of the Arab world and not just among North Africans. 
There are still a number of studies that examined the discourse functions of 
diglossic switching as part of code-switching. These are what I will examine 
below. 

CODE-SWITCHING 
71 
2.5.2 Motivations and discourse functions of diglossic switching 
A number of other studies have attempted to explain the motivations of 
switching between the H and L varieties in Arabic-speaking societies. These 
studies have concentrated less on form and more on motivations for switching. 
I will mention briefly some of these studies. 
Abu-Melhim's (1991) application of the accommodation theory tries to 
explain communication across Arabic dialects, arguing (1991: 248) that the 
idea that Arabic speakers of different dialects rely on MSA when they con-
verse together is not accurate. He studies five conversations, each lasting 
for half an hour, involving a Jordanian couple and an Egyptian couple. The 
subjects chose their own topics. The Jordanians were from Irbid and the 
Egyptians from Cairo. Thus, according to him, they spoke urban dialects. 
Abu-Melhim demonstrates that speakers employ a variety of accommodation 
strategies when conversing with each other, and that these strategies include 
not just switching from their regional dialect to MSA but also switching from 
their regional dialect to another dialect; for example, from Jordanian to ECA, 
and even from their dialect to English ( 1991: 249). For instance, he posits that 
Jordanians switch to English to emphasise or clarify a statement (1991: 242), 
while they may switch to MSA when quoting someone or again to emphasise a 
statement. Switching from Jordanian Arabic to Egyptian is used by Jordanians 
to accommodate to the dominant prestigious variety (Egyptian Arabic) and 
thus to facilitate conversation (1991: 237). 
There have also been a number of studies that have attempted to explain 
switching between ECA and MSA in Egypt, whether in written or oral per-
formance. Abdel-Malek conducted research on the influence of diglossia in 
the novels of Yiisuf al-Siba<I. He found (1972: 141) that the development of 
the genre 'novel' in Arabic literature in the early twentieth century resulted 
in considerable tension between H and L, and in response to that tension a 
new linguistic style (developed by Yiisuf al-Siba<I) appeared in Arabic prose 
literature. Abdel-Malek's idea of a mixed written style is similar to the idea of 
ESA, although he specifies no clear rules to define this style. 
Holes (1993) examined the relation between language form and function in 
Nasser's political speeches. Holes detects that there can be an element of con-
scious choice in using one variety rather than another. In general, 'Speakers 
are free to move up and down it [the stylistic spectrum] in accordance with 
what they perceive to be the moment-by-moment requirements for appropri-
ate language use' (1993: 15). He stresses the role of the speaker by claiming 
that speakers always have 'intentions' and 'strategies', and these two factors 
influence their language choice (1993: 13-45) at both the micro and macro 
levels. In a similar vein, Mazraani ( 1997) examines language variation in rela-
tion to three political figures in Egypt, Libya and Iraq and how these three 
political leaders use language variation as a 'rhetorical strategy' (1997: 25). 

72 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Mejdell (1996) examines stylistic variations in spoken Arabic with reference 
to recordings of the prolific Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz (Najlb Ma);l 
fii?;), quoted at the beginning of this chapter, talking about his life, and tries 
to explain the kinds of processes that motivate stylistic choices by matching 
certain discourse functions with the use of one variety rather than another. 
She comes to the same conclusion suggested by Holes (1993): that people 
often switch from MSA to ECA when giving examples, explaining, rephrasing 
or commenting on a previous statement in MSA. She also alludes to the fact 
that code choice is related to the way one perceives oneself as well as to the 
way one perceives others. In a later article (1999), she studies the interaction 
between MSA and ECA in the spoken performance of Egyptian academics and 
writers 'in settings where community norms require a mode of speaking that is 
more formal' (1999: 228). She suggests that code choice should be examined 
in relation to the speaker's change of role vis-a-vis her or his audience (1999: 
231). Mejdell concludes that she considers 'the access to both varieties [MSA 
and ECA], with the wide span of cultural and social connotations attached to 
them, a rich stylistic resource for speakers to use creatively' (1999: 227; see 
also Mejdell2006). 
Note that there is no determinism here: speakers can choose how they speak 
(though within socially prescribed limits). This refers to the point we discussed 
earlier which was made by Myers-Scotton (1993) that speakers are free to choose 
but their choices will be interpreted within local understandings of markedness. 
Rosenbaum (2000) studies the occurrence of a mixed style MSA and ECA 
in texts written by Egyptians, a phenomenon which seems to be gaining in 
popularity. Rosenbaum thinks that a mixed written style, involving clear shifts 
between H (MSA) and L (ECA), breaks the 'rules, old and new, of writing in 
Arabic, but does not encounter any serious opposition in Egyptian culture, 
probably because Egyptian readers have been accustomed to seeing ECA forms 
in print already for decades' (2000: 82). However, I think the situation in Egypt 
as well as in other parts of the Arab world is more complex than this and there 
are still intellectuals who object to the use of dialect in literature. This will be 
discussed in detail in Chapter 5, but to give an example, Mahfouz (Najlb Ma);l 
fii?;) himself refused to use any dialect in his writing, even in dialogues. 
One can see from all the above studies that linguists have moved forward 
since Ferguson's article on diglossia and have acknowledged and tried to 
explain the diglossic switching that takes place in the Arab world. In the next 
section I will examine empirical data from Egypt. 
2. 5. 2.1 The relationship between code choice and speaker's role in Egyptian 
political discourse: a case study 
In the following study I will examine the relation between code choice and 
choice of role by the speaker. I argue that in political speeches in general 

CODE-SWITCHING 
73 
there is a direct relation between change of role and change of code. This 
relation, though examined here in a modern political speech, is not a new 
phenomenon. 
The speaker will usually choose a linguistic code in order to convey her or 
his aim. In my data, this means essentially whether she or he chooses to do 
so using ECA or MSA. However, there are some types of 'moves' a speaker 
may make, for rhetorical purposes, in relation to the audience, and some ways 
of expressing her or his intention, which appear to be particularly significant 
for what they tell us about how she or he perceives her or his role in rela-
tion to them. These 'moves' are often signalled by specific types of syntactic 
or phonological choices. For example, the use of exclamations rather than 
declaratives may indicate a change in the speaker's role vis-3-vis the audi-
ence. The choice of the first, second or third persons of the verb can also be 
significant: for example, in developing an argument, if the speaker starts by 
using verbs in the first person and then shifts to verbs in the third person, his 
or her doing so may be a sign of a change in his/her role vis-3-vis both the 
message and the audience. Syntactic processes like negation, deixis and the 
expression of verbal aspect require the speaker to make code choices between 
ECA and MSA (as we have seen), and these choices, quite apparent from the 
actual message, send signals as to the role she or he is adopting in relation to 
the audience. 
After examining my political data I found that there is a direct relationship 
between change of role and change of code. This gives evidence for the claims 
of Gumperz and Goffman. 
The speech analysed here was delivered on Labour Day 1999. The speaker 
is the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, and the audience consists of gov-
ernment ministers and government employees from all classes of society. In 
this speech the president gives the Egyptians an account of the achievements 
of the year, as well as problems that still need to be tackled. The speaker 
switches from MSA to ECA and back twice in the speech. The speech is, 
therefore, divisible into four parts. 
2.5.2.1.1 Part one ofthe speech 
Speaker's role: 
Mubarak starts his speech by outlining the political agenda of the past year, the 
country's achievements and aspirations. He assigns himself his basic 'default' 
role, that of a head of state giving an account of what he did throughout the 
year. By doing so, he creates a formal relation with the audience of governor-
governed. For example, he states the importance of an increase in exports 
and a decrease in imports. He also mentions the fact that it is important for 
the economy of Egypt not to be dependent on fluctuations of price in a small 
number of raw materials like petrol Consider the following example from part 
one (analysed examples will be glossed below). 

74 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(63) 
8a:niyan/i~la:~u 1-xalali.fil-mi:za:ni t-tuga:ri/ fan tari:qi ziya:dati ~­
~a:¢ira:t wa tarfi:di 1-'listira:d/ fa qa¢iyyatu ~-~a:dira:ti 1-mi~riyya qa¢ 
iyyatun ma~i:riyyah/ yagib fan tafgala 'lihtima:ma kullu 1-.fi'la:t/ allati 
tata~ammalu ga:niban min fib'll wa mas'lu:liyyati 1-inta:gi.fi ma~rl wa 
kullu 1-mu'lassasa:ti allati tafmalu min 'lagli sala:mati 1-iqti~a:di 1-ma~ 
ril wa nuqtati l-bad'li ~-~a~i:~fi taqdi:ri/ hiya 'Jan taku:na huna:ka 
siya:satun wa:4i~a/ hadafuha tawsi:fa qa:fidat wa nawwfiyyati ~-~a:¢ 
ira:ti 1-mi~riyya batta Ia: taku:na furdatan li-taqalluba:tin kabi:ratin 
murtabitatin bi-'lasfa:ri fadadin qali:lin min al-silafi kal-bitro:l 
'Secondly, redressing the deficit in the trade balance, by increasing 
exports and controlling imports. This is because the issue of Egyptian 
exports is a crucial issue that has to occupy the minds of everyone who 
is involved in Egyptian production. This issue should also occupy the 
mind of all establishments that work for the security of the Egyptian 
economy. The true starting point in my estimation is to have a clear 
policy that aims at increasing the scale and quality of Egyptian exports, 
so that it is not susceptible to great fluctuations, related to the price of a 
few raw materials like petrol.' 
Code choice: 
The code used here is pure MSA in which even case and mood endings are 
respected. Usually, as was said earlier, speakers drop case and mood endings 
even when speaking MSA. However, the president is in fact reading and this 
makes it easier to use case and mood endings. The reason for this choice of code 
seems connected to the role the speaker is playing in this part of the speech. 
There are no verbs in the first person at all. In fact, there is a high degree of 
depersonalising nominalization (underlined), which adds to the 'objectivity' of 
the message. For example: 
(64) 8a:niyanli:Jla:~!!_ 
1-xalali 
fil-mi:za:ni 
t-tuga:ri/ 
fan 
Secondly redressing- det-deficit-gen in-det-balance- det-trade 
by 
nom 
gen 
tari:qi 
ziya:dati 
~-~a:Jira:t wa 
tar{i:di 
1-'listira:d 
way-gen 
increasing-
det-
and 
controlling-
det-
gen 
exports 
gen 
imports 
'Secondly, redressing the deficit in the trade balance, by increasing 
exports and controlling imports.' 
Had the speaker chosen to do so, these nouns could have been replaced by 
verbs like nu#ib (vlpl 'we redress'), nuraffid (vlpl 'we control') etc. These 
verbs would be realised as first person plural and not singular, and the air 
of objectivity and professionalism that prevails in this part might have been 
partly lost by the use of inclusive first person verbs. 

CODE-SWITCHING 
75 
Mubarak also uses several highly marked MSA features: 
1. He uses .?ifra: b (mood and case endings) in many instances. 
Consider the following example, and note the case and mood marking, 
underlined: 
(65) fa 
qa¢iyyat!!:_ 
~-~a:dira: ti 
qa¢iyyatun 
ma~t: 
riyyah/ 
crucial 
Thus 
issue-nom 
det-exports-
det-
issue-nom 
gen 
Egyptian 
yagib 
fan 
tafgal~ 
.?ihtima:ma 
kullu 
1-ji.?a:t/ 
must 
that 
3fsg-occupy-sub 
interest-ace 
all-nom 
det-people 
allati 
tatabammal!!:_ 
ga:niban 
mtn 
fib.? I 
rel 
3fsg-carry-ind 
part-ace 
from 
burden 
wa 
mas.?u:liyyat! 
1-inta:g! 
.fi 
ma~r 
and 
responsibility-gen 
det-production-gen 
in 
Egypt 
'This is because the issue of Egyptian exports is a crucial issue that 
has to occupy the minds of everyone who is involved in Egyptian 
production.' 
2. He also uses MSA relative pronouns (underlined). 
(66) wa 
kullu 
1-mu.?assasa:ti 
allati 
tafmalu 
and 
all-nom 
det-institutions-gen 
rel 
work-ind 
mtn 
.?agli 
sala:mati 
1-iqti~a:di 
1-ma~ri/ 
for 
sake-gen 
safety-gen 
det-economics-gen 
det-Egyptian 
'This issue should also occupy the mind of all establishments that work 
for the security of the Egyptian economy.' 
3. He uses MSA negative structures (underlined). 
(67) batta 
Ia: 
taku:na 
furdatan 
li-taqalluba: 
kabi:ratin 
tin 
So that neg 3fsg-become- susceptible-
to fluctuations-
big-gen 
sub 
ace 
gen 
'So that it is not susceptible to great fluctuations.' 
He also uses highly marked MSA phraseology and vocabulary, e.g. 
(68) batt a Ia: 
taku:na 
furdatan 
li-taqalluba: tin 
kabi:ratin 
So 
neg 3fsg-become- susceptible-
to fluctuations-
big-gen 
that 
sub 
ace 
gen 
'So that it is not susceptible to great fluctuations.' 

76 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
In this example, there is only one verb marked for mood and a number of case 
marked nouns and adjectives, which again renders the sentence saliently MSA 
rather than ECA. 
Phonologically, this whole section of his speech conforms to MSA, rather 
than Egyptian norms. Thus, he consistently uses MSA phonemes like q, 
instead of the ECA glottal stop, in cases where theoretically either q or 'l could 
have occurred, e.g. taqdi:ri rather than ta'ldi:ri 
2.5.2.1.2 Part two ofthe speech 
Now let us consider the role of Mubarak in part two of the same speech, which 
occurs immediately after part one. In this part the code changes from MSA to 
ECA. The change is sudden and quite drastic. This drastic change in the code 
level from MSA to ECA corresponds to an equally radical change of role on the 
part of the speaker, vis-3-vis the audience and the way he mediates his message. 
Speaker's role: 
Here, Mubarak narrates a story to support his abstract argument about the 
trade balance. In narrating the story, he also changes his role vis-3-vis the audi-
ence to that of a 'good old friend', or a 'fellow Egyptian' He takes it for granted 
that the audience will understand what he is talking about. The audience here is 
treated like someone who was born, like him, in the countryside, and who, like 
him, used to make kites out of paper and pieces of string as a child. This was a 
common activity for poor boys who had no choice but to make their own kites. 
The kites he and his audience used to make as children are now being imported 
from Brazil He goes on to make a similar point, this time about the importa-
tion of ice-cream cups and spoons. These concrete examples are given to make 
his point, that something needs to be done about the increase of imports into 
Egypt, clear in a code all will not only understand but also identify with. Here 
he is nowhere near as formal as in part one of the speech; he seems more like a 
concerned friend chatting with his audience over the garden fence, and part of 
the way he conveys this is through the use of the language of everyday life. 
(69) da 'lana marra 'lana kuntl fifarm if-Je: x/ farji:n i{-fayyara:t illi kunna 
b-nifmilhafil-fallabi:n di/ il-wara'l di/ wi-nilza'lha bi-bu:~ wi kuryit 
duba:ra wi nfayyarha/ gaybinha mil-barazi:l/ {abfan da mablag ha:yif/ 
bi-y'lullak wi da mablag/ 'lana ba-¢rab masal/ Jaryinha mil-barazi:l 
(applause) 
ill il maball illi b-yibi:f 'lays kre:m bi-yaftaxirl il-'lays kre:m min barra/ 
ik-kubbaya gayya min barr a 1-mafla'la gayya min barra/ ya farbitil {abb 
ma fandina ma~a:nif 
'I was in Sharm El Sheikh the other day. Do you know these kites we used 
to make in the countryside, the ones made from paper, the ones we used 
to fix with reed and a piece of string and then we would let them fly? They 

CODE-SWITCHING 
77 
import these kites from Brazil. Of course this is a trivial amount of money. 
Then someone comes and tells you, "is this an amount worth bothering 
about?" I am just giving an example. They buy them from Brazil! 
(applause) 
The shop that sells ice cream is very proud to say that the ice cream is 
from abroad, the cups are from abroad, and the spoons are from abroad. 
How wonderful! Come on! Don't we have factories?' 
It is noteworthy that there is no change in topic between parts one and two. 
Mubarak is explaining the same thing: that it is important for Egypt to have a 
stable economy and to reduce imports and increase exports. The difference in 
approach is not in the subject matter, but rather in the way he chooses to tackle 
it, that is, in the 'ideation' triggered by a change in his role and approach, and 
not by a change in topic. In the first part of his speech, on the other hand, he 
took a 'presidential' look at economic problems. In the second, he alludes to 
everyday experiences and observations he shares with the audience. The dif-
ference between parts one and two is the difference between abstract and con-
crete, and the shift in code choice permits him to demonstrate this difference 
and to reach people's intellect as well as emotions. 
Code choice: 
Before I analyse the choice of code in this part, I would like to refer to Milroy's 
work, which is significant for this part and which will be discussed in detail 
in the next chapter. Milroy, in her book Language and social networks (1987: 
10), indicates the relationship between heavy usage of vernacular speech and 
the internal structure of the group using that speech. She also indicates that 
people, whether educated or uneducated, exploit dialect as a means of project-
ing their local identity and emphasising it (see chapter 3). 
Now consider the following typical examples ofMubarak's use ofECA: 
(70) fabfan da 
mablag ha:yif/ bi-y'lul 
lak 
wt 
da 
mablag 
Of 
dem amount trivial 
asp-3msg- to-
and dem amount 
course 
say 
pr2msg 
Of course this is a trivial amount of money. Then someone comes and 
tells you "is this an amount worth bothering about?" 
(71) 
fabb ma 
fandina 
OK 
prep-have-pr1 pl 
'Come on! Don't we have factories?' 
ma~a:nif 
factories 
The use of the underlined expression 'someone comes and tells you' and the use 
of the word tabb are typical features ofECA, but in fact the whole passage is in 
ECA. Furthermore, Mubarak refers to a very special thing that children (he and 

78 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
his audience in earlier years) used to do in the countryside, which is making kites 
out of paper and pieces of strings. As a consequence, the verbs are in the first 
person singular, first person plural and second person plural: ?ana kunt, fatji:n 
('I was', 'do you know'). Moreover, Mubarak starts with a question rather than a 
proposition to involve the audience and remind them of their shared past: 
(72) farji:n 
it-tayyara:t 
2pl-know 
det-plans 
fil-falla~i:n 
di 
in det-countryside dem 
illi kunna 
rel to be-2pl-perf 
b-nifmilha 
asp-2pl-do-pr3fsg 
'Do you know these kites we used to make in the countryside?' 
There is also a quintessentially ECA exclamation used here ironically. It does 
not have a counterpart in MSA and is usually used by Egyptians in personal 
conversations to signal irony or sarcasm. 
(73) ya far~iti 
Oh happiness-prlsg 
'How wonderful!' (lit. 'oh my happiness') 
It may seem surprising that this expression is used by an Arab head of state, 
but it seems less surprising if one takes account of the fact that the president 
is now playing a different role, a role which no doubt appeals very much to 
his audience. The degree of the audience's empathy is indicated by a big burst 
of applause. The applause suggests that the audience approves of his change 
of role, and appreciates his popular mode of addressing them. The tone of 
voice of the speaker also changes in this part to a much more conversational 
one. One can even hear a trace of a countryside accent in this part. Obviously, 
the speaker uses ECA rather than MSA phonology. For example, he uses 
Egyptian? rather than MSA q in war a? 'paper', nilza? 'fix, stick', yi?u:l 'says', 
mafla?a 'spoon' (compare this with the use of q in part one ofhis speech). 
2.5.2.1.3 Part three ofthe speech 
Speaker's role: 
The basic role ofhead of state giving an account of past achievements and future 
plans returns in part three, and the code is again MSA. In part three, as in part 
one, Mubarak again constructs an abstract economic argument, this time part-
historical. Egypt is personified as an abstract entity, competing with other coun-
tries, and obtaining the respect of financial organisations. This was achieved only 
very recently, and Mubarak (by implication) played a role in this achievement: 
(74) wa ~atta !-'lams al-qari:b lamyakunfi wusfi mi~rllamyakunfi wusfi mi~rl 
wa ?ukarrirl ?an tufakkirafil-gadi 1-bafi:di 'law il-qari:b/ ka:na l-gahdu 

CODE-SWITCHING 
79 
mustanfaranfi muwa:gahati mu.fkila:ti l-ams/ mul}a:~aranfi 'li[a:ri rudu:di 
'lajfa:l/ aw !mlu:lin waqtiyya mutafarriqa/ waft ha:oa 1-mana:x/ lam 
yakun mumkinan 'labadan/ 'Jan nufakkira/ 'Jan tufakkira mi4ru fi d-duxu: I 
'lila fa~ri 1-mafru:fa:ti 1-kubra/ 'Iilla bafda 'lifa:dati tafyi:di binya:tiha 
1-asa:siyya/ wa ziya:dati qudrati mu'lassasa:tiha 1-muxtalifa/ fi tanfioi 
1-mafru:fa:ti d-daxma wa rtifa:fna#:biha min al-isti8ma:ra:ti 1-kabi:ra/ 
bafda 'Jan 'la~babat nuq{ata gaobin lil-'listi8ma:ra:t il-fa:lamiyya/ tab!?a 
b-8iqati 1-mu'lassasa:ti 1-ma:liyya k-kubra/ 
'And until very recently Egypt could not, I repeat, Egypt could not 
think of the far or near future. All efforts were exerted to face the 
problems of the past. And all efforts were limited to various tempo-
rary solutions and reactions. In this environment, it was not possible 
for us, for Egypt to think about entering an era of big projects, except 
after rebuilding its main base, increasing the ability of its differ-
ent institutions to implement big projects, and increasing its share 
of great investments. All of this after Egypt became attractive for 
international investment that had the confidence of great financial 
institutions.' 
Code choice: 
The speaker here, as in part one, uses highly marked MSA features. These 
include 
MSA phraseology (underlined): 
(75) wa 
batt a !-'lams 
al-q_ari:b lam yakun 
fi 
wusfi 
mt~r 
And until det-
det-near neg 3msg-to in power-
Egypt 
yesterday 
be-juss 
gen 
'And until very recently Egypt could not,' 
Case marking (underlined): 
(76) ka:na 
1-gahd!!_ 
mustanfaran fi 
muwa:gahat£ mufleila:t£ 
To be-3msg- det-effort- exerted-ace in facing-gen 
problems-
perf 
nom 
gen 
l-ams 
del-yesterday 
'All efforts were exerted to face the problems ofthe past.' 
and negative and demonstrative features: 
(77) lam 
yakun 
fi 
wusfi 
mt~r 
neg 
3msg-to be-juss 
in 
capacity-gen 
Egypt 
'Egypt could not' 

8o 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(78) wa 
fi 
ha:oa 
1-mana:x/ 
lamyakun 
mumkinan 
'labadan/ 
And 
in 
dem 
det-climate 
neg 3msg-
possible-
ever 
to be-juss 
ace 
'Jan 
nufakkira/ 
'Jan 
tufakkira 
mt~ru 
fi 
d-duxu:l 
that 
I pi-think-
that 
3fsg-
Egypt-
in 
det-entering 
sub 
think-sub 
nom 
'lila 
fa~ri 
1-mafru: fa:ti 
1-kubra 
to 
age-gen 
det-projects-gen 
det-big 
'In this environment, it was not possible for us, for Egypt to think about 
entering an era of big projects' 
The speaker also goes back to using a highly nominalised style: 
(79) 'Iilla 
bafda 'lifa:dati 
ta[vi:di 
binya:tiha 
Except after repeating-gen building-gen base-gen-pr3fsg 
'except after rebuilding its main base' 
1-asa: siyya 
det-main 
(80) wa 
ziya:dati 
qudrati 
mu'lassasa:tiha 
and 
increasing-gen 
ability-gen 
institutions-
gen-pr3fsg 
'increasing the ability of its different institutions' 
1-muxtalifa 
det-different 
In both these latter cases the speaker could have used verbs rather than the noun 
phrases. He also uses MSA rather than ECA phonology. For example, again he 
uses the MSA q instead of the glottal stop in qari: b 'near' and qudra 'ability' 
2.5.2.1.4 Partfourofthe speech 
Speaker's role: 
Here the role of the 'good old friend' returns, and the code is again ECA. This 
part occurs immediately after part three. Mubarak narrates the history of a 
shared Egyptian crisis that Egyptians managed to overcome because of their 
good luck and hard work, and because God was on their side. He again appeals 
to the past he shares with the audience, but this time he does not remind them 
of their childhood. He rather reminds them of the crisis the country went 
through, a crisis which was felt by him 'as an Egyptian', as well as by them. 
When there is victory at the end for them all, it is a victory that he as a fellow 
Egyptian shares with them. Egypt had been losing its economic reputation, 
internationally. As president, he had no choice but to borrow money from 
abroad. He did, and the problem was solved. He (as well as all Egyptians) 
managed to return all the money borrowed. 
(81) 'lintum farfi:n ir-ra:gil il-musta8mir lama ka:n yi:gi hine/ 'lana kunt 
ba-fu.f/ fa:wiz yi¢rab tilifo:n falafa:n yis'lal f ala mifa: d walla ba:ga/ 

CODE-SWITCHING 
81 
yiJu:m ya: xud bafrf,u wi yisa:fir min hina/ ya Jimma 1-Jubru~ ya Jimma 
lil-yuna:n/ yitkallim wiyirgaf/ wi bafde:n wa:~id Jalha !if Jana 
falafa:n kulli ma Jafu: z qifaf giya:r ~a-ru: ~ Jasa:fir Jubru~ walla 
1-yuna:n/ ah ma-fi:-ffoyda mafa:kum/ Jalha li kida bi-~ara:~a/ Julna 
baJa nistilifmil-xa:rigl Jahu 1-mukawwina:t il-xa:rigiyya wi Jamrina 
li-lla:h/ 
wi rabbina la buddi ~a-yifrigha/ Jistalafoa/ wi mifi:na/ wi bafde:nya 
xwanna rabbina foragha/ wi jilna xamsa wi fiJri:n milya:r min id-diyu:n 
illi fali:na wi rigifna fabifiyyi:n/ I 
(applause) 
fa rabbina dayman mafa ma~r I 
(big applause) 
Audience: yi~mi: k ya rayyis 
'You know, when an investor used to come to Egypt, I could see that if 
he wanted to make a phone call to ask about an appointment or some-
thing of that sort, he had to go to Cyprus or Greece to make a phone 
call and then come back. And then some one told me, "Do I have to 
travel to Greece or Cyprus whenever I need spare parts? Oh, there is no 
hope for you." He told me so quite frankly. So we said, "Let's borrow 
money from abroad, get those materials from abroad for heaven's sake! 
God will surely make it better." We borrowed money. We progressed. 
Then, brothers, God did make it better, and we paid back 25 billion 
pounds of debt. We are back as we were before, with no debts. 
(applause) 
So God is always with Egypt.' 
(applause) 
Audience: 'May God protect you, Mr President.' 
The story has a happy ending, and the audience shows its pleasure by sponta-
neously shouting 'May God protect you, Mr President.' Note that Mubarak 
does not claim that getting rid of Egypt's debts is just his doing. It is not even 
just the people's doing; it is also God's doing. God 'is always' with Egypt. 
Again the topic is essentially the same as in part three: the lack of economic 
planning in Egypt. Mubarak emphasises once more the fact that Egypt has 
achieved a lot in a short period, but this time he puts this fact across to his 
audience with everyday examples, and very concrete ones, like the difficulties 
people had in making a phone call and obtaining spare parts. This story could 
have been narrated in MSA, but much of its vividness would have been lost, 
especially for an Egyptian audience with whom he shares ECA. 
Code choice: 
Mubarak in this part of his speech uses ECA. He starts with the introductory 
phrase: 

82 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(82) 'lintum 
farji:n 
pr2mpl part-know 
'You know' 
People in Egypt usually start telling an anecdote with this phrase. Mubarak 
uses a similar tactic in part two. In this part, he also uses a story to speak about 
his achievements, and those of Egyptians. As in any normal ECA story, he uses 
ECA conjunctions and other linking phrases: the ECA inchoative verb yi'lu:m 
(3msg-to embark on) to introduce a new episode, for example, and wi bafde:n 
'and then' He employs dialogue to make the story more vivid to the audience: 
(83) 1lJt 
And 
bafde:n 
then 
wa: [Ud 
'lalha 
Iii 
'lana 
falafa:n 
because 
one 
say-perf-3msg 
-pr3fsg 
to-prlsg 
I 
kulli ma 
'lafu:z 
Whenever 
lsg-part-need 
'lubru~ 
walla 
1-yuna:n/ 
Cyprus 
or 
det-Greece 
qitaf giya:r 
ba-ru: b 
parts 
spare 
fut-lsg-go 
ah 
ma-ji:-f fayda 
yes 
neg-
benefit 
adv-neg 
'lalha 
li 
kida 
bi-~ara:ba 
say-3msg-perf-pr3fsg 
to-prlsg 
like this 
with honesty 
'lasa:fir 
lsg-travel 
mafa:kum/ 
with-pr2mpl 
'And then some one told me, "Do I have to travel to Greece or Cyprus 
whenever I need spare parts? Oh, there is no hope for you." He told me 
so quite frankly.' 
Egypt's problem is posed and 'we' (the speaker and the audience) have to deal 
with it. Mubarak does not claim that he dealt with it himself, but that 'we' did 
it, and 'we' decided. This use of the inclusive first person plural is strongly 
associated with the use of colloquial. 
(84) 'listalafoa/ 
wt 
mifi:na/ 
Borrow-lpl-perf and 
walk-lpl-perf 
1Vt 
bafde:n 
ya 
xwanna 
rabbina 
and 
then 
voc 
brothers-prlpl 
God 
faragha/ 
make better-
perf-3msg-
pr3fsg 
'We borrowed money. We progressed. Then, brothers, God did make it 
better.' 
This is a good example of the 'we' and 'they' dichotomy that Gumperz ( 1982a: 
95) mentions. He uses first and second person pronouns with ECA and third 
person pronouns with MSA. Mubarak uses ECA and the inclusive first person 
plural to create solidarity with his audience. 

CODE-SWITCHING 
83 
(85) ?ulna 
ba'la nistili[ 
mil-xa:rigl Jahu 
1-mukawwina:t 
1pl say-
then 1pl-bor-
from-det-
that is del-material 
perf 
row 
abroad 
il-xa:rigiyya 
wt 
Jamrina 
Ii-lla: hi 
wt 
rabbina 
det-abroad 
and 
destiny-pr1pl 
to det-God 
and 
God 
Ia buddi 
ba-yifrighal 
Jistala(nal 
wi 
mi{i:nal 
must 
fut-3msg-make 
borrow-1pl-perf and 
1pl-walk-perf 
better-pr3fsg 
wi 
bafde:n 
ya 
xwanna 
rabbina 
foraghal 
and 
then 
voc 
brothers 
God 
make better-3msg-
perf-pr3fsg 
wi 
j'ilna 
xamsa 
wt 
fijri:n 
milya:r 
mtn 
and 
1pl-remove-perf five 
and 
twenty 
billion 
from 
id-diyu:n 
illi 
fali:na 
wi 
rigifna 
tabifiyyinl I 
det-debts 
rel 
on-pr1pl 
and 
1pl return-perf normal 
'So we said, "Let's borrow money from abroad, get those materials 
from abroad for heaven's sake! God will surely make it better." We bor-
rowed money. We progressed. Then, brothers, God did make it better, 
and we paid back 25 billion pounds of debt. We are back as we were 
before, with no debts.' 
The verbs in this part of the speech are mostly in the first person singular or 
plural, ?ulna, nistilif, 'we said', 'we borrowed' etc. Mubarak also uses a host 
of other ECA linguistic features, like the relative marker illi, and negative 
structures like ma. J in ma-fi:-f foyda, 'you are hopeless' Phonologically, 
this section of the speech is entirely in accordance with ECA norms, the only 
exception being the imported MSA word mustaBmir 'investor' The (} could 
have become s as in ECA pronunciation, but the word itself has no other 
equivalent in ECA. 
2.5.2.1.5 General pattern ofthe speech 
In this speech the speaker adopts a particular strategy of code-switching. He 
states abstract facts in MSA, and then explains these facts in ECA with con-
crete, personalised examples, changing his role in the process. This strategy of 
moving back and forth from MSA to ECA is the basic feature of the 'design' 
of this speech. Table 2.1 summarises the discussion above. 
As was said earlier, this phenomenon of switching between ECA and MSA, 
which corresponds to a change in role on the part of the speaker, is not a new 
phenomenon. To support my data I would like to refer to an older political 
speech by Nasser, the late president of Egypt. 
Nasser(1918-70; Prime Minister 1954; president 1956-70) was an excellent 
manipulator of language. He was known for using ECA in his speeches (see 
Holes 1993). In using ECA, Nasser demonstrated to his audience that he was 

84 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Table 2.1 
Relation between code choice and speaker's role 
Kind of 
Speaker's public 
Role adopted by 
Role given to 
Speaker's 
monologue 
identity 
speaker 
audience 
code 
Pt one 
President of Egypt 
President 
Citizens 
MSA 
Pt two 
President of Egypt 
Good old friend 
Old friends/ 
ECA 
fellow Egyptians 
Ptthree 
President of Egypt 
President 
Citizens 
MSA 
Pt four 
President of Egypt 
Good old friend 
Old friends/ 
ECA 
fellow Egyptians 
one of them, by speaking as they spoke in their daily life. He also made himself 
comprehensible for those who knew little MSA. 
On 26 October 1954, the year of his becoming president, and in one 
of Alexandria's oldest areas, Manshiyah, Nasser delivered a speech to all 
Egyptians: students, peasants, workers and politicians. While he was deliv-
ering the speech, a man stood up and tried to assassinate him by shooting a 
gun at him. This was all on air in front of all the audience, and broadcast to 
all the people listening to the radio at that time. Not surprisingly, it became a 
very famous incident in Egyptian history. The would-be assassin was arrested 
instantly, but Nasser refused to move and decided to speak to the people. 
Indeed, his speech then took another line. He had nearly lost his life. This is 
enough to explain his feelings at that moment. He must have been frustrated 
and shocked if not terrified. He asked the people to listen to him and not to 
panic or move. He told them that they had to be aware of the fact that, if 
Nasser died, they were all Nasser. What is quite surprising is that he spoke in 
MSA. 
(86) 'layyuha 1-muwa:(ini:n 'lioa: ma:t~gama:l fabd in-na:#r fa 'lana 'lal'la:n 
'lamu: t wa 'lana mufma'linn/ fa kullakum gam a: l fabd in-n a: #r (multi. 3) 
tuda.jifu:n fan il-fizza wa tuda:jifu:n fan il-~urriyya wa tuda.jifu:n 
fan ik-kara:ma. 
'layyuha ir-riga:l si:ru: fa/a barakat illa:h 
'Citizens, if Gamal Abdel Nasser dies, he will die happily because 
you are all Gamal Abdel Nasser (3 times). You all fight for freedom 
and dignity. Men, move, with God's blessing.' 
These words still resonate in Egypt among the fans of Nasser. He sponta-
neously, in the heat of the moment, spoke in MSA, repeating sentences and 
words, in a moving voice, probably because he was excited and shocked. It 
seems MSA is used in danger, when one is shocked or furious, at least for the 
president. Nasser was then changing his role. He was no more the friend or 
peer. He was now giving himself a more subtle status. He was a symbol, an 
idea, and this idea was inherent in all Egyptians. Anyone could be him, and 

CODE-SWITCHING 
8S 
anyone could play his role. He was not trying to identify with them; rather 
he was trying to express his anger and defiance. Even if they killed him, he 
would still live in every Egyptian. When challenging all those who wanted 
to get rid of him, he used MSA. MSA also granted him authority: he used 
the voice of the tradition, religious and historical, and the power of his office. 
This is another example of the direct relation between change of role and code 
choice. 
To conclude this section, it is obvious that there is a clear tendency in politi-
cal speeches for speakers to change their code as and when they change their 
role. Given that the point of much political speech-making is to persuade, it is 
unsurprising that there is such a large amount of switching between ECA and 
MSA. Persuasion often involves role change. The question remains whether 
the relationship between change of role and code-switching is limited to politi-
cal speeches, or whether it is a general phenomenon, as some linguists have 
claimed (Goffinan 1981; Romaine 1995).21 There is also a general pattern in 
the way both MSA and ECA are used in the political speech analysed. The 
older speech by Nasser helps support the claim that the relation between 
change of role and code change is an old one. Note that in Egypt as a diglossic 
community, it is the speaker rather than the situation that influences language 
choice, although the role of the situation cannot be denied; but in a hierarchi-
cal order the speaker comes first. 
2.6 CONCLUSION 
In this chapter I have discussed both structural constraints and social motiva-
tions of code-switching in relation to Arabic. For the sake of clarity I divided 
the chapter into two main parts, one (section 2.4) about constraints on both 
code-switching and diglossic switching as a subcategory of code-switching, and 
one (section 2. 5) about motivations and discourse functions of code-switching 
and diglossic switching. There were also two empirical case studies from my 
own research presented in this chapter. 
I would like to conclude this chapter by highlighting two important facts. 
1. Diglossia can be studied within the framework of code-switching. 
Applying theories of code-switching to diglossia can clarify and refine 
our understanding of diglossia in the Arab world in general. When 
exploring motivations and discourse functions of both classic code-
switching and diglossic switching, it is apparent that research on code-
switching can indeed shed more light on diglossia and can be applied 
successfully to data in which there is switching between two varieties 
of Arabic, when one of the two is MSA. However, when applying 
structural constraints theories and models of code-switching to 

86 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
diglossic switching, it becomes clear that the theories and models that 
work with different languages do not necessarily work in a diglossic 
community. Diglossia is more complex than bilingualism. In addition, 
structural constraints on diglossic switching must consider one 
diglossic community at a time before making any generalisations, given 
the difference in exposure to MSA between Arab communities, and the 
difference in internalised MSA structures that have been acquired in 
each community. 
2. The second point worth mentioning is that the amount of work done 
on diglossic switching as part of code-switching is small compared 
to work done on classic code-switching. There is still a great deal of 
work needed to comprehend fully or even predict the phenomenon 
of diglossic switching. 
After examining diglossia and code-switching, it is time to study in more 
detail language variation in the Arab world and the reasons that trigger both 
variation and change. 
NOTES 
1. Mahfouz (Najib Ma~ffi~) was vague in his statement, and did not limit duality to diglossia, 
although perhaps diglossia was what he was describing. It is difficult to know what he had 
in mind exactly. 
2. Diglossic switching will be dealt with later in this chapter, but for the sake of clarity, I want 
to mention that this switching is usually between the Hand L varieties. It is usually between 
MSA and one of the dialects, like Tunisian (cf. Boussofara-Omar 2006a), or Egyptian (cf. 
Mejdell 2006 and Bassiouney 2006), or any other dialect from the dialect group discussed 
in Otapter 1. 
3. There may still be particularities of diglossic switching that are due to the specifics of diglos-
sia seen as a case of prolonged intimate contact between two varieties of what is perceived 
as a single language. 
4. Data on code-switching usually comes from oral performance rather than written. 
5. This fact in itselfis not enough to reject a theory. 
6. It is noteworthy, however, that Mejdell (2006: 391) differentiates between a dominant 
variety and an ML. According to Mejdell, a dominant variety will characterise the speech 
of all speakers, while an ML can be any variety or language they master depending on the 
situation. It is not necessarily a prevalent variety all the time. 
7. Myers-Scotton's use of islands is distinct in some ways from its general use in syntax 
literature. 
8. These possible structures are exemplified below. 
9. The term 'neutral' refers to morphemes that can occur in both MSAand ECA. 
10. I neither came across this form in my data nor found it in other data from Egypt such as 
that ofHoles (1995), Mazraani (1997) and Mejdell (2006). 
11. Mejdell (2006) also found numerous cases in which a b-prefix is inserted with an MSA 
verb. 

CODE-SWITCHING 
87 
12. This may be changing now in Egypt as well, since it has become more prestigious to learn 
English than MSA. This will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5. 
13. Reality is more complex. Many will shift their code in bilingual lectures, and even in mono-
lingual lectures, lecturers may shift their style from formal to informal and the opposite. 
14. Note that code-switched quotations are often not reporting the language of the actual utter-
ance, but in using code-switching demarcate the quotation from the surrounding talk. 
15. Wernberg-Moller did not state the number of hours ofher interviews. 
16. See note 17. 
17. The word 'bad' here may be translated better as 'shame'. Thus what the speaker wants to 
say is 'we would be ashamed' rather than 'we think it is a bad thing' 
18. This sentence is better translated as 'it is not like that there' or 'we do not have anything 
like that there'. 
19. Following Gumperz, a number of linguists began to examine switching as a phenomenon 
with sociological linguistic relevance (see Gardener-Chloros 1985, 1991; Heller 1988; 
Thakerar et al. 1982). Auer and DiLuzio (1984) examined code-switching among the chil-
dren ofltalian guest workers in Germany. Oyne (1982) examined European immigrants' 
languages in contact with English in Australia, and Appel and Muysken (1987) examined 
language contact and code-switching. 
20. The difference between Gumperz and Myers-Scotton is to some extent a case in point, 
illustrating more formal versus more functional approaches in terms of what each thinks is 
necessary for progress in the field. 
21. It could be that the relationship differs from one community to another. This needs more 
studies that compare and contrast different Arab communities or even Arab and non-Arab 
communities. 

CHAPTER 3 
Language variation and change 
There are differences between me and the children in the area. 
These differences make me feel inferior although some of them are as 
miserable as I am 
They say about me, 'he is from the countryside. 
He comes from the place of hunger and murderers . 
he does not 
know how to speak Arabic! All villagers are ill this year. They have the 
hunger disease' 
From the autobiographical novel al-Khubz al-bafi ('For bread alone') 
by the Moroccan writer Mul).ammad Shukri (2000) 
The protagonist in the passage above moves from a village to a city. In the 
village he spoke a dialect of Berber, but now in the city his native language 
is looked down upon and is associated with poverty and death. If he does 
not speak Arabic, he will be forever ostracised from this new community. In 
the novel he does indeed learn to speak Arabic. Because he moves from one 
place to another and thus breaks his social ties to the village, and because of 
the negative associations of his native language, he has to give it up in favour 
of Moroccan Arabic. The change that he undertakes reflects not only on him 
personally, but also on both his old community and his new one. 1 The associa-
tion of a particular dialect with economic power and another with poverty is 
an important factor that will be clear in the study by Holes in Bahrain (1986), 
discussed in this chapter in section 3.4.2. 
In this chapter I will examine variation and change in the Arab world and 
the different factors that trigger such change. But before doing so, I will first 
introduce the subfield of language variation and change, which is essential in 
any sociolinguistic study. 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
89 
J.I INTRODUCTION 
William Labov is often considered to have initiated a new perspective in the 
study of language. He posited that language in general is not static, but is as 
dynamic as society itself. Although this postulation in itself is not necessar-
ily new, Labov's contribution is that he showed that the dynamic aspect of 
language can be quantified. For him language is always moving, changing, in 
accordance with the interaction between different parts of society and the way 
society is organised and is being developed (cf. Guy et al. 1996). Labov was 
interested in examining linguistic variation and change in different communi-
ties. He wanted to know the direction of the change and the reasons behind 
it. It is also worth noting that, unlike earlier students oflanguage change who 
assumed that it is invisible and difficult to study except after it has taken place, 
Labov contended that diachronic change grows out of synchronic variation. 
Thus, if we want to understand diachronic change, we must analyse variation 
at any given time. In this chapter I first highlight the main concepts that Labov 
concentrated on (section 3.2.1). I then move on to the idea of social networks 
as developed by Milroy (section 3.2.2). I also briefly refer to what is called 
the 'third wave' of variation studies, as discussed by Eckert (section 3.2.3). 
Then I briefly shed light on the methods used to study language variation and 
change in relation to the western world as well as the Arab world (section 3.3). 
There are specific extra-linguistic variables that influence language variation 
and the process of change. Some of these variables are examined in section 3.4 
in relation to studies done on the Arab world and with reference to studies 
done on other parts of the world. One variable which perhaps does not play a 
major role in the studies done by Labov and others outside the Arab world is 
diglossia. Therefore, section 3. 5 is devoted to diglossia and its outcome, level-
ling. My main aim is to provide the framework for future studies and to give 
a sometimes theoretica~ sometimes empirical background of work done on 
variation and change. Before proceeding to do so, I would like first to clarify 
some sociolinguistic terms that will recur whenever one discusses language 
variation and change. 
A sociolinguistic variable, according to Milroy (1987: 1 0), is 'a linguistic 
element (phonological usually, in practice) which co-varies not only with other 
linguistic elements, but also with a number of extra-linguistic independent 
variables such as social class, age, sex, ethnic group, or contextual style' This 
concept was in fact developed by Labov. Walters adds that 'empirical studies of 
sociolinguistic variation in the Arab world have, like quantitative studies in the 
west, generally been studies of phonological variation' (1996a: 184). What this 
means is that usually linguists interested in variation will be interested in phono-
logical variables, such as vowels and consonants, although there are still studies 
that include lexical, grammatical or morphological variables. 2 Traditionally 
the target of a linguistic study has been a speech community. There has been 

90 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
more than one definition of a speech community. Labov (1966: 125) contends 
that it is an entity that is 'united by a common evaluation of the same variables 
which differentiate the speakers' However, Trudgill (1974: 33) alludes to the 
difficulty of assigning individuals to abstract groups. Milroy ( 1987: 14) posits 
that a community constitutes 'cohesive groups to which people have a clear 
consciousness of belonging' These groups have a strong territorial basis and a 
common locality to the extent that they might fear moving outside their area. 
Milroy thus emphasises the geographical component of a speech community. 
This will be very significant when studying the Arab world. 
Labov likewise assumes that individuals usually belong to a specific social 
class. 'People can be ordered with respect to the rest of society by quantifiable 
characteristics such as income, education, occupation, residence, or life-style' 
(Milroy 1987: 13). For example, a clergyman is perceived as being of higher 
status than a plumber, although in some countries the plumber may actually earn 
more than the clergyman. That is to say, Labov, following American sociologists, 
assumes that society is organised into social classes, hierarchically arranged. 
Meanwhile, the question of how to observe language change is definitely 
worth asking. Usually irregularities in the usage of a variable may provide 
evidence of linguistic change in progress (Guy et al. 1996). Thus, if a pho-
nological variable such as the q in Arabic is used irregularly by a specific 
community, this may be a sign of a change in progress. Labov (1972a: 163) 
contends that the best way to observe change is to observe two or more suc-
cessive generations of speakers. These generations have to have comparable 
social characteristics, 'which will represent stages in the evolution of the same 
speech community' He also posits that there are two directions for change. 
There is a change from below, which is the 'generalization of all forms to all 
members of the subgroup' (1972a: 178). It is also a change that is below the 
level of consciousness and generally moves from the lower social classes to 
the higher ones without the latter's awareness. Stigmatisation, which is the 
association of a variable with a lower social class or a social group not highly 
regarded, can also initiate change from above, which indicates a correction of 
a variable towards the model of the highest-status group. A change from above 
is a conscious choice and often involves inconsistent borrowing from outside 
the group. In section 3.2 I will analyse in more detail Labov's and Milroy's 
classic works in sociolinguistic variation and change. 
J.2 LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
3.2.1 Social class approach 
Labov also took the initiative in moulding and emphasising the relation 
between language variation and even change and the social stratum of a 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
91 
specific group. In 1961, he began his research into the role of social pat-
terns in linguistic change on the island of Martha's Vineyard, offthe coast of 
Massachusetts. The island had the advantage of being a self-contained unit, 
separated from the mainland by three miles of ocean. Yet still it had enough 
social and geographical complexity to make studying it worthwhile for any 
linguist (1972a). Labov conducted his study by interviewing a large number 
of speakers drawn from various social groups on the island. He interviewed a 
range of people representing various sociodemographic groups; he had both 
sexes and different age groups represented. Instead of eliciting single lexical 
items from one speaker by means of a formal questionnaire, Labov based his 
analysis on the conversational speech of his many informants, supplemented 
by data from reading passages and word lists. He researched a great deal of 
background information about the island. For example, one important change 
which may have influenced language is that the island had first been depend-
ent on fishing for its income but in the 1960s was already becoming dependent 
on tourism from the mainland. Today tourism is the major industry. This 
kind of economic and historical change is very similar to the change that took 
place in the 1970s in Gulf countries and will be referred to frequently in this 
book, since it also reflects on language. 
Labov examined in detail the location and ethnic origin of typical 
Vineyarders' families. He also examined other communities living on the 
island, and was very interested in the attitude of Vineyarders towards their 
community. This method used by Labov sets a standard in the study of varia-
tion and change, as will become clear in section 3.3. 
Labov analysed the use of the diphthongs ay and aw as in 'mice' and 'mouse', 
and was in fact able to observe linguistic change in progress in relation to these 
two. He noted that a movement was taking place away from the standard New 
England realisations of the vowels, towards a centralised pronunciation of the 
second element of the diphthongs associated with conservative and character-
istically Vineyard speakers. The heaviest users of the centralised diphthongs 
were young men who wanted to identify themselves as Vineyarders, who 
rejected the values of the mainland and resented the interference of wealthy 
summer visitors in the traditional island way oflife. It was clear that there was 
a change taking place, and a change that was not towards Standard English and 
that was initiated not by older speakers but by young ones. What is interesting, 
according to Milroy (1987), is that this use of diphthongs was independent of 
education. Some college-educated young men who had returned to the island 
were the heaviest users of the vernacular diphthongs. 
A methodologically more rigorous study, according to Milroy (1987), was 
the one Labov conducted in New York City. The study used 340 informants 
selected by means of a random sample, 3 which suggests that the sample was 
truly representative of the speech of all Lower-Eastside New Yorkers. He 
also sampled a range of different styles from the formal to the quintessentially 

92 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
casual. His method this time was acquiring recordings of conversations, both 
formal and casual. There was always a stranger asking the questions. Then 
sometimes there would be someone entering the room to get the participants 
more involved. This newcomer might start narrating some personal experi-
ence, for example. Labov also asked his informants to read long passages of 
prose, and he followed that with a word list of single lexical items and sets of 
minimal pairs, such as 'god' and 'guard', which many New Yorkers pronounce 
the same.4 
Labov mainly examined phonological variables such as the r sound and 
how it was realised differently in his target community. He was interested 
in whether a speaker pronounced or deleted the consonant r in final or post-
vocalic pre-consonantal position, as in 'car' and 'cart' His concern was post-
vocalic r in two contexts: syllable/word-final, and followed by a consonant. 
He found that all New York speakers of all statuses agree that pronunciation 
of post-vocalic r is prestigious. Southern British English speakers behave in 
opposite fashion by stigmatising this pronunciation, because they in fact rep-
resent a different speech community with different rules. Another example 
is the dropping of h, which is stigmatised in Southern British English but is 
irrelevant in New York, Belfast or Glasgow (see Trudgilll974). 
In this section I have defined what a social class is according to Labov. 
However, a number of linguists find problems with the concept of class (e.g. 
Trudgill1974; Milroy 1987). Trudgill, for example, points out the difficulties 
that arise in trying to assign individuals to abstract groups such as an upper 
class or a lower class etc. Milroy also asks 'why people continue to speak low-
status vernaculars and, even more interestingly, how they manage to maintain 
vernacular norms, when the social gains in adopting a form of speech closer to 
the standard are apparently considerable' (1987: 8). 
Because of the fact that specific variables which are not necessarily associ-
ated with a powerful or a richer group persist in a society, Milroy decided to 
use a different sort of framework when examining language change and varia-
tion. She uses the concept of social networks. 
3.2.2 Social networks approach 
Milroy's classic work on Belfast was based on the concept of social networks; 
this concept not only complements Labov's work based on social class, but also 
standsbyitselfassometimesthemainandonlyexplanationoflanguagevariation 
and change. Milroy conducted her fieldwork for the study of Belfast working-
class speech in 197 ~ 
in three well-defined communities: 'Ballymacarrett', 
'the Hammer' and 'the Clonard' She immediately noticed the problems 
associated with the presence ofthe tape recorder, the use of reading word lists 
and the nature of interviews. Milroy discovered a big methodological obstacle, 
different from the observer's paradox (discussed below), which is the fact that 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
93 
a linguist analysing a specific community is indeed a stranger, and as such his 
or her access to the real linguistic situation is limited, no matter how hard he or 
she tries. Thus, she introduced herself to the three communities as a friend of a 
friend. She called her relation to the members of the three communities that of 
a 'second order network contact' ( 1987: 44). She was also a woman field worker, 
which meant that people were less suspicious and aggressive towards her than 
they would probably have been to a male fieldworker in Belfast at that time. 
Since she was not only a woman but also alone, she did not present any threat. 
Both facts triggered good faith and trust on the part of community members. 
She was thus both an insider and an outsider. She was an insider who could be 
trusted, but still an outsider who could ask certain questions and inquire about 
different facts in the community. By recording her informants, she hoped to 
get a clearer picture of community life as well as samples oflanguage in inter-
action that were closer to the way the speakers normally spoke than Labov was 
able to capture for the Lower East Side. 
Because of the limitations of the concept of social class, Milroy and Gordon 
highlighted the concept of social networks. Their definition of networks is as 
follows: 'An individual's social network is the aggregate of relationships con-
tracted with others, a boundless web of ties which reaches out through social 
and geographical space linking many individuals, sometimes remotely' (2003: 
118). The researchers admitted later that no canonically correct procedure 
for analysing social networks can be identified (2003: 118). Networks can be 
described in relation to density and multiplexity. A dense network is one in 
which a large number of people are linked to each other in ties of kinship, 
occupation, specific voluntary group membership etc. For example, in certain 
areas there are youth gangs who spend a long time together and belong to the 
same club and neighbourhood (2003: 121). A network can also be multiplex in 
that the same person, for example, is connected to another as a co-employee, 
neighbour, kin etc- that is, in several ways. Both density and multiplexity are 
efficient indicators of pressure to adopt the norm of a community. They act 
as 'norm enforcement mechanisms' (Milroy 1987: 50). For example, an older 
woman in 'Ballymacarrett' placed a low value on her relationship with neigh-
bours and seemed to reject the local team value. Thus, she had weak networks 
within the community and her behaviour was unlike that of someone with 
closer ties to the community. It is easy to maintain one's vernacular in close-
knit communities in spite of cultural pressure. However, when networks are 
weakened then language change is often triggered. Social networks can also 
interact with other variables such as gender (see also Aitchison 2001). 
3.2.3 Third wave approach to variation studies: community of practice 
Eckert (2005) introduced a more recent approach to the study of variation 
and change and called it the 'third wave' of variation studies. According to 

94 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
this approach, variation should not be studied as a reflection of an individual's 
social place, but as a 'source' for the 'construction of social meaning' (Eckert 
2005: 1). A key factor in this new approach is the concept of a community of 
practice, defined by Eckert (2005: 16) as: 
An aggregate of people who come together on a regular basis to 
engage in some enterprise. A family, a linguistics class, a garage, band, 
roommates, a sports team, even a small village. In the course of their 
engagement, the community of practice develops ways of doing things 
-practices. And these practices involve the construction of a shared 
orientation to the world around them- a tacit definition of themselves 
in relation to each other, and in relation to other communities of 
practice. 
Thus, instead of examining the relation between individuals and abstract cat-
egories defined by the researcher, such as class, gender, ethnicity, one has to 
examine the constructed relation between an individual and a larger imagined 
community, which is mainly his or her community of practice. According to 
this approach the individual usually uses variables to build an identity and to 
select a community of practice. Eckert supports her argument by work done by 
anthropologists such as Ochs (1991), who claims that linguistic choices do not 
mark the social categories of individuals directly but rather reflect attitudes, 
activities and ways of life that are associated with particular categories. Rather 
than placing people into categories - gender categories, class categories, age 
categories and so on and so forth -linguists should try to understand how the 
construction of identity is part and parcel of the construction of social meaning. 
As Eckert puts it, linguists should question 'how do variables mean?' (2002: 4); 
that is to say, linguists should ask themselves 'how linguistic variants acquire 
the social meaning that is locally relevant to speakers' (Oark 2008: 267). This 
approach to variation and change is yet to be tested in the Arab world. 
In section 3.3 I summarise the methodologies used to measure variation and 
change. Since measuring variation and change is crucial in assessing the situ-
ation in any community, methodology is the key factor in a valid analysis of 
any kind. I also give an overview of methodological tools used by linguists in 
analysing language variation and change, especially in the Arab world. 
3·3 METHODOLOGY 
The methodologies used by both Labov and Milroy in collecting data served 
as a template for other studies in both the Arab world and the western one. 
Before discussing this issue further, I would like to refer to the main methodo-
logical problem recognised first by Labov and eventually by all those who came 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
95 
after him. Labov (1972a: 207) stated that the main aim of a linguist working on 
language variation is to find out how people talk when they are not 'systemati-
cally observed' To do that linguists depend on data that can only be obtained 
by systematic observation. This situation creates what he terms the 'observer's 
paradox' To overcome this paradox, one can supplement formal interviews 
with other data, or seek to change the structure of the interview situation one 
way or another, that is, to manipulate the context in some way- for example 
by asking people to discuss childhood experiences or relate affectively charged 
events. However, the problem persists until the present day and there is no 
thorough and efficient way of eliminating it all together. 
Problems of collecting data for measuring variation and change have been 
discussed by Milroy. According to Milroy (1987), using word lists or elicit-
ing single lexical items is not sufficient to permit us to note the regularity and 
direction of language change, nor is the interview a reliable method by itself. 
If the interview is held by a stranger with an isolated speaker, it will be dif-
ficult for the linguist to have access to the real vernacular of that speaker. By 
its nature the interview's format is not likely to illicit the speaker's vernacular 
or most unguarded speech. Gumperz (1982a) tried to deal with this problem 
by having family members present during the interview to make it less formal, 
or by asking about something personal and getting his informants involved in 
narrating a personal experience. 
One way of trying to collect data that is more natural and presents 
unguarded speech is to use both insiders and outsiders as interviewers, as 
Labov did when he studied what was then termed 'Black English Vernacular' 
(1972b ). He focused on the speech of adolescents up to the age of sixteen and 
used African American fieldworkers, insiders and outsiders. He also used 
peer-group recordings of his informants together and alone. He recorded 
them in real-life situations such as eating, drinking and card playing. 
Collecting background information is really the first step in variation 
research. This is what Labov did with his study of Martha's Vineyard. This 
is also what Milroy did in her study of Belfast, and what Gumperz did in his 
study of the Norwegian village ofHemnes (Gumperz and Hymes 1972). 
Linguists studying the Arab world have used mainly the same methods 
as Labov and Milroy. In fact, Milroy's method of collecting data was used 
in Haeri's study of sociolinguistic variation in Cairo (Haeri 1997). Haeri also 
was a female working alone, and as an Iranian, she shared the religion of her 
informants, Islam. Therefore, it was easy for her to be both an insider and an 
outsider in various ways. She was then able to study phonological variation in 
the speech of men and women in Cairo in relation to class. She used the socio-
linguistic interview in addition to radio and TV programmes for children and 
adults, as well as a word list reading. She analysed the speech of eighty-seven 
speakers (fifty women and thirty-seven men) and limited her study to tradi-
tional urban and modem or industrial urban groups in Cairo. To overcome 

96 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
the observer's paradox, she not only used the social network approach, but 
also tried to speak about personal things with her informants, such as child-
hood games, school days, family, falling in love and local customs.5 
In Holes' study of Shiite and Sunni speakers in Bahrain (1984, 1986), he 
analysed tape-recorded conversations of eighty-seven speakers. He divided his 
group according to education, literacy and illiteracy, age group, and social net-
works. To help overcome the observer's paradox, he explained to his inform-
ants that his interest was to gather information about social customs rather 
than to gather speech for analysis, a common practice among linguists. He 
started recording people in different settings; at home, in the workplace and in 
the market. He was then able to measure variation. He also collected sociode-
mographic background information on the community being analysed and the 
individuals being interviewed before conducting his study. Khan (1997), in 
his study ofKaraitis Jews, used the interview as the main method for collect-
ing data. He interviewed older members who then spoke the dialect fluently. 
See Al-Wer (1999), discussed in section 3.4.1, for a similar methodology. 
Daher (1999), in his study of variation in Damascene Arabic, was aware 
that the presence of the tape recorder makes it difficult to elicit spontane-
ous speech. This is because the tape recorder makes informants more careful 
about their speech; educated speakers are more likely to use MSA more often 
than they usually would. Daher tried to overcome this problem by using an 
interviewer who was familiar with the culture, had the trust of the inform-
ants and was a member of the speech community. The interviewer was also 
a member of the large social network. Most of the informants were either 
friends, family members or co-workers, which as noted above influences the 
degree of representativeness of the data. Daher also chose a cosy setting for the 
interviews, usually the home of the informants, when other family members 
were present. Then he began the interview by asking about personal experi-
ences, memorable stories, hobbies, school and television in Syrian society-
unthreatening topics. He found that stories based on lasting memories worked 
well in reflecting the real vernacular used by the informants. He recorded 
long narratives of informants' stories about a journey on foot from Beirut to 
Damascus, a marriage and an accident. In analysing the data, he also decided 
to ignore the first five minutes of the interview. 
Jabeur (1987), in his sociolinguistic study ofRades, decided first to gather 
information about the history of the place, the reasons for the increasing pop-
ulation, internal rural migration, and the phenomenon of increasing residen-
tial mobility. He conducted a study of the sociodemographic characteristics of 
Rades. He studied the language of twelve women, and to overcome the observ-
er's paradox he adopted, in collecting his data, the social network approach, 
which is based, as stated earlier, on the idea that people behave differently in 
a group, influenced by their network. Jabeur introduced himself as a friend of 
a friend. Thus he depended on existing relations within a community rather 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
97 
than creating new relationships. He used the interview by recording infor-
mation in places where people usually met to drink tea, and since they were 
network members, this would have reduced the effect of observation. 6 
Before examining independent social factors that influence language vari-
ation and change, I would like to note that most of the linguists dealing with 
the issue of variation, especially those dealing with it in the Arab world, build 
their work on the concept of quantitative studies. Q!tantitative studies aim to 
examine the correlation between linguistic variation and other variables, in 
particular social class (Coates 1993: 61 ). One uses quantitative methods to seek 
to uncover statistical relationships between independent variables such as age, 
sex, sect, social class, place of origin or level of education, and dependent vari-
ables such as the relative use of specific linguistic variants that together make 
up a linguistic variable. 7 
3·4 SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIABLES 
I will now examine some of the extra-linguistic variables that influence change 
and variation, and that have been studied by linguists examining the Arab 
world. Independent variables analysed below include ethnicity, religion, 
urbanisation and social class (sections 3.4.1-3.4.4). Gender will be examined 
in Chapter 4. It is noteworthy, however, that dividing the triggers oflanguage 
variation and change into independent variables is not an easy task and is at 
times arbitrary. The variables studied overlap and interact with each other. 
Their definitions also overlap in most cases. For example, in a study that 
concentrates on women, urbanisation and ethnicity, such as Al-Wer's study 
in Jordan (1999) discussed below, it is difficult to examine the study from 
the perspective of one specific variable. Also, across the Arab world sectarian 
differences are often linked to issues of social class and ethnicity in complex 
ways. Thus the division of variables is flexible and serves only as a guide in our 
understanding of variation and change. 
3.4.1 Ethnicity 
Ethnicity is a crucial variable in a great number of places in the world at large, 
and in parts of the Arab world in particular. However, it is a variable that is 
crucial when present but not as crucial in places or communities that are not 
ethnically diverse, although these are now few and far between. In the next 
paragraphs I will explain how ethnicity in the Arab world may differ from 
ethnicity in the west and how linguists dealing with the Arab world define eth-
nicity. The definition of ethnicity is flexible, as in some cases it could include 
differences built on nationalities or religious affiliation and in other cases it 
could be built on skin colour. 

98 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
According to Davies and Bentahila (2006: 58), ethnicity is 'an analytical 
concept used to describe the bonds which lead certain people to identify them-
selves as a group' This bond could be an ancestral lineage. Fishman ( 1977: 17) 
describes this bond as a paternity bond, and posits that 'Ethnicity is, in part, 
but at its core, experienced as an inherited constellation acquired from one's 
parents as they acquired it from theirs, and so on back further and further, ad 
infinitum' As Edwards (1985: 10) argues, the ethnic group's boundary 'can be 
sustained by shared objective characteristics (language, religion, etc. ) or more 
subjective contributions to a sense of "groupness", or by some combination 
of both' 
Note that according to Fishman this bond can be lost and is not inherent, 
that is, one can acquire or lose an ethnicity. 
However, in my opinion losing or acquiring an ethnicity is difficult if not 
impossible. Ethnicity is different from identity in the sense that identity is 
related to the individual and his or her projection of himself or herself(see the 
definition of identity in Chapters 2 and 5), while ethnicity is something one 
is born with. Thus changing one's identity or appealing to different parts of 
one's identity is easier than changing one's ethnicity. 
Davies and Bentahila (2006: 59) also argue that both ethnicity and national-
ism can be considered 'as points on a continuum' Degrees of self-awareness, 
organisation, mobilisation or ideologisation can all be factors that distinguish 
nationalism and ethnicity (cf Connor 1978; Edwards 1985; Fasold 1995; 
Paulston 1994). 
The definition of ethnicity by Fishman relies on patrimony and ances-
tral lineage. However, Owens (2001: 434), when discussing ethnicity in the 
Arab world, posits that ethnicity is 'Any of a number of social parameters by 
which, non-national social groupings are distinguished, including religion, 
shared history, skin colour, kinship, lineage and place of origin. The relevant 
criterion or criteria defining ethnicity may differ from place to place.' Owens 
includes religion in the definition of ethnicity, which may imply that in Iraq 
Sunnis and Shiites can be considered two ethnic groups, and in Egypt Copts 
and Muslims can also be considered two ethnic groups. Such a proposition 
would be politically charged and may not reflect the way in which people 
perceive themselves. For example, most Egyptians tend to perceive them-
selves, whether they are Copts or Muslims, as descendants of the Ancient 
Egyptians, and tacitly feel different from other Arabs because of their Ancient 
Egyptian history8 (see also the views of Salamah Musa, discussed in Chapter 
5). However, Kurds in Iraq may be considered an ethnically different group 
because historically they were part of a specific entity with the same ancestors 
and a shared history (Davies and Bentahila 2006), although they are mostly 
Sunni Muslims. 
I prefer to retain Fishman's definition of ethnicity rather than Owens' 
more flexible one, simply because religion is a more complicated and 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
99 
historical intertwined factor than it seems. Thus I will consider Palestinians 
(both Muslims and Christians) as one ethnic group and Jordanians (both 
Muslims and Christians) as another ethnic group. Although Palestinians and 
Jordanians may have much in common, they both perceive themselves and 
each other as different, although they may still share the same religion. They 
perceive themselves as coming from different lineage and different ancestors. 
This is when the line distinguishing nationality from ethnicity is blurred. 
The importance of family bonds and paternal ancestors is a salient feature in 
the Arab world. Arabs from different countries define themselves according 
to the tribe they belong to, the family they belong to and finally the country 
they belong to. Omani men, for example, until recently needed permission to 
marry a foreign woman (a non-Omani one). I have attempted above to clarify 
what ethnicity refers to in this book, and how it is different from religion and 
other extra-linguistic factors. 
In multi-ethnic communities language variation and change are very appar-
ent and significant. In the past century the Arab world has been in a state of 
flux for different reasons, some of them political and some economic. We 
definitely need more studies that examine variation between different ethnic 
communities in the Arab world. 
A country that has been analysed exhaustively by linguists is Jordan. 
Although a small country with a small population (6 million), Jordan has one of 
the most interesting situations in the Arab world with two nationalities living 
together, sometimes as friends and sometimes as enemies: the Palestinians 
and the Jordanians. In fact, the present-day situation is even more interesting, 
with the king, Abd-Allah, being of Jordanian origin and Q!Ieen Rania being of 
Palestinian origin. Whether this will eventually influence language variation 
and change in Jordan is still to be seen. 
It is worth mentioning, though, that Jordan itself was formed after World 
War I by Britain. Again note that Palestinians and Jordanians are not pre-
cisely two ethnic groups but rather two political entities, but they perceive 
themselves and each other as different, as was said earlier. This is a case when 
politics meddles with linguistics. There will be numerous cases of this med-
dling in Chapter 5. Given that the Arab world is loaded with political changes 
and foreign political interference, this is not surprising. Before explaining the 
linguistic situation in Jordan, I first want to give an overview of the history of 
Jordan. 
3.4.1.1 Jordanians versus Palestinians 
3.4.1.1.1 History ofJordan 
Jordan lies between Israel to the west, Syria to the north, Iraq to the east and 
Saudi Arabia to the south. Jordan as we know it now was created by Britain 
after World War I. Britain seized what was then referred to as Transjordan 

IOO 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
from the Turks after the war, separated it from the Palestinian mandate, and 
placed it under the rule of <AbdAllah ibn f:Iusayn in 1921. In 1946 Britain 
abolished the mandate and Jordan gained independence. 
Al-Wer (1999: 38) posits that historical events have determined the 'demo-
graphic and socio-political constitution of Jordan' The 1948 war resulted in 
the displacement of half a million Palestinians, most ofwhom fled to Jordan 
as refugees. This war also led to the incorporation of the West Bank into the 
Jordanian kingdom, thus changing the western borders of the country. The 
population of Jordan then rose from half a million to 1.4 million. In May 
1967 King Hussein of]ordan signed a defence pact with Egypt against Israel 
(Mansfield 2003: 273). After the 1967 war, another 250,000 Palestinians 
sought refuge in Jordan. The war also resulted in the loss by Jordan of East 
Jerusalem and the West Bank. After the defeat of the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, 
frustrated Palestinian guerrilla forces took over sections of Jordan and open 
warfare broke out between the Palestinian Liberation Organisation (PLO) 
and government forces in 1970. Syria intervened then but Hussein's army 
defeated the Palestinians. The Jordanians drove out the Syrians and 12,000 
Iraqi troops who had been in the country since the 1967 war. Despite protests 
from Arab countries, Hussein, by mid-1971, crushed Palestinian strength in 
Jordan and shifted the problem to Lebanon, where many of the guerrillas had 
fled. This indeed created tension between both groups for a long time. In July 
1989, Jordan renounced its sovereignty over the West Bank. In so doing, it 
emphasised that there are two separate national entities, a Palestinian one and 
a Jordanian one. 
Nowadays, within Jordan, the legal status of Palestinians is equal to that of 
Jordanians. Both groups are considered citizens of Jordan (Al-Wer 1999). In 
fact, some Palestinians claim that of all countries in the Arab world, the only 
one that treats them as equal to its natives is Jordan. Jordan also has the largest 
community of Palestinians in the Arab world. It is noteworthy that not all 
Palestinians who settled in Jordan were war refugees. Some bourgeois families 
settled there early on. Palestinians were, in fact, better trained to open their 
own business and also to work in the public sector because of education and 
experience they brought with them when they came to Jordan. They started 
early on in Jordan to take a leading economic, academic and even political 
role. 
The linguistic situation in Jordan is as follows. There is an urban Palestinian 
dialect, a rural Palestinian dialect, and Bedouin and rural Jordanian dialects 
(Cleveland 1963). To illustrate the difference between these dialects, note the 
realisation of the phonological variable q in all these dialects: 
urban Palestinian dialect: [.?](glottal stop) 
rural Palestinian dialect: [k] (voiceless stop) 
Bedouin and rural Jordanian: [g] (voiced stop) (cf. Abdel-Jawad 1986). 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
101 
According to Suleiman (2004), after the bloody confrontation between 
Palestinians and Jordanians in 1970, Palestinian male students at university 
started using the g variable as opposed to the glottal stop of their urban dialect 
or the k of their rural one. They started accommodating to Jordanian Bedouin 
men. Suleiman recalls how his Palestinian male friends, especially the rural 
Palestinian students, started to use g with the soldiers who operated the check-
points between the town centre and the university (2004: 115). At that point 
the Jordanian dialect was not only the more prestigious one but also the safest 
one to use at a time when the Jordanian government was using force in dealing 
with Palestinians. Thus, although the Palestinian urban dialect was associated 
with urbanism, finesse, wealth and modernism, for Jordanians, the change 
seemed to be towards the local dialect of Jordanian Bedouins.9 
After the reconciliation between Jordanians and Palestinians, the Palestinian 
urban dialect was still a symbol of modernity and education, but Jordanians, 
especially men, did not accommodate to it. Abdel-Jawad (1986) claimed that 
this refusal had to do with feelings of local identity, pride in origin, and soli-
darity. In fact, although Abdel-Jawad does not spell it out in these terms, it 
has to do mainly with social networks. Jordanian tribes have dense and mu1-
tiplex social networks. Abdel-Jawad, for example, noted that each tribe had a 
clubhouse in which members meet to discuss different matters. Thus it is not 
surprising that Jordanians, whether rural or Bedouin, kept their g. Linguists 
do not agree on the present status of q in Jordan. In the past twenty years or 
so, the tendency has been for female Jordanians and female Palestinians to 
use the glottal stop, the variant associated with Palestinians. This had to do 
with the fact that Jordanian women aspire to the modernity and finesse of 
Palestinians (cf. Abdel-Jawad 1986; Al-Wer 1999). Male Jordanians retain the 
g, but it is not clear what male Palestinians use. However, the linguistic differ-
ences between both groups may have decreased immensely lately. Note that 
Suleiman disagrees on the analysis based on gender distinction (2004: 115). 
Al-Wer (1999) has postulated that in Jordan nowadays there is a new dialect 
in the making that is the result of contact between indigenous Jordanian vari-
eties and urban Palestinian varieties. This new dialect is different from any 
other variety in the region. Her empirical research was carried out on 116 
women, all of indigenous Jordanian origin. Some of the phonological variables 
investigated are the following realisations: 
q asg or 'l, as inga:l or 'la:l'he said' 
()as() or t, as in 8a:ni and ta:ni 'again' 
~ as ~ or ~ , as in ~all and t/all 'he remained' 
j as dj or j, as in dja:r andja:r 'neighbour' (1999: 39). 
Her data indicates that the interdental variables () and ~ exhibit the largest 
amount of variation in the direction of the stop variants. She found that there 

I02 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
is a degree of maintenance of the local variant [g], even among women. The 
glottal stop is scarcely used by her informants. She contends that the reason for 
this usage is that the realisation of q as g or 'lis used to stereotype speakers as 
belonging to one or another ethnic group or sex. It is such a salient feature that 
speakers are aware of its implications. Thus, she says that 'speakers, regardless 
oftheir sex, reflect various identities in their linguistic behaviour' (1999: 54). 
Al-Wer likewise argues that this new dialect, which is in the formation 
stages, involves particular patterns of variation involving a combination 
of the variables g, t, d and j. This dialect is different from any other in the 
region and thus cannot be classified as Levantine or otherwise. Therefore, 
although among older speakers dialects can be identified as either Jordanian or 
Palestinian, the same is not true for the speech of the younger generation, in 
which language plays a role in decreasing regional differences and construct-
ing a new dialect, and thus potentially a new identity. Language here is used 
to increase localised and marked features as well as being a symbol of a new 
identity in which ethnic differences are less significant (Al-Wer 2002: 45). 
In a later study (2007), Al-Wer analyses further the new dialect in the making 
in Amman. She argues that Amman had no specific dialect because basically 
until recently it had no stable inhabitants. Now 39 per cent of the inhabitants 
of Jordan live in Amman. Her data comprises 25 hours of recorded interviews 
across three generations of both Jordanians and Palestinians in Amman. The 
variables she examines include the vowel quality of the a: when preceded by r 
and the use of the glottal stop and g variables discussed above in detail Al-Wer 
posits that the quality of the vowel preceding r is different in the Palestinian 
dialect ofNablus and the Jordanian one ofSult. The Palestinian dialect is more 
back, with lip rounding and pharyngeal constrictions (2007: 69). She concludes 
that the differences between the Jordanians and Palestinians are reduced now 
to the minimum, with Palestinians accommodating to the pronunciation of 
Jordanians with regard to this variable. What Al-Wer notices in her study in 
general is, again, the neutralisation of the differences between both groups 
in the younger generation. Note that according to Abdel-Jawad and Al-Wer 
the linguistic situation in Jordan is very different from that in Syria, where 
Palestinians have a socially inferior status to Syrians and thus are expected to 
accommodate thoroughly to the Syrian dialect. This is despite the fact that 
there are approximately 450 thousand Palestinian refugees in Syria. One cannot 
measure the truth of this postulation except with quantitative empirical data. 
In this section I have concentrated on Jordan as a multi-ethnic community. 
As I said earlier, while it is easy to project a different facet of one's identity 
at different stages of one's life, it is difficult to change one's ethnicity. For 
example, in the case of Palestinians in Jordan, although they are integrating to 
a great extent with the Jordanians at different levels, they still perceive them-
selves as Palestinians and not Jordanians. 
Another point worth mentioning here is that tribes form communities of 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
103 
practice. Individuals choose to belong to their tribe because this provides them 
with social strength and status. A clubhouse exclusive to tribe members is a 
community of practice. 
However, more studies are needed about language variation in other multi-
ethnic communities. For example, astudythatexamined the dialect ofPalestinians 
in Egypt or Syria and how it is changing, or not changing, would be well worth 
its sak. The Gulf, since the 1970s, has also attracted people of different ethnic 
origins. More studies done on the Gulf and pidgin Arabic are also necessary. 
3.4.2 Religion 
3.4.2.1 Religion in the Arab world 
The religious landscape of the Arab world is an extremely complex one. It 
is common knowledge that Islam, Christianity and Judaism are represented 
among the populations of the region. At the same time, these religions them-
selves are divided into different sects. 
Thus, Muslims may be divided into Sunnis and Shiites. The former group 
is largely coherent theologically (if not in actual practice); the latter group in 
tum falls into various subgroups, such as the 'Twelvers' (after the number of 
consecutive imams in their theological system), Ismailis, Ibadis and Zaydis. In 
addition, there are historical offshoots of (Shiite) Islam, such as the Druze, the 
Alevis and Bahais. 
Christianity, likewise, falls roughly into three large groups: Orthodox 
churches, Catholics and Uniate churches, as well as Protestants, with some 
additional offshoots that belong to none of these categories, such as the 
Mandeans. Many of these churches are also national churches in the sense that 
they are linked with a particular territory, and in the sense that they employ 
a particular language in their liturgy. Hence, there is the Coptic Orthodox 
Church (which uses Coptic and Arabic in its liturgy), the Greek Orthodox 
(Greek and Arabic), the Armenian Orthodox Church (Armenian), etc. 10 
Finally, there are distinct subgroups within Judaism, too, such as the Karaites, 
and offshoots, such as the Samaritans. 
With all this variation, it is difficult to generalise about religious groups, as 
their presence or absence in the various parts of the Arab world are largely the 
result of historical circumstance. Thus, the Arabian peninsula has no native 
Christians to speak of, whereas Egypt, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Israel-Palestine 
and above all Lebanon all have sizeable Christian communities. Of these, the 
Copts are found almost exclusively in Egypt, where they form the national 
church, while the Maronites are restricted mostly to Lebanon (that is, if we 
ignore expatriate communities elsewhere). The once thriving Jewish commu-
nities of Egypt and Iraq have all but disappeared, but in Morocco and Tunisia, 
small communities remain. 

I04 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
These communities, groups and subgroups often live side by side within 
the same national entity, but they may at times enter into fierce competition 
among themselves; an example of this is the ongoing contention among the 
Christian denominations for space and rights within the Church of the Holy 
Sepulchre in Jerusalem, which has turned violent at times. The Shiite-Sunni 
conflicts in Lebanon and Iraq are cases in point. It is clear, then, that reli-
gious identities in the Arab world are muki-layered, as they relate not only 
to an abstract religion, but also to a distinct group or community within that 
religious group, or even to a 'national' or ethnic group, as is the case with the 
Armenians in Egypt or Lebanon. 
Lebanon, as an Arab country, used to contain the largest number of 
Christians. In 1975, on the eve of the Lebanese civil war (1975-90), Christians 
constituted 55 per cent of the population of Lebanon, most of which adhered 
to the Maronite Church. This has dropped to 40 per cent (2,200,000) in recent 
years, as has the percentage of Christians throughout the Arab world. As 
for Syria, while in 1960 Christians formed approximately 15 per cent of the 
population (about 1.2 million), they are estimated to constitute only 10 per 
cent now, due to immigration and to lower birth rates among Christians than 
among their Muslim counterparts. In Jordan, Christians constitute 7 per cent 
of the population (400,000). In the Palestinian territories of the West Bank 
and Gaza Strip there are about 90,000 Palestinian Christians. There are also 
190,000 Palestinian Christians living in Israel and about 400,000 Palestinian 
Christians living in the diaspora. Egypt's population is estimated at 80 million, 
among which at least 7-9 percent are Christian Copts. In North Africa, there 
are very small communities of Christians, who mainly belong to the Roman 
Catholic church and who live in Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco. 
Jews, on the other hand, who formed a significant minority in the Arab 
world, were forced to leave or migrated after the formation of Israel in 1948. 
The small communities that remain in the Arab world range from about 10 in 
Bahrain to 7,000 in Morocco and 1,000 in Tunisia. 
It is worth mentioning that Muslims in the Arab world make up less than 
one quarter of the world's Muslims in general - estimated at around 1.4 
billion. They are mainly Sunnis with a substantial Shiite minority. In fact, 
Shiites comprise 65 per cent of the population oflraq, and approximately 75 
per cent of the population ofBahrain. Countries such as Lebanon, Yemen and 
Kuwait have substantial Shiite groups. Saudi Arabia also has a Shiite minor-
ity in its eastern province of al-A]J.asa,, and the southern province city Najran 
harbours a minority of Ismailis. 
3.4.2.2 Religion as an independent variable 
Like other social variables, religion does not stand in isolation but is con-
nected to other categories, and in the Arab world specifically, it is also closely 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
105 
connected to the political system of each country. Religion is important in 
terms of language variation and change only in the sense that it can create a 
close-knit community whose members feel for one reason or another that they 
are united by it. 11 I think political factors are essential in a great nwnber of 
commnnities in the Arab world and may be intertwined with religion in most 
cases. Al-Wer (2002: 45) discusses why pressures towards regionallevelling12 
will not make the dialects ofBeirut, Damascus, Jerusalem and Amman identi-
cal. The reason she gives is that the countries of the Levant are separate politi-
cal entities with different political and social attitudes. Whether this attitude 
is that of members of these communities or of the political regime of these 
commnnities is not clear. 
It is worth mentioning, however, that in the Arab world, unlike the west, 
religion is usually not seen as a matter of individual choice, but as a matter of 
family and group affiliation; one is born a Muslim, a Jew or a Christian, and 
that fact becomes almost similar to one's ethnicity. As was established earlier, 
it is almost impossible to change one's ethnicity, because it is dependent on 
how you perceive yourself and how others perceive you, not just as an indi-
vidual but as part of a community. The same is true for religion. This kind of 
attachment to religion is perhaps different among highly educated westerners. 
It is not only that changing one's religion is perceived as a serious misdemean-
our, but also that the convert is seen as rejecting the existing social order, 
tradition and family obligations. Even the rituals and appearance of religion 
are more prominent in the Arab world, where it is common for a Muslim man 
to go to the mosque regularly and for a Muslim woman to wear a headscarf, 
and also for a Christian man or woman to go to church regularly and to wear 
a cross. 
Studies that have concentrated on religion as a variable in the Arab world 
include Holes' study of Bahrain (1984, 1986), in which he highlights some 
very significant factors in language change and variation in this country. He 
first stresses the relation between language variation, change and identity. He 
states that there is a difference between the concept of identity in European 
and American society and the concept of identity in Bahrain specifically. 
That is because while the former is defined by characteristics such as age, 
education, occupation etc., the latter is foundationally defined by sectarian 
differences. These differences are basically between the Shiite Bahamas and 
the Sunni Arabs. These sectarian differences are also reflected in language. 
The Bahamas are monolingual, Arabic-speaking Shiites who form the oldest 
population of Bahrain, and they are traditionally rural. The Arab Sunnis are 
descendants of the Bedouin tribes which began immigrating to Bahrain in the 
late eighteenth century, and they form the majority of the urban population. 
Importantly, the ruling family in Bahrain is from the Sunnis. Thus, power, 
prestige and financial control are associated with the Sunni Arabs. This will in 
fact have a great impact on the direction oflanguage change in this region. As 

I06 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
was said earlier, religion is deeply intertwined with politics in the Arab world. 
This is reflected in the direction of language change and variation. 
Before discussing this further, I would first like to show some of the pho-
nological differences between the Bahama Shiite dialect and the Arab Sunni 
dialect. As usual, we will also include the realisation of the phonological vari-
able in MSA. The variables studied arej and q. 
J 
MSA:j 
Shiites:} 
Sunnis:y 
q 
MSA:q 
Shiites: q 
Sunnis: g 
Holes found that the Shiite Bahama dialect is changing with regard to these 
variables in the direction of the Sunni Arab dialect even when the Sunni Arab 
dialect does not conform to MSA. This finding in itself is important, because 
it draws attention to the fact that change is not always in the direction ofMSA. 
In fact if the prestige dialect, in this case the Arab dialect, deviates from MSA, 
the change can be away from MSA towards the prestige dialect. Even though 
more and more people are exposed to MSA for longer and longer periods of 
time and in more and more contexts, it is not the case that the dialects are 
necessarily becoming more like MSA. 
The change that has been taking place in the dialect of the Shiite Bahamas, 
according to Holes, reflects a change in their social identity, because of 
changes in employment opportunities and increase in social contact between 
both sects. Holes calls this phenomenon a 'conspiracy of convergence' (1986: 
34). For example, the variant q, which was used by the Shiite Bahamas, is 
now associated with peasants and thus, not surprisingly, ignorance, while the 
variantg, which is used in other parts of the Arab world such as Kuwait, Saudi 
Arabia and Qltar, is associated with wealth and sophistication (Holes 2005: 
57). Holes provides evidence that there is a change in progress in the direction 
of g taking place among Shiite Bahamas. 
The Shiite Bahamas living in the town of Mu~arraq were originally crafts-
men specialising in sail-making. With the changes that took place in the 
Gulf in the 1970s because of oil and the collapse of Beirut as the centre of 
commerce, it became important for the Bahama Shiites politically and eco-
nomically to change their dialect towards that of the Sunni Arabs. The Shiite 
Bahamas were suddenly in contact with Arabs much more, whether in the 
market or in public places, and had to accommodate to them, since the Arabs 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
107 
were politically and economically superior (Holes 2005: 60). There were also 
campaigns to eradicate illiteracy in both groups, which may have helped in 
the convergence process. Holes alludes to the lack of linguistic security on 
the part of the Bahama Shiites, which also has to do with weakening in the 
social network ties within this sect. He gives the example of Shiite Bahamas 
in the village of Mu]:larraq who started working in the international airport, 
and since then have been spending their time with Arab Sunni co-workers and 
are not interested any more in going to their local mosque. Note also that the 
dialect used in the media- in television soap operas, songs, speech bubbles in 
newspaper cartoons- is the one used by the Sunni Arabs (Holes 2005: 57). 
While in this study the linguistic distinction is between Sunnis and Shiites, 
the real situation is more nuanced and factors like political and economic 
power are in play here. Also, the weakening of social ties within the commu-
nity, due to historical changes that have taken place in the region in the past 
two decades, is important in shaping language change (see also Holes 2006a, 
2006b). 
Third wave variation studies, though not used to explain variation in 
Bahrain, can be applied neatly to describe the linguistic situation in Bahrain. 
The linguistic variation in the speech ofBahamas is the result of the way they 
perceive their community of practice. The Bahamas have changed their com-
munity of practice. They do not meet as a community in the mosques any 
more, for example. In addition, their use of Arab linguistic variables is the 
result of the way they perceive their identity. Their social identity is chang-
ing and the Arab variables they use are acquiring different meanings and 
connotations. 
In another study that concentrated on religion, Abu-Haidar (1991) exam-
ined the differences between the Muslim (MB) and Christian (CB) Arabic of 
Baghdad. Her study is different from a great number of studies on language 
variation since it does not depend only on phonological variables but also 
examines syntactic and semantic ones, which are more difficult to observe. 
Her study predicts a change in progress towards the Muslim dialect, but 
for different reasons from the ones given by Holes. What her study has in 
common with Holes is the fact that the dialect which is changing, CB, is in fact 
the older dialect but is moving towards a newer one, in this case MB. 
Abu-Haidar states that there were one million Christians in Iraq at the time 
of her data collection. There were in fact villages in the north of the country 
where the population was entirely Christian. Baghdad, on the other hand, 
had around 100 churches- the largest concentration of churches in the whole 
country. She goes on to explain the history and tradition of the Christians 
in Iraq. The indigenous Christian group, the Jacobites, traditionally live in 
northern villages as well as in central cities such as Baghdad and Basra. Their 
church was founded in the sixth century and follows the belief that there is only 
one nature of the divine in the person of Christ; thus the church is regarded 

I08 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
as heretical by both the Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches. 
However, there are also some Armenian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Greek 
Catholics and Protestants in Iraq, although their percentage is very low 
compared to the Jacobites. The Christians of Baghdad are a well-established 
community. Their dialect is a sedentary variety of Arabic which evolved 
from the Arabic vernacular of medieval Iraq. In that sense it is different from 
the Muslim dialect ofBaghdad, which is more recent and of Bedouin origin 
Oastrow 1978: 318). In fact, some districts in Baghdad remained completely 
Christian, at least until the time of the US invasion oflraq in 2003. Christians 
are usually clustered around churches. 
In Baghdad, speakers of MB and CB, like everyone across the Arab world, 
share MSA as a high variety. MB is the low variety for Muslim Baghdadis, 
but as the language of the more powerful, richer community, it also serves as 
a second dialect for Christian Baghdadis. For Christians it is not used at home 
and not spoken among group members, but it is used in formal, less spontane-
ous situations. Therefore, one can think of CB speakers as triglossic speakers, 
who use three varieties of Arabic in different situations that differ in their 
formality. Abu-Haidar gives an example from her childhood. In her primary 
school in Baghdad in the early 1950s, the conversation between the teachers, 
who were all Christian women at the time, and the pupils was often in CB, but 
when the teacher referred to the text or assumed a more serious tone, even 
with a Christian child, she would use MB. Interestingly, MSA was not the 
only variety used as the medium of instruction in schools. The following are 
examples that show the difference between MSA, MB and CB (Abu-Haidar 
1991: 144): 
(1) 
MSA: 
laqad 
samifa 
annaka 
huna: 
laqad 
hear-3msg-perf that-pr2msg 
here 
'He heard you were here.' 
MB: 
Semaf 
enta 
hna: 
hear-3msg-perf you 
here 
CB: 
ken 
samaf 
anta 
ho:na 
ken 
hear-3msg-perf you 
here 
(2) 
MSA: 
al-kalbu 
kabi:run 
det-dog-nom 
big-nom 
'The dog is big.' 
MB: 
tfaleb 
tfabi:r 
Dog 
big 
CB: 
1-kaleb 
agbi:g ya:nu 
Det-dog 
big 
It is noteworthy, however, that Abu-Haidar recognises that even within CB, 
there is still variation between one group of speakers and another, and even 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
109 
within the repertoire of the same speaker. For example, there is a high level of 
phonological variation within CB. She stresses that this variation is not related 
to social variables such as gender or generation. She gives the example of an 
elderly woman who gave both tma:m and tama:m for 'complete' or 'whole' A 
man from a ymmger group of informants provided the two variants nha: g and 
nahag for 'day', while Blanc (1964: 146) gives 'nha:g' as the CB equivalent for 
day. 
Abu-Haidar contends that CB is changing and that its existence is being 
threatened from several directions. The reasons for these changes are, first, 
the accommodation process. Most CB salient features are adjusted towards 
MB during CB/non-CB interaction. Some sociolinguists, like Dorian (1973) 
and Trudgill (1983, 1986), argue that long-term adjustment can sometimes 
result in complete reduction and/or loss of certain salient stigmatised fea-
tures, that is, language change. To support her claim, Abu-Haidar mentions 
the fact that Blanc (1964) found that some overtly stigmatised features, such 
as dental t for interdental t-, were optional among speakers he interviewed. 13 
Such irregularity can itself be an indicator oflanguage change in progress, as 
was mentioned before by Labov. Additionally, some of Abu-Haidar's older 
informants thought that CB features serve as overt markers of one's Christian 
identity, and that many young people do not want to retain them in their 
speech. Most of her young informants saw the postpositional copula and par-
ticle ken as redundant. 
Abu-Haidar posits that, 'The most immediate danger to CB which could 
lead to dialect death, similar to the fate Dorian (1981) predicted for Scottish 
Gaelic, is due to social, rather than to linguistic factors' (1991: 150). She 
explains that the main threat for CB is the fact that CB speakers have recently 
been scattered all over the world. Since the 1960s many have settled in non-
Arab-speaking communities. Although first-generation CB emigrants tend to 
preserve their variety, it is difficult to predict whether they can maintain it. In 
fact, there is a strong likelihood that they cannot. Furthermore, even if they 
do, it will undergo changes in its various locations. 
It is apparent that once more it is weak network ties that may encourage 
language change. Yet, although the situations in Iraq and Bahrain are similar 
in the sense that it is the group that is losing its strong social ties that leads the 
change, the situations in the two countries differ historically, politically and 
economically. Christian Baghdadis are losing their ties because of immigration 
rather than economic changes and movement within the country associated 
with the distribution of wealth and power, as is the case in Bahrain. 
Khan (1997) studied the Arabic dialect of the Karaite Jews in the Iraqi 
town I:llt on the Euphrates, 150 km west ofBaghdad. Khan, like Holes and 
Abu-Haidar, provides historical background about the community he studied 
and their present status. Unlike the other two researchers, though, Khan did 
not try to examine language change in progress, but rather to describe the 

I IO 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
dialect and record it. The Karaites are a Jewish sect that broke away from 
mainstream Judaism in the Middle Ages: the movement began in Iran and 
Iraq in the eighth century and spread to Palestine, Egypt, North Africa, Spain, 
Asia Minor and Eastern Europe. Early urban settlement of f:IIt can be traced 
back to the tenth century. The Karaite Jewish community there was one of 
the most important in the Middle East, and known for its scholarly tradition. 
However, by 1951 the community had declined to twenty families, who then 
emigrated to Israel and settled on the same street in Beersheba. The dialect is 
characterised by some particular syntactic, phonological and lexical features. 
For example, the consonant h is dropped in the third person pronominal 
suffixes immediately after other consonants, as in gibtim 'I brought them' as 
opposed to gibthim, or ma:lim 'belonging to them' as opposed to ma:lhim. It 
is still retained sometimes, as in minhim 'from them' (1997: 69). Khan claims 
that the dialect still maintains some variables of the ~ltu dialect that was 
spoken in the old urban settlement ofl:llt. Although the community is a direct 
descendant of medieval urban settlements, it still maintains Bedouin features 
today and shows almost no interference from other Arabic dialects. However, 
some Hebrew words have entered the dialect because speakers were bilingual 
in Arabic and Hebrew. Although Khan did not mention it, it seems that the 
reason why this dialect maintained itself even after the families immigrated to 
Israel is related to the density and multiplexity of their ties. 
The question still remains as to what extent religion as a variable is signifi-
cant in the Arab world. We certainly know that as with other variables, one 
cannot speak about the 'Arab world' as one entity. The situation is different 
from one country to another and even from one community to another in the 
same country. 
Tomiche (1968: 1178-80) tried to distinguish the Jewish dialect spoken by 
the Jewish community of Alexandria and Cairo until the 1960s from other 
dialects. He states that the Jewish dialect was characterised by the absence of 
emphatics and the use of n-and n-u for first person singular and plural imper-
fect. According to Miller (2004), this claim was refuted by Blanc (1974), who 
prefers to call this dialect a non-standard Cairene Arabic which is shared by 
other groups. For example, then is one of the North African features as well 
as a feature of other areas of Egypt, namely the western delta and the western 
oases (Behnstedt and Woidich 1985-8). In fact, coming from Alexandria 
myself, I know that the use of n-and n-. . -u for first person singular is a char-
acteristic of Alexandrian Arabic and not just limited to a specific religion. 
Other studies that concentrate on religion include studies on Bethlehem in 
Palestine by Spolsky et al. (2000), in which they indicate that Christian speak-
ers, both women and men, tend to use more urban features, like the glottal 
stop, than do Muslim speakers, who tend to use MSA q. Blanc's 1953 study 
of the Northern Palestinian Arabic dialect used by Druze remains a classic, 
one-of-a-kind study, mainly because there are very few if any studies that 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
III 
concentrated on linguistic variation in the speech ofDruze (cf. Walters 2006a 
for other references). 
Miller (2004) explains religion as a variable by positing that in most Arab 
cities religious minorities used to live in certain areas and thus developed dif-
ferent linguistic models, as in Baghdad and Fes. Different religious communi-
ties kept their vernaculars for centuries and did not acquire the dialect of the 
Muslim community. This was due to a degree of segregation, but also to the 
fact that the Muslim urban Arabic dialects were not associated with power, 
because political power was in the hands of foreign rulers up to the begin-
ning of the twentieth century. Only recently has there been any change. An 
additional cause is the demographic changes that have taken place in different 
parts of the Arab world. 
Miller states that there has been some linguistic variation between different 
religious groups but mainly at the lexical level, for religious terms and the like. 
She also thinks that the belief that there are still religiously segregated areas 
is open to question, and the situation may not be as clear cut as was thought 
before. This postulation by Miller has to be tested. There are still religious 
segregated areas in Lebanon and Iraq, for example, but to what extent this 
influences language variation beyond the lexical level needs more study. 
One can conclude from the above discussion that religion by itself is not 
enough to explain variation or to initiate change. Religion is only one factor 
in shaping and moulding linguistic variation and change. Blanc (1964) claims 
that religious linguistic differences are not dominant in Arab cities. They are 
in fact the result of political changes and demographic changes related to the 
sedentarisation and urbanisation of former Bedouin groups as well as ethno-
regional differences (Miller 2004: 189).14 This postulation may not be true for 
all the Arab world, though. 
3.4.3 Urbanisation 
Miller posits that 'urbanization has been one of the greatest social changes 
of the last century in Arab countries' (2004: 177). The population of most 
Arab countries was mainly rural until the mid-twentieth century (Miller 
2007: 2). To illustrate this, note that the creation of Nouakchott, the capital 
of Mauritania, took place in 19 57 It was created mainly for political and 
administrative reasons. In 1962 the population of the city was 5,807, and by 
2005 it had risen to 743,511 (cf. Taine-Cheikh 2007). The same rapid growth 
occurred in the second half of the twentieth century in CasaBlanca, the capital 
of Morocco (cf Hachimi 2007). This rapid growth in the urban populations 
has a number of linguistic ramifications. 
Miller (2004) claims that the process of Arabisation in general started in 
urban centres. Sometimes in cases of inter-dialectal contact, speakers who use 
features close to MSA may drop them and acquire non-MSA urban/regional 

I I2 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
features. An example of this behaviour occurs in the variety of Arabic spoken 
by Shiites in Bahrain, as discussed above (cf. Holes 1984). The question of 
how a prestige urban dialect develops is very difficult to answer, since we do 
not have sufficient data. Holes posits that it depends on the communities' 
political importance, not just their size (1995: 285). Note the cases of Egypt 
and Syria, in which the migrant population came from rural neighbouring 
areas speaking sedentary rural dialects, and accommodated to the main urban 
dialects, Cairene and Damascene respectively, which are considered the pres-
tige variety of the national dialect. Bedouin dialects have not had any signifi-
cant influence on the dialects of these centres. One can also add that the ruling 
family in Egypt (before the revolution) did not speak a Bedouin dialect, as was 
the case in Jordan or Iraq, for example. Even after the presidency was in place 
in Egypt, the president did not speak Bedouin. Thus political power also has 
a role in language change, and not just urbanisation. 15 
Urbanisation also means interaction, language contact and a greater degree 
ofhomogeneity. In fact, there is a difference between the degree of homogene-
ity in Damascus and Cairo. Miller (1997) posits that the degree of homogene-
ity in Cairo is greater than in Damascus. Children born in Cairo to migrants 
from rural areas shift to Cairene Arabic almost automatically (see also Lentin 
1981). When there is interaction between different groups and one group's 
variety is stigmatised, change towards the non-stigmatised variety will take 
place. The following example will clarify this point: Woidich (1994) mentions 
that the Cairene dialect of today is a mixed dialect formed in the second half 
of the nineteenth century, when many people from the countryside moved to 
Cairo. A number of features became stigmatised as a result of being associated 
with low-prestige rural dialects. According to Versteegh (2001), this process 
of stigmatisation led to the disappearance of rural forms and the emergence of 
new forms, as for example the loss ofpausal ima:la (palatalization) in Cairene 
Arabic. Versteegh (1993: 70) also describes the influence ofCairene Arabic in 
the delta 16 He mentions the example of the isoglosses of the realisation of q 
and j. In Cairene the letter q is pronounced as ? and the j is pronounced as g; 
in the Delta q is pronounced as g and j as j. V ersteegh postulates that there is 
a 'formidable clustering of isoglosses' in Egypt. Many Egyptians will admit 
modifying their dialect once they come into contact with the speech of the 
capital, and with time they may give up their original speech habits. 
In fact, sound change in a community such as that in Cairo will be of a dif-
ferent nature from sound change in an isolated community, like Oman, for 
example. This may be because Cairo is in a state of flux -because of its geo-
graphical position, because of the waves of immigrants from all over Egypt, 
and simply because of the sheer number of people who live there, estimated at 
about 20 million now. In contrast, Oman has been geographically isolated for 
a long time, and its population is small. Trudgill (1974) claims that isolated 
communities - of the sort found in Oman - are more resistant to change. 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
113 
Thus, while the differences between Cairene Arabic, the delta dialects of 
Egypt and the Bedouin dialect of Egypt are clearly demarcated and registered, 
the differences between rural and urban communities within Oman are likely 
to be much more difficult to study. 
Holes ( 1996-2006) conducted a study of the sedentary and Bedouin dialects 
of Oman. 17 As was established, one can classify Arabic dialects into Bedouin 
and sedentary. In the Levant, sedentary dialects can be divided into urban 
and rural. Meanwhile, the Bedouin dialects are also changing and Bedouins 
are moving towards an urban setting, as has been the case throughout history. 
Bedouins are giving up their nomadic existence, although they may still call 
themselves 'Bedouins' (1996: 34). 
Although there are differences between Bedouin and sedentary dialects in 
the northern part of the Arab world, this is not the case in Oman, where there 
is relative similarity between Bedouin and sedentary dialects. This is related 
to the social, geographic and economic structure of the two areas. In fact, until 
the early 1970s, Oman, a country which is the size of France, had only 10 km 
of paved road. Geographically, Oman is cut off from the rest of Arabia by 
deserts and mountains rising to 10,000 feet. As late as the 1970s, non-Omani 
visitors were rare and the population was almost illiterate. The tribal structure 
of society helped preserve archaic features in both the Bedouin and sedentary 
dialects. Each of the tribes had similar dress, dwelling, social organisations and 
customs. This, of course, has changed now because of a huge wave of immi-
gration to Oman and a modernisation policy that must have affected language. 
The main change that has taken place in Oman in the past thirty or so years is 
urbanisation. I am sure this urbanisation has affected language in irrevocable 
ways. 
According to Miller (2004), old urban centres with a declining urban elite 
and population are going through a great wave of language change now. In 
North African cities such as Fes, Tangier, Rabat and even Tunis, the old 
urban vernaculars are restricted to older women ( Caubet 1998; Dendane 1994; 
Iraqui-Sinaceur 1998; Jabeur 1996; Messaoudi 2001, 2002; Trabelsi 1988). It 
is worth mentioning, however, that this fact in itself is not surprising. Older 
women are most likely to retain and use features associated with older pres-
tigious urban varieties, given the constraints placed on their lives, along with 
changes related to urbanisation. Note also that, in general, sedentary urban 
dialects are often perceived as more effeminate than rural Bedouin ones, 
especially at the phonological level. In Egypt, for example, upper-Egyptian 
migrants regard Cairene Arabic as more soft and effeminate than their own 
upper-Egyptian dialects. Some male workers consciously keep realising q as 
g rather than J (Miller 1997). This situation seems very similar to the one in 
Jordan discussed above. 
I would like to conclude this section with a study that concentrated on the 
city of Tripoli in Libya (Pereira 2007). The people of Libya, like those of a 

I 14 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
number of other conntries in the Arab world, led a nomadic life to a large 
extent until independence in 1951 and the discovery of oil in 1955. Since then, 
there have been large waves of urban migration into big cities such as Tripoli 
and Benghazi. Libya is now considered one of the most highly urbanised coun-
tries in Africa and the Arab world. The population of Libya is 6 million, 85.8 
per cent of whom live in urban centres. In 1954 there were only 25.1 per cent 
who lived in urban centres. The population of Tripoli specifically increased 
between 1964 and 1995 by 450 per cent (Fontaine 2004). The Tripoli dialect 
started as a Bedouin-type dialect but has changed over time due to internal 
and external immigration. Between 1954 and 1973 there were 187,000 for-
eigners in Libya, half of them settling in Tripoli. The main immigrants came 
from neighbouring Egypt, but there were also some from Syria, Lebanon and 
Tunisia. Because of the complex nature ofTripoli, its dialect is a hybrid; it has 
maintained features from Bedouin dialects, Egyptian colloquial Arabic, MSA 
and even Italian (Pereira 2007: 91). 
Pereira's data is not described clearly. He compiled it between November 
2002 and February 2005 in Tripoli and enhanced it with recordings he made 
with two 25-year-old Tripolitans in Genoa in 2003 (2007: 77). Pereira exam-
ines morpho-syntactic as well as phonological and lexical characteristics of 
the dialect of Tripoli. Bedouin morpho-syntactic features include the dual 
number for nouns, which is formed by suffixing -e:n to nouns, as in walde:n 
'parents' andyome:n 'two days' (Pereira 2007: 87). In addition, the dialect of 
Tripoli 'makes a gender distinction in the second person singular of the verb 
inflection for prefixal and suffixal conjugations', as in the following examples: 
(2007: 85) 
(3) 
kle:t 2msg 
tji:b 2msg 
di:r2msg 
kle:ti 2fsg (to eat) 
tji:bi 2fsg (to bring) 
di:ri 2fsg (to do) 
Phonological characteristics include the MSA q variable which is also realised 
as a voiced g (2007: 84). ECA borrowing includes words such as kuwayyis 
'good',.fi 'there is', bi-yithaya'lli, 'I think, in my opinion' (2007: 90). 
What is noteworthy, however, is that the dialect of Tripoli, unlike that of 
Cairo for example, is not the most prestigious dialect in Libya. According to 
Pereira (2007: 92) everyone in Libya is proud of his or her own dialect. The 
president of Libya is, in fact, of rural Bedouin origin and those who hold 
political and economic power in Libya are also ofBedouin origin. 
3.4.4 Social class 
Oass, as a variable and not in isolation, can be useful. In an effective study of 
Philadelphia vernacular, Kroch (1996) managed to define a specific community 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
115 
as belonging to the upper class. He first claimed that there are well-defined 
geographical boundaries and ethnic boundaries that determine contempo-
rary urban dialects. For example, the Philadelphia vernacular was confined 
to the local metropolitan area and did not extend to the countryside beyond 
Philadelphia suburbs. Thus, it was not spoken by the African American resi-
dents of the city.18 Ethnic and geographic factors are as important in studying 
different communities in the Arab world, as was shown above. 
Kroch's study compared the vowel pronunciation of upper- and middle-
class Philadelphians. The speech of the upper class was called 'main line', 
'chestnut hill' and 'lockjaw' Membership in the upper class was limited to 
families who meet its financial, ethnic and religious standards. The upper class 
was based on inherited wealth, and ethnicity, since it was white and 'Anglo-
Saxon' Since the Civil War its religion had been Episcopalian. It constituted 
a generation that grew up before World War II. Its members were privileged 
and isolated, and the men usually worked as managers or lawyers or owned 
large business enterprises. They had large households with domestic staff, 
such as a butler, servants etc. The women did not work outside the home, 
but were engaged in civic and charitable work. Men and women belonged to 
sexually segregated social clubs where membership was limited to that class. 
They also all received invitations to the yearly assembly ball. Kroch found that 
vowel pronunciation cannot be the source of the distinctiveness of upper-class 
speech. There were no important differences between upper- and middle-
class pronunciations of vowels. The properties that distinguished upper-class 
speech were not phonemic but prosodic and lexical. Upper-dass speech was 
characterised by a drawling and laryngealised voice quality and frequent use 
of intensifying modifiers for both men and women. 
I refer to this study because I think similar studies in the Arab world are 
greatly needed. Also, this study defines social class in relation to ethnicity and 
religion. This may be needed when analysing parts of the Arab world. A study 
that examines the language of the ruling class in different Arab countries like 
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait would be useful, and a study that concentrates on 
the speech of upper-class Egyptians would also be worthwhile. Some of the 
work that examined class as a variable includes Haeri's study of the phono-
logical change of urban middle-class women in Cairo who had a stable urban 
vernacular (1996a). One of the phonological variables she concentrated on is 
palatalisation. She found that variables associated with upper-middle-class 
women tend to become prestigious norms associated with refinement (see 
Chapter 4, section 4.7.2). 
Unfortunately there are few studies that concentrate on class. According to 
Owens (200 I), social class as an independent variable is not as effective as other 
variables, like education and ethnicity. The reason for this is that researchers 
still lack the economic and social data that can help them define social class. 
Linguists still know very little about how class status is defined in the Arab 

I 16 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
world, especially for the old elites. There is also the problem of access. How 
can linguists who do not belong to an elite class in the Arab world themselves 
have access to the upper elite classes, for example? The upper class in the Arab 
world can keep social scientists out of their lives in a way the middle and lower 
class cannot. As was said earlier, in countries such as Jordan, Iraq and Saudi 
Arabia, tribal affiliation and family ties are more dominant than social class 
(Holes 2007). Nevertheless, there is still room for new studies that deal with 
language variation and change, especially in relation to class. 
3.4.5 Other factors 
Other factors that are significant in the study oflanguage variation and change 
include sociodemographic variables such as age and education, and external 
factors such as political upheavals and civil wars. Miller (2004) claims that 
more studies are needed that concentrate on young speakers of Arabic in dif-
ferent communities, since youth speakers constitute the majority of Arabs. 
There have been very few studies on this group. I agree with Miller on that 
point. According to Eckert (2005: 4), in the USA it is, in fact, adolescents that 
lead other age groups in sound change and in the use of 'vernacular variants' 
more generally. I would predict that this is the case in a large number of com-
munities in the Arab world as well, but studies that examine this are needed. 
Further, countries that have gone through civil wars or upheavals such as 
Lebanon are worth studying, since they are likely to be undergoing language 
change. There have been some studies on San'a, (Watson 2003, 2007) and 
Algiers (Boucherit 1986, 2002). Still, more studies are needed about Beirut or 
Baghdad, for example. 
One study that concentrates on Beirut is the one conducted by Germanos 
(2007) in which she examines not a phonological variable but greetings in 
Beirut. Germanos depends in her study on observations in public places, 
shops, kiosks, fast food outlets, business areas and medical centres. Unlike 
other cities discussed above, such as Tripoli, CasaBlanca and Nouakchott, 
Beirut is not growing. In fact, since the beginning of the civil war in 197 5 
the city's population has not increased. When the war broke out the city was 
divided into two parts: East Beirut for Christians, and West Beirut where 
Muslims lived. During the first years of the war 110,000 Muslims and 75,000 
Christians left Beirut. Still today the line between East and West Beirut is 
'very much alive' in the minds of its inhabitants. This division is not just a 
territorial one, but a 'human and economic' one (Germanos 2007: 150). The 
Muslim greeting as-sala:mu falaykum 'peace be upon you' is restricted to spe-
cific areas such as Sabra and Nweyri. The French form of greeting, Bonjour, 
is never used in these areas, and the same is true for the English form hi. 
Christians seem to prefer the French bonjour, while Shiites prefer as-sala:mu 
falaykum. Forms such as marhaba 'welcome' are more neutral. 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
117 
According to Miller (2004), the widespread increase of education in the 
Arab world has resuked in the use of a written form of Arabic by more and 
more speakers. This gives more exposure to MSA and a wider range of 
changes, perhaps sometimes in the direction of MSA. However, although 
education is an important variable discussed by most linguists studying vari-
ation in the Arab world, there is no study that concentrates on education as a 
main variable. There are some, however, that focus on the role of diglossia in 
language change. Walters (2003) posits that diglossia represents a case oflong 
and stable language contact between two varieties. This is indeed a defining 
feature of diglossia as characterized by Ferguson. This means that any type of 
change must be related to the nature of the contact and degree of similarities 
or differences between the varieties involved, namely MSA and the vernacu-
lar. Walters contends that increased access to literacy and MSA has given rise 
to an intermediate variety based on the grammar of the dialect but with a large 
mixture ofMSA vocabulary. However, it is only fair to say that Walters makes 
it clear that linguists are better off thinking about practices of switching rather 
than focussing on an intermediate variety. Likewise, we need to distinguish 
inter-dialectal and intra-dialectal interactions. 
Haeri (1991), for example, contends that a variable such as q is a diglossic 
variable. This is indeed true, since one cannot study the glottal stop or the 
g sound without referring to the standard realisation, the q. In these senses, 
language variation in the Arab world is different from that in the west. In 
addition, because of the increase of inter-dialectal communication in the Arab 
world due to satellite channels and immigration, it is necessary to study level-
ling in relation to language change. Therefore, I would like to discuss levelling 
in relation to diglossia and change in the Arab world. 
3·5 LEVELLING 
Levelling, like a number oflinguistic terms, can be sloppy and hard to define. 
The definitions that follow may overlap with some of the concepts already 
discussed or to be discussed in the next chapters, such as accommodation 
(discussed in Chapter 2). In the Arabic-speaking world, levelling occurs in 
inter-dialectal communication between people from different countries, and 
it is also closely related to the diglossic situation. Here are some definitions of 
levelling by different linguists, with examples. 
Levelling is defined by Blanc (1960: 62) as a process that occurs in 'inter-
dialectal contact', meaning contact between dialects of different countries in 
the Arab world rather than dialects within the same country. According to 
Blanc, levelling refers to the influence of standard Arabic on different dia-
lects. In such contacts, speakers may replace some features from their dialect 
with others from a different dialect that carries more prestige. This different 

I I8 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
dialect is not necessarily that of the listener. Blanc quotes the example of vil-
lagers in central Palestine who may try to use the dialect of Jerusalem, or that 
of non-Muslim Baghdadis who may try to move towards features of Muslim 
Baghdadi. Note that levelling does not necessarily mean that speakers will 
abandon their dialect in favour of another one. They may, for example, choose 
features which are more 'urban' and abandon features which are more 'rural' 
and therefore more difficult for the urban listener to understand. Thus, level-
ling as defined by Blanc is not just accommodation to a different dialect, but 
rather a process of unselecting local and rural features in favour of others 
which are easier to understand because they are more common. In the follow-
ing paragraphs, I will first explain the process of levelling more thoroughly, 
and then proceed to examine the relation between levelling and language 
change. 
According to Holes (1995: 39), while levelling is only the 'elimination of 
very localised dialectal features in favour of more regionally general ones', 
standardisation (or classicisation, as it is called by Blanc) is the elimination 
of local features in favour of standard ones. This use of standard or classi-
cal features is not just to facilitate conversation, but goes beyond that level. 
However, it is noteworthy that this distinction is not always maintained. 
Sometimes the term 'levelling' is used to refer to both to levelling as defined 
here and to standardisation or classicisation. 
Versteegh (2001: 65) defines levelling as a general process in which the 
differences between the different varieties of speakers that make a speech 
community have almost disappeared. This new variety, which is the result 
of levelling, is different from all the specific existing varieties of the speakers. 
He also uses the term 'koineisation' as synonymous with levelling. Versteegh 
posits that the process ofkoineisation or levelling is in most cases connected 
with situations in which groups of speakers were thrown together by accident. 
Therefore, the process is in his opinion usually an unplanned one. However, 
he mentions one case where levelling was a planned process, namely that 
involving settlers in the new polders of North Holland that were reclaimed in 
the first half of the twentieth century (1993: 65). 
According to Holes (1995: 294), levelling can affect all linguistic levels: 
semantic, syntactic, phonological etc. He gives the example of a recorded 
conversation between educated Arabs from the Gulf, Baghdad, Cairo and 
Jerusalem. He examines how these people express the existential 'there', as in: 
'There are people' For these dialects there are at least three dialectal ways of 
expressing existential 'there': 
(4) 
Gulf: /hast!, /aleu/ 
Baghdad: /aku/ 
Cairo: I fi: I 
Jerusalem: I fi: I 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
119 
In this case I fi: I is the feature likely to be used by all of the speakers since it 
has no clear associations with any particular area, and represents the nearest 
thing to a dialectal common meeting point for this specific group. Speakers 
in a 'heterogeneous group tend to level their speech in the direction of a pan-
Arab dialectal form', even if it means in this case that the Iraqis will have to 
resort to using a form that they do not have in their dialect. It is still a form 
that is not uncommon to them. 
3.5.1 Diglossia and levelling 
The position ofMSA is strong and it is difficult for any vernacular to replace it 
(V ersteegh 2001: 71 ). MSA is in most Arabic-speaking countries the only offi-
cial and national language in the constitution. This situation may be different 
from levelling in other communities in which there is no language or variety 
with a special status. Versteegh contends that as a result of this special status 
of MSA, inter-Arabic conversation in dialect will not converge in the direc-
tion of a regional dialectal variety but tend to exhibit an increasing use ofMSA 
features against inter-dialectal conversations. That is to say, levelling will not 
eventually lead to the disappearance of MSA in favour of any vernacular. 
Holes (1995: 294) posits that levelling is a reaction to the dialectal differences 
between speakers whose aim is to emphasise shared elements and eliminate 
local ones. In addition, interaction between dialects both economically and 
socially also encourages the use of levelling (cf. Versteegh 2001). 
For example, Gibson (2002) mentions the fact that increased mobility and 
education influence language in Tunisia. He claims that during the twentieth 
century non-standard dialects have become closer to the standard variety 
in many languages, including English, because of the spread of television, 
radio and other mass media. He tries to examine whether the same is true 
in the Arabic-speaking world, with reference to ongoing phonological and 
morphological changes in Tunisian Arabic. He admits that although there is 
a great influence from MSA on the vocabulary of Arabic dialects, including 
the Tunisian one, the same may not be true for phonology and morphology. 
Thus, he examines the assumption that because of the prestige of MSA, as 
well as the spread of education and mass media, change is towards MSA. He 
studies four Tunisian variables, including the increased use of q instead of g 
which is used in Bedouin dialects. But one should bear in mind that the reali-
sation of this variable is shared between the urban dialect of Tunis and MSA. 
Another variable examined is the treatment of the final vowel in defective 
verbs. Gibson concludes that the direction of many of the changes is towards 
the modem-day dialect of Tunis (2002: 28). In fact, in the case of the conjuga-
tion of defective verbs changes are moving away from MSA-like forms. This 
may still be related to the spread of mass media, since media makes use not just 
of MSA but of different varieties, especially urban ones. 

120 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
3.5.2 Levelling and language change 
Versteegh (2001: 103) gives the example of the Arab armies in the past to 
illustrate the relation between levelling and language change. They consisted 
of a mixture of different tribes, so as a result the existing differences between 
pre-Islamic dialects were levelled out. He posits that the new dialects in the 
conquered territories must have been the result of independent local evolu-
tion. Continuing on this historical line, he explains cases of levelling within 
the same dialect (2001: 149). He contends that, in the Arabian peninsula, 
the 'nomadic-sedentary dichotomy does not function in the same way as 
outside' This is because many tribes have settled members with whom there 
is frequent interaction both economically and socially. Therefore, all dialects 
including the sedentary ones exhibit Bedouin features. 
Another example oflanguage change given by Versteegh (1993: 72-5) is the 
development of Juba Arabic in the southern Sudan. This example is signifi-
cant because Juba Arabic dialect displays ongoing 'decreolising change'19 in 
the development of aspectual and agreement marking of the verb. Versteegh 
refers to a thesis on Juba Arabic (Mahmud 1979), which predicted that in the 
future the linguistic variety or varieties spoken in Juba would become more 
and more similar to Khartoum Arabic. Depending on the political situation, 
which determines the amount of exposure to MSA, Juba Arabic may undergo 
the same equalising influence ofMSA as all Arabic dialects undergo. This may 
result in a situation where Juba Arabic would be nothing more than a regional 
variety of general Sudanese Arabic, without any trace of its creole origins. 
Versteegh concludes that if it is possible for a creolised variety to acquire 
through a process of semantic change features that are found in normal dia-
lects, one can conclude that the only way to distinguish between a decreolised 
and a normal dialect is by an analysis of the historical facts connected with 
those varieties, since the linguistic structure cannot give us any clue to the 
genetic origins. 
The development of Juba Arabic may lead one to start wondering about 
the real origins of present-day regional varieties. Versteegh concludes that 
the levelling that takes place in Sudan and the rest of the Arab world proves 
that the emergence of a regional standard, when it occurs, is identical to 
the levelling process resulting from the influence of a prestigious variety of 
speech. A creolised dialect may be decreolised to such a degree that it seems a 
normal dialect. This is an example oflevelling changing a creole into a normal 
dialect. 
If one assumes a creolisation analysis of the development of the dialects (c( 
Versteegh 2001), then one has to ask whether levelling has played the major 
role in explaining the process of decreolisation and the formation of differ-
ent dialects of Arabic in the Arab world. According to Holes (1986: 221), 
levelling cannot explain the great differences between modem Arabic pidgins 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
121 
and creoles and the mainstream dialects. He posits that similarities between 
modem dialects must stem from the main input, which was a range of slightly 
different dialects which shared similarities as opposed to a unified form of 
Arabic. Versteegh (2004: 352), on the other hand, argues that the influence 
of the standard language should not be ruled out completely. One can find 
examples in the modem Arab world of illiterate speakers who can still produce 
standard forms (see Paiva 1969). This shows that the standard language may 
still have played a major role in modem Arabic dialects. Versteegh also adds 
that at all levels hybrid forms such as b-tuktab are heard (cf. Bassiouney 2006). 
In this hybrid form there is an ECA aspectual marker b- prefixed to an MSA 
passive verb form. The influence of MSA is not just related to the spread of 
education and mass media, but has its religious significance as well, according 
to Versteegh, as it is used in mosques, for example. 20 Thus the exposure to 
MSA is almost inevitable. 
I want to point out that a number of linguists who studied levelling in 
Arabic contend that levelling is not necessarily in the direction of MSA. 
Ibrahim (1986), Abdel-Jawad (1986), Al-Wer (1997) and Gibson (2002) 
explain that MSA is not a spoken variety, and this is the reason why level-
ling does not necessarily have to move towards standard Arabic, but could 
also be directed towards the prestigious vernacular of different countries. 
Gibson also rejects the term 'prestige' when discussing levelling, since there 
is an overt and a covert prestige (cf. Trudgill 1972). Another example to 
support Gibson is provided by Holes (1983a): despite increased literacy and 
urbanisation in Bahrain, the local language does not move towards classical 
features. According to Al-Wer (2002: 46), linguistic change in the Arab world 
is determined by the status of the native varieties, which in tum is determined 
by the status of the speaker and not the status of standard Arabic; likewise, a 
higher level of education does not necessarily mean that speakers will use more 
standard Arabic. 
Finally, one has to note that there are degrees of levelling. For example, 
Egyptians in an inter-dialectal context may accommodate their speech to 
others and use levelling less than North African speakers. However, as was 
said earlier, levelling is not necessarily towards Egyptian Arabic in spite of 
the prestige of this dialect. This is because levelling is dependent not only on 
prestige but on a number of factors brought together, such as the status of the 
speaker and the influence of political ideologies. Another example that proves 
that there are degrees oflevelling is given by Versteegh (2001). He posits that 
the Bedouin dialects in the Arabian peninsula are more conservative than 
those outside, because they do not allow levelling to the same extent as those 
dialects outside the peninsula, the most conservative of them all being Najdi 
Arabic. 
According to Al-Wer (1997), the most important feature in levelling which 
may lead to language change is not education, but frequency of interaction. 

I22 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Meanwhile, what is needed, according to Versteegh (2004: 355), is 'a much 
more detailed and fine-grained analysis of the demographic, cultural, and 
social circumstances of the early period of Arabisation' In fact, there is an 
urgent need to study this phenomenon from different perspectives and in rela-
tion to different variables such as education, gender, social class, community 
etc. However, there are relatively few detailed studies on levelling in Arabic. 
3.6 CONCLUSION 
In this chapter, I have briefly outlined the framework of the study oflanguage 
variation and change in the west as well as in the Arab world, including a com-
parison between the methods and findings in the west and the Arab world. The 
methods used by linguists to study the Arab world are similar to those used in 
the west. However, there is still room for applying third wave variation studies 
to the Arab world. Independent variables such as ethnicity and religion are 
essential in both the Arab and the western worlds. However, in the Arab world 
the implications of ethnicity and religion are different. Ethnicity is intertwined 
with historical and political events and with nationalities to a great extent. 
Religion plays a major role in defining political affiliations, social networks 
and communities of practice. It is part and parcel of one's identity and sense of 
belonging, more so than it is in the west. Indeed, religion like any other vari-
able cannot be studied in isolation, but interacts with other variables, whether 
economic ones (as in the case ofBahrain) or sociopolitical ones (as in the case of 
Iraq). Social class as an independent variable in the Arab world has been exam-
ined by Haeri (1996a, 1996b), but by very few linguists after that. The reason 
for this is that defining class in terms of income, education, residence etc., as 
Labov does, does not reflect the situation in a number of Arab countries, in 
which the tribal system is dominant and in which one's social confidence is 
derived not from income or education but from the status and strength of the 
tribe. Indeed there are still countries with a clearly defined social class system, 
such as Egypt. However, even in Egypt, the interaction between social class 
and social networks is crucial. This needs to be examined in future research. 
A major variable that can distinguish the Arab world broadly from the 
western world is urbanisation. As was said earlier, there was a huge wave of 
urbanisation that took place in the Arab world only half a century ago and that 
changed the demographics of many countries, resulting in linguistic variation 
and change. Other factors that have been discussed in this chapter and that 
have helped mould the direction of change and variation in the Arab world 
are as follows: 
1. The discovery of oil in Gulf states led to changes in the communities of 
practice in countries like Bahrain, Oman, Libya and Saudi Arabia. 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
123 
2. Social and political upheavals took place in the Arab world after 
World War I. 
3. Wars in the region changed the distribution of the populations of 
many countries. Examples of the impact of wars on language varia-
tion and change are apparent in the case of Jordan and especially of 
Palestinians in Jordan. Civil wars like that in Lebanon have also left 
their impact on language variation and change. The Gulf wars must 
have left a great impact as well, but they have not been examined in 
relation to linguistic variables yet. The main outcome of wars is the 
dislocation of a big proportion of the population, which consequently 
leads to language variation, language change and in some cases lan-
guage death. 
4. The majority of the population of the Arab world is young. This 
again is a major factor that can influence language. 
One fear that comes up whenever one correlates language variation with 
quantifiable independent variables is that of falling into a circular argument. 
For example, if we examine linguistic variation in relation to gender and social 
class, we have to assume that there are linguistic differences between different 
social classes and there are also linguistic differences that are related to one's 
gender. Thus, rather than constructing independent variables as they go along, 
linguists can start by predetermining them and thus lose much of their insight 
into the real linguistic situation that characterises a specific community. 
Another point worth mentioning is that independent variables are them-
selves different. There are variables that can be shaped and moulded by the 
individual in relation to the community, and variables that are difficult to 
change and are assumed as almost uncontrollable. In the Arab world especially 
one can divide independent variables into two types: fixed independent vari-
ables (Chart 3.1) and flexible independent variables (Chart 3.2). 
Fixed independent 
variables 
I 
I 
Religion 
Ethnicity 
Tribal affiliations 
Chart 3.1 
Fixed independent variables 

I24 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Flexible 
independent 
variables 
I 
Social class 
Social networks 
Urbanisation 
Education 
Ourt 3.2 
Flexible independent variables 
As was mentioned earlier in this chapter, religion in the Arab world is not a 
matter of individual choice. One is born a Muslim, a Christian or a Jew. One 
is also born a Palestinian, a Kurd, or a Berber. Even if there is intermarriage 
between different ethnic groups, there is still a difference between them. This 
difference is the consequence of the way Kurds, for example, perceive them-
selves and are perceived by others. In tribal communities, the individual may 
be able to change neither tribal affiliation nor the tribe's status, which mirrors 
his or her social status. 
On the other hand there are flexible independent variables (Chart 3.2). 
It is possible for an individual to change and modify social class, education 
or where she or he lives. In Egypt, for example, where there may be a clear 
social class system, it is still possible to move from one class to another, and 
this is usually related to education, place of residence and social income to a 
great extent. Thus a lower-class individual who studies medicine and opens a 
private clinic may become a famous doctor and take two or more leaps in the 
social ladder. 
Fixed variables create and maintain a community of practice. For example, 
religion when a dominant fixed variable, as it is perhaps in Lebanon (Sunnis, 
Shiites and Christians) or Bahrain (Sunnis, Shiites), can help in the crea-
tion of a community of practice and the preservation of this community for 
some time. In other communities, ethnicity or tribal affiliations may be more 
dominant. Palestinians in refugee camps in Lebanon or Syria form their own 
community of practice. Flexible variables could initiate change within the 
community of practice which may lead to language change. For example, 
social networks when loosened by different factors, such as economic or politi-
cal ones' or urbanisation when it changes the structure of a community may 
lead to language change. 
There are also independent variables that cannot be classified as fixed or 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
125 
flexible, such as age and gender. These two, like all variables, interact with 
other variables and are more prominent in certain communities than others. 
The diglossic situation in the Arab world adds a new dimension to our 
understanding of language variation and change in the region. A salient pho-
nological feature such as the q is in fact an MSA variable. Its realisation by 
different speakers in different communities of the Arab world may be related 
to education and literacy as well as exposure to MSA. 
The relation between gender and language change will be discussed in the 
next chapter. This is because, although gender is one variable that interacts 
with others, it is an essential one in the study of sociolinguistics and there 
have been numerous studies concentrating on it. In itself, gender can help 
us understand the underlying cultural constructs that may be characteristic 
of the Arab world. There is a huge body of research on gender that cannot 
be covered in this book. However, gender will be discussed not just as an 
independent variable which is non-classifiable as fixed or flexible, but also as a 
discourse variable that sheds light on sociolinguistic aspects oflanguage use. 
Note that I have not touched upon pidgin Arabic in this book except in 
passing, but it is indeed worth studying. Miller thinks that there are nowadays 
cities with a large component of non-Arabic-speaking populations, which 
leads to pidgin and creole types of Arabic and to regional dialectal varieties 
(Miller 2004; Miller and Abu-Manga 1992; Abu-Manga 1999). In Sudan, the 
non-Arab immigrants speak Arabic but with non-standard Khartoum Arabic 
dialect. Because of the immigration wave to Gulf cities such as Kuwait, Dubai 
etc., a new pidgin Arabic has been created. 
NOTES 
1. Note that this example represents individual language shift: giving up a Berber language 
or at least adding Arabic to the protagonist's linguistic repertoire, that is, becoming bilin-
gual. This is not exactly what variationists have in mind when they write about language 
variation and change. However, the example shows the importance of social pressure and 
extra-linguistic factors in language variation, change and even language death. 
2. The reason why their interest is mainly in phonological variables is that these occur fre-
quently. They are also less salient in many ways than lexical or morpho-syntactic variables 
and thus are less subject to consistent, conscious manipulation. Sound change was the major 
concern ofhistoricallinguistics traditionally(cf. Walters 1988). 
3. In fact, Labov used a secondary sample. That is, he eliminated certain categories of speak-
ers from an earlier random sample created for a sociological study called 'mobilization for 
youth' Thus the sample was not a hundred per cent random, but it was much closer to a 
random sample than variationist work has been generally. 
4. Labov delineated five categories: casual and careful spoken material, and literacy-based 
prompts such as reading passages, word lists and minimal pairs. 
S. Haeri used networks to recruit subjects, a fact that sometimes makes results less 
representative. 

I26 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
6. There are also a number of studies oflanguage use in the Arab world that rely on techniques 
other than the interview for gathering data. These include the study mentioned in the 
next chapter by Abu-Lughod (1987), who analyses folk poetry, that by Hayasi (1998), who 
analyses the language use of a TV series, and that by Eid (2002a), who analyses obituar-
ies. Although these studies are not variationist studies, they teach important things about 
language use and linguistic variation in the Arab world. 
7. Studies that rely on statistics relating variation to other social correlates include, in chrono-
logical order, Hurreiz's study (1978) of Khartoum and the relation between language, 
gender, age and education; Owens and Bani-Yasin's (1987) examination oflanguage used by 
men and women in the Bani-Yasin's tribe Jordanian dialect in relation to level of education 
and age; and Abu-Haider's (1989) comparison of the language used by men and women in 
a Baghdad community in relation to language change. There are statistical studies relating 
gender to social class. Haeri (1992), for example, in her study ofCairene Arabic, provides 
statistics that compare the linguistic behaviour of men in three social classes with that of 
women belonging to the upper middle class. She found that the process of palatalisation is 
associated with the lower middle class; upper-middle-class women tend to avoid it. She also 
used statistics in the same study to relate gender to age and/or social class. Daher (1999) 
used statistics that relate gender to age and education, bearing in mind other factors such 
as word frequency and phonological environment. 
8. At the beginning of the twentieth century Sayyid Darwish composed a nationalistic song 
about Egypt, which starts with the following words: 'Jana l-m~: I kari:m il-funsuril 
bane:t al-magd' ('I am the Egyptian. I am the one who comes from a noble blessed lineage 
(ethnicity). I am the one who has built a civilisation (glory)'). In 2005 a young Lebanese 
female singer sang for Egypt and started her song with the following words' Jana ~ri: wa 
Jabu:ya ~ri: I bi-5ama:ri: wi lo:ni masri: I wi b-xiffit dammi: m~ri' ('I am Egyptian. My 
father is Egyptian. I am Egyptian because of my colour, my tanned skin and my sense of 
humour'). 
9. A famous Jordanian joke is as follows: two young Palestinian men join the army. The 
military officer asks their names. The first one answers ('Jismi Ja:sim', my name is Ja:sim 
[for: "~:sim"]'). When the military officer hears the glottal stop rather than the Bedouin 
Jordanian g, he says, 'You speak like a woman. You are now in the army and you must learn 
to speak like a man.' He then asks the second Palestinian his name. The second Palestinian 
replies, 'ga}Jmad' Thus the second Palestinian changed all his glottal stops into gs even in 
the words that should necessarily start with ?such as the name Jal}mad, 'Ahmad'. The joke 
is indeed very significant linguistically. 
10. A walk along the row of Christian cemeteries in Alexandria illustrates the confusing variety 
of Christian denominations: the Latin cemetery borders the Lutheran, which lies adjacent 
to the cemetery of the Maronites, which is next to the Greek and Coptic Orthodox ones; 
there are also burial sites for Anglicans, the Armenian Orthodox and so on and so forth. 
11. Religion may be regarded in the Arab world as an essential part of one's identity, perhaps 
more so than in the west. However, as a factor that influences language variation and change 
it may be equal in importance to other factors like ethnicity. This varies from one commu-
nity to another. 
12. Levelling will be defined in section 3.5. 
13. It should be noted that his work predated variationist research and represented structuralist 
description. 
14. I think it has to be admitted that since the independence of many Arab countries, Jews and 
Christians have decreased in number and ratio because of political climates. Thus com-
munal varieties have to a large degree disappeared. Whether sectarian fighting in Iraq and 
Lebanon is the outcome of religious differences, ethnic differences or political differences 

LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
127 
is not to be discussed here. However, the linguistic reflexes of these conflicts are yet to be 
studied. 
15. For a study of the historic formation ofCairene, see Woidich (1994). 
16. The Egyptian delta stretches along the river Nile and does not include Cairo. 
17. Oman has of course changed immensely in the pasttwo decades. Holes had already noticed 
this change, which will be referred to later when discussing language policies in the Arab 
world. 
18. Note that there has been an African American elite class in this community since before the 
civil war, but Kroch, perhaps replicating the biases of the dominant society, defined the elite 
in the terms of that society. 
19. This term is used by Versteegh. Others do not necessarily label this a creole. 
20. Note that the difference between CA and MSA is not discussed in detail here because it does 
not contribute to the main argument, but see Chapter 1 for a discussion of this difference. 

CHAPTER 4 
Arabic and gender 
God created Eve from Adam's bent lower rib. That is why women are 
always twisted. They never talk straight. 
An Egyptian Bedouin recounting the story of Adam and Eve, quoted 
by Abu-Lughod (1987: 124) 
4· I I NT R 0 D U C T I 0 N 
The idea that women never talk straight is an assumption found not only 
among the Bedouins in Egypt, but also more universally. Holmes (1998: 
461) contends that the myth that women talk too much exists in all cultures. 
Supposedly women do not know their own minds. They hedge and qualify 
everything they say. As Holmes puts it, they are supposed to be 'indirect and 
devious' (1998: 461). 
However, the presupposition that men and women, because of their sex 
differences, speak differently should not be taken as a given. The research 
on gender has moved and developed beyond this presupposition. Holmes 
and Meyerhoff (2003b: 9) contend that when linguists make generalisations 
about a community at large, they apply their generalisations to both men and 
women. Gender is still an essential factor in language variation and change, 
but, it is a factor that interacts with other independent variables in a commu-
nity, i.e. it has to be 'put into context' (2003b: 9). Sadiqi (2003a: 312) posits 
that it is in fact only within a particular culture that 'gender performance 
acquires meaning.' 
This chapter gives an overview of the study of gender in the field of lin-
guistics in relation to Arabic. Gender has been defined by Coates (1993: 4) 
as 'the term used to describe socially constructed categories based on sex' 
On the other hand, gender is perceived by feminist linguists as something 
that one performs in an interaction rather than something which one has 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
129 
or possesses: 'Gender is not a part of one's essence, which one is, but an 
achievement, what one does. Gender is a set of practices through which 
people construct and claim identities; not simply a system of categorising 
people. And gender practices are not only about establishing identities but 
also about managing social relations' (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 2003: 
305). Thus gender is the product of social interaction. Individuals construct 
a gender identity when they interact with other individuals. If we assume 
that individuals speak differently and have their own repertoire of registers, 
then we must also assume that the process of 'talking' itself modifies or fixes 
one's identity and one's social sphere continually (Holmes and Meyerhoff 
2003b: 11). 
I first (section 4.2) outline briefly approaches to gender studies from a lin-
guistic perspective. Then I discuss gender in the Arab world in general terms, 
to enable readers who are not familiar with the Arab world to have a grasp of 
the diversity of Arab countries, and to enable them to appreciate the cultural 
differences which may also lead to different linguistic contexts between the 
Arab world and the western one. The two concepts that will be of relevance in 
this discussion and that will keep re-occurring in this chapter are the Arabs' 
perception of honour and modesty. The veil as a paralinguistic communicative 
device is also discussed. Section 4. 4 discusses politeness in relation to women. 
Related to the concept of politeness are terms of address. In section 4. 5 I deal 
with terms of address, names and status. Section 4.6 sheds light on women as 
narrators in control oflanguage, with an emphasis on poetry. Section 4.7 will 
investigate the role of gender in language variation and change and will tie up 
with Chapter 3. In section 4.8 I present a study of the projection of identity 
in the speech of men and women in Egypt in talk shows. Section 4.9 will deal 
with the symbolic significance of language in relation to gender. The final 
section will re-examine language universals in the light of data examined and 
observations. 
4.2 APPROACHES T 0 LANGUAGE AND GENDER 
Sociolinguistic theories that concentrated on gender include the deficit theory, 
the dominance theory, the difference theory, the reformist theory, the radical 
theory and the community of practice theory (cf. Sadiqi 2003a for a summary 
of these). Some of these theories are chronological and some overlap. In this 
section, I will only deal with four prominent theories: the deficit theory, 
the dominance theory, the difference theory and the community of practice 
theory. I will start with the deficit theory and highlight in the process of dis-
cussing it Lako:ff's contributions to the study of gender in relation to language, 
since the interest in language and gender has sprung from Lakoffs work on 
language and gender in the 1970s. 

130 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
4.2.1 The deficit theory and Lakoffs contribution to the study of 
language and gender 
In 1975, Robin Tolmach Lakoff published her groundbreaking article 
'Language and woman's place' (reprinted, with commentary, in Bucholtz 
2004). Through her research, she was able to highlight the linguistic dimen-
sion of discrimination against women in many cultures, as well as the domi-
nance of men, who practically set the rules. 
Lakoff said: 'we will find, I think, that women experience linguistic dis-
crimination in two ways: in the way they are taught to use language, and 
in the way general language use treats them' (2003a [1975]: 203); hence the 
idea of dominance and difference, which assumes that women speak differ-
ently because they are taught to do so, but also language does not treat them 
fairly because of men's dominance. She gave examples like the power relation 
between master and servant: while it was normal to say: 
( 1) 
He is a master of the intricacies o facademic politics 
it is less usual to say 
(2) 
She is a mistress of. 
(2003a [1975]: 204). 
'Mistress' had acquired different, sexual connotations, which indicated 
that women had frequently been treated as subordinate, sexual objects. 
Another example Lakoff gave was: 
(3) 
He is a professional. 
When said about a man, it meant he was a lawyer, doctor etc., but when 
one said: 
( 4) 
She is a professional 
it meant she was a prostitute (2003a [1975]: 205). 
Lakoff added that a woman is identified in terms of the men she related 
to. It was normal to ask a woman on occasion, 'What does your husband do?' 
However, one seldom asked a man 'What does your wife do?' His reply might 
be, 'She is my wife', and that in itself was a woman's occupation. 
According to Lakoff, women's language reflected their marginalisation 
in society. For example women tended to use indirectness, empty boosters 
such as 'I am glad you are here', tag questions and hedges such as 'it's prob-
ably dinner time' (McConnell-Ginet 2004: 137). Women's language might be 
deficit because it reflected women's insecurity and powerlessness in society 
(Freed 2003: 701). 
One has to acknowledge that Lakoffwrote her article in the 1970s and that 
since then, the position of women has changed not only in the US, but in 
many parts of the world. However, Lakoff has been criticised for a number 
of reasons: first, some linguists (cf. Mills 2005) claimed that Lakoff relied 
on anecdotal evidence for her generalisations. Thus there is no evidence that 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
131 
'all women' used what she called 'women's language' What Lakoff claimed 
was women's language could be considered a range of repertoires available to 
women (McConnell-Ginet 2004: 137). In addition, O'Barr and Atkins (1980) 
argued that much of what Lakoffhad identified as women's features is in fact 
associated with power as defined by status in courtrooms and is not dependent 
on the sex of the speaker (cited in McConnell-Ginet 2004: 139). Similarly, 
Dubois and Crouch (1975), when examining patterns of language use among 
the participants at a conference, found that male speakers used more tag ques-
tions than females. Lastly, Lakoffwas understood as placing women in a pow-
erless class which does not conform to the structural classes of society (Hall 
2003: 363). This in itself ignores issues such as social status and hierarchical 
relations in different communities. 
4.2.2 The dominance theory 
The dominance theory, which was discussed by Thome and Henley (1975) 
(see also Freed 2003: 701), assumed a linguistic difference between men and 
women that is based on power inequality between both sexes. It focused on 
male dominance, which resulted in women being perceived as unequal to men. 
According to this theory, norms of society are being formed by men and so are 
language practices. 'Language differences were identified as part of a structure 
of unequal access and influence' (Freed 2003: 701). 
In fact, the following words, uttered by Jane Austen's Anne in the novel 
Persuasion at the end of the eighteenth century, are a very early explanation 
of the dominance theory: 'Men have had every advantage of us in telling their 
own story. Education has been theirs in so much higher a degree; the pen 
has been in their hands' (1993: 167). Anne summarised the disadvantages of 
women at her time by mentioning that it was men who dominated history and 
its writing. They had access to it, and they shaped it. It was also men who were 
educated while women were not. 
When speaking about Arab women, Ghidhdhami (2000) posits that women 
are talked about but never talk. In fact, it is considered better for women not 
to talk but to listen. This contradicts the claims of both western and Arab 
cultures that women are chatterboxes who do not know when to keep quiet; 
which brings us to the distinction between practical behaviour and ideology. 
According to Ghidhdhami, a woman is the one loved and the one adored; 
things happen to her, but she does not take the initiative. Again this is the 
assumption that may be prevalent, which does not necessarily reflect reality. 
As Freed (2003) puts it, the media, when afraid of change, tries to impose its 
own fixed ideas about gender differences. 
The problem with theories that rely on power is that they tend to oversim-
plify the definition of power (Sadiqi 2003a: 7). As will become clear later in the 
chapter, there are many facets of power at different stages of one's life in the 

132 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Arab world and they are related not only to gender, but to a nwnber of differ-
ent, independent factors, including the ones discussed in Chapter 3. 
4.2.3 The difference theory 
The 'difference theory', or 'cultural approach' as it has also been called, was 
first formulated by Maltz and Borker (1982), and is frequently associated with 
Deborah Tannen's work (Tannen 1993: 4; see also Freed 2003: 702). This 
approach explains linguistic differences between men and women as a result 
of their being two distinct groups, or even two distinct cultures (cf Tannen 
1994); women and men use different styles and linguistic forms which were 
developed in same-sex childhood peer groups. The focus of this theory is 
more on language differences than on power differences. Cameron (2005), 
however, calls into question the postulation that men and women as groups 
talk differently. Sadiqi (2003a: 10) also posits that this bicultural model cannot 
be applied 'cross-culturally' The difference between men and women cannot 
be studied in isolation from power relationships (cf Freed 2003: 701). 
The difference theory mainly studies gender by analysing the speech of het-
erosexual couples, and also it does not concentrate on differences among women 
themselves; El-Kholy (2002), for example, states that more studies are needed 
in the Arab world that deal with the dynamics of same-sex power relationships, 
such as that of mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law in Egypt. There are also 
men who break our stereotypes and talk as we expect women to talk (Freed 2003). 
Thus, there is a difference between our expectations as analysts and members of 
a certain community and linguistic reality. Again this difference is nurtured by 
the media in order to impose a fixed reality in which women play specific roles 
that do not change or develop (Freed 2003; see also Cameron 2008). 
4.2.3.1 Gender universals 
As an outcome of theories that perceive gender as a binary opposition (Freed 
2003: 702), Holmes (1998: 468, 472) suggests some language universals 
related to gender. First, women are more sensitive to the feelings rather than 
the content of what is said. Men focus on the information. Second, women 
provide more encouragement, supportive feedback or minimal responses 
like mm, uh-huh etc. in conversations between couples (Fislnnan 1980, 1983), 
in management discussion groups (Schick-Case 1988), in political debates 
(Edelsky and Adams 1990), and even in interactions between women and 
men in laboratory or studio conditions (Leet-Pellegrini 1980; Preisler 1986). 
Women are more concerned for their partner's positive face needs. They value 
solidarity. Women tend to use linguistic devices that stress solidarity more 
often than men (for Mayan Indians see Brown 1980; for Javanese see Smith-
Hefner 1988). Third, they also, according to Lakoff (2003a [197 5]), tend to 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
133 
use hedges, tag questions, and terms like 'sort of and 'as you know', which are 
all signals of uncertainty. Fourth, interruption comes from men, not women. 
And men tend to speak more. Men want to maintain and increase their power; 
women tend to maintain and increase solidarity (Holmes 1998: 472). Note that 
Holmes acknowledges that there are some societies in which this is not true, 
for example in Madagascar, as will be discussed below. These assumptions 
about gender will be discussed and challenged throughout this chapter. 
4.2.4 Third wave approach to variation studies: community of 
practice theory 
This theory, discussed in detail in Chapter 3, section 3.2.3, can help explain the 
interaction between gender and other independent variables without resorting 
to differences among men and women. The theory is built on the concept of a 
community that is defined according to what is local and practical. Individuals 
construct their identity in terms of 'allegiance' and 'alliances' (Eckert 2003; 
Sadiqi 2003a: 1 0). These 'allegiances' and 'alliances' are not gender specific but 
community specific. Gender is thus considered not a fixed point that individu-
als revolve around, but rather a factor in defining and constructing an identity, 
a factor that evolves and changes with the individual. It is not necessarily the 
most essential factor in a community. Other factors such as tribal affiliations or 
social class may be more significant in certain communities in the Arab world. 
Sadiqi (2003a: 17), for example, posits that all cultures, to varying degrees, 
impose control on their members. Moroccan culture is a 'type that strongly 
constrains the behaviour of men and women' Sadiqi's postulation about 
Moroccan culture echoes Eckert and McConell-Ginet's (2004) ideas of alle-
giances and alliances. Before proceeding further in this chapter, I will attempt 
to sketch the situation of women in the Arab world briefly, trying throughout 
to break stereotypes. The concepts discussed below are general and perhaps 
basic, but needed for a thorough understanding of the relation between lan-
guage and gender in the Arab world. 
4·3 WOMEN IN THE ARAB WORLD: FRAMING AND 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
I will start the discussion of women in the Arab world with a quote from Sadiqi 
(2003a: 212-13) in which she alludes to the fact that it is not helpful to look 
at Moroccan women as one entity, since diversity within Moroccan society is 
essential for a clear understanding of women's position in society. 
Granting the existence of some deeply human and universal social 
values, the components ofWestem culture are significantly different 

I34 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
from, and sometimes incompatible with, those of Moroccan culture. 
The histories, geographies, religions, oralities, social use oflanguages, 
social organisations, economic statuses, and political organisations 
are different. Moroccan women are perceived as one entity in which 
social boundaries do not seem to count. These women are very much 
associated with terms 'Arab', 'Oriental. 
If it is an oversimplification to speak about' Moroccan women', then it is indeed 
almost impossible to speak about 'Arab women', without acknowledging the 
diversity in their situations and positions. Although, as this chapter will reveal, 
there may be some underlying similarities in the social concepts that govern 
gender performance (honour and modesty are cases in point), the disparities, 
whether economic, political or social, between different communities cannot 
be overlooked. Thus, while the Arab world is certainly patriarchal to an extent 
and in ways that may seem greater than in the west, what outsiders may miss is 
the great diversity of the situations of men and women in the Arab world. This 
diversity will be discussed below roughly in terms of diversity in education, 
urbanisation, economy and traditions. Part of the discussion will be devoted, 
as was said earlier, to the veil and its implications in different communities. 
Before ending this section I will draw attention to two main concepts related to 
linguistic gender performance in the Arab world: honour and modesty. 
4.3.1 Diversity in education 
Because some countries in the Arab world can be characterised as late mod-
ernisers (at least with regard to the west), again with great variation across and 
within countries, we commonly find university professors- male and female-
whose parents are illiterate teaching alongside colleagues whose parents were 
professors or members of the 'liberal professions' (law, medicine etc.). Across 
and within countries and over the last decades things have been changing 
rapidly for women. See Table 4.1 for an example of the diversity in literacy 
rates of women aged 15-24 in eight Arab countries in 1990 and 2004. 
The table shows that within the period of 14 years, there was a leap in the 
literacy level of all the countries presented above. There is also a difference 
between different countries. Thus, while in Egypt the literacy level of women 
has increased from 51 per cent to 79 per cent, in Oman it has increased from 
75 per cent to 97 per cent in 2004. This is indeed linked to economic and social 
changes in both countries. 
4.3.2 Diversity in urbanisation 
While the Arab world is increasingly urban now, as was discussed in chapter 
3, rural/Bedouin life, rural/Bedouin ways and memories of rural/Bedouin 

Table 4. 1 
Diversity in literacy rates 
Country 
Egypt 
Jordan 
Kuwait 
Morocco 
Oman 
Saudi Arabia 
Syria 
Tunisia 
Source: 
World Bank 
Uteracyofwomen aged 15-24 
(per cent) 
1990 
51 
95 
87 
42 
75 
79 
67 
75 
ARABIC AND GENDER 
135 
Uteracyofwomen aged 15-24 
(per cent) 
2004 
79 
99 
100 
60 
97 
94 
90 
92 
ways play roles there that they do not play in the west (cf. Miller 2007). This 
is because, although urbanisation may be well established in old centres such 
as Damascus and Cairo, it is a relatively new phenomenon -around fifty years 
old- in other urban centres such as Muscat, Tripoli or Nouakchott. 
4.3.3 Economic diversity 
There is likewise the issue of disparity in wealth across the countries. Nearly 
half of Egyptians live on less than US$2 a day, while the per capita average 
annual income is US$4,200. The per capita income in Yemen is US$2,400, 
while it is over US$55,000 in Kuwait and the Emirates and over US$75,000 in 
~tar. 1 These economic disparities have great consequences for language use 
and certainly for issues related to language and gender and how communities 
function in a wider sense. Note also that in a country such as Egypt, at the 
beginning ofthe new millennium, 18 per cent of households were headed by 
women and not men (El-Kholy 2002: 34), which may not be the case in some 
Gulf countries, for example. 
4.3.4 Diversity in traditions and religious practices 
Tradition is perhaps one of the fixed independent variables that play a major 
role in Arab countries. A number of customs or ways of life that one may 
associate with religion are in fact associated with tradition. Magic and witch-
craft, alluded to in this chapter, are both practices that can go hand in hand 
with religion, although they may be prohibited by it. Some communities may 
not perceive any contradiction in practising magic and worshipping God 
(Kapchan 1996). 

IJ6 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
One of the highly discussed religious practices is wearing the veil, or J:tija: b 
as Arabs call it, which constitutes usually covering one's hair and showing only 
hands, feet and face. For some communities the veil is a tradition, for others it 
is a religious symbol and for many it is both. 
4. 3. 4.1 The veil 
An outsider and an insider to a great extent may fail to distinguish between a 
traditional dress and a religious one. The connotations associated with veiling 
are lost for an outsider. Although women may wear the veil as a result of reli-
gious conviction, peer pressure or modesty code (discussed below), veiling as 
an extra-linguistic communicative device has deeper meanings and connota-
tions. It may reflect social class, security, status, defiance, tradition, confidence 
and age, to name but a few. 
Wearing the veil may also be read as displeasure with the politics of the 
governments of the west as well as those of Arab governments such as those 
of Egypt or Tunisia which emphasise their secular image. In both Egypt and 
Tunisia there are jobs in which women are prohibited from wearing the veil. 
For example, in Egypt, women working as announcers on television are prohib-
ited from wearing the veil, and if they do then they have to accept work behind 
the screen, as editors or script writers for example, instead of as announcers. 
Tunisia takes this even further, by prohibiting women working in govern-
ment offices from wearing the veil during work hours. Thus, in countries like 
Tunisia women have to take off the veil at work and once outdoors they put it 
back on. In some Gulf countries women put the veil on when they go out and 
once indoors they take it off. Veiling is associated with the concept ofthe public 
sphere and the private sphere, which will be discussed in this chapter. 
According to Abu-Lughod, 'a woman's veil can be manipulated to indicate 
degree of social comfort' (1987: 127). Note also that wearing the veil is not 
necessarily a sign of subordination, but may even be a sign of arrogance. In the 
1930s and 1940s in Egypt, before the 19 52 revolution, 2 there was a strict system 
of aristocracy and feudality. Aristocratic women had to cover their faces or 
hair when they went to investigate their lands in the countryside, even if they 
did not usually do so, so that the peasants do not know what they looked like. 
Peasants were forbidden to look up and warned to avoid eye-<:ontact with an 
aristocratic woman. They might even be whipped if they looked up when these 
women were passing by. For these women, wearing the veil served as a social 
barrier that separated them from peasants, similar in our times to building high 
walls to mansions in Egypt or forbidding lower-class members from entering 
certain quarters of the house. Thus, the veil is not necessarily a sign of piety or 
modesty, but was once, for a certain class, used to signal social hierarchies. For 
a detailed discussion of the significance of the veil see Heath (2008). 
There are two concepts that help in our understanding of linguistic 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
137 
practices, especially those associated with women. Both concepts have been 
discussed exhaustively in anthropological studies and both may govern the 
underlying linguistic performance of most communities, if not all, in the Arab 
world. These two concepts are honour and modesty. 
4.3.5 Honour and modesty 
Abu-Lughod (1987) in her anthropological study ofBedouins in Egypt, which 
will be discussed in detail below, posits that there are two values that represent 
the core of the moral system ofBedouins. These two values are honour (faraj) 
and modesty (~ifma). I think understanding both values helps analysts under-
stand the linguistic choices available to women and the sociolinguistic position 
of women in the Arab world in general. 
Friedrich defines honour as 'a system of symbols, values, and definitions 
in terms of which phenomena are conceptualised and interpreted' (1977: 284, 
cited in Abu-Lughod 1987: 86). The key factor that is essential in defining 
honour is, in fact, self-control One has to control pain, needs, desires, pas-
sions and capricious behaviour. By doing so, one can achieve honour. Thus, 
honour has to be achieved and/or preserved in a specific community. Abu-
Lughod also mentions that freedom from domination, independence, pride 
and strength to stand alone are all values associated with honour. Honour is 
also related to respect, and respect is associated with self-image. For example, 
'failure to reciprocate gifts, miserliness, can lead to loss of respect' (1987: 
92). Abu-Lughod (1987: 105) also differentiates between obeying elders and 
showing respect to them and being forced to obey superiors, which may entail 
loss of respect. Superiors are also expected to respect the dignity of others 
by avoiding aggression and confrontation. 'When a superior publicly orders, 
insults, or beats a dependent, he invites the rebellion that would undermine 
his position' (1987: 99). Note also that honour is age specific.3 All members 
of a community are responsible for the perservation and achievement of each 
other's honour. 
Modesty, according to Abu-Lughod (1987: 73), is connected to veiling to a 
great extent, although as I have exemplified, veiling can also be used as a status 
marker. 'Veiling constitutes the most visible act of modest deference. 
veiling 
is both voluntary and situational' (Abu-Lughod 1987: 159). Note that modesty 
is displayed by women in more than one way. Yet it is mainly displayed by 
ignoring or disregarding anything that calls attention to their sexuality. 
Women's modesty is connected to men's honour. However, although Abu-
Lughod claims that honour is associated with men and modesty with women, 
she gives a significant example in which men also care for the modesty code. In 
the Bedouin tribe that Abu-Lughod studied, men as well as women cover their 
heads. Men cover their heads as a sign of modesty. Men who do not cover 
their heads are considered 'brazen and lacking in religion' (1987: 137). 

I38 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Both concepts of honour and modesty can help explain numerous sociolin-
guistic cases in which Arab women behave differently from western ones and 
in which Arab men also behave differently from western ones. 
4· 4 P 0 LITE NESS IN R E LA T I 0 N T 0 GENDER 
In this section I argue against the assumption that women in general are more 
polite than men and are concerned with solidarity (defined below) while men 
are concerned with power (cf. Kiesling 2003: 514). I also argue that power is 
in fact context-dependent, as will become clear below. 
There are two concepts that will keep recurring when discussing polite-
ness: power and solidarity. After defining both, I will proceed by defining 
politeness and face. According to Brown and Gilman (2003 [1987]: 158), 'one 
person may be said to have power over another in the degree that he is able 
to control the behaviour of the other. Power is a relationship between at least 
two persons, and it is nonreciprocal in the sense that both cannot have power 
in the same area of behaviour.' Power, thus, refers to a hierarchy rank between 
individuals. Solidarity, on the other hand, refers to the social distance or lack 
of distance between individuals. According to Brown and Gilman, solidarity 
is usually the result of frequent contact between individuals as well as marked 
similarities between individuals. As Brown and Gilman put it (2003 [1987]: 
160), 'power superiors maybe solidary (parents, elder siblings) or not solidary 
(officials whom one seldom sees)' 
Politeness is related to power and solidarity. First, politeness reflects a 
behaviour which 'expresses positive concern for others' Brown and Gilman 
distinguish between two kinds of politeness: negative politeness and positive 
politeness. The first is associated with power and the second with solidarity. 
Negative politeness aims to preserve the addressee's freedom of action and 
space (Kiesling 2003: 514). It is a means of underlining the hierarchy and 
distance between the speaker and addressee. Positive politeness, on the other 
hand, is associated with solidarity. It highlights the similarities between speak-
ers (Kiesling 2003: 514). 
Politeness is usually a means of preserving the face of others and is also con-
text-dependent (Holmes 1995: 21). Face is the public self-image that everyone 
wants to claim for themselves ( cf. Brown and Levinson 1987). Negative polite-
ness and positive politeness aim at preserving the face of self and others or at 
least making sure it is not threatened. The following two examples (Holmes 
1995: 21) will show how context-sensitive politeness is: 
(5) Judge to witness in law court: 
The witness will please repeat his response to the last question for the 
benefit of the Jury. 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
139 
In this formal context the judge preserves the face of the witness by referring 
to him in the third person and using politeness devices like 'please' Now note 
the following example: 
(6) 
Husband to wife at home: 
Mm? What was that, love? 
The address form 'love' is again a politeness strategy but used in an informal 
rather than a formal context. In fact it would be inappropriate and face-
threatening to use it in a formal context. Also, the direct question reflects the 
intimacy of the relation and the casual context. The same direct question, if 
asked in a courtroom, would be face-threatening. 
The question is whether there is a direct relation between politeness and 
the social status of women. Many studies would argue that this is definitely 
the case because of the lack of power of women; the less power one has in 
any given interactional context, the more likely one is to be concerned with 
expressing or displaying politeness, especially negative politeness, explicitly. 
Deuchar (1989) applied Brown and Levinson's theory of politeness and face 
to the use of prestigious forms, and posited that powerless people usually 
monitor face more carefully than powerful ones. They do so by using more 
prestigious forms that encode status. One usually speaks respectfully to supe-
riors no matter how well one knows them (Holmes 1995). 
It is suggested that men in most cultures have more access to power and 
status than women. They can use more power-related techniques with impu-
nity because their face is already protected. Women, on the other hand, cannot 
use more assertive techniques when speaking since this may be considered 
face-threatening. This hypothesis is confirmed by the fact that there were 
studies that found that women use back-channel responses, simultaneous talk 
to show interest and support, and facilitative tag questions (Holmes 1995). 
However, there are some studies that did not find any differences in the way 
both sexes use language, or in the degree of politeness they encode (Salami 1991 ). 
In fact, Keenan (1974) conducted a study in Madagascar in which it was found 
that women there are less polite than men. Keenan (1974: 142) also postulates 
that direct speech in Malagasy is associated with loss of tradition. Men prefer 
indirectness as an expression of respect. Thus, men's requests are typically 
delayed and inexplicit. Their criticism is more subtle. Women can be direct and 
straightforward. They in fact perform tasks such as interacting with strangers 
more than men do- tasks which, for example, involve buying and selling. 
Studies like the last one pose problems. First, does the fact that women 
seem less polite automatically mean they have more power than women in 
other communities in which women are more polite than men? The problem 
with terms like power and politeness is that they can be very general. Thus, 
while women in all communities are not completely powerless, there are some 

I40 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
communities in which women and men divide their share of power in differ-
ent contexts. So a husband is powerful with his wife, but a mother has more 
power over the children than the father does, or a husband has power at work, 
and a wife controls the household, deciding what to cook etc. Although to us 
this power given by a husband to his wife may seem little and demeaning, the 
hidden power of women in communities in which men are supposed to be all-
powerful cannot be ignored. 
In a groundbreaking study that examines the way Moroccan men and 
women bargain, Kharraki (200 1) discusses the concept of politeness and face 
in relation to both sexes. Brown and Gilman's model of politeness was used. 
The study analyses more than sixty bargaining exchanges. The conclusion 
reached was that it is in fact men rather than women who in Moroccan society 
use more linguistic solidarity devices, i.e. it is men who use more positive 
politeness techniques than women in bargaining. In fact, women's use of 
insisting strategies is perceived as 'a daring act of assertiveness' (2001: 623). 
Men, on the other hand, feel that such strategies could be face-threatening 
and reduce their social power. Men in this specific community derive their 
social status not by maintaining hierarchies between them and others, but by 
emphasising similarities. Women, on the other hand, emphasise their status 
by appealing to the hierarchical rank. Note the following example of a woman 
who wants to buy some onions (2001: 623): 
(7) Context: a woman wants to buy onions 
Setting: a shop 
Woman: baf-~al 
1-besla 
'la 
How state the-onion 
voc 
Greengrocer: 60 doro 
60 doro 
~assan? 
Hassan 
Woman: 'liwa ma-tebqa-ftejri mor 1-meftarijja rexxesfwijja/ 
Yes neg-be-neg run from the-buyers reduce- a little 
letnin 
tkun xir rebfin 
doro 
Monday to be only forty 
doro 
Greengrocer: ma-ji-ha-f 
'la ~ajja 
Neg-in-her-neg 
voc J:tajja 
Woman: How much are these onions, Hassan? 
Greengrocer: Sixty doros 
Woman: Oh! Don't send your customers away! Reduce the price a 
little! On Monday, they cost only forty doros. 
Greengrocer: There is not much profit in it, hajja! 
In this example, the woman does not use a greeting or any form indicating 
solidarity. She does not use any forms indicating endearment, like ~abibi 'my 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
141 
love', fazizi 'dear' etc., as is often done in such interactions. These forms of 
endearments are also forms of solidarity. Rather, the interaction opens with a 
woman's straightforward question: 
(8) 
Woman: baf-~al 
1-besla 
Ja ~assan? 
How state the-onion voc Hassan 
Woman: How much are these onions, Hassan? 
Then she makes a demand with the hope of getting a good price. There are no 
'polite' terms such as 'please' etc. In some cultures, such behaviour would be 
considered abrupt and rude. 
Sellam (1990: 90) posits that, in general, the way Moroccans make requests 
is different from the way the speakers of English do, for example. The woman 
in this example is not particularly rude. In fact, this exchange does not result 
in any damage to the face of the greengrocer or the speaker. His reaction to 
her does not carry any insult. Insisting is another strategy of bargaining with 
vendors used by women. Other strategies also include repetitions, oaths or 
threatening to buy from another seller (Kharraki 2001). 
Now note the following example of a man who wants to buy some water-
melons from the same greengrocer (2001: 622): 
(9) 
Context: a man wants to buy watermelon from a greengrocer, who is a 
close neighbour 
Setting: shop 
Man: Manssalamu 
falikum/ dellif 
hada 
fa/ 
~assan/ 
I greet 
on- you/ watermelon this 
good 
Hassan 
Man: Peace be upon you. What wonderful watermelon you have there 
Hassan! 
At first sight, this difference between the way men and women bargain in this 
specific Moroccan community may seem bewildering. From the examples 
given by Kharraki (2001), women are much more assertive than men when 
bargaining and much more persistent. This may be, as Kharraki puts it, to 
demonstrate their skills as housewives. It may also have larger implications 
for the power spheres of both sexes in this community. As was said earlier, 
power is context-sensitive. However, the interaction between the women and 
the street vendors in Morocco is not just a manifestation of politeness and 
power relations. It is in fact a manifestation of the intricate relation between 
politeness as a communicative device and independent variables discussed 
in Chapter 3, such as social class, tribal affiliations, ethnicity, age and so on 
and so forth. Social class and status are at work in the above examples. From 
my observations, upper-middle-class women in Egypt, when bargaining or 
arguing with men from a lower class who are serving them, like the porter, 

142 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
caretaker, the street vendor etc., can seem very rude to an outsider, using 
insults and a higher pitch and omitting greetings altogether. Men from the 
same class deal with the situation differently, being calmer, using greeting 
terms and rarely using verbal insults. This is indeed worth studying and may 
yield surprising insights into the power relation between men and women. 
Although independent variables like social class could explain why women 
in the Moroccan context were not concerned with the face of the greengrocer, 
independent variables are not enough to explain why men from the same social 
class act differently. An examination of the way men and women are expected 
to behave in an interaction is indeed needed, and studies of the implications of 
different face-saving strategies employed by both are also needed, before one 
can reach definite conclusions. There are other communities that are similar in 
this respect, like the one mentioned above by Keenan (1974) in Madagascar. 
To sum up, since power is context-dependent and since it is almost impos-
sible to make generalisations about politeness, then one has to concentrate on 
defining the different contexts which may have been taken for granted so far 
and which may render the argument about women, men and politeness strate-
gies clearer. 
Related to politeness, as was said earlier, are terms of address. In section 4.5 
I shed light on both names and terms of address and their relation to status, 
gender and identity. 
4· 5 ' MISTER MAST E R ' : NAMES , S TAT US AND 
IDENTITY 
How we label ourselves and others is significant because it can 'offer a window 
on the construction of gendered identities and social relations in social prac-
tice' (McConnell-Ginet 2003: 69). In this section I examine terms of address 
and names in relation to specific communities, and I also correlate methods of 
referring to both men and women to the underlying structures of a number of 
Arab societies, bearing in mind that there may be a coherent concept of social 
order in all Arab communities that dictates a specific way of using terms of 
address and names. As McConnell-Ginet (2003: 72) puts it, referring to others 
is basic not just in conveying information, but also in maintaining the social 
structure of a community. 
Ever since Mahfouz published his classic 'Cairo Trilogy' in the 1960s 
(2001), women have been angry in Egypt and elsewhere in the Arab world at 
the way the wife in the novels (especially the first one, Bayn al-Qa~rayn ('Palace 
walk')) is treated. Though we are not interested here in the way the husband 
hypocritically managed his life and how he betrayed his wife with impunity 
throughout the novel, I am very interested in the choice of terms of address 
between the husband and wife. The wife, Ammah, is careful throughout the 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
143 
novel to address her husband as si: 'mister' and never to look him in the face or 
argue with him. He, on the other hand, always addresses her as 'Ammah' and 
is much more confrontational and tyrannical. It is no coincidence that his first 
name is Sayyid, meaning 'master' Thus throughout the nove~ his wife refers 
to him as 'mister master' 4 
The relationship between them can be neatly explicated in terms of Brown 
and Levinson's theory of power and politeness (1987). Ammah, the wife, has 
little if any power, has to maintain her face as much as possible, and has to 
preserve the face of others. The husband, Sayyid, has much more power; he 
does not have to pay attention to face within their relationship, and he can 
flout all the rules without threatening his face. His face is already protected 
because he is a man. It is the wife who has to try to use more polite forms to 
protect her face. 5 
In the case of Ammah there is a clear case of power differences. Whether 
names and terms of address are always a reflection of power relations between 
men and women is a crucial issue. This is what I will try to discuss in the next 
paragraphs. Again, as with everything pertaining to gender, the answers are 
not always clear; the case of Ammah and Sayyid, which was very clear cut, 
will not be repeated often in real-life data without complications or other 
implications. In addition, cases in which terms of address involve two men or 
two women may not necessarily reflect power. One should not just take inter-
actions between pairs of adults- one female, the other male -as the quintes-
sential or perhaps only context to try to analyse or understand gender (Holmes 
and Meyerhoff2003b). 
Parkinson (1985), in a study of terms of address in Egypt, did not find sig-
nificant differences in the way men and women used these terms. Terms of 
address were more sensitive to other factors including class, age and occupa-
tion. Although this study is now more than twenty years old, it can help us 
assess the linguistic situation in Egypt more scrupulously. Parkinson noted 
that: 
Knowledge of the proper use of terms of address is, therefore, as 
important to the overall success of a communication as knowledge 
of the conjugation of verbs would be. The terms give the entire 
communication its social setting and tell addressee how the rest of the 
communication is to be taken or understood. .the terms of address 
maybe peripheral to the syntax ofECA, but they are central to the 
process of communicating in ECA. (1985: 225) 
He gives the following example to show the importance of terms of address 
in communication in Egypt and perhaps in the whole Arab world: a group 
of men who were entering a shop in Cairo saw an artist in shabby and paint-
stained clothes. They started addressing him asya rayyis 'hey boss'. The man 

I44 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
was angry and ignored them. Once they entered the shop they realised the 
man was not a painter but an artist. They were very embarrassed and said: 
(1 0) Ia: mu?axza ya bafmuhandis/ ma-kunna:-Jfarfi:n 
'Please don't take offence, engineer, sir, we didn't know.' (1985: 224) 
Terms like engineer, doctor, or Pasha (an old Turkish title; in the time of the 
monarchy in Egypt it was given by the king to aristocrats) are used loosely in 
Egypt. A male police officer could be addressed as a Pasha, a male or female 
nurse or student of medicine could be addressed as doctor, a male or female 
graduate assistant is also addressed as a doctor (meaning professor as well) 
and a male mechanic could be addressed as an engineer. Terms such as famm 
'uncle' are used by both children and adults with male older workers like 
drivers and porters. 
Problems can arise from addressing someone by a term that denotes a lower 
status, as in the example above. Note also that painters in Egypt are usually 
men. It would not have been possible to make this mistake had the paint-stained 
person been a woman, because a woman would have been expected to be an 
artist or an engineer. In the same way, a police officer is always a Pasha (even 
though titles were abolished after the 19 52 revolution in Egypt), but a woman is 
not usually called a Pasha because there are few female police officers in Egypt. 
Parkinson likewise studies terms like /ulgg and bagga, which refer to 
someone who has made the pilgrimage to Mecca. These terms, according 
to Parkinson, are used to address men and women equally. Although they 
are terms of respect, they can replace 'mother' and 'father' when parents get 
older. They can also appear alone or with the first name. Note the following 
example (1985: 152): a working-class man aged 55 asks a working-class male 
aged 17 about the destination of a bus in Cairo. Here is the answer of the 
17-year-old male: 
(11) Ia: ya baggi mifbi-yru:b it-tabri:r 
'No pilgrim it doesn't go to Ta]J.ri:r square' 
The next example (1985: 152) is that of a 55-year-old working-class wife and 
her 60-year-old husband: the husband is standing in the street, and the wife 
sees a bus coming towards him, so she yells: 
(12) tafa:la hinaya bagg 
'Come over here, pilgrim' 
It is not clear whether these people addressed as pilgrim have done the pil-
grimage or not. The term pilgrim is used to strangers and/ or intimates to 
show respect. 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
145 
Now note this example (1985: 153): two older, upper-class female neigh-
bours meet by chance at the door of the building: 
(13) 'lizzayyikya bagga lay/a 
'How are you, pilgrim Layla?' 
The neighbour uses the first name of her neighbour Layla because she has 
known her for a while. She could have used bagga without the first name as 
well. 
Again, all the above examples show that both terms, bagg and bagga, are 
used by both sexes. There is no evidence that women feel insecure and thus 
use terms of address more (as Trudgill suggested in 1972). In the following 
example the term ha:nim, which is a Turkish term that means 'gentlewoman' 
or 'lady', is used by a pickle salesman in the market to an upper-class woman 
to denote respect and formality. 
(14) 'laywa ya sitt ha:nim fayza bika:m? 
'Yes madam, how much worth (of pickles) do you want?' (1985: 167) 
In this example it is clear that the status of both speaker and addressee in 
Egypt is indeed much more significant than their sex. 
Some of what has to be accounted for is found in cases where men and 
women behave similarly, which is something the variationists discussed later 
in this chapter seemed to overlook. Abu-Lughod (1987: 154), in her study of 
Bedouin women of the western desert of Egypt, claims that they must try to 
be modest. This implies hiding their sexual or romantic attachments. This 
is reflected in the way women address their husbands; they do not use their 
husbands' first names but refer to them as 'that one', haoa:k, or if they are 
affectionate, 'the old man' ,Ja:yib, or 'the master of my house', ~a bib be:ti. This 
is what they do when others are around or when they are in formal situations. 
It seems as if this situation is not very different from the one described by 
Mahfouz, which was supposed to have taken place in Egypt at the beginning 
of the twentieth century and not in the 1980s. However, as was said earlier, the 
situation is not as simple as it seems. One can claim that women in these socie-
ties have less power than men and have to maintain their face by using terms 
of address and thus being more polite. The only problem is that men in a lot of 
Arab societies, including the Bedouin ones, do not refer to their wives by name 
in formal gatherings either, as Abu Lughod also noted in her study.6 
Hachimi (2001: 43) reports that husbands in Morocco would refer to their 
wives as mal/in ddar 'owners of the house' or drari, which literally means 
'children', and which refers, in that context, to both 'children' and 'wives' 
It is only non-traditional married women who are referred to by their names. 
Mothers are addressed and referred to with terms such as bajja (bagga in 

I46 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Egypt), again a term of respect for one who has made the pilgrimage, lalla 
'mistress' andfrifa 'lady with noble blood' Hachimi also notes that while in 
other Arab communities, mothers are addressed as 'mother + name of her 
eldest son', e.g., ?umm ?a~mad 'mother of Ahmed' (cf. Minai 1981), this is 
not the case in Morocco. When addressed by strangers, a woman in Morocco 
could be called madame followed by their husband's name, 'Mrs+ husband's 
name', although legally women in the Arab world do not take their husbands' 
family name, but keep that of their birth family, which is usually their father's 
family name. Moroccan educated men in embassy receptions, for example, 
introduce their wives as madame 'madam', very rarely as mrati 'my wife' or by 
her first or family name (Sadiqi 2003a: 134). Again this is related to the honour 
and modesty code. 
The way a woman refers to herself is context-dependent (Sadiqi 2003a: 
135). In Egypt a woman could use 'madam' + her husband's first and last 
name when ordering food via the phone, for example, or when in contact with 
people she does not know, whether men or women. A woman uses her first 
and last name at her workplace and when buying or selling her properties. 
This pertains not only to the honour and modesty code discussed above, but 
also to the power the name has, as will be discussed below. 
Terms of address can be used to mark the distance between females and 
males who could be potential sexual partners (Sadiqi 2003a: 79). In communi-
ties in which honour and modesty are two essential factors that, combined, 
define an individual's worthiness, as was explained earlier, the way individuals 
are addressed is loaded with meaning. In Egypt when two close male friends 
converse and ask about each other's wives, they do not use the first name of the 
wife, since this might imply a violation of the honour and modesty code by the 
male friend. A man could ask his friend 'how is madam so and so (first name)?' 
or 'how is the ~agga (no first name) (al-~agga)?'.etc. Interestingly enough, 
when two female friends converse they can use each other's husbands' names. 
This shows again that the modesty code is not exclusive to women, but mani-
fests itself differently in the interaction between men and women. However, 
these observations need to be studied systematically. 
From a different perspective, sadness at the loss of women's names, whether 
the women are dead or alive, and perhaps the implications for loss of identity 
with the loss of name, are discussed in an unprecedented study by Eid (2002a), 
which is based on obituaries as a source in three communities: Egyptian, 
Persian and American. She obtained her data from three major newspapers, 
Al-Ahram (Egyptian), Ettela 'at (Iranian) and the New York Times (American). 
Her data was collected for one-month periods at ten-year intervals from 1938 
until 1998. Eid (2002a) uses statistics that parse different kinds of informa-
tion, such as use of the names of the deceased (whether men or women), use of 
professional titles (for the deceased and their relatives), and use of the names 
of relatives of both men and women (whether the relatives are male or female). 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
147 
She measures the impact of gender, culture and time independently and com-
bined on obituaries. Of the dead women she studied, she writes: 
I remember their names, except those women who lost theirs in the 
world of obituaries. .I will always remember the joy I felt every time I 
found more Egyptian women with their names, American women with 
their professions, and Iranian women mentioned at all. (2002a: 281) 
Her study implies that women in Egypt are identified in obituaries not by 
name but by their relation to different males and perhaps even females in their 
lives. Thus a woman who dies is known as the mother of so and so, the wife of 
so and so etc. This practice also means that by herself, she may not be identi-
fied at all. Whether or not obituaries reflect society may not be clear, but the 
fact that obituaries are written by members of society is already evidence that 
they at least reflect our ideal belief about what society should be like. In that 
'society' a woman is not 'someone', but the mother, daughter, wife, sister of 
someone. 
In obituaries, Egyptian women were the only group who in 1998 still 
appeared without a name 10 per cent of the time, while 100 percent oflranian 
women's names have presentation in 1998 obituaries. When it comes to 
occupation and professional titles, the space belonged to Egyptian men, who 
occupied 94 per cent of occupation space (space devoted to discussion of 
professional life) and 97 per cent of professional title space, while social space 
remained the domain ofwomen in Egyptian obituaries (63 per cent in 1998). 
In American obituaries, women and men were represented equally, although 
there was still a difference in professional space even in the 1990s. Only 36 
per cent of American women had their occupations mentioned and only 8 per 
cent of American women had their professional titles mentioned. In obituaries 
at least, women were, thus, lagging behind in professional titles in the three 
countries. 
In comparing the treatment of Egyptian and American women in obituaries 
in 1998, Eid observes that what an Egyptian woman loses after she dies is her 
first name. What an American woman also loses alive and dead is her last name 
if she is married. A dead American woman may have her maiden name given 
in parenthesis, if at all. A dead Egyptian woman may or may not have her first 
name mentioned, but even if she has her first name mentioned, her daughter's 
name may not be. She may only be defined as the wife of such and such, and 
in most cases her mother's name will not be mentioned. Eid gives examples of 
inconsistencies sometimes depending on different individuals, but the overall 
picture seems to be consistent. Women's first names in Egypt are preferably 
not mentioned in obituaries, while women's maiden names in America are 
again preferably not mentioned, and if mentioned then not bold-faced but in 
parenthesis. 

I48 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Again, if names are part of one's identity then women seem to give up 
much of their identity in most cultures, although one has to note that given 
their cost, obituaries will appear for only some of the deceased, whether males 
or females. However, the symbolic nature of names does not stop at being 
markers of one's identity, but may play an even more subtle role. 
4.5.1 Names and why they are hidden 
In Egyptian culture names hold power, especially the first name of a mother. 
The power I am referring to here is not just linguistic in nature but in fact 
magical. Although religion in the Arab world is taken seriously by members of 
all religious communities, Egyptians- whether Christians or Muslims- still 
tend to believe in magic and supernatural forces. For example, in rural areas 
specifically, women may resort to magic, usually performed by an older person 
who is reputed to be in touch with jinn (spirits), to solve marriage problems, 
to cause harm to enemies, to make a man impotent, to bear children, to make 
a married couple get divorced and so on and so forth. Magic can be used to 
inflict harm or solve problems. However, to use magic on someone, especially 
in a harmful way, this person's mother's first name is needed. A mother's 
name is more like an Achilles heel, a vulnerability, and over time it has also 
become something both shameful and yet sacred. 
To elaborate on this point, a mother's name, especially if the mother is dead, 
is not mentioned except with the immediate family and definitely not to people 
that are not to be trusted. A father's name does not hold the same power. For 
example, when praying for her children, a mother would use the child's first 
name followed by 'son of (mother's name)', e.g., Ashraf son ofFa~ima. Thus, 
it is quite common for elderly women when asked about their mother's name 
to give a false one consistently, especially to young children who might reveal 
the secret to other grownups, who might then use the name to cast a spell on 
the elderly woman or on her offspring. Thus, refusing to use a woman's first 
name, whether she is alive or dead, is culture-specific and may have to do with 
the power the name has rather than the power women lack. So wedding invita-
tions usually include the name of the bride and her father but not her mother's 
name, and the name of the groom and his father but not his mother's name. 
Sadiqi (2003a) discusses, in her sociolinguistic study of Moroccan women, 
fortune telling, witchcraft and black magic. Although she does not go into 
details of how names are used in the three practices in Morocco, she empha-
sises the importance of the three practices in the Moroccan community. She 
posits that 'the three practices are very real in Moroccan culture as they are 
believed to offer "solutions" and "remedies" to weak, problem stricken literate 
and illiterate men and women that are victims of social stress that they cannot 
handle' (2003: 73). 
The importance of witchcraft and magic is not exclusive to Egypt and 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
149 
Morocco but is found in the Arab world at large.7 The implications of this for 
women and how they are addressed are indeed crucial for a more thorough 
understanding of the interaction between gender and language in Arab com-
munities. One needs a study that evaluates all the implications of women's 
names. However, there is no study that does this to date. 
In this section I have only briefly touched the tip of an iceberg. There is 
much more to be studied in the way women are addressed and the way they 
address others, as well as in the way they retain or give up their names, or have 
them taken from them. The answers, as always, are not clear, but that should 
only make the journey of discovery worth making. What is obvious, though, 
is that despite the great differences and disparities of many sorts we find 
between Arab communities, there are sound reasons for claiming that these 
communities in fact have a culture in common at some profound level and that 
this culture is manifested in the two interlinked values: modesty and honour. 
Although both take different shapes in different communities across the Arab 
world, they are at the core similar and essential for a successful communicative 
process. 
In section 4. 6 I show how women as narrators survive in parallel to men and 
use similar themes and forms in their narration. 
4· 6 WHEN A CHI C KEN C R 0 W S LIKE A C 0 C K : 
WOMEN NARRATORS 
Al-Farazdaq, the famous medieval Arab poet (641-742), once said of a woman 
who recites poetry: 
( 15) 'lioa: ~a: flat id- daja:jatu ~iya: ~a d-di: ki 
fa-Oba~u: ha: 
'If a chicken crows like a cock, 
slaughter her.' 
(Ghidhdhami2000: 154) 
Though the number of female Arab poets is less than the number of male 
poets, there are still some remarkable female poets who have decided to 'crow 
like a cock', beginning with the pre-Islamic female poet al-Khansa, (Tuma<;l 
ir hint 'Amr, d. 634 or 661) and up until today. What is interesting about the 
poetry of al-Khansa, is that in theme it is not that different from the poetry of 
men. Although al-Khansa, does not describe any weaponry in detail, as male 
poets often do, 8 she does use the same forms and grammatical constructions 
and almost the same themes as her male peers. These similarities are interest-
ing, since, as detailed below, studies done on women's poetr~ from a linguistic 
point of view, as well as studies of women who just recite poetry rather than 

I 50 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
compose it, have not come up with much evidence that there are any major 
differences between the themes or the forms of poems created by men and 
women. Some marginal differences have been detected, but none pertaining 
to women specifically. Whether the case is different in other cultures is worth 
investigating. In this section I will summarise some of the major studies done 
across the Arab world on women's poetry and women's prose from a linguistic 
perspective. Note that the three studies, which I will examine in more detail 
below, depend on folk genres of poetry rather than high-culture poetry which 
is in MSA and which is perhaps less spontaneous or less representative of the 
ordinary people. I will then shed light on a study conducted by Eid (2002b) 
that examined women's prose. 
First, Stilbnan and Stilbnan ( 1978) used various genres of songs in order 
to study the language of women in relation to society. They concentrated on 
women's songs in Morocco. Songs sung in women's gatherings during work 
or play were analysed, or these sung on semi-religious occasions such as wed-
dings, circumcisions and death. These songs were called farabi by members 
of this community. The researchers also examined songs dealing with topics 
that are of interest to women rather than men. 
Stilbnan and Stilbnan (1978) studied the Jewish community of Sefrou, a 
provincial town in Morocco that lies 18 km south of Fes. In the 1940s the 
community comprised 6,000 Jews, i.e. one-third of the population ofSefrou. 
In 1972, when the fieldwork began, there were only 200 Jews left, the others 
having emigrated mainly to Israel. They retained their own distinctive dialect, 
the Sefriwi dialect of Jews. 9 The female poet whose poems Stillman and 
Stilhnan analysed, Siml).a poni, was an illiterate married woman in her fifties. 
Like most Arabic folk poetry, her verses were sung, not recited. She composed 
while singing using specific formulaic expressions. Stilbnan and Stillman 
also examined singing duels, which were similar to a war of words (contests) 
between women. One woman composed her verse from some cue in the last 
line of the opponent's verse, and then the duel continued. This competition 
could get personal, as when one refered to the other woman's husband etc. 
Siml).a specialised in mawwa:l, which is a kind of poem or song that originated 
in Iraq and is sung throughout the Middle East. 
The themes that occurred were usually melancholic ones, like separation, 
loneliness, unrequited love and exile. These themes do not differ depend-
ing on gender, according to the researchers, but rather seem like traditional 
Andalusian themes. 10 Another motif found in these Moroccan songs is that of 
the Andalusian garden. Note the following example: 
(16) tmenni:t gelsa mafa: gza:li: fil-far$a 
l-far$a xa:liya ma: fiha-r-rbba 
'I wish I could sit with my gazelle in a garden, 
a deserted garden whose owner is not there.' (1978: 73) 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
151 
Stilhnan and Stilhnan compared themes and structures used by women to 
those used by men and concluded that both men and women refer to gardens, 
baths, high ceilings and windows in their poetry. Not only is there no clear 
difference between the poetry of men and women, but also there are ahnost no 
differences between the poetry of Jews and non-Jews, i.e., Muslims. Stilhnan 
and Stilhnan posit that, 'There is nothing in the content of the "\arabi" as 
sung by our poetess which could be identified as particularly Jewish, with the 
exception of the occasional mention of personal names, such as David'11 ( 1978: 
74). 
Abu-Lughod (1987), whose work was referred to earlier, has studied the 
social function of the Bedouin poetry of men and women in Egypt. She 
concentrated on the sociolinguistic and pragmatic significance of poetic dis-
course in a Bedouin tribe in the western desert in Egypt called Awlad 'Ali. 
She studied how poetry and songs were used by men and women to express 
different attitudes and feelings ranging from love to anger and defiance, 
and how poetry also defines and redefines the degree of intimacy between 
individuals. 
This study is crucial in a number of ways. First, although Abu-Lughod 
did not mention it by name, she indirectly and very early on used the social 
networks approach for collecting her data. She used her Muslim background 
as an asset in her research, and also her father's background in Egypt. She was 
both an insider and an outsider. She was an insider because she shared with 
the Bedouins their Muslim identity12 and stayed with them long enough to 
be able to participate in their daily rituals without them feeling uncomfort-
able, and an outsider because she was not from that community herself, and 
therefore was allowed to ask questions and behave differently. She claimed to 
have taken the role of'an adoptive daughter' (1987: 15). Note that she started 
her fieldwork mainly as an anthropologist but ended up with a study on the 
discourse significance of poetry in that community. We can read her work 
as ethnography of communication. Still, the methods she used to integrate 
in that community were not different from those used by others, like Haeri 
(1996a). 13 In fact, at the onset of Abu-Lughod's study, her father accompanied 
her. She said that as an Arab, he realised that being a young unmarried woman 
travelling by herself on an ambiguous mission was not going to help her in her 
research (1987: 11 ). He knew his culture well and knew that she would not be 
able to gain the trust of the community if she arrived on her own, and thus 
would have a hard time convincing them to open up and feel at ease with her. 
In her behaviour, she appealed to the half-Arab identity she had, and behaved 
with respect towards the culture of the community. 
It was clear to Abu-Lughod from the beginning that as a woman she would 
not have many liberties, but she would be able to enjoy an intimacy with other 
women that would eventually open new doors for her. Similarly, early on 
she became aware of the great importance of poetry in the community under 

I 52 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
investigation, an importance that surpassed all her expectations. While staying 
in the house of one of the seniors of the tribe, a shepherd's wife helping in the 
household recited a poem about despair in love. Abu-Lughod, in all innocence, 
read it to the ~ajj (the senior person she was staying with), who was usually a 
calm, helpful man. Suddenly his attitude changed and he became angry and 
asked her who had recited the poem to her. He was afraid that it had been his 
wife, and that the poem had been a reflection of her feelings towards him. The 
~ajj's senior wife14 scolded Abu-Lughod for having revealed something as 
sensitive as a woman's poem to a man (1987: 11). Abu-Lughod then realised 
that poetry in this community was used 'as a vehicle for personal expression 
and confidential communication' (1987: 26). 
Abu-Lughod focused specifically on poems called ginna:was, which are 
little songs similar to lyrical poems but also similar to the American blues 
in content and emotional tone. They are mostly about romantic love. They 
describe a feeling and are usually 'personal statements about interpersonal 
situations' ( 1987: 27). This kind of poetry exploits sound elements like allit-
eration, intonation and rhythm to a great degree. Words, for example, are 
usually repeated in reverse order. Note the following example: 
(17) damf za: d ya: mawla:y 
xafar fazi: zi fi wa:n iz-zafal 
'Tears increased, oh lord. 
The beloved came to mind in the time of sadness.' (1987: 179) 
In the above poem 
fi wa:n 
in when 
'in the time' 
is repeated nine times. 
fazi: zi 
beloved me 
fi wa:n 
in when 
iz-zafal 
the-sadness 
'beloved in the time of sadness' 
is repeated twice. The order is reversed, as in: 
fi wa:n 
fi wa:n 
fi wa:n iz-zafal 
fi wa:n 
fazi: zi fi wa:n iz-zafal 
in the time 
in the time 
in the time of sadness 
in the time 
beloved in the time of sadness 

fi wa:n 
fi wa:n 
in the time 
in the time 
ARABIC AND GENDER 
153 
fazi:zifi wa:n iz-zafal beloved in the time of sadness 
Although these poems are rarely sung by men in public any more, but are 
usually sung by women at weddings and on similar occasions, both men and 
women recite poetry about their beloved ones, though in different settings and 
mainly without the other sex's being present. Much of Bedouin life remains 
sex-segregated to a great extent, more than life in urban centres such as Cairo 
or Alexandria. The following poem was recited by a jilted man and reveals 
feelings of grief and pain caused by loss. When it was recited to women of the 
community by Abu-Lughod, they were touched by it. 
(18) fazi: z lil-kfo: ma: ha:n 
sayya:tha: xata: wa.jfa:tni: 
'Her bad deeds were wrongs that hurt 
Yet I won't repay them, still dear the beloved.' (1987: 189) 
Similar themes occur in a poem recited by a woman: 
(19) oahabit ge.fun 1-awla:f 
kanni:ba zini:ni: yji:bhum 
'I have lost their tracks, the loved ones 
perhaps my singing will bring them.' ( 1987: 242) 
Here the power of poetry is called upon by the woman, and indeed poetry is 
powerful in this community. Abu-Lughod states that both men and women 
lead two parallel lives: a public one and a private one. There are codes of 
behaviour that they have to maintain, among them the modesty code and the 
honour code. Poetry, the domain of the private life, can violate all codes as 
long as it remains private. Men and women of the community express through 
poetry weaknesses that may violate the honour code and romantic love that 
may violate the modesty code. Both men and women share poems only with 
friends and close kin. Poetry is not to be shared with men or women across dif-
ferent generational or status lines. The public and private spheres, are distinct 
and well defined. In the public sphere the two codes discussed in section 4.3, 
honour and modesty, have to be maintained. 
Abu-Lughod's study is an eye-opener in many respects. First, it reframes 
and analyses values like honour and modesty, within the framework of a spe-
cific community, and in so doing correlates how both concepts can be used in 
different parts of the Arab world. Second, she draws attention to the nuanced 
nature of the relation between men and women, the public sphere and the 
private sphere, and an individual and a community. Although Abu-Lughod 

I 54 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
does not state clearly in her study the complex nature of the power relation 
between men and woman in the Arab world at large, she refers to the spheres 
that men and women control and adjust. 
Rosenhouse (2001) studied the narrative structure of stories narrated by 
Bedouin and sedentary male and female speakers from Israel, specifically that 
of a type of folk story dealing with fantastic events and characters. The analy-
sis focused on linguistic elements like clause structure, number of words per 
clause, verb tense use and demonstratives. The sixteen stories were ofthe same 
type and from the same dialect area; eight were narrated by males and eight by 
females. Rosenhouse concluded that there were inter-gender and inter-group 
differences, but also similarities. In fact, the differences between Bedouin and 
sedentary dialect narratives were much less than Rosenhouse expected. There 
were also a large number of occurrences of the yijfal form 15 used as part of a 
modal structure in all the data, to give vividness to the story and to express the 
present tense. One difference between men and women was that women used 
demonstratives more than twice as often as did men. However, there were no 
other major differences noticed. 
Eid (2002b) examined eight female modern Egyptian writers and the 
various ways they use both MSA and ECA in their work. The women writers 
varied in the way they used ECA and MSA. Some used only MSA, even in 
dialogues, while others used both, or just ECA. The study did not compare 
female writers to male writers, but makes it clear that there was no obvious 
tendency for women to use ECA or MSA. According to Holes (2004: 376), 
a number of Egyptian male writers have exploited the diglossic situation by 
using both MSA and ECA in their novels in both narration and dialogue, 
among them Yfisufldris (1927-91). Although there are a number of studies 
in the Arab world that deal with the themes of women writers, there are few 
studies if any that deal with the language variation of women and men writers 
in the Arab world. There is a great need for such studies. 
In this section I have examined some linguistic studies that concentrate on 
women as narrators of poetry (poets) or prose (writers). In fact, none of the 
studies discussed demarcates a clear and crucial difference in the way men 
and women use language in narration. Perhaps there is none. More studies are 
needed, however, before one can reach this conclusion. What is worth men-
tioning is that in poetry the differences between men and women, whether real 
or imaginary, are blurred. Poetry in different communities in the Arab world 
creates an ideal world in which both men and women can express their weak-
nesses and needs. From al-Khansa, in pre-Islamic poetry to the women in 
the western desert in Egypt, women have found a means of expressing them-
selves, an outlet through art. Abu-Lughod ( 1987: 185) calls poetry 'a discourse 
of defiance' Perhaps it is so. 
In sections 4.4-4.6, I have concentrated on women in relation to polite-
ness; terms of address, names and status; and women as narrators. In the 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
ISS 
next section I examine linguistic variation between men and women in more 
detail. 
4· 7 LANGUAGE VA R I AT I 0 N AN D CHANGE IN 
RELATION TO GENDER 
I argue that quantitative sociolinguistic research tends to treat gender as a 
given and then examine variation between males and females; categories such 
as social class, ethnicity and sex are treated as clear and simple categories that 
can be used directly to account for variation within a community. This in 
itself, as was mentioned in Chapter 3, is an oversimplification. 
I first (section 4.7.1) give an overview of studies on language variation in 
relation to gender in general, and then (section 4.7.2) concentrate on studies 
done on the Arab world. Finally, I question some earlier claims about language 
variation between men and women in the Arab world. 
4. 7.1 An overview of studies on language variation in relation to 
gender 
There is a claim in the western world that women use more prestigious lan-
guage forms than men. Women, especially in the lower middle class, took the 
initiative in the introduction of new prestigious forms of many of the pho-
nological variables studied in the US, UK and other industralised societies 
such as Sweden (cf Romaine 2003). Men initiate change from below (Labov 
1990). 
This may first be related to economic and social factors. Nichols in 1983 
conducted a study in two small villages in South Carolina in which three 
groups were examined. Nichols was able to link the patterns oflinguistic vari-
ation to the economic positions of men and women in the community. The 
poorer/working-class women were interacting with speakers of more standard 
varieties of English far more than their husbands. Women used more prestig-
ious norms because of the differences in profession and economic exposure of 
men and women. James and Drakich ( 1993) argued that the use of prestigious 
linguistic forms by women is related to the economic opportunities available 
to them. That is to say, if one sex is exposed more often to the prestigious 
forms of language because of the jobs they hold or their social and economic 
circumstances, they will eventually use more prestigious norms. 
To the extent that such a claim is valid, it may account for the fact that 
women's speech in working-class communities in the west has been found 
to be closer to the standard than men's. Lower-working-class women are in 
contact with middle-class people more. However, this factor cannot be con-
sidered an essential one in language choice, since Holmquist ( 198S) found that 

I S6 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
young men in a Spanish village were exposed more to standard Spanish16 than 
were young women, because the men worked more outside the community 
and because they spent time in the military service; yet women in that com-
munity still used more prestigious forms. This pattern of behaviour may be 
related to Milroy's concept of social networks, discussed in Chapter 3. Men in 
the Spanish village have more dense and multiplex networks than the women, 
although they may come from the same class. In fact, it is not always men 
who have the strongest social networks. Cheshire (1982) revealed that older 
women in a Welsh community were the ones who used more non-standard 
forms of speech; she accounts for this finding by pointing out that they had the 
strongest social networks. The theory of market forces and the theory of social 
networks complement each other, since both depend on interaction between 
people. Stil~ although the idea of social networks is valid in explaining the 
differences between the two sexes, it is not enough in itself to account for all 
cases of differences. 
Even in studies that examined language change in bilingual communities, 
women seem to be initiating a change towards the more prestigious variety. 
Gal (1978a) studied a Hungarian village in Austria in which social networks 
and market forces interact strongly. Gal posited that young men and young 
women there did not differ in their type of social networks. None the less, 
women still used the prestigious variety, standard German. Gal (1978a) states 
that the reason for this is that women feel less loyal to the community than men 
do. In fact the major independent variable in that case was not sex but 'peas-
antness' of network, peasantness being defined in local terms: having cows 
and chickens. Younger women had fewer peasant networks because they had 
a goal of speaking German without an accent - the goal of the youth but not 
their elders- which increased the likelihood that young women could marry 
a German-speaking, urban, middle-class men and leave their current peasant 
lifestyle. Their life would then be materially easier. Their use of standard was 
a way of showing their attitude towards being peasants. They in fact chose not 
to be peasants, and this was symbolised by their language choice. 17 
Women in the western world were assumed to be more status conscious 
and less secure in their social positioning (cf Romaine 2003). According to 
Trudgill ( 1972), language is used as a symbolic means of securing social status. 
He claims that women have a less secure position in society, are subordinate 
to men, and as a result use more prestigious forms. This is an overgenerali-
sation and has been criticised in a great number of studies (cf Holmes and 
Meyerhoff 2003a). Romaine gives the example of women in Sweden, which 
is a country famous for gender equality, and in which women still use more 
prestigious forms than men. Nordberg and Sundgren (1998) conducted a 
comparison of gender differentiation across two generations, first in 1967 and 
then again in 1996, in a town called Eskilstuna in central Sweden, about 110 
km from Stockholm. They concluded that gender differentiation in most of 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
157 
the variables had not changed. They examined six morphological variables. 
Women were still using more prestigious forms than men, although, as was 
said earlier, women's status in Sweden is secure. Thus, correlating the use of 
prestige with social security is not always viable. 
Women are supposed to use language as a means of gaining respect and 
influence. Gaining respect and influence means asserting one's membership 
in all the social groups to which one belongs. If, for example, one belongs to 
a group that uses a prestigious-standard variety, using this variety may be a 
way of gaining respect in that group. Eckert (1998) examined the speech of 
two groups of girls in a Detroit high school. She found that the working-class 
group spoke a less prestigious variety than the middle-dass group. This was 
because the latter group did not need to rebel against society. They considered 
society a means of asserting their identity. In fact, women can use language 
as a way of gaining respect, if they cannot do so in a more direct way. Salami 
(1991) found that Nigerian women do not use a more prestigious language 
than men because they do not need to gain respect. There is already a high 
level of participation by them in the society. 
The most important interpretation of studies done on the west, and the one 
that concerns us directly, is that lower-middle-class women tend to use more 
prestige forms to compensate for their socially insecure position (cf. Labov 
1982; Trudgill 1972; Paulston and Tucker 2003). However, Labov (1982: 
201) claims that this is not the case in the Near East and South Asia and that 
in these areas women are not necessarily more conservative than men. Labov 
may not have taken account of the difference between a prestige variety and a 
standard one (see Chapter 1). Many linguistic studies in the Arab world have 
shown that for most people at least in urban areas there is a prestige vernacu-
lar, the nature of which depends on many geographical, political and social 
factors within each country. In Egypt, for example, for non-Cairenes it is 
Cairene. It is usually the urban dialect of the big cities. There is also a stand-
ard variety, MSA. This linguistic situation does not exist in western societies, 
with the consequence that at first glance the results reached by some western 
linguists concerning language and gender seem to contradict those reached by 
some linguists in the Arab world. 
The fact that linguists like Daher (1999) provide evidence that specific 
women of a specific background in a particular locale may not use some stand-
ard features oflanguage does not contradict the findings ofLabov and others, 
since women may still use the prestige form of language, which, as was said 
earlier, is different from the standard one. Note also the claim made by Abu-
Haidar (1989: 479) that young women in the Arab world are more sensitive 
and innovative than old and young men to linguistic changes. Abu-Haidar's 
interpretation is in line with the claim made by Labov (1972b: 243) that 
women are more sensitive than men to prestige patterns. 
In section 4.7.2 I will first give an overview of linguistic studies that 

I S8 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
concentrate on variation and then examine a selected number of them in 
detail 
4. 7.2 An overview of linguistic variation in relation to gender in the 
Arab world 
Studies that concentrate on phonetic, phonological and prosodic features 
are mentioned chronologically. First, Roux (1952) examined the differences 
between men's and women's speech in Morocco in relation to specific con-
sonants, such as s, z and r. Hurreiz (1978) in his study of Khartoum also 
examined the use of intonation. Royal (1985) studied the relation between 
pharyngalisation, class and gender in Egypt. Al-Khateeb (1988) studied 
a number of consonants used in Irbid in Jordan, which include q, k and t, 
and one vowel, a. He studied them in relation to gender, education and age. 
Trabelsi (1988) studied the use of diphthongs and monophthongs in relation 
to gender in Tunisia. Al-Muhannadi (1991) studied the articulation of some 
segments including the q in the speech of Qttari women. He found that certain 
segments characterise the speech of the Bedouin community while others 
characterise urban speech. 18 
I will now examine some of the studies on variation in more detail Walters 
(1991) made a quantitative sociolinguistic study of Arabic as spoken in Korba, 
a small Tunisian town, to examine sex differentiation there. He compared and 
contrasted his findings with western studies. To collect his data, he used a 
male Tunisian teacher of French and a female student of language. The issue 
was also to see whether the sex of the interviewer mattered. He was interested 
in phonological variables, especially the ima:la, vowel raising (palatalisa-
tion, produced by a rising movement of the tongue towards the prepalatal 
region). 19 He found that ima:la is used by older people, less educated people 
and females. It is considered a feature of the dialect of Korba which is now 
looked down upon, especially when used outside Korba and with Tunisians 
from other areas. 
Daher (1999) examined 8 and o as MSA variables realised differently in 
Damascene Arabic. He measured the way both phonological variables are 
realised by men and women. In Damascene Arabic the variables would be 
realised ass and z respectively. He found that men tend to realise them more 
in their standard form (which is different from the prestige form), 8 and o, 
than women did. 
Daher's methods were very effective. He tried to overcome the observer's 
paradox in more than one way. He was aware that it is difficult to elicit spon-
taneous speech in the presence of a tape recorder. The recorder makes the 
informants more conscious and thus they use more MSA than they usually do. 
Daher made sure the interviewer was familiar with the culture, had the trust of 
the informants, and was a member of the speech community. The informants 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
159 
were mostly either friends, family members or co-workers. The setting was 
their homes, where other family members were present. Daher then ignored 
the first five minutes of the interview. He started by asking about personal 
experiences, memorable stories, hobbies at school, television in Syrian society, 
and society in general. In fact, stories with lasting memories worked well, 
such as those about a journey on foot from Beirut to Damascus, a marriage, 
an accident etc. His informants had all finished at least elementary education. 
He found that speakers who realised the two variables in their MSA form 
were speakers whose professions entailed much use of the written language, 
i.e. they were mainly men. He claims that 'men are more likely than women to 
approach the standard variant as a speech norm' ( 1999: 180). This situation is 
stable; there is no change in progress taking place. MSA is used in major insti-
tutions such as law, education etc. Because of that it is associated with men, 
who have more access to education and more access to professions. 
In another study (1998), Daher examined another phonological variable real-
ised differently in Damascene Arabic and SA, namely the uvular variable I ql, 
which is realised as a glottal stop in Damascene Arabic. His study was based 
on thirty hours of tape-recorded sociolinguistic interviews with twenty-three 
men and twenty-three women. The informants were classified into three levels 
of formal education, i.e. elementary school, high school and college degree, and 
into three age groups, i.e. 15--24, 25--39 and 40-70. He found that men tended 
to favour the connotations and usage of q, while women avoided its connota-
tions and usage. The q variable was being introduced into the dialect through 
education. And since, according to Daher (1998: 203), education was 'tradi-
tionally the domain of a small male elite', women did not use the q as much as 
men. In fact, according to him, even educated professional women tended not 
to use it because the glottal stop is associated more with urbanisation and mod-
ernisation, while q was associated with men and rural speakers. He concluded 
that men and women in that context approached different norms, since MSA 
and the vernacular were two sets of norms instead of one. 
The attachment of women to the urban variables and to modernisation is 
common for studies done on the west (cf. Romaine 2003), and studies done on 
Arabic. Al-Wer (1999) reached a similar conclusion in her study, discussed in 
chapter 3, of the Palestinian and Jordanian dialects used by men and women 
in Jordan. She concluded that indigenous Jordanian women responded to 
the urban prestige norms more than men did. This was because, for them, 
according to Al-Wer, urban Palestinian women represented finesse (1999: 
41). Palestinian women appeared more liberated, more modem and better 
educated than Jordanian ones. Havelova (2000) reached a similar conclusion in 
the study he conducted in Nazareth. He posited that it was gender more than 
religion directing phonological variation. When examining the realisation of 
the MSA q variable, he found that women used the glottal stop more, while 
men tended to use the rural variant k. 

I6o 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
In a different vein, Haeri (1996a) was interested in the variation within 
Cairene Arabic between men and women, especially in the processes of front-
ing and backing. She noted that data from ten different communities in Cairo, 
Egypt, suggests that women take the lead in fronting processes, and she posed 
the question of whether this variation between men and women is anatomical 
in nature or social. She concentrated specifically on two variables: the degree 
of pharyngealisation and apical palatalisation. Pharyngealisation is a secondary 
articulation which involves the backing of the tongue towards the pharynx (cf 
Jakobson 1978 [1957]), while palatalisation is a fronting process that involves 
tongue fronting as well as raising (cf Bhat 1978; Haeri 1996a: 106). She 
contended that social class plays an important role in this variation between 
men and women. She concluded that men have heavier pharyngealisation 
than women perhaps in order to sound tough and manly (1996a: 107), while 
weak or no pharyngealisation is characteristic of women in general and upper-
middle-class men and women in particular (cf. Royall985). Although strong 
pharyngealisation is a process found in CA, it tends to be avoided by women. 
For women, weak pharyngealisation is associated with the upper classes, civi-
lisation etc., while strong pharyngealisation or backing is associated not just 
with men but with men from the lower classes. Haeri (1996a) found that in 
Cairo it is in fact middle-class women who initiate change. Variables associ-
ated with upper-middle-class women tend to become prestigious norms asso-
ciated with refinement, thus become models for lower-class women who have 
social ambition. 
Tables 4.2 and 4.3 summarise some ofHaeri's findings with regard to pala-
talisation and the use of the MSA phonological variable I ql 
The tables show that class and gender interact as independent variables 
in Egypt and influence linguistic variation. However, an MSA variable such 
as the I ql is used more frequently by men than women across almost all 
classes. 
Table 4.2 
Strong palatalisation in female speakers in Cairo, by social class 
Class 
Strong 
Weak 
Total tokens 
%of 
Palatalisation 
palatalisation 
total tokens 
Lower middle N% 
697 
877 
1574 
41 
44 
56 
Middle middle N% 
322 
478 
800 
21 
40 
60 
Upper middle N% 
266 
688 
954 
25 
28 
72 
Upper 
N% 
30 
469 
499 
13 
6 
94 
Total 
N% 
1315 
2512 
3827 
34 
66 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
161 
Table 4. 3 
Use of I q/ by male and female Cairene speakers, by social class 
(average number oftokens per 1,000 words) 
Class 
Female speakers 
Male speakers 
Lower middle 
0.37 
3.14 
Middle middle 
7.60 
8.20 
Upper middle 
4.91 
8.59 
Upper 
3.57 
9.76 
There are other studies that also found that young, educated, middle-class 
women use more foreign lexical items than men do (cf. Lawson-Sako and 
Sachdev 2000 for a study done on Tunis). 
The above studies all indicate, first, that women sometimes do not have 
access to education and professional life to the same extent as men do and thus 
their use of MSA is less than that of men. This interpretation echoes Jane 
Austen's claim in her novel Persuasion that we discussed at the beginning of 
this chapter. On the other hand, when women have a choice between the pres-
tigious urban variety, a rural variety and MSA, they are more prone to choose 
the urban variety as a symbolic means of asserting their identity. 
Haeri (1996a: 307) claims that 'studies of gender differentiation have shown 
that women who have equal levels of education to men use features of classi-
cal Arabic significantly less than men' (see also Haeri 2006: 529). Note that 
Mejdell (2006) found that this generalisation did not apply to some of her 
female informants. 
In the following paragraphs I will show the limitations of quantitative vari-
ation studies that rely on gender as an independent factor: 
Variation research that relies on gender as a variable starts with catego-
rising people into males and females and places them into fixed social 
classes, which may yield circular arguments, as was discussed in Chapter 
3. Language in this case will just be a reflection of already existing social 
identities rather than a construction of identities and communities 
(Romaine 2003). Research against this kind of categorisation includes 
Goodwin (2003), Eckert (2003) and Holmes and Stubbe (2003). 
Two key factors in the variation of speech between men and women, 
according to Romaine (2003: 109), are 'access' and 'role' The amount 
of access that women have to the prestige language and the role that 
they play in their community are significant in their language use. Both 
factors have to be considered before any conclusions about variation and 
gender can be reached. 
Variationists claim that in the Middle East women move away from the 
prestige forms (cf. Romaine 2003). This is not necessarily true and may 

162 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
be the result of the confusion between standard and prestige which was 
discussed in Chapter 1, and which will be alluded to again in the next 
section. 
In addition, use of language may have a discourse function and is not 
just an outcome of social factors. For example, according to Larson 
(1982) women use more standard in Norway when they want someone 
to do something or when they want to persuade. 
4· 8 P R 0 J E C T I 0 N 0 F IDENTITY IN THE S PEE C H 
OF EDUCATED WOMEN AND MEN IN EGYPT: 
EVIDENCE FROM TALK SHOWS -
A CASE STUDY 
This study has two purposes. First, it examines the use of MSA and ECA in 
talk shows. I shed light on code choice and code-switching by women specifi-
cally in relation to identity. Second, the study examines assertiveness tech-
niques such as interruption and floor-controlling by women. 
To reiterate variationist studies done on the Arab world all indicate, first, 
that women sometimes do not have access to education and professional life 
to the same extent as men do and thus their use of MSA is less than men's. 
On the other hand, when women have a choice between the prestigious urban 
variety, a rural variety and MSA, they are more prone to choose the urban 
variety as a symbolic means of asserting their identity. 
In spite of the fact that talk shows may not be representative as stratified 
samples of variationist research should be, talk shows can help demonstrate 
that certain general conclusions about the use of MSA by educated women 
should not be drawn: This study aims to provide another perspective, one 
that shows that educated women with access to MSA in fact can and do use 
it in certain contexts for a discourse function and to project a specific identity 
on themselves. The question that this study poses is why women and men use 
MSA when they do. It also shows that in specific contexts, Egyptian women 
are as assertive as men if not more. 
My data consists of fifteen hours of talk shows. The analysis includes five 
talk shows. Two are exclusive to one group, males or females and not the 
other. Note that all the participants are in the same age group, 45-55. 
In programmes in which there are exclusively men or women, there is still 
no difference in the way MSA is used by each. The quantity of MSA is related 
to the role the speaker wants to take and which part of his or her identity he 
or she appeals to. The use of the phonological variable q specifically was not 
exclusive to men. Both women and men use q and sometimes it is women 
rather than men who do so. 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
163 
4.8.1 Description of data 
The talk shows examined are the following: 
1. kala:m nawa:fim 'Women talk': Four women from different parts of 
the Arab world discuss current issues in the Arab world and the world 
in general (no announcer). 
2. ma wara:'l al-'labt/a:O'Beyondevents': Four men from different parts of 
the Arab world discuss current events in the world (male announcer). 
3. ~iwa:r ad-dustu:r 'The constitution dialogue': Educated men and 
women from Egypt discuss changes to the Egyptian constitution. 
Sometimes there are three men and one woman, and sometimes two 
men and two women (male or female announcer). 
4. il-buyu:t 'lasra:r 'Home secrets': Usually two men and two women 
from Egypt discuss family problems in Egypt (female announcer). 
5. qabla Jan tu~a:sabu 'Before you are held accountable': A group of 
men and women, two and two, usually from Egypt, discuss a current 
problem with religious implications (female announcer). 
4.8.2 Categorising the data 
In this study, I try throughout to distinguish broadly between ECA and MSA 
as distinct code levels. The main difficulty encountered by a linguist dealing 
with two languages or two varieties that are closely related, like MSA and 
ECA, is to differentiate clearly and consistently between them. This is because 
MSA and ECA have a number of shared vocabulary, syntactic and morpho-
logical features. If we put to one side the absence of case and mood endings, 
some utterances could be classified as either ECA or MSA. Therefore it was 
difficult at times to make a clear distinction between them. 
After an initial survey, I categorised my data on the basis of counting MSA 
and ECA variables, whether lexical, morphological, phonological or syntactic. 
The categories start from MSA and move gradually and quantitatively to 
ECA. Note that in case the participants come from different parts of the Arab 
world and use a different colloquial from MSA, the categories are still able to 
help us in our understanding of the choice of variety. In these cases I replaced 
ECA with the variety used, so instead of categorising an utterance as basically 
ECA, I categorised it as basically SCA, for example. 20 These seven categories 
are in the following order: 
MSA 
MSA with insertions of ECA 
Basically MSA 
Mixture of MSA and ECA 

I64 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Basically ECA 
ECA with insertions of MSA 
ECA 
As was said earlier, I measured these categories by counting the MSA percent-
age of variables in the speech of the participants: (see Table 4.4). 
Note thatthe category' MSA' has a wider range than the category ECA; MSA 
has 80-100 per cent MSA variables, while ECA has 0-10 per cent MSA vari-
ables. This is because my data is spoken and something as subtle as the quality 
of a vowel can render a morpheme or word ECA in the counting process. 
I have categorised my data using these seven categories because I attempt to 
show how code choice and social motivations are related and how, in a stretch 
of discourse that is basically geared towards one variety rather than another, 
the speaker's motivations may be different. In a stretch of discourse which is 
geared towards MSA, the speaker's relationship to the audience and projec-
tion of self may be different from one that is geared towards ECA. Again, 
whether and how code choice substantiates and expresses pragmatic variables 
of this kind is handled more insightfully if the speaker's code is first carefully 
analysed and divided into different categories on the basis of form alone. 
Therefore, this rough categorisation is an important first step to enable us to 
get to grips with how and why a speaker moves from using one kind of Arabic 
to using another. 
The categorisation above has of course no formal status as either a linguistic 
or a social construct, the only purpose being to help arrive at an understanding 
of how the dynamics of switching between MSA and ECA, the 'poles' at either 
end of a stylistic line, take place. I do not claim that the notion of categories 
occurs in the mind of Egyptians when speaking, nor that these are in any sense 
consciously 'used' by Egyptians. The only operational difference between my 
'categories' is in the quantity of MSA or ECA features, regardless of whether 
these features are phonological, morpho-syntactic or lexical in nature. The 
basis of my division is simply the quantity of features from both codes in a 
given stretch of discourse. 
Table 4.4 
Categorisation by use of MSA variables 
Category 
Use of MSA variables (%) 
MSA 
MSA with insertions ofECA 
Basically MSA 
Mixture of MSA and ECA 
BasicallyECA 
ECA with insertions of MSA 
ECA 
80-100 
70-80 
60-70 
40-60 
20-40 
10-20 
0-10 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
165 
I exemplify below the features used to distinguish between MSA and 
ECA. 
4. 8. 2.1 Lexical features 
There are certain lexical items and expressions which are markers of one code 
rather than another. For example, the verb 'to go' in MSA is oahaba, while 
in ECA it is a different lexical item altogether, ra: b. This type of item is the 
easiest to spot. For example in programme 2 in the series 'Before you are held 
accountable', the male journalist, who speaks 'basically ECA', uses a number 
of quintessentially ECA expressions and vocabulary. 
(20) fi ba:ga 
'there is something' 
(21) 'la:h 
'yes' 
The MSA counterpart of these words and expressions is different: 
(22) huna:ka.(ay'lan 
'there is something' 
(23) nafam 
'yes' 
On the other hand, in programme 2 in the series 'Home secrets', the 
female judge, who speaks 'MSA', uses many quintessentially MSA lexical 
items. 
(24) nabnu 
'we' 
(25) nabba8 
'we search' 
The ECA counterpart of these lexical items and expressions would be: 
(26) 'libna 
'we' 
(27) niMa8 
'we search' 

I66 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Note that there is a large amount of vocabulary shared between the two 
codes, and sometimes the difference between two lexical items, one in 
ECA and the other in MSA, is only a low-level phonological one, as in 
examples (25) and (27) above. The only difference between the MSA and 
the ECA realisations of the same verb is in the vowel pattern and syllable 
structure. 
It is by no means clear whether differences on the phonological or lexical 
level are more salient. This needs further research and a large amount of 
data. 
4.8.2.2 Morpho-syntactic features 
Case and mood marking are purely MSA morphological features. If a speaker 
consistently uses case and mood endings, this indicates that her or his utter-
ance is stylistically 'high flown' It is noteworthy, however, that in spoken 
MSA in Egypt, people tend to drop case and mood endings except in the most 
elevated (especially religious) discourse. So in Egypt the criterion of case and 
mood marking has limited usefulness in deciding which code is being used, 
since it is so rare. On the other hand, the aspectual/mood marker b or the 
tense marker !za are features that are characteristic of ECA, with a different 
counterpart in MSA, and their use is a sign that a speaker has moved in the 
direction of ECA. 
There are numerous other significant morpho-syntactic differences 
between MSA and ECA. There are major differences in the way in which 
negation, deixis, tense and aspect are realised in ECA and MSA. There are 
also other significant differences in the expression of syntactic processes 
such as relativisation and interrogation. 
The following examples illustrate how ECA and MSA morpho-syntactic 
features can combine. Note this example from programme 2 in the series 
'Home secrets', in which the female judge uses a number of salient MSA 
morpho-syntactic features: 
(28) al-a~ka:m if-Jarfiyya wil- qa:nuniyya wil-qada: 'liyya 8a:bital 8ubu:tan 
layaqba/1 wala gadalwala muna:qafa 
'Legislative, legal and procedural rules are fixed so as not to allow any 
scope for argument or discussion.' 
She uses case marking in 8ubu:tan 'fixed', accusative. She also uses the MSA 
negative marker Ia in Ia yaqbal. 
Now note the following example from programme 2 in the series 'Before 
you are held accountable', in which the male journalist uses the ECA plural 
demonstrative do:/ and follows ECA structure by having the demonstrative 
after rather than before the noun it modifies as in MSA. 

(29) il-fataya:t do:! 
'These girls' 
The MSA counterpart would be 
(30) ha: 'lula: 'li al-fataya:t 
'These girls' 
ARABIC AND GENDER 
167 
In the MSA counterpart the demonstrative precedes the noun. 
4.8.2. 3 Phonological features 
As was said above, some lexical items are shared by both varieties and the only 
factor that causes them to be classified as ECA rather than MSA is that they 
are phonologically ECA. The vowel pattern may be different, or the realisa-
tion of consonants; see example (27) above. 
Note also the following example from programme 2 in the series 'Before you 
are held accountable', in which the female director uses the MSA q instead of 
the ECA glottal stop. 
(31) al-faqr 
'poverty' 
In the following example from programme 2 in the 'Home secrets' series the 
vowel quality marks this word, spoken by the female journalist, as ECA rather 
thanMSA. 
(32) fe:'l 
'something' 
The MSA counterpart would be 
(33) fay'l 
'something' 
4.8.3 Detailed description of the data 
kala:m nawa:rim 'Women talk': Four women from different parts of the 
Arab world discuss current issues in the Arab world and the world in general. 
There is no announcer present. 
Programme 1 broadcast November 2006 
Topic: Religion and tolerance 
Duration: 1 hour and a half 

I68 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Woman 1: Saudi; basically SCA 
Woman 2: Lebanese; basically LCA 
Woman 3: Egyptian; ECA 
Woman 4: Syrian; Syrian Colloquial Arabic (SYCA) 
Programme 2 broadcast December 2006 
Topic: Divorce rates in the Arab world 
Duration: I hour and a half 
Woman 1: Saudi; SCA with insertions ofMSA 
Woman 2: Lebanese; LCA 
Woman 3: Egyptian; ECA with insertions ofMSA 
Woman 4: Syrian; SYCA Arabic with insertions ofMSA 
ma wara:l al-la}Jda:(J 'Beyond events': Four men from different parts 
of the Arab world discuss current events in the world. There is a male 
announcer. 
Programme broadcast December 2006 
Topic: The economic influence of China on the world 
Duration: 1 hour 
Male announcer: ECA 
Male minister offoreign affairs: Basically MSA 
Male economic expert: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Male businessman: ECA with insertions of MSA 
}Jiwa:r ad-dustu:r 'The constitution dialogue': Educated men and women 
from Egypt discuss changes to the Egyptian constitution. Sometimes, there 
are three men and one woman, and sometimes two men and two women. 
There is a male announcer. 
Programme 1 broadcast October 2006 
Topic: The changes in the Egyptian constitution 
Duration: 1 hour and a half 
Male announcer: Basically ECA 
Female professor oflaw: Mixture of MSA and ECA 
Male professor of law: Basically ECA 
Male politician: Basically ECA 
Programme 2 broadcast November 2006 
Topic: Imposing emergency laws in Egypt 
Duration: I hour and a half 
Female announcer: Basically ECA 
Female judge: Basically MSA 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
169 
il-buyu:t ?asra:r 'Home secrets': Usually two men and two women from 
Egypt discuss family problems in Egypt. There is a female announcer. 
Programme 1 broadcast October 2006 
Topic: Women who betray their husbands 
Duration: 2 hours 
Female announcer: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Male psychologist: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Female psychologist: ECA with insertions ofMSA 
Female social worker: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Programme 2 broadcast December 2006 
Topic: The new forms of marriage in the Arab world 
Duration: 2 hours 
Female announcer: Basically ECA 
Female judge: MSA 
Female journalist: Mixture of MSA and ECA 
Male journalist: Basically ECA 
Male writer: Mixture of MSA and ECA 
qabla ?an tu}Ja:sabu 'Before you are held accountable': A group of men 
and women, two and two, usually from Egypt, discuss a current problem with 
religious connotations. There is a female announcer. 
Programme 1 broadcast October 2006 
Topic: Marriage and the treatment of women 
Duration: 2 hours 
Female announcer: Basically MSA 
Male religious scholar: Basically ECA 
Female religious scholar: Mixture ofMSA and ECA 
Programme 2 broadcast December 2006 
Topic: Street children 
Duration: 2 hours 
Female announcer: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Male professor of psychology: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Male journalist: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Female professor of sociology: ECA with insertions of MSA 
Female director: ECA with insertions of MSA21 
If we exclude the women who are not Egyptian, then we are left with 
16 Egyptian women and 13 Egyptian men to compare and contrast for the 
purpose of this study. Tables 4.5 and 4.6 summarise the categories they use. 

I70 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Table 4.5 Male speakers (number: 13) 
Number of speakers 
Code choice 
0 
0 
1 
1 
5 
5 
1 
MSA 
MSA with insertions ofECA 
Basically MSA 
Mixture of MSA and ECA 
Basically ECA 
ECA with insertions ofMSA 
ECA 
Table 4.6 
Female speakers (number: 16) 
Number of speakers 
Code choice 
1 
0 
2 
3 
2 
7 
1 
MSA 
MSA with insertions ofECA 
Basically MSA 
Mixture of MSA and ECA 
Basically ECA 
ECA with insertions ofMSA 
ECA (Egyptian colloquial Arabic) 
Although the tables suggest that there is a difference in the way both men 
and women use MSA - in the programmes analysed, women use more MSA 
than men- because of the limited amount of data, I do not want to draw defi-
nite conclusions. However, it is clear that women do not use less MSA than 
men. 
4.8.3.1 Factors examined 
In addition to the role that language form plays in projection of identity, which 
will be discussed in detail below, the following factors are also important in 
determining the code used by men and women in talk shows: 
Education background: When the announcer presents the participants, 
she or he usually mentions their profession, and whenever the partici-
pants speak, their professions and names are written on the screen. All 
participants have been educated at university level and beyond. 
Intended audience: The programmes are broadcast on the Arab satellite 
dish. Thus the audience is Arabs everywhere, even outside the Arab 
world. 
Subject matter: The subject matter is important in the sense that some-
times women are expected to be experts in specific topics, such as 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
171 
marriage problems or street children. However, there is still a limit to 
the importance of subject mater, since, as will be clear in the data, in 
programmes that discuss a political issue, women can still be assertive. 
This is more dependent on how women perceive themselves, whether 
they perceive themselves as experts in the subject matter or not. This 
is when education also interacts with professional life and form of 
language. 
The role of the announcer: The programme announcers in the pro-
grammes selected play a minimum role and do not interfere in the inter-
action except rarely. These are discussion programmes and usually it is 
up to the participants to take turns. The announcer starts by posing the 
question and rarely interferes after that. 
4.8.3.2 Data analysis 
Eid (2007) posits that the media, especially the broadcasting media, has a large 
role to play in 'negotiating the relationship between the two varieties': MSA 
and ECA. It 'creates in between spaces that serve as excellent sites for the 
negotiation of identities. It does so by bringing public content into the privacy 
of the home and taking private content to the public view to audiences that are 
local and, when aired over satellite channels, global as well.' (2007: 405). This 
is true for the data presented in this study, in which the speakers also use code-
switching to negotiate identity. Talk shows specifically are an opportunity 
for women to compete with men on a professional level and to re-define their 
identity according to context. 
The relation between form and function with regard to the use of MSA is 
highlighted by Holes (2004: 344). He posits that: 
In any passage of Arabic speech, whether monologue or conversation, 
one cannot track, still less make sense of, the moment-by-moment, 
unpredictable changes in language form unless one is also aware of 
co-occurrent changes in the ideational content of the discourse and 
the interpersonal relationships of the participants, as perceived by 
the participants themselves. Changes in the form of what is said are a 
complex set of signals- the rules of which have yet to be worked out-
of these underlying changes. 
Note the following example taken from programme 2 in the series 'Before 
you are held accountable', which is broadcast on the religious channel Iqra? 
'Read' The setting is a garden and, in addition to the female announcer, there 
are two men and two women. One man is a professor of psychology, the other 
is a journalist. One woman is a professor of sociology while the other is the 
director of a non-governmental organisation that takes care of street children. 

I72 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
The topic for discussion is street children. Two participants, one man and one 
woman, hold PhDs. I have chosen this excerpt because it occurs in the middle 
of the talk show, when speakers are supposed to be more relaxed about being 
on television. 
I will use the following abbreviations to refer to the men and women: 
Male professor of psychology: M-P 
Male journalist: M-J 
Female professor of sociology: F-P 
Female director: F-D 
(34) M-P: il-~uhh axha:ru ?e:h fandukum/ I hi-yitkallimu fan il-~uhh/ I 
'How about love? Do they speak oflove?' 
F-D: a:h tahfan hi-yitkallimu fan il-~uhhl fi: minhumyafnifi ?i{a:r al-
zawa:g/ tahfanfil hida:ya h-tih?a ~assa ?inni huwwa illi ~a-yintafilha/ 
lakin il-mafa:fir hardu/ ma-htih?a:-fmustaqirra/ ya dukto:r ha:fim/ 
li?anni hiyya hi-t~ihhu ta~t rfagt mufayyan/ wi wa¢f mufayyan/ lamma 
b-yi#af nadl wi yixli hi: hal ha:oihi al-mafa: fir hi-tatahaddal tam a: man/ 
fayi:gi wa~id ta:nil al-munqio/fayinqioha min wa¢f ?a:xar/ fa t~ihhu 
huwwa/ wa ha:kaoa/ I 
'Yes of course they speak oflove. Some of them speak oflove within the 
frame of marriage. Of course at the beginning the girl feels that the man 
is her saviour. But also, Dr Hashim, her feelings are not stable, because 
she loves him under certain pressure and certain circumstances. When 
the man proves to be a scoundrel and jilts her, these feelings she had for 
him change completely. Then another man comes, who plays the role 
of the saviour who also saves her from another situation. So she falls for 
him and then it goes on like that.' 
M-J: le:hfi hint h-tihrah min it-tafakkuk il-?usari I wifi:h hint hi-tista~ 
mill/ 
'Why is there one girl who runs away from a disintegrated family and 
another who can put up with it?' 
F -P: fa/a ~asah hardu if-fax$iyya illi ?itrahbit guwwa if-hint/ fi ?awwil 
sanawatha/ yafni. 
'This is also dependent on the girl's acquired personality in her first 
years. I mean . 
M-J: yafni hi-taftamid fa/a do:r il-?usra 
'So it depends on the role of the family.' 
F -D: mif far£ ?inn yiku:n it-fifl tift fa:rif I mum kin yiku:n min guwwa 
il-he:t. 
'It is not necessary that the child lives in the street for him to be a street 
child, he can be living with his parents still.' 
M-J:fi ~ala:t kiti:ra giddan lil-tafakkuk/ ?awwalan mumkin il-he:t nafsu 
hardu ... 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
173 
'There are different cases of disintegration. First, maybe the home itself 
is also 
' 
F-D: mumkinyib'la gaww il-be:t fa:rid 
'The atmosphere at home may be repulsive.' 
M-J:fikrat i~-~ala:ba in-nafsiyya/ yafni iHifl bi-yitbammilwalla ma-b-
yitbammil-fi/ fi 'laifa: I fanduhum/ yafni fi hafa.fa fil mawa¢i: f dil wi 
fi 'laifa:l mumkin bi-yistabmilu/ wi yiqawmu/ 'lila 'la: xirul I bas fi ba:ga 
tanyayimkin 'lafa:rit liha dukto:rafahinnda/ wi hiyyafikrat il-faqr/ 
yafni 'listigla:l ha:za il-fa'lr il-mawgu:d fand il-fataya:t do:/. 
'The concept of psychological strength refers to whether the child can 
bear his circumstances or not. There are children 
I mean there are 
children who are weak in that respect. Other children can put up with 
this and can struggle against it etc. but there is something else that 
perhaps Dr Shahinda referred to, which is the concept of poverty. I 
mean taking advantage of the poverty of these girls 
' 
F-D: 'lana baftarid fa/a ha:oa ik-kala:m/ ma~r tu:l fumraha balad 
fa'li:ra. 
'I object to what you have just said. Egypt has always been a poor 
country.' 
M-J: 'lismabi li-bass akammil ig-gumla . 
'Just allow me to finish my sentence 
F-D: wi tu:l fumraha baladfa'li:ra/ fumrina kunna bi-nismaf fan 
banatna fil-fa: rif I I 
'And Egypt has always been a poor country. We never heard of our 
girls living in the streets.' 
M-J: wara:'l kull mustagillfi wa:bid bi-yistagillu/ da tabi:fil lakin 'la:h 
fi tagayyura:t ba~alitfi mugtamafna 'laswa'l b-kti:r giddan min it-tag 
ayyura:t illi ba~alit zama:n/ wil- tafakkuk il-'lusaril 
'Behind everyone who is exploited, there is someone who exploits them. 
This is natural. Yes there are changes that took place in our society, 
changes that are much worse than the ones that happened before and 
also the disintegration of families.' 
F-D: il-'laxras da b-yifaggal hint fandaha 'larbaf sini:n wi huwwa ma-b-
yiftagal-fle:h/ I yafni fayzi:n. 
'Why does this dumb (unable to speak) man make a 4-year-old girl 
work for him while he does not work? So we want 
' 
M-J: 'libna b-nitkallim 'Jan system 'ligtima: fi . 
'We are speaking about a social system 
' 
F-P: ma hiyya il-'lusra mutafakkika/ 
'But it is a disintegrated family.' 
F-D: min 'ligma:li 'larbaftala:ftifl/ ~annafoa bala:t il-faqr faqat/ 
tilif il-fa'lr bas 'larbafa fil-miyya/ al-faqr faqat ka-fa:milwa: bid/ 
ma-fi:-f ba:ga 'lismaha al-faqr faqat/ il-fawa:mil il-'liqti~a:diyya/ mafa 

I74 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
t-tafli:ml il mufamla is-sayyi?al I fadatan lamma titfakkak il-?usral 
fadatan il-fi.flla bi-yuqbal hinal wa Ia bi-yuqbal hinal I 
'We have a total of 4,000 children. We classified cases of poverty only. 
We found that poverty is only 4 per cent. Poverty is only one reason. 
It is not only about poverty. Economic factors in addition to education 
and abuse are important. Usually when the family is disintegrated, the 
child is not accepted by both parties.' 
In this example, the interaction between the two men and women is in fact 
an eye-opener in many respects. The announcer was not really involved in 
the interaction at all. So it was up to the participants to take turns. While the 
dialogue goes back and forth between men and women 17 times, women take 
control of the floor 9 times while men take control of the floor 8 times of the 
interaction. There are two who specifically control the floor, the F-D and the 
M-J, but still it is clear that women in this example are not less assertive than 
men. The interaction starts with the M-P asking the F-Da question about love 
and its importance for street girls. F-D considers herself the expert among all 
participants since she is the director of an organisation that deals directly with 
street children. She gives her answer. It is up to the participants to direct the 
interaction. Then another man, M-J, asks the second question and the inter-
action goes on. F-D is the only woman who asks a question and it is in fact a 
rhetorical one, when she wonders why a dumb man would make a 4-year-old 
girl work for him. Thus, men ask two questions while women only gave prop-
ositions, as F-D does at the end of this example, when she gives numerical 
evidence of cases of poverty between girls to support her argument. 
The women in our example do not hedge. In fact F-D interrupts M-J and 
states clearly that she objects to what he said. While M-J refers to F-P as 'Dr 
Shahindah', his title is never used by any woman. 
One has to bear in mind that these are all well-educated women, and judging 
from the way they dress they are also upper-middle-class women. They are 
still conservative in their outfit: F -D wore a head scarf, while F -P did not, but 
she was still wearing a long-sleeved dress. 
All the speakers in this part use ECA with insertions of MSA. Counting the 
MSA and ECA features used by both men and women revealed no differences 
between them in this talk show. Let us consider in detail some MSA and ECA 
features, whether phonological, morpho-syntactic or lexical. If we consider 
the use of the MSA phonological variable q, we find there is no clear difference 
in its use between men and women in the above example. 
Note that there are words that cannot be pronounced with a glottal stop, 
for example il-?iqti~a:diyya 'economic', which is used by F -D. F -D uses q five 
times and uses the glottal stop twice, as infa?r 'poverty' andfa?i:ra 'poor' 
M-J does not only use q. He uses it once in il-faqr 'poverty' and then he uses 
the glottal stop for the same word. 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
175 
Throughout the data there is no tendency for women to stick to the glottal 
stop while avoiding q. In fact the q occurs 116 times by women and 98 times 
by men in positions which permit either the MSA q sound or the ECA glottal 
stop. This may indicate that women in talk shows use more MSA features 
than men. However, such a postulation needs more data. 
F-0 uses MSA demonstratives, as in: 
(35) ha:oa ik-kala:m, 
dem det-talk 
'what you have just said' 
She also uses MSA negation with an MSA passive verb and an ECA aspect 
marker, the b-, as in 
(36) fadatan if-tift 
Ia 
bi-yuqbal 
Usually det-child 
neg 
asp-msg-
pass-accept 
hina 
here 
hina/ wa 
Ia 
bi-yuqbal 
here/and 
neg 
asp-msg-
pass-accept 
'Usually the child is not accepted by both parties' 
The form of language used by F -D is a marked choice, as Myers-Scotton 
(1998) calls it, that emphasises F -D's identity. It is marked because it occurs 
in a context in which ECA demonstratives were used. Just before she starts 
speaking, M-J used an ECA demonstrative. 
(37) il-fataya:t do:! 
det-girls dem-pl 
F-D considers herself the expert among all participants, and, as is clear in 
the content of what she says, she thinks that she is more knowledgeable than 
the man. Her use of MSA demonstratives is to highlight her disagreement 
with what M-J claims, that poverty is the cause of the increase in the number 
of street children. She interrupts him and states that she objects to what he 
says. She uses the MSA demonstrative system to do that. Also, when stating 
facts about the reasons why some children become street children, she uses the 
MSA negative system as well as the MSA passive form albeit with the ECA 
b-prefix (see example 34). The ECA counterpart would be 
(38) it-tift 
mif bi-yitJabal 
The-child 
neg asp-msg-pass-accept 
'the child is not accepted by both parties' 
hina wa Ia hina 
here and neg here 

I76 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
The choice of MSA features in the woman's speech is related to the identity 
she projects on herself, which is her identity as a social reformist and a director 
of a non-governmental organisation for street children. 
What is also worth mentioning is that M-J uses the English word 'system' 
while neither female switches to English at all. 
Now note the following example from programme 2 in the series 'Home 
secrets', in which a female judge starts speaking in MSA to the audience as 
well as the participants. She wants to make a point that 'secret marriages' and 
'temporary marriages', though they may be widespread in the Arab world, are 
in fact against religion and humanity. Note that she is wearing not just a head 
scarf but also gloves, which are symbols of ultra-conservative Islamic dress. 
(39) Female judge: nabnufi zaman/ furi4a fala l-mar?a ?an tubtaoal/ 
wayugta~ab gasadaha/ wa nabnu gami:fan nabba8/ min an-na:biya 
al-farfiyya/ walla min an-nabya iq-qa:nuniyya/ al-abka:m if'-farfiyya 
wil-qa:nuniyya wil-qada: ?ryya 8a: bita/ 8ubu: tan Ia yaqbal wa Ia gada/ 
wa Ia muna: qafa/ 
'We live at a time when women are expected to be abused, when women's 
bodies are raped, while we are all still investigating whether this is allowed 
according to jurisprudence or law. Legislative, legal and procedural rules 
are fixed so as not to allow any scope for argument or discussion.' 
The female judge in this example uses MSA rather than ECA (except very 
rarely), although the interaction that has been going on was not in MSA. She, 
however, uses MSA morpho-syntactic features like negation, as in 
( 40) Ia yaqbal 
wa 
Ia gada/ 
wa 
Ia muna: qafa 
neg 3msg-accept 
and 
neg argument 
and 
neg discussion 
'not to allow any scope of argument or discussion' 
in contrast to the ECA 
( 41) mif' bi-yi?bal 
wa 
not 
asp-3msg accept 
and 
Ia gada/ 
wa 
Ia muna?Ja 
neg argument 
and 
neg 
discussion 
'not to allow any scope of argument or discussion' 
She also consistently uses the q phonological variable and never the glottal 
stop. Even the pronoun she starts with is an MSA pronoun, nabnu, as opposed 
to the ECA equivalent, ?ibna 'we' 
The fact that the interaction that has been taking place before between the 
female journalist and the male journalist was not in MSA is significant in this 
example. Unlike the female judge, the female journalist's code is categorised 
as a mixture of MSA and ECA, the male journalist speaks basically ECA, and 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
177 
the male writer speaks a mixture of MSA and ECA. The negotiated manner of 
speaking in the programme is not MSA. Thus the female judge's use ofMSA 
represents again what Myers-Scotton (1998) calls a marked choice, a choice 
not expected by the participants or the audience (see Chapter 2). This example 
can also be explained in terms of indexicality, which was discussed in Chapter 
2 and will be defined again here for the sake of clarity: indexicality is a rela-
tion of associations through which utterances are understood. For example, 
if a specific code or form of language presupposes a 'certain social context, 
then use of that form may create the perception of such context where it did 
not exist before' (Woolard 2004: 88). If a code is associated with the authority 
of courtrooms and this code is then used in a different context, it will denote 
authority. The language of the speaker would then be considered an authorita-
tive language (Silverstein 1998: 267 cited in Woolard 2004: 88). This is exactly 
the case in the example of the female judge. By using MSA, a language associ-
ated with authority of several kinds- religious, legal/governmental- as well 
as education, the female judge lays claim to all MSA indexes. These indexes 
can help shape her projection of identity as well. By using MSA the woman is 
assigning herself the elevated status of an authority on the subject matter and 
a religious scholar as well as a legal expert. If one examines the content of what 
she says, one will notice that she is stating facts and giving powerful conclu-
sions. MSA gives her postulations an air of authority. 
She is also assigning herself the role of the commentator on the frame of 
events, the all-knowledgeable, sophisticated, educated woman. 
This is exactly what happens in parliament in Egypt, when a member of 
parliament speaks MSA rather than ECA. By using a code different from the 
one expected and used thus far by other members, which is usually a mixture 
of MSA and ECA, the speaker is also appealing to a specific part of his or her 
identity and laying claims to all MSA indexes. 
Compare the above example to the following one, which is by a male 
member of the Egyptian parliament, given in January 1999 in the People's 
Assembly (Majlis al-Sha'b). The speaker voices his opinion about the sanc-
tions imposed on Iraq. 
The speaker, as it were, removes himself from his surroundings and party 
affiliation, and says that he wants to speak as an Arab and an Egyptian. He 
asks the parliament members as well as the head of parliament to remember 
the famous slogan of Mu~~afa Kamil (1874-1908), the Egyptian national 
hero, who said that one should never make concessions about the rights of 
one's country. The speaker wants to highlight the importance of supporting 
the Iraqis, because they are suffering harsh penalties as a result of sanctions 
which, in his view, are quite unfair. 
(42) b-~ifati ?almuwa:tin sa:mib fafu:r fu¢wi mag/is if-Jafbl ?allaoiyantami: 
?ilafafbi mi~r wa ?ila 1-?umma 1-farabiyya/ wa ?argu ?an taboif?ayyat 

I78 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
?intima:? bizbi li 'law ligayrifil-badi:8 fan haoihi 1-qadiyya/ siya:dat 
ir-ra?i:s leu/lama rattabtu badi:8anfi ha:oa 1-mawrju:f rja:fa minni/ 
faqatl ?ilta~aqa fi oihni ?al?a:n qa:lat/ wa maqu:latl al-wa{ani al-
kabi:r mu~fafa ka:mill findama qa:l/ ?inna manyatasa:mabafi buqu:qi 
bila:dihi wa law marratin wa: bida/ yafi:f ?abad ir!-r!ahr muzafzaf 
il-faqi:da/saqi:mu 1-wigda:n 
'I speak as the citizen Sami]J. 'Ashur, the member of parliament, who 
belongs to the Egyptian people, and to the Arab nation, and please 
disregard my affiliation to any political party, and disregard the affili-
ation of others, when discussing this issue. Speaker, whenever I 
prepare a speech about this topic, I lack the words. There is only one 
thing that still sticks in my mind right now, and that is the saying of 
the great national hero, Mustafa Kamil, when he said, "whoever 
concedes the rights of his country to someone even once, lives ever 
after faltering in his beliefs, and will always remain weak to the 
core" ' 
Note that the speaker himself says that he does not speak as a member of 
parliament belonging to a specific party, but as an Egyptian and an Arab. 
Therefore, he wants people to perceive him as such, with no regard to his 
political affiliations. 
At the beginning, the speaker does not refer to himself by saying 'I am 
Sami]J. 'Ashfir'; he rather starts by 'as the citizen Sami]J. 'Ashfir, the member of 
parliament, who belongs to the Egyptian people, and to the Arab nation.' 
In this speech, the parliamentarian could speak ECA or a mixture of MSA 
and ECA, and this does happen in parliament in Egypt (cf. Bassiouney 2006), 
but he attempts to stick to MSA. The female judge in example (39) likewise 
does not refer to her own personal opinion, but starts with the all-inclusive 
'we' and then starts postulating about women's plight in our time. 
In examples (39) and (42), the use of code is not an arbitrary one. It is a 
result of the role the female judge and the male member of parliament project 
on themselves by using all MSA indexes. He projects on himself the role of 
'the archetypal Egyptian', or 'the archetypal Arab' He is not speaking as an 
individual member of parliament any more, but rather as a kind of 'abstract 
voice' speaking for the historical record. She projects on herself the identity 
of the authoritative figure. They both use a code that reflects their identity. 
Thus, the code used is not related to the gender of the speaker but to the pro-
jection of identity in the part of the speaker. 
Returning to the discussion of programme 2 in the 'Home secrets' series, 
the reply to the female judge does not come from one of the men present but 
from another woman, the famous Egyptian journalist lq bal Barakah. She does 
not use MSA only as the female judge does, although she still uses MSA fea-
tures. Her utterance is categorised as a mixture of MSA and ECA. 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
179 
( 43) Female journalist: il-mugtamaf il-farabi yufa:mil al-marfa ka-fe:? I 
fafe:? 
fabi: fi ?innaha tata[lawwal fi yo:m min il-?ayya:m 'lila silfa tuba: f wa 
tuftaral I il-qawani:n sabtal di mufkilitnal I 
'Arab society treats woman as a thing. So it is quite natural that one day 
women become goods to be bought and sold. Indeed laws are fixed and 
that is our problem.' 
There are ECA features like the demonstratives, as in di mufleilitna 'that is 
our problem' Also, the vowel infe:? is the ECA e: rather than the MSA ay. 
However, the verb is in MSA,yufa:mil 'to treat'; the ECA counterpart would 
be bi-yifa:mil. Once more the switching between ECA and MSA is used to 
draw attention to what is being said. The MSA verb emphasises the point 
made by the female journalist that women are treated as goods in Arab society. 
In fact all the verbs in this extract are in MSA: yufa:mil 'to treat', tatabawwal 
'to become', tuba:f'to be sold' and tuftara 'to be bought'. The last two verbs 
are in the MSA passive form. After she states her facts clearly, she ends her 
postulation with an ECA demonstrative phrase 
( 44) di 
mufleilitna 
dem problem-ours 
'that is our problem' 
ECA here is the marked code since it is juxtaposed with the MSA verbs. 
Code-switching between MSA and ECA serves to get her message through 
more effectively. 
The male journalist is then asked by the announcer to give his opinion. He 
uses less MSA than either women. In fact, by counting MSA and ECA fea-
tures, one can deduce that he uses a variety which is categorised as basically 
ECA. 
(45) Male journalist: ?ana ba-tkallim fan iz-zo:gl tayyib ma 1-sitt hiyya 
ig-guz? it-ta:nil il-wagh it-ta:ni lil-fumla. 
'I am speaking about the husband. But women are also the other half. 
They are the other side of the coin.' 
He uses ECA features like the aspectual marker b in ba-tkallim, and ECA 
lexical items, as in sitt for 'woman' instead of the MSA mar?a. 
The man is then interrupted by the female journalist, who starts defending 
the woman whose problem is being discussed. 
(46) Female journalist: wabid ?usta:o fil gamfa 
'He is [the husband] a university professor.' 

I8o 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
The female journalist observes that the husband who deceived his wife was in 
fact a professor, so he has to take all the blame, and thus it was easy for him to 
deceive a girl and marry her secretly. 
The male journalist then answers: 
(47) Male journalist: ?ibna fandina na:s ma-tfallimit-fwi lakin fandaha 
mabda? 
'There are people who have no education whatsoever but who have 
principles.' 
The male journalist wants to stress that deceiving is not related to level of 
education. He uses ECA negation in ma-tfallimit-f'who have no education' 
Again, this example shows that both men and women manipulate MSA 
and use it as a symbol of their identity, authority and expertise. MSA is also, 
sometimes, juxtaposed with ECA to leave the utmost effect possible on the 
audience. In a study conducted by Bassiouney (2005-9) in which thirty adver-
tisements from national Egyptian television channel (1) were analysed, it was 
concluded that the use of MSA is not related directly to the gender of the 
speaker but rather to the nature of the product and the target demographic. 
Although commercial language is special in nature, it is still important to note 
the linguistic forms used by men and women in relation to the diglossic situa-
tion in Egypt and other Arab countries. 
4.8.3.3 Identity and code choice 
Human identity is defined by Lakoff (2006: 142) as 'a continual work in 
progress, constructed and altered by the totality of life experience. While much 
ofthe work in support of this belief concentrates on the larger aspects ofidentity 
-especially gender, ethnicity, and sexual preferences- in fact human identity 
involves many other categories. Identity is constructed in complex ways, more 
or less consciously and overtly.' Lakoff points to the variability of identity at 
different stages of one's life and in different contexts. One's identity is made up 
of more than one part; a mother can also be a professor, a wife, an administrator, 
a politician, a friend, an Egyptian, a Muslim, an Arab and so forth. As Lakoff 
says, an individual is a member of a 'cohesive and coherent group' as well as an 
individual (2006: 142). Bastos and Oliveira (2006: 188) emphasise the fact that 
identity is both 'fixed' and 'continuous', in the sense that individuals perceive 
themselves differently in various situations or contexts. Identity is also mani-
fested through language use, as is the case in the data analysed. 
When discussing the use of code choice by women, linguists tend to concen-
trate on the disadvantages of women in the public sphere, while ignoring how 
code choice can be used as a means of attaining power by women and asserting 
their identity. Cameron (2005: 496) discusses how women are marginalised 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
181 
globally in public spheres and how women are silenced in public contexts or 
denied access to the 'language literacies and speech styles' needed to enter the 
public domain. Sadiqi (2006: 647), when discussing language and gender in 
the Arab world, postulates that women had to struggle to be able to enter the 
public arena. While this may be true, her other statements are too general. She 
claims that although literate women have a 'less detached attitude' towards 
MSA, they, like illiterate women, are not encouraged to be in the public 
sphere' and use MSA less than men. She also postulates that MSA is the 'male 
domain', since it is the language of the public sphere and the institution. 
The data presented in this study reveals that this may not be the case in 
all contexts and for all Arab women. When women are in the public sphere, 
which occurs frequently in Egypt, especially in the media, they use the oppor-
tunity to establish their status and identity, and MSA is one of the tools used 
by them to define and clarify these. 
In addition, according to Cameron (2005: 139), as people, whether men 
or women, are interacting with one another they are also adopting particular 
'subject positions' and assigning positions to others. Thus, when a woman is 
talking she is also assigning herself a position, such as teacher, expert, pro-
fessional and so forth. She is also assigning positions to the others she talks 
to; she may choose to express solidarity with them, claim distance from them 
or even condescend to them. The definition of subject positions is similar 
to that of identity given by Bean and Johnstone (2004), who contend that 
identity is formed by our experiences and set of memories and, more impor-
tantly, by the projection of our experiences and memories on the way we 
express ourselves. If having an identity requires 'self expression', then indi-
viduals have to resort to all their linguistic resources to express their identity 
(2004: 237). The linguistic resources available to women in the programmes 
analysed include code choice and code-switching. Bolonyai (2005: 16-17) in 
a study of bilingual girls, shows how they intentionally and strategically use 
their linguistic resources to exhibit their power. They use code choice to 
position themselves in a dominant position. This can be done by switching 
to English to show their expertise and knowledge. Switching to English is 
used as a control mechanism and a power display. Switching is also a means 
of asserting their superior identity. Again, this is exactly what women do 
when they switch to MSA in the programmes analysed. 
Finally I will discuss in more detail the second point that the study makes, 
which is that in talk shows Egyptian women can be as assertive as men, if not 
more. 
4. 8. 3. 4 Interruption and assertiveness 
futerruption is different from overlap. futerruption is defined as simultaneous 
talk that involves the violation of rules of turn-taking. It may also convey lack 

I82 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
of care on the part of the interrupter for the face of the other participant. It 
usually takes place in the middle of a clause or sentence rather than at the end. 
Overlap, on the other hand, is not considered a violation of the tum-taking 
system, and could be used to support an argument, as a transition device, or 
to show involvement. It is not usually a contradiction of what has been said 
before, and it takes place at the end of a clause rather than in the middle of it 
(Cheng 2003: 34; see also Tannen 1994; Romaine 1998). While interruption 
can be considered a face-threatening device, overlap is usually a supportive 
device that denotes solidarity. Note also that the notion of interruption pre-
supposes an idealised world in which tum-taking always takes place at the 
end of a clause, which is not always the case in actual conversations (Romaine 
1998; Tannen 1994). 
In example (34), as was said earlier, the announcer was not really involved 
in the interaction at all. So it was up to the participants to take turns. While the 
dialogue goes back and forth between men and women 17 times, women control 
9 times and men control only 8 times in the interaction. There are two who spe-
cifically control the floor, the F -D and the M-J, but still it is clear that women in 
this example are not less assertive than men. This is true for all my data. 
4. 8. 3. 4.1 Difference between overlap and int~uption 
Two examples of overlap follow. 
(48) F-P: fa/a basab bardu if-fax#yya illi ?itrabbit guwwa il-bint/ fi ?awwil 
sanawatha/ yafni. 
'This is also dependent on the girl's acquired personality in her first 
years. I mean 
M-J: yafni bi-taftamid fa/a do:r il-?usra 
'So it depends on the role of the family.' 
This is an example of an overlap rather than an interruption. M-J uses overlap 
to support and clarify what is said by F-P There is no contradiction and 
he speaks after the sentence filler yafni 'I mean' Note also that the speaker 
pauses after yafni. Thus, he does not interrupt F-P in the middle of a clause. 
(49) M-J:.fi bala:t kiti:ra giddan lil-tafakkuk/ ?awwalan mumkin il-be:t nafsu 
bardu. 
'There are different cases of disintegration. First maybe the home itself 
is also 
F-D: mumkinyib?a gaww il-be:t ta:rid 
'The atmosphere at home may be repulsive.' 
This is another example of an overlap. M-J pauses after bardu 'also', and F -D 
clarifies and summarises his point, without any threat to his face. 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
183 
Examples of interruption now follow. 
(50) M-J:fikrat i~-~ala:ba in-nafsiyyal yafni iHifl bi-yitbammil walla ma-b-
yitbammil-filfi 'latfa:l fanduhuml yafnifi hafa.fafil mawa¢i:f dil wifi 
'lat fa: I mumkin bi-yistabmilul wi yiqawmul 'lila 'Ia: xirul I bas fi ba:ga 
tanya yimkin 'lafa:rit liha dokto:rafahinndal wi hiyya fikrat il-faqrl 
yafni 'listigla:l ha:za il-fa'lr il-mawgu:d fand il-fataya:t do:/. 
'The concept of psychological strength refers to whether the child can 
bear his circumstances or not. There are children . 
I mean there are 
children who are weak in that respect. Other children can put up with 
this and can struggle against it etc. but there is something else that 
perhaps Dr Shahinda referred to, which is the concept of poverty. I mean 
taking advantage of the poverty of these girls. 
(this is the first part of a 
clause; the speaker is interrupted before he finishes the sentence).' 
F-D: 'lana ba-ftarid fa/a ha:oa ik-kala:ml ma~r tu:l fumraha baladfa'li:ra. 
'I object to what you have just said. Egypt has always been a poor 
country.' 
M-J: 'lismabi li-bass akammil ig-gumla . 
'Just allow me to finish my sentence 
[This should be modified by 
an adjectival demonstrative di 'this', which the speaker could not say, 
because he was interrupted again.] 
F-D: wi tu:l fumraha baladfa'li:ral fumrina kunna bi-nismaf fan 
banatna fil-fa: rif I I 
'And Egypt has always been a poor country. We never heard of our 
girls living in the streets.' 
M-J is interrupted by F-D twice in the middle of the sentence and she states 
clearly that she objects to his claims. First, M-J realises he is being interrupted 
and he asks her to allow him to finish his sentence. However, F-D interrupts 
him again and continues with her argument that she does not agree with him. 
F-D's assertiveness is clear in her interruptions and her general postulations 
about Egypt. 
(51) F-D: il-'laxras da b-yifaggal bint fandaha 'larbaf sini:n wi huwwa ma-b-
yiftagal-f le:hl I yafni fayzi:n. 
Why does this dumb man make a 4-year-old girl work for him while he 
does not work? So we want 
' 
M-J- 'libna b-nitkallim 'Jan system 'ligtima:fi. 
'We are speaking about a social system 
' 
In this example, M-J interrupts F-D again in the middle of the clause, by 
reminding her of the aim of the conversation that he thinks that F -D may have 
digressed from. 

I84 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Note the following example from programme 1 in the series 'The constitu-
tion dialogue', in which there is only one woman and three men. The woman 
interrupts the man when she does not like what he is saying, and asserts her 
identity by reminding him that she is a professor of law and knows exactly 
what she is talking about. Her assertive way is defined by her interruption and 
by re-stating what he already knows about her occupation. 
(52) Jismab li-1 
Jana 
dokto:rafil-qanu:n 
Allow me/ 
I 
professor in law 
'Excuse me, I am a professor oflaw.' 
Jisma~ li- is not used in this context politely but as a defiance device. The man 
in fact backs down and shows his solidarity by saying: 
(53) laJa l-fafu 
ya dokto:ra. 
No forgiveness 
voc professor 
'Yes of course, forgive me, professor.' 
By using her professional title he is also emphasising her status and acknowl-
edging her power. 
In the last example below, from programme 1 in the series qabla Jan 
tuba:sabu 'Before you are held accountable', which discusses different forms of 
marriage in the Arab world, a male religious scholar seeks help from the female 
announcer because he has been interrupted twice by a female religious scholar. 
(54) Male religious scholar: hiyya bi-tJatifni: dilwaJtilmiJfa:rif akammil 
kala:mil ge:r raJyi al-farf. 
'She is interrupting me. I cannot finish what I am saying. This is differ-
ent from the opinion oflegislative law 
'[First part of a clause] 
(55) Female religious scholar: argu:k tira:gif al-qara:r al-~a:dir fan 
mag/is al-bubu:B al-isla:miyyafil-azhar/ al-laoi: Jursila li wiza:rit 
al-Jadl/ tarak li-Juli: al-amr min manyatawallu:na al-qara:r fi mi~r 
al-battifi ha:oa al-amrl al-raJyi al-laoiya~~a bi-aglabiyya laysa xafaJ 
fa/a 1-mustawa al-farfi: I 
'Please revise the decision of the research syndicate at Al-Azhar 
University, which was sent to the ministry of justice. The decision gave 
members of government the authority to decide the best way of dealing 
with the law. If a suggestion is endorsed by the majority then it cannot 
be wrong in legislative terms.' 
I want to note that words such as argu: k 'please' in (54) or Jisma~ li- 'allow 
me' when used in Egypt in contexts such as talk shows, are not considered 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
185 
Table 4. 7 
Number of interruptions and overlaps initiated by women and men 
Men 
Women 
Speakers 
13 
16 
Interruption initiated by 
27 
33 
Overlap initiated by 
48 
58 
polite terms but rather detaching and challenging ones. On the other hand, 
the expression used by the male politician, al-fafu 'forgive me' in (53), dem-
onstrates negative politeness as defined earlier in this chapter. Table 4. 7 shows 
the total munber of interruptions and overlaps initiated by men and women in 
all the data analysed in my study. 
As in the example of Moroccan women bargaining, Egyptian women on 
talk shows do not appeal to solidarity but rather to power. They are indeed 
assertive. 
I have not analysed interruption and assertiveness in detail here but rather 
wanted to give the reader a feel of the linguistic situation. I also wanted to 
argue that women and men are not two independent/homogeneous entities. 
They interact on a daily basis and when they do, it is not always gender that is 
the governing factor. 
4.8.4 Conclusion 
In this study I argue that, first, there is a direct relation between the code used 
by speakers and the projection of identity which is manifested clearly in the 
examples analysed. Therefore, it is not possible to measure the frequency of 
MSA features in the speech of women in the public sphere without under-
standing which part of their identity they appeal to. Moreover, this is true for 
both men and women. The women in the programmes are as educated and 
as exposed to MSA as the men and they do not have any problem in using 
MSA. 
Second, code-switching is used by both men and women as a linguistic 
device to leave the utmost effect possible on the audience. Thus when switch-
ing minimises the costs and maximises the rewards of the speaker, the speaker 
resorts to it, since, as Myers-Scotton claims, this is the main aim of the speaker 
in most cases (Myers-Scotton 1993: 110; 2006). Assertiveness goes hand in 
hand with the projection of identity on the part of the speaker. 
The diglossic situation in Egypt can be used by women to show their 
authority and expertise and to appear emphatic and assertive. Once more I 
want to emphasise that in this study I do not aim at making generalisations, 
but rather at questioning them. Although talk shows are a special kind of data, 
they still represent women in the public sphere. 

I86 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
4·9 THE SYMBOLIC USE OF LANGUAGE 
The symbolic significance oflanguage has been and will be discussed through-
out the book. In fact, most acts of language choice by both men and women 
are a symbolic act of some sort. If, for example, women are seen in a culture 
as a symbol of tradition and the transmitters of history, then they may want 
to preserve this role by using a specific variety, and not necessarily the most 
prestigious one. 22 Miller (2004) posits that in established Arab cities where the 
old urban vernacular has been replaced by a new one, it is older women who 
retain linguistic features of the old dialect. Still, in other situations oflanguage 
contact and change, young women tend to acquire features faster than do older 
women. Eckert (1998) states that one cannot make a generalisation like the one 
that posits that women are more or less conservative than men; it is only that 
women use 'symbolic resources' more than men to 'establish membership and 
status' (1998: 73). It could also be that women evaluate and use the symbolic 
resources differently. 
An interesting example of the symbolic use oflanguage is that by women in 
the Thonga community in South Africa; they are more respected in traditional 
Thonga culture than in Zulu culture. It is thus not surprising that they use 
the less prestigious language, Thonga, as a way of rebelling against the loss of 
power and respect which is associated with Zulu for them. Men, on the other 
hand, use the more prestigious Zulu language (Herbert 2002: 321-4). 
In a study conducted by Hoffinan (2006) about Berber language use by 
women, it is women who have the role of maintaining Berber and preserv-
ing it. Before discussing Hoffman's study in detail, I will first give some 
background information about the linguistic situation in Morocco, which is 
discussed in detail in Chapter 5, but which needs to be outlined here. 
According to Sadiqi (2003a: 218-29) the languages/varieties used in 
Morocco and their associations are as shown in Table 4.8. 
Sadiqi divides the use of language between men and women according to 
domains and contexts. It is appropriate in specific contexts to use a specific 
variety or language and in others to use another. 
According to Hoffman, at a time when political and economic factors shape 
women's linguistic practices, it is still rural Berber women who carry the 
burden of speaking the language and remaining monolinguals. If the language 
is to continue, it falls to women to pass it on because they are monolingual 
caregivers. The Tashelhit language community of south-western Morocco 
was specifically examined. Tashelhit Berber speakers reside in the Anti-Atlas 
mountains and Sous valley. Note that in public it is urban Berber men, who 
are usually bilingual in Arabic (Standard and colloquial) and Berber languages, 
who are the prominent figures in the Amazigh rights movement for valoris-
ing and preserving the language (Demnati 2001, cited in Hoffinan 2006: 146). 
The reasons why these women are practically monolingual and do not speak 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
187 
Table 4.8 Languages and varieties used in Morocco and their gender 
associations 
MSA 
The language of the 
high institution and 
usually associated 
with men rather than 
women because 
of the contexts in 
which it is used, and 
in which men play a 
prominent role. 
Moroccan colloquial 
Arabic 
The language 
associated with both 
men and women. 
It is used in the 
public and private 
domains. It is used 
in the media, in 
trade transactions, 
in education, in 
television soap 
operas and in films. 
Berber varieties 
The language 
associated with 
women. There are 
more monolingual 
women who speak 
Berber varieties 
only than men. This 
may be due to the 
high illiteracy rate 
of women compared 
to men, to the use of 
Berber by mothers 
to their children, 
and to its association 
with home, folk 
culture and personal 
identity for Berbers 
in general. Men still 
use Berber but they 
are mostly bilingual 
in Berber languages 
and Moroccan 
Arabic. However, 
the contexts in 
which Berber 
languages are used 
are associated more 
with the private 
sphere, home and 
nostalgia than with 
the public one. 
French 
The language 
associated with men and 
women. It is a language 
linked to financial 
gain and economic 
opportunities. Note 
that urban upper and 
middle class men 
associate French 
with business and 
administration, while 
urban upper-middle 
class women associate 
it with everyday use 
and socialisation. 
any Arabic, although this in fact affects their access to resources, is because of 
the closer relation they have to the land. In the Anti-Atlas mountains, women 
are the agriculturalists and men are considered Wlfit to farm, but more suited 
for clean city work (2006: 156). Note that although men are not attached to 
the land they are still attached to the language, since it serves as a symbol of 
belonging to a tribe and a community. 
Hoffman discusses the example of a study done on Mexican Nahuatl 
women by Hill and Hill (1986; Hill1987), in which it was demonstrated that 
women use their heritage language more than men and are expected to do so 
by both men and women. The same is true for the Berber women analysed. 

I88 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
They use fewer Arabic loan words and borrowings than men even when they 
are familiar with Arabic, especially in counting and identifying colours, two 
domains where Arabic prevails with males. These women are 'romanticised' 
by men and considered the carriers of heritage. Their language is seen as pure. 
They use high pitch and loud volume index, seen as denoting femaleness, con-
fidence, boldness, assertiveness and bravado (Hoffman 2006: 158, 159). These 
are all features that are supposed to be lacking in Arab women. Such features 
are used in popular music, as performed by Fatima Tabaamrant, where high 
pitch indexes and a roughness in women are admired. Although females in 
that community are seen as being authentic, they are also known for having 
very poor schooling, and being completely detached from the Arabic-speaking 
community, which may be economically superior. 
In a similar vein, the following study conducted by Walters is an example of 
a study that reveals how language can be used as one of the symbolic resources 
for women. Walters (1996b), in his paper 'Gender, identity, and the politi-
cal economy of language', studies a diglossic community and a bilingual one 
simultaneously. He studies foreign wives coming from England, Canada or 
the USA married to Tunisian men and living in Tunisia. These wives have 
integrated themselves into a new community. To some extent their status in 
this community is predetermined by certain factors, such as them being native 
speakers of English and their husbands' position in this community, as well as 
their in-laws' positions. However, there is still room for these women to shape 
and modify their status. The language used for communication can serve as 
one of the symbolic means of modifying a status. 
The women have three if not four options. There is the option of not learn-
ing any new language and communicating in English, which is not practical. 
There is the option of learning MSA, and there is also the option of using 
French, which is supposed to be the language of educated Arabs in Tunisia, 
thus the more prestigious language than TCA; or they can use the Tunisian 
colloquial dialect, which is in practice the best instrumental language available 
to them for their daily lives. By learning TCA they can do their shopping, com-
municate with their in-laws, and get involved in Tunisian culture in different 
ways and probably to different degrees. The women generally spoke French 
well. Some also knew some TCA, in response to the linguistic demands and 
possibilities of daily personal and professional life, in ways that are profoundly 
linked to their class positions and family situations as well as their status as 
educated native speakers of English. French, on the other hand, was associ-
ated with economic market forces and economic pressure, since French could 
enable them to find jobs, or perhaps because for them French is more related 
to English and thus easier to learn - French is a Romance language written 
in Roman script, unlike Arabic (MSA and TCA), which is a Semitic lan-
guage. Besides, there are no sufficient teaching facilities for Tunisian Arabic, 
unlike, for example, SA, which, as was said earlier, may be another option for 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
189 
these women. The interesting thing about this study is that these women are 
expected to learn Tunisian Arabic to interact with family and friends, but some 
still prefer French as a symbolic means ofkeeping their distance and not getting 
involved in family conflicts. French also serves as a symbol of their power and 
prestige. One of the goals of the study was to highlight the differences in 
outcome despite the similarities in the social positions of these women. 
Hoffman claims that women in general as both individuals and members 
of groups either initiate language change, by adopting an instrumental lan-
guage and abandoning their ancestral one, as occurred in Gal's study of 
Austria ( 1978a), or decide to take on the role of authentic symbols of herit-
age. They become so not just through language but also through their dress 
codes, cooking and songs. The situation Hoffinan describes is similar to that 
of female Peruvian Quechua speakers. These women can keep their hold and 
control over their status in their communities by maintaining the language (cf. 
Harvey 1994: 55). 
It is worth noting that women's use of language may be symbolic in some 
cases, but, women themselves could be regarded as a symbol, and this is 
reflected in language. For example, in literature, poetry and songs, Egypt 
is presented as a woman whose honour men have to fight to reclaim or pre-
serve (Baron 2005: 47). The city of Beirut is portrayed as a woman in Nizar 
~bbanfs poem with the title 'Bayliit: sitt al-dunya' 'Beirut, mistress of the 
world' Related to this, Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (2004: 167) suggest 
that women are usually appointed to jobs that enhance a company's symbolic 
image, such as those of a secretary, flight attendant or receptionist. Being 
regarded as a symbol themselves implies that women are expected also to pre-
serve the symbol by different means and some of these means, are related to 
language use and maintenance. 
So far, all these studies have concentrated on women. Indeed, as will 
become clear in Chapter 5 below, language is a powerful symbol for both men 
and women. 
For example, Eisikovits (1987) analysed the speech of working-class male 
adolescents in Sydney, and found that there is a change in their language when 
talking to close friends of the same age and when talking to the interviewer. 
With the interviewer they use even more non-standard forms intentionally as 
a symbol of their independence and anger at the social norms. They talk 'with 
defiance and bravado' (1987: 56-114). 
To conclude, I will highlight the points discussed: 
The association of women with tradition is not absolute but can change, 
in the same way as women's role in a specific community is subject to 
change. 
The linguistic choices available to women are also not absolute but are 
limited by a number of factors, such as their access to a language or 

190 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
variety, the context and domain in which they can use this language or 
variety, and their ability to learn a different language or variety (as is the 
case with the Anglophone wives of Tunisian men discussed above). 
Language can be used as a symbolic resource for both men and women, 
although women have been studied more than men in relation to 
language. 
4· I 0 
G END E R UN IVERS A L S R E- EXAMINED 
If we re-examine the gender universals discussed by Hobnes (1998), then 
indeed we will find that in the Arab world, as is the case in the west and indeed 
in all cultures of the world, women are still subordinate to men in one way 
or another, and this fact is reflected in language use. However, it is wrong to 
assume that women do not fight directly or indirectly in all cultures to assert 
their power, perhaps sometimes in an unexpected way. 
Kharraki's (2001) study about Moroccan women bargaining and being less 
polite than men challenges one language universal. Likewise, data presented 
on Egyptian women and men in talk shows exemplifies how women can inter-
rupt, challenge and control the floor as much as men if not more. Again, this 
challenges another language universal. 
There are numerous ways in which women in the Arab world can invoke 
power. One of them is age. Eckert (2003: 369) alludes to the fact that gender 
has to be studied in relation to age. Arab women in general gain status by 
aging. Abu-Lughod (1987) mentioned, for example, that Bedouin women 
in the western desert in Egypt tend to show their faces more and veil less 
when they have higher status or when they are older. A mother's status is 
much higher than a young woman's. The formidable power of mothers in the 
Arab world is reflected in language to a great extent. Mothers, by praying for 
or cursing their children, are thought to be able to give happiness or inflict 
misery. This is indeed done through language. A mother can pray for her 
son and her prayers are believed to have the utmost effect, and the opposite 
is likewise true. To give an example, a 1960s Egyptian fibn called al-Shumii 
al-sawda, ('Black candles') asserts the linguistic power of mothers. The fibn 
is about a blind poet who cannot save his girlfriend from capital punishment 
because of his blindness, which was the result of an accident. In a moment of 
despair, the blind poet starts saying to his mother desperately and tearfully 
that this is the first time in his life that he feels disabled and weak. He breaks 
down and starts cursing his fate. At that point the mother is moved, and 
looking into the sky she says: 
(56) ya rabbi dafwa min ?alb fumru ma foqad il- Jamal wala il-?ima:n bi: k' 
Voc God/ prayer from heart never neg lost the hope nor the-faith in-you 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
191 
'Oh God. This is a prayer from a heart that never lost hope or belief in 
you.' 
Two minutes later in the film, the blind poet looks at his hands and screams, 
'I can see! I can see my hand!' Although this may sound absurd to a westerner, 
most Egyptians do not find the events absurd at all, but very believable. In 
a quarrel between a mother and her children, a mother can always issue the 
threat of cursing her children, which is almost as effective as issuing them a 
threat of death. Thus words spoken by a mother are powerful and must be 
taken seriously. 
In the classic Egyptian novel al-Watad ('The tent peg'), by Khayrl Shalabl 
(1986), we have a powerful, rural, illiterate mother who holds the family 
together. Even though the husband is alive, he is never in the forefront; 
decisions are taken mainly by the mother. The mother's power is reflected 
through her language choice. Since in literature a writer can redefine reality 
with impunity, in the last chapter of the novel the uneducated peasant mother, 
Fa~imah, speaks in MSA. The children reply to her in ECA, although we 
know that this could not have happened in reality. Because it would be almost 
impossible for an uneducated, peasant mother on her deathbed to start speak-
ing pure MSA, Egyptian readers also take this use of MSA to be indicative 
of the power mothers have; recall the discussion of the association of MSA 
with authority. Similarly, the son's reply is always in ECA since he does not 
have any power over the mother. Note the following example, in which the 
eldest son tries to placate the mother by telling her not to take what his young 
brother said seriously: 
(57) 
f.S~ ~~I~ 
J4 4..&. 4,w .. u-ii 46. 1:1 ~I~ t,l-
~alli fa/a in-nabi: 
ya 
l}agga ba'la! 
si:bik 
minnu/ 
Pray for the-prophet 
voc 
l_tagga be/ 
leave-you 
from-him 
huwwa 
yafni 
ik-kala:m 
fale:h 
gumruk/ 
he 
mean 
the-talk 
on-him 
customs 
'Invoke God's blessing on the Prophet, hajja, please do not think of 
what he said. He is just saying nonsense. His words do not count.' 
The elder son tries to calm his mother by asking her to invoke God's blessing 
on the Prophet and not to take heed of what her younger son said in moments 
of anger. He speaks in ECA. By asking her to pray to the Prophet he takes the 
initiative in the reconciliation that the mother seems to refuse by replying in 
MSA. 
It is noteworthy that the son does not address his mother as 'mother', but 
as l}agga, (although she has not made the l}ajj, 'pilgrimage'), which brings us 
back to the power and status affiliated to terms of address. In contrast to the 
'mister master' situation that we discussed in section 4.5, here it is the son 

192 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
who acknowledges his mother's power and status, which she gained by age 
and which makes her not just a mother but a bajja. The relation is in fact 
very formal, and it is the son who cares about preserving her face and not vice 
versa. 
The mother then starts telling her children her life story and her achieve-
ments; all this is done in MSA. 
(58) .:fol r!.J .• ..s.Jil '*.J ~ 
.J .. ~ 
~~ c:::'.JJ .)c. w.,iil_,. 'J l_,;ts .. w'.;~ J.»- -,A.J .;l.lll .» ..:..J..;..J .lAL 
!4J t\;~ 'J U.) ..:..li (!.JJii Uf. ~"j ,.S~ Jl.i .J .. ..:..I.J~ .J l.;~i ~ 
.;.)i .. ~~ 
laqad 
daxaltu 
ha:oa ad-da:r 
wa 
hiya muga"ad gudra:n/ 
Already enter-
this 
the-house and she only 
walls 
lsg-perf 
ka:nu: 
Ia: 
yuwa:fiqu:n fala zawa:g 
'labi:kum minni: I 
be-3mpl-
neg 3mpl-agree 
on 
marrtage father-
from-me 
perf 
yours 
wa 
kuntu 
wabi:dat 
'labawayyi/ 
and 
be-lsg-perf lonely 
parents-mine 
wa lam 'lakun falla:~a/ fazaraftuhuma: 'lafga:ran wa xutf 
rawa:t 
and neg lsg-be peasant/ plant-lsg-they trees-ace and vegeta-
bles 
wa 
qa:la 
gaddukum 
li-'labi:kum/ 
kay fa 
and 
say-3msg-perf grandfather-
to-father-your-
your-pi 
pl 
how 
tatazawwag 
hint 
'l armata 
Ia: 
fa: 'lila /aha: I 
2msg-marry 
girl 
widow 
neg 
family to-her 
'I had come to your grandfather's house when it was just walls. They 
did not approve my marriage to your father. I was an only child and I 
was no peasant then. Since then, I have planted trees and vegetables. 
Your grandfather then asked your father how he can marry a mere 
widow with no family.' 
This is an example of the hidden power of women in Egypt. Women may 
compensate for the loss of power in some contexts by asserting their power in 
others, e.g. with their children. Again, although this is a piece of fiction, it is one 
that tries to mirror society and a countryside community, in which the mother 
runs the household and presumably, though not realistically, speaks MSA. 
In different contexts women may have more power than men. As the 
studies above show, in Morocco women seem to be more assertive in bargain-
ing than men. For example, in Egypt a woman with her male driver has more 
power and can be more assertive than her husband. So while with a husband 
the women may or may not abide by all the universals discussed above, like 
hedging, using tag questions, interrupting less, caring about face etc., this may 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
193 
not be the case with a son, a subordinate man or a vendor. With what women 
consider their social inferiors they manage face differently. More studies are 
definitely needed to examine the language of women in different contexts. 
Also, in some parts of the Arab world there is a hierarchy that cannot be 
ignored which may depend on tribe, class, education etc. 
Another way in which women can reclaim their power is by reversing old 
sayings to their benefit. Hachimi (200 1) gives the example of Moroccan women 
who are now aware of the sexist implications offolk wisdom in Morocco. They 
reverse the meaning of old sayings. For example, klma dlfyalat 'women's 
word', which is an expression that is used to mean that a woman's promise 
cannot be taken seriously, is now used by women in Morocco to emphasise 
that a promise will be carried out beyond doubt. 
Indeed language universals are culture- or community-specific to a great 
extent, in the same way as politeness strategies and face-threatening strategies 
are also both culture- or community-specific and context-specific. 
I will conclude this section with a quotation from Kapchan (1996: 2), who 
conducted an anthropological study on women who work in the market in 
Beni Mellal, a provincial capital in Morocco with a population of 350,000. 
Kapchan concluded that women use the same linguistic strategies to gain 
power and status as men in the market. She posits about one of the women 
who sell goods in the market: 
She speaks of the cure of the viscera. She ingests her product on the 
spot to demonstrate its safety and efficacy, and offers her audiences 
samples. She swears by God, invokes the authority of the written 
word, and encourages her audience to put their belief in the herbs and 
to leave the rest, the responsibility to her. Her presence in the Suq is 
anomalous. She is a mother and breadwinner, aggressive and crafty in 
the skills of the marketplace. She speaks to men as well as to women 
forthrightly and with authority, using public genres of speech. 
4· I I 
C 0 N C L US I 0 N 
Analysts, studying the relation between language and gender, should begin 
with the assumption that gender will rarely stand alone but will interact in 
complex ways with other social variables, both fixed and flexible, such as 
class, education, ethnicity etc. Likewise, they should assume that the range 
of behaviours engaged in by women and men are not independent- no more 
Mars and Venus- but overlap and are highly contextualised. 
In comparing and contrasting sources and methods used to study gender by 
linguists, it has been concluded that the sources used by linguists in the Arab 
world are varied to some degree, (from obituaries to women in the market), 

I94 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
but much research remains to be done. For example, we need more studies 
that examine job interviews, like the one that examines verbal interactions 
between men and women using recordings of several job interviews in Dutch 
companies (Bogaers 1998). Studies that concentrate on the media and how 
women are represented there linguistically are also needed. 
When it comes to the methods used in studying language and gender, one 
finds that linguists studying the Arab world use the same techniques as their 
western counterparts: they concentrate on quantitative studies, they use social 
correlates and statistics, and finally they also try to overcome the observer's 
paradox ( cf. Coates 1993 for an overview of some western studies on gender). 
However, the linguists discussed above, as well as others studying gender in 
the western world, could not overcome the observer's paradox completely. As 
Haeri ( 1992: I 06) posits, 'Investigating interactions between iconic values based 
on sex differences and social structure is an inherently difficult task, and the 
data that would be required to examine completely the issue are not available.' 
In addition, linguists studying language and gender need to expand their 
horizons and include more studies that examine gender in relation to code-
switching, for example, like the study done by Walters ( 1996b) in Tunisia, and 
indeed the diglossic situation should be considered more in studies done on 
the Arab world. Further, pragmatic studies that examine the language of men 
and women in relation to politeness are needed. For example, Keating (1998) 
studied women's roles in constructing status hierarchies, by examining hon-
orific language in Pohnpei, Micronesia. Similar studies need to be done on the 
Arab world; although Arabic does not have true honorifics, it has other means 
of showing status and hierarchies. 
It was also concluded in this chapter that there are two main approaches to 
studying gender from a linguistic perspective. The binary approach to gender 
assumes that men and women, because of the way they are brought up and 
treated in their community, are two different groups and as such there are dif-
ferences in their linguistic performances. The construction approach assumes 
that men and women together form and are formed by a community, which in 
tum is constructed and modified by independent, fixed and flexible variables. 
Individuals, whether men or women, within this community project an iden-
tity on themselves which is usually reflected in their linguistic performance. 
These two approaches are summarised in Charts 4.1 and 4.2. 
The myth of men and women as two altogether different entities exists 
because we nourish it. Reality is different but indeed also shaped by the myth 
(cf. Cameron 2008). 
When discussing politeness, names and terms of address, and women as 
narrators, it was clear that extra-linguistic independent variables, both fixed 
and flexible, can help explain the sociolinguistic performance of both men 
and women. Evidence from data from talk shows, as well as evidence from 
different studies that concentrate on the performance of women in the Arab 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
I95 
Binary 
approaches to 
gender 
I 
I 
I' 
....., 
' 
/ 
' 
I' 
' 
The deficit theory 
The dominance 
The difference 
Quantitative 
theory 
theory 
variation research 
' 
../ 
\.., 
./ 
Chart 4.1 
Binary approaches to gender studies 
' 
Construction approaches 
to gender 
\.., 
./ 
I 
' 
Community of practice 
Interplay of 
Projection of identity 
theory 
independent variables 
approach 
such as age, ethnicity and 
tribal affiliations 
./ 
./ 
Chart 4.2 
Construction approaches to gender studies 
world, reveals the intricate nature of concepts such as politeness and variation 
in language use. 
The social status of women continues to change, especially in the Arabic 
world, as the result of the exposure of women to the outside world, education, 
work etc. (cf. Haeri 1996a; Kapchan 1996; Daher 1999; Sadiqi 2003a). 
NOTES 
1. Countries like Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates depend largely on a huge 
number ofimported workers, some from elsewhere in the Arab world and some from poorer 
developing countries. 

Ig6 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
2. The 1952 revolution will be discussed in detail in ChapterS. 
3. Baron (2005) highlights the problem of translating terms such as honour, faraf, from 
Arabic. The term honour may entail high rank, nobility, distinction, dignity etc. Arabs use 
the term honour to refer to national honour. For example, it is common for a country to be 
seen metaphorically as a woman whose honour has to be preserved by its citizens. 
4. Whether it was the norm at the beginning of the twentieth century for women to address 
their husbands as mister+ first name is difficult to prove. In Egyptian films of the 1930s and 
1940s, women are divided into those who use a term of address when addressing a husband 
and those who do not. Men are also divided into those who use terms of address with or 
without the wife's first name and those who do not. There are examples of men using terms 
such as l}agga 'one who does the pilgrimage', 'lumm 'mother'+ first child's name, and ha:nim 
'lady' with no first name attached to it; cf. note 6 below. 
5. It was established earlier that women in the Arab world are not powerless and there are 
different kinds of power. However, the example from Mahfouz is indeed exaggerated and 
shows an extreme case of tyranny on the part of men. 
6. In Egyptian films of the 1930s and 1940s, aristocrats never addressed their wives by their 
first names but as ha:nim 'lady' or the like; cf. note 4 above. 
7. It is worth noting that witchcraft and magic are more common in Mrican Arab countries 
than Asian Arab ones. Thus, Morocco, Egypt, Tunisia and Sudan specifically rely more 
on these forces and devise ways of dealing with them than do Gulf countries. This may be 
related to the African identity of these countries more than their Arab one. 
8. Pre-Islamic poetry usually starts with predictable themes, such as a man praising his tribe or 
his sword, which is a symbol of his strength, pride and honour. In addition, a poet usually 
recalls the glorious past with nostalgia and feels sad for the loss of home and family. 
9. see Chapter 3 for a discussion of communities, language variation and religion. 
10. Unrequited love is one of the most prevalent themes of Arabic popular music. 
11. David: in Arabic, dawu:d would be the name used. Although Muslims could refer to David 
as well, since he is mentioned in the Qur'an as one of the Prophets, Jews possibly refer to 
him more frequently. 
12. It is difficult for someone who is not a Bedouin to have an insider status. She, however, 
shares specific characteristics with the Bedouins such as her Arab origin and her religion. 
She had also been familiar with the culture of the Bedouins early on when she travelled 
with her father. Being an 'insider' in a Bedouin society is a complex issue (cf. AI-Torki and 
EI-Solh 1988). 
13. Both Abu-Lughod and Haeri were women and both were culturally Muslim. 
14. Since this community practises polygamy, a senior wife is usually the oldest and first wife 
of the man and is usually given more status than other wives. 
15. Examples of this form are: yif[af 'to go out, or climb the stairs', yifrab 'to drink' ,yijla~ 'to 
open' 
16. In all the above studies a standard language, whether German, Spanish or English, is basi-
cally equivalent to the most prestigious variety in Arab countries, that is, Cairene Arabic in 
Egypt, Damascene Arabic in Syria etc. In fact, in the Arab world there is only one standard, 
which is MSA as opposed to the different vernaculars. 
17. Note that this is a study oflanguage change and not just of variation. 
18. Studies that concentrate on the lexical variation between men and women include Hurreiz 
(1978), which compares and contrasts the use of specific expressions by men and women 
in formal and informal situations in Khartoum. Morpho-syntactic studies include Jabeur's 
(1987) study of diminutives in the urban dialect ofRades. In addition, Owens and Bani-
Yasin (1987), in their study of the Bani Yasin tribe of Jordan, examined the use of concord 
in the speech of men and women. Phonetic, phonological and prosodic features have been 

ARABIC AND GENDER 
197 
studied by a number oflinguists. For example, the consonant q used in Arabic and its reali-
sations have been studied by Kanakri (1984) in relation to Jordanian Arabic. Jabeur (1987) 
in his study ofRades also examined the realisation of q as q in the urban dialect and as gin 
the rural one. 
19. For a full description of the phenomenon see Fleisch (1971). 
20. This study does not analyse inter-dialectal communication, communication between people 
who speak different dialects in the Arab world. This is indeed a topic worth a study of its 
own. 
21. Note that the speakers do not necessarily accommodate their speech to that of the announc-
ers. Thus, the accommodation theory (Giles et al. 1987), though relevant in any kind of 
communication, does not play a major role in this study. 
22. It is worth noting that women will not necessarily accept the role assigned to them by a 
community. There may be a difference between what women really do with language and 
what they are expected to do. 

CHAPTER 5 
Language policy and politics 
Standard Arabic speaking: 
They have accused me of bareness in the prime of my youth. 
I would that I were barren, so that I should not suffer the 
words of my enemies. 
I have encompassed the book of God in word and meaning. 
And have not fallen short in any of its verses and exaltations. 
I am the sea; in its depths pearls are hidden. 
Have they asked the diver for my shells? 
I see the people of the west full of power and might. 
And many a people have risen to power through the power of 
their language. 
l:lafi~ Ibrahim (1871-1932) 
In his poem about Arabic, by which he meant SA, I:Iafi~ Ibrahim sums up the 
feelings of the majority of Arab intellectuals about the language. Arab govern-
ments in their struggle for freedom from colonising powers often appealed 
to language as a shield for their identity. 1 It is indeed true that the power of 
language reflects the power of its people. Still, the struggle is not always fair, 
nor is it always fruitful. In February 2007, the Arab League held a confer-
ence to discuss the future of SA with emphasis on teaching it to children. 
The conference was the collaborative work of many parties: the Arab Council 
of Childhood and Development, the Arab League (AL), the Arab Gulf 
Programme for United Nations Development Organisation, UNESCO, the 
Kuwaiti Fund for Arab Economic Development, and the Islamic Organisation 
for Education, Science and Culture (ISESCO). The reporter of the event 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
199 
for al-Ahram Weekly wrote "'The Arab Child's Language in the Age of 
Globalisation", a three-day conference held at the Arab League last week, 
focused on the role of language in shaping identity and how to promote its 
unity among future generations' (Abdel Moneim 2007). Indeed, the confer-
ence echoed words written powerfully by I:J.afi? Ibrahim (above) almost a 
century earlier. 
Note that throughout this chapter the distinction between MSA and CA 
will not be maintained and both will be referred to as SA. This is because this 
chapter deals mainly with ideologies related to identity, politics and language 
policy, and since native speakers do not make this distinction it would be both 
confusing and imprecise to make it in this chapter specifically. 
5.1 THE POWER OF LANGUAGE 
Language can be used as an instrument for communication, but it can also 
be used as a symbol of one's identity. If we just think oflanguage as a means 
of communication then we underestimate its power. Language policies may 
reflect a conflict within a country or may trigger one. Thomason (2001) 
mentions the fact that many a time an armed conflict is caused by language 
policies. For example, in 1976 there were anti-Apartheid riots in Soweto, a 
township outside Johannesburg, in South Africa. The riots were triggered by 
a government decision to enforce the law that required the use of Afrikaans 
as a medium of instruction in some schools. In Sri Lanka there were also riots 
triggered by the conflict about the use of Sinhalese and the use of Tamil. 
According to Thomason, 'Language serves as a powerful symbol for discon-
tented groups' (2001: 47).2 
This symbolic significance of language can help explain why advocates for 
SA, which is not the spoken dialect of any Arab country, struggled to main-
tain it amidst colonisation, modern technology and globalisation. Yet the path 
of SA advocates was not always smooth, and the differences among different 
Arab countries in their attitudes towards it are as different as the history and 
environment of each country. 
To be able to appreciate fully the discussion on language policy in the Arab 
world, one has to resort to political science, sociology, psychology, anthro-
pology and history as well as sociolinguistics. However, this chapter aims 
to give a snapshot of different language policies in the Arab world, imple-
mented ones and even unimplemented ones, and of the ever-evolving relation 
between language, ideology, nation and state in the Arab world. The chapter 
starts (section 5.2) with a definition oflanguage policy. Section 5.3 examines 
the general concept of nation and juxtaposes it with that of state. Then the 
relation between the Arab nation and language is discussed. Because both 
ideologies and policies in the Arab world have been shaped by the history of 

200 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
colonisation in the area, mainly British and French colonisation, in section 
5.5 I compare and contrast French and British patterns of colonisation and 
their impact on ideology and policies. Some countries are examined in detail: 
Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Sudan, Israel and the 
Palestinian territories. The linguistic situation in Libya and the Gulf coun-
tries is also referred to (section 5.6), and in section 5.7 there is a discussion of 
Arabic language academies and their main objectives. Section 5.8 provides a 
case study of two interviews with two presidents of Arab countries Syria and 
Yemen. The relation between SA and politics is highlighted in this section. 
Section 5. 9 concentrates on the concept of linguistic rights with reference to 
the Arab world, and finally English and globalisation are discussed in section 
5.10, before the conclusion to this chapter. 
Note that Arab countries are diglossic, as was mentioned in Chapter 1. 
This will again add more complexity to the language policies adopted in the 
Arab world. The languages in competition for official status may include a 
colloquial, SA, a foreign language and/or a language spoken by a significant 
minority such as Berbers in Morocco. However, in the twenty-three countries 
in which Arabic is the sole or joint official language, it is SA that has this status 
rather than any of the vernaculars. 
5.2 WHAT IS LANGUAGE POLICY? 
I will start the discussion of language policy with a quotation from Wright 
which sums up beautifully the main components of language policies in the 
Arab world in particular and in the world at large. 
Language policy is primarily a social construct. It may consist 
of various elements of an explicit nature- juridical, judicial, 
administrative, constitutional and/ or legal language and may be extant 
in some jurisdictions, but whether or not a policy has such explicit 
text, policy as a culture construct rests primarily on other conceptual 
elements- belief systems, attitudes, myths- the whole complex that 
we are referring to as linguistic culture, which is the sum totality of 
ideas, values, beliefs, attitudes, prejudices, religious stricture, and all 
the other cultural 'baggage' that speakers bring to their dealings with 
language from their background. (2004: 276) 
To illustrate Wright's definition, consider these two anecdotal incidents, one 
mentioned by Spolsky (2004) and the other by a Syrian acquaintance of mine. 
Spolsky (2004: 1) starts the first chapter in his book about language policy with 
the story of a 56-year-old Turkish woman who was refused a heart transplant 
by a doctor in a clinic in Hanover, Germany, with the claim that her lack of 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
201 
German, which is common among some Turkish immigrants in Germany, 
would act as an impediment to her recovery process. The clinic supported 
the doctor's decision by explaining that because the woman did not speak 
German, she might not understand the doctor's orders, and might thus take 
the wrong medicine. As Spolsky argues, doctors and clinics make language 
policy 'when they decide how to deal with language diversity' The doctor, 
because of his 'linguistic culture', was in fact implementing a policy in which 
Turkish immigrants have, and are expected, to learn German. 
When discussing the role of SA in education in Syria, a Syrian acquaintance 
spoke about how crucial SA is in Syria and how vigorously schools promote 
it. He then recalled his childhood years in primary education in Damascus in 
the 1980s, when his maths teacher lowered his grade by two marks although 
he answered all questions correctly. When he asked why this was the case, the 
teacher then answered that he had made one mistake in SA by giving a noun the 
wrong case marking. Although this was a maths exam and not an Arabic one, 
and although the student did not even make a spelling mistake but a grammati-
cal one, and a very common one at that, his grade was lowered by the teacher. 
The teacher was again implementing a policy here, by deciding to highlight the 
importance of SA. These two anecdotes suggest that policy, as Wright posits, is 
a cultural construct. It is the sum of beliefs, attitudes, values and even miscon-
ceptions at times that individuals have accumulated from their community. 
However, language policy may also 'consist of various elements of an 
explicit nature- juridical, judicial, administrative, constitutional and/ or legal' 
Language policy usually refers to 'a set of planned interventions supported and 
enforced by law and implemented by a government agency' (Spolsky 2004: 5). 
The key factor in language policy is the power and legitimacy to enforce a 
policy. Power in that case refers to both political power and economic power. 
Language policies always try to push forward an official language. 
An official language is usually the language used in government offices in 
official contexts and documents, and the constitution clearly states that it is 
official. As Wright (2004: 243) puts it, it is a language with 'muscles'; it is sup-
ported by the institution and by a legal written document; it is something de 
jure. A national language, on the other hand, is the language of cultural and 
social unity. It could be used as a symbol to unite and identify a nation or a 
group of people (Holmes 1992: 52). It does not necessarily have to have an 
official status. 
Factors related directly to language policy are language ideologies, language 
practices and language planning. The three will be defined below. 
5.2.1 Language ideologies 
The term language ideologies refers to the belief system that is prevalent in a 
specific community about language and language use. Ideologies are perhaps 

202 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
the 'cultural constructs' that Wright refers to in the quotation above. These 
beliefs influence language practices and motivate them. As was clear from 
the two anecdotes above, ideologies are crucial for the implementation of a 
policy. They usually form the basis for language planning processes. In fact 
they can also form the basis for modifying language policies (Spolsky 2004: 
14). Although in most countries there is more than one ideology, one ideology 
is usually dominant. Spolsky posits that 'language ideology is language policy 
with the manager left out, what people think should be done. Language prac-
tices, on the other hand, are what people actually do' (2004: 15). Where people 
use a language is important in its maintenance. Thus, there are domains for 
language use such as home, workplace, religious worship places, government 
offices, schools and so on and so forth (Spolsky 2004: 43). Language practices 
are sustained in these domains. 
The difference between practice and ideology is significant in the Arab 
world especially. For example, in 2008, Mazin al-Mubarak, a scholar of SA 
and a member of the Language Academy in Syria, called for a reinforcement 
of the status of SA, and for an effort to eradicate the use of the colloquial 
gradually in Syria. The plan to rid Syria of all colloquials, according to him, 
included awareness programmes for the whole family to teach parents how 
to deal with the challenges of introducing SA at home with their children; 
making sure newspapers have a section with full case marking for children 
to read and learn from; improving the SA of media announcers; increasing 
the number of songs, plays and films in SA as opposed to the colloquial ones; 
and encouraging children's competitions for writing poetry, novels and short 
stories in SA by offering them prizes. Al-Mubarak even went as far as suggest-
ing that both the public and private sectors in Syria should start refusing work 
presented to them in colloquial even if this work were soap operas, advertise-
ments or signposts. Al-Mubarak's ideology may be in line with the political 
agenda of Syria as well as a belief in the slogan 'one nation, one language', 
which will be discussed in section 5.3. However, his ideology is to a great 
extent a symbolic one which is almost impossible to implement, given that the 
colloquial is the spoken language used by Syrians in most domains including 
home, group interaction and schools (if not an SA class), and in most soap 
operas and songs. 
On a similar note, in the conference referred to at the beginning of this 
chapter, which took place in February 2007 and which was concerned with the 
future of SA, the reporter stated the following: 
ISESCO Secretary-General AbdelAziz Al-Twigrii spoke of 'language 
pollution', the condition whereby the influence of foreign languages 
-those of economically predominant countries- corrupts Arabic, 
especially among children. One study released at the conference 
found that the language of advertising and the commercial world has a 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
203 
corrupting effect- with the use of colloquial and foreign words written 
in Arabic script. Another, carried out on Libyan children, found that 
dialect and foreign expressions were far preferable among them than 
SA. This can undermine the language in use for 15 centuries and leave 
Arabs exposed to 'cultural invasion'; it is a mistake to let dialect prevail 
at the expense of the Arabic tongue. (Abdel Moneim 2007) 
The last postulation in that quotation, that 'it is a mistake to let dialect prevail 
at the expense of the Arabic tongue', is indeed significant. Dialect, meaning 
the colloquial Arabic of Arab countries, is considered a corrupted version of 
SA. SA is the 'Arabic tongue', the real language; dialects are not Arabic. The 
postulation ignores the fact that dialects are in fact the spoken languages in 
all Arab countries while SA is not the spoken dialect of any of the Arab coun-
tries mentioned. Ideology is again tied closely to politics. Perhaps ideology in 
both the Syrian case discussed above and the conference reported here do not 
adhere to reality. However, an ideology is significant even if it is a 'romantic 
notion' like the one mentioned here: that SA can prevail and be the daily 
language used by all Arabs. As Hill and Mannheim (1992: 382) argue, lan-
guage ideology may remind us that cultural concepts analysed by linguists are 
usually subjective and contentious. Language ideologies especially are used as 
political, religious or social weapons in conflicts, as will become clear through-
out this chapter (cf. Schieffelin et al. 1998). 
Related to language ideologies is the symbolic function of language as 
opposed to its instrumental function. Suleiman (2003: 174) discusses the 
power of the symbol. As stated earlier, the fact that SA has survived for such 
a long time even though it is not a spoken language may have to do with its 
power as a symbol. For example, Algeria tried to impose SA as a symbol of 
its identity. French in Algeria was associated with the colonial power and the 
seven years' war to gain independence. To assert its identity Algeria imposed 
SA. On the other hand, French had been an instrumental language for almost 
a century; France had been in Algeria from 1830 and Algeria was considered 
part of France. French had been imposed and used then to play the Arabs 
against the Berbers. It was the language used in government offices and 
schools and as a means of communication. The proper role of' Arabic' had 
been among the issues in the struggle for independence long before the war 
began. Its declaration as an official language was almost purely symbolic- no 
texts, few teachers, as will become clear when discussing Algeria below. Part 
of Arabic's symbolic import was also the Arab Muslim identity of a country 
with a significant Berber minority. 
Language policies have to take into consideration both functions of lan-
guage, the symbolic and instrumental, otherwise the policy will be lacking. 
This is not an easy task, however, especially with the instrumental function 
that English is gaining worldwide. Note that according to Wright (2004) 

204 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
a language policy will not work if it clashes with feelings of identity and 
communities. 
Economic factors are also related to language ideologies. Governments can 
try to impose languages as much as they like, but unless their plans reflect the 
economic reality, they will not be appealing to the people. A language plan 
that does not include French in Morocco, although Morocco's main economic 
dealings are with the west, and especially France, will not reflect the economic 
reality. 
Before concluding this section about ideology, I want to refer to a concept 
that will keep recurring whenever one examines language policies, and which 
is related directly to ideology: the concept of language attitude. Walters 
(2006b: 651) posits that 'language attitudes are psychological states related 
in complex ways to larger abstract language ideologies' Because of this it is 
difficult to elicit the real attitude of people in a straightforward questionnaire. 
There are a number of methodological problems related to attitude, one of 
which is the representativeness of the data collected. For example, in the next 
sections some language attitude surveys will be mentioned which were mostly 
done on university students or high school students; neither group represents 
the majority of the population in Arab countries, or necessarily the attitude of 
the masses of the population. Another methodological problem is that people 
who answer these questionnaires may answer from a prescriptive perspective; 
what they think they should do as opposed to what they actually do. The anec-
dote in Chapter 1 in which Ferguson met a scholar who claimed he only spoke 
SA, but then replied to the phone in colloquial, is a case in point (cf. Walters 
2006b for a full discussion of methodological problems). As Walters puts it, 
for a methodology to be effective, the researcher has to be trained in psychol-
ogy. However, such surveys are still useful as guidelines for a prevalent ideol-
ogy or signs of group discontent with a specific policy. 
5.2.2 Language practices 
Language practices have been juxtaposed with language ideologies in the last 
section. Practices refer to the habitual selection that individuals make within 
their linguistic repertoire (Spolsky 2004: 9). Thus, faced with three words 
that mean 'computer' in Egypt, al-ba:sib al-?a:li:, basu:b and kompiyu:tar, 
Egyptians use kompiyu: tar. By doing so, they are consciously or unconsciously 
selecting a lexical item that will directly affect language policy. The sum of all 
lexical, morphological, syntactic and phonological patterns used by individu-
als comprises their language practices. 
Language practices are sometimes more significant than language poli-
cies. If a policy works against language practices, there is no guarantee that 
it will be successful. For a policy to be successful, it has to lay claim to both 
language practices and language ideologies. As was said earlier, individuals in 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
205 
a community, their asswnptions about language and their linguistic habits, 
make a policy even when there is no written one (Spolsky 2004: 9). 
5.2.3 Language planning 
Language planning refers to the efforts to manage, modify or influence the 
habitual practice of individuals as part of a community. There are two kinds 
of language planning: status planning and corpus planning: Status planning 
refers to the process of selecting a language or variety for use. Corpus planning 
is the process by which the language or variety selected is codified, i.e. choices 
are made to standardise spelling, grammar, lexicon etc. Spolsky (2004) gives 
the example of Serbians who wanted to codify their language by making sure 
Croatian elements were omitted and replaced by Serbian ones. 
In multilingual countries, many languages compete to gain official status. 
But in practical terms assigning a language an official status is a costly task. It 
means that the government has to provide services and information in this lan-
guage or languages. In Canada, for example, a number of minorities would like 
their languages to gain the official status French has. These languages include 
Italian and Chinese. To plan for an official language (status planning), the 
planners have to bear in mind the function the language will have. They have 
to agree on the form of language that will be codified, and then they have to 
codify it, thus securing its grammar and vocabulary (corpus planning). Finally 
they have to make sure that the language will be accepted and the attitude of 
the people using it will be positive (cf. Lambert 1999; Spolsky 2004). 
Corpus planning is a complicated issue, and if there is more than one 
language involved in the process, then the task is even more complicated. 
Lambert (1999) discusses the need for teaching materials and teachers trained 
in the languages concerned and in language teaching pedagogy. Then there 
is the problem of the selection of which language to teach at each educational 
level. This is usually subject to fierce political negotiation. There is also the 
need to layer the languages used in schools and provide instruction in differ-
ent languages at different levels of the education system. Finally there is the 
issue of adult learning and designing curriculum to fit adult needs (Lambert 
1999: 21). 
Thomason (2001) gives an example of how policy can be different from 
planning. In 1920 the state of Nebraska declared that English was its official 
language, at a time when German was used as the medium of education for 
some students; because of anti-German feelings at the time of World War I, 
the state created this law. It was in fact never implemented. 
To conclude this section, I would like to point out again that a policy does 
not have to be written to be implemented and that a policy is not necessarily 
clear to all members of a community. For example, in the USA there is an 
implicit disagreement as to which policy is used. Some may argue that the 

206 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
USA adopts a monolingual policy since there is low level of recognition of 
any language other than English. Others may argue that the USA encourages 
multilingualism since there is legal official support of other languages. There 
is neither a written policy in the USA, nor an agreement about which policy is 
being implemented (Spolsky 2004). 
5·3 NATION AND STATE 
Guibemau (2007: 11) defines a nation as 'a human group conscious of forming 
a community, sharing a common culture, attached to a clearly demarcated 
territory, having a common past and a common project for the future, and 
claiming the right to rule itself Guibemau's definition is perhaps difficult to 
quantify since a perception of what constitutes a common culture, a common 
collective perspective of the future, and a common feeling of autonomy is 
subjective to a great extent. Terms like culture are also difficult to define. 
Would the culture of Kuwait have enough components in common with that 
of Tunisia? Or even would Djibouti share a culture with Syria? It could be 
that Arab countries, for example, share some underlying psychological per-
ception of values and beliefs. In the preceding chapter, values such as honour 
and modesty were discussed as underlying values that distinguish Arabs from 
westerners. 
I do not aim to examine thoroughly what a nation is, but just to give the 
reader an idea of how a nation could be defined. One of the major factors in 
defining a nation seems to be the psychological dimension of belonging to a 
community. A nation is also attached geographically to a specific territory and 
may have a specific religion. A nation may have its way of perceiving itself in 
relation to history, which may or may not be a true perception; a nation will 
have its own myths (Grosby 2005). Note also that a national identity may 
remain buried for years and can then be resurrected at times of crises or major 
historical turning points (Guibemau 2007).3 
A nation as opposed to a state does not necessarily have clear borders nor 
the legitimacy that a state may have. 'The state may be loosely defined as a 
structure that, through institutions, exercises sovereignty over a territory 
using laws that relate the individuals within that territory to one another as 
members of the state'(Grosby 2005:22). A state may also have citizens from 
different nations. For example, Britain is a state with different nations such as 
the Welsh nation, and the Scottish nation (Guibernau 2007). 
5.3.1 The relation between nation and language 
It is assumed that the emphasis on language as a defining factor of a national 
identity started to bloom during the nineteenth century with the work of the 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
207 
German philosophers Herder and Fichte and the French Renan. Germans 
related language to a shared cultural heritage. Also, one of the bases of the 
French revolution was a shared cultural contract between citizens and a 
nation built on a homogeneous oral and written language that united this 
nation (cf. Miller 2003; Spolsky 2004; Wright 2004). However, according 
to Grosby (2005: 70) the relation between nationalism and language is much 
older than that. He gives the following two examples: in Israelite tradition 
there is evidence that suggests that differences in language were understood as 
indicating distinctions between native Israelites and foreigners. Similarly, in 
1312 in Poland, there was a supposedly German-led revolt of Cracow against 
Lokietek. Although the revolt was not successful and was put down, anti-
German sentiments developed. The instigators were then trailed and their 
guilt was determined by whether or not they could correctly pronounce such 
Polish words as soczewica 'lentil', kolo 'wheel' and mlyn 'mill' The person who 
mispronounced any of these words was judged to be either German or Czech 
and hence guilty. 
5.3.2 The Arab nation 
The Arabic word 'lumma is equivalent to 'nation', while watan, on the 
other hand, refers to a 'country' as opposed to a nation. A common usage of 
'lumma is to refer to al-'lumma al-farabiyya 'the Arabic nation' and al-'lumma 
al-'lisla:miyya 'the Islamic nation' The latter, as will be discussed below, is 
a universal term rather than particular to a specific community with a shared 
culture and history. 
In the Arab world, as is the case in the west, a nation can also be defined 
in terms of different factors, including but not limited to language, religion, 
geographical enviromnent, historical background, colonial history, values etc. 
Linguists and intellectuals disagree as to which of these factors is the most 
essential. In fact, each factor is manipulated politically at different stages in 
history. For example, the Syrian nationalist AntOn Sa 'adah (d. 1949) held the 
view that the enviromnent plays the most essential role in shaping the national 
character (cf. Suleiman 2003: 219). 
However, in the twentieth century, the relation between the Arab nation 
and SA has been in the forefront in govermnent constitutions, in language 
academies, among Arab intellectuals and in the media more broadly. National 
unity was assumed to be achieved through linguistic unity and, thus, multilin-
gualism was perceived as a threat to national unity (Miller 2003: 3). According 
to Suleiman (2003) there are writers who emphasise the relation between 
nationalism and language. Consider, for example, the work which Ibrahim 
al-Mazini (1889-1949) published in 1937 (cited in Suleiman 2003: 198), in 
which he argued that language is a factor that defines a nation. Similarly, 
al-Anf?iri and al-Anf?iri in their book a!- cUrnbah fi muqabil a!- awlamah 

208 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(' Arabness in the face of globalisation') (2002) emphasise the relation between 
the Arabic language and the Arab nation. They posit that: 
What differentiates the Arab world or the Arab nation from all other 
nations and states in the world is language. Statistics show that Arabic 
is the third biggest language, not in terms of its speakers, but in terms 
of the countries that adopt it as its official language. Arabic comes after 
English and French. However, countries that use French or English as 
their official language are scattered all over the world, while countries 
that adopt Arabic as their official language comprise one geographical 
entity that stretches from the ocean to the gulf. (2002: 37) 
Note that in ancient times the only true 'Arab' was the Bedouin Arab, and 
kinship and lineage as much as language were important means of identifica-
tion (Miller 2003: 3). Miller also contends that in pre-modem states there was 
no correlation between language and nation; the elite of a country could be 
speaking a different language from the commoners. In the Ottoman period, 
for example, it was religious affiliation rather than language that defined the 
nation. However, I think it is worth mentioning at this stage that the rela-
tion between nation and language must have started earlier than the modem 
period in the Arab world. The fact that the elite spoke a different language is 
not a criterion for judgement, since the elite in some Arab countries nowadays 
may frequently still speak a language other than Arabic, even if they know 
Arabic, as is probably the case in some Gulf countries, in Egypt,4 Morocco or 
Algeria, and still there is a belief in the slogan 'One nation, one language' held 
by many. People could speak a language while thinking they speak another; 
consider again the anecdote mentioned by Ferguson in Chapter 1 and the case 
of the Syrian scholar Mazin al-Mubarak mentioned earlier in this chapter. 
As was said earlier, common beliefs about what constitutes a nation are not 
necessarily realistic. A nation could be built on language ideology rather 
than language practice, as long as the ideology is a vessel for forming a sense 
of belonging between members of a specific community. As was mentioned 
earlier, there is a psychological component to a national identity. However, I 
do agree with Miller that an Arab is now defined differently from how it was 
defined in the early Islamic period. 
The Arabs' perception of the Arab nation is very complicated and possibly 
needs a book by itself (cf. Suleiman 2003). Some Arabs perceive themselves 
as belonging to a nation because they have a common colonial history, they 
occupy a specific geographical space, they share nostalgia for a glorious past 
and they speak 'Arabic' The Arab nation is not a political entity but an ideo-
logical one, in the same way as the idea of 'one nation, one language' is also 
sometimes only ideological. In a survey conducted by Egyptian professor MuJ:t 
sin Khi<,lr (2006) to examine feelings of Arabness among Egyptian university 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
209 
graduate students from different fields of study, the professor presented a 
questionnaire to 270 students, in medicine, science, humanities and business, 
about whether they thought there would ever be a unified Arab nation and, if 
this did indeed happen, what this nation would look like. More than half of the 
students gave optimistic answers such as: 
One day there will be a unified Arab nation with no borders. 
This unified nation will have the same education system, and the 
same governmental system. 
Some students went as far as saying that this nation, once united, should coor-
dinate its architectural infrastructure and paint all houses the same colours. 
It is noteworthy still that Egyptians' perception of their Arabness is very 
complicated and correlates with different political and historical changes. 
The Arab nation is represented by the Arab League (AL). When compared 
to the EU, the AL as an ideological construct seems at first different in some 
respects. Both Guibernau (2007) and Ricento (2006: 55) contend that the 
EU comprises countries with different perceptions of history, different lan-
guages and a different way oflooking at the universe. Consider, for example, 
the differences between Greece and Sweden. However, the EU is relatively 
functioning as a political and economic power. The AL is different since it 
comprises the Arab nation. The AL, defines itself in its website as an asso-
ciation of countries whose peoples are Arabic speaking. Its objectives are to 
strengthen relations among the member states, coordinate their policies and 
promote their interests. Guibemau (2007: 115) calls the EU a non-emotional 
identity. I would call the Arab league 'an ideological emotional identity' first 
and foremost, and this is not a political statement but a sociolinguistic one, as 
will become clear in the discussions below. 
Nationalism in general has a bad reputation and has been accused, some-
times rightly, of a number of atrocities over history and a number of cases of 
intolerance: the murder of innocent civilians in the Balkans, in Kashmir or in 
Kurdistan are all examples of governments or people who were not ready to 
compromise their concept of a nation (Grosby 2005: 116). On the linguistic 
level, the Arab nation has been accused of promoting linguistic intolerance (cf. 
Miller 2003). Although Arabic is associated with Islam, and although politics 
in some countries is associated with Islamic radical movements, the Islamic 
nation is a universal one where kinship, language and territory are surpassed 
(Grosby 2005). The Arab nation as an ideology is built as was said earlier, on 
a number of factors, prominent among which is language. Religion is not a 
main component since not all Arabs are Muslims, and even the Muslim Arabs 
are not all Sunnis. Diversity, whether, economic, cultural or historical, is still 
dominant in the Arab world, and language seems like the safest haven for 
nationalists. Note that the harshest linguistic policies towards minorities have 

210 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
come from secular states; Turkey is a case in point (Miller 2003: 4). Linguistic 
rights will be discussed in detail in section 5. 9. However, in the next section I 
will first list countries with Arabic as the official language. 
5·4 COUNTRIES WITH SA AS THE OFFICIAL 
LANGUAGE 
Table 5.1 lists all countries with SA as the sole or joint official language, as 
well as the other languages used in these countries. 
Apart from four countries, Comoros, Chad, Djobouti and Somalia, Arabic 
is the sole official language of all countries in this table. 
5·5 FRENCH VERSUS BRITISH PATTERNS OF 
COLONISATION AND THEIR RELATION TO 
LANGUAGE POLICIES 
By the beginning of the twentieth century the majority of Arab countries were 
under either the British or French mandate. In 1916 Britain and France nego-
tiated the Sykes-Picot agreement in which most of the Arab world, excluding 
Saudi Arabia and North Yemen, were divided between France and Britain. 
France controlled the Mediterranean coast of North Africa and what is now 
Syria and Lebanon, while Britain controlled Iraq, Transjordan, Egypt and the 
Sudan (Mansfield 2003). 
Most of the structures of these countries were established during the colo-
nial period, and were shaped to correlate with British and French systems. 
Thus systems of education, government, politics, economics and even the 
architecture were influenced by either Britain or France. The indigenous Arab 
linguistic, religious and cultural traditions were downplayed and ignored by 
the colonising power (cf. Findlow 2001; Shaaban 2006: 694.) 
After independence Arab countries followed a policy of Arabisation. SA was 
a symbol of an identity that had been suppressed for years. For a great number 
of Arab intellectuals immediately after independence, SA was a language of 
independence, tradition, a glorious past, and even the language in which a 
sound moral system could be explained and maintained (cf. Sa'di 1993). 
However, the use of foreign languages, French and English specifically, is 
still prevalent in the Arab world, even more so than at the time of colonisation, 
for different reasons. Some of these reasons are related to economic needs 
and market forces, as is the case with countries that depend on tourism for 
their hard currency, such as Morocco, Tunisia and Egypt, or countries that 
depend on France as their main trading market, such as Morocco. Although 
most of the reasons why parents in the Arab world are keen on teaching their 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
2I I 
Table 5.1 
Countries with Arabic as the joint or sole official language 
Country 
Official language• 
Languages usedb 
Algeria 
Arabic 
Arabic, Chaouia, French, Kabyle, 
Tachelhit, Tamazight, Taznatit 
Bahrain 
Arabic 
Arabic, English, Farsi, Urdu 
Chadc 
French, Arabic 
Arabic, Daza, French, Gulay, Kanuri, 
Maba, Sara, Zaghawa 
Comoros 
Shikomor, Arabic, 
Arabic, French, Shikomor 
Frenchd 
Djibouti 
Arabic, French 
Afar, Arabic, French, Somali 
Egypt 
Arabic 
Arabic, Armenian, Domari, Greek, 
Nubian 
Iraq 
Arabic 
Arabic, Azeri, Farsi, Kurdish, Turkmen 
Jordan 
Arabic 
Arabic, Armenian, Chechen, Circassian 
Kuwait 
Arabic 
Arabic, English 
Lebanon 
Arabic 
Arabic, Armenian, English, French, 
Kurdish 
Libya 
Arabic 
Arabic, Nefusi, Tamashek, Zuara 
Mauritania 
Arabic 
Arabic, Fulfulde, Soninke, Tamashek, 
Wolof 
Morocco 
Arabic 
Arabic, Draa, French, Spanish, 
Tachelhit, Tamazight, Tarifit, 
Oman 
Arabic 
Arabic, Baluchi, English, Farsi, Swahili 
Palestinian Territories 
Arabic 
Arabic, Domari 
Q!ltar 
Arabic 
Arabic, English, Farsi 
Saudi Arabia 
Arabic 
Arabic, English 
Somalia 
Somali, Arabic 
Arabic, Gabre, Jiddu, Maay, 
Mushungulu, Somali, Swahili, 
Sudan 
Arabic 
Arabic, Bedawi, Beja, Dinka, English, 
Fur, Nuer 
Syria 
Arabic 
Arabic, Armenian, Assyrian, Azeri, 
Kurdish 
Tunisia 
Arabic 
Arabic, Berber languages/dialects, 
French 
United Arab Emirates 
Arabic 
Arabic, Baluchi, English, Farsi, Pashto, 
Somali 
Yemen 
Arabic 
Arabic, Mehri, Somali 
Notl!f: 
(a) UNESCO, (unless otherwise indicated), http:/ /portal. unesco.org/ education/ en/ ev .php-URL_ 
ID=20183&URL_DO_ TOPIC&:URL_SECTION=20l.html; last accessed 18 April 2009. 
(b) UNESCO (ibid; Versteegh et al. (2006-70); Moseley and Asher (1994). This list should be treated as 
a rough guide. 
(c) Chad, although not a member of the Arab League, is a partly Arabic-speaking country. 
(d) Source: Constitution of the Comoros Islands: http:/ /www.beit-salam.km/article.php3?id_ 
article=34; last accessed 20 October 2008. 

212 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
children a foreign language, and learning one themselves, are to a great extent 
utilitarian (Shaaban 2006), there are still symbolic connotations of the use of 
French in North Africa, for example. As will be discussed in the next section, 
Berbers in Algeria, after efforts towards complete Arabisation that did not 
take account ofBerber languages, made a point of using French as a symbol of 
their objection to Arabisation policies, and because for some of them French 
is associated with open-mindedness and rationality (see the subsection on 
Algeria below). 
Before proceeding to compare and contrast French and British patterns of 
colonisation and how these were reflected in language use and language poli-
cies, it is important to mention that with regard to language policies and the 
relation between politics, history and language, scholars as well as politicians 
and even members of different countries may find it difficult to be objec-
tive. One writes from a specific background and with a specific ideology. As 
Spolsky mentions in the preface of his book on language policy, 'it is hard 
to conceive of a scholar who is strictly neutral' (Spolsky 2004: ix). Suleiman 
likewise starts his book A war of words (2004) by claiming that he writes with 
both a Palestinian and a British identity, and that language is part and parcel 
of one's identity. It is not surprising, then, that one can find scholars who 
discuss language policy in Algeria from very different perspectives and who 
reach very different conclusions. Thus, while Holt (1994) may claim that 
the Arabisation policy in Algeria was successful to some extent, Benrabah 
(2007a) claims that the Arabisation policy in Algeria was a disaster at all 
levels. This example is just to illustrate the complexity of the issues at hand. 
This complexity cannot be dealt with in detail in one chapter, but is referred 
to throughout. 
5. 5.1 French patterns of colonisation 
French in France is not just perceived as a language of a particular nation; 
it is an instrument that reflects universal values of rationalism and clarity of 
expression. (Holt 1994). The aim of French colonisation was to assimilate the 
colonised people (Chumbow and Bobda 1996). Thus the colonies were known 
as African French territories of France overseas. France tried to eradicate SA 
from all its North African holdings by making French the official language 
in all public domains, including administration, public life and education 
(Alexandre 1963). Being civilised entailed learning French, and it was only 
the elites who did so. 
However, the linguistic and political situation was different in Syria and 
Lebanon, which were under French mandate from 1916 until1946. French 
was not the sole official language, but both SA and French were declared 
official languages, although in practice, French dominated in education and 
administration (Shaaban and Ghaith 1999). 

5.5.1.1 North Africa 
Spolsky posits that: 
LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
2I3 
The proclamation of national monolingualism, on the principle of 
'one nation, one state, one language' in a language other than that of 
the previous colonial power, was and remains an obvious method of 
asserting real independence. A number of nations tried to do this. 
(1994: 133) 
Again in this statement the relationship between politics and policies is high-
lighted. However, the backlash of colonisation, which according to Spolsky is 
always the declaration that each nation has only one language, does not reflect 
reality. North African countries (Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia) provide 
examples of this. 
In 1950 France's colonial holdings in North Africa were still untouched 
and constituted the largest single Francophone area in the world. A number 
of years later France's control over the three countries ended (Morocco and 
Tunisia: 1956; Algeria: 1962), although the presence of French was still 
strong. French had been the only official language of the three countries, in 
both educational and administrative environments. Even Islam, which might 
have given people the chance to use SA, was suppressed (Sirles 1999: 118). 
Thus these countries were left to fend for themselves after independence and 
forge a language policy as independent nation-states. 
5.5.1.1.1 Algeria 
Languages used in Algeria: SA, Algerian Colloquial Arabic, Berber 
languages/dialects (Chaouia, Tamazight, Kabyle, Taznatit, Tachelhit 
and French) 
Biggest minority5: Berbers 25 per cent 
Colonisation: 1830-1962 
The postulation that 'Through language people can be controlled and political 
power exercised' (Miller 2003: 3), finds no stronger evidence than in the case 
of Algeria. France tried ruthlessly and meticulously to eradicate SA there. 
Algeria, in return, after independence tried ruthlessly and meticulously to 
eradicate French and resurrect SA. This task met some huge challenges, and 
because of the intricate relation between language, religion, political affilia-
tions, ethnic identity - Berber versus Arab - and social economic factors, the 
opinions of scholars about the language situation in Algeria are diverse and not 
devoid of a political stand. 
In this section I illustrate the relation between ideology and practice in 
Algeria, trying in the meantime not to take any stands. 

214 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
ALGERIA BEFORE INDEPENDENCE 
Algeria was under French rule for 132 years (1830-1962). According to Holt, 
'one hundred and thirty years of language and educational policy determined 
by an outside power have evidently left deep scars' (1994: 25, see also Kaplan 
and Baldauf 2007). The attitude of the French when they colonised Algeria 
was to tum it into part of France on the other side of the Mediterranean (Stora 
2001). 
France's policy in the early years of colonisation was to suppress the indig-
enous culture rather than replace it with a French one. France attacked the 
structure of society; the French depended on military pacification of the 
Algerians and tried to break up important families and tribes. They also played 
the Berbers and Arabs against each other. 6 The French seemed as if they mainly 
wanted to marginalise Algerians rather than assimilate them; their policy was 
based on exclusion rather than inclusion. This exclusion was based not on race 
but on language and religion. On the social and religious level, they made the 
Muslim judicial system subordinate to the French one (Holt 1994: 34). 
In 1848 Algeria became formally part of France (cf. Stora 2001: 6), with 
French as the official language. To achieve their aim of eradicating SA, the 
French took hold of the religious endowments which provided the financial 
base for education and closed all Q!tr'anic schools, allowing education only 
in French ones. Education was related to religion and usually run by Muslim 
religious institutions in which one of the means oflearning SA for children was 
memorising the Q!lr'an. Thus the old education system in Algeria collapsed. 
If one examines the level of literacy before and after colonisation, the result 
will be somewhat shocking. According to Gordon (1978) the level of Arabic 
literacy at the onset of colonisation was 40-50 per cent. This is definitely high 
at that time given that the teaching methods were very basic and printing was 
not in use. According to Holt, things deteriorated so quickly that when the 
French left Algeria, 90 per cent of Algerians were illiterate (Holt 1994: 28-9). 
In 1847 Alexis de Toqueville sums up the plight inflicted on Algerians by 
the French as follows: 
Muslim society in Africa was not uncivilised; it was merely a backward 
and imperfect civilisation. There existed within it a large number 
of pious foundations, whose object was to provide for the needs of 
charity or for public instruction. We laid our hands on these revenues 
everywhere, partly diverting them from their former uses; we reduced 
the charitable establishments and let the schools decay, we disbanded 
the seminaries.[. .] Around us knowledge has been extinguished, 
and recruitment of men of religion and men oflaw has ceased. That 
is to say we have made Muslim society much more miserable, more 
disorganised, more ignorant, and more barbarous than it had been 
before knowing us. (2001: 140-1) 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
2I5 
If we put aside the judgemental comments about Algerians, we are left with a 
description of the dire situation inflicted by France on Algeria, especially that 
pertaining to religion, education and literacy. Perhaps such a description is 
useful in explaining the growing importance of religion as well in Algeria, as a 
reaction to French policies. 
In the first half of the twentieth century, Algerians began to develop a sense 
of nationalism which circulated around SA, and which came as a reaction to 
France's political, social and educational policies. The majority of Algerians 
spoke colloquial Algerian Arabic and/or Berber. The Algerians resorted in 
their religion and history and found a great tradition in Islam, literary works 
and SA. Religion and personal identity became connected to SA. Although by 
then Algerians were mostly illiterate, they were still exposed to SA through 
Muslim scholars and Q!Ir'anic recitations. Algerians began their struggle early 
and before their independence. In 1931, seven years before Arabic was decreed 
a foreign language by France, the Algerians formed the Algerian Association, 
which became the strongest defender of Arab and Muslim culture and a major 
provider of education in Arabic. 
In 1931, A~mad Tawfiq al-Madanrs book Kitab al-Jaza 'ir ('The book of 
Algeria') was published, in which he declared: 'Islam is our religion, Arabic 
our language and Algeria our fatherland' (al-Madani 1931). French was con-
sidered by the nationalists a symbol of colonisation and oppression. 
In 1933, preachers were banned from preaching in SA in mosques. Then 
Algerians began setting up a system of private schools. Religion became a 
symbol of national unity which included Berbers and Arabs (Holt 1994). 
Nevertheless, Arabic was officially decreed a foreign language in 1938 (Tigrizi 
2004). 
France's policy helped eradicate Arabic, but failed to eradicate national 
identity and failed to establish French as a national language. What really 
helped establish French was contact between the French-speaking population 
from France living in Algeria and the Algerians. The two factors that played a 
major role in establishing French were, according to Holt (1994), immigration 
and urbanisation. From 1914 to 1954 two million Algerians lived in France. 
The amount of French lexis which has entered colloquial Algerian Arabic 
during this period is vast (for example, words like 'firmli' and 'infirmiere'). In 
addition there were more than one million French, Italian and Maltese people 
living in Algeria. Algerians had to interact with them and the language of 
interaction was usually French (Sirles 1999). 
ALGERIA AFTER INDEPENDENCE 
Mter 132 years of anti-colonial and strong nationalistic feelings piling up, and 
after seven years of a bloody war with the French, Algeria gained its independ-
ence from France in 1962. Algeria suffered the most severe effects of colonisa-
tion linguistically, and yet it is still the country in the Maghreb that sought 

216 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
most ardently to pursue Arabisation. Algeria was left with 10 per cent literacy 
in Arabic and/or French. Yet according to Sirles (1999) more than half of the 
Algerians spoke French, and more than three times as many were literate in 
French as in Arabic. However, Benrabah (2007a) gives different figures for 
literacy in French specifically. According to Benrabah, Algerians literate in 
SA were around 300,000 out of a population of 10 million. However, 1 million 
( 10 per cent) of the population were literate in French and 6 million ( 60 per 
cent) were able to speak French. (cf Gallagher 1964: 148; Gordon 1978: 151; 
Benrabah 2007a: 230). 
According to Mostari (2004), after independence Algeria was committed to 
the policy of Arabisation. Arabisation was encouraged by Algerian nationalists 
and political leaders who were trying to carve a niche for themselves amidst 
a French-speaking elite (Mostari 2004: 26). In September 1962, Ben Bella 
became the president of the Democratic Republic of Algeria, and the constitu-
tion of the country was set in October of 1963. The preamble of that constitu-
tion (dated 10 September 1963) stated that: 
Islam and the Arabic language have been efficient means of resistance 
against the attempts of the colonial regimes to de-personalize the 
Algerian people. Algeria needs to affirm that Arabic is its national and 
official language, and that it draws its main spiritual force from Islam; 
and yet, the Republic guarantees to all that their views and beliefs 
shall be respected, and that all shall be free in their religious worship. 
(Tigrizi 2004: 291) 
However, as will be clear below, Arabisation was faced with big obstacles. 
In the mid-1960s the then Algerian president Houari Boumedienne 7 pushed 
for a programme of complete Arabisation (Djite 1992: 21). Because after the 
war most foreigners left, there was a shortage of teachers. Algeria requested 
12,000 teachers from France but got only 4,000. SA was introduced for seven 
hours per week in primary schools. But there was still the major problem of 
lack of teachers. In 1964, 1,000 Egyptian teachers were brought in. Because 
of strong nationalist movements among the Egyptian teachers that perhaps 
not all Algerians shared, and because of traditional methods of teaching, the 
outcome of bringing teachers from Egypt was less than perfect. Benrabah 
claims that the colloquial Egyptian Arabic that the Egyptian teachers spoke 
was difficult for Algerians to comprehend (Benrabah 2007a: 230). 
By September 1967, the minister of education, Taleb Ibrahimi, intiated 
complete Arabisation of grade two in primary education. Note that the system 
of education corresponded to the French one, in which students spend five 
years in primary education, four years in middle school and three years in 
secondary education (Benrabah 2007a: 231). 
In 1968 a law was passed declaring that civil servants were required to 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
2I7 
demonstrate ability in SA. Within three years Arabic courses were set up 
within the various ministries. Yet in 197 5 all ministries were still carrying out 
their work in French. 
Arabic became the official language. Islam became the state religion in 1976. 
However, French remained the language of higher education and administra-
tion (Holt 1994). By 1979, French was introduced at fourth grade and English 
as a secondary mandatory foreign language at eighth grade (Benrabah 2007a: 
232). All the time unofficial private bilingual schools, French/ Arabic, not 
endorsed by the government, were still functioning, specially in Algiers (cf. 
Bemabah 2007a). 
According to Sirles (1999), this forced Arabisation in education was dis-
astrous. It produced half a generation of Algerians who went through an ill-
trained, understaffed system of Arabic-language education during these early 
years. However, French was then not the language of colonisation any more, 
so the number of Algerians receiving education in French grew. 
During the following years, from 1979 onward, a large part of cultural life 
was Arabised, including primary and secondary education and many humani-
ties faculties at universities. Broadcasts on radio, television stations, public 
signs and the judicial system were Arabised as well. Still, the centre of power 
remained French. 
The next president of Algeria, Chadli Benjedid (in office 1979-92), 
declared the further expansion of Arabic. In 1980 he appointed a militant 
Arabist to head the nation's higher council of national language, and in 1984 
he called for the establishment of an Arabic language academy in the country 
(Sirles 1999). 
The graduates of Arabised degree programmes expected jobs, but did 
not find any (Holt 1994: 38). By the mid-1980s people realised the discrep-
ancy between language policy and linguistic reality. Algeria managed to 
change primary and secondary school curricula even in technical areas and 
the sciences (Mostari 2004; Bemabah 2005, 2007a). It also achieved success 
in requiring sound competence in Arabic as a condition for government 
employment. But the private sector was different, so graduates of government 
universities could not find jobs. Students in Arabised universities staged a 
two-month strike demanding employment. The minister of the interior issued 
a directive to employers to end their discrimination against Arabised students, 
stating that credentials and not language should be the basis of employment. 
'Employers began hiring token Arabised students on the condition that they 
also spoke fluent French' (Saad 1992: 137). 
In 1990 there were demonstrations at the University of Science and 
Technology at Bah Ezzouar. Students who were not competent in French due 
to their public education system were demanding the immediate Arabisation 
of the entire curriculum. Political leaders sided with them but no change really 
happened. Still, French newspapers circulated more than Arabic ones (Sirles 

218 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
1999). In 1991 a tough law stated that Algeria would be completely Arabised 
by 1997, and a law was issued stating that anyone who signed a document 
written in any language other than Arabic would pay a fine of about 40 to 200 
dollars (Benrabah 2005: 425). 
The partial success of Arabisation created demands the state could not 
or would not meet (Holt 1994). The question of language now appeared in 
political debates, and SA was used in nationalist and Islamist movements as a 
source of authenticity and identity. Politics once more played a role. Iflslamic 
fundamentalists were to get the upper hand in government then Arabisation 
would be pursued with even more zeal. If, on the other hand, strong economic 
and financial resources took control, then French would be back with even 
more force than before (Sirles 1999). 
In 1999 President Bouteflika (1999-) admitted that Algerian culture is 
plural and was using French publicly. He then received a letter from members 
of the council for Arabic language warning him against 'public use of French 
and the Franco-phone lobby in the presidency' (Benrabah 2005: 382). 
THE PRESENT-DAY SITUATION 
Currently schools teach all subjects including science, maths and technical 
subjects in Arabic. French is a foreign language taught at second grade for 
approximately five hours a week (Cherfaoui 2004: 2; cf. Temim 2006). At 
university level, medicine, engineering and all technical subjects are taught 
in French, which is a major problem for students who are not trained to use 
French. Humanities subjects, such as philosophy, history and geography, are 
taught in Arabic. Social sciences, such as business administration, economics 
and political science, are taught in both Arabic and French. In mid-2005, the 
minister of higher education declared that 80 per cent of university first year 
students failed their final exams because of linguistic incompetence (Allal 
2005: 13; Ma'iz and Rouadjia 2005: 13.) The minister declared that govern-
ment schools did not equip students with the linguistic competence to study 
in French. 
In an attitude survey conducted by Benrabah (2007a) during April-May 
2004, in which 1,040 Algerian secondary school students were given a ques-
tionnaire to answer, 55.3 per cent wrote that they preferred learning French 
to SA; only 37.6 per cent preferred SA, and 1.3 per cent preferred Tamazight. 
Benrabah (2007a) found in another survey that 75 per cent of Algerians sup-
ported the idea of teaching scientific subjects in French in schools. The results 
of these surveys are related to the function of French as an instrumental lan-
guage with economic importance. However, the informants used are still few 
and do not represent the majority of Algerians. The problem with surveys that 
examine attitudes is one of thoroughness first and foremost and then one of 
deducing a true result from the informants, who may be under some pressure 
or imagine that they are under some pressure, especially in a country such as 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
219 
Algeria in which speaking a language may be perceived as making a political 
statement (see section 5.2.1 and cf. Walters 2006b). 
BERBERS IN ALGERIA 
In Algeria there is more than one language/ dialect ofBerber, namely Chaouia, 
Tamazight and Taznatit. Of all the Berbers in Algeria, Kabylians in the north-
west ofthe country are the most prominent group (Mostari 2004). 
There was a stronger than expected backlash after independence from 
the Berber-speaking tribes, who, as we have said, make up about 25 per cent 
of the population. They began an armed struggle against the authorities in 
1962-3 after forming the Socialist Forces Front (FFS), which was opposed 
to Arabisation policies in Algeria (Mahe 2001: 442). Taleb lbrahimi, who 
was minister of education in 1967, informally allowed Moulad Mammeri, a 
Berber/Kabylian writer and academic, to restore the chair ofBerber studies at 
Algeirs University. However, this was not enough recognition of the Berbers' 
linguistic rights, which were ignored after independence. Berbers began a 
linguistic resistance movement by banning their children from speaking (col-
loquial) Arabic at home and making a point of speaking French in shops, cafes 
and restaurants (cf. Kahlouche 2004: 106; Mahe 2001: 471). For the Berbers, 
SA was unable to deliver a democratic secular ideal. Berbers demanded recog-
nition and freedom of expression. More unrest broke out in 1988, which was 
again supressed by the government (Tigrizi 2004). 
According to Tigrizi (2004), President Chadli Benjedid adopted a new 
constitution on 13 February 1989 which highlighted Algeria's political plural-
ism but did not take account of Berber rights. In fact, the preamble of that 
constitution read: 
Algeria, as land of Islam, as integral part of the Maghreb, as Arab, 
Mediterranean and African country prides itself on the glory of its 
Revolution ofNovember 1st, and on the respect which this country has 
acquired for itself through its commitment to the promotion of justice 
in the world. (Tigrizi 2004: 293). 
Once more, Algeria emphasised its Arab and Muslim identity. 
However, strikes were on the rise from the 1990s (Mostari 2004). In 
1999 President Bouteflika claimed that it was up to the Algerians to make 
Tamazight a national language but not an official one. In 2003 Tamazight 
was declared a national language. In 2004 the president described it as a 
dividing factor (Lewis 2004). He then declared openly in 2005 that there 
would be only one official language and not two. Tamazight was adopted as 
a national language by the National Assembly on 8 April 2003 (Benrabah 
2007a). In 2004 Abderrazak Dourari became head of the institute for 
the planning of Tamazight. From 2005 onwards, Tamazight has been 

220 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
introduced in the first three years in middle school for three hours a week 
(Benrabah 2007b: 77). 
Benrabah (2007a: 226) claims that the enforcement of SA as the only official 
language is the main cause of the rise of fanaticism, civil war, unemployment 
and the failed education system. He adds that the regime in Algeria is 'An 
authoritarian regime allergic to pluralism whether cultural, political or lin-
guistic' (2007a: 248), because the regime seems to prefer one subgroup over all 
others. Benrabah's claims make his political stand clear and do not just reflect 
a linguistic stand. As was said earlier, it is indeed difficult to remain neutral 
when discussing such an issue. 
It would be simplistic to think that multilingualism will solve all problems 
in Algeria, including unemployment, poverty, fanaticism and political frus-
tration (see section 5. 9). In the case of Algeria the linguistic situation reflects 
political tension rather than creates it. It is easier for intellectuals to be out-
spoken about linguistic diversity, a safe topic compared to other political ones. 
In order to understand the complexity of the situation one has to realise that 
diversity and conflicts were perhaps to a great extent part of Algeria before 
independence as well. 8 
For example, Sa<dl, a Berber himself, claims that France implanted sec-
tarianism in Lebanon and has been trying to do the same thing in Algeria. 
According to him, it is France that supports the Berber movement financially, 
and its aim is to destroy Algerian unity and make sure that the French lan-
guage will prevail at the expense of SA. By playing SA against Berber, France 
makes French the saviour and the most neutral language of the three (Sa <di 
1993: 205). Sa <dl's claims show that there is division among Berbers them-
selves and that the situation is not solely a linguistic one, but mainly viewed 
as a political one. 
To conclude this section, I posit that an ideal policy will not only reflect the 
multilingualism of a community, but also reflect the political and economic 
realities of a community. In a similar vein, Algerian writer Amin al-Zawi 
claimed that Algeria should start thinking of French as 'a prize of war' which 
can serve as a gateway to modernity (al-Zawi2006). 
Still, SA is important for Algeria, since it can act as a unifying factor and 
one that relates Algeria to its past and its neighbours. Even before independ-
ence Arabic was a symbol of identity and a political tool to confront colonisa-
tion, sometimes without a practical programme to implement its spread. 
The problems of education faced in Algeria are first and foremost problems 
of lack of resources. Government education in the Arab world at large is far 
from perfect because of this lack. The fact that schools in Algeria fail to bring 
out students who master SA is not because SA is impossible to master and 
not because the diglossic situation renders people inhibited, but because the 
methods are lacking and the money spent on teaching in government schools 
is very little. Private education is always another alternative, as in most of 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
221 
the Arab world. However, the problem with Algeria specifically and North 
African countries in general is the linguistic discrepancy between schools 
and universities. The fact that schools teach science and maths in Arabic and 
universities suddenly teach technical subjects in French is indeed a peculiar 
problem pertaining to North Africa. 
5.5.1.1.2 Morocco 
Languages used in Morocco: SA, Moroccan Colloquial Arabic, 
Berber languages/ dialects (Tachelhit, Draa, Tamazight, Tarifit), 
French and Spanish 
Biggest minority: Berbers 45 per cent 
Colonisation: 1912-56 
Morocco is a country with Arab-speaking and Berber-speaking populations. 
According to Ennaji (2002), Berbers make up 40 per cent of the population; 
Faiq (1999) states that Berbers make up 45 per cent of the population. In 
present-day Morocco the Berber languages/ dialects, French, SA, Spanish 
and at least five varieties of Moroccan Arabic are used. The main conflict in 
language policies is between the roles assigned to SA, Berber and French, 
although Spanish is important in areas that were occupied by Spain in the 
north and the Moroccan Sahara (Ennaji 2002). 
Again, as in Algeria, in Morocco also we encounter the problem of the 
discrepancy between language used as an instrument and language used as a 
symbol. Morocco too is a country in which French constitutes the 'elite lan-
guage', and this has an effect on Arabisation. 
A HISTORY OF THE FRENCH COLONISATION OF MOROCCO 
French colonisation started in Morocco in 1912. In fact, France was follow-
ing the principle held by most colonisers, including England, as will become 
clear later: the principle of divide and rule. For example, the decree known 
as le Dahir berbere, relating to the recognition of a separate justice system for 
the Berber tribes, and passed in 1930, was widely seen as a measure to divide 
Morocco into two parts: a Berber part and an Arab one. The decree was met 
with opposition from both sides (Ennaji 2002: 71). 
French was then imposed as the medium of instruction in schools, gov-
ernment, administration and the media. SA was used only in religious and 
traditional activities (Ennaji 2002). According to Gill (1999: 124), the French 
had neither the intention of educating the whole population nor that of mod-
ernising them. 
Note that the length of the French colonisation in Morocco was only 44 
years. Morocco gained its independence in 19 56. This period of colonisation 
is relatively short compared to Tunisia's, which was colonised for 7 5 years, or 
Algeria's, which was colonised for 132 years. 

222 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Morocco was also different from Algeria in the quantity of the French 
colonial population living there. There was only a small French colonial 
population of around 350,000 (Belal and Agourram 1970: 142) among a 
'native' population of around 5 million (Houtsma et al. 1913-36: VI/590, 
"Morocco"). This colonial population was concentrated on the coasts of 
Morocco along the Mediterranean and the Atlantic. While the great majority 
of Algerians and Tunisians lived along the coasts, the majority of Moroccans 
at that time did not. Moroccans were scattered throughout the country and 
not concentrated in specific areas. Moreover, many major cities, like Fes, 
Meknes and Marrakesh, are not on the coast. Therefore, there was very 
little contact and interaction between Moroccans and their colonisers. Thus 
it comes as no surprise that after independence, the first official population 
count in 1960 showed that only one in fourteen Moroccan Muslims could 
speak French; only 6 per cent were literate in French and twice as many were 
literate in Arabic. It was reported that proficiency in spoken colloquial Arabic 
was about 80 per cent, indicating that a good portion ofBerbers, had mastered 
spoken colloquial Arabic (Sirles 1999: 120). 
THE SITUATION AFTER INDEPENDENCE 
During the twenty years following independence the country's political lead-
ership made decisions and then reversed them (Sirles 1999). The two main 
reasons for this change were lack of teaching materials and resources, and 
shortage of trained teachers. There was also the fear that Arabisation would 
lead to a rise in Islamic fundamentalism similar to what happened in Algeria 
(Shaaban 2006). 
I:Iammud (2000) divides Morocco's Arabisation policy into five stages. In 
the first stage, from 19 58 to 1967, Arabisation was launched, but French still 
played an essential role. The first stage is described in the next paragraphs. 
Sirles ( 1999) declares that all members of the major cabinet of the first gov-
ernment of post-dependence Morocco, except the defence and interior minis-
ters, had not been educated in France at the university level. In spite of that, 
Morocco's new minister of education, MuJ:tammad al-Fasi, started the process 
of Arabisation in 1957 by Arabising subjects at the primary level. To do so he 
had to bring teachers from the Middle East, mainly from Egypt. This is because, 
as in Algeria, Morocco was not prepared for this process; it did not have enough 
teachers trained in SA (Ennaji 2002). Again as with Algeria, there were prob-
lems with the colloquial Arabic the teachers used, which was incomprehensible 
for some Moroccans, and the Egyptians' Nasserist politics orientation was also 
a problem. The government then changed its policy two years later concerning 
introducing SA in primary education (Sirles 1985: 202-55 passim). 
In 1966 the new minister of education, Mohamed Benhima, declared that 
Arabisation in Morocco had failed to improve the standards of education, the 
general level of students' achievement and students' knowledge of SA and/ or 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
223 
French. He posited that French should be kept for instrumental purposes to 
meet the needs of modernity, science and technology. This policy met with 
negative reactions from different groups. At that point in time Morocco was 
in a critical situation. The nationalist, pan-Arabist Istiqlal party was calling 
for Arabisation. There had been Berber riots for three years (1957--60) calling 
for the official recognition of Berber (Faiq 1999). A spokesman for the only 
Moroccan trade union stated in the press in 1966 that due to the faltering of 
Arabisation, public education would be limited to the elite (Ennaji 2002). 
Basically, Morocco found itself caught between two conflicting policies: 
universalisation and Moroccanisation. Universalisation means expanding 
education to more students, which increases the need for more teachers. 
Moroccanisation means using Moroccans rather than foreigners as teachers. 
Since most Moroccan teachers and educators were educated in France, the 
process of Arabisation was doomed at that stage (Sirles 1999: 120). 
The second stage was from 1968 to 1972, and during this period the gov-
ernment managed to complete Arabisation for the elementary cycle (I:lammfid 
2000; Ennaji 2002). In the 1970s the new minister of education, Azzeddine 
Laraki, gave a new impetus to Arabisation. He aimed to implement Arabisation 
completely in education and administration. 
The third stage was from 1973 to 1977. During that stage, social studies in 
the secondary schools were all Arabised. During the fourth stage, from 1978 
to 1980, there were efforts to Arabise all secondary school subjects. During the 
fifth stage, from 1981 to the present, all secondary school subjects including 
science subjects and maths have been Arabised. 
FRENCH IN MOROCCO 
The socioeconomic environment encourages the use of French rather than 
SA. Morocco, for example, trades mainly with France. King Hassan II himself 
reflected these conflicting feelings towards Arabisation. He was praising 
Arabisation at the same time that he was establishing political and economic 
ties with France. There was also the feeling that French was the elite's lan-
guage; the leaders continued to send their children to French schools. This 
made Arabic seem as if it were the language of the masses, not the upper 
classes or the elites (Sirles 1985: 236-7). 
Note that just like English in Egypt, as will be clear below, French gained 
more status even though right after independence it was spoken only by one 
in fourteen Moroccans, as was said earlier. The reasons for this are economic, 
political and geographical in nature. According to Sirles ( 1999), although 
Morocco is part of the Arab world, it followed a different policy in its eco-
nomic and political development. Its policies were quite independent of other 
Arab countries' For example, its largest export commodity, which is phos-
phates, is exported mainly to France and the USA. It is also a country that 
depends on tourism to a great extent. 

224 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Migration was also crucial in the increase of the French presence in 
Morocco. Urbanisation eventually led to contact with French. At the end of 
French rule more than two-thirds of the population lived in towns and vil-
lages under 5,000 in population; then millions migrated to coastal cities where 
there was a strong French influence. For example, Casablanca increased in 
its population from less than 1 million to more than 2.3 million in the twenty 
years after independence (Sirles 1999: 127). 
THE PRESENT-DAY SITUATION 
As in Algeria, the university level has still not been Arabised in Morocco. 
French is still the medium of instruction in the schools of medicine, engineer-
ing and science (Ennaji 2002: 75, see also Shaaban 2006). Ennaji argues that 
the reason why French is still dominant today in these schools is that all refer-
ence books in these subjects are either in French or in English. There is a lack 
of teachers who are trained to teach these subjects in SA. 
The linguistic discrepancy between school and university led to frustra-
tion in the young generation. For example, there have been student strikes at 
the University ofFes since 1990-1, when the first Arabised science students 
reached university level and could not deal with French textbooks. Many of 
them eventually decided to change to the faculty of letters to study Islamic 
studies or French because they could not take scientific courses in French. In 
the academic year 1998-9 students at the faculty of science and technology 
boycotted exams for one term because they were unable to assimilate course 
material in French in time for exams (Ennaji 2002: 77; see also Marley 2004). 
Currently French is taught from third grade in public schools in Morocco. 
However, there are also government-supervised private bilingual schools in 
which French is taught side by side with SA, and maths and science are taught 
in French while the history of Morocco and civics are taught in SA. There is 
also a third kind of schools which do not comply to government standards. In 
these private schools, French is the main language of instruction and Arabic 
is taught as a second language or even a third one, after English. These are 
usually the schools where the elites send their children. 
However, English is also entering the picture, with the opening of American 
schools in Morocco which again do not comply with the government stand-
ards and where SA is again a second or third language. In 199 5, the American-
accredited Al-Akhawayn University opened in Ifrane (Shaaban 2006). As in 
Egypt, the Gulf countries and Tunisia, English in Morocco is thus coming at 
full force. 
In present-day Morocco there are at least two conflicting attitudes towards 
Arabisation, without even taking account of the Berbers' attitude: that of the 
'Arabisants' and that of the 'Fran~isants' The Arabisants are usually Arabic-
educated intellectuals, politicians, lawyers and teachers educated in the Middle 
East, mainly at Al-Azhar University. For them Arabic education is essential 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
225 
because Islam and Arabic have been used as a weapon to confront colonisation 
(cf. Bensadoun 2007). The right-wing Istiqllil party exemplifies this attitude. 
Ennaji also believes that 'the Muslim fundamentalists go even further to claim 
that only classical Arabic is worth teaching and learning because it reflects 
Muslim tradition, beliefs and values' (Ennaji 2002: 75). The Fran~isants are 
usually the French-educated elite. They may hold positions in higher educa-
tion, public administration and the private sector. They prefer French and SA 
to monolingual Morocco with only SA. They think bilingualism can provide 
Arabic with new terminology that can be translated or transferred to Arabic, 
and thus can in its own way reinforce Arabisation. Note that some also prefer 
French to learning SA altogether. 
In two questionnaires by Ennaji (2002) in which the attitudes of 112 uni-
versity students and 19 of their teachers at the Institute of Technology in 
Fes towards SA and French were elicited. It was suggested that the majority 
of students were not in favour of Arabisation The reason they gave is that 
it is difficult to master SA or to use it for science and technology. They also 
preferred bilingualism, because they felt there are two domains that need two 
languages: French should be used for science and technology, and Arabic for 
the humanities and literature. For them French could be used as a 'tool' for 
meeting the needs of the modern age and might enable them to move forward 
economically and socially (Ennaji 2002: 83). Note, however, that choosing 
science students specifically is bound to yield this predictable result, since, 
as is clear throughout the section on North Africa, it is students of science 
who suffer the discrepancy between school and university. In addition, 28 per 
cent of the students were bilingual Berberophones. The problematic issues 
encountered with language attitude surveys in general are also encountered in 
this survey. 
Ennaji (2002: 83) contends that 'The linguistic rivalry is emerging as a 
hidden struggle for cultural identity and the revival of Arab-Muslim values 
and beliefs.' Thus, Arabic is emerging with a new motive in mind, and a new 
status. Sirles (1999) posits that the Arabisation policy may create a new group 
of leaders and businessmen who depend on Arabic rather than French to 
conduct their transactions. However, Sirles argues that what goes against this 
is Moroccan dependence on the west for most of its trade and hard currency. 
It is quite apparent that all these policies do not consider the importance of 
Berber, nor do they try to incorporate it in any plan. None the less the status of 
Berber and the way that Morocco deals with it are worth studying as well. 
THE STATUS OF BERBER AND LANGUAGE POUCY 
Berbers were bilinguals before and after colonisation. As far as Berbers are 
concerned, Arabic Morocco was preceded by centuries of Berber Morocco. 
The constant call for Arabisation since independence in 19 56 has antagonised 
the Berber speakers and emphasised feelings of identity among them (cf. 

226 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Faiq 1999; Thomason 2001). The status of the Berber dialects/languages in 
Morocco shows a clear case of the discrepancy that can occur between lan-
guage policies and real linguistic situations. The policies in Morocco until very 
recently did not take account of Berber dialects or seek to standardise them. 
Thus, the preamble of the 1996 constitution states: 'Le Royaume du Maroc, 
Etat musulman souverain, dont la langue officielle est l'arabe, constitue une 
partie du Grand Maghreb Arabe' ('The kingdom of Morocco, a sovereign 
Muslim state, of which the official language is Arabic, forms part of the greater 
Arab Maghreb'). 9 The policy was that the purity of Arabic is something to be 
preserved. It is the language of the country and its religion. Again, this policy 
in essence ignored the multilingualism that existed in Morocco long ago, even 
before the French colonisation in 1912 (cf. Ennaji 2002; Thomason 2001). 
In 1994 the king of Morocco decreed that Berber dialects would be taught 
at least in primary education. Plans had been drawn up and associations were 
being established for that purpose. In the same year, Moroccan television 
started a daily broadcast of 1 0-minute news bulletin in each of the three Berber 
dialects: Tachelhit, Tamazight and Tarifit (Faiq 1999). In 2003 Tamazight 
was introduced in 300 elementary schools all over the country. However, even 
now Berber languages are not recognised in the constitution (Errihani 2006). 
Marley (2004) posits that Morocco has to face the multilingual situation it is 
in without limiting its struggle to implementing SA. 
Even though the relation between Arabs and Berbers in Morocco was not 
always harmonious, they were able to exist together for centuries, although 
Berber languages/ dialects had been undermined. If we think of language as 
a symbol of identity then there must be a reason why the language issue did 
not cause conflict in Morocco. This is in fact because the allegiance of some 
Berbers is to the tribe and Islam before the state. The king of Morocco cleverly 
manipulates this allegiance. By calling himself ami:r al-mu'lmini:n 'the com-
mander of the faithful', which is a classical Islamic title, he derives his legiti-
macy from Islam and from being a shar1[(i.e. a descendant of the Prophet). He 
refers to a large community that surpasses ethnicity (Faiq 1999). 
Morocco is still struggling with its multilingualism more than fifty years 
after independence. Thomason describes the language situation in Morocco 
by stating: 
Morocco, a country long regarded by the outside world as a coherent 
and tolerant one, is going through a period of great flux 
it is 
apparent that the Berbers of morocco have embarked 
on a process 
ofhistoricising their territory and territorializing their history. 
(Thomason 2001: 151) 
It is worth mentioning, however, that Berbers did not use the Arabic script 
to write their dialects/languages, which were mainly oral ones. Although the 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
227 
Arabic script was used among Tachelhit speakers, Berbers decided to use the 
Tifinagh script to codify their language. This script was only used in emblems 
and short texts like epigraphs before this (Aissati and Kurvers 2008). Berber 
languages/dialects are now emphasised as a symbol of a distinct identity, and 
using Arabic script may be a threat to this identity (see section 5.5.2.2 for a 
similar phenomenon in Sudan). 
Note also that in a survey conducted by Marley (2004) in which 159 second-
ary school students were asked to rate their attitude about bilingualism, SA 
and Tamazight, 84 per cent of the students preferred bilingualism in French 
and SA to monolingualism in SA, and only 10.1 per cent found it useful to 
learn Tamazight. However, Marley argues that this is because the survey was 
conducted in Khouribga -which is an area with no Berbers. 
5. 5.1. 1. 3 Tunisia 
Languages used in Tunisia: SA, Tunisian Colloquial Arabic, Berber 
languages/ dialects and French 
Biggest minority: Berbers 1 per cent 
Colonisation: 1881-1956 
Tunisia was occupied by France for 7 5 years. Berbers in Tunisia, unlike in 
Morocco, constitute only 1 per cent of the population. They in fact do not 
have any political representation (Faiq 1999). 
TUNISIA AFTER INDEPENDENCE 
Mter independence, literacy rates in French and Arabic were in rough 
parity, and about 40 per cent could speak French (Gallagher 1964: 134). fu 
fact Arabisation would have been easier in Tunisia than in Algeria because 
its Berber population was very scattered and small, and their presence was 
not seen as an impediment to the process of Arabisation (Sirles 1999: 120). 
Arabisation, at least at the beginning, was not a political issue in Tunisia, 
unlike in Algeria. President Habib Bourguiba stressed biculturalism and 
strong ties with France and the west. His government was pro-western. This 
pro-western tendency may have been decreased by the Palestine Liberation 
Organisation (PLO)'s moving to Tunis in the 1980s and early 1990s. This 
must have influenced the overt embracing of the west. 
Competence in French is still considered prestigious in Tunisia. Language 
attitude surveys in Tunisia of French-Arabic bilinguals show that they prefer 
French newspapers and journals (Sirles 1999; see also Daoud 2007). 
Bourguiba, at the beginning of his presidency, was a strong supporter of 
Arabisation, and then he changed his attitude and favoured French. Although 
Arabisation was gradual, the policy was not always consistent. French was 
delayed to the fourth grade and then brought back to second grade and then 
delayed to third grade. 

228 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
In 1999 the Tunisian government declared that all administration would be 
arabised by the year 2000. There was also a call to Arabise computer software 
and databases in all public institutions. 
Arabisation of science, mathematics and technical education up to ninth 
grade was achieved in 1997 (Daoud 2002). Scientific and technical subjects 
in secondary school and university are still in French. It is worth mentioning 
that Tunisia was reputed to be more successful than other Arab countries in 
training teachers and producing Arabic textbooks (Shaaban 2006). 
Tunisia is still struggling with different ideologies. In 1996 there were 
large demonstrations calling for the ousting of the education minister and the 
changing of the university curriculum towards more Arabic (Sirles 1999). 
Over the last twenty years Arabic has become more dominant than French 
in Tunisia. It is now used in government documents, official forms and letters, 
and shop signs. However, French is still dominant in banking documents, 
insurance documents and medical documents. Wholesale and retail shops 
still issue receipts in French. Thus, although the 1980s generation has been 
growing up with more Arabic around, especially in education, French is still 
playing a major role in Tunisia, perhaps a role that is only threatened by the 
spread of English (Daoud 2007: 275). 
Again in Tunisia, as is the case in other countries in the Arab world, politics 
plays the major role in language policies. Sirles (1999: 122) posits that 'politics 
appear to play the central role in the future of Tunisian language planning' 
There are challenges from the religious movement that Tunisia has to face and 
that could change its policies. 
5.5.1.1.4 Conclusion to language policy in North Africa 
According to Gill (1999), Arabic has a symbolic significance and French an 
instrumental significance. Arabic - SA in this case - is associated with Islam, 
nostalgia and the glorious past, and is also a unifying factor, while French and 
to a great extent now English are the languages of technology and science. 
As long as French still holds social prestige, as it does in Morocco, Algeria 
and Tunisia, then it will survive. Berber languages/dialects are now gaining 
status, although Hoffmann (1995) highlights the possible consequence of the 
rise of regional languages, as in the case of Catalan in Spain. The speakers of 
these indigenous languages, who were long suppressed, may establish oppres-
sive tactics against non-speakers. However, there are a number of North 
African scholars who argue that what can help Morocco's language policies, 
for example, is an acknowledgement and appreciation of language diversity 
(cf. Ennaji 2002: 84). The system should be inclusive rather than exclusive. 
SA does not exclude French, vernacular or Berber languages/dialects. 
Each country is different when it comes to the linguistic situation, the past, 
the environment, the history and length of colonisation, and the ethnic groups 
and their sizes. Therefore, any language policy should take into account all of 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
229 
these factors. For example, while Morocco is 45 per cent Berber, Tunisia is 
only 1 per cent Berber. The situation in Tunisia is thus different. Nevertheless, 
as long as the west controls the economic and technological world, policies of 
Arabisation are challenged and Arabic is sometimes perceived as if it is at odds 
with the modem world. Gill (1999: 134) posits that language policies in North 
Mrica are sometimes at odds with socioeconomic reality. fu the absence of an 
economic outlet, language policy should accompany socioeconomic change 
rather than create it. 
There will be more discussion and comparisons of North African countries 
at the end of the section on French patterns of colonisation, when both Syria 
and Lebanon have been discussed. 
5. 5.1. 2 Syria and Lebanon 
As was said earlier, following the Sykes-Picot agreement of 1916, Syria and 
Lebanon became part of the French mandate. France was already notorious 
in Syria because of its policies in North Africa. Thus Syrians demonstrated 
hostility towards the French. Although anti-Turkish feelings were on the rise 
in Syria, most Syrians did not perceive their salvation in France. However, 
according to Mansfield (2003: 156), only the Maronites in Mount Lebanon 
thought of France as a protector. The British government at that time 
regarded France's control over Syria as 'excessive' (Mansfield 2003: 181). fu 
1919 a General Syrian Congress, meeting in Damascus, demanded the recog-
nition of Syria's independence but failed to achieve its aim. fu the same year 
Syria launched a futile attack on French positions on the Lebanon border. 
With North African and Senegalese soldiers, and with tanks and planes, 
France seized Damascus in July 1919. 
In 1920 General Gouraud issued the decree of 31 August, in which he 
declared the creation of le Grand Liban (Mansfield 2003: 182). This which 
consisted of Mount Lebanon, the Biqa' plain to the east, and the coastal towns 
of Tripoli to the north and Sidon and Tyre to the south. The majority of the 
inhabitants of Lebanon were then Christians (see Chapter 3). 
5.5.1.2.1 Syria 
Languages used in Syria: SA, Syrian Colloquial Arabic, Kurdish, 
Armenian, Azeri, and Assyrian 
Colonisation: 1916--46 
Syria's population is composed of several ethnic groups, including Arabs, 
Druze, Kurds and Armenians. There are also several religions and religious 
sects in Syria, namely Sunni Muslims (c. 70 per cent of the population), 
Alawis (a Shiite sect, estimated at 9-15 per cent), Christians (c. 12 per cent) 
and Druze, as well as a dwindling Jewish community. 

230 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
During the French mandate in Syria (1916-46), Syria was regarded by 
France as a focus of Arab nationalism (Mansfield 2003: 182). The situation 
in Syria was more like that in Egypt than that of North Africa. Although SA 
was suppressed in Syria, as was said earlier, and both administration and edu-
cation were officially conducted in French, this did not have the same effect 
in Syria or Lebanon as in North America for a number of reasons. First, the 
position of Arabic in both Syria and Lebanon was strong because of the mis-
sionary schools that had opened at the end of the nineteenth century. These 
missionary schools, which represented different churches in the west, taught 
SA in addition to their own language. For example, the Catholic school taught 
French and Italian in addition to SA, while the Presbyterian and Anglican 
schools taught English in addition to SA. 
Second, the Syrian Arab Science Academy was established in 1919, with 
the goal of providing SA with the technical terms needed for modernisation 
(Shaaban 2006: 699), the same year that the general congress demanded the 
recognition of Syria's independence. Third, the geographical location of Syria 
enabled it to interact more with neighbouring Arab countries, and its relatively 
short colonial history helped Syrians and Lebanese retain their knowledge of 
SA. In fact, Syria gained its independence from France almost six years before 
Egypt gained full independence from the British occupation. Because of all 
the above reasons, France's position in Syria was not as strong as its position in 
its North African territories. As was said earlier, Britain was reluctant to allow 
France to seize Syria. In 1930 the French government agreed on a constitution 
that made Syria a parliamentary republic with France retaining control over 
security and foreign affairs. 
During the French mandate the University of Damascus was established 
(1923), with its teaching mainly in Arabic. Syria proclaimed its independ-
ence and declared SA the sole official language in 1946. After independence, 
a feeling of patriotism and nationalism was on the increase. There was also 
Syria's desire to regain territory split offby the French. SA became dominant; 
it was the symbol of unity. Although there are Kurds in Syria, who constitute 
10 per cent of the population, their language is not on the agenda oflanguage 
policies there. For example, Syria replaced Kurdish place-names with Arabic 
ones (Spolsky 2004). In that sense the ruling Syrian government is similar 
to the governments of Morocco and Algeria, since they suppressed other 
languages (in their case Berber languages) in favour of one official, unifying 
language. 10 
The government in Syria managed to Arabise all university subjects 
including science, maths and technical fields such as engineering and medi-
cine (Shaaban 2006). According to Miller, Arabisation in science is more 
advanced in Syria than in any other country (Miller 2003). However, in 
Syria as in most Arab countries English is gaining status as a global language 
(Shaaban 2006). 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
231 
SA AND POLITICS IN SYRIA 
The reasons why Arabisation in Syria has been a thorough and an efficient 
process in both schools and universities are related to the political ideologies 
of the Syrian government. The ruling Baath party adopts a secular social-
ist policy. This party belongs to the Shiite sect of the Alawis. According to 
Kedar, Alawis' Islamic credentials are not held in high esteem by the Orthodox 
Muslims of the Sunni majority (Kedar 1999: 142). The Alawis, though a 
minority in Syria, are thus ruling Sunnis, the majority, and other religious 
groups and sects, and have been ruling Syria for more than three decades. 
The party's ideology has been to emphasise the 'Arabness' of all Syrians. The 
president has been and is called qa:?id al-?umma 'leader ofthe nation' Kedar 
also notes that Syria's official name is al-Jumhuriyah al-'Arabi yah al-Suriyah 
'the Arab Republic of Syria' The Arab element is thus prior to the Syrian 
one. The Syrian press describes Syria as qiblat al-furu:bah 'the direction to 
which all Arabs should direct their faces for prayers' The qibla (the direc-
tion to which all Muslims tum their faces during prayers) is supposed to 
inspire unity among Muslims, and thus referring to Syria as the qibla of Arabs 
reflects Syria's role of inspiring unity among Arabs. The Syrian government 
has fostered the image of Syria as a strong opponent to western hegemony 
and ideologies, and the Syrian press has also blamed the other Arab states for 
betraying the cause of the nation (Kedar 1999). 
5.5.1.2.2 Lebanon 
Languages used in Lebanon: SA, Lebanese Colloquial Arabic, 
Armenian, Kurdish, English and French 
Colonisation: 1916-46 
According to Mansfield (2003: 202), a substantial part of the population of 
Lebanon after the partition of Syria and Lebanon rejected French control at 
least on an emotionalleve~ and regarded themselves as part of an Arab nation. 
The sectarian political system imposed by the French- the president was to 
be a Maronite, the prime minister a Sunni Muslim, and the president of the 
Chamber of Deputies a Shiite (cf. Mansfield 2003)- was weakening feelings 
of national identity within Lebanon but not eradicating them. 
The education system at the time of the French mandate remained in the 
hands of missionary schools, and higher education was exclusively provided 
by the Jesuit Universite Saint-Joseph (established. 1875) or the American 
University of Beirut (A UB, established. 1866 ), a Presbytarian institution. The 
Universite Saint-Joseph taught- and still teaches- in French, while the AUB 
used Arabic for a short while in all subjects, even in medicine, but now uses 
mainly English (cf Mansfield 2003; Shaaban 2006: 699). 
Currently French is associated with the Christians in Lebanon, and English 
is associated with the Muslims. In a survey conducted by Shaaban and Ghaith 

232 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
(2002: 558) of students' perception of the ethnolinguistic vitality of SA, 
French and English, university students regarded French as a 'symbol of 
sectarian conflicts' 
As in other parts of the Arab world, Lebanon's elite, whether Muslims 
or Christians, prefer private education to public. In private schools, maths, 
science and technical subjects are taught in French or English, and humanities 
subjects are taught in SA. In addition to the AUB and Saint-Joseph, there is 
also the Beirut Arab University, co-founded in 1960 by the Lebanese Jam 'Iyat 
at-Birr wa-al-IJ:tsan, and Alexandria University. The Lebanese university's 
close ties with Egypt are evident in the fact that its operations were moved 
to Alexandria during the civil war (1975-90), and its degrees are awarded 
jointly with Alexandria University. Technical subjects, science and maths at 
university level are taught in a mixture of SA and English, as in Egypt, while 
humanities and social sciences are taught in SA. 
5.5.1.3 Conclusion to French patterns of colonisation 
French colonisation began and ended at different times in different countries 
and had different effects. However, Tables 5.2-5.4 show that the education 
systems in countries colonised by France, perhaps with the exception of 
Syria, have been influenced largely by colonisation. Algeria, which was con-
sidered a province of France for 132 years and which France was not ready 
to give up without a 7-year struggle, has the largest sum of Arabic lessons of 
all the countries discussed. While, even Syria teaches 10 hours of Arabic for 
the first year of primary education students, and 2 hours of English, Algeria 
starts with 14 hours of Arabic, and no French until second grade. Teaching 
SA in Algeria was a reaction to the long, severe involvement by the French 
in managing both the country and the linguistic situation. Both Tunisia and 
Morocco were protectorates of France and perhaps managed to overcome 
feelings of bitterness towards France. Note that when Morocco and Tunisia 
gained their independence there were more people who spoke and read 
French than in Algeria. 
In Morocco the difference in hours between Arabic and French is levelled 
out in the second cycle of primary education and in secondary education. In 
Tunisia, again, the difference in hours is largely levelled out between Arabic 
and French at the end of primary education and throughout secondary educa-
tion. In Algeria, from the sixth year of school (college), the difference between 
both is levelled out. Algeria now teaches Tamazight as a second foreign lan-
guage for three hours a week from the sixth year of school, for three years. 
In Lebanon, French or English is the first foreign language taught to stu-
dents from their first year of school. The number of hours devoted to French/ 
English and Arabic is very similar starting from primary education. Note 
that, in Lebanon, schools adopt either French or English as the first foreign 

Table5.2 
Language of instruction by subject and educational cycle: Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia 
Subject 
Morocco 
Algeria 
Tunisia 
Primaire (6 yrs) 
Secondaire 
Secondaire 
Primaire (5 yrs) 
College (4 yrs) 
Lycee (3yrs) 
Ens de base 
Ens secondaire 
collegial (3 yrs) 
qualifiant 
(9 yrs) 
(4 yrs) 
(1+2 yrs) 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
French 
French 
French 
French 
French 
French 
French 
French 
French 
History 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
n/a 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Maths 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
French 
Sciences 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
Arabic 
French 

Table 5.3 
Weekly hours per language in primary and secondary education: Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia 
Year 
Morocco' 
Enseignement 
fondamental 
Premier cycle 
Second 
(6 yrs) 
cycle 
(3 yrs) 
Arad 
Fre 
Ara 
Fre 
1 
11 
2 
11 
3 
6.5 
8 
4 
6.5 
8 
5 
6 
8 
6 
6 
8 
7 
8 
9 
Notes: 
• UNESCO (2007) 
b Benrabah (2007b: 95-8) 
c Daoud (2007: 268-9) 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
Enseignement 
secondaire 
(1+2 yrs) 
Ara 
6 
Ara 
Fre 
FL2 
5 
5 
4--5 
2-5 
4--5 
3-6 
1-5 
4--5 
3-6 
Ecole 
primaire 
(5 yrs) 
Ara 
Fre 
14 
12 
3 
11 
4 
8.3 
5 
7 
5 
d Ara=Arabic; Fre=French; FL=Foreign Language; TZ=Tamazight. 
Ara 
5 
5 
5 
5 
Algeriab 
Tunisia< 
College 
Enseignement 
Ens de base 
Ens secondaire 
(4 yrs) 
secondaire 
(9 yrs) 
(3 yrs) 
(3yrs) 
Fre 
Tz 
Eng 
Ara 
Fre 
Eng 
Ara 
Fre 
Eng 
Ara 
Fre Eng 
5 
3 
3 
3-5 
4--5 
2-3 
11.5 
4.5 
3.5 
3 
5 
3 
3 
4--5 
3-4 
3-4 
11.5 
4.5 
3.5 
3--4 
5 
3 
3 
3-7 
3-4 
3-4 
10 
9 
0-5 
2-4 3--4 
4 
5 
10 
9.5 
7 
11.5 
7 
11 
5 
4.5 
2 
5 
4.5 
2 
5 
5 
2 

Table 5.4 
Weekly hours/periods per language in primary and secondary education: Lebanon and Syria 
Year 
Lebanon' 
Primary education 
Middle school 
Secondary school 
(6 yrs) 
(3 yrs) 
Ara' 
Fre/Eng 
Ara 
Fre/Eng 
FL2 
Ara 
1 
7 
7 
6 
6 
2 
5 
2 
7 
7 
6 
6 
2 
3--6 
3 
7 
7 
6 
6 
2 
2--6 
4 
6 
6 
5 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Notes: 
'UNESCO (2007). Numbers represent periods of 45 minutes. 
b Syria, Ministry of Education (2008). Numbers represent periods of unspecified length. 
'Ara=Arabic; Fre=French; Eng= English; FL2=Second Foreign Language 
(3 yrs) 
Fre/Eng 
5 
3--6 
2--6 
Basic education 
(9 yrs) 
FL2 
Ara 
Eng 
2 
10 
2 
2 
9 
3 
2 
8 
3 
8 
3 
7 
3 
7 
3 
6 
3 
6 
3 
6 
3 
Syriab 
Secondary education 
(3 yrs) 
Fre 
Ara 
Eng 
Fre 
5 
3 
2 
5-7 
3--4 
2-3 
4-8 
4-5 
4-5 
2 
2 
3 

236 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
language depending on the region/religious affiliation. In Syria, the first 
foreign language is in fact English and not French, and is usually taught for 
only 2-3 hours a week from the beginning. The hours of Arabic and English 
are not equal while Arabic is taught for 6-10 hours, English is taught for 
approximately 3. 
Of all the countries colonised by France, it is only Syria, and perhaps parts 
of Lebanon, that adopt English as the first foreign language and not French. 
This again shows that the political agenda of France in Syria and Lebanon was 
different from that in North African countries. 
The political struggle in each country was and is different in nature and 
may take the shape of an ethnic struggle for equal rights, as in the case of 
Berbers in Morocco and Algeria; a religious struggle - fundamentalists versus 
secularists in Algeria, and Christians versus Muslims in Lebanon; or even an 
ideological struggle, as in the case of Syria, with the political party ideology of 
pan-Arabism and political hegemony. 
This section has examined how language policy interacts with extra-
linguistic factors such as political struggles for independence, ethnicity, 
religion and urbanisation (as is the case in Morocco) and economic forces. 
Although the outcome of colonisation is different in each country, the reper-
cussions, whether political or linguistic, are still dominant. 
5.5.2 British patterns of colonisation 
The British, unlike the French, did not aim at assimilating their holdings 
in the Arab world, nor did they consider their Arab colonies part of Britain. 
Consider the following quotation from Lord Palmerston (d. 1865), British 
prime minister 1855-8 and 1859--65, which summarises the attitude of at least 
a part of the British establishment before the colonisation of Egypt. 
We do not want Egypt or wish it for ourselves, any more than any 
rational man with an estate in the north of England and a residence 
in the south would have wished to possess the inns on the north road. 
All he could want would have been that the inns should be well-kept, 
always accessible, and furnishing him, when he came, with mutton-
chops and post-horses. (Ashley 1879: II 337-8) 
Britain regarded Egypt as the 'inns' on the road rather than as a province or 
a territory overseas, and although English was declared an official language 
along with Arabic in Egypt, Sudan, the Palestinian territories and Israel, 
Britain lacked the zeal to implement its policy, and had no interest in the lin-
guistic situation as such. 
For the British, being civilised did not entail learning English specifi-
cally but learning and speaking a European language. Thus only a European 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
237 
language should be used and recognised as the language of education (Spolsky 
2004). The British aimed at weakening SA by promoting the vernacular, as 
will become clear below. For the British, the diglossic situation was inhibit-
ing and difficult to understand. Thus Britain tried hard to raise the status of 
the colloquial at the expense of SA. They believed that children should learn 
the language they speak, which in the Arab world would be the colloquial/ 
vernacular. In fact, this was also their policy in India, where they used the 
vernacular of each area for elementary education and English for secondary 
education (Spolsky 2004). However, Britain's encouragement ofthe colloqui-
als was not without a political aim as well. In addition, Britain forged colonial 
policies that stressed the separateness of African and European identities. 
5.5.2.1 Egypt 
Languages used in Egypt: SA, ECA, Nubian, Armenian, Greek, 
Domari 
Colonisation: 1882-1952 
Egypt is different from North Africa when it comes to language policy and 
the position of SA. In the 19 50s and 1960s Egypt took the lead in propagating 
both independence in the Arab world and SA (cf Mansfield 2003). The idea 
of the Arab nation was very concrete in that period. Although the influence of 
English or French is not as strong as it was in North Africa, the British occu-
pation did try to weaken SA, as was said earlier. 
EGYPT BEFORE INDEPENDENCE 
Egypt was occupied by Britain for seventy years, from 1882 to 1952. The 
British administration aimed to weaken Arabic from the beginning of the 
occupation (Shraybom-Shivtiell999). To do so they first introduced English 
and French as the required languages in the education system. Second, they 
elevated the status ofECA rather than SA by emphasising the distinctiveness 
of the Egyptian identity as opposed to the Arab identity. They were aiming 
to eradicate any Egyptian national aspirations and to tighten their grip on 
Egypt. 
To achieve the first goal of establishing foreign languages as the medium 
of education, the British administration announced in 1888 that the lan-
guage of instruction in all schools was to be either French or English. Their 
explanation for this was that Egypt was moving towards a European style 
of development and that this development is technological and scientific in 
nature. During this period Egypt's elite began to send their children to foreign 
schools, whether English, French or German, i.e. schools in Egypt using these 
languages as the language of instruction. The demands for the revival of SA 
were met with harsh criticism of its weakness as a living language. Its grammar 

238 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
and vocabulary were thought to be fossilised. The methods of teaching SA 
were also criticised for being tedious and difficult. SA was seen as a language 
taught by repetition and memorisation and not fit for the contemporary needs 
of society (Shraybom-Shivtiell999). 
At that time key figures in the British administration were calling for the 
use of Egyptian Arabic (ECA) as a written language and also its use as the 
official language to be used in civil affairs. Lord Dufferin, special envoy of 
Her Majesty's government in Egypt and British ambassador to the Ottoman 
Empire, when ordered to provide a plan for Egypt's reorganisation, devoted 
part of his report to the problems with Arabic and to expanding the colloquial. 
At that time, foreign orientalists in the Arab world showed a strong interest 
in the colloquial. Carlo Landberg (swedish) wrote about the Syrian dialect, 
Louis Jacques Bresnier (French), was interested in the Algerian dialect, and 
]. Seldon Willmore (British) in 1901 wrote a grammatical analysis ofEgyptian 
Arabic. Orientalists started opening schools to teach colloquial (Shraybom-
Shivtiell999: 134). The Egyptians then seemed to be encouraging what the 
British were doing. During the initial period of British rule in Egypt, the 
Egyptians 'meekly and willingly accepted British guidance and supervision' 
(1999: 134). 
At the same time that the British were seeking to weaken the role played by 
SA, Egyptian national identity was being revived and shaped by other factors. 
This identity was not, however, always associated with SA. According to 
Suleiman (2003: 175-6), several external factors helped shape this identity: 
1. The 1919 revolution, in which Muslims and Christians were united: The 
Egyptian leader Sa'd Zaghliil (1860-1927) and his colleagues were 
arrested by the British mandate on 8 March 1919 and exiled to Malta 
days after he demanded full independence for Egypt from the British. 
Women took off their veils to demonstrate side by side with men, 
both Muslims and Copts. The revolt resulted in the death of 1,000 
Egyptians and 36 British and Indian soldiers. A month later, in April 
1919, on the recommendation of the new high commissioner, Lord 
Allenby, Sa'd Zaghliil and his colleagues were released from detention 
and returned to Egypt. To Egyptians this was one of the first times that 
the British complied with their demands, which enhanced their feelings 
of patriotism and confidence. 
2. The creation of a parliamentary democracy in 19 22-23: Britain declared 
Egypt independent in 1922 but with four stipulations - reservations 
that limited its sovereignty. In 1923 parliamentary democracy was 
established, though most of the power was still in the hands of the 
British and the monarchy. Martial law was also lifted. 
3. The pride Egyptians felt in their past and pharaonic history as a result ofthe 
discoveryofthe tomb ofTutankhamen in 1922: In the Valley of the Kings 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
239 
at Luxor, the British Egyptologist Howard Carter discovered the tomb 
ofTutankhamen with all treasures and the mummy untouched. 
4. The ending of the caliphate by the Turkish leader Mustafa Kemal Atatiirk 
in 1923: After this, King Fu'ad of Egypt made a discreet attempt to 
become the leading Muslim figure and the caliph, but gave it up 
when he met with no encouragement (cf. Haag 2003: 280-3). 
Egyptians felt a direct psychological and racial link between modern-day 
Egyptians and their pharaonic ancestors (Suleiman 2003: 176). They felt they 
were different from other Arabs with whom they shared a language, which 
is SA. They also felt different from their co-religionists, mainly Muslims. 
They had the belief that 'Egypt's great powers of assimilation have enabled it 
to absorb waves of immigrants and to stamp their mental make-up with the 
indelible imprint of its character' (2003: 176). 
Some intellectuals began to argue that Egyptian Arabic was the true 
language of Egyptians rather than SA, which is the language stressed by all 
Arabs. For example, Niqiila Yiisuf raised the issue in 1929. He posited that 
Egypt has its own environment, which is very different from the Bedouin 
environment in which Arabic is spoken. Arabic, meaning SA, was for him 
a desert language not suitable for the modem needs of Egypt (Suleiman 
2003: 178). Similarly, Salamah Miisa (1887-1958) 'declared that SA is a 
dead language which cannot compete with the colloquial as the true mother 
tongue of Egyptians' (Suleiman 2003: 182). Suleiman notes the fact that 
Miisa declared this statement not in ECA, but in SA. Suleiman contends 
that in that sense Miisa is similar to those who advocate the use of SA as a 
spoken language, but who never use it themselves. Miisa was convinced that 
Arabs were less advanced than Egyptians, so there was no use in retaining 
their language. SA, according to Miisa, was a poor language, artificial, dif-
ficult and backward. He proposed a solution using the Roman alphabet to 
write colloquial language. As far as science was concerned, this would enable 
Egyptians to borrow words from European languages and keep up with 
modem technology. 
However, at that point there were still intellectuals who were quite aware 
of the possible dangers associated with abandoning SA altogether. Some pro-
posed modernising SA to make it more receptive to lexical borrowing from 
colloquial and other languages. One of the initiators of this move was Lut 
fi al-Sayyid (1872-1963). He suggested creating a middle language between 
standard and colloquial. Others, like <Abd Allahal-Naann (1844--96), who was 
a journalist, warned Egyptians against abandoning the standard. In his article 
'Language loss in surrendering the self he called upon Egyptians to hold on to 
Arabic instead of surrendering themselves to foreign languages. This was all 
at a time when the British were emphasising the importance of colloquial and 
foreign languages in schools (cf. Suleiman 2003: 174). 

240 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
THE BEGINNING OF THE ARABIC REVIVAL IN EGYPT 
According to Suleiman (2003), the attitude of Egyptians had changed by the 
late 1930s. Mu~ammad < Alliibah, an Egyptian journalist, declared that Egypt 
was an Arab country because of the Arabic language. This change is reflected 
in the layout of his newspaper, al-Siyasah al-Usbii ciyah ('Weekly Politics'). 
The cover page used to appear with pharaonic decorations. The Islamic 
dates were only on the inside pages. In 1930 the pharaonic decorations were 
replaced by caricatures and the Islamic dates were on the front page (Husayn 
1983 vol. 2: 172, cited in Suleiman 2003: 180). 
In fact, even before the 1930s, there were calls for the revival of Arabic. 
At the time that Egyptians were reshaping their identity, a number of them 
began to realise the significance of SA. Shraybom-Shivteil (1999) postulates 
that by the beginning of the twentieth century, with the start of the process 
ofliberation from foreign rule and the rise of nationalist aspirations, Egyptian 
intellectuals felt a need to deal with the issue of SA. There was definitely an 
awareness that it was an issue. The first person to begin the change in lan-
guage education policy was Sa <d Zaghliil, when he was minister of education 
between 1906 and 1910. He aimed at replacing English with Arabic as the 
language of instruction in schools even though Arabic then could not meet 
the needs of science. His aim of introducing it was a crucial first step that 
came amidst nationalist calls for the revival of Arabic. The beginning of the 
century also witnessed the establishment of Fu'ad I University in 1908 (later 
to become Cairo University). The committee decided unanimously that the 
official language of instruction would be Arabic. 
The call to reform Arabic to meet modem needs came quite early in Egypt 
as compared to other countries, and included calls to modify grammar, script 
and spelling. There were also some radical ideas like eliminating grammatical 
rules entirely, getting rid of the dual system and the suffix of the feminine 
plural. King Fu'ad, although he himself did not know Arabic well, was very 
aware of its importance. He established the Academy ofthe Arabic Language 
in 1932. The king intervened personally in the reform of the language. He 
proposed the simplification of Arabic letters upon the recommendation of the 
British orientalist Denison Ross, who had new letters designed for use at the 
beginning of a sentence similar to capital letters in Latin orthography. These 
letters were called crown letters and they were designed to facilitate mastery in 
reading and writing (Shraybom-Shivtiel1999: 136). This proved to be a failed 
experiment. Despite all these efforts the situation did not change. As late as 
the 1940s foreign languages were still the primary means of instruction except 
in religious schools, which were under the supervision of al-Azhar University. 
Private schools excluded Arabic while public schools used it in a very limited 
manner, and they themselves were limited in number (Shraybom-Shivtiel 
1999). 
In the meantime, a key figure appeared in Egypt who had a great influence 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
241 
on the revival of Arabic. The writer 'faha I:Jusayn (1889-1973) was himself 
educated at al-Azhar University. In his book Mustaqbal al-thaqiifoh fi Mi~r 
('The future of culture in Egypt', 1938), he called for the establishment of 
Arabic in foreign schools - those schools that were run by non-Egyptians 
and not under government supervision (Shraybom-Shivtiel1999). According 
to Suleiman (2003), 'faha I:Iusayn believed in Egypt's national identity as 
built not on religion but on the political, geographical and historical environ-
ments. He, like Miisa, looked to Europe as a model. He also believed in the 
significance of the modernisation of language. Yet he and Miisa had different 
attitudes towards SA . .E:Iusayn held the belief that 'Muslims (more accurately, 
Muslim rulers and elites) 
understood that religion is one thing and politics 
is another, and that the first basis for establishing political unity is common 
interests' (1944: 21, quoted in Suleiman 2003: 191). He stressed the impor-
tance oflanguage as the medium for thought and modernisation. 
According to I:Jusayn, Egypt, which was known for moderation, should 
aim at integration with the west and not at assimilation. Therefore, one of the 
policies of the state should be to make sure that SA was taught in all private 
foreign schools in Egypt. He called for the elimination of all teaching of 
foreign language in the primary stage in state schools. He was aware that SA 
was dreaded as a subject, and he thought this was so because of the concentra-
tion on grammar as a means of teaching (Suleiman 2003: 193) . 
.E:Iusayn thought there was a difference between teaching about the lan-
guage and teaching of the language. Thus, the parrot-like learning style used 
to study grammar and rhetoric was not valid. According to him, because 
language should have a creative role, SA had to be simplified without being 
compromised. .E:Iusayn remained throughout an ardent supporter of SA. 
This is because, according to him, if Egyptians ignored SA, they would cut 
themselves off from their past and their Arab literary heritage. He still had 
problems with al-Azhar, where he studied, because it was the sole authority 
in grammar teaching and teacher training. He even claimed that the Coptic 
church should make sure that it used good Arabic (meaning SA), since Arabic 
was part of Egypt's national identity, but was not limited to Egyptian national 
identity (Suleiman 2003: 194). 
In the early 1940s I:Jusayn Haykal was appointed minister of education; 
private foreign schools were instructed to teach their pupils Arabic, Egyptian 
history and geography. Still, the primary language of instruction in these 
schools remained a foreign language. However, Shraybom-Shivtiel posits that 
'the introduction of Arabic as a required language constituted a turning point 
in Egypt's national education system' ( 1999: 137). 
EGYPT AFTER INDEPENDENCE 
Mter the 1952 revolution11, Nasser had in mind the goal of making education 
accessible to everyone by offering it free to all the population, and making 

242 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
primary education compulsory. In addition to that, according to Shraybom-
Shivtiel, 'Egypt, in its efforts to achieve national unity during the 1950s and 
1960s, positioned literary Arabic (SA) at the core ofits educational system and 
utilised it as the cornerstone in the development of the image of the young gen-
eration in the Arab World' (1999: 131). Nasser had the goal of helping other 
Arab countries achieve independence and emphasising similarities rather than 
differences among all Arab countries. SA was to play a major role as a unify-
ing force in defining the Arab nation at that time12 Shraybom-Shivtiel (1999) 
argued that in order for Egypt at that time to achieve national unification, it 
had to emphasise joint heritage and modem political needs. A logical result 
of the 1952 revolution was a change in both the attitude and the approach 
towards Arabic. To enhance the pan-Arab movement and to build a national-
ist feeling among the new generation of Egyptians, schools began teaching 
Islamic resources, classical Arabic literature and poetry. A new image of Egypt 
was being formed: that of Egypt as part of the Arab nation (Faksh 1980). 
Nasser himself, when addressing the United Nations on 28 September 
1960, said, 'We announce that we believe in a single Arab nation. The Arab 
nation was always united linguistically. And linguistic unity is unity of 
thought' (Dajani: 1973: 119-37). During this period, the idea held before the 
revolution that called for the simplification of SA grammar and spelling dis-
appeared. Colloquial lost its status once more, and became only the language 
of daily life. In fact, SA was encouraged as the language of academics, intel-
lectuals and educated people. The Arab Academy of Language worked hard 
in creating scientific terms in Arabic. Universities began teaching SA even in 
science faculties. In 1960 the Egyptian minister of education, Kamal al-Din 
I:Iusayn, called on the Arabic Language Academy in Cairo to recommend that 
only SA be spoken at universities13 (Shraybom-Shivtiel1999). 
According to Shraybom-Shivtiel, SA at that time, although not a spoken 
language, became the spoken language of the elite in some domains/contexts, 
such as lectures or formal gatherings and to discuss specific topics as well. It 
gained a new status for some intellectuals which replaced the status of foreign 
languages. If this were the aim of the revolution, then it was to a great extent 
achieved, since SA was not just the official language, but also gained the status 
of a prestige language, which carries political significance. 14 Note that SA had 
been a discredited language during foreign rule (1999: 138). 
However, the call for Egypt's identity distinct from that of the Arab world, 
and the importance of colloquial, may have been ignored for some time but 
they were never forgotten. Twenty years later, after Nasser's death in 1970, 
and the peace treaty with Israel in 1979, Egypt was ostracised by the rest 
of the Arab world. The feeling that Egyptians are different from Arabs was 
beginning to be fostered once more. According to Suleiman, the writer Liiwis 
<Awa<,l (1915-90) called for a distinct identity for Egyptians which should 
be reflected in their language. He called for this in a book published during 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
243 
the time of the presidency of Anwar Sadat (1970-81), when Egypt 'veered 
towards an "Egypt first" policy in response to the Arab boycott following its 
peace treaty with Israel in March 1979' (Suleiman 2003: 198). 'Awa<;t tried to 
separate the language factor from national identity and the political sphere. 
According to him, Egypt had been under colonising powers for about 4,000 
years. These colonisers were different: Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Turks and 
British, to name a few. By returning to its pharaonic past, Egypt could regain 
its sense of creativity. This could be done by the creation of an Egyptian lan-
guage. He even went so far as to say that the use of the glottal stop in Egyptian 
Arabic is caused by the racially bound physical constitution of the Egyptian 
vocal tract, a claim that is patently false (Suleiman 2003). In fact, this 'Egypt 
first' policy was also reflected in the education system in Egypt, starting from 
1980 and continuing to the present day. Egyptian children were taught in their 
social studies classes that their affiliation is first to their country, Egypt, then 
to the nation, the Arab world, and finally to their religion, in most cases Islam 
(see 'Abd al-Kafi 1991; Khi<;lr 2006). 
THE PRESENT-DAY SITUATION 
Currently there are two educational systems in Egypt: a public one and a 
private one (see Chart 5.1). The public one does not fill all labour-market jobs; 
there are two different markets for the public and the private systems. SA is 
taught more in the public schools, while the private system concentrates on 
foreign languages much more. The largest employer requiring moderate to 
advanced knowledge of SA is the state. Government posts, like those of Arabic 
teachers or those whose jobs involve reading and writing in SA, need knowl-
edge of SA. However, even the degree of this knowledge required varies from 
one job to another. For example, working in a state hospital as a physician, 
nurse, director of public relations, agent and secretary all require different 
levels oflanguage skills (Haeri 1997). 
Haeri (1997) poses the question of how much knowledge of SA is needed in 
jobs which by and large are more attractive and better paid than government 
jobs. By that she means jobs like those of an owner of a small or large business: 
construction, boutique, pharmacy, television production, doctors in private 
clinics and hospitals, teachers in private schools who do not teach SA etc. She 
gives the example of a diplomat who does not master SA and depends on his 
secretary for writing official documents in SA. Haeri posits that the upper 
classes do not receive their education in SA. They may have knowledge of it, 
and they can use standard words in their speech depending on context as bor-
rowed words. In that sense, Egypt is different from, for example, the USA, 
where there are also two different systems of education that possibly aim at 
different labour markets, but where in both systems the standard language, 
which is English, is taught. According to Haeri, this situation in Egypt does 
not favour SA. Haeri says: 

244 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Public/state schools 
All subjects taught in 
Arabic 
Foreign language (English) 
introduced for 3 hours a 
week increasing to 
approximately 5 hours in 
middle/ secondary 
school (ages 12-18) 
French, Spanish or 
German from first year of 
secondary school (age 16) 
Private schools 
supervised by 
government 
Arabic and English, 
French or German 
taught from 
kindergarten 
Same curriculum as 
public schools, But 
both Arabic and English 
(or foreign language) 
taught an equal 
amount of hours. 
Language of instruction 
in science and maths may 
be English, French or 
German 
Second foreign 
language taught from 
Independent private 
schools 
No Arabic taught 
Curriculum set by the 
country of origin (USA, 
UK) 
fourth year of primary school 
I 
Public universities 
Humanities taught in Arabic 
Science, medicine and technology 
taught in Arabic (lectures) and 
English (texts, terminology) 
I 
! 
Private universities 
Institutions accredited by 
foreign bodies (e.g. American 
University in Cairo, accredited in 
the USA) 
Entire curriculum taught in 
English or any other foreign 
language 
Arabic not taught, or taught as 
foreign language 
Chart 5.1 
The education system in Egypt 
It appears that by and large members of the upper classes in Egypt are not 
the ones who know the official language the best or use it the most. In fact, 
speaking with a number ofEgyptian sociologists and anthropologists, 
I was told that I should use the criterion of foreign language school 
attendance as central to my classification of speakers. (1996a: 162-3)15 
Egypt is a country that is dependent on tourism to a great extent for 
its economic growth (Schaub 2000). It has been reported that the largest 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
245 
group of foreign tourists is in fact from the UK. According to the American 
University in Cairo career advising and placement services office, the number 
one criterion for finding a decent job is being able to demonstrate proficiency 
in English (cf. Russelll994: 147). In addition, since Sadat adopted the open-
door economic policy, Egyptians have been very keen on learning English. 
The role of English in the Arab world will be discussed in detail in section 
5.10. However, Chart 5.1 gives an idea of the organisation of the education 
system in Egypt. 
It is noteworthy that al-Azhar, though criticised by f:Iusayn, has played 
a role in maintaining SA, and the Academy of the Arabic Language, which 
existed much earlier than other academies in the Arab world, must have 
played a role as well. Egypt was under a different colonising force and suffered 
a different kind of discrimination against standard from the discrimination 
that North African countries have suffered. However, Shraybom-Shivtiel 
summarises the relation between policies and politics when he postulates that 
'the history of modem Arabic, therefore, serves as a microcosm of the devel-
opment of Egypt's socio-political image in the modem world' (1999: 138). 
5.5.2.2 Sudan 
Languages used in Sudan: SA, Sudanese Colloquial Arabic, Dinka, 
Bedawi, Beja, Nuer, Fur and English (and see list in the section below). 
Of all Arab countries, Sudan has the most languages used (Mugaddam 
2006). 
Ehno-linguistic make-up: Southern peoples 34 per cent (Nilotic and 
Nilo-Hamitic, Sudanic linguistics groups- Dinka, Nuer etc.); Arabised 
peoples of the north 40 per cent; non-Arabised peoples of the north 26 
per cent (Beja, Fur, Nuba etc.) (Lesch 1998: 17). 
Colonisation: 1882-1956 
In an article which is more political than linguistic, Sharkey (2008) discusses 
language policies in Sudan, and how these policies reflect the unbalanced 
political power in the country between the northern and the southern parts. 
Sharkey posits that the current language policy of Sudan in which SA is the 
sole official language will not be conducive to national unity but in fact to divi-
sions within Sudan (2008: 43). 
Y okwe ( 1984) had argued more than twenty years earlier that the language 
policy of Sudan does not take account of the southern languages. He claims 
that 51 per cent of the Sudanese people speak Arabic as their mother tongue, 
20 per cent speak Arabic as a second language, but only 5 per cent of southern-
ers speak Arabic as a second language. According to him, there are 136 lan-
guages spoken in Sudan, of which 114 are Sudanese and the rest are foreign, 
including English. Although in Khartoum 96 per cent of the population 

246 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
speak Sudanese Colloquial Arabic, in the south this is not the case. Among 
the languages spoken in the south are: Acholi, Aja, Avokaya, Bai, Baka, 
Banda-Mbres, Banda-Ndele, Belanda Bor, Belanda Viri, Beli, Berta, Boguru, 
Bongo, Didinga, Dongotono, Feroge, Gbaya, Gula, lndri, Kakwa, Lango, 
Lokoya, Lopit, Luwo, Mandari, Mangayat, Njalgulgule, Nuer, Shilluk, Suri, 
Tennet, Thur~ Toposa and Zande16 (see also Yokwe 1984: 153). In the north 
the Coptic church uses SA, while the Roman Catholic church uses Sudanese 
Colloquial Arabic and the Anglican churches use colloquial Arabic if it is the 
language of the community they are in. 
BEFORE INDEPENDENCE 
The British relied on Egyptian officers to govern Sudan from 1924 onward. The 
British also tried to block the spread of Arabic in the south by attempting a south-
ern policy I closed district policy in 1930-46. Under this policy Britain claimed 
that theN egroid Africans of the south were culturally and racially different from 
the northerners, who claim to be Arab. As a result, the southerners could either 
be separated from the northerners or be integrated into what was then British 
East Africa (corresponding roughly to the territory of present-day Kenya) ( cf. 
Yokwe 1984; Miller 2003). On the other hand, the British did not have a plan 
for teaching the different languages of the south. Teaching in southern Sudan 
was left in the hands of missionaries and was done by these missionaries first in 
the different vernaculars and then in English at higher levels (Miller 2003). This 
system corresponds to the linguistic ideology of the British, which was to teach 
in the child's vernacular mother tongue and then in English. Once more the 
British were not trying hard to promote English but to weaken SA. The rate of 
literacy in the south remained low compared to the north (Miller 2003). 
The British policy in the south did not succeed in eradicating Arabic, which 
still served as a lingua franca, but did succeed in creating an English-speaking 
Christian elite. In 1946 the closed district policy ended. 
The Report of the International Education Commission on Secondary 
Education in the Sudan of 1955 estimated that it was a 'waste of time and 
energy to teach the south their own vernaculars [i.e. their languages] in 
schools with no reading material available to them and no written literature, 
since in that case students could not pursue any reading after they left school' 
The same fact was emphasised even after independence in a UNESCO report 
in 1963. The report added that even if Latin script were used for these lan-
guages, teaching them would still be a futile task (Yokwe 1984). 
AFTER INDEPENDENCE 
Sudan gained its independence from British rule in 19 56 and Arabic was 
declared the sole official language of Sudan. According to Miller (2003: 11), 
there may have been an underlying ideology in the Sudanese government then 
that Arabic language and culture are superior to the southern African culture. 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
247 
As early as 1963, an organisation called The Sudan African Closed Districts 
National Union sent a petition to the UN complaining that Arabic had replaced 
the vernacular languages which were taught at lower elementary schools. They 
argued that children should begin with their native language, not a foreign one 
(a position that was advanced strongly by the 1953 UNESCO declaration enti-
tled The use of vernacular languages in education). In 1972, after the Addis Ababa 
agreement which put an end to the first civil war between the north and south, 
the regional government formulated a comprehensive policy which acknowl-
edged the use of the spoken languages. In rural areas the spoken languages are 
used in the first four years of school, and SA is introduced only orally. 
Economic and political inequality, and religious, cultural and racial differ-
ences, may be some of the reasons for the conflict between the southern and 
northern parts in Sudan. However, for the southerners Arabic is associated 
with the north and with Islam (Miller 2003: 16). 
The different languages used in Sudan, especially in the south, are the oral 
vehicle for folklore, traditions and local beliefs. These languages are used in 
communicating with family and friends. In the urban part of southern Sudan, 
Sudanese colloquial Arabic is used in the markets, schools and offices (see 
Mugaddam 2006). It also serves as a lingua franca. Although Arabic has a 
role in the towns in the south, it barely exists in the villages. As was noted 
earlier, the Sudanese languages are used in the first four primary school years 
in the south. In the north, at all levels of education English is used as a foreign 
language introduced at middle school and Arabic is the main language of 
instruction. There is no room for other local languages (Sharkey 2008). This 
emphasis on SA is because the government highlights Arab political unifica-
tion which is based not on colour or religion but on language. According to 
Yokwe (1984) southerners have been resisting this policy since the nineteenth 
century. However, Sudan is still struggling with the problem of acknowledg-
ing so many languages. Politicians, whether in the south or the north, may 
have to resort to Arabic since it is already the official language. As Yokwe 
(1984) puts it, southerners may have to accept Arabic not as a symbol of sub-
mission, but as a practical solution. 
THE PR~ENT-DAY SITUATION 
In the north, the government is still committed to Arabisation. Elementary, 
middle and secondary schools have been completely Arabised, including 
scientific and technical subjects. In 1991, higher education was formally 
Arabized throughout Sudan, although English remains a compulsory core 
subject at Khartoum University17 Also in 1991, Sudan established the Higher 
Authority of Arabisation (HAA) in order to establish SA as the language of 
instruction at universities in scientific and technical areas. The HAA's mission 
was to coin technical terms, to establish a SA scientific library and to encour-
age translation and scientific publications in SA (Shaaban 2006). 

248 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
The relation between the political conflict in Sudan and language ide-
ologies is highlighted by scholars in the field who are either for or against 
Arabisation. Those against it claim that Arabisation is a catalyst in the civil 
wars in southern Sudan from the 1950s onward, and the conflict in Darfur 
that erupted in 2003. Sharkey (2008: 28) postulates that having one language 
as the official language does not lead to unity but to resentment. She calls for 
the government's acknowledgement of the diversity within Sudan, including 
the linguistic diversity. Sharkey criticises the government's linguistic ideolo-
gies by positing that 'this Arabism is ideological, meanwhile, in the dictionary 
sense that it has inspired and justified a schema of actions or policies that are 
implicitly or explicitly adopted and maintained regardless of the course of 
events' (Sharkey 2008: 28). 
However, even Sharkey herself acknowledges that in spite of resentment 
feelings in the south of Sudan, Arabic (at least colloquial Arabic) is still 
spreading, especially in Darfur, and not for political or ideological reasons, but 
for practical ones, such as contact, trade and market forces. 
It is worth mentioning that southern Sudanese, like Berbers in Morocco, 
decided to codify their language (corpus planning) in a script other than the 
Arabic one. In Morocco it is Tifinagh script, and in Sudan it is Latin script, 
even though there were attempts by Egyptian teachers in the middle of the 
twentieth century to teach southern Sudanese languages in Arabic script (cf. 
Sharkey 2008). 
5.5.2.3 Palestine and Israel 
At the beginning of this chapter, I mentioned the fact that language policies do 
not always go hand in hand with language planning. One of the crucial factors 
that influence language policies is language contacts. In fact contact is more 
relevant than schools and curricula. This is the case in Israel and Palestine. 
While Arabs may not want to learn Hebrew in schools in the Gaza Strip and 
the West Bank, they learn it from contact with Israelis, often in prison in fact 
(Spolsky and Shohamy 1999). In Israel economic factors also play a major role, 
so while Israeli Jews do not feel the need to learn Arabic, Israeli Arabs feel 
the need to learn Hebrew. In fact the situation in both Israel and Palestine is 
crucial to our understanding of language policies because sometimes policies 
do not reflect reality and, in spite of political animosity, language contact leads 
eventually to language learning. I discuss the situation in Israel, then that in 
the Palestinian Territories. 
5.5.2.3.1 Language policy in Israel 
According to Spolsky (2004), the move to revive Hebrew in Palestine started 
in the 1890s. Hebrew began to be taught in the schools such as Zikhron 
Yaakov and Petach Tikvah. From 1890 onwards a political campaign started 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
249 
in Britain to have Hebrew recognised as an official language. The codifica-
tion of language was fast and efficient. Dictionaries were written, grammars 
codified and academies established. This is why Sirles (1999: 118) says that 
language policies apart from those of Hebrew can claim only modest success. 
In fact, Hebrew was recognised after World War I by the British mandate 
as an official language. It was used in the main public and private schools of 
the Jewish community, serving as a lingua franca among immigrants from 
many backgrounds. It was spread by a 'strong ideological campaign' (Spolsky 
1994: 227). The British army entered Jerusalem in 1918, and prior to this 
date English and Arabic were the official languages. Britain added Hebrew 
as the official language and gave the Hebrew-speaking and Arabic-speaking 
communities responsibility over their own educational systems, with little or 
no financial support. According to Spolsky and Shohamy (1999), the Hebrew 
speakers seized this opportunity and used it to support the spread of Hebrew. 
Although Arabs and Jews had separate school systems, there was language 
contact between them, mainly with the Jews learning Arabic (Amara 2003). 
In 1948 Hebrew became the national language and dominated all other offi-
cial languages. English was dropped from the list of official languages and only 
Hebrew and Arabic remained. Israeli Arabs continued to use their vernacular 
in speaking and SA in their schools, but also had to learn Hebrew formally 
in schools as a required subject and informally at home (Spolsky 1994: 228). 
However, 'official language use has maintained a de facto role for English, after 
Hebrew but before Arabic' (Spolsky 1994: 227; cf Fishman et al. 1977). For 
example, Spolsky says that 'if public notices are bilingual they tend to be more 
often in Hebrew and English than in Hebrew and Arabic' (1994: 227). 
There were plenty of Hebrew courses for new immigrants. Hebrew became 
the language of government, parliament, television and radio stations. There 
is also an Arabic-language radio station, and the government television station 
broadcasts Arabic three and half hours daily. However, according to Spolsky 
and Shohamy (1999), English has more status and Arabic is somewhat dis-
criminated against (Spolsky 1994: 228). Spolsky and Shohamy (1999: 119) 
posit that Israeli Arabs' main complaint is not that their language is not taught 
in schools, because it is in fact taught in schools, and they are also keen on 
learning both English and Hebrew, but that their language is not used in 
signposts and the provision of Arabic subtitles and programmes on Israeli 
commercial television. 
Spolsky and Shohamy (1999: 119) mentioned three court cases in their 
study. In the first one, a group of Arabic speakers in Haifa requested the city 
authorities to have Arabic added to signposts that are in Hebrew and English. 
In the second case, a local Arab developer had asked to require the city author-
ities in upper Nazareth to permit him to display advertising posters written in 
Arabic only, rather than enforcing a municipal code requiring that two thirds 
of a poster be in Hebrew. In the third case, the ministry of public roads was 

250 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
asked to add Arabic to road signs. According to Spolsky and Shohamy (1999: 
119), these three cases have clear political nndertones; by asserting their 
linguistic rights, the Arab Israelis are trying to assert their identity (Spolsky 
1994: 228). The court resolved the three cases without the need to resort to the 
constitution, which states that Arabic is an official language. In the first case, 
the municipality agreed to add trilingual signs in Hebrew, English and Arabic 
in its plan over the next years. In the second case, the Arabic signs were per-
mitted, and in the third case, the ministry agreed to make the changes. 
It is noteworthy, however, that a large portion of the population is bilingual 
or multilingual. Among the languages spoken in Israel are different varieties of 
Arabic from North Africa, Egypt, Syria, Iraq and Yemen. Yiddish is also used 
among older immigrants from Eastern Europe and ultra-orthodox Jews who 
refuse to use Modem Hebrew. Among the other languages used are Russian, 
and the Jewish varieties of Amharic among Ethiopian Jews. To deal with the 
complicated language situation, the Israeli Ministry of Education supervises 
2,500 vocational, agricultural and comprehensive schools, 2,000 with Hebrew 
as the language of instruction and 500 with Arabic. In the Arabic-language 
school areas, Hebrew starts from the third grade and continues as a main 
subject nntil twelfth grade. A new Hebrew curriculum with emphasis on the 
communicative aspects of language rather than on literature and culture is 
being suggested (Amara 2007). 
As for the Jewish schools with Hebrew as the language of education, the 
teaching and learning of Arabic are a problem. Spolsky (1994) contends that 
this is because of the diglossic situation, which makes it difficult to decide 
which variety to teach - standard or vernacular - and also because of the atti-
tude towards Arabic. 
InJnne 1986 Yitzhak N avon, then minister of education-and himselffluent 
in Arabic- created a new policy of teaching Arabic as a compulsory subject in 
seventh to twelfth grades. SA was to be taught as a compulsory subject, with 
colloquial as an option, in the fourth year. Until then Arabic, meaning SA, in 
Jewish schools had been compulsory for three hours a week for grades 7-9, 
and optional for grades 10-12. Whether or not policies of teaching Arabic are 
successful depends on the political situation (Spolsky 1994: 232), and accord-
ing to Spolsky and Shohamy (1999) few students ended up mastering Arabic, 
for a number of reasons. First, three hours a week is not enough to reach pro-
ficiency levels. Second, students were taught SA and not the spoken variety, 
and they were usually taught in Hebrew. Finally, a negative attitude towards 
the language does not usually help in the process ofleaming. For Jews in Israel 
Arabic is the language of neighbouring conntries, a number of which are not 
on good terms with Israe~ and the language of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip 
and the West Bank as well as Israeli Arabs. The small minority who master 
Arabic, according to Spolsky and Shohamy (1999: 146), may either work for 
the intelligence service or become orientalists at the nniversity. 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
251 
However, Spolsky (1994) speculates that Arabic as a minority language 
will be maintained among Arabs because of neighbouring countries, although 
among Jews it remains a marginal language. It may be a spoken vernacular 
at home among groups of immigrants, or a school subject, but it may remain 
no more than that. Spolsky contends that bilingualism in Israel is uneven, 
because while Arabs master Hebrew and even English sometimes, Israelis do 
not master Arabic. 
This uneven bilingualism is significant since it shows that language reflects 
political power, ideologies and economic factors. In the case of Israel, only 
Israeli Arabs need to learn Hebrew, since it will help them develop their 
careers and participate more fully in the country in which they are citizens. 
5.5.2.3.2 Language policy in the Palestinian Territories 
Amara (2003) posits that the ideal policy in the West Bank and Gaza Strip 
would be one in which Arabic was maintained for relations with Arab coun-
tries, but also the need for both Hebrew and English was considered. Amara 
posits that since Israel is a reality Palestinians live with, then it is essential for 
them to learn its language. English will also be used for communication with 
the western world. Meanwhile, the end of Ottoman rule in Palestine in 1917 
brought about changes in all areas, including language (Amara 2003: 319). 
In 1948 Israel was established on most of Palestine's land except the West 
Bank, which was annexed to Jordan, and the Gaza Strip, which became the 
responsibility of Egypt (Amara 2003: 219). After 1948 the Jordanian curricu-
lum was in force in the West Bank, and the Egyptian curriculum in the Gaza 
Strip. This was the case even during the Israeli occupation. From 1967 to 1994 
Israel occupied these two areas. English then served as a lingua franca between 
Palestinians who did not know Hebrew and Israelis who spoke no Arabic. 
English was viewed as a neutral language (Al-Masri 1988). Note that some older 
Palestinians had learned Hebrew during the British mandate through contacts 
with Jews. The use of Hebrew in the West Bank and Gaza stopped after 1948, 
but after the 1967 occupation contact between the two was re-established. 
Hebrew began to be learned informally. It became the main language ofbusiness 
and trade between Israelis and Palestinians. For example, Palestinian workers 
in the Israeli labour market learned spoken but not written Hebrew. After the 
Intifada (the late 1993 Palestinian uprising against Israeli forces), Hebrew was 
in fact taught in prisons. Knowledge of Hebrew was instrumental and work-
related. It was also being taught at private institutions (Amara 2003). 
Then when the Palestinian authorities took over both areas, there was a need 
for an independent Palestinian policy. Arabic became the official language of 
Palestine, and English was used as a second language because of its status as 
a global language. It is mainly used in institutions of higher education. The 
first Palestinian curriculum for general education in 1996 emphasised the 
status of English. There was a proposal to teach English from first grade in all 

252 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
government and private schools, which is now being implemented. English is 
taught for approximately three hours in the first years of school. 
Amara argues that, although the attitude towards it is negative, Hebrew 
is needed as a functional language given the political situation (Amara 2003: 
218). Hebrew is taught at universities in the Arabic departments, but not 
spoken Hebrew, only written (Hamed 1995 cited in Amara 2003: 224). The 
Palestinian workers who experienced life in Israel can speak Hebrew much 
better than students who studied it at university. There has been a proposal 
to teach Hebrew as a third language in schools, but it has never been imple-
mented. French was also considered (Amara 2003). 
5.5.2.4 Conclusion to British patterns of colonisation 
In the previous section, we examined four countries colonised by Britain: 
Egypt, Sudan, Israel and the Palestinian Territories. These countries suffer 
from different problems and have different political systems and different 
language policies and ideologies. In Egypt, perhaps more than any other Arab 
country, the competition between SA and ECA has been highlighted by a 
number of intellectuals, some preferring the symbolic significance that the 
colloquial carries to that carried by SA. In August 2006, a Coptic Christian 
multimillionaire launched a new, private, Egyptian satellite channel called 
0-TV The channel's distinctive feature is its use of ECA for all domains, 
even in news broadcasts, a domain associated exclusively with SA. As was 
expected, there were Egyptians who were in favour of the idea of using ECA 
in the news and claimed that this is the only channel that highlights Egypt's 
distinct identity. However, the fact that the channel is owned by a Coptic 
Christian and uses ECA met with scepticism from others. Blogs started dis-
cussing the pros and cons of using ECA in the news for the first time in Egypt. 
The Muslim Brotherhood website accused the channel of aiming at an audi-
ence of rich Egyptian youth and of encouraging the breakdown oflanguage in 
Egypt. Using ECA in the news was regarded as a conspiracy, and an impracti-
cal one at that, since it is hard to read the news in colloquial, almost needing 
more effort than to read it in SA. (Kamal2008)18 It is clear that the issue of 
ECA versus SA in Egypt is far from resolved. 
The problem in Egypt that may have a direct effect on SA is the clear gap 
between the elite and the masses (Table 5.5). The elite send their children 
to private schools, in which they learn English, French or German, and the 
masses can afford only state schools, in which Arabic is the main language of 
instruction. With Egypt now moving into a capitalist system and privatising 
most of the companies owned by the government, knowledge of SA is down-
played and knowledge of English specifically is becoming a must. Since the 
government is basically failing to provide any jobs, the private sector will set 
the rules. Due to privatisation, a whole generation who were working for the 

Table 5.5 Weekly hours/ periods per language in primary and secondary education: Egypt, Sudan and Palestinian Territories 
Year 
Egypt' 
Sudanb 
Palestinian Territories< 
Primary 
Middle school 
Secondary school 
Basic education 
Secondary 
Basic education 
Secondary 
education 
(3 yrs) 
(3 yrs) 
(8 yrs) 
education 
(10 yrs) 
education 
(6 yrs) 
(3 yrs) 
(2 yrs) 
Arad 
FL1 
Ara 
FLl 
Ara 
FLl 
FL2 
Ara 
Eng 
Ara 
Eng 
Ara 
Eng 
Ara 
Eng 
1 
12 
3 
7 
s 
6 
6 
3 
10 
4 
4 
8 
2 
12 
3 
7 
s 
4-8 
4--8 
3 
9 
4 
4 
8 
3 
12 
3 
7 
s 
4--8 
4-8 
3 
9 
4 
4 
8 
4 
11 
3 
9 
8 
s 
11 
3 
9 
3 
7 
6 
11 
3 
9 
3 
7 
7 
9 
7 
7 
8 
9 
7 
7 
9 
7 
10 
s 
Notes: 
• UNESCO (2007). Numbers represen periods of 45 minutes. 
b UNESCO (2007).N umbers represent periods of 40 minutes. The informal use of the spoken languages in rural areas (P.OOO) is not shown. 
c Palestinian National Authority, Ministry of Education (1998). 
d Ara=Arabic; FLl=First foreign language; FL2=Second foreign language; Eng= English. 
3 
s 
s 
3 
s 
s 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 

254 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
government were forced into early retirement by the private companies that 
bought the companies where they used to work, with the result that a new gen-
eration will take over for which SA does not play a major role. A new phenom-
enon in Egypt is the great number of private universities that are opening up 
beside the American University in Cairo, and the increase in private schools 
that are not supervised by the Egyptian Ministry of Education and in which 
SA is basically not taught at all. Thus, there is a new generation of Egyptians 
who are highly educated and who speak ECA but who are illiterate in SA 
because in their private schools SA is not taught at all. This seems the most 
pressing problem for Egypt today. 
Sudan, on the other hand, suffers from an ethnic, religious and politi-
cal conflict that is reflected linguistically in the southerners' opposition to 
Arabic. The conflict in Sudan is mainly about distribution of resources 
and power, but also about projection of identity, and whether the identity 
of Sudan is that of an Arab country or an Mrican one, a Muslim country 
or a Christian/multireligious one. While Sharkey (2008: 21-2) accuses the 
Sudanese government of imposing an Arab identity on Sudan only to become 
a member of the Arab League and get the help of Gulf countries, northern 
Sudanese intellectuals emphasise the Arab origin of Sudan. 
In Israel and the Palestinian Territories, the status of Arabic is a reflection 
of an ongoing political conflict whose outcome, as Spolsky and Shohamy posit 
(1999), will play the major role in determining the direction of language poli-
cies there. Currently, according to Spolsky (2004 ), Arabic is regarded by Israeli 
Jews either as the language of the enemy, or as the language of neighbouring 
countries that are not all at peace with Israel. And yet, it is also the language 
of the biggest minority group in Israel, who interact with and participate in 
different domains oflife in Israel. As for the Palestinian Territories, Arabic is 
the language that connects them to their past and to their neighbours. 
In all the above discussion, Britain's linguistic role was not prominent. 
Britain's political one was. Nevertheless, English has gained a status in all 
the countries discussed above. English managed to forge its own role, as the 
language of the elite in Egypt, as the neutral lingua franca for Israelis and 
Palestinians, and as the safe haven for southern Sudanese instead of Arabic. 
Unlike France, Britain did not try to establish its language in the colonies 
discussed above: English established itself. This statement will be discussed 
in detail in section 5.1 0. 
5.6 LANGUAGE POLICIES IN OTHER PARTS OF THE 
ARAB WORLD 
fu section 5. 5, I examined the relation between language ideology and language 
policies in North African countries, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Sudan, Israel 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
255 
and the Palestinian Territories. Libya, although a North African conntry, 
is different from the countries we have analysed. It was occupied by Italy in 
1911. At the time, Italy tried to impose Italian as the language of instruction 
in schools, but this policy was not successful for a number of reasons. First, 
there was strong local resistance most of the time. Thus there was no time for 
people to assimilate and learn the language. In addition, few Libyans attended 
the schools where Italian was the language of instruction. In fact, at that time 
few Libyans attended schools of any kind. After the 1969 revolution, a strong 
Arabisation policy began (Pereira 2007). SA became the language of instruc-
tion at all educational levels and at universities for humanities subjects. Yet 
English is still taught in schools and used at universities in science and tech-
nology subjects, in addition to SA (Spolsky 2004). 
In the Gulf countries, the present linguistic situation is critical. Due to 
immigration to these oil countries, a vast number of language minorities exist. 
A great number of people in these countries are multilingual as a result of 
significant but marginalised foreign minorities. For example, in Bahrain, one 
third of the population of 650,000 is made up of foreigners. Although Arabic 
is the official language, there are large minority groups, like the Persians. Thus 
there are 50,000 speakers ofPersian, 20,000 speakers of Philippine languages, 
and 18,000 speakers of Urdu. Kuwait has a population of2 million, over half of 
whom are foreigners. Oman has a population of2,400,000, a high proportion 
of which is again made up of foreign workers. In 2001, the population of Saudi 
Arabia was 22.7 million, 5.3 million of whom were non-nationals. Although 
there is a policy of indigenisation in labour, foreigners still constitute a large 
group in these countries (Spolsky 2004: 141). 
One cannot speculate how and whether language policies in these coun-
tries will change because of the significant minorities present in them. But 
since we have shown that it is language contact and interaction that lead to 
the preservation and learning of a language, then one can predict that these 
countries will have to take account of their minorities, who are usually there 
to stay, in spite the fact that they may be contract workers. My gut feeling is 
that English, in addition to Pidgin Arabic. will serve as a lingua franca in these 
countries and may act as an instrumental language, and as such will over time 
gain more status than Arabic, whether standard or colloquial. 
In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), the government has decided to imple-
ment a law for the protection of Arabic, SA. When the deputy minister of 
culture, Bilal Budiir, was asked by journalists how an Arab country produces a 
law to protect its own language, he replied that Arabs have become a minority 
in the UAE, in which at least ten languages are spoken, Arabic is the fourth 
language spoken at the moment, and English is the main lingua franca. Of 
the population of the UAE, 65 per cent are non-Arab foreigners; the indig-
enous population makes up only 15 per cent. Sharjah, the capital, has already 
imposed a law that requires all government offices to use Arabic for their oral 

256 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
and written transactions. The rest of the Emirates is still in the process of 
forming a similar law (Ma~amidiyah 2007). 
5·7 THE ROLE OF LANGUAGE ACADEMIES IN THE 
ARAB WORLD 
There are at least five language academies in the Arab world: the Arab 
Academy of Damascus, established in 1919; the Arabic Language Academy in 
Cairo, established in 1932; the Iraqi Academy, established in 1947; the Arabic 
Language Academy of Jordan, established in 1976, and the Arabic Language 
Academy in Libya and in Algeria, which is not functioning at the moment. 
The idea of creating an Arabic language academy sprang up first in Syria 
and then in Egypt at the beginning of the twentieth century and was inspired 
by the French Academy, which was founded in 1635 with the goal of prescrib-
ing rules for the French language in order to purify it and make it capable of 
treating the arts and sciences. Currently the aim of the French Academy is 
still to guard the French language, by producing standardised grammars and 
dictionaries (Spolsky 2004: 64). 
The main purposes of all the Arabic academies are the preservation of the 
Arabic language and the development of Arabic to meet the needs of modem 
society in all domains of human knowledge (Sawaie 1986: 57, 2006). The 
academies are also responsible for the creation and standardisation of scientific 
terms (cf Khalifa 1977) and the Arabisation of terms from other languages. 
Examples of this from the Arabic language academy in Cairo are the word for 
telephone, which is either ha:tifor tilifo:n, and the word for bank, which is 
either bank or ma~raf(Sawaie 1986 ). 
Each academy focuses on a different aspect in the process of preserving 
Arabic, meaning SA, and each academy changes its focus over the years. The 
academy of Damascus started with the following goals (Sawaie 2006: 635): 
1. the simplification of literary work to make it accessible to the public 
2. the establishment of a national public library 
3. the coinage oftechnical and scientific terms 
4. the publication of an Arabic journal 
5. support for Arabic research and publications. 
In 2001 the academy realised the need to unify technical terms across the 
Arab world and to find methods of simplifying SA grammar. The academy 
also aimed at encouraging Syrians and Arabs more generally to use SA in all 
domains of life, and at finding means and ways to curb the spread of dialects 
(Sawaie 2006). This last goal of the academy of Damascus is not shared as 
enthusiastically by the other academies. Although the ideology comes up in 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
257 
intellectual arguments in Egypt from time to time, it is not as dominant as it is 
in Syria, for political reasons (see discussion of Syria above). 
The Cairo academy has the following goals (Sawaie 2006: 635): 
1. the maintenance of Arabic (SA) by making sure it has new terminology 
for science and technology 
2. the editing of classical texts and manuscripts 
3. the compilation of dictionaries and the publishing of a journal. 
Note that currently membership in the Cairo academy is not restricted to 
Egyptians or even Arabs but is open to all scholars who excel in maintaining 
SA (Sawaie 2006). 
The academies in Damascus and Iraq have been more concerned with 
aspects of historical linguistics and literature, while the academy in Cairo has 
been concerned with developing materials in SA morphology, grammar and 
coinage of scientific and technological terms. All the academies have produced 
a yearly journal, although this has not always been regular because of eco-
nomic and political difficulties (Sawaie 2006). 
The academies base their words on qiyiis 'analogical derivation', which is 
the formation of words according to existing word patterns. This enables the 
academies to produce new terminology and new words from existing roots. 
For example, one of the forms approved by Cairo Academy in the 1930s was 
jifa:la, which denotes professions like (iba:fah 'printing',jira:bah 'surgery' 
etc. Dictionaries are then produced with the new forms 
One problem with all these academies is that there is no guarantee that 
writers in particular and society in general will follow their recommendations, 
since the academies lack any authority. In March 2007 the chair of the Cairo 
Academy, Fariiq Shiishah, stated in Akhbiir al-Adab, the literary magazine 
of Egypt, that the role of the academy was diminishing because of its lack of 
authority. He proposed that the recommendations of the academy should be 
imposed on all mass media in Egypt and should be declared compulsory by 
them. Whether this is possible or not is another question. 
Another problem is the lack of coordination of activities between the dif-
ferent academies. Thus, each academy may coin a different term for the same 
concept. An example of this lack of coordination is the fact that during the 
political unity between Syria and Egypt, 1958--61, the two countries' acad-
emies were united, but when the political unity broke up, the academies also 
broke up. Again, politics plays a major role in forming policies and influencing 
language. Members of the academies were aware of this problem; a call for the 
unification of all academies was established early on, in 1956, and again in 1971 
when coordination between the academies in Egypt, Syria and Iraq was more 
prominent. In 1977 the Jordanian academy followed suit. Now two members 
of each academy meet, headed by a president, to standardise forms and arrange 

258 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
conferences. For example, a conference on SA legal terminology took place in 
Damascus in 1972, one on SA oil terminology in Baghdad in 1973, and another 
on SA Arabic medical terminology in Tunis in 1992. Currently the academies 
are still suffering from political disagreement and lack of resources and finan-
cial support. After the last war in Iraq (beginning in 2003), it is still not clear 
whether the academy in Iraq will function again (cf. Sawaie 2006). 
5.8 SA, POLITICS AND THE ACHING NATION: 
A CASE STUDY 
Throughout this chapter the relation between SA and politics has been exam-
ined. In this section I give a current example of the symbolic role of SA in 
defining a nation and serving political aims. I contrast two interviews with two 
Arab leaders: the Syrian president Bashshar al-Asad and his Yemeni counter-
part <Ali <Abd Allah Salil). The markedness theory as developed by Myers-
Scotton (1998, 2006) will be used to explain the data, as well as the concept of 
indexicality as explained by Woolard (2004). 
The first example I discuss is an extract from an interview held with the 
current president of Syria immediately after the Hezbollah-Israel war that 
took place in Lebanon in summer 2006 (broadcast on Al-Jazeera). The role of 
Syria in supporting Hezbollah was discussed, but more importantly so was the 
role of Iran in the war. Iran is not an Arab country and yet it has a very close 
relationship with Syria, which at the moment is one of the ardent believers in 
the Arab nation and the slogan 'one nation, one language', which was nearly 
dead after the death of the Egyptian president Nasser in 197019 The Syrian 
president, as was said earlier, is referred to in the Syrian media as 'the leader 
of the Arabs' Syria has always emphasised the importance of SA in both its 
schools and universities. Given that there are still both Christians and Jews 
in Syria beside Muslims, it is indeed language that can be the unifying factor: 
Syria has only 70 per cent Sunni Muslims, 12 per cent Christians (mostly 
Orthodox and Greek Catholic), and 18 per cent other minority groups includ-
ing Jews and Druze. This again helps us understand why Syrian intellectuals 
emphasise SA so much and have the ambition of SA replacing the colloquial 
one day. Arabic is the unifying factor in a country that does not emphasise its 
religious identity and has a political system that tends towards socialism (see 
section 5.5.1.2 above on Syria). 
The president of Syria, whether in interviews or speeches, speaks in SA, 
unlike the president of Egypt, who switches between SA and ECA. Example 
(1) below is crucial not only because of the topic discussed, but also because 
the president, when interviewed by an Egyptian journalist who switches 
throughout the interview between SA and ECA, sticks to SA only. By doing 
so, as will become clear below, he lays claims to all the authoritative powers 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
259 
of SA and confirms his support for the Arab nation even if collaboration with 
Iran is necessary. Once more, SA becomes a symbol for the identity of Syria 
and the nation in general. 
(I) Interviewer: ?ayna ?i:ra:n min ha:za if-farq il-?aw~af ig-gadi:dl I farq 
?aw~a( gadi:dl il-Ia.· fib ir-ra?i:sifi:hl amri:ka w- ?isra?i:/1 zayyi ma 
kunna bi-n?u:/1 ?am il-Ia.· fib ir-ra?i:si fi: h ?i:ra:nl ?am if-f arabi I 
'What is the role oflran in this new Middle East? Who is the main 
player in this new Middle East? Is it the USA and Israel as you men-
tioned? Or is it Iran? Or is it the Arabs?' 
The question asked by the Egyptian journalist is not in SA. He uses ECA, as 
in bi-n?u:l, which has the ECA aspectual marker b-as well as the ECA glottal 
stop rather than the SA q. The reply of the president, who is not reading, is in 
fact in SA with case and mood markings. He also uses SA negation, demon-
stratives and syntactic structures. 
The unmarked code in this interview is established by the interviewer as a 
mixed code of both SA and ECA. This is usually the code used in interviews 
in the media by interviewees who are not usually reading, even if the inter-
viewer uses SA. When the president replies in a specially elevated variety of 
SA that many, including the journalist, would not be able to produce extem-
poraneously, he is in a sense appealing to all the connotations of SA, especially 
the legitimacy associated with it. SA is then a marked choice that has an effect 
on the audience (on markedness, see Chapter 2, section 5.2.1). Applying the 
indexicality concept as developed by Woolard (2004) to this interview, we find 
that each code presupposes and is associated with a social context: a mixture of 
SA and a colloquial by the interviewee is associated with political interviews, 
while SA is associated with public political speeches. If SA is then used in a 
different context, such as in a political interview, the speaker who uses it lays 
claim to all the indexes of SA, including the authoritative ones. 
(2) 
President: ma yuhimmuni huwa 1-farabl tabfan ?isra?i:lla:fib ra?i:si 
min xi/a:/ fudwa:nl il-wulaya:t il-muttabida Ia: fib ra?i:sil min xi/a:/ 
mawqifha ka quwwa fu~ma: I wa min xila:l dafmaha al-ge:r mabdu:d 
1-isra?i:l/ amma bi-nisba 1-?i:ra:nfo hiya dawlafi haoihi al-manfiqa 
munou 1-?azall munou t-ta:ri:xl I !a: kin ?ana ?uri:du ?an ?aqu:lal ?in 
ka:nat ?i:ran Ia: fib ra?i:sil al-muhimml ?an nara ?annana al-ga:?ib 
ar-ra?i:si ka-farabl fan as-sa:ba as-siya:siyyafi manfiqatinal ha:oihi 
hiya an-nuqta allatiyajib ?an nara:hal I ?ahamml min ?an nu¢i:f 
waqtanafil badi:()il ?an ?i:ra:n talfab dawr yajib ?anyakbur aw ya~gurl 
'I am interested in the Arabs. Of course Israel is a crucial player because 
of its attacks as an enemy. The USA is a crucial player because of its 
role as a super-power and its unlimited support for Israel. As for Iran, 

260 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
it has been a conntry in this region for a long time, since the beginning 
of history. But I want to mention that iflran is the main player we have 
to nnderstand that we as Arabs are the main absentee in the political 
arena in our region. This is the point that we have to nnderstand. This 
is more important than wasting our time wondering whether the role of 
Iran should be less or more.' 
When declaring that his main interest is the Arabs, it is SA that the president 
uses. For whatever role Iran plays, it is Arabs who are crucial to him and 
whom, at least in this public statement, he expresses his concern about. The 
contrast between him and the annonncer is salient to the audience. 
Note the sentence in example (3), in which the annonncer uses the glottal 
stop and ECA structure: 
(3) 
zayyt 
ma 
kunna 
bi-nlu:l 
like 
that 
be-2pl-perf asp-2pl-say 
'as you mentioned' 
Now contrast example (3) with example (4), in which the president uses the 
SAq: 
(4) 
la:kin 
?ana 
?uri:du 
?an 
But 
I 
lsg-want-ind 
that 
'But I want to mention that' 
laqu:la 
lsg-say-sub 
The Syrian president uses mood marking, as in: 
(5) 
?ana 
?uri:du 
?an 
I 
lsg-want-ind 
that 
'I want to mention' 
He also uses case marking as in: 
(6) fil- badi:Oi 
in-det-talk-gen 
?aqu:la 
lsg-say-sub 
'in wondering (speaking about)' 
However, the agenda of the Syrian president is very different from that of 
the Yemeni one, for example. While Syria derives its power from Nasser's 
belief, mentioned earlier, that the Arab world is nnited linguistically, the 
Yemeni president derives his legitimacy partially from his claim that Yemen, 
nnlike its Gulf neighbours, is a democratic conntry. The president ofYemen 
projects an identity of a democratic ruler and his words are aimed at a non-

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
26I 
Yemeni audience first and foremost. In a similar context, the Yemeni presi-
dent, unlike the Syrian one, uses a number of features from his dialect and 
does not attempt to stick to SA. 
Example (7) is taken from an interview with theY emeni president that took 
place in 2007 (on Al-Jazeera). The interviewer uses SA only and is formal in 
addressing the president; he addresses him with the 'you' plural, for example, 
much as one would do in French or German. The issue for discussion is the 
corruption that is prevalent in Yemen and whether or not the president has 
taken measures to curb it. The fact that the interviewer uses SA only is not a 
surprise, since interviewers usually prepare their questions beforehand and can 
read them from a piece of paper as well. This interviewer has a piece of paper 
to read from. However, as was said earlier, use of both SA and a colloquial by 
the interviewee, who is not supposed to have prepared the answers and who is 
not reading from a piece of paper, is common in political interviews. By using 
a mixture of SA and colloquial Yemeni, the president is using an unmarked 
variety rather than a marked one. He, unlike the Syrian president, is not laying 
claims to the indexes of SA. 
(7) 
Interviewer: sa-Juf[i: k baf¢ al-amfJila min da: xi! al-~izb al-~a: kim 
nafsul fa/a mayabdul huna:k Jazmafi 1-baladl ~atta al-~zb al-~a:kim 
yuftabar guz£ min al-Jazmal 
'I will give you some examples of personnel in the ruling party itself. It 
seems there is a crisis in the country. Even the ruling party is consid-
ered part of the problem.' 
President: na~u naftadd inni ha:oa al-ba/ad balad dimugra:{i: I wa huwa 
famfatun mu¢i:Jaji 1-man{igal haria mafru:fl wi Jayyi baladdimugra:{il 
il-go:lfi:ha akfJar mimma huwa ~gi:gal il-go:lfi:hal aw al-~akyifi:ha 
fakfJar mimma hiya ~gi:gil le.fl lirannifi:ha dimugra{iyyal Jioa balad 
ma-ji:ha dimugra:{iyyal ma ~adayigdarryi~ki: fan il-fasa:dl 
'We appreciate the fact that this country is a democratic one. It is a 
beacon oflight in the region. This is a known fact. In any democratic 
country, some of what is being said is untrue. Some talk or some of 
the gossip is beyond the truthful. Why? Because there is democracy. If 
there is a country that does not have democracy, no one can speak about 
corruption.' 
Interviewer: bil-¢ab{ 
'Exactly.' 
President: ma ~ada yigdar yi~ki: fan il-fasa:dl 
'No one can speak about corruption.' 
Interviewer: ~a~i:~ 
'True.' 
President: Ji~a. 
I fa dad min il-muxa:lifi:n da: xi! il-ta~gi:ga:tl 
wifil niya:ba il- fa:mmal niya:bit il-Jamwa:l il-fa:mmal {ayyib 

262 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
ma-tigdar-fi tijarrimhum aw tiffin fanhuml 'lila fi ¢o: 'l ma yagirrah 
il-ga¢a: 'l I I ma-tigdir-fl lakin fadad min al-murtakibi:n da: xi! il-niya: ba 
bil-fafara:t aw il-fifrina:t min muxtalafmu'lassasa:t id-dawlal ha:da 
waMihl. 
'We 
I A nwnber of the perpetrators are nnder investigation, and 
before the general prosecutor, and the state finance bureau. Well, you 
cannot hold them acconntable, or report on them, except in the light of 
that which the courts establish. You cannot, but some of the perpetra-
tors are before the general prosecutor, tens, twenties of them from all 
the different institutions ofthe state. That is one.' 
The Yemeni president, nnlike the Syrian one, uses only colloquial negation, 
as in ma-tigdir-f 'you cannot' (repeated), to defend himself against the inter-
viewer's accusations of corruption in Yemen. The use of colloquial negation 
may be to add emphasis to the denial by the president of the existence of such 
corruption. The use of colloquial morpho-syntactic features is highlighted 
by the use of SA morpho-syntactic features by the interviewer, such as the 
use of the sa- future marker with the SA verb sa-'lufti: k 'I will give you' 
Phonologically, the president consistently uses the g realisation of the q vari-
able even in words like dimugra:tiyya 'democracy', which is now used widely 
with the q, and does not occur with a glottal stop in conntries that use a glottal 
stop instead of the q, like Egypt and Syria. He even starts the last section of(7) 
with the colloquial prononn 'libna 'we', rather than the standard one, nabnu. 
The use of SA by the Syrian president is in line with the political and 
ideological agenda of Syria. It comes as no surprise that Syria is very keen 
on promoting SA in schools and nniversities while Yemen does not show the 
same enthusiasm. An increasing nwnber of private schools in Yemen now 
teach science and maths in English rather than Arabic. The emphasis on SA as 
a nnifying factor is waning in Yemen. In fact, the president in this interview is 
to a great extent differentiating himself from his neighbouring Arab conntries 
that are not democratic in nature. I am not implying that SA is not demo-
cratic; what I am trying to imply is that the emphasis by the president in that 
interview is not on the unity of the nation that speaks one language, but rather 
on distinguishing himself from the rest of the nation which has a different 
political system. It would be surprising if he used SA as the Syrian president 
did, since the topic is not 'we Arabs', but rather how 'we Y emenis' are demo-
cratic. The expected unmarked choice is what the president ofYemen uses: a 
mixture of SA and colloquial. 
It is worth mentioning that although the topic of discussion is different, the 
setting ofboth interviews is similar. 
To conclude this section, I have contrasted the two presidents to show 
that the political nndertones of language choice are not to be ignored. While 
considering language policies in the Arab world, one has to also consider the 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
263 
political agenda of different countries. In the Arab world there may be an 
underlying ideology that 'we speak one language', but within the nation as 
such there are different political systems and different political ideologies, 
which are sometimes reflected in language choice. 
5·9 LINGUISTIC RIGHTS AND POLITICAL RIGHTS 
Some linguists (Fishman 1967; Fishman et al., 1968; more recently Spolsky 
2004: 58) distinguish three 'types' of nations. The first is that of, monolingual 
mono-ethnic and ethno-linguistically homogeneous nations with insignificant 
minorities. This type is now rare, although Lambert (1999) lists Japan as 
belonging to it. The problem with deciding whether a community is mono-
ethnic or not lies in the decision whether a minority is significant or not- a 
decision that is surely subjective, and potentially politically motivated. For 
example, Berbers in Tunisia represent only 1 per cent of the population, and 
may be considered by some as a non-significant minority, and by others as a 
significant one. 
The second type of nation in this scheme is that of 'dyadic' or 'triadic' 
nations, in which two or three ethno-linguistic groups live side by side and 
share ahnost equal linguistic power, in Belgium, Switzerland and Canada. 
The third type of nation is the 'mosaic' or multi-ethnic nation in which more 
than three linguistic groups exist. Nigeria and India are examples of this type. 
In fact, more than half the countries of the world have five or more ethnic 
groups. However, usually, as Grin (2005: 449) suggests, ethnically, culturally 
or linguistically different groups compete over both material and symbolic 
resources within a given social, economic and political sphere. One of the 
most thorny issues is linguistic rights and obtaining an official status for a 
language. 
The Declaration on Cultural Diversity of UNESCO's general conference, 
which took place in Paris on 2 November 2001, states the following: 
All persons should therefore be able to express themselves and to 
create and disseminate their work in the language of their choice, and 
particularly in their mother tongue; all persons should be entitled to 
quality education and training that fully respect their cultural identity; 
and all persons should be able to participate in the cultural life of their 
choice and conduct their own cultural practices, subject to respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedom20. 
The actions that are recommended to achieve equal linguistic rights for 
everyone include protecting the linguistic heritage of different communities 
by encouraging and supporting linguistic diversity. 

264 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Having the right to use and express oneself in one's mother tongue is in 
fact a moral right, but a costly one. As Grin posits, if a language policy is fair, 
it should include all languages of the major minority groups, and for this to 
happen, 'some members of society are likely to lose, while others win from the 
policy, and even if all win, some will win more than others' (Grin 2005: 455). 
For example, the estimated cost of the move from monolingualism to bilin-
gualism in the Basque Country and Guatemala was 4--5 per cent per capita of 
spending in the system (cf Grin 2005: 454). The conflict between languages 
is also a conflict over resources and how they are used, for example whether 
for better schooling, housing or bilingual education (Grin 2005). This may 
explain why the results of attitude surveys in which informants, mainly stu-
dents, in Algeria and Morocco were asked about the usefulness of learning 
Tamazight, as opposed to SA or French, were usually unfavourable towards 
Tamazight (Marley 2004; Benrabah 2007a). Most of the areas the informants 
came from had few if any Berbers, and these informants did not see the need 
of learning an extra language even if spoken by a significant minority (see 
sections 5.5.1.1.1 and 5.5.1.1.2 above on Algeria and Morocco). This again 
throws light on the complexity of the relation between linguistic rights and 
actual policies. 
In addition, as Wright (2004: 243) puts it, for a minority group to impose 
their language as an official language, or even make sure their language is used 
in education, they have to have some political weight; otherwise they are com-
pletely dependent on the majority of the people to respect their will. However, 
if the majority has a different ideology altogether then this is not possible. 
Usually in multi-ethnic nations, there is uneven bilingualism, in which the 
minority group is bilingual in their language and that of the majority, while 
the majority group is monolingual. For a minority group to stick to learning 
only their mother tongue is almost like ostracising themselves. According 
to Wright, the price to pay in such cases is marginalisation within the state, 
which is usually too high a price. 
Note that for Berbers, for the southern Sudanese and for Israeli Arabs, 
linguistic tolerance is correlated with political tolerance, cultural participa-
tion and more democratic involvement in the government. Language is again 
a symbol which is impregnated with meanings and connotations. Language 
reflects identity and values associated with this identity whether these values 
are moral or practical in nature: values such as equality, power, dominance 
and progress. However, the ideology of correlating multilingualism and lin-
guistic tolerance with political systems remains a mere ideology with its own 
exaggerations, misconceptions, assumptions and myths. Linguistic tolerance 
is never easy to achieve and assigning individuals their linguistic rights is not 
always straightforward, because of the reasons discussed above. In democratic 
countries such as Germany, Switzerland, the UK and Austria, to name but a 
few, minorities are still struggling for their linguistic rights. 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
265 
Stevenson (2005: 157), when discussing minorities and linguistic rights in 
Austria, refers to the strict policy that Austria has with regard to the imposi-
tion of German. All migrants have to learn German within a certain amount 
of time, by taking specific courses; if they fail to complete the courses for three 
years, they have to pay a fine of200 Euros. However, if they do not complete 
the courses within four years of entering Austria, their residence permit is not 
renewed. According to Wright (2004: 199), 'linguistic space is only opening 
up for territorial rather than migrant groups' Wright gives the example of a 
law passed by the Labour government in Britain at the beginning of the new 
millennium, when there was worry among members of the government that 
immigrant children were not assimilating well. The new law stated that it was 
the duty of the immigrant to become competent in English. 
Correlating linguistic rights with democracy may seem simplistic at times. 
It is more viable to correlate linguistic rights with political ideologies and the 
projection of identity. SA provides the symbol that countries and governments 
need. It provides the symbol for those Arabs who want to belong- Sudanese, 
Algerians, Moroccans, Tunisians - and those who want to lead - Egyptians, 
Syrians, and recently some Gulf countries (cf Mansfield 2003: 249 for a dis-
cussion of Egypt's aspirations to Arab leadership). 
Another important aspect of the relation between language policy and 
politics in the Arab world is diglossia. Diglossia has been accused of hinder-
ing Arabisation processes, of causing an increase of illiteracy levels and even 
of promoting and sustaining non-democratic systems. McFerren (1984: 5) 
identified diglossia as the cause of the failure of Arabisation in North Africa: 
'Diglossia remains the single greatest impediment to Arabisation in the 
Maghreb.' Similarly, the following is Haeri's conclusion to her book Sacred 
language, ordinary people 
Beyond its use for religious purposes, most Egyptians find speaking 
and writing in classical Arabic difficult, especially given the dire state 
of pre-college education. The official language thus acts as an obstacle 
to their participation in the political realm. There is of course no 
suggestion here that this is the only reason for absence of democracy 
in Egypt. But the language situation makes a strong comment on the 
nature of politics in that country. There seem to be deeply entrenched 
political interests in having classical Arabic to be the sole official 
language. (Haeri 2003: 151) 
Note first that the call to use colloquial instead of SA in education has been 
promoted by colonising powers, especially the British (see section 5.5.2.1 above 
on Egypt). This call is associated in the mind of native speakers in general and 
intellectuals in particular with colonisation and orientalist thinking. When the 
call to use the colloquial instead of SA in writing and in school subjects comes 

266 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
from non-Arabs, the scepticism is even greater (cf. Walters 2006b). For Arabs 
such calls are considered a conspiracy to divide the Arab nation. It is SA that, 
as Walters puts it, 'is the glue holding the Arab culture and the Arab world 
together' (2006b: 660). In a hypothetical world, if each Arab country started 
using its own colloquial in domains in which SA was used, then in fifty years, 
all Arab countries would be detached from SA, and the common SA literature 
which was read by all Arabs would be incomprehensible for a young genera-
tion trained only in colloquial Whether Arabs would still understand each 
other is difficult to predict. Possibly some of them might still be able to com-
municate since Arabic satellite channels are now broadcast worldwide with all 
dialects of the Arab world. 
An incident that is of relevance to this discussion took place in the year 2000 
in France. The French minister of education decided Arabic should be taught 
as an optional language in some secondary schools, given the great number of 
North Africans in France (estimated at 5 million). He decided to use the col-
loquial dialect of Morocco. Na~ir al-~ari, then director of the Institut du 
Monde Arabe, sent a letter to the minister of education in France at the time, 
Jack Lang (minister 2000-2), in which he argued that teaching Moroccan col-
loquial Arabic instead of SA was not the best option for students. His letter 
argued the following: teaching Moroccan colloquial Arabic would not be fair 
to the other North Africans who do not belong to Morocco, such as Algerians 
and Tunisians, who have a different dialect, and who comprise a large portion 
of the North African minority. He also mentioned that since there are differ-
ent dialects within Morocco, it would be problematic to choose one of them, 
even if it were the prestigious one, for some it might not carry the same pres-
tige. On the other hand, teaching SA would be of more benefit to the students 
at many levels. First, most of the curriculum of Arab countries for primary 
education is similar in content. This would connect the minority group to 
their Arab roots and ensure that the students would have the same ability 
to understand news bulletins in SA, read literature in SA, and write in SA. 
Al-An~ari asked the French minister to reconsider his decision in the light of 
all these arguments (al-A~ari and al- A~ari 2002: 40). 
While al-~ari was mild in his reaction, other Egyptian intellectuals were 
not. Egyptian scholar Yfisuf 'Izz al-Din (2006) accused France of religious 
intolerance and posited that France's policy with regard to teaching colloquial 
has a political dimension. Once more he emphasised that SA gathers Arabs 
together and colloquials divide them. 
In addition, there is also the psychological aspect, which is difficult to 
ignore, Arabs do not consider their colloquial another language. It is still 
Arabic; whether it is good Arabic or bad Arabic that they speak is a moot 
point. The fact that they do not consider SA a different language is sig-
nificant. For example, expressions like al-lahga al-mi~riyya 'the Egyptian 
dialect', or al-fa:mmiyya al-mi~riyya 'Egyptian colloquial Arabic', are used by 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
267 
intellectuals in Egypt to refer to ECA. However, the average Egyptian when 
asked what she or he speaks would reply automatically 'Arabic' Children 
watch Sinbad translated into SA without complaining that the language is 
incomprehensible. 
In addition, using two varieties, a standard one and a colloquial one, in 
different domains is not uncommon. Germany is also a diglossic community, 
and even if Hochdeutsch (Standard German) is spoken (while SA is not), 
some Germans end up writing in Hochdeutsch, though they never speak it. 
What Haeri (2003: 152) calls a 'highly uneasy relation to the self that develops 
in Egyptian children, because they grow up hearing that the language they 
speak is bad and has no grammar, is in fact an ability to adapt to and later even 
manipulate the linguistic situation. Egyptian children do not think in terms of 
bad and good, although this is difficult to prove without psychological data. 
Children are trained to think in terms of domains: in the same way as there 
is a public domain and a private domain, there is an SA domain and an ECA 
domain. Children could think in terms of good or bad if their parents, for 
example, forbade them to speak colloquial with them or in front of others, 
which does not happen in any Arab country that I know of, even if Arab schol-
ars say otherwise. Given the cases studied in this book in which the diglossic 
situation provided an opportunity for speakers to project their identity and 
leave an effect on their audience, I would consider diglossia, once more, an 
asset rather than an impediment. As one can deduce from all the discussion 
above, diglossia is dragged into the conflict without capturing the fact that 
diglossia itself is linguistic diversity, and by eliminating it we are suppressing 
a linguistic richness in Arab societies. 
5.10 ENGLISH AND GLOBALISATION 
When discussing language policies in Egypt, I mentioned the vast influence of 
the privatisation move that has taken place in the last decade in Egypt, result-
ing in parents rushing to teach their children English so that they can find 
jobs in the private sector, since the public sector now fails to provide the same 
jobs and security it used to. Walters (2006b: 660) discusses the influences of a 
globalised economy which is based on Anglo-American capitalism, and which 
has little to do with culture or politics and everything to do with economic/ 
market forces on the linguistic situation in Arab countries. 
Universities in which the medium of instruction is English are being 
established throughout the Arab world, including countries in which French 
played a major role, such as Morocco and Tunisia. Spolsky (2004: 87) posits 
that Tunisians are keen on learning English now even more than French. As 
Shaaban (2006: 703) puts it, 'although the Arabists insist on their children 
acquiring a good basis in Arabic, and the others insist on a good French 

268 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
education, both parties are espousing English as a language of education in 
Arab societies' 
When it comes to scholarship and technology, computer manuals, for 
example, are written in English, and scholars who want to be recognised inter-
nationally, even French scholars, have to publish in English. Even France 
with its systematic language policy cannot stand in the face of the spread of 
English within French society (Spolsky 2004 ). Crystal (1987: 358) contended 
more than twenty years ago that 'over two-thirds of the world's scientists write 
in English, three quarters of the world's email is written in English, of all the 
information in the world's electronic retrieval systems SOper cent is stored in 
English' (see also Luke et al., 2007). Arab societies are following what Fishman 
calls their 'common sense needs and desires', and these needs are not neces-
sarily related to their colonial past (1997: 639). There are changes affecting 
the world at large, whether social, political or economic, and related directly 
to globalisation. Language is just another domain in which these changes are 
reflected (cf. Bourdieu 2001). 
In fact, globalisation makes one wonder once more to what extent official 
language policies influence language practices. Britain has no constitution that 
states that English is the official language, and the USA has nothing about 
language policy in its constitution (cf. Spolsky 2004: 223). Still, English is 
dominant in both countries and is spreading to the whole world. Note that 
the fact that the policy is not written does not mean it is not implemented. As 
was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, a policy is implemented by 
members of a particular community even if not written, as long as there is tacit 
agreement as to what this policy is. 
5.11 CONCLUSION 
I will conclude this chapter with the following comment by Wright (2004: 
225): 'Language is a robust marker of group membership and one that is not 
easily changed.' Arabs are still struggling with how to define themselves, as a 
group and/ or individually, and how to belong to a group and still project a dif-
ferent identity. Language is at the heart of this struggle. The instinct to belong 
is what nations are usually built on (Grosby 2005). However, as has been clear 
throughout this chapter, Arab countries are as different as they are similar and 
attitudes are as diverse as they are coherent: Arab Muslims, Arab Christians, 
Syrians, Egyptians, Lebanese, Algerians, to name but a few, are also strug-
gling with the ideology of what they are 'supposed to be' and what they really 
are. It is not easy to separate the two and perhaps one should not attempt it, 
since both forge an identity. 
The interplay between ethnicity, as in the case of Berbers or southern 
Sudanese, religion, as in the case of Lebanese Christians and Lebanese 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
269 
Muslims, politics, as in the case of Arab Israelis, and language is indeed 
complex and cannot be covered in one chapter. I aim only at giving a snapshot 
oflanguage policy, ideology, practices and politics. 
Most Arab countries except Iraq, where Kurdish had been acknowledged 
regionally for decades, have Arabic and only SA as their official language. This 
does not reflect the linguistic reality, but may have many political, ideological 
and symbolic undertones. 
In this chapter I have discussed language policies in general and then exam-
ined the situation in some Arab countries in detail (sections 5.2-5.5). One of 
the factors essential to language policies is language contact. Fishman (1997: 
194) argues that: 'endangered languages become such because of the lack of 
informal inter-generational transmission and informal daily life support, not 
because they are not being taught in schools' If we examine the language plan-
ning process used by the caliph <Abd al-Malik in the first centuries oflslam21, 
we find that one of the reasons why Arabic spread so fast, replacing other 
languages, is that Arabs were in contact with the people they conquered; they 
built cities and settled in them. This is in effect urbanisation. Also, economic 
factors are important. Arabs at the time were in control of the economy of these 
countries. They eventually became advanced scientifically and economically. 
Wright (2004: 113) discusses how Arabic was used as a lingua franca to under-
stand the scientific concepts developed in the age of the caliphates. Scholars 
from non-Arabic-speaking countries had to learn Arabic. Gill ( 1999) mentions 
that the success of a language is dependent on economic factors as well as the 
prestige associated with the language. At present, English, French, Spanish 
and to a lesser extent German are important for people in the Arab world. The 
status ofEnglish is rising fast, especially in countries where tourism provides a 
substantial amount ofhard currency, such as Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia. 
As for education in the Arab world, the discrepancy between high school 
and university level in Arab countries is a big problem. In many countries, 
especially North African ones, education in public high schools is mainly in 
Arabic, but science faculties use French as the medium of instruction. This 
can be an impediment to students. Arab countries have to face this problem 
one day. Either Arabic has to catch up and be used more in science, which is 
not an easy task, or English and French will remain the languages of the elite 
and the educated in Arab countries. English has been referred to as 'a killer 
language' (cf. Fishman 2002). Fishman thinks this is not a precise term, since 
it is people who give the language the status it has. If indeed English is a killer 
language, then where does that leave SA, a language that is not even spoken 
by anyone as a vernacular? Why did SA survive and confront colonisation, 
modem technology and the widespread use of English? 
Indeed, religion has a vast role to play in the survival of SA. But there is 
also the romantic belief among users of Arabic and Muslims in the appeal and 
superiority of their language, as is evident in the poem cited at the beginning 

270 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
of this chapter. Schiffinan (1996: 69) points to the perceived 'sacredness of 
Arabic', while the entry for 'Koran' in the Concise encyclopedia of Islam sum-
marises the traditional Muslim position neatly: 
Muslims consider the Koran to be holy scripture only in the original 
Arabic of its revelation. The Koran, while it may be translated, is only 
ritually valid in Arabic. This is connected with the notion of Arabic as 
a 'sacred' Language itself is sacred, because of its miraculous power to 
communicate and to extemalise thought. (Glasse 1989: 46) 
For Muslims words are powerful; they are divine. Indeed, to fight a curse one 
has to use words, Arabic words mainly from the Q!Ir'an. The Encyclopedia 
(Glasse 1989: 46) adds that Arabic, though 'originally a desert nomadic 
dialect, has maintained a fresh directness that makes it a more suitable vehicle 
than many others' The writer attributes this freshness to the relationship 
between words and their roots, and to the Q!Ir'an's use of simple statements 
(cf. Wright 2004: 69). The Concise encyclopedia of/slam further notes that: 
Simple statements, which are the rule in the Koran, open, under the 
right conditions of receptivity, into astonishing and vast horizons; the 
world is reduced to ripples in consciousness. These and other qualities 
make Arabic an incomparable medium for dialogue between man and 
God in prayer. (Glasse 1989: 47) 
Wright argues that these attitudes towards Arabic (SA) affect language 
policy-making in the Arab world and the Islamic world in general (2004: 70). 
She contends that all language policies are culturally specific. To a great extent 
this is true, although again, it is difficult to define the term 'culture' Culture 
in this sense is the shared historical and geographical background of a group 
of people who also have the same set of values and beliefs. These beliefs may 
or may not be religious ones. 
The call to save MSA is still heard in all parts of the Arab world. In 2007 
Dr Yiisuf 'Izz al-Dm, a renowned professor and scholar, as was mentioned 
earlier, said in the Egyptian literary magazine Akhbar al-Adab (Nfir 2007) 
that it is our duty as Arabs and patriots to confront the conspiracy against us 
to weaken SA. His words echo words spoken a century ago, but perhaps the 
mission to preserve SA and the struggle to save it are just at their onset. 
NOTES 
1. Wright (2004: 224) discusses how communities suffering from colonisation, or who have 
suffered from colonisation, consider language an 'identity marker'. 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND POLITICS 
27I 
2. Suleiman (1999: 11) tries to examine how 'political conflict in the Middle East, whether 
inter-ethnic or inter-nation, is related to language policies'. 
3. Around the second half of the twentieth century, when most of the Arab countries gained 
their independence, the idea of the Arab nation was at its zenith and Nasser, the then presi-
dent of Egypt, was hailed as the leader of Arabs and of Arab unity (Haag 2003). 
4. In the documentary film Four Egyptian Women (1996), a female Egyptian professor who was 
then about SO years old claimed that she only spoke French to her family and Arabic to the 
servants, and when she read the Qur'an for the first time, it was in French and not Arabic. 
It is also common for rich families in Egypt now to address their children in English and 
have nannies who only speak English at home. 
5. Figures on minority are given only for some countries, as the degree ofimportance of these 
groups differs from one country to another. 
6. Note that in 1830 the Jewish community of Algeria comprised some 25,000 persons, most 
of whom were quite poor (see Stora 2001). 
7. President Boumedienne ruled for three decades of relative peace, although his regime was 
authoritarian. The diversity within Algeria was hidden under the surface and only came out 
again in 1989 (Stora 2001). 
8. From 1989, new political movements became strong nationalist, liberal, radical, Islamist 
and even communist. In 1992, the military forces intervened to end an election that would 
have been won by opposition Islamists of the Front Islamique du Salut (FIS). Politicians 
do not agree as to whether it would have been better to let democracy take its course or to 
intervene (cf. Stora 2001). 
9. Source: Morocco, Ministryofjustice, Constitution, http:/ /www.justice.gov.ma/fr/legisla-
tion/legislation.aspx?ty=1&id_l= ; last accessed 30 October 2008. 
10. In fact, apart from Iraq, where Kurdish is acknowledged regionally and has been for a long 
time, no country acknowledges Kurdish. Iraq acknowledges Kurdish in the Kurdish region; 
in Iraq, street names are written in both languages, for example. This is not the case in other 
countries such as Syria, Armenia or Turkey (Spolsky 2004). 
11. Nasser with his Free Officers (army officers) started their bloodless coup on 26July, 1952 to 
get rid of the monarchy and the British presence in Egypt. The coup was welcomed by a great 
number of Egyptians who regarded it as a new beginning and an end to a corrupt era. King 
Farouk was ordered to abdicate in favour ofhis son and to leave Egypt. For a short time after, 
his son was named king, before Egypt was declared a republic in 19 53 ( cf. Haag 2005). 
12. Nasser is described by Mansfield (2003: 278) as 'an Egyptian who developed a genuine 
beliefin the movement to unite the Arabs, of which he saw Egypt as the natural leader' 
13. This was not really implemented by students. However, the ideology is very similar to that 
proposed by Mazin al-Mubarak (p. 000). 
14. This status that SA obtained at that time may explain why Ferguson, in his analysis of 
diglossia (1972 [1959]), mentioned that SA is the language used in mosque sermons, 
university lectures and political speeches. This is not the case today, but since his article 
was first published in 1959, it may reflect the sentiment of the time. In addition, Badawi's 
levels may also reflect the attitude of Egyptians at the time (see Chapter 1 above for his 
classifications). 
15. See Chart 5.1 to understand why Haeri was classifying speakers in this way. 
16. See Ethnologue, 'Sudan', http:/ /www.ethnologue.com/show_country.asp?name=sd, last 
accessed 30 October 2008. 
17. See University of Khartoum website, http:/ /www.uotk.edu/index.php?id=825, last 
accessed 30 October 2008. 'The second phase of Arabicization was formally started in 1991. 
Arabic replaced English as medium of instruction in all Sudanese Universities and higher 
institutions oflearning.' 

272 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
18. See http:/ /www.ikhwanonline.com/ Article.asp?ArtiD=39000&SeciD=294, last accessed 
1 November 2008. 
19. Part of the Nasserist ideology was the issue of who would lead the Arab world. 
20. See UNESCO, http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001271/127160m.pdf; last 
accessed 11 Novermber 2008. 
21. See Versteegh (2001) for a discussion of the process of Arabisation at the time oflslamic 
conquests. 

General conclusion 
In this book, I have first shed light on the diglossic situation and the main groups 
of dialects in the Arab world. It was established at the beginning that the distinc-
tions made by linguists between CA, MSA and the different vernaculars are not 
necessarily accepted by native speakers and in some cases not even trusted, as 
was shown in Chapter 5, in which there were native speakers who were scepti-
cal about linguists and politicians, especially non-Arab ones, discussing their 
language and linguistic situation. The relation between language and ideology 
is very much in the forefront of the minds of native speakers. Arabic, in its 
entirety, is a major means by which people in the Arab world can endow them-
selves with a sense ofbelonging and manifest different facets of their identity. 
When discussing the structural constraints and discourse functions ofboth 
diglossic switching and code-switching, it was apparent that the diglossic 
situation is more complex than the bilingual one, and that theories that can 
be applied neatly to bilingual code-switching are challenged by diglossia. In 
fact, when discussing code-switching, diglossic switching was also examined. 
When concentrating on quantitative variationist studies in the Arab world, 
levelling and diglossia were still relevant. MSA phonological variables like 
the q were juxtaposed with dialectal ones in Egypt, Bahrain and Jordan, to 
name but a few. Diglossic switching was found to have a discourse function 
for educated women in talk shows. It was also seen as a means of highlighting 
political affiliations and agendas in the case of the interviews with the Syrian 
and Yemeni presidents analysed in Chapter 5. Diglossia thus remains in the 
weft and warp of any sociolinguistic study in the Arab world. Studies that con-
centrate on dialects rather than MSA still refer to the diglossic situation and 
still compare and contrast MSA variables with dialectal ones. It is diglossia, or 
rather the conscious obsession with diglossia by native speakers of Arabic as 
well as linguists working on Arabic, which distinguishes the Arab world from 
the western one and distinguishes studies conducted about the Arab world 
from their western counterparts. 

274 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Linguists working on the Arab world realised that a blind application of 
methods and theories constructed for the west would not work for the dif-
ferent Arab countries. However, the methods of collecting data used in the 
west were to a great extent adhered to by linguists working on the Arab world. 
The findings were indeed different in a number of ways. First, the dynamics 
of change and variation in the Arab world are different because of the way 
communities are structured and maintained. Independent variables such as 
religion, ethnicity and class tend to be defined differently in relation to the 
Arab world. One essential factor that plays a major role in the study of varia-
tion and change in the Arab world is urbanisation, especially in countries such 
as Libya, Oman and Bahrain where urbanisation is both recent and rapid. 
The interaction between gender and other independent factors is also 
examined in this book. Gender is not necessarily the main defining factor that 
influences change and variation. In the Arab world, men and women together 
form and are formed by a community, which in tum is shaped by independent 
fixed and flexible variables. 
I started this book with the catchphrase 'the earth speaks Arabic' which 
triggered a number of unanswered questions that this book has attempted to 
answer at least partially. I end this book with the same phrase but with a differ-
ent speculation about its connotations. There are two facts that render Arabic 
inclusive in many respects. The first is the non-distinction between CA, MSA 
and the colloquials by the mass of native speakers who may think they speak 
Arabic, perhaps bad Arabic, but still perceived by many as a corrupted version 
of the same language as that of the Q!.Ir'an. An aggregate picture of Arabic 
is prevalent. The second fact that this book has tried to capture is the diver-
sity of the Arab world, whether religious, historical, political, ethnic, social 
or economic. This diversity in itself renders Arabic an inclusive, common 
component of different communities. Tribes, religious groups, upheavals, 
rapid urbanisation, wars, civil wars, social and political changes, dislocation of 
large groups, ethnic minorities, varied ethno-geographic and historical back-
grounds are all characteristics of the Arab world that are reflected directly or 
indirectly through language. 
The Arab world is a place where individuals play different roles through 
language choice and code-switching. It is a place where intellectuals have at 
least two varieties available to them, and a place where people can add to the 
two varieties a different language all together; a place where the struggle for 
independence and social justice has been going on hand in hand with a lin-
guistic struggle to maintain and develop standard Arabic, and the struggle for 
democracy and civil rights has been going on hand in hand with the struggle 
to acknowledge other languages and not just standard Arabic. Language has 
been used as a political tool to the utmost. 
The Arab world is also a changing place; some Arabs have been chang-
ing from pearl divers to oil traders and from Bedouins to city dwellers. It is 

GENERAL CONCLUSION 
275 
changing from a place where older women were the carriers of tradition to 
younger women setting the course of events and taking control of their lin-
guistic choices. 
I have aimed throughout this book to set the reader thinking about dif-
ferent linguistic issues pertaining to 'Arabic' in its entirety. By challenging 
and discussing different approaches to Arabic sociolinguistics and perhaps 
sociolinguistics in general, I have aspired to add freshness and vitality to the 
field. Both Arabic and Arabs will remain a fertile ground for investigation in 
sociolinguistics. There is still more that needs to be unfolded and examined. 

Bibliography 
ARABIC TITLES 
'Abd ai-Ghani, M. (1986), Taha lfusayn wa-al-siyiisah, Cairo: Dar ai-Mustaqbal ai-'Arabr. 
'Abd al-Kali, I. (1991), 'ai-Ta'IIm wa-bathth al-huwiyah al-qawmiyah ti Mi~r', PhD thesis, 
Cairo University. 
ai-An~ari, N. and M. ai-An~ari (2002), al-'Umbahftmuqabil al-'awlamah: '.Antifir li-na:;;arjiyah 
jadfdah, Cairo: ai-Hay'ah ai-Mi~riyah ai-'Ammah lii-Kitab. 
ai-Madani, A. T. (1931), Kitab al-Jaza'ir, Algiers: s.n. 
ai-Qa'rd, Y. (2004), Qjsmat al-ghurama', London: Dar ai-Saqr. 
Badawi, S. A. (1973), Mustawayat al-'Arabfyah al-mu 'tifirahft M4r: Bal}thft 'alaqat al-lughah 
bi-al-l}a¢arah, Cairo: Dar ai-Ma'arif. 
Dajani, A.M. (1973), 'Abd al-Ntifirwa-al-thawrah al-'Arabfyah, Beirut: Dar ai-Wal)dah. 
Ghidhdhami, 'A.M. (2000), Thaqafot al-wahm: Muqarabat l}awla al-mar 'ah wa-al-jasad wa-al-
lughah, Casablanca: ai-Markaz al-Thaqati al-'Arabi. 
J:Iabib, M. and Q Sha'ban (1983), Tadrfs al-lughah al-Arabfyahft al-marl}alah al-ibtida'fyahfi 
al-bilfid al-'Arabfyah, Beirut: Dar ai-Kitab ai-Lubnanr. 
J:Iammiid ,S. (2000), 'Ta 'rib al-ta 'lim wa-al-siyasah al-l ugha wiyah tiai-Mamlakah ai-Maghribiyah 
bayna al-mac;II wa-al-hll<:lir', inK. Sha'ban (ed.), al-Lughah wa-al-ta'lfm, Beirut: ai-Hay'ah 
ai-Lubnaniyah lii-'Uii.im al-Tarbawiyah, 91-120. 
Ibrahim, I;I. (1980), Dfwan Jfafi~ Ibrahfm, Cairo: ai-Majlis ai-A'Ia lii-Thaqafah. 
'Izz ai-Drn, Y. (2006), 'Wajib qawmi wa-wa!ani yad'iina 1il-t~addi li-hadhihi al-mu'amarah: 
Al-'ammiyah tuhaddid bi-indithar ai-'Arab', Akhbtir al-Adab 622 (19 March), http://www. 
akhbarelyom.org.eg/adab/issues/662/100l.html, accessed 4 January 2008. 
Kamal, W. (2008), 'Sawirus wa-rli'il)at al-mal ti qanat OTV', Ikhwfin Online, http://www. 
ikhwanonline.com/ Article.asp?ArtiD=39000&SeciD=294, accessed 10 November 2008. 
Kha!Ifah, 'A. ( 1977), 'Majma' al-lughah al-'Arabi yah ti al-mu'tamar', al-Lis an al-'Arabf 15(3): 
19-22. 
Kharyush, A. (2002), 'Dawr majma' al-lughah al-'arabi yah ai-U rdunni ti ta 'rib al-ta 'lim al-'ilmi 
al-jami'r ti ai-Urdunn', Majallat Majma' al-Lughah al-'Arabfyah bi-al-Qahirah 97: 145-
79. 
Khic;lr, M. (2006), Min fajawat al-'adalah ft al-ta 'h-m, Cairo: ai-Dar 
ai-Mi~riyah 
al-Lubnaniyah. 
Mal)limidiyah, 'A. (2007), '~niinli-l)imayatal-lughahal-' Arabiyahqariban tiai-Imarat' ,al-Jazera 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
277 
Online (13 July), http:/ /www.aljazeera.net/News/archive/archive?Archiveld=1063226, 
accessed 12 November 2008. 
Mahfouz, N. (2006), Rasa "iluhu: Bayna falsafat al-walyiah wa-diriimli al-shak~yah, Cairo: 
ai-Dar ai-Mi~rfyah ai-Lubnanlyah. 
Mubarik, M. (2008), 'Mazin Mubirak 'ac;lwan tr Majma' ai-Lughah ai-'Arabfyah', Shurufiit, 
http:/ /www.moc.gov.sy/index.php?d=30&id=1351, accessed 29 November 2008. 
Musa, N. ( 1987), Qat/fyat al-tal}awwul ita al~~a ft al-'alam al-'Arabi' al-l}adfth, Amman : Dar 
ai-Fikr. 
Nur, M. (2007), 'Faruq Shi.ishah: Mi~r bila sultah lughawlyah. 
wa-al-majma' 'yuhitr wa-la 
aJ:lad yasma'', Akhbiir Al-Adab 714 (18 March), http:/ /www.akhbarelyom.org.eg/adab/ 
issues/714/0200.html, accessed 4 January 2008. 
Sa'df, 'U. (1993), al-Ta 'rib ft al-Jazii "ir: Kifii~ al-sha 'b 4idda al-haymanah al-Frankii.junfyah, 
Algiers: Dar ai-Ummah. 
Shalabl, Kh. (1986), al-Watad, Cairo: Dar ai-Fikr. 
Shukrl, M. (2000), al-Khubz al-~aji: Sfrah dhiitfya riwiiryah, London: Dar ai-Siql. 
ai-Zawl, A. (2006), 'ai-Lughah al-faransfyah ghanlmat J:larb nadkhul 'abraha iii ai-J:ladathah', 
Akhbiir al-Adab 702 (24 December), www. akh barelyom.org. eg I adab/issues/702/0904. html, 
accessed 4 January 2008. 
TITLES IN EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 
Abdel Moneim, A. (2007), 'Pickled tongue', al-Ahram Week!)' 834(1-7 March), http:/ /weekly. 
ahram.org.eg/2007 /834/cu5.htm, accessed 4 January 2008. 
Abdei-Jawad, H. (1986), 'The emergence of an urban dialect in the Jordanian urban centers', 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 61: 53--63. 
Abdei-Malek, Z. (1972), 'The influence of diglossia on the novels ofYuusifai-Sibaa'i',Journal 
of Arabic Literature 3: 132--41. 
Aboheimed, I. A. (1991), Linguistic anarysis of diglossia in Arabic and its implications for teaching 
Arabic to non-Arabs in Riyadh (Saudi Arabia), [Leeds]: [s.n.]. 
Abu-Haidar, F. (1988), 'Male/female linguistic variation in a Baghdadi community', in A. 
K. Irvine, E. B. Serjeant and G. R. Smith (eds), A miscellany of Middle Eastern articles: In 
memoriam Thomas Muir Johnstone (1924-83 ), Professor of Arabic in the University of London, 
1970-82, London: Harlow, 151-62. 
-
( 1989), 'Are Iraqi women more prestige conscious than men? Sex differentiation in Baghdadi 
Arabic', Language in Society 18: 471--81. 
-
(1991), Christian Arabic of Baghdad, Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
-
(1992), 'Shifting boundaries: The effect of Modern Standard Arabic on dialect convergence 
in Baghdad', Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics i v: 91-106. 
-
(2002), 'Arabic and English in conflict: Iraqis in the UK', in A. Rouchdy (ed.), Language 
contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic theme, London: 
RoutledgeCurzon, 286-96. 
Abu-Lughod, L. (1987), Veiled sentiments: Honor and poetry in a Bedouin society, Cairo: 
American University in Cairo Press. 
Abu-Manga, A. (1999), Hausa in the Sudan: Process of adaptation to Arabic, Cologne: R. 
Koppe. 
Abu-Melhim, A. R. (1991), 'Code switching and linguistic accommodation in Arabic', 
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics v: 231-50. 
Ageron, C. R. (1991), Modern Algeria: A history from 1830 to the present, London: Hurst. 
Agius, D. A. (1996), SiculoArabic, London: Kegan Paul International. 

278 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Aissati, A. and]. Kurvers (2008), 'Language policy and literacy', unpublished paper presented 
at the 17th Sociolinguistics Symposium, Amsterdam, 3-5 Apri12008. 
Aitchison,]. (2001), Language change: Progress or decay?, 3rd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
AI Batal, M. (2002), 'Identity and language tension in Lebanon: The Arabic of local news at 
LBCT', in A. Rouchdy (ed.), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on 
a sociolinguistic theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 91-115. 
Alexandre, P. (1963), 'Les problemes linguistiques africains vus de Paris', in]. Spencer (ed.), 
Language in Africa, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 53-69. 
AI-Khateeb, M. A. A. (1988), 'Sociolinguistic change in an expanding urban context: A case 
study oflrbid city, Jordan', PhD thesis, University of Durham. 
Allal, M.A. (2005), 'Que fait-on de l'universite algerienne?', El Watan (2-3 December), 13. 
AI-Masri, N. (1988), 'Teaching culture in the foreign language classroom with particular refer-
ence to the Gaza Strip', Master's dissertation, University of Salford. 
AI-Muhannadi, M. (1991), 'A sociolinguistic study of women's speech in Q!ltar', PhD thesis, 
University of Essex. 
Altoma, S.]. (1969), The problem of diglossia in Arabic, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
AI-Torki, S. and C. EI-Solh (1988), Arab women in the field: Studying your own society, New 
York: Syracuse University Press. 
Al-Wer, E. (1991), 'Phonological variation in the speech of women from three urban areas in 
Jordan', PhD thesis, University of Essex. 
-
(1997), 'Arabic between reality and ideology', International Journal of Applied Linguistics 
7(2): 251-65. 
-
(1999), 'Why do different variables behave differently? Data from Arabic', in Y. Suleiman 
(ed.), Language and society in the Middle East and North Africa: Studies in identity and varia-
tion, Richmond: Curzon, 38-58. 
-
(2002), 'Education as a speaker variable', in A. Rouchdy ( ed.), Language contact and language 
conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 41-53. 
-
(2003), Variation and change in Jordanian Arabic, London: RoutledgeCurzon. 
-
(2004), 'Variability reproduced: A variationist view of the [Q.]/[d] opposition in modern 
Arabic dialects', in M. Haak, R. DeJong and K. Versteegh (eds), Approaches to Arabic dia-
lects: A collection of articles presented to Manfred Woidich on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, 
Leiden: Brill, 21-31. 
-
(2007), 'The formation of the dialect of Amman: From chaos to order', in C. Miller, E. 
AI-Wer, D. Caubet and]. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the city: Issues in dialect contact and 
language variation, London: Routledge, 55-76. 
Amara, M. H. (2003), 'Recent foreign language education policies in Palestine', Language 
Problems and Language Planning 27(3): 217-32. 
-
(2007), 'Teaching Hebrew to Palestinian pupils in Israel', Cu"ent Issues in Language 
Planning 8(2): 243-57. 
Appel, R. and P. Muysken (1987), Language contact and bilingualism, London: Arnold. 
Arnold,]., R. Blake and B. Davidson (eds) (1996), Sociolinguistic variation: Data, theory, and 
analysis, Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language and Information. 
Ashley, E. (ed.) (1879), The life and c~espondence of Henry John Temple, Lord Palmerston, 
London: Richard Bentley & Son. 
Attia, M. F. (2005), 'Seeing through advertisements: A feminist stylistic approach in Arabic 
and English discourse', al-Logha 5: 43-74. 
Auer, P. and A. Di Luzio (1984), Interpretative sociolinguistics: Migrants, children -migrant 
children, Tiibingen: Narr. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
279 
Austen,]. (1993), Persuasion, Ware: Wordsworth. 
Baron, B. (2005), Egypt as a woman: Natitmalism, gender, and politics, Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press. 
Bassiouney, R. (2003a), 'Theories of code switching in the light of empirical data from 
Egypt', in D. Parkinson and S. Farwaneh (eds), Perspectives tm Arabic Linguistics xv: 
19-39. 
-
(2003b), 'Linguistics', lemma in Encyclopaedia of women in Islamic cultures (EWIC), Leiden: 
Brill. 
-
(2006), Functions of code switching in Egypt: Evidence from monologues, Lei den: Brill. 
-
(2009), 'The variety ofhousewi ves and cockroaches', in E. AI-Wer ( ed. ), Arabic Dialectology, 
Leiden: Brill. 
Bastos, L. C. and M. Oliveira (2006), 'Identity and personal/institutional relations: people and 
tragedy in a health insurance customer service', in A. DeFina, D. Schiffrin and M. Bamberg 
(eds), Discourse and identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 188-212. 
Bateson, M. C. (1967), Arabic language handbook, Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics. 
Bean,]. M. and B. Johnstone (2004), 'Gender, identity, and "strong language" in a professional 
woman's talk', in M. Bucholtz (ed.), Language and woman's place: Text and commentaries, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 237-43. 
Behnstedt, P. and M. Woidich (1985--8), Die iigyptisch-arabischen Dialekte, Wiesbaden: 
Reichert. 
Belal, A. and A. Agourram (1970), 'L'economie marocaine depuis l'independance', in C. 
Debasch ( ed. ), Les ectmomies maghribines, Paris: CNRS, 141--64. 
Belazi, H., E.]. Rubin and A.]. Toribio (1994), 'Code switching and x-bar theory: The func-
tional head constraint', Linguistic Inquiry 25(2): 221-37. 
Bell, A. ( 1984 ), 'Language style as audience design', Language in Society 13(2): 145-204. 
-
(2001), 'Back in style: Reworking audience design', in P. Eckert and]. Rickford (eds), Style 
and sociolinguistic variation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 139-169. 
Belnap, R. K. and B. Bishop (2003), 'Arabic personal correspondence: A window on change in 
progress', Internatitmal Journal of the Sociology of Language 163: 9-25. 
Benrabah, M. (2005), 'The language planning situation in Algeria', Current Issues in Language 
Planning 6( 4): 379-502. 
-
(2007a), 'Language-in-education planning in Algeria: Historical development and current 
issues', Language Policy 6: 225-52. 
-
(2007b), 'The language planning situation in Algeria', in R. B. Kaplan and R. B. Baldauf 
(eds), Language planm'ng and policy in Africa. Vol. 2: Algeria, COte d'Ivoire, Nigeria and 
Tunisia, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 25-148. 
-
(2007c), 'Language maintenance and spread: French in Algeria', Internatitmal Journal of 
Francophone Studies 10(1-2): 193-215. 
Bensadoun, M. (2007), 'The (re)fashioning of Moroccan national identity', in B. Maddy-
Weitzman and D. Zisenwine (eds), The Maghrib in the new century: Identity, religitm, politics, 
Gainesville: University Press ofFiorida, 15-35. 
Bentahila, A. (1983), Language attitudes amtmg Arabic-French bilinguals in Morocco, Clevedon: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Bentahila, A. and E. E. Davies (1983), 'The syntax of Arabic-French code switching', Lingua 
59: 301-30. 
Berger, A.-E. (2002), Algeria in others' languages, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Berk-Seligson, S. (1986), 'Linguistic constraints on intra-sentential code switching: A study of 
Spanish-Hebrew bilingualism', Language in Society 15: 313-48. 
Bhat, D. N. S. (1978), 'A general study ofpalatization', in J. Greenberg, C. Ferguson and E. 

280 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Moravcsik (eds), Universals of human language. Vol. 2: Phonology, Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 47-91. 
Bishai, W. B. (1964), 'Coptic lexical influence on Egyptian Arabic', Journal of Near Eastern 
Studies 23(1): 39-47. 
Blanc, H. (1953), Studies in North Palestinian Arabic: Linguistic inquiries among the Druzes of 
Western Galilee and Mt. Carmel, Jerusalem: Israel Oriental Society. 
-
(1960), 'Style variations in Arabic: A sample of interdialectal conversation', in C. A. 
Ferguson (ed.), Contributions to Arabic linguistics, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 81-156. 
-
(1964), Communal dialects of Baghdad, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
-
( 197 4 ), 'The nekteb-nektebu imperfect in a variety of Cairene Arabic', Israel Oriental Studies 
4:206-26. 
Blau,]. (1977), The beginnings of the Arabic diglossia: A study of the origins ofNeoarabic, Malibu: 
Undena. 
Blom, J.-P. and].]. Gumperz (1972), 'Social meaning in linguistic structure: Code-switching 
in Norway', in].]. Gumperz (ed.), Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communi-
cation, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 407-34. 
Bogaers, I. E. (1998), 'Gender in job interviews: Some implications of verbal interactions of 
women and men', International Journal of the Sociology of Language 129: 35-58. 
Bohas, G., J.-P. Guillaume and D. Kouloughli (2006), The Arabic linguistic tradition, Washington, 
DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Bolonyai, A. (1996), 'Turning it over: L2 dominance in Hungarian/English acquisition', 
unpublished paper, Second Language Research Forum (SLRF), University of Arizona. 
-
(2005), '"Who was the best?": Power, knowledge and rationality in bilingual girls' code 
choices', Journal of Sociolinguistics 9(1 ): 3-27. 
Borg, A. and G. M. Kresse! (2001 ), 'Bedouin personal names in the Negev and Sinai', Zeitschrift 
for arabische Linguistik 40: 32-70. 
Boucherit, A. (1986), 'Contact et differenciation dialectale a Alger', MAS-GELLAS 2: 
13-55. 
-
(2002), L 'arabe parte a Alger: Aspects sociolinguistiques et enonciatift, Paris and Lou vain: 
Peeters. 
Boumans, L. (1996), 'Embedding verbs and collocations in Moroccan Arabic/Dutch code-
switching', Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics ix: 45-65. 
-
(1998), The syntax ofcodeswitching: Analysing Moroccan Arabic/ Dutch conversation, Tilburg: 
Til burg University Press. 
-
(2002), 'Repetition phenomena in insertional codes witching', in A. Rouchdy (ed.), Language 
contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic theme, London: 
RoutledgeCurzon, 297-316. 
Bourdieu, P. (2001), 'Uniting to better dominate', Items and Issues 2(3-4): 1-6. 
Boussofara-Omar, N. (1999), 'Arabic diglossic switching in Tunisia: An application ofMyers-
Scotton's MLF model', PhD thesis, University of Texas at Austin. 
-
(2003), 'Revisiting Arabic diglossic switching in light of the MLF model and its sub-models: 
The 4-M model and the Abstract Level model', Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 6(1): 
33-46. 
-
(2006a), 'Diglossia', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and A. 
Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, i: 629-37. 
-
(2006b ), 'Neither third language nor middle varieties but diglossic switching', Zeitschrift for 
arabische Linguisti/e 45: 55-80. 
Boxer, D. and E. Gritsenko (2005), 'Women and surnames across cultures: Reconstituting 
identity in marriage', Women and Language 28(2): 1-11. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
281 
Britto, F. (1986), Diglossia: A study of the theory with application to Tamil, Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University. 
Brown, P. (1980), 'How and why are women more polite: Some evidence from a Mayan com-
munity', inS. McConneii-Ginet, R. Borker and N. Furman (eds), Women and language in 
literature and society, New York: Praeger, 111-36. 
Brown, P. and A. Gilman (2003 [1987]), 'The pronouns of power and solidarity', in C. Paulston 
and R. Tucker (eds), Sociolinguistics: The essential readings, Oxford: Blackwell, 156-76. 
Brown, P. and S. C. Levinson (1987), Politeness: some uni-versals in language usage, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
-
(1999), 'Politeness: Some universals in language usage', in A. Jaworski and N. Coupland 
(eds), The discourse reader, London: Routledge, 321-35. 
Bucholtz, M. ( ed.) (2004), Language and woman's place: Text and commentaries, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Cameron, D. (1992), Feminism and linguistic theory, New York: StMartin's Press. 
-
(2003a), 'Gender issues in language change', Annual Re-view of Applied Linguistics 23: 
187-201. 
-(2003b), 'Gender and language ideologies', in]. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The hand-
book of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 447-67. 
-
(2005), 'Language, gender and sexuality: Current issues and new directions', Applied 
Linguistics 26(4): 482-502. 
-
(2006), On language and sexual politics, London: Routledge. 
-
(2008), The myth of Mars and Venus: Do men and women really speak different languages?, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Caubet, D. (1998), 'Etude linguistique des traits prehilaliens dans un dialecte en voie 
d'urbanisation', in]. Aguade, P. Cressier and A. Vicente (eds), Peu.plement et arabisation au 
Maghreb occidental, Madrid: Casa de Velazquez, 165-75. 
Chambers,]. K., P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds) (2002), The handbook of language 
-variation and change, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Cheng, W. (2003), Intercultural con-versation: A study of Hong Kong Chinese, Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. 
Cherfaoui, Z. (2004), 'Reforme de !'ecole et enseignement du fran~is: Recrutement de 2000 
diplomes, El Watan (7 June), 1-2. 
Cheshire, J. ( 1982), 'Linguistic variation and social function', in S. Romaine ( ed. ), Sociolinguistic 
-variation in speech communities, London: Arnold, 153--66. 
Chomsky, N. (1993), Lectures on go-vernment and binding: The Pisa lectures, 7th edn, Berlin and 
New York: Mouton. 
Chumbow, B.S. and A. S. Bobda (1996), 'The life-cycle of post-imperial English in Cameroon', 
in]. A. Fishman, A. Rubai-Lopez and A. W. Conrad (eds), Post-imperial English, Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter, 401-30. 
Oark, L. (2008), 'Re-examining vocalic variation in Scottish Gaelic: A cognitive grammar 
approach', Language Variation and Change 20: 255-73. 
Oeveland, R. L. (1963), 'A classification for the Arabic dialects of Jordan', Bulletin of the 
American Schools of Oriental Research 167: 56-63. 
Oyne, M.G. (1982), Multilingual Australia, Melbourne: Hawthorne Press. 
-
(1987), 'Constraints on code switching: How universal are they?', Linguistics 25: 739--64. 
-
(ed.) (1992), Plu.ricentric languages: Differing norms in different nations, Berlin: Mouton. 
Clyne, M. G. and S. Kipp (1999), Plu.ricentric languages in an immigrant context: Spanish, Arabic 
and Chinese, Berlin: Mouton. 
Coates,]. (1993), Women, men, and language, London: Longman. 
-
(ed.) (1998), Language and gender: A reader, Oxford: Blackwell. 

282 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Cohen,]., K. McAlister, K. Rolstad and]. MacSwan (eds) (2005), Proceedings of the Fourth 
International Symposium on Bilingualism, Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press. 
Connor, W. (1978), 'A nation is a nation, is a state, is an ethnic group, is. .',Ethnic and Racial 
Studies 1: 377-400. 
Coulmas, F. (ed.) (1997), The handbook ofsociolinguistics, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Crystal, D. (1987), The Cambridge encyclopedia of language, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
-
(2001), A dictionary of language, Chicago: Chicago University Press. 
Daher, J. (1998), 'Gender in linguistic variation: The variable (q) in Damascus Arabic', 
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics xi: 183-205. 
-
(1999), '(8) and (~) as ternary and binary variables in Damascene Arabic', Perspectives on 
Arabic Linguistics xii: 163-202. 
Daoud, M. (2002), 'Language policy and planning in Tunisia: Accommodating language 
rivalry', http:/ /www.miis.edu/docs/langpolicy/chl4.pdf, accessed 10 June 2006. 
-
(2007), 'The language situation in Tunisia', in R. B. Kaplan and R. B. Baldauf (eds), 
Language planning and policy in Africa. Vol. 2: Algeria, C8te d'Ivoire, Nigeria and Tunisia, 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 256-307. 
Davies, E. E. and Bentahila, A. (2006), 'Ethnicity and language', lemma in K. Versteegh, M. 
Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and lin-
guistics, Leiden: Brill, ii: 58--D5. 
DeFina, A. (2007), 'Code-switching and the construction of ethnic identity in a community of 
practice', Language in Society 36(3): 371-92. 
DeFina, A., D. Schiffrin and M. Bamberg (eds) (2006), Discourse and identity, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Dendane, Z. (1994), 'Sociolinguistic variation in an Arabic speech community: Tlemcen', 
Cahiers de Dialectologie et de Linguistique Contrastive 4: 62-77. 
Deuchar, M. (1989), 'A pragmatic account of women's use of standard speech', in]. Coates and 
D. Cameron (eds), Women in their speech communities: New perspectives on language and sex, 
London: Longman, 27-32. 
Deutch, Y. (2005), 'Language law in Israel', Language Policy 4: 261-85. 
DiSciullo, A. M., P. Muysken and R. Singh (1986), 'Government and code mixing' ,Journal of 
Linguistics 22: 1-24. 
Djite, P. G. (1992), 'The Arabization of Algeria: Linguistic and sociopolitical motivations', 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 98: I 5-28. 
Dorian, N. (1973), 'Grammatical change in a dying dialect', Language 49: 413-38. 
-
(1981), Language death: The life cycle of a Scottish Gaelic dialect, Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. 
Douglas, D. (1986), 'From school to university: Language policy and performance at the 
University ofKhartum', International Journal of the Sociology of Language 61: 89-ll2. 
Dubois, B. and I. Crouch (1975), 'The question of tag questions in women's speech: They really 
don't use more of them', Language in Society 4: 289-94. 
Eckert, P. (1998), 'Gender and sociolinguistic variation', in ]. Coates (ed.), Language and 
gender: A reader, Oxford: Blackwell, 64-75. 
-
(2002), 'Constructing meaning in sociolinguistic variation', unpublished paper presented 
at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, New Orleans, http:/ I 
www.stanford.edu/ -eckert/ AAA02. pdf, accessed 18 November 2008. 
-
(2003), 'Language and gender in adolescence', in]. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The 
handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 381-400. 
-
(2005), 'Variation, convention, and social meaning', unpublished paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, Oakland, CA, 7 January 2005. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
283 
Eckert, P. and S. McConneii-Ginet (1995), 'Constructing meaning, constructing selves: 
Snapshots of language, gender and class from Betten High', in K. Hall and M. Bucholtz 
(eds), Gender articulated: Language and the socially constructed self, New York: Routledge, 
469-508. 
-
(2003), Language and gender, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
-
(2004 ), 'The good woman', in M. Bucholtz ( ed. ), Language and woman's place: Text and com-
mentaries, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 165-77. 
Eckert, P. and ]. R. Rickford (eds) (2001), Style and sociolinguistic 'Variation, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Edelsky, C. and K. Adams (1990), 'Creating inequality: Breaking the rules in debates',Journal 
of Language and Social Psychology 9(3): 171-90. 
Edwards, ]. R. (1979), 'Social class differences and the identification of sex in children's 
speech' ,Journal of Child Language 6(1): 121-7. 
-
(1985), Language, society, and identity, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Eid, M. (1982), 'The non-randomness ofdiglossic variation in Arabic', Glossa 16(1): 54--84. 
-
(1988), 'Principles of code switching between standard and Egyptian Arabic', Al-Arabiyya 
21: 51-79. 
-
(2002a), The world of obituaries: Gender across cultures and o'Ver time, Detroit: Wayne State 
University Press. 
-
(2002b), 'Language is a choice: Variation in Egyptian women's written discourse', in A. 
Rouchdy ( ed. ), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic 
theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 203-32. 
-
(2007), 'Arabic on the media: Hybridity and styles', in E. Ditters and H. Motzki (eds), 
Approaches to Arabic linguistics: Presented to Kees V ersteegh on the occasion of his sixtieth birth-
day, Leiden: Brill, 403-34. 
Eisele, ]. C. (2002), 'Approaching diglossia: Authorities, values, and representations', in A. 
Rouchdy (ed.), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic 
theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 3-23. 
Eisikovits, E. (1987), 'Sex differences in the inter-group and intra-group interaction among 
adolescents', in A. Pauwels (ed.), Women and language in Australian and New Zealand society, 
Sydney: Australian Professional Publications, 45-58. 
El-Hassan, S. (1977), 'Educated spoken Arabic in Egypt and the Levant: A critical review of 
diglossia and related concepts', Archiwm Linguisticum 8(2): 112-32. 
-
(1980), 'Variation in the demonstrative system in educated spoken Arabic', Archi'Vum 
Linguisticum 9(1): 32-57. 
EI-Kholy, H. (2002), Defiance and compliance: Negotiating gender in low-income Cairo, New 
York: Berghahn Books. 
Ennaji, M. (1997), 'The sociology of Berber: Change and continuity', International Journal of 
the Sociology of Language 123: 23-40. 
-
(2002), 'Language contact, Arabization policy and education in Morocco', in A. Rouchdy 
(ed.), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic theme, 
London: RoutledgeCurzon, 7!hl!8. 
Errihani, M. (2006), 'Language policy in Morocco: Problems and prospects of teaching 
Tamazight' ,Journal of North African Studies 11(2): 143--54. 
Faiq, S. (1999), 'The status of Berber: A permanent challenge to language policy in Morocco', 
in Y. Suleiman (ed.), Language and society in the Middle East and North Africa: Studies in 
'Variation and identity, Richmond: Curzon, 37-53. 
Fakhsh, M.A. (1980), 'The consequences of the introduction and spread of modern education: 
Education and national integration in Egypt', in E. Kedourie and S. G. Haim (eds), Modern 
Egypt: Studies in politics and society, London: Cass, 42-55. 

284 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Fasold, R. (1995), The sociolinguistics of society, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Ferguson, C. A. (1971), Language structure and language use: essays, Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press. 
-
(1972 [1959]), 'Diglossia', Word 15: 325-40. Reprinted in P. P. Giglioli (ed.), Language and 
social context, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 232-51. 
-
(1990), 'Come forth with a Surah like it: Arabic as a measure of Arab society', Pmpecti7)es on 
Arabic Linguistics i: 39-51. 
-
(1996 [1991]), 'Diglossia revisited', in A. Elgibali (ed.), Understanding Arabic: Essays in con-
temporary Arabic linguistics in honour of El-Said Badawi, Cairo: AUC Press, 49-67. 
Ferguson, C. A., R. K. Belnap and N. Haeri (1997), Structuralist studies in Arabic linguistics: 
Charles A. Ferguson's papers, 1954-1994, Leiden and New York: Brill. 
Findlow, S. (2001), 'Global and local tensions in an Arab Gulf state: Conflicting values in UAE 
higher education', paper presented at the International Conference 'Travelling policy/ local 
space: Globalization, identities, and education policy in Europe', Keele University, 27-9 
June. 
Fischer, W. (2006), 'Classical Arabic', inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and A. 
Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, i: 397-405. 
Fishman, J. A. (1967), 'Bilingualism with and without diglossia, diglossia with and without 
bilingualism' .Journal of Social Issues 23: 29-38. 
-
(1977), 'Language and ethnicity', in H. Giles (ed.), Language, ethnicity, and intergroup rela-
tions, London: Academic Press, 15-57. 
-
(1997), 'Maintaining languages: What works and what doesn't', in G. Cantoni (ed.), 
Stabilizing Indigenous Languages, Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University. 186-98. 
-
(2002), 'Endangered minority languages: Prospects for sociolinguistic research', International 
Journal on Multicultural Societies 4(2): 1-9. 
Fishman, J. A., R. L. Cooper and A. W. Conrad (1977), The spread of English: The sociology of 
English as an additional language, Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Fishman,}. A., C. A. Ferguson andJ. Das Gupta (eds) (1968), Language problems of developing 
nations, New York: Wiley. 
Fishman, P. A. (1980), 'Conversational insecurity', in H. Giles, P. Robinson and P.M. Smith 
(eds), Language: Social psychological perspecti7)es, Oxford: Pergamon, 127-32. 
-
(1983), 'Interaction: The work women do', in B. Thorne, C. Kramarae and N. Henley (eds), 
Language, gender, and society, Rowley, MA: Newbury House, 89-101. 
Fleisch, H. (1971), 'lmlila', inP. Bearman, T. Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donze) and W. 
P. Heinrichs (eds), Encyclopaedia of/slam, 2nd edn, Leiden: Brill, iii: 1162-3. 
Fontaine, J. (2004), 'La population libyenne, un demi-siecle de mutations', in 0. Pliez (ed.), 
La nou7)e/le Libye: Sociites, espaces et geopolitiques au lendemain de !'embargo, Paris: Karthala, 
159-75. 
Fought, C. (ed.) (2004), Sociolinguistic 7)ariation: Critical reflections, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Freed, A. F. (2003), 'Epilogue: Reflections on language and gender research', in J. Holmes and 
M. Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 699-721. 
Gal, S. (1978a), 'Peasant men can't get wives: Language change and sex roles in a bilingual com-
munity', Language in Society 7: 1-16. 
-
(1978b), 'Variation and change in patterns of speaking: Language shift in Austria', in 
D. Sankoff (ed.), Linguistic 7)ariation: Models and methods, New York: Academic Press, 
227-38. 
Gallagher, C. F. (1964), 'North African problems and prospects: Language and identity', in J. 
A. Fishman, C. A. Ferguson and J. Das Gupta ( eds), Language problems of de7)e/oping nations, 
New York: Wiley, 129-50. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
285 
Gardener-Chloros, P. (1985), 'Language selection and switching among Strasbourg shoppers', 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 54: 117-35. 
-
(1991), Language selection and switching in Strasbourg, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Germanos, M. (2007), 'Greetings in Beirut: Social distribution and attitudes towards different 
formulae', in C. Miller, E. Al-Wer, D. CAubet and J. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the city: 
Issues in dialect contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 147--65. 
Gernoble, L. and L. Whaley (eds) (1998), Endangered languages: Language loss and community 
response, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gibson, M. (2002), 'Dialect levelling in Tunisian Arabic: Towards a new spoken standard', in 
A. Rouchdy (ed.), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolin-
guistic theme, London: RoutledgeGuzon, 24--40. 
Giles, H., A. Mulac,J. Bradac and P. Johnson (1987), 'Speech accommodation theory: The first 
decade and beyond', in M. L. McLaughlin (ed.), Communication yearbook 10, Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage, 13-48. 
Gill, H. (1999), 'Language choice, language policy and the tradition-modernity debate in 
culturally mixed postcolonial communities: France and the francophone Maghreb as a 
case study', in Y. Suleiman (ed.), Language and society in the Middle East and North Africa, 
Richmond: Curzon, 122-36. 
Glasse, C. (ed.) (1989), A concise encyclopedia of !slum, San Francisco: Harper and Row. 
Goffman, E. (1981), Forms oftal/e, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Goodwin, M. H. (2003), 'The relevance of ethnicity, class, and gender in children's peer nego-
tiations', inJ. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: 
Blackwell, 229-51. 
Gordon, D. C. (1978), The French language and national identity, The Hague: Mouton. 
Gordon, M. and J. Heath (1998), 'Sex, sound, symbolism and sociolinguistics', Cu"ent 
Anthropology 10(4): 421-49. 
Grice, P. (1975), 'Logic and conversation', in P. Cole and]. Morgan (eds), Syntax and semantics 
3, New York: Academic Press, 41-58. 
Grin, F. (2005), 'Linguistic human rights as a source of policy guidelines: A critical assess-
ment',Journal of Sociolinguistics 9(3): 448--60. 
Grosby, S. (2005), Nationalism: A very short introduction, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Guibernau, M. (2007), The identity of nations, Cambridge: Polity. 
Gumperz, J. J. (1976), 'The sociolinguistic significance of conversational code switching', 
Papers on Language and Context (Working Paper 46), Berkeley: University of California, 
Language Behaviour Research Laboratory. 
-
(1982a), Discourse strategies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
-
(1982b), Language and social identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gumperz, J. ]. and D. Hymes (eds) (1972), Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of com-
munication, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Guy, G. R., C. Feagin, D. Schiffrin and J. Baugh (eds) (1996), TQTIJards a social science of lan-
guage: Papers in honor of William Labov, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins. 
Haag, M. (2003), The timeline history of Egypt, New York: Barnes & Noble. 
Haak, M., R. DeJong and K. Versteegh ( eds) (2004), Approaches to Arabic dialects: A collection 
of articles presented to Manfred Woidich on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, Lei den: Brill. 
Haas, W. (1982), Standard languages, spoken and written, Manchester: Manchester University 
Press. 
Hachimi, A. (2001), 'Shifting sands: Language and gender in Moroccan Arabic', in M. 
Hellinger and H. Bussmann (eds), Gender across languages: The linguistic representation of 
women and men, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1: 27-51. 
-
(2007), 'Becoming Casablancan: Fessis in Casablanca as a case study', in C. Miller, 

286 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
E. AI-Wer, D. Caubet andJ. C: E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the city: Issues in dialect crmtact and 
language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 97-122. 
Haeri, N. (1991), 'Sociolinguistic variation in Cairene Arabic: Palatalization and the qafin the 
speech of men and women', PhD thesis, University of Philadelphia. 
-
(1992), 'Synchronic variation in Cairene Arabic: The case of palatization', Perspectives on 
Arabic Linguistics iv: 169--80. 
-
(1994), 'A linguistic innovation of women in Cairo', Language Variation and Change 6: 
87-112. 
-
(1996a), The sociolinguistic market of Cairo: Gender, class, and education, London and New 
York: Kegan Paul International. 
-
(1996b), "'Why do women do this?": Sex and gender differences in speech', in G. R. Guy 
( ed. ), Towards a social science of language. Vol. I: Variation and change in language and society, 
Amsterdam: Benjamins, 101-14. 
-
(1997), 'The reproduction of symbolic capital: Language, state, and class in Egypt', World 
Journal of Human Sciences 38(5): 795--816. 
-
(2000), 'Form and ideology: Arabic sociolinguistics and beyond', Annual Review of 
Anthropology 29: 61--87. 
-
(2003), Sacred language, ordinary people: Dilemmas of culture and politics in Egypt, New York 
and Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
-
(2006), 'Culture and language', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and 
A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, i: 527-36. 
Hall, K. (2003), 'Exceptional speakers: Contested and problematized gender identities', in 
M. Meyerhoff and J. Holmes (eds), Handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 
352--80. 
Hammond, M. (2000), 'Subsuming the feminine other: Gender and narration in Idwar ai-
Kharrat's Ya Banat Iskandariyya',Journal of Arabic Literature 31: 38-58. 
Harvey, P. (1994), 'The presence and absence of speech in the communication of gender', in P. 
Burton, K. Kushari Dyson and S. Ardener (eds), Bilingual women, Oxford: Berg, 44-64. 
Hary, B. H. (1992), Multiglossia in Judeo-Arabic: With an edition, translation and grammatical 
study ofthe Cairene Purimscroll, Leiden and New York: Brill. 
Havelova, A. (2000), 'Sociolinguistic description of Nazareth', in M. Mifsud (ed.), Proceedings 
of the Third International Conference of AIDA, Hal Lija: Association internationale de dialec-
tologie arabe (AIDA), 141-4. 
Hayasi, T. (1998), 'Gender differences in modern Turkish discourse', International Journal of 
the Sociology of Language 129: 117-26. 
Heath, J. (1989), From code-switching to borrowing: Foreign and diglossic mixing in Moroccan 
Arabic, London and New York: Kegan Paul International. 
-
(2008), The veil: Women writers on its history, lore and politics, Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Heller, M.S. (1978), 'Bonjour, hello? Negotiations oflanguage choice in Montreal', Working 
Papers in Sociolinguistics 49, Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Lab. 
-
( 1982), 'Negotiations oflanguage choice in Montreal', in J. J. Gumperz ( ed. ), Languages and 
social identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 108-18. 
-
(1988), Code switching: Anthropological and sociological perspectives, Berlin: Mouton. 
Herbert, R. K. (2002), 'The political economy of language shift: Language and gendered eth-
nicity in a Thonga community', in R. Mesthrie (ed.), Language in South Africa, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 316-37. 
Hill,). H. (1987), 'Women's speech in Mexicano', inS. U. Philips, S. Steele and C. Tanz (eds), 
Language, gender and sex in comparative perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
121-60. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
287 
Hill,]. H. and K. C. Hill (1986), Speaking Mexica1W: The dynamics of syncretic language in 
Central Mexico, Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press. 
Hill,]. and B. Mannheim (1992), 'Language and world view', Annual Review of Anthropology 
21: 381-406. 
Hobbs, P. (2004), 'In their own voices: Codes witching and code choice in the print and online 
versions of an African-American women's magazine', Women and Language 27(1): 1-12. 
Hoffmann, C. (199 5), 'Monolingualism, bilingualism, cultural pluralism and national identity: 
20 years oflanguage planning in contemporary Spain', Current Issues in Language and Society 
1(3): 59-90. 
Hoffman, K. (2006), 'Berber language ideologies, maintenance, and contraction: Gendered 
variation in the indigenous margins of Morocco', Language and Communication 26: 144-67. 
Holes, C. (1983a), 'Bahraini dialects: Sectarian differences and the sedentary/nomadic split', 
Zeitschrift for arabische Linguistik 10: 7-38. 
-
(1983b ), 'Patterns of communal language in Bahrain', Language in Society 12( 4): 433-57. 
-
(1984), 'Bahraini dialects: Sectarian differences exemplified through texts', Zeitschrift for 
arabische Linguistik 13: 27-Q7. 
-
(1986), 'The social motivation for phonological convergence in three Arabic dialects', 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 61: 33-51. 
-
(1993), 'The uses of variation: A study of the political speeches ofGamal Abd ai-Nasir', 
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics v: 13-45. 
-
(1995), 'Community, dialect, and urbanization in the Arabic-speaking Middle East', Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental and African Studies 58(2): 270-S7. 
-
(1996), 'The Arabic dialects of South Eastern Arabia in a socio-historical perspective', 
Zeitschrift for arabische Linguistik 31: 34--56. 
-
(2004), Modern Arabic: Structures, functions, and varieties, Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. 
-
(2005), 'Dialect and national identity: The cultural politics of self-representation in Bahraini 
musalsalaat', in P. Dresch and]. Piscatori (eds), Monarchies and nations: Globalization and 
identity in the Arab states of the Gulf, Reading: Tauris, 52-72. 
-
(2006a), 'Bahraini Arabic', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and A. 
Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, i: 241-55. 
-
(2006b), 'Gulf States', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and A. 
Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, ii: 210-16. 
-
(2007), "'Hello, I say, and welcome! Where from, these riding men?" Arabic popular poetry 
and political satire: A study in intertextuality from Jordan', in E. Ditters and H. Motzki 
(eds), Approaches to Arabic linguistics: Presented to Kees Versteeth on the occasion of his sixtieth 
birthday, Leiden: Brill, 543--63. 
Holmes,]. (1992), An introduction to sociolinguistics, London: Longman. 
-
(1995), Women, men and politeness, London: Longman. 
-
(1998), 'Women's talk: The question of sociolinguistic universals', in ]. Coates (ed.), 
Language and gender: A reader, Oxford: Blackwell, 461--83. 
-
(2004), 'Power, lady, and linguistic politeness in Language and woman's place', in M. Bucholtz 
(ed.), Language and woman's place: Text and commentaries, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
151-7. 
Holmes,]. and M. Meyerhoff (eds) (2003a), The handbook of la.nguage and gender, Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
-
(2003b), 'Different voices, different views: An introduction to current research in language 
and gender', in J. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and gender, 
Oxford: Blackwell, 1-17. 
Holmes, ]. and M. Stubbe (2003), "'Feminine" workplaces: Stereotype and reality', in ]. 

288 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Holmes and M. Meyerhoff (eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 
573-99. 
Holmquist, J. C. (1985), 'Social correlates of a linguistic variable: A study in a Spanish village', 
Language in Society 14(2): 191-203. 
Holt, M. ( 1994 ), 'Algeria: Language, nation, and state', in Y. Suleirnan ( ed. ), Arabic sociolinguis-
tics: Issues and perspectives, Richmond: Curzon, 25-41. 
Houis, M. (1971), Antkropologie linguistique de /'Afrique noire, Paris: PUF. 
Houtsma, M. T., T. W. Arnold, R. Basset and R. Hartmann (eds) (1913-36), The Encyclopaedia 
of Islam: A dictionary of the geography, ethnography and biograplry of the Muhammadan peoples, 
Leiden: Brill. 
Hurreiz, S. H. (1978), 'Social stratification and linguistic variation in Khartoum and its vicin-
ity', in R. Thelwall (ed.), Aspects of language in the Sudan, Ulster: New University of Ulster, 
41-9. 
Hymes, D. (2003), 'Models of the interaction oflanguage and social life', in C. Paulston and R. 
Tucker (eds), Sociolinguistics: The essential readings, Oxford: Blackwell, 30-47. 
Ibrahim, M. H. (1986), 'Standard and prestige language: A problem in Arabic sociolinguistics', 
Anthropological Linguistics 28( I): 115-26. 
lraqui-Sinaceur, Z. (1998), 'Le dialecte de Tanger', in J. Aguade, P. Cressier and A. Vicente 
(eds), Peuplement et arabisation au Maghreb occidental, Madrid: Casa de Velazquez, 131-40. 
Isaksson, B. (1999), 'The non-standard first person singular pronoun in the modern Arabic 
dialects', Zeitschrifl for arabische Linguistik 37: 54--83. 
Ismail, H. (2007), 'The urban and suburban modes: Patterns oflinguistic variation and change 
in Damascus', in C. Miller, E. Al-Wer, D. Caubet and J. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the 
city: Issues in dialect contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 
188-212. 
Jabeur, M. (1987), 'A sociolinguistic study in Tunisia: Rhades', PhD Thesis, University of 
Reading. 
-
(1996), 'Women, social change, and linguistic variation in the urban dialect ofTunis', in C. 
Holes (ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd conference of AIDA, held at Cambridge, 10-14 September 
1995, Cambridge: University Publications Centre, 85-94. 
Jaffe, A. (2007), 'Codeswitching and stance: Issues in interpretation', Journal of Language, 
Identity, and Education 6(1): 53-77. 
Jakobson, R. (1978 [1957]), 'Mufaxxama: The "emphatic" phonemes of Arabic', inS. AI-Ani 
(ed.), Readings in Arabic linguistics, Indiana: Indiana University Linguistics Oub, 269-81. 
James, D. and S. Oarke (1993), 'Women, men and interruptions: A critical review', in D. 
Tannen (ed.), Gender and conversational interaction, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
231-68. 
James, D. and J. Drakich (1993), 'Understanding gender differences in amount of talk: A 
critical review of research', in D. Tannen (ed.), Gender and conversational interaction, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 281-312. 
Jassem, Z. A. (1994), Lectures in English and Arabic sociolinguistics, Kuala Lumpur: Pustaka 
An tara. 
J astrow, 0. (1978), Die mesopotamisch-arabischen pltu-Dialekte, Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 
-
(2004), 'Jiidisches, christliches and muslimisches Arabisch in Mossul', in M. Haak, R. De 
Jong and K. Versteegh (eds), Approaches to Arabic dialects: A collection of articles presented to 
Manfred Woidich on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, Leiden: Brill, 135-50. 
Jernudd, B. H., M. H. Ibrahim and J. A. Fishman (1986), Aspects of Arabic sociolinguistics, 
Berlin: Mouton. 
Johnstone, B. (1996), The linguistic individual: Self-expression in language and linguistics, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
289 
Johnstone, B. and J. M. Bean (1997), 'Self-expression and linguistic variation', Language in 
Society 26(2): 221-46. 
Kahlouche, R. (2004), 'Le berbere dans Ia politique linguistique algerienne', Revue 
d'Amenagement Linguistique 107(Winter): 103-32. 
Kamhawi, D. L. W. (2001), 'Code-switching: A social phenomenon in Jordanian society', 
Master's dissertation, University of Edinburgh 
Kanakri, A. (1984), 'linguistic variation in the Jordanian Arabic dialect of males and females', 
Master's dissertation, Wayne State University. 
Kapchan, D. (1996), Gender on the market: Moroccan women and the rrooicing of tradition, 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Kaplan, R. B. and R. B. Baldauf (eds) (2007), Language planning and policy in Africa. Vol. 2: 
Algeria, Cdte d'Ivoire, Nigeria and Tunisia, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Keating, E. (1998), 'Honor and stratification in Pohnpei, Micronesia', American Ethnologist 
25(3): 399-411. 
Keddad, S. (1986), 'An analysis of French-Arabic code-switching in Algiers', PhD thesis, 
University of London. 
Kedar, M. (1999), "'Arabness" in the Syrian media: Political messages conveyed by linguistic 
means', International Journal of the Sociology of Language 137: 141-6. 
Keenan, E. (1974), 'Norm-makers, norm-breakers: Uses of speech by men and women in a 
Malagasy community', in R. Baumann and]. Sherzer (eds), Explorations in the ethnography of 
speaking, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 125-43. 
Kendall, S. (2004), 'Mother's place in "Language and woman's place"', in M. Bucholtz (ed.), 
Language and woman's place: Text and commentaries, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
202-8. 
Kenny, K. D. (2002), 'Code-switch fluency and language attrition in an Arab immigrant com-
munity', in A. Rouchdy (ed.), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on 
a sociolinguistic theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 331-52. 
Kiesling, S. F. (2003), 'Prestige, cultural models, and other ways of talking about underlying 
norms and gender', in J. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and 
gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 509-27. 
Khan, G. (1997), 'The Arabic dialect of the Karaite Jews of Hit', Zeitschrift for arabische 
Linguistik 34: 53-102. 
Kharraki, A. (2001), 'Moroccan sex-based linguistic difference in bargaining', Discourse and 
Society 12: 615-32. 
Kroch, A. (1996), 'Dialect and style in the speech of upper class Philadelphia', in G. R. Guy, C. 
Feagin, D. Schiffrin and J. Baugh (eds), Towards asocial science oflanguage. Vol. I: Variation 
and change in language and society, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 23-45. 
Kuntjara, E. (2005), 'Gender and assertiveness: Bargaining in the traditional market in East 
Java', Women and Language 28(1): 54--61. 
Labov, W. (1966), The social stratification of English in New York City, Washington, DC: Center 
for Applied linguistics. 
-
(1971), 'The notion of "system" in creole studies', in D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and 
creolization of languages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 447-72. 
-
(1972a), Sociolinguistic patterns, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
-
(1972b), Language in the inner city: Studies in the Black English vernacular, Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. 
-
(1982), 'Building on empirical foundations', in W. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds), 
Perspectives on historical linguistics, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 17-82. 
-
(1990), 'The intersection of sex and social class in the course oflinguistic change', Language 
Variation and Change 2(2): 205-54. 

290 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
-
(2003 [1969]), 'Some sociolinguistic principles', in C. Paulston and R. G. Tucker (eds), 
Sociolinguistics: The essential readings, Oxford: Blackwell, 234-50. 
Lahlou, M. ( 1991), 'A morpho-syntactic study of code switching between Moroccan Arabic and 
French', PhD thesis, University ofTexas at Austin. 
Lake, J. L. and C. Myers -Scotton (2002), 'Second generation shifts in sociopragmatic orienta-
tion and codeswitching patterns', in A. Rouchdy (ed.), Language contact and language conflict 
in Arabic: Variatilms on a sociolinguistic theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 317-30. 
Lakoff, R. (2003a [1975]), 'Selections from ''Language and woman's place"', in C. B. Paulston 
and R. G. Tucker (eds), Sociolinguistics: The essential readings, Oxford: Blackwell, 203-7. 
-
(2003b), 'Language, gender, and politics: Putting "women" and "power" in the same sen-
tence', in]. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: 
Blackwell, 159-78. 
-
(2006), 'Identity a Ia carte: You are what you eat', in A. De Fina, D. Schiffrin and M. 
Bamberg (eds), Discourse and identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 142--65. 
Lambert, R. D. (1999), 'A scaffolding for language policy', International Journal of the Sociology 
of Language 137: 3-25. 
Larson, K. (1982), 'Role playing and the real thing: Socialization and standard speech in 
Norway',Journal of Anthropological Research 38: 401-10. 
Lawson-Sako, S. (2001), 'Assellema, ~ va? Aspects of ethnolinguistic vitality, language atti-
tudes and behaviour in Tunisia', PhD thesis, University of London. 
Lawson-Sako, S. and I. Sachdev (1996), 'Ethnolinguistic communication in Tunisian streets', 
in Y. Suleiman (ed.), Language and ethnic identity in the Middle East and North Africa, 
Richmond: Curzon, 61-79. 
Lawson-Sako, S. and I. Sachdev (2000), 'Codeswitching in Tunisia: Attitudinal and behav-
ioural dimensions', Journal of Pragmatics 32(9): 1343-61. 
Leet-Pellegrini, H. M. (1980), 'Conversational dominance as a function of gender and 
expertise', in H. Giles, P. Robinson and P.M. Smith (eds), Language: Social psychological 
perspecti'Ves, Oxford: Pergamon, 97-104. 
Lentin,]. (1981) 'Remarques sociolinguistiques sur l'arabe parle a Damas', Professorial thesis, 
University of Paris III, Sorbonne Nouvelle. 
Lesch, A. M. (1998), Sudan: Contested national identities, Bloominton: Indiana University 
Press. 
Lewis,]. E. (2004), 'Freedom of speech- in any language', Middle East Qllarterly 11(3): 1-10. 
Upski, J. (1977), 'Code-switching and the problem of bilingual competence', in M. Paradis 
(ed.), Aspects of bilingualism, Columbia, SC: Hornbeam Press, 250--63. 
Luke, A., C. Luke and P. W. Graham (2007), 'Globalization, corporatism, and critical language 
education', International Multilingual Research Journal1(1 ): 1-13. 
MacSwan, J. (2005), 'Codeswitching and generative grammar: A critique of the MLF model 
and some remarks on "modified minimalism"', Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 8(1): 
1-22. 
Maddy-Weitzmann, B. and D. Zisenwine ( eds) (2007), The Maghrib in the new century: Identity, 
religion and politics, Gainesville, FL: University ofFiorida Press. 
Mahe, A. (2001), Histoire de lagrande Kabylie (XIXe-XXe siicles): Anthropologie historique du 
lien social dans les communautis 'Villageoises, Paris: Editions Bouchene. 
Mahfouz, N. (2001), The Cairo trilogy, London: Everyman. 
Mahmud, U. A. (1979), 'Variation and change in the aspectual system ofjuba Arabic', PhD 
thesis, Georgetown University. 
Mai'z, M. and A. Rouadjia (2005). 'Quelles langues pour l'enseignement des sciences? Arabe, 
fran~is ou anglais?', El Watan (28 December), 13. 
Maltz, D. and R. Borker (1982), 'A cultural approach to male-female miscommunication', in 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
291 
J. Gumperz (ed.), Language and social identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
196--216 
Mansfield, P. (2003), A history of the Middle East, 2nd edn, New York: Penguin. 
Marley, D. (2000), 'Interactions between French and Islamic cultures in the Maghreb', http:/ I 
www.surrey.ac.uk/LIS/MNP /may2000/Marley.html, accessed 21 October 2008. 
-
(2004), 'Language attitudes in Morocco following recent changes in language policy', 
Language Policy 3: 25-46. 
Mar-Molinero, C. and P. Stevenson (eds) (2006), Language ideologies, policies and practices: 
Language and the future of Europe, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Mazraani, N. (1997), Aspects of language variation in Arabic political speech-making, Richmond: 
Curzon. 
McCarus, E. N. (2007), 'Modern standard Arabic', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, 
M. Woidich and A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: 
Brill, iii: 238-62. 
McConneii-Ginet, S. (2003), "'What's in a name?" Social labelling and gender practices', inJ. 
Holmes and M. Meyerhoff (eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 
69-97. 
-
(2004), 'Positioning ideas and gendered subjects: ''Women's language" revisited', in 
M. Bucholtz (ed.), Language and woman's place: Text and commentaries, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 136-42. 
McElhinny, B. (2003), 'Theorizing gender in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology', in 
J. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 
21-42. 
McFerren, M. (1984), Arabization in the Maghreb, Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics. 
McOmber, M. L. (1996), 'Phonemic pharyngalization', Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics viii: 
233-58. 
Meiseles, G. (1980), 'Educated spoken Arabic and the Arabic language continuum', Archivum 
Linguisticum 11(2): 118-48. 
Mejdell, G. (1996), 'Some sociolinguistic concepts of style and stylistic variation in spoken 
Arabic, with reference to Nagib Mahfuz talking about his life', in J. R. Smart (ed.), Tradition 
and modernity in Arabic language and literature, Richmond: Curzon, 316-26. 
-
(1999), 'Switching, mixing- code interaction in spoken Arabic', in B. Brendemoen, E. 
Lanza and E. Ryen (eds), Language encounters across time and space, Oslo: Novus, 225-41. 
-
(2006), Mixed styles in spoken Arabic in Egypt, Lei den: Brill. 
Messaoudi, L. (2001), 'Urbanisation linguistique et dynamique langagiere dans Ia ville de 
Rabat', in T. Bulat, C. Bauvois and P. Blanchet (eds), Sociolinguistique urbaine: Variations 
linguistiques, images urbaines et sociales, Rennes: Presses de l'Universite de Rennes, 87-98. 
-
(2002), 'Le parler ancien de Rabat face a )'urbanisation linguistique', in A. Youssi (ed.), 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference of AIDA, held at Ma"akesh, 1-4 April2000, 
Rabat: Amapatril, 223-33. 
Miller, C. (1997), 'Pour une etude du contact dialectal en zone urbaine', in B. Cameron (ed.), 
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference of Linguistics, Oxford: Pergamon, no. 0106. 
-
(2002), 'Jeux de langues: Humour and codeswitching in the Maghreb', in A. Rouchdy ( ed. ), 
Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic theme, London: 
RoutledgeCurzon, 233-55. 
-
(2003), 'Linguistic policies and the issue of ethno-linguistic minorities in the Middle East', 
in A. Usuki and H. Kato (eds), Islam in the Middle Eastern studies: Muslims and minorities, 
Osaka: Japan Center for Area Studies, 149-74. 
-
(2004), 'Variation and change in Arabic urban vernaculars', in M. Haak, R. DeJong and 

292 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
K. Versteegh (eds), Approaches to Arabic dialects: A collection of articles presented to Manfred 
Woidich on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, Leiden: Brill, 177-206. 
-
(2007), 'Arabic urban vernaculars: Development and change', in C. Miller, E. AI-Wer, D. 
Caubet and]. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the city: Issues in dialect contact and language 
variation, London and New York: Routledge, 1-31. 
Miller, C. and A. Abu-Manga (1992), Language change and national integration: The Sudan, 
Khartoum: Khartoum University Press. 
Miller, C., E. AI-Wer, D. Caubet and]. C. E. Watson (eds)(2007), Arabic in the city: Issues in 
dialect contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge. 
Mills, S. (2004), 'Oass, gender and politeness', Multilingua 23: 171-90. 
-
(2005), 'Gender and impoliteness' ,Journal of Politeness Research 1: 263--80. 
Milroy, L. (1987), Language and social networks, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Milroy, L. and M. Gordon (2003), Sociolinguistics: Method and interpretation, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Minai, N. (1981), Women in Islam: Tradition and transition in the Middle East, New York: 
Seaview Books. 
Mitchell, T. F. (1986), 'What is educated spoken Arabic?', International Journal of the Sociology 
of Language 61: 7-32. 
Morsly, D. (1984), 'L'enseignement du fran~is et de l'arabe en Algerie pendant Ia periode 
coloniale', in C. Achour (ed.), Reflexions sur Ia culture, Algiers: Office des Publications 
Universitaires, 33-43. 
Mortimer, R. (2007), 'Algerian identity and memory', in B. Maddy-Weitzmann and D. 
Zisenwine (eds), The Maghrib in the new century: Identity, religion and politics, Gainesville, 
FL: University ofFiorida Press, 36-49. 
Moseley, C. and R.E. Asher (eds) (1994), Atlas of the world's languages, London: Routledge. 
Mostari, H. (2004), 'A sociolinguistic perspective on Arabisation and language use in Algeria', 
Language Problems and Language Planning 28(1): 25-44. 
Mugaddam, A. H. (2006), 'Language maintenance and shift in Sudan: The case of migrant 
ethnic groups in Khartoum', International Journal of the Sociology of Language 181: 123-36. 
Myers-Scotton, C. (1986), 'Diglossia and code switching', in J. A. Fishman, A. Tabouret-
Keller, M. Oyne, B. Krishnamurti and M. Abdulaziz (eds), The Fergusonian impact, Berlin: 
Mouton, 403-15. 
-
(1993), Social motivations for code switching: Evidence from Africa, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
-
(1997), Duelling languages, Oxford: Oarendon Press. 
-
(1998a), 'A way to dusty death: The matrix language turnover hypothesis', in L. Gernoble 
and L. Whaley ( eds), Endangered languages: Language loss and community response, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 289-316. 
-
( ed.) (1998b ), Codes and consequences: Choosing linguistic varieties, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
-
(2004a), 'Precision tuning of the Matrix Language Frame (MLF) model of codeswitching', 
Sociolinguistica 18: 106-17. 
-
(2004b), 'Research note and erratum', Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 7(1): 89-90. 
-
(2006), Multiple voices: An introduction to bilingualism, Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Nait M'barek, M. and D. Sankoff (1988), 'Le discours mixte arabe/fran~is: Emprunts ou 
alternances de langue', Canadian Journal of Linguistics 33(2): 143-54. 
Nevo, M. (1999), 'Notes on the Judaeo-Arabic dialect of Siverek', Zeitschrift for arabische 
Linguistik 36: 66-84. 
Nichols, P. (1983), 'Linguistic options and choices for Black women in the rural South', in B. 
Thorne, N. Henley and C. Kramarae (eds), Language, gender and society, Newbury, MA: 
Newbury House, 54--68. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
293 
Niehoff-Panagiotidis, J. ( 1994 ), Koine und Diglossie, Wies baden: Harrassowi tz. 
Nielsen, H. L. (1996), 'How to teach Arabic communicatively: Toward a theoretical framework 
for TAFL', in A. Elgibali (ed.), Understanding Arabic, Cairo: AUCPress, 211-39. 
Nordberg, B. and E. Sundgren (1998), On observing language change: A Swedish case study, 
Uppsala: Institutionen fOr nordiska sprAk. 
O'Barr, W. M. and B. K. Atkins (1980), "'Women's Language" or "powerless language"?', in 
S. McConneii-Ginet, R. Borker and N. Furman (eds), Women and languages in literature and 
society, New York: Praeger, 93-110. 
Ochs, E. (1991), 'Indexing gender', in A. Duranti and C. Goodwin (eds), Rethinking context: 
Language as an interactive phenomenon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 335-58. 
Omoniyi, T. and G. White (2006), The sociolinguistics of identity, London: Continuum. 
Owens, J. (1995), 'Minority languages and urban norms: A case study', Linguistics 33: 305-58. 
-
(2000), Arabic as a minority language, Berlin and New York: Mouton. 
-
(200 1 ), 'Arabic sociolinguistics', Arabic a 48: 419-69. 
-
(2007), 'Oose encounters of a different kind: Two types of insertion in Nigerian Arabic 
codeswitching', in C. Miller, E. Al-Wer, D. Caubet and J. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in 
the city: Issues in dialect contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 
249-74. 
Owens, J. and R. Bani-Yasin (1987), 'The lexical basis of variation in Jordanian Arabic', 
Linguistics 25(4): 705-38. 
Palesterian National Authority, Ministry of Education (1998), http:/ /www.pcdc.edu.ps/ 
Arabic/secondary_education_plan.pdf, last accessed 17 October 2008. 
Paiva, H. (1969), Notes on classicization in modern colloquial Arabic, Helsinki: Snallmanink. 
-
(1982), 'Patterns ofkoineization in modern colloquial Arabic', Acta Orientalia 43: 13-32. 
-
(2006), 'Dialects: Classification', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich 
and A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, i: 
604-13. 
Parkinson, D. B. (1985), Constructing the social context of communication: Terms of address in 
Egyptian Arabic, Berlin: Mouton. 
-
(2003), 'Verbal features in oral fusha in Cairo', International Journal of the Sociology of 
Language 163: 27-41. 
Paulston, C. B. (1994), Linguistic minorities in multilingual settings, Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Paulston, C. B. and R. G. Tucker (eds) (2003), Sociolinguistics: The essential readings, Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Pereira, C. (2007), 'Urbanization and dialect change: The Arabic dialect of Tripoli (Libya)', in 
C. Miller, E. AI-Wer, D. Caubet and J. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the city: Issues in dialect 
contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 77-96. 
Philips, S. U. (2003), 'The power of gender ideologies in discourse', in J. Holmes and M. 
Meyerhoff ( eds ), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 252-76. 
Preisler, B. (1986), Linguistic sex roles in conversation, Berlin: Mouton. 
Ricento, T. (2006), 'Americanization, language ideologies and the construction of European 
identities', in C. Mar-Molinero and P. Stevenson ( eds), Language ideologies, policies and prac-
tices: Language and the future of Europe, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 44-57. 
Rizq, S. (2007), 'The language of Cairo's young university students', in C. Miller, E. AI-Wer, 
D. Caubet and J. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the city: Issues in dialect contact and language 
variation, London and New York: Routledge, 291-308. 
Roberts, I. ( 1997), Comparative syntax, London: Arnold. 
Romaine, S. (ed.) (1982), Sociolinguistic variation in speech communities, London: Edward 
Arnold. 
-
(1995), Bilingualism, Oxford: Blackwell. 

294 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
-
(1998), 'Why women are supposed to talk like ladies: The glamour of grammar', in N. 
Warner, J. Ahlers, L. Bilmes, M. Oliver, S. Wertheim and M. Chen (eds), Gender and belief 
systems: Proceedings of the third Berkeley Women and Language Conference, Berkeley, CA: 
Berkeley Women and Language Group. 
-
(2003), 'Variation in language and gender', inJ. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The hand-
book of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 98--118. 
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2000), "'Fushammiyya": Alternating style in Egyptian prose', Zeitschrift 
for arabische Linguistik 38: 68--87. 
Rosenhouse, J. (2001), 'A comparative analysis of stories narrated by Bedouin and sedentary 
male and female speakers', Zeitschriftftir arabische Linguistik 39: 64-83. 
Rouchdy, A. (ed.) (1992), The Arabic language in America, Detroit: Wayne State University Press. 
-
(2002), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolinguistic theme, 
London: RoutledgeCurzon. 
Roux, A. (1952), 'Quelques mots sur le langage des musulmanes marocaines', Orbis 1: 376--84. 
Royal, A.M. (1985), 'Male/female pharyngalization patterns in Cairo Arabic: A sociolinguistic 
studyoftwo neighbourhoods', PhD thesis, UniversityofTexas. 
Russell, M. (1994), Cultural reproduction in Egypt's private university, PhD thesis, University 
of Kentucky. 
Ryding, K. C. (2005), A reference grammar of Modern Standard Arabic, Cambridge and New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Saad, Z. (1992), 'Language planning and policy attitudes: A case study of Arabization in 
Algeria', PdD thesis, Columbia University. 
Sadiqi, F. (1991), 'The spread of English in Morocco', International Journal of the Sociology of 
Language 87: 99-114. 
-
(1995), 'The language of women in the city ofFes, Morocco', International Journal ofthe 
Sociology of Language 112: 63-79. 
-
(1997), 'The place of Berber in Morocco', International Journal of the Sociology of Language 
123: 7-21. 
-
(2002), 'The language of introduction in the city ofFes: The gender-identity interaction', 
in A. Rouchdy ( ed. ), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: Variations on a sociolin-
guistic theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 116--48. 
-
(2003a), Women, gender and language in Morocco, Leiden: Brill. 
-
(2003b), 'Women and linguistic space in Morocco', Women and Language 26(1): 35-43. 
-
(2006), 'Language and gender', lemma in K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and 
A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, ii: 642-50. 
Safi, S. (1992), 'Functions of code switching: Saudi Arabic in the United States', in A. Rouchdy 
(ed.), The Arabic language in America, Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 72--80. 
Salami, L. 0. (1991), 'Diffusing and focussing: Phonological variation and social networks in 
Ife-lfe, Nigeria', Language in Society 20(2): 217-45. 
Sallo, I. K. (1994), 'Code-switching at the university: A sociolinguistic study', in R. de 
Beaugrande, A. Shunnaq and M. H. Heliel (eds), Language, discourse and translation in the 
West and Middle East, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 115-32. 
Sankoff, D. and S. Poplack (1981), 'A formal grammar for code switching', Papers in Linguistics 
14: 3-45. 
Sankoff, D., S. Poplack and S. Vanniarajan (1990), 'The case of the nonce loan in Tamil', 
Language Variation and Change 2: 71-101. 
Sawaie, M. (1986), 'Arabic language academies as language planners', in N. Schweda-Nicholson 
(ed.), Languages in the international perspective, Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 56-65. 
-(2006), 'Language academies', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and 
A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, ii: 634-42. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
295 
Schaub, M. (2000), 'English in the Arab Republic of Egypt', World Englishes 19(2): 225-38. 
Schick-Case, S. (1988), 'Cultural differences, not deficiencies: An analysis of managerial 
women's language', inS. Rose and L. Larwood (eds), Women's careers: Pathways and pitfalls, 
New York: Praeger, 41-63. 
Schieffelin, B. B., K. A. Woolard and Paul V. Kroskrity (eds) (1998), Language ideologies: 
Practice and theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Schiffman, H. R. (1996), Linguistic culture and language policy, London: Routledge. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1974), 'Sociostylistic variation in spoken Egyptian Arabic: A re-examination 
of the concept of diglossia', PhD thesis, Brown University. 
Schulz, D. E. (1981), 'Diglossia and variation in formal spoken Arabic in Egypt', PhD thesis, 
University ofWisconsin-Madison. 
Scotton, C. M. and W. Ury (1977), 'Bilingual strategies: The social functions of code switch-
ing', Linguistics 193: 5-20. 
Sellam, A. (1990), 'Aspects of the communicative approach to language teaching', Rroue de Ia 
Faculte des Lettres 1(1): 81-93. 
Shaaban, K. (2006), 'Language policies and language planning', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. 
Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia. of Arabic language and 
linguistics, Leiden: Brill, ii: 694-707. 
Shaaban, K. and G. Ghaith (1999), 'Lebanon's language-in-education policies: From bilingual-
ism to trilingualism', Language Problems and Language Planning 23(1): 1-16. 
-
(2002), 'University students' perceptions of the ethnolinguistic vitality of Arabic, French 
and English in Lebanon',Journa/ ofSot:Wlinguistics 6(4): 557-74. 
Sharkey, H. J. (2008), 'Arab identity and ideology in the Sudan: The politics oflanguage, eth-
nicity, and race',AfricanAffairs 107/426: 21-43. 
S'hiri, S. (2002), 'Speak Arabic, please! Tunisian Arabic speakers' linguistic accommodation 
to Middle Easterners', in A. Rouchdy ( ed. ), Language contact and language conflict in Arabic: 
Variatimzs on asot:Wlinguistic theme, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 149-74. 
Shorrab, G. (1986), 'Bilingual patterns of an Arabic-English speech community', International 
Journal of the Sociology of Language 61: 79-88. 
Shraybom-Shivtiel, S. (1999), 'Language and political change in modern Egypt', International 
Journal of the Sot:Wlogy of Language 137: 131-40. 
Shuy, R. W. (2003 [1990]), 'A briefhistory of American sociolinguistics', in C. B. Paulston and 
R. G. Tucker (eds), Sociolinguistics: The essential readings, Oxford: Blackwell, 4-16. 
Sidnell, J. (2003), 'Constructing and managing male exclusivity in talk-in-interaction', in J. 
Holmes and M. Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 
327-52. 
Silverstein, M. (1996), 'Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic life', in R. Ide, R. 
Parker and Y. Sunaoshi (eds), Salsa III: Proceedings of the Third Annual Symposium about 
Language and Society, Austin: University of Texas, Department of Linguistics, 266-95 
Silverstein, P. A. (2007), 'The Maghrib abroad: Immigrant transpolitics and cultural involution 
in France', in B. Maddy-Weitzmann and D. Zisenwine(eds), The Maghrib in then1!11lcentury: 
Identity, religion and politics, Gainesville, FL: University of Florida Press, 237-66. 
Sirles, C. A. (1985), 'An evaluative procedure for language planning: The case of Morocco', 
PhD thesis, Northwestern University. 
-
(1999), 'Politics and Arabization: The evolution of post-independence North Africa', 
International Journal ofthe Sot:Wlogy of Language 137: 115-29. 
Smith-Hefner, N. J. (1988), 'Women and politeness: The Javanese example', Language in 
Society 17(4): 535-54. 
Sperber, D. and D. Wilson (1986), 'Loose talk', Proceedings ofthe Aristotelian Society, NS 6: 
153-71. 

296 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Spolsky, B. (1994), 'The situation of Arabicin Israel', in Y. Suleiman (ed.), Arabic sociolinguis-
tics: Issues and perspectives, Richmond: Curzon, 227-34. 
-
(2004), Language policy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Spolsky, B. and E. Shohamy (1999), The languages of Israel: Policy, ideology, and practice, 
Oevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Spolsky, B., H. Tushyeh, M. Amara and K. Bot (2000), Languages in Bethlehem: The sociolin-
guistic transformation of a Palestinian town, Amsterdam: Royal Tropical Institute. 
Stapleton, K. (2003), 'Gender and swearing: A community practice', Women and Language 
26(2): 23-33. 
Stevenson, P. (2005), "'National" languages in transnational contexts: Language, migration and 
citizenship in Europe', in C. Mar-Molinero and P. Stevenson ( eds ), Language ideologies, poli-
cies and practices: Language and the future of Europe, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 147--61. 
Stillman, N. A. andY. K. Stillman (1978), 'The art of a Moroccan folk poetess', Zeitschrift der 
deutschen Morgenliindischen Gesellschafl128: 65-89. 
Stokoe, E. H. (2005), 'Analysing language and gender' ,Journal of Sociolinguistics 9(1): 118--33. 
Stokoe, E. H. and J. Smithson (2001), 'Making gender relevant: Conversation analysis and 
gender categories in inderaction', Discourse and Society 12(2): 217-44. 
Stora, B. (2001), Algeria 1830-2000: A short history, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Stroomer, H. (2004), 'The Arabic dialect of women in Meknes (Morocco): Gender linked 
sound changes?', in M. Haak, R. DeJong and K. Versteegh (eds), Approaches to Arabic dia-
lects: A collection of articles presented to Manfred W oidich on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, 
Leiden: Brill, 291-307. 
Suleiman, S. M. K. ( 1985),Jordanian Arabic between diglossia and bilingualism: Linguistic analy-
sis, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins. 
Suleiman, Y. (1994), Arabic sociolinguistics: Issues and perspectives, Richmond: Curzon. 
-
(ed.) ( 1999 ), Language and society in the Middle East and North Africa: Studies in variation and 
identity, Richmond: Curzon. 
-
(2003), The Arabic language and national identity: A study in ideology, Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press. 
-
(2004), A war of words: Language and conflict in the Middle East, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
-
(2006a), 'The betweenness of identity: Language in trans-national literature', in Z. S. Salhi 
and I. R. Nett on ( eds ), The Arab diaspora: Voices of an anguished scream, London: Routledge, 
11-25. 
-
(2006b), 'Charting the nation: Arabic and the politics of identity', Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics 26: 125-48. 
Syria, Ministry ofEducation (2008), http: I /syrianeducation.org.sy /nstyle/index.php?op=arti 
culos&task=verart&aid=394, last accessed 17 October 2008. 
Taine-Cheikh, C. (2007), 'The (r)urbanization of Mauritania: Historical context and contem-
porary developments, in C. Miller, E. AI-Wer, D. Caubet and]. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic 
in the city: Issues in dialect contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 
35-54. 
Talbot, M. (2003), 'Gender stereotypes: Reproduction and challenge', in J. Holmes and M. 
Meyerhoff(eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 468--86. 
Talmoudi, F. (1984), The diglossic situation in North Africa: A study of classical Arabic/ 
dialectal Arabic diglossia with sample text in 'mixed Arabic', GOteborg: Acta Universitatis 
Gothoburgensis. 
Tannen, D. (1990), You just don't understand: Women and men in conversation, New York: 
William Morrow. 
-
(ed.) (1993), Gender and conversational interaction, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
297 
-
(1994), Gender and discourse, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
-
(1998), 'The relativity of linguistic strategies: Rethinking power and solidarity in gender 
and dominance', in D. Cameron (ed.), The feminist critique of language: A reader, London: 
Routledge, 261-79. 
-
(2004 ), 'Cultural patterning in ''Language and woman's place"', in M. Bucholtz ( ed. ), Language 
andwomansplace: Text and commentaries, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 158--64. 
Temim, D. (2006), 'Politiques scholaire et linguistique: quelle(s) perspective(s) pour I' Algerie?', 
Le Fran;ais Aujourd'hui 154: 19-24. 
Thakerar, ]., H. Giles and ]. Cheshire (1982), 'Psychological and linguistic parameters of 
speech accommodation theory', in C. Fraser and K. R. Scherer (eds), Advances in the social 
psychology of language, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 205-55. 
Thimm, C., S. C. Koch and S. Schey (2003), 'Communicating gendered professional identity: 
Competence, cooperation, and conflict in the workplace', in J. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff 
(eds), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: Blackwell, 528--49. 
Thomason, S. G. (2001), Language contact: An introduction, Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. 
Thorne, B. and N. Henley (1975), Language and sex: Difference and dflminance, Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House. 
Tigrizi, N. (2004), 'Les langues dans les constitutions algeriennes', Cahiers de l'ILSL 17: 
289-99. 
Tocqueville, A. de (2001), Writings on empire and slavery, ed. and trans. J. Pitts, Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Tomiche, N. (1968), 'La situation linguistique en Egypte', in A. Martinet (ed.), Le language, 
Paris: Encyclopedie de Ia Pleiade, 1173-S7. 
Trabelsi, C. (1988), 'Les usages linguistiques des femmes de Tunis', Professorial thesis, 
University of Paris III. 
Trudgill, P. (1972), 'Sex, covert prestige, and linguistic change in the urban British English of 
Norwich', Language in Society 1: 215-46. 
-
(1974), The social differentiation of English in Norwich, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
-
(1983), On dialect: Social and geographical perspectives, Oxford: Blackwell. 
-
(1986), Dialects in contact, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Unesco (2007), World data on education, 6th edn, http:/ /www.ibe.unesco.org/Countries/ 
WDE/2006/index.html, last accessed 20 October 2008. 
Versteegh, K. (1984), Pidginization and creolization: The case of Arabic, Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. 
-(1993), 'Levelling in the Sudan: From Arabic creole to Arabic dialect', International Journal 
ofthe Sociology of Language 99: 65-79. 
-
(2001), The Arabic language, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
-
(2004), 'Pidginization and creolization revisited: The case of Arabic', in M. Haak, R. de 
Jong and K. Versteegh (eds), Approaches to Arabic dialects: A collection of articles presented to 
Manfred Woidich on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, Leiden: Brill, 343-57. 
Versteegh, K., M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and A. Zabroski (eds) (2006-7), Encyclopedia of 
Arabic language and linguistics, Lei den: Brill. 
Walters, K. (1988), 'Dialectology', in F. J. Newmeyer (ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge survey, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, iv: 119-39. 
-
(1991), 'Women, men, and linguistic variation in the Arab world', Perspectives on Arabic 
Linguistics iii: 199-229. 
-
(1996a), 'Diglossia, linguistic variation, and language change in Arabic', Perspectives on 
Arabic Linguistics viii: 157-97. 

298 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
-
(1996b), 'Gender, identity, and the political economy of language: Anglophone wives in 
Tunisia', Language in Society 25(4): 515-55. 
-
(2003), 'Fergie's prescience: The changing nature of diglossia in Tunisia', International 
Journal of the Sociology of Language 163: 77-109. 
-
(2006a), 'Communal dialects', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and 
A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, i: 442-8. 
-
(2006b), 'Language attitudes', lemma inK. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich and 
A. Zaborski (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic language and linguistics, Leiden: Brill, ii: 650-64. 
Watson,]. (2003), 'Insiders, outsiders, and language development in San'a', in I. Ferrando and 
J. J. Sanchez Sandoval ( eds ), AIDA: 5th conference proceedings: Cadiz, September 2002, Cadiz: 
Universidad de cadiz, 561-70. 
-
(2007), 'Linguistic leveling in Sanllani Arabic as reflected in a popular radio serial', in C. 
Miller, E. AI-Wer, D. Caubet and]. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabic in the city: Issues in dialect 
contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 166-87. 
Weinreich, U. (1953), Languages in contact: Findings and problems, New York: linguistic Circle 
ofNew York. 
Wernberg-Moller, A. (1999), 'Sociolinguistic meaning in code-switching: The case of 
Moroccans in Edinburgh', in Y. Suleiman (ed.), Language and society in the Middle East and 
North Africa: Studies in variation and identity, Richmond: Curzon, 234-58. 
Whiteley, W. (1969), Swahili: The rise of a national language, London: Methuen. 
Wodak, R. (2003), 'Multiple identities: The roles of female parliamentarians in the EU parlia-
ment', in J. Holmes and M. Meyerhoff ( eds ), The handbook of language and gender, Oxford: 
Blackwell, 671-98. 
Woidich, M. (1994), 'Cairo Arabic and the Egyptian dialects', in D. Caubet and M. Vanhove 
(eds), Actes des Premieres Journees Internationales de Dialectologie Arabe de Paris: Colloque 
international tenu a Paris du 27 au 30 janvier 1993, Paris: Langues'O, 493-507. 
Woolard, K. A. (2004), 'Codeswitching', in A. Duranti (ed.), Companion to linguistic anthropol-
ogy, Oxford: Blackwell, 73-94. 
Wright, S. (2004), Language policy and language planning: From nationalism to globalisation, New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Yokwe, E. M. (1984), 'Arabicization and language policy in the Sudan', Studies in the Linguistic 
Sciences 14(2): 157-70. 
Ziamari, K. (2007), 'Development and linguistic change in Moroccan Arabic-French codes-
witching', in C. Miller, E. Al-Wer, D. Caubet and]. C. E. Watson (eds), Arabicin the city: 
Issues in dialect contact and language variation, London and New York: Routledge, 275-90. 
Zuhur, S. (2005), The Middle East: Politics, history and neonationalism, [s.l.]: Institute of Middle 
Eastern, Islamic, and Diasporic Studies. 

Index 
4-M model, 40-1, 43, 47-9, 56 
problems with, 50-3 
Abdel-Jawad, H., 101, 121 
Abdel-Malek, Z., 71 
abstract vs. concrete code-switching, 83 
Abu-Haidar, F., 18, 107-9, 126n, 157 
Abu-Lughod, L., 136, 137, 145, 151-4, 
190 
Abu-Melhim, A. R., 71 
academies oflanguage, 256-8 
Academy of the Arabic Language, 240, 245 
'access', 161 
accommodation theory, 64 
Addis Ababa agreement, 247 
adjective 'old', dialectal varieties, 25 
adverbs, dialectal varieties, 24 
advertisements, 180 
age 
and language change, 116 
and social status, 190 
Akhbtir al-Adab, 257, 270 
Al-Ahram (Egyptian newspaper), 146 
ai-An~iirl, N., 266 
ai-An~iirl, N. and M. ai-An~iirl, 207-8 
ai-Din, Y., 270 
Al-Farazdaq, 149 
ai-Khansa', 149 
Al-Khateeb, M.A. A., 158 
al-Khu.bz al-~tift, 88 
ai-Madanl, A. T., 215 
ai-Mubariik, M., 202 
Al-Muhannadi,M. 158 
ai-Nadlm, A., 239 
ai-Q!I'Id, Y., 9 
ai-Sayyid, L., 239 
ai-Sha'b, M., 177-8 
al-Shumii 'al-5awda'('Black candles'), 190-1 
ai-Sibii'I, Y., novels of, 71 
al-Siyiisah al-Usbu'fyah ('Weekly Politics'), 
240 
al- 'Uriibahft muf/libil al-'awlamah ('Arabness 
in the face of globalisation'), 207-8 
al-Watad ('The tent peg', Shalabi), 191-2 
AI-Wer, E., 100, 101-2, 105, 121 
ai-Zawl, A., 220 
Alawis, 231 
Alexandria, 126n 
Alexandrian Arabic, 110 
Algeria, 203, 232-4 
French colonisation, 213-21 
languages used, 211 
'allegiance' and 'alliances', 133 
Allubah, M., 240 
Amara, M. H., 251-2 
Amman, Jordan, new dialect, 102 
'analogical derivation', 257 
Anglo-American capitalism, 267 
Arab Academy of Damascus, 256-7 
Arab Academy of Language, 242 
Arab League (AL), 209 
Arab nation, 242 
Arab world, 20, 210-12, 269 
Arabic identity, 208-9 
Arabic Language Academy in Cairo, 
257 
Arabic Language Academy of jordan, 
257 

300 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
Arabisation 
in Morocco, 222-5 
in Sudan, 247-8 
in Syria, 230-1 
'Arabness in the face ofglobalisation', 207-8 
aristocracy, 136 
Ashley, E., 236 
'Ashur, S., 178 
aspectual marker b- in ECA, 58 
assertiveness, 181-5 
attitude 
and ideologies, 204 
to language in Algeria, 218-19 
to language in Morocco, 225, 227 
to language in Tunisia, 227 
Auer, P. and A. DiLuzio, 63 
Austen,]., 131 
Austria 
language policy, 265 
social networks, 156 
authoritative language, 175-7 
authority as function of code-switching, 62 
Awad., L., 242-3 
b-prefix 
inECA, 58 
in MSA/ECA switching, 45--6, 51 
Baath party, 231 
Badawi, S. A., 14--15 
Baghdad, Iraq, 107-9 
dialects, 18 
Bahrain, 105-7, 255 
dialects, 18 
languages used, 211 
study methodology, 96 
Barakah, 1., 178-80 
bargaining exchanges, 140-2 
Baron, B. 196n 
Bassiouney, R. 180 
Bastos, L. C. and M. Oliveira, 180 
Bateson, M. C., 12 
Bayn al-Q~rayn ('Palace walk', Mahfouz), 
142-3 
Bean,]. M. and B. Johnstone, 181 
Bedouin dialect, 19, 112, 121 
poetry, 151-4 
stories in Israel, 154 
'Before you are held accountable', 163, 
165-7, 169-70, 171-6, 182-4 
Beirut, 116 
Belazi, H. E. et al., 35 
Belfast, N. Ireland, 92-3 
Beni Mella!, Morocco, 193 
Benrabah, M., 212, 216,218-19, 220 
Bentahila, A. and E. E. Davies, 34, 35, 39 
Berbers 
in Algeria, 219-21 
language, 186-8 
in Morocco, 221,225-7 
Berk-Seligson, S., 33 
'Beyond events', 163, 168 
bilingual switching vs. diglossic switching, 
54 
bilingualism, 264 
in Morocco, 225, 227 
'Black candles', 190-1 
Black English Vernacular, 95 
code-switching, 65--6 
Blanc, H., 14, 15, 109, 110-11, 117-18 
Blom, J.-P. and J.]. Gumperz, 29, 59 
Bolonyai, A., 56, 181 
bonds, ethnic, 98 
'Book of Algeria, The', (ai-Madanl), 215 
'borrowing' and code-switching, 35 
Boumans, L. 35, 38-9 
Bourguiba, President Habib, 227 
Boussofura-Omar, N., 42, 52-3, 58 
bridges, 41 
Britain 
and colonisation, 236-48,252 
immigration, 265 
role in North Africa, 254 
Britto, F., 11 
Brown, P. and A. Gilman, 138 
Brown, P. and S.C. Levinson, 143 
Budiir, B., 255 
Cairene Arabic (CA), 14--15, 112, 126n 
gender differences, 160 
vs. MSA, 11-12 
Cairo, study of language change, 95-6 
Cairo Academy, 257 
'Cairo Trilogy' (Mahfouz), 142-3 
Cameron, D., 132, 180-1 
Carter, H., 239 
case marking 
inMSA, 166 
in MSA/ECA switching, 48 
in political speech, 75, 79 
categorisation of dialects for analysis, 163-5 

Chad, languages used, 211 
change see language change 
'change in footing', 62-3 
'changing of hats', 63 
Cheshire,]., 156 
Christian Baghdadi (CB), 107-9 
Christianity, 103-4 
dialects, 18 
civil wars, 123 
classicisation, 118 
Clyne, M.G., 32-3 
Coates,]., 128 
code choice, 69 
and gender, 186-7 
and identity, 84-5, 180-1 
and power, 181 
code-switching 
vs. code-mixing, 30 
definition, 29-30 
and diglossic switching, 29, 31, 54 
functions, 60 
motivation, 59-85 
reasons for, 29 
refusal, 64 
in song, 68-9 
syntactic, 31-41 
as a universal phenomenon, 64 
as the unmarked behaviour, 65-6 
see also diglossic switching 
codification ofHebrew, 249 
colloquial, 15 
Arabic and colonisation, 238 
vs. SA in interviews, 261-2 
colonisation, 210-12 
of Algeria, 213-21 
British, 236-48, 252 
of Egypt, 236-45 
French, 213-35 
ofLebanon, 231-3, 235 
ofMorocco,221-7 
ofNorth Africa, 213-29 
ofSudan,245-8 
of Syria, 229-31, 235 
of Tunisia, 227-8 
commercial language, 180 
communicative competence 
code-switching as, 28 
and markedness, 66, 69-70 
community of practice, 94, 124, 133 
Comoros, languages used, 211 
complementiser (CP) 
islands in, 38 
as subordinate clause, 37 
INDEX 
301 
composite matrix language, 56-8 
concrete vs. abstract code-switching, 83 
constitution 
of Algeria, 216, 219 
of Morocco, 226 
'Constitution dialogue, The', 163, 168, 184 
constraints, 31 
'contemporary classical', 15 
content morphemes, 41 
and matrix language theory, 37 
in MSA/ECA switching, 44-56 
convergence, 64 
conversational code-switching, 63 
corpus planning, 205 
coup, Egyptian, 271n 
creative role in code-switching, 63 
creolised dialect, 120-1 
Crystal, D., 268 
CS see code-switching 
cultural approach see difference theory 
culture, 270 
Daher,]., 97, 157-9 
Dahir berbere, le, 221 
Damascene Arabic, 97 
gender differences, 158-9 
data gathering, 126n 
Davies, E. E. and A. Bentahila, 98 
Debtor's share, The, 9 
Declaration on Cultural Diversity, 263 
decreolising change, 120 
deference maxim, 70 
deficit theory, 130-1 
definite articles 
in code-switching, 35 
in MSA/ECA switching, 45, 48, 49 
demonstratives 
inECA, 58 
in MSA/ECA switching, 45, 48, 49 
in political speech, 79-80 
Detroit, USA, 157 
Deuchar, M., 139 
dialects 
Bedouin and sedentary, 19 
change over time, 18 
as corrupted versions, 203 
in Egyptian literature, 72 

302 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
dialects (cont.) 
Jewish, 110 
in Jordan, 100-3 
perception of own use, 13 
prestige vs. standard, 18-19 
regional, 20-6 
Shiite vs. Sunni, 106 
and urbanisation, 112-14 
difference theory, 132-3 
diglossia, 10-12, 265-7 
and code-switching, 29, 31, 54 
definition, 27n 
and language change, 117 
and levelling, 119 
diglossic switching, 42-58 
and code-switching, 29, 31, 54 
motivation, 71-86 
see also code-switching 
diphthongs and language change, 91 
DiSciullo, A.M. et al., 34-6 
discontinuous passive morpheme, in MSA, 
57-8 
divergence, speech, 64 
diversity 
in Arab world, 274 
and education, 134-5 
Djibouti, languages used, 211 
domains of speech events, 14 
dominance theory, 131-2 
dominant language see matrix language (ML) 
Dorian, N., 109 
Druze, 110-11 
Dutch, 26 
/Moroccan Arabic code-switching, 38-9 
dyadic nations, 263 
early system morphemes, 41, 49, 52-3 
ECA (Egyptian Cairene Arabic), 21-5 
and colonisation, 237-8 
demonstratives, 58 
/English, code-switching in song, 68-9 
/MSA, switching, 42-58: in political 
speeches, 74-85 
and MSA: distinguishing for data analysis, 
163-5; morpho-syntactic features, 
166-7 
vs. MSA: and gender, 174-80; in 
literature, 154; lexical items, 165-6; 
phonological features, 167 
negation, 53 
vs. SA, 239: in Egypt, 252; in interviews, 
258-60 
on television, 252 
Eckert, P., 93-4, 116, 157, 186, 190 
Eckert, P. and S. McConneii-Ginet, 129, 
133, 189 
economic diversity, 135 
economic factors 
and language policy, 204 
in spread of Arabic, 269 
Educated Spoken Arabic (ESA), 16-17, 54 
education 
in Algeria, 216-18, 220-1 
in Arab world, 269 
and diversity, 134-5 
in Egypt, 237-8, 240-3, 244, 253 
and French colonisation, 232-6 
in Israel, 250 
language of, 15 
and language change, 117 
and language policy, 205 
in Lebanon, 231-2 
in Morocco, 222-4 
in Palestine, 253 
in Sudan, 246-7,253 
in Syria, 230 
in Tunisia, 227-8 
Edwards, ]. R., 98 
Egypt 
Bedouin poetry, 151-4 
British colonisation, 236-45 
Christianity in, 104 
culture of magic, 148-9 
dialects, 21, 112 
diglossic switching in, 42-58, 71 
education, 237-8, 240-3, 244, 253 
elite in, 252 
English in, 267 
language policy, 240, 252-4 
languages used, 211 
levelling in, 121 
literature, 190-2 
parliament, 177-8 
political speech, 73-85 
prestige dialect, 18 
soap operas, 27n 
social class, 124 
songs, 126n 
talk shows, 162-85 
terms of address, 143-5 

and veiling, 136 
written texts, 71-2 
see also Cairene Arabic; ECA 
Egyptian Cairene Arabic see ECA 
Eid,~.,42, 146-8,154,171 
Eisikovits, E., 189 
El-Hassan, S., 42 
EI-Kholy, H., 132 
elite language, French in ~orocco, 223 
embedded language (EL), 37 
islands, 38-9 
see also matrix language 
employment 
in Algeria, 217 
in Egypt, 245 
endangeredlanguages,269 
English, 268 
in Arab world, 210-12 
/ECA, code-switching in song, 68-9 
in Egypt, 267 
/German code-switching, 32-3 
/Hungarian code-switching, 56--7 
/Iraqi Arabic code-switching, 36--7 
as a killer language, 269 
/Lebanese or Palestinian Arabic code-
switching, 39 
in Lebanon, 231 
as marked variety, 67 
/~oroccan Arabic code-switching, 40, 
61-2 
in ~orocco, 224 
in Palestine, 251-2 
/Panjabi code-switching, 32,35 
/Saudi Colloquial Arabic code-switching, 
60-1 
/Shona (South African language) code-
switching, 67--8 
/Spanish code-switching, 32-3 
in Sudan, 247 
/Swahili code-switching, 38, 66--7 
/Tamil code-switching, 35 
in Tunisia, 267 
in United Arab Emirates, 255--6 
Ennaji, ~., 221, 224 
equivalence constraint, 32-3 
ESA (Educated Spoken Arabic), 16-17, 54 
ethnicity 
definition, 98-9 
and religion, 98-9, lOS 
as a sociolinguistic variable, 97-103 
INDEX 
303 
Ettela'at (Iranian newspaper), 146 
European Union, 209 
expertise and use of~A, 175--6 
exploratory choice maxim, 70 
face and politeness, 138-9 
factuality as function of code-switching, 62 
Faiq, S., 221,227 
Fasold, R., 11 
Ferguson, C. A., 10-14 
Fishman,]. A., 14, 27n, 98, 268-9 
fixed independent variables, 123-5 
flexible independent variables, 123-5 
'For bread alone', 88 
formality and politeness, 139 
Four Egyptian Women, 271n 
'frame', change in, 62-3 
France 
Arabic teaching in, 266 
and colonisation, 213-35 
revolution, 207 
Fran~isants in ~orocco, 225 
free morpheme constraint, in CS, 32 
Freed, A. F., 131 
French 
in Arab world, 210-12 
in Lebanon, 231-2 
/~oroccan Arabic code-switching, 33-4, 
39-40 
in ~orocco, 223-4 
in Tunisia, 228 
/Tunisian Arabic code-switching, 35 
French Academy, 256 
Friedrich, 137 
Front lslamique du Salut (FIS), 271n 
functions for code-switching, 60,64 
'Future of culture in Egypt, The' (Husayn), 
241 
future tense and dialectal varieties, 21 
,iinna:was poetry, 152-3 
Gal, S., 156 
Gaza Strip, 251 
gender 
agreement in code-switching, 36 
and code choice, 186--7 
and community of practice theory, 133 
deficit theory, 130-1 
definition, 128-9 
difference theory, 132-3 

304 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
gender (cont.) 
differences in Jordan, 101 
distributions in talk show study, 170 
dominance theory, 131-2 
and ECA vs. MSA, 174--80 
and interruption, 181-5 
and linguistic status, 189 
and literature, 154 
and phonological realisation, 158--60 
and poetry, 149-54 
and politeness, 139-42 
and power, 131-2, 141-2, 192-3 
and prestigious forms, 155-7, 161 
and social class, 160 
and social networks, 156 
and solidarity, 132, 140 
studies, approaches to, 195 
and terms of address, 142-3, 145--6 
and traditional practices, 136 
and turn-taking, 174 
universals, 132-3 
General Syrian Congress, 229 
German/English code-switching, 32-3 
Germanic languages, 26 
Germanos, M., 116 
Germany 
as diglossic community, 267 
Turkish immigrant in, 200-1 
Ghidhdhamr, 'A.M., 131 
Gibson, M., 119, 121 
Giles, H. et al., 64 
Gill, H., 221,228, 229,269 
Glasse, C., 270 
globalisation and spread of English, 268 
glottal stop, 174-5, 262 
and dialects, 20 
Goffman, E., 62-3 
Gordon, D. C., 214 
government principle, 34-7 
Grand LiJJan, le, 229 
greetings 
in Beirut, 116 
and gender, 140-1 
Grin, F., 263-4 
Grosby, S., 207 
Guibernau, M., 206, 209 
Gulf Arabic group of dialects, 21 
Gulf countries, 255 
Gumperz,J. J., 29-30, 31, 59--60,63-4, 
95 
H (high) variety, 10-12 
as polar, 13-15 
Hachimi, A., 145-6, 193 
Haeri, N., 95, 160, 161, 194, 243-4, 265, 267 
J:lammiid, S. 222 
Havelova, A., 159 
Haykal, H., 241 
Hebrew, 248-51 
in Palestine, 251-2 
/Spanish code-switching, 33 
Heller, M. S., 64 
Hemnesberget, Norway, 59--60 
'heritage classical', 14-15 
Hezbollah-Israel war, 258 
Hit, Iraq, 109-10 
Higher Authority of Arabisation (HAA), 247 
Hill, J. H. and K. C. Hill, 187 
Hill, J. and B. Mannheim, 203 
historical pride in Egypt, 238--9 
Hochdeutsch, 267 
Hoffman, K., 186-7, 189, 228 
Holes, C., 18, 71, 96,105-7,113, 118--21, 
154, 171 
Holmes,)., 128, 132 
Holmes,). and M. Meyerhoff, 128--9 
Holmquist,). C., 155--6 
Holt, M., 212, 214 
'Home secrets', 163,165,166,169,176-7, 
178--80 
homogeneity and urbanisation, 112 
honour, 137-8, 196n 
and poetry, 153 
and terms of address, 146 
Hungarian/English code-switching, 56-7 
Hurreiz, S. H., 158 
Husayn, T., 241 
Hussein, King of Jordan, 100 
Ibrahim, H., 18, 121,198 
ICA (Iraqi Colloquial Arabic), 21-5 
/English code-switching, 36-7 
identity 
Arabic, 208--9, 268 
asserting through choice oflanguage, 67 
and code choice, 84-5, 180-1 
in code-switching, 65 
and communities of practice, 94 
Egyptian vs. Arabic, 237 
vs. ethnicity, 98 
andMSA, 178 

national, 206-7 
negotiations, 70 
and religion, 104-5 
Sudan,254 
as a universal social arena, 64-5 
Yemeni, 262 
Idrrs, Y., 154 
il-buyu:t Jasra:r'Home secrets', 163, 165, 
166, 169, 176-7, 178-80 
immigration and linguistic competence, 265 
independence 
in Algeria, 215-18 
in Egypt, 241-3 
in Morocco, 222-3 
in Sudan, 246--7 
in Syria, 230 
in Tunisia, 227 
independent variables, 123-5 
indexicality, 70, 177, 259 
influence and respect, 157 
informants bias, 62 
instrumental function oflanguage, 203 
inter-communal communication, 16-17 
interdialectal contact, 117 
interruption and gender, 181-5 
intersentential code-switching, 30 
interview with Syrian president, 258-60 
interview with Yemeni president, 260-3 
interviewers, insiders and outsiders as, 95-7 
intrasentential code-switching, 30 
Iraq 
languages used, 211 
religion in, 107-10 
Iraqi Academy, 257 
Iraqi Colloquial Arabic (ICA), 21-5 
/English code-switching, 36-7 
Islam, I 03-4 
and the Arab nation, 209 
and Arabic, 270 
in Morocco, 225 
suppression by colonisation, 214 
islands in matrix language theory, 38-9, 55--6 
Israel, 248-51, 254 
Christianity in, 104 
English as marked variety, 67 
storytelling, 154 
Istiqlal party, 225 
Italy, colonisation of Libya, 255 
iwa:r ad-dustu:r 'The constitution dialogue', 
163, 168, 184 
INDEX 
305 
Jabeur, M., 97-8 
James, D. and]. Drakich, 155 
Jews see Judaism 
Jordan, 18, 99-103 
Christianity in, 104 
diglossic switching, 71 
languages used, 211 
prestigious forms, 159 
Juba Arabic, 120 
Judaism, 103-4,250 
and Hebrew, 249 
Karaites, 109-10 
and poetry, 150-1 
leala:m nawa:fim 'Women talk', 163, 167-8 
Kapchan, D., 193 
KaraiteJews, 109-10 
Keating, E., 194 
Kedar, M., 231 
Keenan, E., 139 
Khan, G., 97, 109-10 
Kharraki, A., 140--1, 190 
Khartoum Arabic, 120 
Khic;lr, M., 208 
'killer language', English as, 269 
Kitiib al-Jazii U. ('The book of Algeria', 
ai-Madani), 215 
koineisation, 118 
Koran, 270, 271n 
Korba, Tunisia, 158 
Krach, A., 114-15 
Kurdish, 271n 
Kuwait, 255 
languages used, 211 
L (low) variety, 10-12 
as polar, 13-15 
Labov, W.,65,89-92,95, 157 
Lahlou, M., 39 
Lakoff, R. T., 130-1, 132, 180 
Lambert, R. D., 205, 263 
language academies, 256-8 
Language and social networks (Milroy), 77 
'Language and woman's place', 130 
language attitude and ideologies, 204 
language change 
approaches to studying, 90-4 
in Baghdad, Iraq, 109 
and education, 117 
identifying, 90 

306 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
language change (cont.) 
in Jordan, 100-3 
and levelling, 120-2 
methodology of measuring, 94-7 
and religion in Bahrain, 105-7 
and urbanisation, 112-14 
and youth, 116 
language contact and language policy, 269 
language death, from more than one matrix 
language, 55 
language ideologies 
and language policy, 201-4 
Sudan,248 
language planning and language policy, 
205--6 
language policy, 264-5 
in Austria, 265 
and contact, 269 
definition, 200 
and education, 205 
in Egypt, 240, 252-4 
in Gulf countries, 255 
and ideologies, 201-4 
in Israel, 248-5 l 
in North Africa, 228-9 
in Palestine, 251-2 
and planning, 205-6 
and practices, 204-5 
and riots, 199 
in Sudan, 245-6 
in Syria, 230 
language pollution, 202-3 
language practices and language policy, 
204-5 
language variation, 123 
in Jordan, 99-103 
see also language change 
Larson, K., 162 
late system morphemes, 41 
Lebanese Colloquial Arabic (LCA), 21-5 
/English code-switching, 39 
Lebanon, 236 
Christianity in, 104 
French colonisation, 231-3, 235 
languages used, 211 
Levantine group of dialects, 21 
levelling 
definitions, 117-18 
and diglossia, 119 
and language change, 120-2 
lexical items, ECA vs. MSA, 165--6 
Libya, 113-14, 255 
languages used, 211 
linguistic status and gender, 189 
linguistic tolerance, 264 
literacy 
in Algeria, 216 
and colonisation, 214 
and diversity, 134-5 
literature, 71-2 
in Egypt, 190-2 
and gender, 154 
terms of address, 142-3 
ma wara:? al-?a!rtJa:O 'Beyond events', 163, 
168 
McCarus, E. N., 23 
McConneii-Ginet, S., 142 
McFerren, M., 265 
Madagascar, 139 
magic, l96n 
and names, 148-9 
and religion, 135 
Mahfouz, N., 28, 72, 86n, 142-3 
maiden names in obituaries, 147 
Malagasy, 139 
male dominance, 130-l 
Maltz, D. and R. Borker, 132 
Mansfield, P., 229,231 
marked choice maxim, 70 
markedness 
and communicative competence, 69-70 
andMSA, 177 
of SA in interviews, 259-60 
theory of code-switching, 65-70 
Marley, D., 226-7 
Martha's Vineyard, study oflanguage 
change,9l 
matrix language (ML), 37-41 
composite, 56-8 
limited to code-switching, 55 
and MSA/ECA switching, 43-58 
problems with, 54-5 
Mauritania, Ill 
languages used, 211 
mawwa:l, ISO 
maximal projections, 55--6 
islands as, 38 
maxims in code-switching choices, 70 
Mazraani, N., 30, 71 

media, role in code-switching, 171 
Meiseles, G., 14, 16 
Mejdell, G., 13, 31, 42, 58, 72, 86n, 161 
Mesopotamian Arabic group of dialects, 21 
metaphorical code-switching, 59--60, 62, 
63 
Miller, C., 110,111, 113,116--17, 186,208, 
230,246 
Milroy, L., 77, 89-93, 95 
minority languages, 264 
Mitchell, T. F., 16--17, 54 
'mixed forms', 43 
ML see matrix language (ML) 
Modern Standard Arabic see MSA 
modernisation oflanguage in Egypt, 241 
modesty, 137--8 
and poetry, 153 
and terms of address, 146 
Moneim, A., 199, 202-3 
monolingual nations, 263 
monolingualism and independence, 213 
Montreal, Canada, 64 
mood marking 
inMSA, 166 
in political speech, 75 
Moroccan Arabic 
/Dutch code-switching, 38--9 
/English code-switching, 40, 61-2 
/French code-switching, 33-4, 39-40 
Moroccan colloquial Arabic, taught in 
France, 266 
Moroccanisation, 223 
Morocco, 111,186--8,232-4 
bargaining exchanges, 140-2 
culture of magic, 148--9 
French colonisation, 221-7 
gender in, 133-4 
languages used, 187, 211 
songs in, 150-1 
terms of address, 145--6 
'morpheme order principle', 41 
morphemes, two kinds, 37 
morpho-syntactic overlap, 47 
mosaic nations, 263 
Mostari, H., 216 
mothers, symbolic power of, 190-2 
MSA, 15 
in Bahrain, 106 
vs. CA, 11-12 
vs. dialects, 21--6 
INDEX 
307 
/ECA switching, 42-58: in political 
speeches, 74--85 
and ECA: distinguishing for data analysis, 
163-5; morpho-syntactic features, 
166--7 
vs. ECA: and gender, 174--80; in literature, 
154; lexical items, 165--6; phonological 
features, 167 
vs. ESA, 16--17 
and gender, 158--9 
and identity, 178 
and levelling, 119, 121 
and prestige, 18--19 
teaching as the standard, 13 
/TCA switching, 52-3, 58 
Miisa, 239 
Mubarak, Hosni, speech by, 73--85 
multi-ethnic nations, 263 
multilingualism vs. unity, 207 
Muslim and Christian dialects, 18 
Muslim Baghdadi (MB), 107-9 
Muslim Brotherhood website, 252 
Muslims see Islam 
Mustaqbal al-thaqiifah ft Mifr ('The future of 
culture in Egypt', Husayn), 241 
Myers-Scotton, C., 28--30,35,37-41, 56-7, 
63-70 
Nahuatl women, Mexico, 187 
Nairobi, Kenya, 66-7 
Nait M'barek, M. and D. Sankoff, 33 
Najdi Arabic, 121 
names 
and magic, 148-9 
in obituaries, 147 
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 83-5, 241-2, 271n 
national language, 201 
nationalism, 209 
and ethnicity, 98 
nations 
Arab and language, 207-10 
definition, 206 
types of, 263 
Navon, Y., 250 
Nebraska, USA, language policy, 205 
negation 
dialectal varieties, 24-5 
ECA, 53 
negative markers in MSA/ECA switching, 
44,48 

308 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
negative politeness, 138-9, 184-5 
negative structures in political speech, 75, 
79-80 
networks, 109 
definition, 93 
'neutral morphemes', 43 
New York City, study oflanguage change, 
91-2 
New York Times (American newspaper), 
146 
newspapers, Egyptian, 240 
Nichols, P., 155 
Nielsen, H. L., 17 
Nordberg, B. and E. Sundgren, 156--7 
North Africa 
Christianity in, 104 
French colonisation, 213-29 
group of dialects, 21 
language policy, 228-9 
role of Britain in, 254 
Norway, code-switching in, 29, 59-60 
novels see literature 
number agreement in code-switching, 36 
O'Barr, W. M. and B. K. Atkins, 131 
0-TV, 252 
obituaries, 146-8 
'observer's paradox', 95, 158-9, 194 
Ochs, E., 94 
official languages, 201, 205 
Hebrew as, 249 
minorities as, 264 
in Palestine, 251 
in Sudan, 248 
oil, discovery of, 122 
Oman, 255 
dialects, 112-13 
languages used, 211 
'one nation, one language', 208 
outsider late system morphemes, 41, 49, 51, 
52-3 
overlap, 182 
Owens,]., 98, 115 
Owens,]. and R. Bani-Yasin, 126n 
'Palace walk' (Mahfouz), 142-3 
palatalisation in Cairene Arabic, 160 
Palestine, 251-2, 254 
education, 253 
languages used, 211 
Palestinian Arabic/English code-switching, 
39 
Palestinian Christians, 104 
Palestinians in Jordan, 100-2 
Palmerston, Lord, 236 
Paiva, H., 18-19 
Panjabi/English code-switching, 32, 35 
Parkinson, D. B., 17, 143-4 
parliament, Egyptian, 177--8 
passive form 
inECA, 58 
in MSA/ECA switching, 46, 49 
pattern system, 23 
peasantness, 156 
People's Assembly, 177--8 
perception of dialect use, 13 
Pereira, C., 113-14 
personal pronoun, dialectal varieties, 23 
Persuasirm (Austen), 131 
pharyngealisation in Cairene Arabic, 160 
Philadelphia, USA, vernacular, 114-15 
phonological features, ECA vs. MSA, 167 
phonological integration in code-switching, 
32 
phonological realisation and gender, 158--60 
phonological variables, 125n 
pidgin Arabic, 125 
poetry and gender, 149-54 
Poland, 207 
politeness, 138-42 
negative, 184-5 
and power, 138-9, 143 
political speeches, 71 
in Egypt, 73-85 
politics and religion, 105--6 
position and code choice, 181 
positive politeness, 138 
possessive construction, dialectal varieties, 
20-1 
power 
and code choice, 181 
and gender, 131-2, 141-2, 192-3 
and politeness, 138-9, 143 
as a universal social arena, 65 
preposition phrase, code-switching within, 
35 
prepositions, dialectal varieties, 24-5 
prestige dialect, 114 
and gender, 155-7, 161 
in Jordan, 159 

and levelling, 121 
vs. standard, 18-19, 157 
urban dialect, 112 
prestige languages, North Africa, 228 
pronunciation as test of nationality, 207 
qabla Jan tul}a:sabu 'Before you are held 
accountable', 163, 165-7, 169-70, 
171--6, 182--4 
Q!Ltar, languages used, 211 
Qi.smat al-gkurama '(The debtor's share), 9 
Qur'an, 270, 271n 
Rades, study methodology, 97--8 
refusal to code-switch, 64 
regional dialects, 20--6 
relative pronouns in political speech, 75 
religion, 124 
and Arabic, 270 
and ethnicity, 98-9, 105 
and identity, 104-5 
in Iraq, 107-10 
in Lebanon, 231-2 
and magic, 135 
as a sociolinguistic variable, 103-11 
in Syria, 229, 258 
and veiling, 136 
religious suppression by colonisation, 214 
research methodology, 151 
respect 
and honour, 137 
and influence, 157 
revolution, Egyptian, 238 
Ricento, T., 209 
riots and language policy, 199 
'role', 161 
Romaine, S., 35, 60, 63, 65--6, 156, 161 
root system, 23 
Rosenbaum, G. M., 72 
Rosenhouse,]., 154 
Rouchdy, A., 39 
Raux, A., 158 
Royal, A.M., 158 
rural dialects see urbanisation 
SA (Standard Arabic), 21, 26, 266 
as 'Arabic tongue', 203 
vs. colloquial in interviews, 261-2 
vs. ECA, 239: in Egypt, 252; in interviews, 
258--60 
INDEX 
309 
and employment in Egypt, 243 
and Hebrew, 249-50 
re-emergence in Egypt, 242 
survival, 269-70 
assymbolofindependence,210 
weakening, by British in Egypt, 237--8 
Sa 'adah, A., 207 
Sacred language, ordinary people (Haeri), 
265 
Sa'dr, 'U., 220 
Sadiqi, F., 128, 132-4, 148, 181, 186 
Safi, S., 60-1 
Salami, L. 0., 157 
Sallo, I. K., 36 
same-sex power relationships, 132 
Sankoff, D. and S. Poplack, 31-2 
Sankoff, D. et at., 35 
Saudi Arabia, 255 
languages used, 211 
Saudi Colloquial Arabic (SCA), 21, 23 
/English code-switching, 60-1 
Schiffman, H. R., 270 
Scotton, C. M. and W. Ury, 64 
sedentary dialect, 19, 113 
sedentary stories in Israel, 154 
Sefrou, Jewish community, 150-1 
self-control and honour, 137 
Sellam, A., 141 
Semitic language, 23 
sentence fillers in code-switching, 61 
Shaaban, K., 267 
Shalabr, Kh., 191-2 
shared morphemes, problems with 
identifying matrix language, 55 
Sharkey, H.]., 245, 248, 254 
Shiites, 103-4 
in Bahrain, 105-7 
andMSA, 18 
Shona (South African language)/English 
code-switching, 67--8 
Shraybom-Shivteil, S., 240-2 
Shiishah, F., 257 
Shukrr, M., 88 
signposts in Israel, 249-50 
SimJ:ta poni, 150 
Sirles, C. A., 216-17,222-3,225 
situation in motivating code-switching, 
59 
situational code-switching, 59, 61, 63 
social arena model, 64-5 

310 
ARABIC SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
social class, 126n 
in Egypt, 124 
and gender, 155, 157, 160 
andlanguagechange,90-2 
and politeness, 141-2 
as a sociolinguistic variable, 114--16 
and terms of address, 144 
and veiling, 136 
Social motivations for code switching (Myers-
Scotton), 28 
social networks 
approach, 92-3, 151 
and gender, 1 56 
in Jordan, 101 
social status and age, 190 
Socialist Forces Front (FFS), 219 
sociolinguistic variables, 89 
solidarity 
and gender, 132, 140 
and politeness, 138-9 
Somalia, languages used, 211 
songs 
code-switching in, 68-9 
in Egypt, 126n 
in Morocco, 1 50-1 
South Carolina, USA, study of gender and 
language, 1 55 
Spain, social networks, 156 
Spanish 
/English code-switching, 32-3 
/Hebrew code-switching, 33 
speaker roles, 71 
in code-switching, 62-3 
in political speeches, 73 
speech community, 89-90 
speech divergence, 64 
Spolsky, B., 200-1, 205,248, 250-1, 254,267 
Spolsky, B. and E. Shohamy, 249, 250,254 
Spolsky, B. et at., 110 
Standard Arabic see SA 
standard vs. prestige form, 18-19, 157 
standardisation, 118 
state, definition, 206 
status hierarchies, 194 
status planning, 205 
Stevenson, P., 265 
Stillman, N. A. andY. K. Stillman, 150-1 
stylistic spectrum, 71 
subject positions and code choice, 181 
subjectivity as function of code-switching, 62 
Sudan, 254 
British colonisation, 245-8 
education, 246-7, 253 
languages used, 211 
levelling in, 120 
Sudan African Closed Districts National 
Union, 247 
Suleiman, Y., 29, 67, 101, 203, 207, 212, 
238-40, 242 
Sunnis, 103-4, 231 
in Bahrain, 105-7 
andMSA, 18 
Swahili/English code-switching, 38, 66-7 
Sweden, gender and prestigious language, 
156-7 
switching see code-switching; diglossic 
switching 
Sydney, Australia, 189 
Sykes-Picot agreement (1916), 210, 229 
symbolic function oflanguage, 186-90, 
203 
Syria, 102, 236 
Christianity in, 104 
French colonisation, 229-31, 235 
and language policy, 202 
languages used, 211 
president of, 258-60 
SA in, 201 
system morphemes, 56-8 
and matrix language theory, 37-8 
in MSA/ECA switching, 43-58 
systematic observation, 95 
tag questions, 130-1 
talk shows in Egypt, 162-85 
Tamazight, 219-20, 226 
Tamii/English code-switching, 35 
Tannen, D., 132 
Tashelhit community, Morocco, 186-8 
TCA see Tunisian Colloquial Arabic 
teaching 
Arabic, 13 
language of, 15 
'Tent peg, The' (Shalabi), 191-2 
terms of address, 142-6 
and magic, 148-9 
'they' code see we/they dichotomy 
third wave approach, 93-4, 107 
Thomason, S. G., 199, 205,226 
Thonga community, South Africa, 186 

Thorne, B. and N. Henley, I3I 
Tigrizi, N., 2I6, 2I9 
Tok Pisin, 33 
tolerance, linguistic, 264 
Tomiche, N., IIO 
Toqueville, A. de, 2I4 
tourism in Egypt, 244-5 
Trabelsi, C., I 58 
tradition, veiling as, I36 
transaction as a universal social arena, 
65 
triadic nations, 263 
Tripoli, Ubya, 113-I4 
Trudgill, P., 90, I09, II2, I 56 
Tunisia, I 58, 232-4 
diglossic switching in, 42 
English in, 267 
French colonisation, 227-8 
languages used, 211 
levelling in, 119 
and veiling, I36 
western female residents, I88-9 
Tunisian Colloquial Arabic (TCA), 
2I-S 
/French code-switching, 35 
/MSA code-switching, 52-3, 58 
Turkish immigrant in Germany, 200-I 
turn-taking 
and gender, I74 
and interruption, I82-3 
Tutankhamen, 238-9 
two constraints theory, 3I-4 
UNESCO, 247, 263 
uniform structure principle, 48-9 
United Arab Emirates (UAE), 255-6 
languages used, 211 
unity vs. multilingualism, 207 
universal grammar, 3I 
universal social arena, identity as a, 64-5 
universal theory of code-switching, 64 
universalisation, 223 
unmarked choice maxim, 70 
unmarked code-switching, 65-6 
upper class in Philadelphia, USA, II 5; see 
also social class 
urban dialect, I9 
INDEX 
31 I 
urbanisation, I22, I34-S 
as a sociolinguistic variable, III-I4 
USA, language policy, 205 
variables, sociolinguistic, 89 
veiling, I36 
and modesty, I37 
verbs 
dialectal varieties, 24-6 
in political speech, 74 
vernacular Arabic, I6 
Versteegh, K., 20-I, 112, II8, I20-2 
Vineyarders, 9I 
virtuosity maxim, 70 
vowel raising as non-prestigious form, I 58 
Wales, social networks, I 56 
Walters, K., I3-I4, 89, 117, I 58, I88-9, 204, 
266-7 
War of words, A (Suleiman), 2I2 
wars, I23 
we/they dichotomy, 60, 62, 82 
'Weekly Politics' (Egyptian newspaper), 240 
Weinreich, U., 59 
Wernberg-Moller, A., 6I-2 
West Bank, 2SI 
witchcraft see magic 
Woidich, M., 112 
women 
as symbols, I89 
see also gender 
'Women talk', I63, I67-8 
Woolard, K. A., 70 
word order and code-switching, 32-3 
Wright, S., 200-I, 203-4, 264-5, 268-70 
Yemen 
languages used, 211 
president of, 260-3 
Yiddish, 250 
Yokwe, E. M., 245 
youth and language change, II6 
Yfisuf, N., 239 
Zaghlfil, S., 238 
Ziamari, K., 39-40 
Zulu language, I86 

