


Cover images :fJ Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998 99. takcn from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table. available at www.chcmsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-476-0 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
t i * )  The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004 
A II righ 1.7 rcwr 1:c4 
Apcir~ jiotii unj*,fuir tl~~cilittg.fi7s 
the piirlwses c?f'rescwdi or priwle .stir&, or criticisrti or 
rericws (IS pcvmiittetl under the tcrins of' the U K  Copyright, Designs und Piitent.7 Aci , 
1988. t1ii.r ~~tthliccirii~n 
mu)' not he ruprotlircwl. stored or transniittetl, in titiy fi)rrn or by 
uny nwms, withour flic prior prniission it1 wiring of Tlic R o j d  Socic.t,r of Cliemistty . or 
in rhc ccise of'rc.l~i-oSr(ii'lii(' rc~protli.wtion only in acc~ordmw H'itli thr twnis of the liwn~x~s 
issued bj. the Copyright Liwtsing Agenc~ 
it1 tlic L' K ,  or in uccordcnci~ with rhc t c r m  of' 
tlic liceticcs iss~rcd b!, rhe tippropriuti. Reprodiretion Rights Orgmixitioii oiitsidc thc i K. 
Ent1iririe.s conccwing reprohrctiori orrtsido the ternis stotcd here shoultl he . w i t  to 
Tlw Roj*ul Socic.ty of' C'licwiistry at the utl~lre.s.s printcvl on this ptigc. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House. Scicnce Park. 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, U K  
Registercd Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Alden Booksct. Northampton 
Printed and bound by Italy by Rotolito Lombarda 

Preface 
The aim of this textbook is not to provide you, the reader, with large numbers 
of correlation tables for every form of spectroscopy used by organic chemists; 
nor is it designed to give you an in-depth understanding of the physical 
processes that occur when molecules interact with electromagnetic radiation. 
What we hope to do in this textbook is to provide you with a basic 
understanding of how each type of spectroscopy gives rise to spectra, and 
how these spectra can be used to determine the structure of organic 
molecules. This text is aimed at undergraduate students in Years 1 and 2, and 
is meant to provide an introduction to organic spectroscopic analysis, 
leading to an appreciation of the information available from each form of 
spectroscopy and an ability to use spectroscopic information in the 
identification of organic compounds. 
We will concentrate upon the most commonly used techniques in organic 
structure determination: nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), infrared (TR) 
and ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry (MS). 
The amount of' space devoted to each technique in this text is nieant to be 
representative of their current usage for structure determination. 
Finally, we will try to bring all of these techniques together in an attempt 
to show you how to go about the structure determination of an unknown 
compound in a (reasonably) logical manner. Our aim has been to provide 
spectra to illustrate every point made, but do aiialyse fully each of the spectra 
in order to obtain the maximum information available. We hope you enjoy 
this text and find it useful in your studies. 
R. J. Anderson, D. J. Bendell and P. W. Groundwater 
Sunder Ian d 
I
.
.
 
111 

F D I  C A T I O N A L  C O N S U L T 4 ' 4 r  
Mr M Bcrrv 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on [he 
fundamental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying 21 given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable lo chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T 1  ES I N  T H F  S E R I E S  
I I T L E S  I N  T H L  S E R I E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morri.s 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henrlorson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J ./otws 
Structure and Bonding .I Birrrctt 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hmson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Iiill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M S t i ~ i s h ~ q ~  
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Bwrerf 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Organic Synthetic Methods J R Hmvoii 
A r a n  a tic C heini s t ry .I D Hepiiwtl?, 
D R W(iriiig citicl M .I Wiwing 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Peptides and Proteins S D o o ~ r i ~ i  
Biophysical Chemistry A Cooper. 
Natural Products: The Secondary 
Metabolites J R Hatisol? 
Maths for Chemists, Volume I, Numbers, 
Functions and Calculus M Cockett rind 
G Doggett 
Maths for Chemists, Volumc 11, Power Series, 
Complex Numbers and Linear Algcbra 
M Cwi(tJtt rind G Doggctt 
Inorganic Chemistry in Aqueous Solution 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
J Biirrctt 
R J iliirk~eson. D J Reniklf mil 
P W Groiiiirhiwfrr 
s E Dci!lrl 
J M Seddi~i cind J D Girk~~ 
J M Holll1.s 
n 0 HrlJWclrd 
Nucleic Acids S Doonmi 
Fir, [her infiwtmit ion crhout th i.v .srric.s i s  ri wiirihlt> (it 1 iwv I,. r.w, org; f c I 
Or-tkr riiirl ciiyiiiric~s slioiifd he scn 10: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: + 44 1223 432350; Fax: + 44 1223 4260 17; Email: sales(n r.sc.org 

Contents 
1.1 
1.2 Double Bond Equivalents 
The Interaction of Electromagnetic Radiation with 
Molecules 
2.1 Instrumentation 
2.2 
2.3 C hrom op hores 
2.4 Applications of UV Spectroscopy 
Selection Rules and the Beer-Lambert Law 
3.1 Instrumentation 
3.2 
3.3 Characteristic Group Vibrations 
Selection Rules and Hooke's Law 
1 
4 
7 
8 
10 
19 
24 
26 
27 
4.1 Instrumentation 
51 
4.2 Origin of the NMR Effect 
55 
4.3 Chemical Shift 
57 
4.4 'H NMR Spectroscopy 
59 
4.5 Decoupled, NOE (Double Resonance) and COSY Spectra 
83 
4.6 
"C NMR Spectroscopy 
89 
V 

vi 
Con tents 
4.7 Other Nuclei 
4.8 
Liquid Chromatography NMR 
5.1 Instrumentation 
5.2 Vaporization and Ionization Processes 
5.3 Fragmentation Processes 
5.4 Mass Analysis 
5.5 Mass Spectral Data 
5.6 Hyphenated Mass Spectrometry Methods 
5.7 MS-MS 
\ 10 
I l l  
120 
121 
128 
136 
142 
146 
148 

General Principles 
I 
A 
The Interaction of Electromagnetic Radiation 
with Molecules 
You will already know from your studies that the energy levels of atoms 
and molecules are quantized, i.e. there are discrete energy levels in atoms 
and molecules (Figure 1.1). 
Figure 1 .l Discrete energy 
levels of an atom or molecule 
1 

2 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
In Figure I .  I, El corresponds to the ground state of the atom/molecule, 
and E2, E3 and E4 represent excited states. Given that these are all discrete 
energy levels, the difference in energy between them (and so the encrgy 
required for a particular transition) will also be a discrete value, which 
is called a quantum. We can see from Figure 1.1 that in order to excite 
the atom/molecule from El to E2 it must absorb an amount of encrgy 
equivalent to AI2. Excited states are generally short lived and relax back 
to the ground state by emission of energy, in this case 
The energy difference between the excited state (EZ) and the ground 
state ( E l )  will correspond to a certain frequency (v) or Mavelcngth (A) 
of electromagnetic radiation, and this will depend upon the type 
of transition (and hence the separation between energy levels). The 
relationship between the energy of a transition and the frequency is given 
by equation (1.1): 
A E =  hv 
(1.1) 
and so: 
A E =  hc/A or A E =  hcg 
(1.2) 
The energy of a particular transition is, therefore, proportional to the 
frequency or wavenumber (7 = l/A) and 
wavelength (equation 1.2). 
The electromagnetic spectruni is divided 
names of these regions and the associated 
together with the corresponding energies, 
wavenumbers, are shown in Figure 1.2. 
inversely proportional to the 
into a number of regions. The 
atomic/molecular transitions, 
frequencies, wavelengths and 
Figure 1.2 The electromag- 
netic spectrum 
From Figure 1.2 we can see that nuclear niagnetic resonance transitions 
(NMR), which correspond to wavelengths in the radiowave region of the 
spectrum, are those with the smallest gap between the energy levels, and 
electronic transitions in the ultra\ iolet-\ isible (UV-Vis) region have the 

General Principles 
3 
largest energy gap between transition levels. The UV-Vis region is 
important, since absorptions in this region give rise to the colour 
associated with molecules; Figure 1.3 shows this region in more detail. 
Figure 1.3 The visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum 
X-rays have such high energy that they are capable of ionizing atoms 
and molecules, but they are also important in terms of structure 
determination using single-crystal X-ray diffraction. This technique is 
the ultimate in structure determination since it provides a “map” of the 
molecule in the crystal, e.g. Figure 1.4, but it is highly specialized, is 
limited to crystals and is not routinely available for all organic chemists, 
so it will not be discussed any further here. 
I 
0- 
I N+ 
Figure 1.4 Single-crystal X-ray 
structure of 2,6-diphenylbenzo- 
Microwave (rotational) spectra are very complex, even for diatomic 
molecules, and give little useful information on organic molecules, which 
are relatively large. Rotational transitions are often responsible for the 
broadness of infrared (TR) bands, since each vibrational transition has a 
number of rotational transitions associated with it. The use of microwave 
spectroscopy is extremely rare in organic chemistry, and it too will be 
discussed no further here. 
Transitions in all of the other forms of spectroscopy (UV-Vis, IR and 
NMR) are governed by selection rules that state which transitions are 
“allowed” and which are “forbidden” (although these latter transitions 
may still take place). We will mention the selection rules for each of these 
forms of spectroscopy when we study them in detail in Chapters 2 4 .  

4 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Finally, one technique that does not rely upon electromagnetic radiation, 
mass spectrometry, will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5. 
I .2 
Double Bond Equivalents 
Before we begin our study of these spectroscopic techniques. a 
reminder of a non-spectroscopic piece of information which is very 
useful in the determination of organic structures: the number of doiible 
bond eyuicalents, DBE (a), which tells us how many double bonds or 
rings are present in a molecule. Each double bond or ring reduces the 
number of hydrogens (or halogens) in a molecule by 2, so when we 
calculate the number of DBEs we simply compare the number of 
hydrogens which would be present in the fully saturated, acyclic 
compound with the number actually present, and divide by 2 to give 
the number of DBEs. 

General Principles 
5 
NH* 
1.2 

6 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) 
Spectroscopy 
2. I Instrumentation 
There are several different types of UV-Vis spectrometers, with the usual 
instrument met in an undergraduate laboratory being a double (or dual) 
beam spectrophotometer, which consists of a UV-visible light source, two 
cells through which the light passes, and a detector (usually a 
photomultiplier) to measure the amount of light passing through the 
cells. There are basic spectrometers that measure the absorbance at a 
specific wavelength, set by the user, and others that can scan the entire 
7 

8 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
UV-Vis range. Newer spectrometers are usually computer controlled and 
allow the user greater flexibility, ~ . g .  
in overlaying spectra of a reaction 
mixture over time, 01- constructing a calibration graph to determine the 
concentration of an unknown. 
Single-beam UV-Vis spectrometers work on the same general 
principles, but measure the absorption of the reference first, followed 
by the sample. They can scan across the entire UV-Vis range or can be 
used at a single wavelength. Detector technology has improved recently: 
the diode array detector enables simultaneous detection over the entire 
range to be achieved, allowing rapid quantification of absorbing 
species. 
The term UV-Vis normally applies to radiation with a wavelength in 
the range 200-800 nm. There are many groups that absorb below 200 nm, 
but this part of the spectrum is difficult to examine (as oxygen absorbs UV 
radiation below 200 nm) unless the spectra are recorded in a vacuum 
(vacuum UV-Vis). 
In the double-beam UV-Vis spcctrophotometer the light is split into two 
parallel beams, each of which passes through a cell; one cell contains the 
sample dissolved in solvent and the other cell contains the solvent alone. 
The detector measures the intensity of the light transmitted through the 
solvent alone (Io) and compares it to the intensity of light transmitted 
through the sample cell (I). The absorbance, A, is then calculated from 
the relationship shown in equation (2.1): 
10 
A = log,,- I 
(2.1) 
Ethanol is transparent to UV above 200 nm and is, therefore, commoiily 
used as the solvent in UV-Vis spectroscopy. 
2.2 
Selection Rules and the Beer-Lambert Law 
As you will have seen in Chapter 1, light at the short wavelength end of 
the electromagnetic spectrum has enough energy to promote electronic 
transitions in organic molecules, such that absorption of UV light (200- 
400 nm; 595-299 kJ mol-') or Vis light (400-800 nm; 299-149 kJ mol-') 
can result in the promotion of outer electrons from one electronic energy 
level to a higher one. 
The difference between electronic energy levels is greater than the 
difference between any other molecular energy levels, so these transitions 
require the higher energy of short wavelength radiation. Promotion 
between other energy levels, i.e. vibrational or rotational, requires only 
the lower energy infrared (vibrational) or microwave (rotational) 
radiation (Figure 2.1). 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
9 
Electronic transitions 
1
1
1
1
-
 
Rotational energy 
levels 
At room temperature, the majority of molecules are in the lowest 
vibrational state of the lowest electronic energy level, the “ground state” 
(El). Absorption of UV or visible light leads to promotion of an electron 
from El to the excited electronic level, E2. The electronic transition is 
accompanied by vibrational and rotational transitions, so that the 
promotion of an electron can occur from the ground state electronic 
energy level of El to any of the vibrational or rotational energy levels of 
E2. This explains why UV-Vis absorption bands are characteristically 
broad, although energy transitions between rotational and vibrational 
energy levels within one electronic energy level can show fine structure 
(e.g. see Chapter 3 for many examples of sharp absorbances). Fine 
structure in UV spectra can sometimes be achieved by using a solvent 
that has little interaction with the sample molecules. 
The fact that there are many electronic transitions possible, however, 
does not mean that they can or will occur. There are complex selection 
rules based on the symmetry of the ground and excited states of the 
molecule under examination. Basically, electronic transitions are allowed 
if the orientation of the electron spin does not change during the 
transition and if the symmetry of the initial and final functions is different; 
these are called the spin and symmetry selection rules, respectively. 
However, the so-called “forbidden” transitions can still occur, but give 
rise to weak absorptions. 
According to the Beer-Lambert law, the absorbance, A, of a solution is 
directly proportional to the path length ( I ,  length of the cell containing the 
solution, in cm) and the concentration of the absorbing molecule (c, in 
moles per litre), according to equation (2.3): 
A = E C ~  
(2.3) 
where E = the molar absorptivity of the absorbing molecule, some- 
times called the molar extinction coefficient, and is characteristic of 
the molecule. The molar absorptivity is usually expressed in units of 
100 cm2 mol-’, although it is becoming more common to use units 
of dm3 mol-’ cm-’ (these units give values of E that differ by a factor of 
Figure 2.1 
Schematic diagram 
showing possible molecular 
electronic transitions, and 
vibrational and rotational energy 
levels 

10 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
10 from those values in units of 100 cm2 molp’). The molar absorptivity, E ,  
is a measure of the intensity of the absorption and usually ranges from 0 
to lo6 (units of 100 cm2 mol-I). The greater the probability of a particular 
absorption and its associated electronic transition, the greater the E value 
for that transition. For most molecules, absorptions associated with 
n + n* transitions have higher 8 values than the n + n:* transitions. 
In general, forbidden transitions give rise to low-intensity (low I) 
absorption bands (E < 10,000), but two important “forbidden” absorp- 
tions are seen quite commonly: the n+n* transition of ketones at 
approximately 300 nm (E usually 10-loo), and the weak n-n* 
absorption of benzene rings at about 260 nm (E about 100-1000). 
2.3 
Chromophores 
The part of the molecule containing the electrons involved in the 
electronic transition which gives rise to an absorption is called the 
c..iiit-omophorc. The wavelength of the maximum of the broad absorption is 
labelled Amax. Most of the simple, non-conjugated chromophores give rise 
to high-energy (low-wavelength) absorptions with low-intensity (I) 
values, but the majority of these absorptions are lost in atmospheric 
oxygen absorptions (Table 2.1). 
Table 2.1 Absorption wavelengths of simple, non-conjugated chromophores 
i,,,/nm 
Chromophore 
Transition causing absorption 
-150 
C-C or C-H 
u+u* 
-1 85-1 95 
-X: 
(X = 0, 
N, S) 
n + a *  
o-bonded electrons 
Lone pair electrons 
-300 
c=o: 
n+z* 
-190 
Lone pair electrons 
n+o” 
-190 
C=C (isolated) 
n+z* 
.n-bonded electrons 
With the exception of the high-energy O+(T* transition of saturated 
alkyl systems, these transitions require either a lone pair or a n-bond from 
which the electron can be promoted. In Fact, UV spectra are generally 
only of interest if the system is unsaturated; chromophores with the 
greatest degree of unsaturation give rise to the most intense absorptions 
at longest wavelength. 
We can show electronic transitions using molecular orbital diagrams, 
e.g. the n: + n;* transition of ethene, CH2=CH2, is shown in Figure 2.2. 
Here we can see that UV radiation at 190 nm provides the required energy 
(626.3 kJ mol-’) to promote a bonding electron from the n-bonding 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
11 
orbital (the highest occupied tnoilccufar orbital, HOMO) to the n*- 
antibonding orbital (the 10,nest rinoccrrpicr! molecular orbital, LUMO), 
resulting in the excited state of ethene, in which the n-electrons are 
unpaired and the HOMO is now the Tc*-antibonding orbital. 
HOMO 
LUMO 
7t* - 
f 
hv 
HOMO 
I 
Ground state 
Excited state 
As mentioned previously, the intensity of the major absorption, and of 
course the E value, increases as the chromophore increases in length. As 
conjugation increases the chromophore, systems with u higher degree of 
conjugation have greater intensity absorption bands with larger I vulues. 
Increased conjugation decreases the energy difference between the 
HOMO and the LUMO of a particular system, which means that less 
energy is required to promote an electron to a higher energy level. As 
lower energy transitions appear at higher wavelengths, it follows that, in 
general, the longer the chromophore, the longer the \i?avelength of 
the 
a bso rp t ion rnax im urn. 
The effect of conjugation on the UV-Vis spectrum of a simple 
chromophore is shown in Table 2.2, in which we can see that the conju- 
gated MVK has an increased A,m,, 
and E for both absorption bands. 
Table 2.2 Effect of conjugation on a simple chromophore 
Transition 
Propanone (acetone) 
But-3-en-Z-one (methyl 
0 
vinyl ketone, MVK) 
I1 
0 
Me+vIe 
II 
Me/C' 
CH=CH2 
Rrnax (t:) 
Amax (c) 
x 4 x *  
n i x *  
(C=C) 
(C=O) 
187 nm (900) 
270 nm (15) 
219 nm (3600) 
324 nm (24) 
Figure 2.2 The n: + x* 
transition of ethene 
An intense absorption above 210 nm indicates the presence of a 
conjugated system, and the longer the wavelength, the longer the 
chromophore. 

12 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
0-Carotene (Figures 2.3 and 2.4) is the classic example used to illustrate 
how a lengthened chromophore produces an absorption at longer 
wavelength. 0-Carotene has 11 conjugated n-bonds, which leads to a 
much smaller energy difference between the n and TC* molecular orbitals 
than for an isolated double bond. This translates into a series of weak 
absorptions up to 500 nm: in the visible region. 
Figure 2.3 The orange- 
coloured pigment p-carotene 
(i,,, 
426, 
451 and 483 nm), 
found in carrots 
Figure 2.4 The UV spectrum of 
p-carotene (5.8 
x lop5 mol dmp3 
in ethanol) at high wavelength 
Me 
Me 
0.2 1 
0 1  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
410 
430 
45 0 
470 
490 
Wavelength (nm) 
When white light (light of all wavelengths) is passed through a solution 
of a compound which absorbs in the visible region, the compound 
absorbs light of the appropriate wavelength (energy) to promote an 
electron and reflects the remaining light. The colour we perceive is the 
reflected light, and is complementary in colour to the light that was 
absorbed. Table 2.3 shows the relationship between absorbed and 
reflected (perceived) colour and wavelength. 
Table 2.3 The relationship between absorbed and reflected (perceived) colour 
Perceived colour 
Colour absorbed 
Wavelength of 
of compound 
by compound 
absorbed light (nm) 
Green-yellow 
Yellow 
Red 
Blue 
Green-blue 
Green 
Violet 
Blue 
Green 
Yellow 
Orange 
Red 
400-424 
424-49 
1 
49 1-570 
570-585 
585-647 
647-700 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
13 
After absorption of the blue-green colour from white light (carotene 
absorbs light of wavelength up to about 500 nm), the complementary 
colour (red-yellow) remains to be reflected and perceived by our eyes. 
p-Carotene, therefore, appears intensely orange coloured; as the name 
implies, it is found in high concentrations in carrots. 
The chromophore is not only extended by conjugation: the presence 
of an electron-donating substituent on an aromatic ring also has the 
effect of increasing the wavelength of absorption, as we can see for the 
examples in Box 2.1. 
2.3.1 Role of the Solvent 
We have seen how the position and intensity of A,,, 
is affected by the 
energy difference between the electronic energy levels. The Franck- 
Condon principle states that electronic transitions involve the movement 
of electrons, including those of the solvent, but not the movement of 
atoms. When the solvent electrons can rearrange to stabilize the excited 
state of a molecule, the energy difference between the electronic levels 
of the molecule is lowered and the absorption moves to higher 
wavelength. 

14 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Scheme 2.1 Resonance rep- 
resentations of the ground and 
excited states of an alkene 
To help us understand how a polar solvent can help to stabilize an 
excited state, we will consider the 7t + n* transition of an alkene. We can 
represent the ground state and excited state species in a simple way with 
resonance structures. It is important to realize, though, that the dipolar 
structures in Scheme 2.1 are not the excited state but they do make a 
(minor) contribution to the excited state structure. 
\ 
/ 
hv 
+ ..- 
-.. + 
C=C - 
-C-C- 
and -C-C- 
Contributors to the excited state 
/
\
 
1
1
 
I
I
 
Ground state 
c 
Even with our simplistic example, we can see that a polar solvent, such 
as ethanol, will stabilize the dipolar species on the right-hand side of the 
equation better than a non-polar solvent, such as cyclohexane. This extra 
stabilization of the excited state (LUMO) by ethanol leads to a decrease 
in the energy difference between the HOMO and LUMO and a shift to 
higher wavelength, a red (bathochromic) shift, when the spectrum is 
recorded in ethanol. 
Conversely, in the case of the n + n *  transition of a ketone, the 
interaction of the lone pair of the ground state carbonyl with a polar 
solvent lowers the energy of the lone pair n orbital, and thereby increases 
the energy required to promote an electron to the IT* energy level. 
Consequently, there is often a blue (hypsochromic) shift - to lower 
wavelength ~ observed when the UV spectrum of a ketone is recorded in 
ethanol rather than cyclohexane. 
2.3.2 Effect of pH 
Dramatic changes to the UV-Vis spectra of some compounds, especially 
certain substituted aromatic compounds, occur with a change in the pH 
of the solvent. 
Phenols and substituted phenols are acidic and display striking 
changes to their absorptions upon the addition of base. Removal of 
the acidic phenolic proton increases the conjugation of the lone pairs 
on the oxygen with the .n-system of the aromatic ring, as shown in 
Scheme 2.2, leading to a decrease in the energy difference between the 
HOMO and LUMO orbitals, and an associated red or bathochromic 
shift (to longer wavelength), along with an increase in the intensity of the 
absorption (Figure 2.5). 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
15 
Scheme 2.2 
Effect of pH upon 
the absorption maxima of 
phenols 
Figure 2.5 The UV-Vis spectra 
of phenol (0.15 mmol dm” in 
ethanol, black) and the phenolate 
ion (0.074 mmol dm 
NaOH, red) 
in 0.1 M 
Treatment of an aromatic amine with acid, on the other hand, causes 
protonation of the amine (Scheme 2.3), and this leads to a loss of the 
overlap between the amine lone pair and the aromatic n-system. The 
result is a blue or hypsochromic shift (to shorter wavelength) along with 
a decrease in intensity (Figure 2.6). 
Scheme 2.3 
Effect of pH upon 
the absorption maxima of an 
aromatic amine 

16 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Figure 2.6 UV-Vis spectra of 
aniline (0.14 mmol dm-3 in 
ethanol, black) and the aniliniurn 
ion (1.4 mmol dm-3 in 0.1 M HCI, 
red) 
Many pH indicators owe their utility to their absorptions in the visible 
region of the UV-Vis spectrum. Changes to the pH lead to changes in 
the indicator chromophore, and result in reliable colour changes at 
predictable pH values. One such example is that of phenolphthalein, 
which is a phenol and can be deprotonated at elevated pH to give 
the anion (Scheme 2.4), extending the chromophore and leading to a 
Scheme 2.4 Acid-base equi- 
libria of phenolphthalein: colour- 
less to magenta (only the major 
resonance contributors to 
the anion are shown) 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
17 
substantial bathochromic shift (to longer wavelength). Thus the anion 
of phenolphthalein is deep magenta in colour, while un-ionized 
phenolphthalein is colourless (Figure 2.7). The pK, of this acid-base 
equilibrium is 9.4: at acidic and neutral pH there is insufficient anion to 
detect the colour by eye, and it appears colourless. As the pH approaches 
the pK,, the concentration of anion increases and, at pH 8.2, the 
colour becomes visible to the eye. As pH 8.2 is close to neutrality, 
phenolphthalein is widely used to show the end-point in weak acid- 
strong base titrations. 
Figure 2.7 
The UV-Vis spectra 
of phenolphthalein (0.103 rnmol 
dm-3) at pH 13.0 (upper red line), 
pH 9.0 (upper black line), pH 8.0 
(dashed red line) and pH 4.0 
(dashed black line) 
2.3.3 Woodward-Fieser Rules 
As we have already seen, delocalization of electrons by conjugation 
decreases the energy difference between the HOMO and LUMO energy 
levels, and this leads to a red shift. Alkyl substitution on a conjugated 
system also leads to a (smaller) red shift, due to the small interaction 
between the a-bonded electrons of the alkyl group with the n-bond 
system. These effects are additive, and the empirical Woodward-Fieser 
rules were developed to predict the Amax values for dienes (and trienes). 
Similar sets of rules can be used to predict the A,,,, 
values for a,P- 
unsaturated aldehydes and ketones (enones) and the Amax values for 
aromatic carbonyl compounds. These rules are summarized in 
Table 2.4. 

18 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Table 2.4 
UV absorption wavelength correlations for conjugated systems 
Dienes 
Enones 
Aromatic 
carbonyls 
1. Use the appropriate parent value 
215 nm 
X = H 207 nm 
254 nm (when 
X = C 215 nm 
homocyclic 
(acyclic or part of 
diene -within 
six-membered ring) 
one ring) 
X = C  202nm 
(part of five- 
membered ring) 
2. Add an increment for any extra conjugated n-bonds 
c=c 
30 
30 
C=C-C=C 
40 
40 
Exocyclic C=C 
5 
5 
3. Add increments for any substituents 
H 
0 
0 
R (CH3, efc.) 
5 
‘
X
P
 
Y 
CI 
5 
r
P
 Y 
OH, OR 
5 
X
P
 Y 
OCOR 
0 
‘
X
P
 
Y 
0- 
‘
X
P
 
Y 
SR 
30 
U
P
 Y 
NR2 
60 
‘
X
P
 
Y 
10 
12 
18 
15 
12 
- 
35 
30 
- 
6
6
 - 
- 
- 
75 
- 
- 
85 
- 
- 
95 
- 
6 
18 
6 
- 
s 
6 
- 
X =  H 250 ntn 
X=C 246nm 
X=OH, OR 
230 nm 
0 
2- 
3- 
4- 
3
3
7
 
2- 
3- 
4- 
0 
0 
10 
2- 
3- 
4- 
7 
7 
25 
2- 
3- 
4- 
15 
15 
80 
2- 
3- 
4- 
20 
20 
85 
Using the Woodward-Fieser rules, we can predict the absorp- 
tion maximum of an unsaturated compound with pleasing accuracy, 
generally to within +5 nm of the observed value. For example, the 
calculated absorbance maximum of ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) of 265 nm 
(Figure 2.8) is only 1 nm different from the observed value at 266 nm 
(Figure 2.9). 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
19 
y, 
Calculated A,,, 
nm 
Parent diene 
215 
Extra C=C (conjugated) 30 
Exocyclic position 
5 
265 
C substituent x 3 
15 
- 
230 
250 
270 
290 
310 
Wavelength (nm) 
2.4 
Applications of UV Spectroscopy 
Before NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry revolutionized the 
structural elucidation of organic molecules, UV spectroscopy was an 
important technique and was used to identify the key chromophore of an 
unknown molecule. The importance of UV is much diminished now- 
adays, but it still retains its place in certain applications, such as the 
determination of kinetic parameters, KM (the Michaelis constant) and kcat 
(the turnover rate of an enzyme, in molecules per second), for a number of 
enzymic reactions and in the analysis of pharmaceuticals. 
2.4.1 UV in the Analysis of Pharmaceutical Preparations 
The molar absorptivity (1) of a known molecule is constant under 
identical conditions of solvent, concentration and path length, and can be 
used to quantify the amount of a particular pharmaceutical in a tablet. 
Such assays form the basis of many quality assurance procedures in the 
pharmaceutical industry, and have been extensively used by the British 
Pharmacopoeia (B.P.). More recently, however, high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) has replaced UV analysis in many B.P. assays, 
as most industrial analyses routinely use HPLC. 
Figure 2.8 
Ergocalciferol 
(vitamin D2) and the calculated 
absorption maxim um 
Figure 2.9 
UV-Vis spectrum of 
ergocalciferol (0.12 mmol dm-" 
in ethanol) 

20 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
In the pharmaceutical industry, medicines are standardized to a 
particular weight of active pharmaceutical per unit (for example, mg of 
substance per tablet), so the weight of a substance in a tablet, or volume 
of medicine, is of more interest than the number of moles. For most 
pharmaceutical preparations, then, we use the specific absorbance, 
A(1%, 1 cm), which is the absorbance (loglo lo/l) 
of a 1% w/v solution 
(i.e. 1 g of substance in 100 cm3 solvent) in a 1 cm path length cell, in 
place of the molar absorptivity, 1. This is the ahsolutc imwthoci of substance 
identification, and the absorbance, A ,  can be related to A(1%, 1 cm) by 
equation (2.4): 
A = A(l%l, 1 cm) x concentration x path length 
(2.4) 
The absolute method relies on the UV spectrophotometer being accurate 
in the measurement of wavelength and intensity, and the B.P. specifies 
methods for the calibration of both. However, UV-Vis spectra are not 
specific for any one particular substance, as many UV absorbing 
molecules have similar UV spectra, and this method is used in 
conjunction with several identification tests, as described in the B.P. 
A number of B.P. tests require derivatization of the substance 
under investigation before the UV absorbance is recorded. In these 
cases, in order to take account of the possibility of the reaction not 
proceeding to completion, the cornparati! e method is employed, which 
makes use of a reference (defined in the B.P.). The concentrations and 
absorbances of the reference and substance under investigation are 
related by equation (2.5): 
2.4.2 UV Detection in Chromatography 
UV spectroscopy is exploited for the detection of analytes in a number of 
separative analytical techniques, such as thin la! cr chromatography 
(TLC) 
and HPLC. 
Thin Layer Chromatography 
TLC is a simple technique that is commonly used for the rapid qualitative 
analysis of reaction mixtures. Many organic compounds used in che- 
mical and pharmaceutical manufacture, and in organic and medicinal 
chemistry research, contain an aromatic ring or other UV-absorbing 
system which can be visualized on the TLC plate under a UV lamp. 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
21 
The whole procedure takes about 5 minutes and is a much-valued 
technique in the laboratory. 
UV Detectors in HPLC 
HPLC has transformed quality control in the pharmaceutical and 
chemical industries, as it provides a rapid means of checking the purity of 
samples and even allows for the purification of small amounts of samples 
by preparative HPLC. The majority of such systems use UV to detect and 
quantify substances as they elute from the separative column. UV 
detectors are usually variable wavelength and can be used to detect 
molecules with absorption maxima above 210 nm by measuring the 
absorbance of the eluent. When a UV-absorbing substance is eluted from 
the HPLC column, it absorbs UV radiation at the appropriate 
wavelength for its chromophore. The amount of UV absorbed is 
proportional to the quantity of substance being eluted, and is converted 
into a peak on a chart recorder. Integration of each peak allows the 
relative quantities of the components of the solute to be determined. 

22 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
gure 2.1 0 UV-Vis spectra of 
dine (0.14 mmol dmp3 in 
hanol, black) and 4-nitroaniline 
.14 mmol dm -3 in ethanol, red) 

Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) Spectroscopy 
23 
Figure 2.1 1 
carvone (0.043 mmol dmp3 in 
ethanol, A = 0.432) and (b) 
piperonal (0.067 mmol dmp3 in 
ethanol, A = 0.509) 
UV spectra of (a) 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
3.1 
Instrumentation 
An IR spectrometer consists of an energy source (in this case a source of 
TR radiation, wavelength 2.5-1 5 pm), a sample holder, detector and 
plotter. In older instruments the IR beam was split into two equal 
intensity beams, one of which passed through the sample and the other 
did not. If the sample, or air, contains groups whose vibrational 
frequency corresponds to that of the IR radiation, it will absorb energy 
and an absorption peak will be seen. The beam which did not pass 
through the sample was used as the “background” or reference (absorp- 
tions due to atmospheric water, carbon dioxide, etc.), and the signal 
detected for this beam was subtracted from that of the sample, therefore 
making allowances for the atmospheric conditions. 
Modern spectrometers employ a single beam, and the spectra are stored 
in a digital form (as in NMR: see Chapter 4). First, the background 
spectrum is obtained and stored, then the sample (plus background) 
spectrum is obtained. The instrument software then subtracts the 
background spectrum to give the sample spectrum. Modern instruments 
(again like NMR spectrometers) do not scan through the IR spectrum 
24 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
25 
frequency range; the spectrum is obtained by irradiation with a single 
pulse of radiation, and all the frequencies are excited at once. The resulting 
spectrum is then Fourier transformed (a complex mathematical process 
which, thankfully, we do not need to know about to use TR instruments) to 
give the conventional looking spectrum. One advantage of this technique 
over the older instruments (which gave spectra that were the result of a 
single scan) is that several scans can be obtained and added together (in 
digital form). This addition of spectra results in an increase in the signal- 
to-noise ratio and spectra can be obtained on smaller amounts of material. 
The method used for sample preparation depends upon the nature of 
the sample. Liquids are easily examined as films formed when one drop of 
the liquid is squeezed between two flat sodium chloride plates, which arc 
transparent to TR radiation in the 4000-666 cm-' region. Solids can be 
examined as solutions, mulls in Nujol, or as potassium bromide discs. For 
solutions, a 5% solution of the solid is introduced into a sodium chloride 
cell, which is usually 1 mm thick. The solvent employed should be 
reasonably transparent to IR, and the background should be obtained 
with the cell containing the solvent only. 
Nujol mulls are prepared by finely powdering about 1 mg of the sample 
by grinding with a mortar and pestle then adding 1 drop of Nujol (a liquid 
hydrocarbon) and mixing thoroughly. The mull is then placed between 
sodium chloride plates as for liquid films. Problems with this method arise 
due to the insolubility of a wide range of organic compounds in Nujol and 
the presence of C-H absorption bands arising from the Nujol itself 
(Figure 3.1). Alternatively, about 1 mg of the sample is finely ground with 
about 1 0 0 ~  
its bulk of dry potassium bromide, then pressed into a thin 
KBr disc by means of a hydraulic press while connected to a vacuum pump 
to remove any water from the sample. This method, although slightly more 
time consuming than making a mull, gives spectra with no IR bands due to 
solvent as KBr, like NaC1, is again transparent in the region of interest. 
Figure 3.1 Nujol IR spectrum (liquid film, NaCl plates) 

26 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
3.2 Selection Rules and Hookeys Law 
IR spectroscopy corresponds to transitions between the vibrational 
energy levels of a molecule, involving the stretching or bending of 
bonds. For an organic chemist the region of interest for IR spectroscopy 
is of wavelength from 2.5 to 15 pm, which is normally expressed as 
the wavenumber range 4000-666 cm-’, since this is the region in which 
the most diagnostically useful vibrations occur. Organic chemists 
usually begin their IR analysis starting from the peaks at the low- 
wavelength (high-wavenumber) end of the spectrum, i.e. from 4000 to 
666 cm-I. 
IR transitions arise due to the interaction of the oscillating electric 
vector of the IR light with the oscillating dipole moment of the molecule 
(due to the molecular vibration). The selection rule for 1R transitions - 
which must be obeyed if IR absorption is to occur for a particular 
vibration - states that the molecule must have a dipole moment and that 
there must be a change in the molecular dipole moment during the vibra- 
tion, i.e. the dipole moment must be different at the extremes of the 
vibration. As an example of molecular dipole moments changing during 
vibrations, consider the centrosymmetric molecule acetylene (ethyne), 
H-C-C-H. 
Acetylene has no dipole moment and the C=C stretching 
vibration (a, Scheme 3.1) results in no change in the dipole moment; 
this vibration is, therefore, IR inactive (not observed in the IR spectrum). 
The symmetrical stretch of the two C-H bonds (b) also does not result in 
a change in the molecular dipole moment and so is also IR inactive. The 
asymmetric stretch (c) does, however, result in a change in the dipole 
moment and is IR active (the structures shown for each vibrational mode 
in Scheme 3.1 are the two extremes for each vibration). 
Scheme 3.1 Stretching 
vibrations of acetylene 
As we shall see later, complex organic molecules have a large number 
of vibrational modes (including overtones, combinations and so-called 
“forbidden” bands), and these give rise to very complex spectra; however, 
as we shall also see, some vibrational modes can be attributed to 
individual functional groups (these are the most useful diagnostically to 
the organic chemist) and others to vibrations of the whole molecular 
structure. Those vibrational modes which can be attributed to individual 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
27 
functional groups (characteristic group vibrations) can be best described 
mathematically if we imagine the two bonded atoms as two vibrating 
masses connected by a spring (a simple harmonic oscillator). The 
frequency of the vibration for this system is then given by Hooke's law 
(equation 3.1): 
where k is the force constant of the bond (N m- I )  - the stronger the bond 
the greater the value of k; V is the wavenumber (cm- '); v is the frequency 
(Hz); c is the speed of light (3 x 10" cm s-'); and p is the reduced mass in 
kg (equation 3.2): 
where ml = relative atomic mass of MI x atomic mass unit, m2 = relative 
atomic mass of M2 x atomic mass unit, and the atomic mass unit = 
1.66 x 
kg. 
Looking at Hooke's law, we can see that for a strong bond (large k )  
connected to a light mass it predicts a high-frequency (or wavenumber) 
vibration, and this is in agreement with the observed wavenumbers for the 
0-H and N-H absorptions (3600-3200 cm-I). 
3.3 
Characteristic Group Vibrations 
As mentioned previously, complex organic molecules have a large 
number of vibrational modes, each of which will give rise to an TR 
absorption band as long as it involves a change in the molecular dipole 
moment. Some of these bands can only be attributed to vibrations of the 
whole molecular skeleton; these bands occur between 1500 and 1000 cm-' 
and are characteristic of the molecule. This region is, therefore, known as 
the "fingerprint region" and, in the same way that our fingerprints are 
unique to us, the pattern of TR bands in this region is unique to a given 
molecule. 
Some of the IR absorption bands can be attributed to the vibration qf 
individual bonds, and these bands are the most diagnostically usejul 
since they help in the identijication o j  the ,functional groups present 
in the molecule. This is the most important use of IR spectroscopy for 
the organic chemist. In looking at these characteristic group vibrations, 
it is convenient to consider the TR spectrum as being divided into 
five regions: 

28 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
C-H 
stretch 
2900-2700 cm-' 
(often two bands) 
R
=
H
 
C-H 
stretch 
about 3300 cm-' 
Scheme 3.2 Diagnostically 
useful C-H stretches 
4000-2300 cm-' 
Vibrations of single bonds to H (C-H, 0-H, N-H 
and S-H) 
2300-1850 cm-' 
Vibrations of triple and cumulative bonds 
1850-1500 cm-' 
Vibrations of C=X 
1 500-1 000 cm- ' Fingerprint region 
1000-666 cm-' 
Unsaturated C-H bending 
We will now consider the absorptions in each of these regions in 
detail, but an indication of where the common functional groups absorb 
is given in Box 3.1. 
3.3.1 4000-2300 cm-': Vibrations of Single Bonds to H 
Absorption bands in this region correspond to the stretching vibrations of 
single bonds to hydrogen: C-H, 0-H, N-H and S-H. 
C-H (3100-2700 cm-') 
C-H vibrations are rarely diagnostically useful, since all organic mole- 
cules contain C-H bonds and there is little difference in the stretching 
frequencies of the C-H bonds in most environments. In addition, C-H 
stretches are usually weak due to the small dipole moment of this bond. 
We can often, however, distinguish between a C-H in an unsaturated 
group (3100-3000 cm-') and a C-H in a saturated group (about 
2900 cm-'), but the most useful C-H stretches are those for an aldehyde 
and an alkyne (Scheme 3.2). For example, in the spectrum of 
benzaldehyde (Figure 3.2) we can see that there are two moderately 
strong C-H stretches at 2820 and 2740 cm-I. 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
29 
Figure 3.2 IR spectrum of benzaldehyde (liquid film, NaCl plates) 
In general, strong absorptions above 3100 cm-' indicate either 0-H 
or N-H vibrations. 
0-H (3600-2500 cm-') 
0-H vibrations are generally strong and are very useful in identifying 
functional groups containing the hydroxyl group, but we should always 
be aware that the presence of water in a sample will also give a strong 
0-H absorption. 
This functional group is present in phenols (ArOH), alcohols (ROH) 
and carboxylic acids (RC(0)OH). Unfortunately, the wavenumber of 
the absorption is not a reliable indicator of the functional group 
present, since the position of the 0-H absorption is very sensitive to 
hydrogen bonding. In general, the more concentrated a solution, 
the greater the extent of hydrogen bonding and, since hydrogen 
bonding weakens the 0-H bond, the smaller the value of k (the force 
constant) and so the lower the frequency (or wavenumber) of the 
vibration. 
Examples of the type of peaks which arise due to absorption by the 
0-H group can be seen in the IR spectrum of 4'-hydroxyacetophenone 
(Figure 3.3), in which there are broad 0-H peaks centered on 3304 cm-' 
(non-hydrogen bonded) and 3 1 58 cm- 
(due to hydrogen bonding), 
and paracetamol (Figure 3.4), in which there is an 0-H absorption at 
3161 cm-'. 

30 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Figure 3.3 IR spectrum of 4'-hydroxyacetophenone (KBr disc) 
Figure 3.4 
IR spectrum of paracetamol (KBr disc) 
Carboxylic acids (RC02H) often form dimers (Scheme 3.3) and tend 
to have a higher degree of hydrogen bonding, so they usually absorb 
towards the lower end of this region. Because of this hydrogen bonding, 
carboxylic acids tend to have a number of weak absorptions (correspond- 
ing to different bond strengths) which cover a range of frequencies such 
that they normally give rise to broad absorptions - often with some fine 
Scheme 3.3 Hydrogen- 
bonded dimer of a carboxylic acid 
structure just evident - between 3200 and 2500 cm-'. Examples of the 
resultant broad O-H absorption peaks can be seen in the IR spectra of 
benzoic acid (Figure 3.5), in which there are multiple peaks between 3010 
and 2560 cm-', and aspirin (Figure 3.6), in which there is a similar 
pattern between 3005 and 2550 cm-'. 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
31 
Figure 3.5 IR spectrum of benzoic acid (KBr disc) 
Figure 3.6 IR spectrum of aspirin (KBr disc) 
Solids or dilute solutions of phenols, alcohols and even carboxylic 
acids have a lesser degree of hydrogen bonding and so absorb in the 
3600-3200 cm-' region. If the presence of a carboxylic acid is suspected, 
then there will, of course, be an absorption for the associated carbonyl 
group at 1730-1680 cm-I. 
N-H (3500-3300 cm-') 
N-H absorptions appear in much the same region as 0-H, but it is 
usually possible to distinguish the N-H absorptions as they are generally 
sharper owing to a smaller degree of hydrogen bonding. Once again, these 
absorptions are reasonably strong, and we can easily distinguish primary 
amines (RNH2) and primary amides (RCONH2) from secondary amines 
(R2NH) and secondary amides (RCONHR). Primary amines and amides 

32 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
have two (very often three) stretches in this region corresponding to the 
symmetrical and asymmetrical stretches (Scheme 3.4) of the two N -H 
bonds in these functional groups, while secondary amines and amides 
have only one N-H stretching vibration. In distinguishing N-H from 
0-H vibrations, it is useful to note that for an N-H stretching vibration 
there should be a corresponding bending vibration at 1450-1 550 cni-' 
(normally weak). 
The TR spectrum of aniline (Figure 3.7) shows a typical N-H absorption 
pattern for a primary amine, with stretches at 3432, 3355 and 3214 cm-', 
while that of paracetamol (Figure 3.4) shows the single stretch observed 
for a secondary amide at 3325 cm-' and we can also see the contrast 
between this sharp peak and the much broader 0-H at 3161 cm-'. The 
spectrum of benzocaine (Figure 3.8) also shows the three bands at 3423, 
3342 and 3221 cm-' which characterize a primary amine. 
Scheme3.4 Symmetricand 
asymmetricstretchesofaprlmary 
amine 
Figure 3.7 
IR spectrum of aniline (liquid film, NaCl plates) 
Figure 3.8 
IR spectrum of benzocaine (KBr disc) 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
33 
N +-H (3300-2250 cm-') 
For salts of amines we also obtain strong bands for both the stretching 
vibrations and the associated bending modes (Table 3.1). 
Table 3.1 Stretching and bending vibrations of ammonium salts 
Ammonium salt 
Stretching vibrationlcrn ~ ' 
Bending vibration/cm - ' 
-3000 
2 70 0-2 2 
5 0 
2700-2250 
1600-1 500 
1600--1550 
not diagnostically useful 
The spectrum of the zwitterionic amino acid L-tyrosine shows the effect 
of protonation of the amino group, with the Nf-H stretching vibration 
occurring over a broad range (3100-2600 cm-'), while the carboxylate 
group stretching vibration is weakened and comes at around 1589 cm-', 
along with the N +-H bending and C=C of the aromatic ring (Figure 3.9). 
Figure 3.9 IR spectrum of L-tyrosine (KBr disc) 
S-H (2700-2400 cm-') 
The S-H absorption is typically weak and occurs at a lower wavenumber 
(frequency) than the corresponding O-H vibration because of the higher 
atomic mass of sulfur (and so increased reduced mass of SH). The 
difference in reduced mass, however, does not completely account for the 
reduction in the stretching frequency of the S-H bond as this bond is also 
generally weaker (smaller k )  than the corresponding O-H bond (typical 
bond dissociation energies: OH, 460 kJ mol-'; SH, 340 kJ mol-'). 
3.3.2 2300-1850 cm-I: Vibrations of Triple and 
Cumulative Bonds 
Absorptions in this region typically arise due to vibrations of functional 
groups containing triple or cumulative bonds. 

34 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
When discussing the IR selection rules, we saw that the CsC bond of 
acetylene absorbs at 2 180 cm- (although this particular absorption band 
is IR inactive). Table 3.2 gives the stretching vibrations for alkynes and 
other triple and cumulative bonds which absorb in this region. 
~ 
Table 3.2 Stretching vibrations of triply and cumulatively bonded functional groups 
Functional group 
Stretching vibrationhm- ' 
-CrC- (alkynes) 
-C=N (nitriles) 
- N r N  (diazonium salts) 
-N= N = N (azides) 
-C=N=N (diazo compounds 
-N-C=N- 
(carbodiimides) 
-C=C=C- 
(allenes) 
+ 
+
-
 
I
t
-
 
I 
1 
Terminal R-C- C-H 
21 40-21 00 
Internal R-CS-R 
2260-2 1 90 
2260-21 00 
2280-2240 
2 
1 60-21 00 
2050-2000 
10 
C =C=O 
(ketenes) 
co2 
2 
1 50-2 
- 1950 
-2150 
2350 
Most of these absorption bands are moderate to weak; in particular, 
the alkyne bands decrease in intensity with increasing symmetry in the 
molecule. An example of a strong nitrile absorption can be seen in the 
spectrum of benzonitrile (Figure 3.10) at 2228 cm-'. 
Figure 3.10 
IR spectrum of benzonitrile (liquid film, NaCl plates) 
3.3.3 1850-1500 cm-': Vibrations of C=X 
This is probably the most useful diagnostic region as it includes the 
stretching vibrations for those common functional groups which contain 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
35 
a double bond to carbon (C=C, C=N and C=O). The absorptions for 
carbonyl groups are particularly useful, since they are strong and their 
position is very sensitive to the type of functional group present, as well as 
to any hydrogen bonding or conjugation present in the molecule. 
Box 3.2 gives an indication of the typical ranges for the stretching 
vibrations of carbonyl-containing functional groups. In general, the more 
electronegative the group X in RCOX, the stronger the C=O bond, and 
so the higher the wavenumber (frequency) for the stretching vibration. 
We can partly explain this increase in wavenumber by imagining a 
resonance form for RCOX in which the C-X bond is broken as a result of 
the electron-demand of the X group, as shown in Scheme 3.5. 
Scheme 3.5 Resonance 
showing strong carbonyl group 
absorption when X is strongly 
electronegative 

36 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Obviously, the more electronegative the group X, the more likely this is 
to happen and, since one of the resonance forms has a G O  (and hence a 
larger value for the force constant, k), this will lead to a stronger C==O 
bond, and so increased stretching frequency. For example, the two 
carbonyl absorptions in acetic anhydride (ethanoic anhydride; in which 
the X group is the very electronegative CH3COF) can be seen at 1822 and 
1762 cm-' in Figure 3.1 I .  This separation by 60 cm-' is very common for 
these bands, because of the asymmetric and symmetric C=O stretches. 
Figure 3.1 1 IR spectrum of acetic anhydride (liquid film, NaCl plates) 
On the other hand, electron-donating groups (particularly those 
capable of resonance stabilization) will decrease the C=O bond strength 
and so lead to a decrease in the stretching frequency (wavenumber) 
(Scheme 3.6). 
Scheme 3.6 Resonance forms 
of an amide. The C-0 bond has 
partial single-bond character, so 
a smaller k 
One interesting feature of primary and secondary amide spectra is the 
presence of two absorption bands in this region - referred to as amide I 
(essentially the carbonyl band) and amide I1 (a combination band 
essentially due to N-H bending). The amide I1 band is generally less 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
37 
intense than amide I and is often about 80 cmpl lower than the 
amide I band. 
Conjugation and hydrogen bonding also serve to weaken the C=O 
bond, through a decrease in the bond order, and so lead to a decrease in 
the stretching frequency. As we can see in Scheme 3.7, there is a resonance 
form for a conjugated carbonyl group in which the C-0 bond is a single 
bond. Overall, then, the conjugated carbonyl group has a lower bond 
order than an isolated carbonyl group, so it has a smaller k and hence a 
smaller stretching frequency. Conjugation does, however, increase the 
dipolar nature of the bond, and so usually leads to an increase in the 
intensity of the carbonyl absorption. The effect of conjugation on a 
carbonyl absorption can be seen in the IR spectra of the esters ethyl 
acetate (ethyl ethanoate, Figure 3.12) and ethyl benzoate (Figure 3.13). 
Scheme 3.7 Resonance forms 
of a conjugated carbonyl group. 
The C-0 bond has partial single- 
bond character, so a smaller k 
Figure 3.12 
IR spectrum of ethyl acetate (liquid film, NaCl plates) 

38 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Figure 3.13 
IR spectrum of ethyl benzoate (liquid film, NaCl plates) 
Figure 3.14 
IR spectrum of 2-methylpropanal (liquid film, NaCl plates) 
Hydrogen bonding also leads to a decrease in the carbonyl stretching 
frequency, since we can think of the hydrogen bond as utilizing some of 
the carbonyl bond electron density. This results in a lower bond order for 
this bond, and a consequently lower stretching frequency. One interesting 
aspect of the effect of hydrogen bonding on the IR spectrum of carbonyl 
compounds is the effect of intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonding. 
Intramolecultr hydrogen bonding (within one molecule) is independent of’ 
the concentration of the sample and so the position of the carbonyl band 
will not vary with concentration. Intermolecular hydrogen bonding, on 
the other hand, is dependent upon the concentration, since the more 
concentrated the sample, the greater the extent of the hydrogen bonding, 
and so the position of the carbonyl band will vary with concentration. 
The more concentrated the sample, the lower the stretching frequency. 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
39 
The effect of increasing concentration (and so increasing extent of 
hydrogen bonding) on the solution spectrum of 4'-hydroxyacetophenone 
can be seen in Figure 3.15 and Scheme 3.8b, in which the C=O 
absorption shifts to lower frequency (wavenumber) upon increasing the 
concentration of the solution. The C=O absorption in 4'-hydroxyaceto- 
phenone initially occurs at 1672 cm-' (Figure 3.15a), but is shifted to 
1665 cm-' upon increasing the concentration (Figure 3.15b). The C=O 
absorption in 2'-hydroxyacetophenone (Figure 3.16a and 3.16b, and 
Scheme 3.8a) appears at lower wavenumber than that for 4'-hydroxy- 
acetophenone at approximately equivalent concentrations (compare 
Figures 3.15b and 3.16a) and, as expected for intramolecular hydrogen 
bonding, is independent of concentration (1 64 1 cm- '). Also evident 
from these spectra is the fact that the increase in hydrogen bonding in 
Figure 3.15b has shifted the broad 0-H absorption to lower wavenumber 
(from 3330 to 3320 cm-'), but the absorption corresponding to non- 
hydrogen-bonded 0-H at 3584 cm-' is unaffected. 
Figure 3.15 
solution in chloroform 
IR spectra of 4'-hydroxyacetophenone: (a) 7 mg ~ 1 1 1 ~ ~  
solution in chloroform (trichloromethane); (b) 14 mg cmP3 

40 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Figure 3.16 IR spectra of 2'-hydroxyacetophenone: (a) 12 mg cmp3 solution in chloroform (trichloromethane); (b) 24 mg ctnp3 
solution in chloroform 
Scheme 3.8 Inter- and intra- 
molecular hydrogen bonding: 
(a) 2'-hydroxyacetophenone 
showing intramolecular hydrogen 
bonding (not concentration 
dependent); (b) 4'-hydroxy- 
acetophenone showing inter- 
molecular hydrogen bonding 
(concentration dependent) 
The effect of ring strain on the stretching frequency of vibrations, 
particularly those of carbonyl groups, can be seen in the stretching 
frequencies of lactones (cyclic esters) and lactanis (cyclic amides), as 
shown in Box 3.3. As can be observed, the smaller the ring becomes, the 
more strained the ring (as the bond angles become increasingly removed 

41 
Infrared Spectroscopy 
from the idealized angle of 120" for an sp2 hybridized carbon atom and 
the amount of eclipsing interactions with neighbouring groups increases), 
and the higher the stretching frequency of the carbonyl group in both the 
lactones and lactams. The value for the six-membered rings is usually 
close to that for the acyclic systems, since this ring (and larger rings) have 
very little ring strain. 
Also present in this region are the C=C and C=N stretching vibrations 
(Scheme 3.9), but these are generally much weaker than the carbonyl 
absorptions. 
Examples of the C=C stretches in aromatic rings can be seen in the 
spectra of paracetamol (Figure 3.4) at 161 1 cm-I, aspirin (Figure 3.6) at 
1605 cm-' and benzocaine (Figure 3.8) at 1634 cm-I. The C=N group 
of oximes (C=NOH) absorbs between 1680 and 1650 cm-', and the 
corresponding 0-H absorption occurs between 3600 and 3570 cm- ' 
(often lowered by hydrogen bonding). 
Finally, in this region are the N-H 
bending vibrations (1640- 
R 
R 
X 
R 
R 
1650-1590 cm-l 
R )dR 
R 
1690-1650 cm-' 
1550 cm-I), which will have corresponding stretching vibrations 
between 3600 and 3200 cm 
~ '. These absorptions are often difficult 
to distinguish from C=C vibrations. The N-H 
vibration of the 
secondary amide paracetamol is probably responsible for the absorp- 
tion at 1564 cm-' (Figure 3.4), while that of aniline (Figure 3.7) may 
be partly responsible (in addition to the C=C stretch) for the peak at 
1620 cm-'. 
Scheme 3m9 C=C and C-N 
vibration stretching frequencies 

42 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
3.3.4 1500-1 000 cm-’? Fingerprint Region 
Absorptions in this region are largely due to the vibrations of the whole 
molecular skeleton, and this region is known as the “fingerprint region”. 
Because every organic molecule has absorptions in this region, it is 
often difficult to pick out any functional group vibrations that happen 
to occur in this region, but there are a few which are sufficiently strong 
to stand out from the crowd of those belonging to the molecular 
skeleton. 
In particular, nitro compounds usually have two strong absorptions 
(at 1570-1 500 and 1370-1 300 cm-’), whereas nitroso compounds 
(N=O) have only one absorption (1600-1450 cm-’). For example, the 
asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of the nitro group in the 
spectrum of nitrobenzene (Figure 3.17) occur at 1525 and 1348 cm-’. 
Another strong absorption is the C-0 absorption of ethers (including 
epoxides), alcohols, esters and carboxylic acids (1 300-1 050 cm- I ) ,  which 
can be seen at 1281 cm-’ in the spectrum of benzocaine (Figure 3.8) or 
113 1 cm-l in the spectrum of acetic anhydride (Figure 3.11). For the 
same reason that the S-H bond absorbs at lower frequency than the 
0-H bond, thioketones (C=S) absorb in this region (1200-1050 cm -’). 
Finally in this region are the S=O stretches of a variety of compounds, 
including sulfoxides, sulfones and sulfonic acids, which occur at 
1350-1010 cm 
e.g. dimethyl sulfoxide (Figure 3.18) in which the 
S=O stretch appears at 1057 cm-’, and the P=O stretch of phosphates 
(1300-1250 cm-’). 
Figure 3.17 
IR spectrum of nitrobenzene (liquid film, NaCl plates) 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
43 
Figure 3.18 
IR spectrum of dimethyl sulfoxide (liquid film, NaCl plates) 
3.3.5 1000-666 cm-’: Unsaturated C-H Bending 
All of the vibrations in this region can be attributed to the out-of-plane 
bending vibrations of the C-H bonds of unsaturated groups, particu- 
larly aromatic rings (see Table 3.3). Many experienced organic chemists 
can use these vibrations to distinguish between the substitution patterns 
of di- and trisubstituted benzene rings, but this is not something which is 
recommended for beginners. A much easier and foolproof method of 
distinguishing these substitution patterns is to concentrate upon the 
aromatic region of the ‘H NMR spectrum. Monosubstituted aromatic 
rings are the most readily distinguished, since they usually have two 
strong absorptions in this region (typically at 740 and 690 cm-I), 
whereas a 1,2-disubstituted (ortho) ring has only the one band 
(see Box 3.4). 
Table 3.3 Out-of-plane bending vibrations of the C-H bonds in unsaturated 
groups 
Unsaturated 
Bending 
group 
vibrationlcm ’ 
Alkenes 
995-71 0 
cis-Alkenes 
71 0-670 
trans-Alkenes 
970-960 
Aromatics 
900-690 

44 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
The IR spectrum of the monosubstituted benzonitrile (Figure 3.10) 
gives two C-H out-of-plane bending peaks (at 759 and 688 cm-'), that of 
aniline (Figure 3.7) gives peaks at 754 and 692 cm-', but ethyl benzoate 
(Figure 3.13) and benzoic acid (Figure 3.5) give only one strong C-H out- 
of-plane bending peak (at 712 and 707 cm-' respectively). Finally, the 
1,4-disubstituted (para) 4'-hydroxyacetophenone (Figure 3.3) gives one 
C-H out-of-plane bending peak at 836 cm-', the 1,3-disubstituted 
(meta) 3'-hydroxyacetophenone (Figure 3.19) gives two peaks (at 795 and 
683 cm- ') and the 1,2-disubstituted (ortho) 2'-hydroxyacetophenone 
(Figure 3.20) has the main peak at 755 cm-I. 
Figure 3.19 IR spectrum of 3'-hydroxyacetophenone (KBr disc) 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
45 
Figure 3.20 IR spectrum of 
2’-hydroxyacetophenone (liquid 
film, NaCl plates) 

46 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
47 

48 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Infrared Spectroscopy 
49 

50 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
Spectroscopy 
4.1 
Instrumentation 
Although the main aim of this book is to provide an aid to the inter- 
pretation of organic spectroscopic data, it is difficult to do this without 
some knowledge of the instrumentation used to carry out the data 
acquisition. In order to obtain an NMR spectrum, the sample 
(typically 5-20 mg, depending upon the experiment required) is dis- 
solved in about 0.75 cm3 of a solvent (Box 4.1), placed in an NMR 
51 

52 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
tube and lowered into the magnetic field of the NMR spectrometer 
(Figure 4.1). 
The NMR solvent will obviously be in vast excess over the sample, 
so ideally should not contain any of the nuclei being investigated in the 
0 
I1 
experiment since these will “swamp” the spectrum. For this reason, 
fully deuterated solvents, such as deuterochloroform (deuterotrichloro- 
methane, CDC13) or dimethyl sulfoxide-d6 (CD3SOCD3, 4.1), are used 
in proton (‘H) NMR spectroscopy, and are also commonly employed 
in carbon (13C), fluorine (‘”F) and phosphorus (31P) NMR spec- 
troscopy. These, or other, fully deuterated solvents often contain trace 
amounts of the protiated solvent, e.g. CHC13 in CDC13, owing to 
incomplete isotopic labelling in their preparation; this is actually quite 
useful since the peaks for these solvents have well defined chemical 
shifts (see Section 4.3) and can be used to reference the spectrum. In 
13C NMR spectroscopy we have to accept that the best solvent for an 
organic molecule will normally itself be organic, and so will contain 
carbon atoms, and the largest peak in the I3C spectrum will therefore 
be that for the solvent. 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
53 
Figure 4.1 
spectrometer 
Diagram of an NMR 
Although modern NMR spectrometers appear to be very complex, 
their operation is relatively straightforward. The various components 
of an NMR spectrometer are shown in Figure 4.1, and dealing with 
each of these in turn we can build up a fairly simple picture of how an 
NMR spectrometer actually operates. The most important (and 
expensive) part of any modern NMR spectrometer is the super- 
conducting magnet (SCM), in which an electric current in a coil, which 
is made from a material which has no electrical resistance at very low 
temperature (-4 K or -269 “C), generates the magnetic field. As we 
will discover later, the strength of the magnetic field used to carry out 
an NMR experiment determines both the signal-to-noise ratio and the 
resolution of the data acquired. Indeed, the magnet is such an integral 
part of any NMR instrument that we usually describe a spectrometer 
by the frequency at which protons in the magnetic field absorb energy; 
a 300 MHz instrument is therefore one in which protons undergo their 
NMR transition at 300 MHz. A key practical consideration, which 
leads to the major running cost of any NMR instrument, is the need 
to hold the coil of the magnet at 4 K, since this is currently the 
highest temperature at which NMR magnets can be made to 
superconduct. 
As we have mentioned above, a critical parameter in determining 
the signal-to-noise and resolution of our NMR data is the strength of the 
magnetic field we are using. Another important consideration is the 
magnetic field homogeneity; the better the field homogeneity of our NMR 
magnet, the longer the NMR signal will persist and the better the quality 
of the acquired NMR data. The process of adjusting the homogeneity of 
the magnetic field is called “shimming” and, together with spinning the 
NMR tube (at 15-20 Hz), usually produces a suitably homogeneous 
magnetic field. 

54 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
When the sample is loaded into the magnet, it ends up inside the 
sample coil within the NMR probe, the function of which is to transmit 
radiation (transmitter) to the sample and also to receive the NMR signal 
(receiver). A great deal of effort has gone into the design of modern 
NMR probes to make them as efficient as possible in terms of the signul- 
to-noise ratio, through having the shortest distance possible between the 
sample and the receiver coil. In addition to being able to spin the sample 
within the coil, there are also variable-temperature units built into most 
NMR probes so that, if NMR data are required at different 
temperatures, a heated or cooled stream of gas can easily be passed 
over the NMR sample. 
Nowadays, virtually all NMR spectra are obtained on Fourier 
transform (FT) spectrometers. An FT experiment is carried out by 
placing the solution of the sample in a magnetic field and by irradiating 
it with a short pulse (broad spectrum) of radiofrequency radiation. The 
effect of this irradiation over such a broad range is that all the nuclei in 
the sample are excited at the same time. The NMR spectrometer then 
detects the radiation given off by the sample as the nuclei “relax” back to 
their lower energy state, and one way in which they can do this is by 
transferring energy to other, nearby, nuclei with spin (we will learn a little 
more about this later). 
The nuclei in the sample that are present in differing chemical 
environments (see Section 4.3 on chemical shift) give off radiation with 
characteristic frequencies (sine waves with different frequencies) and the 
net result is interfering wave patterns of differing frequency, forming an 
interferogram or free induction decay (FTD) - a plot of signal intensity 
against time. In order to obtain the spectrum in the form we are 
familiar with, this FJD is Fourier transformed - a mathematical 
process which, thankfully, we do not need to understand - to give a 
plot in which the x-axis represents the particular frequency at which a 
transition occurs and the y-axis represents the intensity associated with 
this transition. 
One of the main advantages of FT spectrometers is that, since the 
FID is in digital form, we can repeat the excitation/detection process 
a number of times and all the resulting “scans” can be added and the 
FT performed on the resultant FID. In this way, we can improve the 
signal-to-noise ratio and can detect nuclei which are not very abundant 
(e.g. 13C) or have low sensitivity to NMR (see Section 4.2). These 
nuclei could not have been detected on the older continuous wave 
instruments, as the spectrum was the result of a single scan, obtained as 
one of the frequency or magnetic field were varied while keeping the 
other cons tan t . 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
55 
4.2 
Origin of the NMR Effect 
To explain the origin of the NMR effect, we have first to think about 
why something has a magnetic field associated with it. Consider a simple 
compass, the needle of which is a small magnet and is therefore affected 
by the presence of other magnetic fields (i.e. it moves in the presence of, 
or interacts with, other magnetic fields). The Earth has associated with it 
its own small but nonetheless significant magnetic field and a compass 
will interact with this and will always point North. We now have a 
means of detecting magnetic fields: take a compass near the suspected 
source and watch for an interaction, i.e. some movement of the needle. 
If we attempt this simple experiment near a wire carrying an electric 
current, we find that we can detect the presence of a magnetic field 
and this gives us a clue to one particular source of a magnetic 
field: all moving charges have associated with them not only an electric 
field but also a magnetic field. 
What has this got to do with NMR? An atomic nucleus has a 
positive charge associated with it (which is why the negatively charged 
electrons are maintained in their orbit) so we have one component of 
what is required for a magnetic field - a charge. In addition, certain 
nuclei, with odd mass or atomic numbers, spin because their spin 
quantum number Z is not zero (Z # 0) (Box 4.2), and so we would 
expect to find a magnetic field associated with these “nuclear magnets”. 
If we could find a compass with a small enough needle (i.e. one that 
was of the order of the size of an atomic nucleus, - lO-“’ m), we would 
find that it would interact with nuclei which had I # 0. Of course, this 
is not just a one-way effect, as the atomic nucleus not only affects 
magnetic fields brought near it but is itself affected by such fields. 
Rather annoyingly, some of the most common nuclei found in organic 
molecules (12C, l 6 0  and 32S) have both even mass and atomic numbers 
(Box 4.3) and so have a spin quantum number of 0, and can never 
exhibit an NMR effect. 

56 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
When a magnetic field (the symbol for which is B) is applied to nuclei 
with spin quantum number I # 0, the nuclei can adopt (21 + 1) orientations 
in the field (Box 4.2), and the NMR selection rule states that transitions 
with Amz = 5 1 are allowed. For a nucleus with spin I = %, (such as ‘H, 
I3C, I9F and 31P), there are therefore two possible arrangements: either 
aligned “with” (lowest energy state, a, mz = +%, 
) or aligned “against” 
(highest energy state, p, mz = -%, ) the applied field, B (Figure 4.2). 
Figure 4.2 
Allowed orientations 
for a nucleus with spin I= ’/2 in 
a magnetic field 
From basic spectroscopic theory, E= hv (see Chapter I), and we know 
that when there are two differing energy levels we can observe allowed 
transitions between them by either monitoring the absorption or emission 
of electromagnetic radiation - hence the origin of the NMR effect. The 
NMR experiment involves moving atomic nuclei from the lower energy, 
a, state (“with” or parallel alignment) to the higher energy, p, state 
(“against” or anti-parallel alignment) and then monitoring the effect this 
has on the sample of nuclei being observed. 
As you can imagine, the size of the magnetic field generated by a single 
atomic nucleus is incredibly small and the size of the interaction of 
such a small nuclear magnet with even the strongest magnetic fields 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
57 
(i.e. those generated by modern superconducting magnets) is, therefore, 
also incredibly small. We would expect therefore to find that NMR 
transitions are induced by very low frequency radiation and this indeed 
turns out to be the case. NMR transitions are of such a low energy that 
they occur in the radiofrequency (low energy) end of the electromagnetic 
spectrum, and the relationship between the magnetic field and the 
frequency of the transition is given in equation (4.1): 
where v is the frequency at which the NMR transition occurs, y is the 
magnetogyric ratio and BeE is the field experienced by the nucleus. 
The energy difference between the possible alignments of the nuclear 
magnetic dipole is thus dependent on the strength of B: the stronger the 
applied field, the greater the energy gap and the greater the frequency 
(Figure 4.2). When there is no applied field, there is no energy difference 
between the possible alignments of the nuclei (the energy levels are said 
to be degenerate) and the NMR effect is not observed. Even in the 
magnetic fields produced by the strongest superconducting magnets the 
difference in energy between the possible alignments of the nuclear 
magnet is very small. This small energy difference gives rise to another 
feature of NMR spectroscopy: the poor signal-to-noise ratio. The 
population difference between quantized energy levels is proportional to 
the energy difference between them and, because of the small energy gap 
between the energy levels of the nuclear dipole in a magnetic field, the 
Boltzmann distribution for a nucleus with spin I =  
at room 
temperature is very nearly 50:50, i.e. approximately 50% of the nuclei 
will be aligned “with” and 50% of the nuclei will be aligned “against” 
the magnetic field. Therefore we always attempt to conduct NMR 
experiments at the highest frequency possible; since the value for y is 
constant for a given nucleus, we do this by making the strength of the 
main magnetic field (B) as large as we can. This is one of the main 
reasons why chemists pay very large sums of money for superconducting 
NMR magnets with the strongest field possible (of course, there is also 
an element of ego here!). 
4.3 
Chemical Shift 
The first thing we need to consider when discussing the NMR effect is why 
equation (4.1) contains the term B e E  rather than B. This is called the 
chemical shift effect, and to understand this key aspect of NMR spectra 
we need to consider what happens when we place our NMR sample in a 
magnetic field. The atomic nuclei in our sample adopt one of a number of 
possible alignments, depending upon their spin. We also, however, have to 

58 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
take into account the f x t  that the atoms in our NMR sample do not just 
contain one charged species but also contain a second (electrons). What 
effect does the main field have on the electrons within the atoms in our 
NMR sample? Because of their charge, electrons also interact with the 
magnetic field and begin to circulate around the nucleus. As we have 
already discovered, moving charges generate magnetic fields and, as 
happens for the nucleus itself, the atomic electrons produce their own 
magnetic field when the NMR sample is placed into a magnet. In the case 
of the atomic electrons, the field produced is such that it opposes the 
main field (Figure 4.3) and therefore has the effect of decreasing B (the 
applied field) at the nucleus. This decrease in the strength of the main field 
is tiny (and can be measured in parts per million when compared to the 
main field), but is nonetheless detectable when the NMR experiment is 
performed. The size of this chemical shift effect is obviously dependent 
upon the electron density surrounding the nucleus: we would expect a 
nucleus surrounded by high electron density to be most affected by the 
opposing magnetic field generated by the electrons, and conversely one 
with a low electron density to show a lesser chemical shift effect. NMR is 
therefore uniquely sensitive to the niolecular environment of the nuclei 
being observed. 
Figure 4.3 
Interaction of the 
electron magnetic field with 
the main magnetic field 
This is, in fact, what we find when we do an NMR experiment: if an atom 
is attached to an electron-donating substituent, the result is an increase in 
the electron density surrounding the nucleus, and a decrease in B,K. This 
modification of the main field (B) by the surrounding electrons is often 
called shielding (as the nucleus is effectively being “shielded” from the 
main field by the magnetic field generated by the electrons); the greater 
the electron density, the higher the shielding (and lower the frequency for 
the transition). The term used to describe the situation where an electron- 
withdrawing group causes a reduction in the electron density and, hence, 
an increase in BeK, is deshielding. A deshielded nucleus thus resonates 
(another commonly used term to describe the frequency at which an 
NMR transition occurs) at a higher .frequency than would have been 
expected. If B,ff is greater for a more deshielded nucleus, then, from 
equation (4. I), the frequency at which the NMR transition occurs is clearly 
higher. The end of an NMR spectrum where deshielded nuclei appear 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
59 
(high parts per million, or ppm, values) is termed the high-frequency 
(or, more commonly, the low-field) end of the spectrum, while shielded 
nuclei appear at the low-frequency (high-field) end. 
The really important aspect to all of this is that nuclei in similar 
chemical environments exhibit similar chemical shifts. Thus protons 
('H nuclei) attached to a carbon atom bonded to oxygen, H-C-0, show a 
characteristic chemical shift (3.54.5 ppm), while protons attached to a 
carbon atom bonded to nitrogen, H-C-N, 
have a different chemical 
shift range (2.5-3.5 ppm) and, since the carbon is attached to the less 
electronegative N atom, resonate at lower frequency. We can therefore 
use chemical shifts to our great advantage when interpreting NMR 
spectra. 
The usual units used to measure the chemical shift effect are parts per 
million (ppm). As was stated above, this is due to the fact the chemical 
shift effect is very small when compared to the main field. NMR can be 
carried out at many different magnetic field strengths, depending on the 
strength of the magnets used for the experiment. We know from equation 
(4.1) that the frequency of a transition is directly proportional to the 
strength of the magnetic field, B. If we were to use frequency as our units 
of measurement of chemical shift, we would find ourselves having to issue 
tables of chemical shift values for each possible value of B. We remove 
this unwanted magnetic field (B) dependence by defining chemical shift 
(6) to be the ratio of the frequency at which an NMR transition occurs to 
the strength of the main field as measured by the frequency at which 
protons resonate (equation 4.2): 
( 4 4  
\'sample - Vreference 
106 (ppm) 
6 =  
t'spectrometer 
In CDC13 or DMSO-d6 we normally choose tetramethylsilane (TMS), 
(CH&Si, as our reference, and this is given a reference value of 0 Hz 
so that, in the above example, the signals which occur at 100 Hz and 
500 Hz, at magnetic fields of 100 MHz and 500 MHz respectively, have 
a chemical shift of 6 1.0 in both cases. 
4.4 
'H NMR Spectroscopy 
4.4.1 'H Chemical Shifts 
A 'H NMR spectrum consists of a plot of chemical shift against 
intensity and, since the area under each peak in a ' H  N M R  spectrum is 
proportional to the number of 
' H  nuclei giving rise to the peak, we 
integrate the spectrum to give the number of protons in each molecular 

60 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
environment (Figure 4.4, red trace). As mentioned previously, chemical 
shift values are distinctive for the chemical environment of a 
particular nucleus. Thus, similar chemical environments give rise to 
signals with similar chemical shifts, and these are often tabulated to 
allow us to use chemical shift as a starting point for our interpretation 
of NMR spectra. The 'H chemical shifts for some of the most 
common functional groups are given in Box 4.4, but much more 
extensive lists are available elsewhere. The first thing you will notice 
about the chemical shifts in Box 4.4 is that the range is rather small 
(typically 6 0-15), and this is due to the fact that the chemical shift of 
protons is influenced only by the 1s electron. For all other nuclei 
(which have p-electrons), much greater effects on the chemical shift 
are seen and, for example, the usual chemical shift range for 13C is 6 
0-220. You will also notice from Box 4.4 that the more electro- 
negative the atom which the carbon bearing the proton is attached to, 
the more deshielded the proton (the higher the frequency). Thus, 
H-C-0 
have higher chemical shifts than H-C-N, 
which have higher 
chemical shifts than H-C-C. 
'H Chemical shifts are thus a measure of 
electron density and the more electronegative the group attached to 
the carbon bearing the proton, the higher the chemical shift (6) of 
that proton. 
Figure 4.4 500 MHz 'H NMR spectrum of ethyl benzoate in CDC13 (& 7.25) 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
61 
One particularly noticeable feature of Box 4.4 is the effect of 
aromaticity on the chemical shift: you can see that protons attached to 
an aromatic ring have chemical shifts in the region 6 6.5-8. If the 
case of a benzene ring is considered, then this effect is very clearly 
illustrated (Figure 4.5): because of the presence of the delocalized 
electrons that occur above and below the aromatic ring, when the 
ring is placed in a magnetic field a ring current is set up in which the 
aromatic electrons of the ring circulate in the planes above and below 
the ring. As we saw earlier, moving charges generate magnetic fields 
and, in this case, there is a reinforcement of the main field to produce 
a higher than expected B,B for an aromatic system. Thus, the protons 
of a benzene ring occur at a lower field (higher ppm value) than 
would have been expected in a molecule such as this - that is, they 
are deshielded. 
Figure 4.5 
Aromaticity and 
chemical shift 
Similar effects are seen in functional groups which contain multiple 
bonds and so have electrons which can circulate in an applied magnetic 
field. In some cases, this circulation of the n;-electrons happens more 

62 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
readily about one particular axis of the molecule, and this produces regions 
of “magnetic anisotropy”. For example, in a carbonyl group, -CHO, this 
circulation leads to the deshielding (6 9.5-10.5) of protons within a cone 
whose axis is along the carbonyl bond, while protons in the molecule which 
lie close to this group, but outside this cone, are shielded (Figure 4.6). 
Figure 4.6 Shielding and 
deshielding for a carbonyl group 
(+ represents deshielding, 
- shielding) 
The values of chemical shifts for protons attached to different 
functional groups are reasonably constant, so that we can predict the 
chemical shift of protons in various molecular environments (especially 
protons attached to an aromatic ring or those of a methylene group) by 
using some empirical rules (Boxes 4.5 and 4.6). 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
63 

64 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Among organic molecules, the most acidic are the carboxylic acids 
(RC02H), and so it is no surprise that the proton of the carboxyl 
group, with very low electron density (acidic), is strongly deshielded 
(6 10-15). Other noticeable features of acid protons, and of any NH, 
SH or OH, is that their NMR peaks are generally broad (owing to 
rapid exchange, especially with the solvent and any water present, these 
protons are continually being lost to, and regained from, other 
molecules), do not couple to other protons (again owing to fast 
exchange) and have variable chemical shifts (which are dependent upon 
the solvent, the concentration of the sample and the temperature). 
The question of the rates of exchange processes and their effect on an 
NMR spectrum is complex and we do not have space to go into it in 
depth here, but, as a general rule, anything which happens at a rate 
greater than once per millisecond (ljl000 s) will lead to broad NMR 
peaks, while anything which happens more slowly will give rise to 
discrete peaks for the individual protons which are in exchange. The 
exchange of acidic protons with the solvent usually happens much 
more often than once per millisecond and these peaks appear broad 
and have no coupling. 
While considering exchange processes, it is often common to see more 
peaks than would be expected in the 'H NMR spectra of amides; the 
reason for this is that amides can exist as rotamers about the aniide 
bond. This phenomenon has already been discussed (in Section 3.3.3) as 
it leads to a decrease in the CO bond order and a resulting decrease in the 
stretching frequency for an amide bond vibration. These rotamers are in 
slow exchange on the NMR timescale, so that the NMR spectrum can 
appear to be a mixture of two discrete compounds, with an example of 
this process shown in the spectrum of N,N-dirnethylformamide (DMF, 
N,N-dimethylmethanamide) (Figures 4.7, 4.8), in which the two methyl 
groups are clearly not equivalent at 353 K, owing to restricted rotation 
about the C-N bond. If restricted rotation is suspected of complicating 
a 'H spectrum, we can re-run the spectrum at higher temperatures. This 
should overcome the energy barrier to the rotation and, for example, 
the peaks for the methyl groups in DMF would broaden and coalesce 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
65 
into one peak. At the coalescence temperature (413 K for DMF in 
DMSO-d6), the rotation is happening at about the NMR timescale, and 
we see a characteristically broad peak for the N-methyl groups. At 
temperatures above the coalescence temperature there is a singlet for 
all six H atoms of the N-methyl groups, since the C-N bond is in free 
rotation and the two methyl groups are equivalent. By determining the 
coalescence temperature (T,) and by knowing the chemical shift 
difference (av in Hz) of the two peaks which coalesce, we can calculate 
the free energy of activation for the process using equation (4.3): 
AG: = x7,[ 22.96 + In ($)I 
(4.3) 
From Figure 4.8, Tc is 413 K and av can be measured as 48 Hz, which is 
the separation in Hz between the two methyl peaks at 353 K (in this case) 
so that: 
AGI = 8.314 x 413 x 22.96 + In - = 3434 x [22.96 + In (8.6)] 
[ 
ri31 
= 3434 x [22.96 + 2.151 = 3434 x 25.1 = 86.2 kJ mol-' 
Figure 4.7 
Restricted rotation in 
N, N- d i met h y If o r m am id e 
Figure 4.8 Variable-tempera- 
ture 'H NMR spectra of 
N, N-d i met h y I f o r m am i d e i n 
DMSO-d,; coalescence 
temperature, T, = 413 K 
(A@ = 86.2 kJ mol-') 

66 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
4.4.2 Spin-Spin Coupling 
From what has been said so far, we might expect that single protons, 
e.g. H-CC13, and groups of chemically equivalent protons, e.g. CH3-R, 
would give rise to single 'H NMR peaks. This does happen, but only if 
there are no other magnetic nuclei close by in the molecule, i.e. for us to 
obtain a singlet peak for a given proton there must, in general, be no 
protons on adjacent carbon atoms. 
At low field (high frequency) in the 'H NMR spectrum of 
dichloroacetaldehyde diethyl acetal (dichloroethanal diethyl acetal or, 
to give the IUPAC systematic name, 1,l -dichloro-2,2-diethoxyethane) 
(Figure 4.9), we can see that there are two doublets (2 sets of 2 lines) at 
6 4.63 and 6 5.59 (we will look at the higher field end of this spectrum 
later). The origin of these lines, known as splitting patterns, is so 
important that we shall try to explain it in two different ways here, and 
we will also show you how to predict such splitting patterns in two ways. 
An understanding of NMR splitting patterns is crucial to the ability to 
elucidate structures by NMR since the patterns, and the separation 
between the peaks (the coupling constant, J ) ,  give key information about 
the molecular structure. 
Figure 4.9 Low-field (high- 
frequency) region of the 300 MHz 
'H NMR spectrum of dichloro- 
acetaldehyde diethyl acetal in 
CDC13 
Have a look again at the structure of dichloroacetaldehyde diethyl 
acetal: we can see that three bonds separate the protons marked in bold in 
this structure. In aliphatic molecules such as this, or in the aliphatic 
portions of larger molecules, spin-spin coupling is usually restricted to a 
maximum of three bonds between the atoms which are coupled. Thus 
these protons couple to one another, and give rise to the doublets at 6 4.63 
( J  = 5.6 Hz) and 6 5.62 ( J  = 5.6 Hz), and there is no interaction between 
either of these protons with those of the ethyl groups. Our first question 
should be: how do these doublets arise? There are, of course, many other 
questions we need to ask, but we will come to them later. 
The doublets arise due to spin-spin coupling, which is a magnetic 
" through-bond" interaction between the two nuclei which are coupled (we 
will call them HA and HX, as this is the convention), brought about by the 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
67 
interactions between local magnetic fields and bonding electrons. The 
magnitude of the coupling constant, J, depends upon the bonding system 
between the nuclei, with fewer bonds between the nuclei giving rise to 
larger values of the coupling constant. A key point we need to know and 
remember is that chemically and magneticnlly equivalent protons do not 
couple to one another. 
The Origin of Spin-Spin Coupling 
Remember that a proton, or any other nucleus with spin I = 
can have 
(21 + 1) = 2 orientations in an applied magnetic field. The two possible 
orientations are aligned “with” (mI = 
the 
applied field. Remember also that the frequency v of an NMR transition 
is proportional to the magnetic field experienced by the nucleus, BeK. 
and “against” (mf 
= 
The Effect of HA on HX (and HX on HA) 
Consider first HA, and how the magnetic environment of this proton is 
influenced by the presence of HX. If HX were absent, HA would 
experience a magnetic field of BA. However, in approximately 50% of the 
molecules in the sample (remember that the population differences 
between the two energy levels are incredibly small so that the energy levels 
are almost equally populated), HX will be aligned “with” the applied 
magnetic field, B, so that HA will experience a magnetic field of BA + ABX 
(Hx reinforces the applied field) (Figure 4.10a). Thus, in this 50% of the 
sample molecules, HA will absorb at a slightly higher frequency than vA, 
and we say that, in this case, HA is deshielded. 
Figure 4.10 
In about 50% of the 
molecules in the sample, HX will 
be aligned “with” B (a) and in 
about 50% HX will be aligned 
“against” B (b) 
In the other approximately 50% of the molecules in the sample, 
however, HX will be aligned “against” B (Figure 4.10b), so that HA will 
experience a magnetic field of BA - ABx and will thus absorb at a slightly 
lower frequency than V A  (shielded). Thus, instead of a single line for HA at 
vA, we observe a doublet (two lines of equal intensity), with one line at a 
slightly higher frequency than V A  and the other at a slightly lower 

68 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
frequency (Figure 4.1 1). The separation between the lines is known as the 
coupling constant, JAX, and is always measured in Hz. 
Figure 4.1 1 
and HX 
Doublets for HA 
There is an equal and opposite interaction between HA and HX which 
gives a doublet of JAX for HX. Look back again at Figure 4.9, and you 
will see that what we predicted is exactly what we observe for the two CH 
protons of dichloroacetaldehyde diethyl acetal, C12CHCH(OCH2CH3)2. 
The Energy Level Diagram for Two Interacting Nuclei, HA and HX 
For a more detailed analysis we need to look at the energy levels for the 
particular spin system. For a two-spin system (HAHX) there are four 
energy levels, and so four allowed transitions (Amf= I), two of which 
involve HA and two of which involve HX (Figure 4.12). The arrangement 
where both nuclei are aligned “with” the applied field is the most stable 
and so lowest in energy, whereas that in which both nuclei are aligned 
“against” the magnetic field is the least stable and so highest in energy. 
X I  is the energy required to excite HX from being aligned “with” the 
applied field to “against” while HA remains “with” the applied field, and 
X2 is the energy required to excite HX from being aligned “with” the 
applied field to “against” while HA remains “against” the applied field. 
A l  and A2 are the corresponding transitions for the HA nucleus. 
Figure 4.12 Energy levels of an 
AX spin system 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
69 
We can see from the diagram that there is a difference in energy between 
the transitions XI and X2, with XI being larger than X,. This results in two 
resonances for HX: X I  at a higher frequency than if no HA were present, 
and X 2  at a slightly lower frequency, i.e. a doublet centred on vx. This 
situation would not have arisen without the presence of HA and, 
consequently, there is an exactly equal and opposite effect on HA by HX, 
again leading to two resonances. Looking at the figure we can see that: 
XI + A2 = A ,  + x2 
so that: 
That is, the difference in energy between A 1 and A2, and so the difference in 
the frequency of the transitions must be equal to the difference between X1 
and X2 so that the splitting of the HA and HX signals is exactly equal (JAx). 
Predicting Splitting Patterns 
Arrow Diagrams 
We can predict spin-spin splitting patterns in either of two ways, and we 
will start by considering the effect on a given nucleus (nuclei) of the 
possible orientations in an applied magnetic field of the neighbouring 
protons. We will call this the “arrow diagram” method, in which nuclei 
aligned “with” the applied magnetic field are represented by an arrow up, 
and those “against” by an arrow down. 
Consider nitroethane, CH3CH2N02, in which the methyl (CH3) group 
has three chemically and magnetically equivalent protons, and the 
methylene (CH2) group has two chemically and magnetically equivalent 
protons. The only coupling which will be observed, therefore, will be that 
between the three protons of the methyl group and the two protons of the 
adjacent methylene group. This coupling is often referred to as vicinal or 
three-bond (3J) coupling and is the most frequently observed type of 
coupling in ‘H NMR spectra. 
In the aliphatic region of ‘H NMR spectra, two-bond or geminal 
coupling (2J) has the largest coupling constant (see later), but is less 
common than 3J coupling, while four-bond coupling has the smallest 
coupling constant and is often non-existent. In general, then, the fewer 
the number of bonds between two nuclei which are coupled, the larger the 
coupling constant will be. 
Coming back to nitroethane, in the “arrow diagram” method we need 
to consider what effect the methylene protons have on the methyl 
protons and vice verso. We can determine this by considering the possible 
orientations for the two methylene protons and the three methyl protons 
in an applied magnetic field. 

70 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
The CH3 protons experience different magnetic environments, 
depending upon the orientation of the methylene protons (Box 4.7). 
Since there are a total of four possible orientations of these two 
protons - there are two ways of producing one proton “with” and one 
“against” - and, because in NMR the population difference between 
energy levels is incredibly small, the fraction of molecules in the sample 
with the methylene protons in each arrangement will be that given in 
parentheses (in Box 4.7) after the respcctive orientations. Thus, the CH3 
group adjacent to the methylene can exist in three magnetic environments 
and so gives three lines (a triplet) with relative probabilities, and so 
relative intensities, of the three lines of 1 :2: 1 (Figure 4.13a). 
Figure 4.13 Predicted coupling 
pattern for the A2X3 spin system in 
nitroethane, CH3CH2N02 
We can now look at the effect of the three methyl protons on the 
magnetic environment of the methylene group in the same way, but, as 
there are now three protons to be considered, there will be a greater 
number of possible orientations. Before looking at the pattern obtained 
(Box 4.8), you might like to try to work it out for yourself. 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
71 
So, the methylene (CH2) protons can exist in four magnetic 
environments (due to the different orientations of the three methyl 
protons) and so will give four lines (a quartet) in the 'H NMR spectrum, 
of relative intensities 1:3:3:1 (Figure 4.13b). 
Looking now at the actual 'H NMR spectrum of nitroethane 
(Figure 4.14), we can see that there is a triplet of coupling constant 
(J) 7.4 Hz at 6 1.54 and a quartet of coupling constant 7.4 Hz at 6 4.38. 
Figure 4.14 300 MHz 'H NMR spectrum of nitroethane, CH3CH2N02, in CDCl3 

72 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Notice that the integrals give us the ratio of the area under the 
peaks and not the absolute value, so that the spectrum of ethoxyethane 
(CH3CH20CH2CH3), which would have exactly the same splitting 
pattern, would also have a triplet and a quartet in the ratio of 
3H:2H. 
Successive Splitting 
A much more commonly used method for the prediction of splitting 
patterns is that of “successive splitting”, since this method can be used 
(through the use of scale diagrams) for the prediction of the multiplicity 
(splitting pattern) of very complex spin systems. 
In this method we take advantage of the fact that each spin 
nucleus Itill split the peak due to its iion-equivalent neighhour into a 
doublet of separation J (Hz). Interacting nuclei are represented by 
letters of the alphabet, with the gap between the letters in the 
alphabet indicating the separation between the nuclei in chemical 
shift. For example, in the description of the origin of spin-spin 
coupling, we used a two-nuclei system HAHX: this would be termed 
an AX spin system, in which the chemical shift separation for HA 
and HX is “large” enough to give first-order coupling (later we will 
look at the definition of first-order coupling, and what happens when 
two nuclei which are close in chemical shift, HAHB, couple). The 
spectrum of nitroethane (Figure 4.14) is representative of an A2X3 
spin system. 
AX Spin System 
Two doublets with a coupling constant of JAX (Figure 4.15). 
Figure 4.15 
An AX spin 
system 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
73 
AX2 Spin System 
A triplet (for HA) of integral 1 and a doublet (for Hx) of integral 2 
(Figure 4.16). 
Figure 4.16 An AX2 spin 
system 
AX3 Spin System 
A quartet (for HA) of integral 1 and a doublet (for Hx) of integral 3 
(Figure 4.17). 
Figure 4.17 An AX3 spin 
system 
In general in 'H NMR spectra, for n non-equivalent protons coupling 
to the proton in question, we will obtain (n+ 1) lines, the relative 
intensities of which are given by Pascal's triangle (Box 4.9). Similar 
considerations do, of course, apply to other spin $$ nuclei. 

74 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Let us now look at a more complex spin system, in which we have two 
different coupling constants to the same proton. In the trisubstituted 
aromatic 3-amino-4-methoxybenzoic acid shown in Figure 4.18, we have 
an AMX spin system and this leads to a 1,3- (or meta) coupled doublet for 
H2 at 6 7.26, a 1,2- (or ortho) coupled doublet for H5 at 6 6.85 and a 
doublet of doublets (both ortho and wleta coupling) for H6 at 6 7.21. 
Figure 4.18 
(a) Splitting pattern 
for 3-amino-4-methoxybenzoic 
acid 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
75 
Figure 4.18 (b) Actual 500 MHz ’H NMR spectrum of 3-amino-4-methoxybenzoic acid in DMSO-d6 
The simple patterns we have discussed so far give rise to “first-order” 
spectra which are very similar to the predictions we have made. First- 
order spectra are obtained when there is a reasonably large chemical shift 
difference between the coupling constants of the coupled nuclei, such that 
equation (4.4) is obeyed: 
where 6A and 6s are the chemical shifts of the two coupled nuclei, A and B, 
and J A B  is the coupling constant between these nuclei. From examining 
this equation, you may already have realized one advantage in running ‘H 
NMR spectra at as high a field as possible (i.e. at 500 MHz rather than at 
300 MHz). Since the chemical shift of a signal is independent of the spec- 
trometer frequency, running a spectrum at a higher magnetic field will mean 
that the difference in chemical shift between two signals will be the same in 
ppm, but the separation in hertz will be greater at the higher field. At higher 
field there is, therefore, more chance of obtaining first-order spectra. 
Let us now look at what happens when the chemical shift difference 
between the coupled nuclei is small and the simple patterns become 
distorted, i.e. non-first-order spectra. The simplest example of this is an 
AB spin system. Remembering that an AX system will give a pair of 
doublets, we will now look at a system in which the chemical shift 
difference is relatively small, so that the spin system is now described as 
AB. The two doublets of the AX system now become distorted (with the 
amount of distortion from the AX spectrum increasing as the chemical 
- tjB(in Hz) 2 10 x JAB(in Hz) 
(4.4) 

76 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
shift difference decreases) and the line in each doublet which is closest to 
the other doublet (inner line) increases in size, while those furthest away 
(outer lines) decrease in size (Figure 4.19). 
Figure 4.19 
Non-first-order AB 
splitting pattern 
This effect is often referred to as the “roof top’, effect and is actually 
quite useful since the doublets slope towards the signal they are coupled 
to, often making the identification of coupled signals easier. Figure 4.20 
shows a portion of the 500 MHz ‘H NMR spectrum of N-acetyl- 
L-phenylalanine, and we can clearly identify an ,4BX system due to the 
-CH2-C‘H- 
group. Normally the two protons of a methylene group 
(CH2) would be chemically and magnetically equivalent and so would 
not couple to one another. However, if these protons are non-equivalent 
[which is often the case if they form part of a ring and/or are adjacent to 
a stereogenic (chiral) centre] then coupling between them occurs and, as 
they are likely to be close in chemical shift, since they are attached to the 
same carbon atom, an AB spectrum is obtained. As there is also an 
adjacent proton (the a-H of the amino acid), an ABX spectrum is 
obtained for N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine. The methylene protons (HA and 
HB) are adjacent to the chiral centre, so they are non-equivalent and 
couple to one another and to the proton attached to the stereogenic 
centre (a-proton), HX. We have seen before, and shall see again in 
the following section, that the fewer the bonds between coupled nuclei, 
the greater the coupling constant, so the geminal (2J) coupling of the 
methylene protons to each other will be greater than the coupling of 
either HA or HB to HX. In addition, HA and HB frequently have non- 
equivalent vicinal (3J) coupling constants to HX. In the 500 MHz 
spectrum of N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine (Figure 4.20), we can see the pair 
of doublets of doublets (one for HA and one for HB) at 6 2.85 and 3.05. 
Closer examination of this spectrum shows that the doublet of doublets 
at 6 2.85 has coupling constants of 13.8 and 9.6 Hz, while that at 6 3.05 
has coupling constants of 13.8 and 4.9 Hz. The larger coupling constant 
( 1  3.8 Hz) is obviously the geminal coupling constant, JAB, while the two 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
77 
smaller coupling constants (9.6 and 4.9 Hz) are the vicinal coupling 
constants, JAx and J B X .  The signal for HX will be complicated as this 
proton couples to both HA and HB (with J values of 9.6 and 4.9 Hz), and 
also to the NH (coupling constant, J =  7.7 Hz) and can be seen at 6 4.40. 
Figure 4.20 500 MHz 'H NMR spectrum of N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine in DMSO-d6 
The spectrum of N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine also introduces us to 
another important consideration in 'H NMR spectra: the effect of 
stereoisomerism on the 'H NMR spectrum. Each of a pair of enantiomers 
has the same physical properties (apart from their ability to rotate the 
plane of plane polarized light) and so will have identical 'H NMR 
spectra. The spectra for N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine and its enantiomer, 
N-acetyl-D-phenylalanine, will therefore be identical in every respect. 
Diastereoisomers, on the other hand (no pun intended), have different 
physical properties and so give different 'H NMR spectra. 

78 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
In an extension of this effect, enantiotopic (prochiral) groups [groups 
which, if different, would produce a chiral (stereogenic) centre] do not 
lead to different 'H NMR spectra, but diastereotopic groups (groups 
which, if different, would produce diastereoisomers) do. To illustrate this 
point, we can use an imaginary substitution test and imagine replacing 
one of the hydrogens of (chloromethy1)benzene or dichloroacetaldeh yde 
diethyl acetal(l,l-dichloro-2,2-diethoxyethane) 
by deuterium (Box 4.10). 
We can see that the two hydrogens of the methylene group in 
(ch1oromethyl)benzene are prochiral but substitution would give rise to 
enantiomers, so that in 'H NMR terms these protons are equivalent. For 
dichloroacetaldehyde diethyl acetal, however, we can see that suhsti- 
tution of either of the two hydrogens of the ester methylene group gives a 
stereogenic centre at this carbon and at the carbon which has the two 
ethoxy groups attached. In this case, the substitution test would lead to 
diastereoisomers, so these methylene protons are non-equivalent and 
couple to one another, as well as to the adjacent methyl protons, to give 
two overlapping sets of eight lines at 6 3.75 (Figure 4.21). This imaginary 
test is often very useful in predicting whether the two protons of a 
methylene group couple to one another, but it is not infallible, and often 
two diastereotopic protons do not couple to one another (especially if 
they are remote from the other stereogenic centre in the molecule). 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
79 
Figure 4.21 300 MHz 'H NMR spectrum of dichloroacetaldehyde diethyl acetal in CDC13 
How do we know if a peak is a doublet of triplets (dt) or a triplet of 
doublets (td)? The multiplet with the largest coupling constant 
is quoted first, i.e. a doublet of triplets (dt) has the larger J value for 
the doublet (see Box 4.11). 
The Magnitude of Spin-Spin Coupling 
As has been stated a number of times in previous sections, the size of the 
coupling constant, J, is dependent upon the number of bonds between the 
coupling nuclei and the molecular environment of the nuclei. It is generally 

80 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
true that the fewer the bonds between nuclei which are coupled, the greater 
the coupling constant. For example, as we shall see in the following 
sections, one-bond "C-' H coupling constants typically lie in the range 
120-250 Hz, and, as we have seen already, aliphatic geminal (two-bond, 
'J) 'H-IH coupling constants often lie in the range 10-20 Hz and aliphatic 
vicinal (three-bond, 'J) 'H-'H coupling constants in the range 5-8 Hz. 
However, the difference between the magnitude of 2J and ' J  coupling 
constants is not clear-cut. There are a number of ' J  coupling constants 
which lie in the 10-20 Hz range, most notably the coupling constant for 
trans alkene protons (12-18 Hz), and a number of 2J coupling constants 
which lie in the 0-8 Hz range, most notably that between the two protons 
of a terminal alkene group (0-3 Hz). Longer range (4J and 5J) couplings 
can be observed, especially in aromatic or alkenic molecules, but these are 
Figure 4.22 Examples of 
'H--'H 
coupling constants (usual 
values given in brackets) 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
81 
less common. Figure 4.22 contains a list of some representative coupling 
constants and extensive lists are available elsewhere. We will now briefly 
consider those factors which have the greatest influence upon the 
magnitude of the coupling constant, but we should always remember 
that, for all coupling, the shorter (and so stronger) the bonds between the 
nuclei which are coupling, the larger the coupling constant will be. Since 
most structural information can be obtained from vicinal coupling 
constants, we will concentrate initially upon the factors which influence 
the magnitude of this three-bond coupling. 
C’icinal coupling constants can give a great deal of information about 
the conformation adopted by a molecule. Such conformational analysis 
is particularly useful in cyclic systems and in peptides/proteins, which 
have some conformations which are more energetically favoured than 
others. 
Remembering that coupling involves the interaction of the nuclear 
spins of the coupling nuclei via the bonding electrons of the bonding 
system between them, it becomes apparent that the coupling constant is 
dependent upon orbital overlap, and so on the dihedral angle, 6, between 
the planes containing the nuclei. The relationship between the vicinal 
coupling constant between nuclei HA and HX, J A ~ ,  
and the dihedral 
angle, 8, is given by the Karplus equation, equation (4.5): 
JAx = JScos20 - 0.28 (Hz) 
(4.5) 
3 
where Js is a constant dependent upon the other substituents present on 
the carbon atoms. A very useful approximation, however, is equation (4.6): 
i.e. Js = 9, which gives the plot shown in Figure 4.23. 
Figure 4.23 
Plot of dihedral 
angle (0) against coupling 
constant ( J )  

82 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Note that the value of J s  is actually slightly greater than 9 Hz at 
8= 180" (where the C-H orbitals have the greatest degree of overlap) 
and slightly lower than 9 Hz at 8= 0". As cos 90" = 0, the coupling 
constant due to a dihedral angle of 90" is 0 (where there is the least 
amount of overlap between orbitals). As mentioned previously, the 
Karplus equation is particularly useful in more rigid systems (although 
the accuracy of the predicted values is dependent upon the substituents 
present), and a good example of its use in cyclic systems is in the 
analysis of the coupling constant of the anomeric hydrogens in methyl 
a- and P-D-glucopyranosides. In methyl a-11-glucopyranoside (Figure 
4.24), the coupling constant - due to coupling to the hydrogen on C2 
~ 
for the anomeric hydrogen (HI), 6 4.52, is 3.6 Hz, which is larger than 
the predicted value of 2.25 Hz for a dihedral angle (6) of 60". In methyl 
P-D-glucopyranoside, the coupling constant for the anomeric hydrogen 
is 7.8 Hz, which is smaller than the predicted value of 9 Hz for a 
dihedral angle of 180". 
Figure 4.24 300 MHz 'H NMR spectrum of methyl a-glucopyranoside in DMSO-d6 
Conformational analysis is also possible for the secondary structure 
present in peptides and proteins. For example, in helices the dihedral 
angle H-N-C,H 
is -120" while in P-sheets it is -180", so that these 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
83 
structural features can be identified by the coupling constant of the a-H of 
J < 6 Hz for helices and J > 7 Hz for a P-sheet. 
It is difficult to find simple examples to illustrate the effect of angle 
strain on the vicinal coupling constant, but a reduction in the angle strain 
results in an increase in the vicinal coupling constant. 
The presence of electronegative elerncnts directly attached to the same 
carbon atom as one of the vicinally coupled protons decreases the 
magnitude of the coupling constant, while the presence of electropositive 
elements increases it. This effect is small in chains (which are capable of 
relatively free rotation) but more pronounced in rigid systems such as 
alkenes. 
Geminal coupling constants are increased (made more negative) by: 
The introduction of an electronegative substituent on an adjacent 
carbon atom. 
The introduction of an electropositive substituent on the same carbon 
atom as the geminally coupled hydrogens. 
Having an adjacent n;-bond, so that the C-H orbital can overlap with 
the n-orbitals of the n-bond (this effect is more pronounced for 
carbonyls than for carbon+arbon double bonds). 
They are decreased by: 
An increase in the H-C-H 
bond angle (i.e. an increase in the O/Os 
character of the carbon atom). 
The introduction of an electronegative substituent on the same 
carbon atom as the geminally coupled hydrogens. 
The introduction of an electropositive substituent on an adjacent 
carbon atom. 
Long-range couplings are generally limited to 4J or 5J, and then only in 
exceptional circumstances, e.g. the short bonds in aromatic rings give rise 
to meta (44 
and occasionally para (5J) 
coupling between protons, and the 
even shorter bonds present in alkenes and alkynes can give rise to even 
longer range couplings (up to 74. Finally, in saturated systems, a 
particularly favourable arrangement for long-range coupling is when four 
bonds adopt a W arrangement (highlighted in bold in Figure 4.22). 
4.5 
Decoupled, NOE (Double Resonance) 
and COSY Spectra 
4.5.1 Decoupled Spectra 
If it is not obvious which protons in a molecule are coupled to which, 
we can determine coupled signals through the use of decoupling 

84 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
experiments (Figure 4.25), in which we irradiate one nucleus while 
detecting all the other nuclei in the molecule, i.e.“double resonance” using 
two pulses of radiation. In this experiment, the signal due to any nucleus 
coupled to that being irradiated collapses, and the peak obtained is that 
which we would see if the nucleus being irradiated were not present. By 
irradiating at the resonance frequency of a specific nucleus we are 
continually exciting this nucleus to its higher energy state, which is also 
continually relaxing back to its lower energy state. This is happening so 
fast on the NMR timescale (faster than once per millisecond) that any 
nuclei coupled to the irradiated nucleus “see” only the average of the two 
spin states (a and p), and any coupling to it is removed. With the ready 
availability of COSY spectra (see the next section), this technique is not 
employed as often as it once was. In Figure 4.25b, the triplet at 6 4.32 
for the methylene in bold in Figure 4.25a was irradiated, causing the 
methylene protons which were coupled to it (red) to lose all coupling to 
these protons. The methylene signal at 6 1.74 therefore collapses from a 
quintet (five lines) to a triplet (since it is now coupled only to the 
methylene. CH2, protons) and the signal being irradiated disappears, with 
the rest of the spectrum being unchanged. 
Figure 4.25 
(a) 500 MHz ’H NMR spectrum of dibutyl phthalate in CDC13 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
85 
Figure 4.25 
(b) Decoupled (double resonance) 500 MHz ’H NMR spectrum of dibutyl phthalate in CDC13, with irradiation 
at 6 4.32 
4.5.2 COSY Spectra 
The acronym COSY stands for (’Orrclatcd Spectroscopb’ and this 
technique is widely used to determine all of the coupling interactions in a 
single experiment. This proves to be more efficient than the decoupling 
experiment in which each signal is irradiated in turn to determine its 
coupling partners. COSY involves a multiple pulse sequence (which we 
do not need to know anything about in order to use the technique) and is 
an example of two-dimensional (2D) spectroscopy. 
The HH COSk’ experiment is quick to perform, relatively easy to 
interpret and allows us to correlate the ‘H shifts of all the coupling 
partners in the molecule. The “normal” ‘H spectrum is plotted on both 
the x- and y-axes, and a projection also appears along the diagonal (with 
the peak heights represented by contours). The key signals in this 
spectrum are the correlation (or cross) peaks which appear off the 
diagonal. The COSY spectrum is symmetrical about the diagonal axis, 
and the cross-peaks therefore all appear on either side of the diagonal axis 
and are symmetrical about it. The symmetry of the spectrum makes 
identification of the cross-peaks for a given signal relatively simple, since 
the two coupled peaks (on the diagonal) and the cross-peaks (off the 

86 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
diagonal) form the four corners of a square. In order to determine the 
coupling partner for any peak, we need only go directly vertically (or 
horizontally) from a given peak until we come to a cross-peak. Going 
horizontally (or vertically) from this peak to the diagonal takes us to the 
peak for the coupling partner (see Figure 4.26). 
Figure 4.26 500 MHz HH COSY NMR spectrum of ethyl benzoate in CDCl3 
As all the coupling relationships in the molecule are given in the COSY 
spectrum, it is normal to be able to deduce all of the structural fragments 
in a molecule from the HH COSY spectrum. 
4.5.3 NOE Spectra 
If we irradiate one nucleus, while detecting another nucleus which is close 
to it in space (but not necessarily bonded to it), i.e. double resonance, then 
the signal for the detected nucleus is enhanced and the signal-to-noise 
ratio improved. We can achieve this by irradiating a given nucleus with a 
low-level radiofrequency signal and monitoring what is happening in the 
rest of the spectrum. Because the NMR relaxation processes (those 
processes which help the system to return to equilibrium where there is an 
excess of nuclei in the lower energy level) are governed by through-space 
interactions, enhancement of the signals for nearby nuclei (the nuclear 
OFerhauser effect, NOE) is observed. We do not need to understand the 
theory behind this effect, which is very useful in obtaining distance 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
87 
information in a molecule, e.g. which protons are close in space to each 
other in a molecule. One of the main uses for this effect is to study the 
conformation of proteins, but we can also take advantage of this effect in 
decoupled 13C spectra, and it will be discussed again in this context later. 
As the enhancements we see due to ‘H-IH NOE are small (typically 
7-lo%), it is extremely difficult to see any effect by simple comparison of 
two spectra, with and without the NOE effect. The easiest way to analyse 
these type of data is by difference spectroscopy, with a control spectrum 
acquired in which the NOE effect has deliberately not been switched on and 
a second spectrum acquired where the NOE has been allowed to build up. 
Upon subtraction of the control spectrum from the spectrum with the 
NOE present, we obtain an NOE difference spectrum in which the signals 
with enhancements show up as small positive peaks, the signal which was 
irradiated shows up as a large negative peak, and all other (unaffected) 
peaks are absent (Figure 4.27). These spectra are usually quoted with the % 
enhancement of the signals. To measure this we need to take into account 
the integral for the peak irradiated (the one signal which is negative on 
the difference spectrum). For example, in Figure 4.27b, the signal at 6 3.60 
is for 3H (OCH3), so 1H will be equivalent to 
of this value. 
Figure 4.27 500 MHz NOE spectra of methyl P-glucopyranoside in DMSO-d6: (a) irradiation of the anomeric hydrogen (6 4.42), 
giving enhancement of the methoxy signal and ring hydrogens (red); (b) irradiation of the methoxy signal (6 3.60), giving 
enhancement of the anomeric position (red) 
Once again, there is a 2D version of this experiment which gives all 
of the NOE effects in the molecule in a single spectrum (UOES\;”). 
This experiment works best for large molecules (m/z > lOOO), but can 

88 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Figure 4.28 (a) 500 MHz 'H NMR spectrum of reserpine in DMSO-d,; (b) 500 MHz NOESY NMR spectrum of reserpine in 
D M SO- ds 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
89 
sometimes be used for relatively small molecules (Figure 4.28). Cross- 
peaks in the NOESY spectrum indicate NOE between the two peaks to 
which they give correlations, and the hydrogens giving rise to these peaks 
must therefore be close in space. 
4.6 
13C NMR Spectroscopy 
Carbon-12 has an abundance of 98.9% but a nuclear spin ( I )  of 0 and is 
not detectable by NMR. Fortunately, I3C, with a natural abundance of 
1.1 Yo, has a nuclear spin of %, and so gives rise to NMR signals, and 
13C NMR spectroscopy has become an important tool in structure 
confirmation and elucidation. 
Since only 1.1% of the carbon atoms in a molecule are detectable 
(by 13C NMR), the data are more difficult to acquire than the corres- 
ponding ‘H data. However, even a few milligrams of sample have billions 
of molecules present, so that there is a very high probability of each 
carbon atom being 13C in some of the molecules. 
Problems of sensitivity are largely overcome by using a greater number 
of scans or more concentrated samples. Typically, we can obtain a 
‘H NMR spectrum using 6 1 6  scans on 10-20 mg of sample, whereas the 
corresponding 13C data will require 256-2048 scans to obtain a 
reasonable spectrum. 
A conventional ‘,C NMR spectrum is referred to as being proton 
decoupled (Figure 4.29) and consists of a plot of chemical shift 
against intensity, with one peak for each carbon atom in the 
molecule (the three peaks at 6 79.8 are for the solvent, CDCl,). As 
with proton NMR spectroscopy, chemically and magnetically 
equivalent atoms appear together on the spectrum; however, unlike 
a ‘H NMR spectrum, the area under each peak is not always propor- 
tional to the number of I3C nuclei giving rise to the peak. In parti- 
cular, quaternary carbons (which have no attached protons) have no 
nearby nuclei with spin to which they can transfer their energy, so 
they do not have sufficient time to “relax” back to equilibrium (with 
the excess population in the lower energy state) before the next pulse 
is applied. As a result, their peak intensities are normally reduced 
compared to other groups, e.g. methyl (CH,). It is for this reason 
that we do not integrate the I3C spectrum, as the peak areas are not 
necessarily related to the number of carbon atoms in each molecular 
environment. 

90 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
- 
I
.
.
'
'
 
55 
PPm 
105 
100 
95 
90 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
Figure 4.29 75 MHz 13C NMR spectrum of methyl a-glucopyranoside in a mixture of CDCI3 and DMSO-d6; 6c CDCl3 79.8 (three 
peaks), 6c DMSO-d6 40.5 (not shown) 
4.6.1 13C Chemical Shifts 
The chemical shifts of carbon atoms usually lie between 6 0-220 (with 
TMS again being used as the reference value of 6 0) (Boxes 4.12-4-14), 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
91 
and are influenced by the deshielding or shielding effects of atoms and 
groups in a manner similar to that of protons. Perhaps surprisingly, 
however, the chemical shifts of 13C atoms do not necessarily match the 
relative positions of the corresponding protons in the 'H spectrum. 
Alkanes 
The signals of carbon atoms in an alkyl chain appear at the high-field end 
of the spectrum, typically about 6 10-30. In general, methyl groups (CH3) 
are most shielded (lowest 6 value), then methylene (CH2) and methine 
(CH), with quaternary alkyl carbon atoms (no attached Hs) being most 

92 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
deshielded (highest 6 value). Whatever the atom or group attached to an 
alkyl carbon, we find that the greater substitution of that carbon, the more 
deshielded its signal. Thus, we nearly always find methyl carbons at lower 
6 values than the corresponding methylene, methine or quaternary 
carbon atoms. 
Furthermore, a methyl group on a quaternary carbon is more de- 
shielded than a methyl attached to a methine, which is more deshielded 
than a methyl attached to a methylene group. We can see examples of all 
three of these methyl groups in the I3C chemical shifts of two C6HI4 
isomers, 3-methylpentane and 2,2-dimethylbutane (Figure 4.30). 
Figure 4.30 13C chemical shifts 
of methyl substituents of (a) 3- 
methylpentane and (b) 2,2- 
dimethylbutane 
We often see examples which do not fit these simple rules (“C chemical 
shifts are too variable to make assignments certain), and it is always 
advisable to use other complementary NMR techniques to aid spectral 
assignment (see Section 4.6.3). 
The Effects of Functional Groups on the I3C Chemical Shift 
We will now look at the effect a functional group has upon the carbon to 
which it is attached. When we have an electron-withdrawing atom or 
group on a particular carbon atom, we find a reduction in the electron 
density, resulting in a deshielding of the carbon and a shift downfield (to a 
higher 6 value). 
To illustrate this theory, consider the effect of the nitro group (NO2) on 
the carbon chemical shifts in nitroethane, CH3CH2N02. The positively 
charged nitrogen is strongly electron withdrawing and we can expect the 
nitro group to have a strong deshielding effect on the carbon atom to 
which it is attached. The fully decoupled I3C spectrum of nitroethane 
(Figure 4.31) has two signals, one at 6 70.75 and the other at 6 12.3. The 
methylene carbon (CH2) is strongly deshielded by the electron-with- 
drawing nitro group and appears at 6 70.75. This deshielding effect is not 
transmitted significantly through o-bonds, and we find the methyl group 
within the usual alkyl range at 6 12.3. You might like to consider what 
gives rise to the triplet (at 6 77.0). 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
93 
Figure4.31 75 MHz proton-decoupled I3C NMR spectrum of nitroethane, CH3CH2N02, and DEPT 135 spectrum (inset) in CDCI3 
Perhaps surprisingly, an electron-donating atom or group on a carbon 
atom also results in a decrease in electron density on that particular 
carbon atom and a shift of the signal to lower field. We can partly explain 
this effect in terms of the electronegativity of most electron-releasing 
groups, e.g. OR or NHR, and the carbon atom directly bonded to the 
heteroatom “feels” only this electron-withdrawing nature. For example, 
the methylene bonded to the N in ethylamine, CH3CH2NH2, gives rise 
to a signal at 6 36.7, while the corresponding carbon in ethanol, 
CH3CH20H, appears at 6 57.8. Both nitrogen and oxygen exert an 
electron-withdrawing effect on the attached sp’ hybridized carbon, 
causing deshielding of the signal, but oxygen, being more electronegative 
than nitrogen, has a stronger deshielding effect. The methyl groups of 
ethylamine and ethanol are less affected, and appear at 6 18.8 and 6 18.1, 
respectively. 
There are not many atoms or groups that lead to shielding of the 
attached carbon, but the nitrile (-C=N), ethynyl (acetylenic, -C_C-) and 
iodo (and to a lesser extent, bromo) groups do have this effect, so 
in propanenitrile (propionitrile), but- 1-yne and iodoethane we find the 
methylene carbon atom upfield relative to most other methylene groups 
(Table 4.1). In these compounds the shielding effect is possibly due to 
the large cloud of electrons on the substituent being close enough to 
lead to an increase in electron density and so in the shielding of the 
attached carbon. 

Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
- 
94 
Figure 4.32 Substituted 
alkenes and alkynes 
Table 4.1 
the methylene carbon is shielded 
I3C chemical shifts of methylene groups in substituted ethanes in which 
- 
~~ 
H 
Z 
\
I
 
,Cp=C, 
H-Cp=C,-Z 
\ 
H 
H 
CH&H2X 
Propanenitrile 
But- l-yne 
Brornoethane 
lodoethane 
X = CGN 
X=C=CH 
X = B r  
X = l  
6C 
10.9 
12.3 
27.9 
- 1.05 
Alkenes and Alkynes 
When we look at alkenes (sp2 hybridized) and alkynes (sp hybridized), we 
find that they are deshielded compared to alkane carbon atoms (sp3 
hybridized). Alkene carbons generally appear between 6 100-140, while 
alkyne carbons are found at 6 75-105; however, in both these systems the 
exact chemical shift depends upon the substituents present on the multiple 
bonds. Similar to the effects upon alkanes, both electron-withdrawing 
and -donating substituents (Z) directly attached to an alkenic or alkynic 
carbon (C,) lead to deshielding of that carbon signal, compared to that of 
ethene or ethyne (Figure 4.32). However, the chemical shift of the 
adjacent alkenic or alkynic carbon atom (C,) is affected differently by 
electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups. 
Electron-withdrawing groups, such as aldehydes and carboxylic acids, 
cause deshielding to both C, and C,, so that C, is usually more 
deshielded, while electron-donating groups cause deshielding of C, but 
shielding of Cp. 
If we look at the 13C spectrum (proton decoupled) of acrylic acid 
(propenoic acid) (Figure 4.33), we find three unique carbon signals at 
6 128.1, 133.15 and 172.0. We can easily identify the carboxyl carbon 
signal at 6 172.0 as it has a double bond to the highly electronegative 
oxygen; this leaves the two alkenic, C2 (or a) and C3 (or p), carbon 
signals, which appear at 6 128.1 and 6 133.15. The 0 atom, with its high 
electronegativity, polarizes the C=O bond so that the carbonyl carbon is 
electron deficient (6+). In a conjugated unsaturated system like this, the 
.n-bond of the C=C will be polarized by the presence of the electron- 
withdrawing carbonyl group so that C2 (C,) will have a slightly greater 
electron density than C3 (Cp). In summary, both C, and C, are deshielded 
due to the strong electron-withdrawing effect of the carboxyl group, but 
C ,  is more affected than C,. Such effects can be relayed along an extended 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
95 
conjugated system, with each double bond being polarized so that we 
obtain alternating 6+ and 6- carbon atoms. 
C3 
3
2
 
7 
C02H 
c2 
I 
Figure 4.33 
Proton-decoupled 75 MHz 13C NMR spectrum of acrylic acid in CDCI3 
An exactly opposite effect occurs in alkenes substituted by electron- 
donating groups, in which C, is deshielded and C, shielded. In general, 
both electron-withdrawing (EWG) and electron-donating groups (EDG) 
affect the electron density on C, and Cp of an alkene, with the effect 
usually being greater on Cp (Figure 4.34). 
Figure 4.34 The effect of elec- 
tron withdrawing (e.g. COR) and 
donating (e.g. OR) groups on the 
electron density of alkene carbon 
atoms 
Aromatic Systems 
Aromatic carbon atoms usually give rise to signals in the region 6 120- 
140, although the exact chemical shift is affected by the substituents 
on the ring (benzene itself has a 13C chemical shift of 6 128.3). 

96 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Atoms or groups that can withdraw electrons from (EWG) or donate 
electrons to the n-system (EDG) lead to different patterns of 
deshielding or shielding of the ring carbon atoms. The size of the 
shielding or deshielding effect depends upon the amount of electron 
donation or withdrawal by the attached group. As we have already 
seen with alkanes and alkenes, most substituents, whether electron 
donating or electron withdrawing, lead to some deshielding of the 
carbon to which they are attached (ipso). The more electronegative the 
attached atom, the more deshielded the substituted carbon atom. As 
before, the exceptions are -C-N, 
-C=CH, -Br and -1, which all have 
a shielding effect. 
We can predict whether the 2- (orrho), 3- (meta) and 4- (para) carbon 
atoms are shielded or deshielded by a particular substituent using the rule 
of thumb given in Box 4.15. 
We can understand these substituent effects better by considering the 
resonance forms possible for an aromatic system with an electron- 
withdrawing group (e.g. C=O) or an electron-donating group (e.g. OH) 
(Figure 4.35). We can see immediately from the resonance structures 
that the most significant effects are seen at the 2- (ortho) and 4- (para) 
positions, whether the substituent is electron donating or withdrawing 
and, in practice, the 3- (meta) carbon is rarely affected by more than a 
few ppm. 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
97 
Figure 4.35 
Resonance forms 
for aromatic molecules with 
C=O or OH groups 
In a manner analogous to that used previously to predict 'H chemical 
shifts in aromatic systems (Box 4.Q we can use substituent constants to 
estimate the 13C chemical shifts of a range of compounds, e.g. substituted 
aromatic compounds (Box 4.16). 

98 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Carbonyl Groups 
Carbonyl carbons, such as those in esters, carboxylic acids, amides, 
ketones and aldehydes, in which the sp2 carbon is bonded by a n-bond 
to the highly electronegative 0, have a characteristic chemical shift of 6 
160-220 (Box 4.13). Within this range, the sp2 carbon atoms of aldehydes 
and ketones are most deshielded and usually resonate at 6 185-220, while 
those of carboxylic acids and their derivatives resonate about 6 160-180. 

99 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
Some characteristic chemical shift ranges were given in Boxes 4.12- 
4.14. However, the exact chemical shift of a particular carbon atom can 
be affected by a range of factors, such as temperature and conformational 
restriction, so that chemical shift is not usually a key factor in the 
assignment of 13C NMR spectra. 
4.6.2 Coupling to 13C Nuclei 
13C exhibits coupling to other NMR-active nuclei, such as 'H and 2H (D), 
19F and 31P. The coupling arises in the same way as 'H-'H coupling, 
which we met earlier in Section 4.4.2, and you can use the same argu- 
ments to predict and explain the observed coupling to 13C. We can use 
the coupling from 13C to other atoms to help us in the interpretation 
of spectra. 

100 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Carbon-I 3 (' 3C-1 3C) Cou pl i n g 
I3C-l3C coupling is not usually observed in the spectra of organic 
molecules, as there is only about 0.01% chance (= 1.1% of 1.1%) of 
finding two 13C atoms adjacent to one other in the same molecule, and the 
resulting signal is too weak to be observed. Of course, if a sample is 
enriched in 13C, as would be found in a "C-labelled (enriched) 
compound, then 13C-'3C coupling is seen, and is usually of the order of 
40-180 Hz, with larger J values for unsaturated carbons atoms owing to 
the shorter bonds in these systems. 
Proton ('H-I3C) Coupling 
D e c o up le d Spectra 
The major coupling to carbon that can be detected in any organic molecule 
is the 'H-13C coupling, The presence of this coupling can complicate the 
C spectrum dramatically, so it is usually removed by irradiating over the 
entire proton frequency range while obtaining the carbon spectrum. This 
gives rise to the standard proton-decoupled I3C spectrum (often called 
broad-band decoupled spectrum), in which each non-equivalent carbon 
atom gives rise to a single peak. A further advantage of this irradiation of 
all the protons in the molecule is that the carbon spectrum benefits from 
the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) and the signal-to-noise ratio in the 
carbon spectrum is improved (by as much as 300%). Organic chemists 
most often request this type of I3C spectrum as it allows rapid assignment 
of the majority of the carbon signals, and we have already seen an example 
when we assigned the I3C spectrum of paracetamol (Figure 4.36). 
13 
Undecoupled and Off-resonance Spectra 
Sometimes the coupled I3C spectrum is useful in determining whether a 
carbon atom is a quaternary (no attached Hs), methine (CH), methylene 
(CH2) or methyl (CH3). Like 'H-'H coupling, 'H-I3C coupling follows 
the (n+ 1) rule, so that the carbon atom of a methyl group appears as a 
quartet, that of a methylene appears as a triplet, that of a methine appears 
as a doublet and quaternary carbons are seen as singlets. Such spectra are 
usually referred to as undecoupled spectra and 'Jew is usually of the order 
of 120-250 Hz, and is dependent upon the amount of unsaturation. 2JcH 
and 3JCH coupling constants are usually less than 20 Hz, except for 2J 
coupling from a carbonyl carbon to a vicinal hydrogen, -c( = 0)-C-H, 
which is about 30 Hz, and from C2 of a terminal alkyne to the terminal 
hydrogen atom, -c=C-H, which is about 50 Hz. 
Undecoupled spectra are rarely obtained since lJCH coupling constants 
are so large that very complex spectra can arise (made even more complex 
by 2JcH and even 3JCH). In order to simplify the spectra, partial decoupling 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
I01 
of the 'H-13C signals produces an off-resonance spectrum, in which only 
the 'JCH coupling is seen. These spectra require a reduced acquisition time 
compared to undecoupled spectra, but have limited usefulness as the outer 
peaks in multiplets are sometimes lost in the baseline noise, making it 
difficult to distinguish between quartets and doublets, triplets and singlets 
(Figure 4.3 7). 
OCH2CH2CHzCH-j 
OCH2CH2CH2CH-j 
0 
132 
131 
130 
ppm 
30 
25 
20 
PPm 
170 
160 
150 
140 
130 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
I 
70 
- 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
PPm 
I--*-*** 
I - 
170 
160 
150 
140 
130 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
ppm 
Figure 4.37 
(a) Off-resonance decoupled 125 MHz 13C spectrum of dibutyl phthalate in CDCI3; (b) proton decoupled 125 MHz 
13C spectrum of dibutyl phthalate in CDCI3 

102 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Deuteri urn (2H-'3C) Coup1 i ng 
Deuterium (2H, more commonly denoted D) has a spin ( I )  of 1 and 
D-'? 
coupling is a common feature of 13C NMR spectra (see Box 4.17 
for prediction of peak multiplicities), since they are normally obtained 
using CDC13 or DMSO-d6 as the solvent (see the peaks at 6 77.0 in 
Figure 4.37 and 6 40.5 in Figure 4.36, respectively). Deuterium has a 
natural abundance of 0.015%, so D-13C coupling is only really seen in 
D-labelled compounds and its decoupling is rarely necessary. The size of 
the D-13C coupling constant is about $ that of the corresponding 
H-13C coupling. 
Fluorine (19F-'3C) and Phosphorus (31P-13C) Coupling 
Both 19F and 3'P have 100% natural abundance and a spin ( I )  of %, 
meaning that, if present in a molecule, they will also give rise to 
coupling with I3C and 'H within the usual bond ranges. '.Icr is 
usually between 150-180 Hz for aliphatic compounds, while 2JCF and 
3.1cF are generally between 5 and 25 Hz. Slightly larger I9F-l3C 
couplings are found in aromatic systems ('JcF is about 250 Hz), 
which also exhibit longer range 19F-13C coupling, with 4JcF of the 
order of 3 Hz. 
Organophosphorus compounds rarely have more than one P atom in 
the molecule, giving rise to a doublet for any C atom within three bonds 
(assuming the proton-carbon coupling has been removed) and so these 
compounds show clearly the connectivity of carbon atoms close to the P 
atom. The size of the coupling constant is dependent on the number of 
bonds and the phosphorus oxidation state, such that ' J  is the largest at 
about 45-150 Hz, while 2J and ' J  are of the order of 10-15 Hz. 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
103 
4.6.3 13C Assignment Techniques 
As mentioned earlier, the irradiation of directly bonded hydrogen atoms 
increases the intensity of 13C signals through the NOE, which means that 
CH, CH2 and CH3 groups usually have a relatively high intensity in a 13C 
NMR spectrum, while we can often recognize quaternary carbon atoms 
because of their low intensity. This difference in intensity is due to the 
different relaxation rates, and is the reason we do not integrate 13C NMR 
spectra. 
There are many assignment techniques which can be run to aid 
interpretation and assignment of difficult 13C NMR spectra, with the 
most commonly used being: 
Distortionless Enhancement by Polarization Transfer (DEPT). 
Heteronuclear Multiple Quantum Correlation (HMQC). 
Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Correlation (HMBC). 
Used together, these spectra have revolutionized structure elucidation by 
helping organic chemists to deduce the connectivities of hydrogens to the 
corresponding carbon atoms. 
DEPT Spectra: Identifying Quaternary, Methine, Methylene and 
Methyl Carbons 
DEPT uses a pulse sequence that includes a delay between the excitation 
pulse and the detection of the emission signal from the carbon atoms 
which is related to the C-H coupling constant, in order to distinguish 
between the different types of carbon atom (we do not need to understand 
how this is achieved). 
As DEPT relies on the transfer of polarization from a directly bonded 
H atom to the carbon - resulting in the increased sensitivity of the carbon 
atoms - only I3C atoms that are attached to H atoms are detectable by 
this method, and so no quaternary carbon atoms are seen on DEPT 
spectra. Depending upon something called the pulse angle (which is 
expressed as a number after the acronym, but we do not need to know its 
significance), there are three different DEPT experiments that can be 
carried out on a particular sample. 
DEPT 135 gives positive signals (vertically up from the baseline) for 
methyl (CH,) and methine (CH) carbon atoms; niethylene (CH2) signals 
are negative and appear below the baseline. 

Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
- 
104 
DEt’T 00 only detects the methine carbons which are seen as positive 
signals. 
DEPT 45 is rarely used, as it is less differentiating, with all methine, 
methylene and methyl signals being positive. 
DEPT spectra are particularly useful in assigning aliphatic parts of 
molecules, where there may be methine, methylene and methyl groups 
all fairly close in chemical shift; they are also of great help when two 
carbon signals coincide, providing they are seen in opposite domains, 
e.g. the methyl and methylene signals in a DEPT 135 spectrum 
(Figure 4.38). 
Figure 4.38 
75 MHz 13C DEPT 135 spectrum of methyl a-glucopyranoside in DMSO-d6 
Two-dimensional COSY 
There are several variations of correlation spectroscopy, all giving rise 
to different, complementary data. We have already met HH (homo- 
nuclear) COSY earlier in this chapter (Section 4.5). An obvious 
extension to the COSY experiment is to use it for heteronuclear 
correlation, e.g. correlation of all the ‘H and 13C signals in a molecule 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
105 
so that we can determine which 'H is attached to which 13C. The CH 
COSY technique does this, and correlates the 13C chemical shifts on 
one axis (usually the y-axis) with the 'H shifts on the other (usually 
the x-axis) through the one-bond ('4 CH coupling. In the CH COSY 
spectrum, each IH-"C 
pair gives a single cross-peak in the spectrum. 
The pulse sequence employed (which again we do not need to 
understand) leads to polarization transfer from the 'H to the I3C, 
leading to an increase in the 13C sensitivity, but, since this technique 
involves detection of the carbon nuclei, it requires large amounts of 
sample and is rather time consuming. 
Similar spectra can be obtained more rapidly and with less sample 
if the data are acquired through the proton signals, which are much 
more intense. Basically, the 'H NMR data are acquired and the 
'H-"C 
coupling constant used as the delay in a pulse sequence, 
which enables us to obtain the carbon spectrum. This method of 
obtaining the data is called "inverse-modc", since the carbon atoms 
are detected through their attached hydrogen atoms rather than by 
direct detection, with obvious benefits in the sensitivity and the time 
taken to obtain a spectrum. HMQC and HMBC are both examples 
of "inverse-mode" spectra and this method is so much quicker than 
CH COSY that an entire HMQC spectrum can be obtained in 
much less time than it takes to obtain the proton-decoupled 13C 
spectrum. 
HMQC Spectra 
Like COSY spectra, the HMQC experiment gives rise to a two- 
dimensional spectrum that shows the correlation between a carbon 
atom and the attached proton(s), i.e. it shows lJCH coupling. The 
carbon signals are detected through the low-intensity satellite signals 
(due to 'H-I3C coupling) in the proton spectrum, which enables the 
chemical shift of the coupled carbon to be extrapolated. Since the 
carbon atoms are detected through the attached protons, quaternary 
carbons are again not detected in this experiment. The proton 
spectrum is usually plotted along the x-axis for reference and the 
carbon chemical shifts are usually plotted along the y-axis (the 13C 
spectrum is often not plotted). The carbon-proton correlations show 
as contours (cross-peaks) at the intersection of each of the signals 
(Figure 4.39). One major advantage of this technique is that, since the 
13C spectrum is spread over 200 ppm, even overlapping 'H signals are 

106 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
separated when correlated with the 13C dimension, as shown for the 
multiplets in Figure 4.39. 
Figure 4.39 HMQC 
['J('H-13C)] spectrum of dibutyl 
phthalate in CDCl3 
The application of this technique can be seen in Figure 4.40, in which 
the HMQC spectrum of paracetaniol is shown. In this spectrum, all the 
carbon atoms with directly attached protons are immediately assignable: 
the methyl carbon can be assigned to the signal at 6 24.6, C2 and C6 to 
that at 6 115.9, and C3 and C5 to that at 6 121.7. Using this method, we 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
107 
have confirmed our earlier assignments and can be fairly certain of their 
accuracy. 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
I
-
 
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
 ppm 
HMBC Spectra 
Sometimes, however, the exact arrangement of the carbon atoms is 
not immediately clear from the standard spectra and, of course, we 
cannot identify the quaternary carbon atoms from an HMQC 
spectrum. In these cases, further information is required about atom 
connectivities, and as I3C is so low in natural abundance, a I3C-l3C 
correlation experiment is not realistically possible with unlabelled 
compounds. It is possible, however, to detect 'H-13C couplings over 
two bonds (giving rise to 2JcH coupling) and even three bonds (3JcH 
coupling); in certain molecules, 4 J c H  coupling can even be seen 
(usually in unsaturated systems). The experiment which detects this 
longer range 'H-I3C coupling, and once again converts it into a 
correlation map, is called heteronuclear multiple bond correlation. 
HMBC spectra are also two-dimensional "inverse mode" spectra and 
they show the connectivities of carbon atoms through their 2JcH and 
3JcH coupling. Once again, the correlations are represented by 
contours at the intersection of the appropriate H and C signals on 
the 2D spectrum (Figure 4.41). 
Figure 4.40 HMQC 
['J(1H-13C)] NMR spectrum of 
paracetamol in DMSO-d6 

Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
- 
108 
0 
I I .  
1 
~oppmppm 
.I 
I 
I I 
5
4
3
 2
1
 
Figure 4.41 
HMBC [2J(’H-13C) and 3J(1H-13C)] spectrum of dibutyl phthalate in CDCl3 
Using HMBC, the longer range connectivities are detected from a 
particular H to the carbon atom(s) either two bonds away (H-C-C: 2J 
coupling) or three bonds away (H-C-C-c: 
‘J coupling), so that, 
indirectly, the carbon-carbon connectivities can be deduced and a map 
can be generated of the carbon and hydrogen connectivities. 
When HMBC spectra are used in conjunction with HH COSY spectra, 
the 2JcH 
couplings can be identified in the HMBC spectrum because the 
vicinal hydrogen atoms can be identified from the COSY spectrum and 
related to their attached carbon atoms. 
If we return to paracetamol to examine the HMBC spectrum, we can 
see how useful this experiment is. Remember, the HMBC spectrum shows 
2J and ‘J CH coupling. This means that a cross-peak vertically below a 
proton signal indicates that the proton is two or three bonds away from 
the carbon atom to which that signal corresponds. 
When the structure of the compound under investigation is known, or 
at least suspected, the interpretation process can be aided by devising a 
table of expected *J and 3J CH coupling. We can then compare the 
expected cross-peaks to the observed peaks to confirm, or otherwise, the 
structure. Such a table for paracetamol would appear as in Table 4.2. 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
109 
Table 4.2 Expected *J and ’ J  CH correlations for paracetarnola 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
H (6) 
NH (9.66) 
OH (9.14) 
3/5 (7.34) 
2/6 (6.69) 
CH3 (1.99) 
c (6) 
* 
* 
0 
(*I 
8 (24.6) 
2/6 (1 15.9) 
4(131.9) 
0 
* 
1 (154.0) 
0 
* 
0 
7 (167.4) 
0 
3/5(121.7) 
* 
(*) 
0 
a 
represents an expected 2J(’H-’3C) correlation and * a 3J(’H-’3C) correlation; (*) 
represents a possible ’J(’H-’’C) 
correlation from H2 to C6 or from H3 to C5, etc. 

110 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
4.7 
Other Nuclei 
We have seen earlier in this chapter that certain nuclei, other than carbon 
and hydrogen, also have nuclear spin and are NMR-active. The fact that 
there are other NMR-active nuclei leads to the question: can we run 
spectra specifically to see these other nuclei? The answer is yes. In Table 
4.2 we can see which nuclei have spin and are NMR-active so that, in 
theory, the NMR spectrum of any of these nuclei can be recorded. The 
nuclei of greatest interest to organic chemists, besides 'H and 13C, are 14N 
(and 15N), I7O, 19F and 31P. Nuclei with 100% abundance, I9F and 31P, 
present little problem to the NMR spectroscopist and recording the 
NMR of these nuclei is fairly routine. 
Although you would expect deuterium (D) NMR to be every bit as 
useful as 'H NMR, it is not carried out routinely as deuterium has a 
natural abundance of 0.01 5% and very low sensitivity. Furthermore, as 
the spin is greater than %, it is a quadrupolar nucleus and the signals are 
usually broad. Deuterium shows signals in the same chemical shift range 
as 'H (6 0-12), and NMR is most often used in experiments using 
D-labelled compounds to investigate reaction mechanisms. 
Although 14N is 99.6% abundant and has spin I= 1, it too is a 
quadrupolar nucleus and this again causes severe line broadening, which 
makes the signals difficult to observe clearly. 15N and 1 7 0  are relatively 

111 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
low in abundance and of even lower sensitivity than I3C, so these NMR 
experiments are reserved for special applications. 
4.8 
Liquid Chromatography NMR 
LC-5 M K combines high-performance liquid chromatography with an 
NMR detector, with a key feature being the replacement of the 
aqueous part of the LC mobile phase with D20, while using a fully 
protonated organic component such as methanol (CH30H) or 
acetonitrile (CH3CN). LC-NMR requires some means of continuously 
introducing the LC mobile phase into the NMR spectrometer until the 
LC peak of interest has eluted from the column. The normal NMR 
probe is, therefore, replaced by a probe containing a flow cell, the 
volume of which ranges between 50 and 400 pL, and a stopped-flow 
technique is employed, which involves using a UV detector (or any 
other form of detector) to trigger the LC pump to stop at the exact 
moment the LC peak reaches the flow cell. Once the flow has been 
stopped with the peak of interest in the flow cell, any of a number of 
different NMR experiments can then be carried out on the sample, e.g. 
HH COSY. 
In an LC-NMR probe the sample coil is much closer to the sample 
and the limit of detection is therefore decreased from the milligram 
(mg) to the microgram (pg) scale. In conjunction with being able to 
obtain a large number of scans on the sample stopped in the flow cell, 
one of the inherent disadvantages of NMR (i.4. poor signal-to-noise) 
is thus partially overcome. Another way of further enhancing the 
signal-to-noise ratio is to cool the NMR probe to a very low 
temperature. 
As D20 is used as one of the solvents, we observe a large HOD 
peak due to exchange with any water remaining in the mobile phase 
(Figure 4.43). Coupled with this HOD peak is the even larger signal 
associated with the organic solvent, which must be suppressed by 
irradiating the solvent signal with low-level continuous radiation 
before data acquisition is undertaken. Thus, as in decoupling, the 
energy levels of the solvent signals are saturated and they are reduced 
to a level where their effect on the signal-to-noise ratio of the NMR 
spectrum is greatly reduced. One drawback, however, is that any 
sample signals that happen to occur at the same chemical shift as the 
solvent peaks are not observed in the spectrum. It is possible, under 
these circumstances, to change solvent system and thus move the 
solvent peaks, and the irradiation frequency, to a different chemical 
shift. 

Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
- 
112 
- 
I 
l
~
l
-
l
'
l
m
l
~
l
'
l
~
l
'
l
~
l
 
Ppm 
7.4 
7.2 
7.0 
6.8 
46 
64 
6.2 
6.0 
1 
k 
Figure4.43 500 MHz 'H LC-NMR spectrum of approximately 3 pg of prednisolone 21-acetate in D20/CH3CN/0. 1 % HC02H, with 
solvent suppression at 6 1.90 (CH,CN) and 84.16 (residual water). The peak at 6 8.05 is due to HC02H. The aliphatic protons are 
masked by the acetonitrile peak, but the methylene and alkene protons (highlighted in bold) can be seen in the range 6 4.5-7.5 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
113 

114 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
115 

116 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
117 

118 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
I19 

Mass Spectrometry 
5.1 
Instrumentation 
Mass spectrometry is the technique most commonly used to measure the 
mass of molecules (usually organic molecules, including biomolecules), 
and can therefore help to characterize a particular molecule or to identify 
an unknown. Mass spectrometry can also be used to generate information 
about the structure of a molecule. 
In order to generate a mass spectrum, which is a plot of intensity against 
mass-to-charge ratio (m/:), 
the sample must first be vaporized and 
ionized, then sorted by mass-to-charge ratio and finally detected. We can, 
120 

Mass Spectrometry 
121 
therefore, break the process of mass spectrometry down into three stages: 
ion generation, mass analysis and ion detection. 
5.1.1 Ion Generation 
An ion source, as the name suggests, is the part of the mass spectrometer 
where the “gas phase ions” are generated. All of the various ion 
generation techniques that are available to us have one feature in 
common: they both vaporize and ionize our analyte molecules. In most 
cases, the vaporization stage occurs first, but with some techniques the 
ionization stage occurs first. The most commonly employed techniques 
are discussed in Section 5.2. 
5.1.2 Mass Analysis 
Once ionized, the analyte ions are separated by their interaction with an 
electric or magnetic field in a high vacuum (usually - lop4- 
N mP2, 
which is 10-9-10-’2 bar) in order to minimize the interaction of the 
gaseous analyte ions with molecules in the air. In some cases, the mass 
analysis process can be made to produce data with high mass accuracy. 
The various options for the process of mass analysis are discussed 
in Section 5.4. 
5.1.3 Ion Detection 
The final part of the mass spectrometer is the ion detector, for which there 
are many options; however, discussion of the technical details of the 
various ion detection methods is beyond the scope of this text. 
5.2 
Vaporization and Ionization Processes 
There are a number of vaporization and ionization processes that can be 
employed, but we will deal only with the most common techniques. 
Tn most cases the vaporization process occurs before the ionization 
takes place; however, there is one notable exception to this: electro- 
spray ionization. 
The techniques we will discuss are electron impact (EI) and chemical 
ionization (CI), fast atom bombardment (FAB), matrix assisted laser 
desorption ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI). Other 
techniques, such as field desorption (FD) and secondary ion mass 

122 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
spectrometry (SIMS), have their uses, but will not be discussed here, 
owing to our limit on space. 
5.2.1 Ionization Techniques 
Why would we choose one ionization technique over another? Well, 
each technique has a range of substrate (analyte) types and relative 
molecular masses for which it is best suited (as illustrated in 
Figure 5.1). 
Very polar I
t 
3 
2 
.- 
4 
a 
0 a 
CA 
d 
2 
Non-polar 
FAB 
ESI 
Figure 5.1 Applications for 
common ionization techniques 
Electron Impact 
-1000 
-2000 
-6000 
- 100,000 
-500,000 
Molccular weight 
Electron impact (El) is a relatively harsh technique and involves a 
sample being volatilized into the gas phase by heating in a vacuum, then 
bombarded by a stream of electrons in order to cause ionization of the 
sample. These electrons are generated by a metallic filament and 
accelerated through a potential difference such that they have a typical 
energy of 70 eV ( 6 . 7 5 ~  
10' kJ mol-'), and their impact on the gaseous 
sample molecules results in the ionization of these molecules, as shown 
in Figure 5.2. Now the first thing we might expect is that negatively 
charged electrons will lead to a negatively charged ion (an anion). 
This is not the case, as the electrons are moving too rapidly to be 
captured by the molecule (the molecule would also have to contain 
groups capable of capturing an electron), and when they impact with 
the molecule they actually knock an electron out of the molecule 
(Figure 5.3), resulting in a cation radical (a positively charged ion with 
an unpaired electron). 

Mass Spectrometry 
123 
Figure 5.2 
Diagram of an El 
source 
The electron lost will be one of the least tightly bound in the molecule, 
i.e. one of the electrons in the highest occupied molecular orbital 
(HOMO), and, in general, the order of ease with which electrons are lost 
upon ET is: 
lone pair > n-bonded pair > o-bonded pair 
We said earlier that EI is a relatively harsh technique and we will now see 
why. The amount of energy required to remove an electron from a 
molecule (which depends upon what type of orbital the electron occupies) 
is approximately 7 eV (675 kJ mol-I), so that the electrons employed in 
EI have ten times the energy required to do the job, Some of this excess 
energy is imparted to the molecule and results in an excess of vibrational 
energy and the fragmentation (breaking up) of the molecular ion (see 
Section 5.3). In some cases, the extent of fragmentation results in the 
absence of the molecular ion. 
Chemical Ionization 
M + e- - 
M+' + 2e- 
Figure 5.3 El process 
Chemical ionization (CI) is closely related to electron impact, as it also 
uses a stream of electrons in the ionization process. In this case, however, 
it is not the sample molecules which are ionized, but a reagent gas, usually 
ammonia or methane, which is present at a much higher concentration. 

124 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Scheme 5.1 CI processes 
Once again, the sample must be volatilized by heating in a vacuum, but the 
main difference between CI and EI is that in CI the sample is ionized by a 
strong acid produced by the ionization of the reagent gas (Scheme 5.1). 
electron impact 
(a) CH4 
* CH4+' + 2e- 
(b) CH4" + CH4 
'CHS + 'CH3 
(c) 'CHS + M 
* 'MH + CH4 
electron impact 
NH3 
* NH3" + 2e- 
NH3''+ 
NH3 
* 'NH4 + 'NH2 
+NH4 + M . 
+MH + NH3 
As we can see in Scheme 5.1, the electron impact on the reagent gas 
(methane or ammonia) leads to a molecular ion, CH4+' (Scheme 5.1 a), 
which reacts with the CH4 reagent gas to give a strong acid, CH5+, and a 
radical, CH3' (Scheme 5.1 b). It is this strong acid (CH5+) which ionizes 
the sample by protonation (Scheme 5.1~). 
As mentioned above, the two most commonly used reagent gases are 
ammonia (NH3) and methane (CH,). Chemical ionization generally 
results in the production of an [M + 1 ]+ion with little excess energy, and 
so fragmentation is less evident than in ET. The acid formed from 
ammonia (NH4+) is not as strong as that from methane (CH5'), so that, 
in cases where the sample is ionized by the ammonium ion (NH4+), this 
process is less energetically favourable than the corresponding process 
with the carbonium ion (CH5+) and, therefore, less fragmentation 
usually accompanies the use of ammonia as the reagent gas. 
Chemical ionization, unlike electron impact, is also capable of 
producing negatively charged ions. EI does not produce anions because 
the kinetic energy (and so the velocity) of the electrons is too great for 
them to be captured by a molecule. We can liken this process to trying to 
catch a tennis serve whilst cycling - a very difficult (some might say, 
impossible) task. If, however, the ball is moving at a much slower speed, 
such as, for example, a tennis ball thrown to a cyclist, then the task 
becomes easier. In chemical ionization, owing to the presence of relatively 
high concentrations of the reagent gas, collisions are much more likely 
between electrons and the reagent gas, thereby reducing the speed of the 
electrons and making them more likely to be captured by the molecule, so 
giving an anion (Scheme 5.2). Alternatively, a reagent gas anion, e.g. X-, 
may be produced in the source, and this can remove a proton from the 
sample, also leading to the formation of an anion (Scheme 5.2). 

Mass Spectrometry 
125 
Fast Atom Bombardment 
We will now concentrate upon some “soft” ionization methods - so 
called because they give rise mainly to the peak associated with the 
molecular ion and very little fragmentation. Another benefit of these 
techniques is that, unlike both EI and CI, they do not require the sample 
to be volatile and so permit the analysis of biomolecules, which are 
generally large, sensitive and polar. 
Mass spectrometry has been revolutionalized by the advent of electro- 
spray ionization, but, before we concentrate on this relatively recent 
addition to the array of ionization methods, we will first discuss two other 
techniques which are routinely used for the ionization of biomolecules: 
matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) and fast atom 
bombardment (FAB). These techniques share common features in that: 
The analyte (sample being analysed) is dissolved in a low-freezing- 
point matrix, which not only keeps the analyte in solution in the high 
vacuum ion source, but also assists in the vaporization and ionization 
processes. 
The solution is given a large pulse of energy, either from a beam of 
fast moving atoms (FAB) or from a laser (MALDI). 
Fast atom bombardment (FAB), as the name implies, involves bombarding 
a solution of the analyte in a matrix (most usually propane-1,2,3-trio17 
propane- 172,3-trithiol, 2-nitrobenzyl 
alcohol 
or 
triethanolamine, 
Figure 5.4) with a beam of fast moving atoms, generally xenon atoms 
with energy in the range 6-9 keV (580-870 kJ mol-’). 
OH 
OH OH 
SH 
SH 
SH 
I
l
l
 
I
l
l
 
CH2-CH-CH2 
CH2-CH-CH2 
Propane- 1,2,3-triol 
Propane- 1,2,3-trithiol 
(Glycerol) 
(Thiogly cerol) 
HOCH2CH2, 
,CH2CH20H 
N 
2-Nitrobenzyl alcohol 
I 
CH2CH20H 
Triethanolamine 
Scheme 5.2 Formation of 
anions by CI 
Figure 5.4 Structures of FAB 
matrices 

126 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
COzH 
I 
2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid 
C02H 
N 
Nicotinic acid 
This bombardment results in the transfer of energy from the Xe atoms 
to the matrix, leading to the breaking of intermolecular bonds and the 
desorption of the analyte (usually as an ion) into the gas phase. Unlike EI, 
FAB can also be used to generate negatively charged ions. 
FAB has been widely used for the ionization of large polar mole- 
cules and generally gives [M + l]+peaks (corresponding to the 
MH+ion) with little fragmentation. In negative ion mode the most 
abundant peaks obtained are the [M - 11- peaks, corresponding to 
[M-HI-. A feature of FAB spectra is the peaks which correspond to 
protonated (or deprotonated) clusters of the matrix. For example, if 
propane-1,2,3-triol is used as the matrix, then peaks would be obtained 
for its protonated oligomers, [(HOCH,CHOHCH,OH),,H] + , at rn/z 
values of 93 (for n = l), 185 (for n =2), etc. In addition, some minor, 
and useful, fragmentation is sometimes observed as a result of FAB 
ionization. 
Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization 
As stated earlier, matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI ) is 
similar in principle to FAB except that in this case the energy is 
transferred to the matrix from a laser beam and the matrix employed 
must therefore have a chromophore which absorbs at the wavelength of 
the laser. Common matrices employed in MALDI are aromatic or 
heterocyclic carboxylic acids, such as 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid and 
nicotinic acid (Figure 5.5). The matrix absorbs a pulse of energy from the 
laser beam and undergoes rapid heating, which ultimately leads to the 
vaporization and ionization of the analyte molecules. Once again, peaks 
corresponding to matrix cluster ions are obtained along with the usual 
MH +peaks for the molecule under investigation. 
Figure 5.5 Common MALDI 
matrices 
E I ect rospray I on izat ion 
Electrospray ionization (ESI) was first employed more than 20 years ago, 
but it is fairly recently that it became a routine technique for the “soft” 
ionization of a wide range of polar analytes, including biomolecules. 
For this technique, the analyte is usually dissolved in a mixture of an 
organic solvent (most commonly acetonitrile or methanol) and water 
with a pH modifier [e.g. formic (methanoic) or acetic (ethanoic) acid 
for positive ion mode]. The presence of the pH modifier ensures that 
ionization takes place in the solution state. This is the only common 
case where ionization occurs before ion vaporization; the exact 
mechanism of the vaporization (Figure 5.6) is still not clearly under- 
stood in EST. 

Mass Spectrometry 
127 
Figure 5.6 Schematic diagram 
of an electrospray source 
Because ionization has taken place in the solution state by protonation 
or deprotonation of the analyte (depending upon the pH modifier used), 
the molecular species detected is almost exclusively [M + H]+in positive 
ion mode and [M-HI- in negative ion mode, and both these species 
undergo very little fragmentation. Since the solvent mixtures employed in 
EST are those commonly used in reverse phase liquid chromatography, 
ESI is frequently combined with LC to give liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis (see Section 5.6). One further advantage 
of ESI is that it often gives multiply charged ions for large molecules with 
many ionizable functional groups. This has the advantage of lowering the 
m/z ratio and thereby allowing the determination of the masses of large 
molecules without the need for a detector that has a large mass range. 
One disadvantage of ESI is that it is very sensitive to contaminants 
in the solvents, particularly alkali metals, and we often see ions which 
correspond to [M + Na] +or [M + NH4] + . These peaks, however, can 
often be useful in accurate mass determination (see Section 5.5) using ESI. 
Atmospheric Pressu re C hem i cal I on ization 
The advent of atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) is a 
relatively recent development, in which the same processes occur as in CI, 
outlined previously, but at atmospheric pressure. By a very similar 
mechanism to CI, the reagent gas (water) becomes protonated and can act 
as an acid towards the analyte, leading to the addition of a proton. Once 
again the species formed in positive ion mode is [M + HI + . In the case of 
negative ion mode, the reagent gas acts as a base towards the analyte, and 
deprotonation occurs leading to the formation of [M-HI-. Once ions 
have been formed, they are funnelled towards the analyser inlet of the 
MS instrument by the use of electric potentials. APCI is also employed in 
LC-MS systems (see Section 5.6). 

128 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
5.3 
Fragmentation Processes 
As we mentioned earlier, the main aim of mass spectrometry is to obtain 
a peak for the molecular ion, Mf*, since this can be used to confirm, 
or to obtain the relative molecular mass. Using EI or CI it is often the 
case that we obtain peaks for additional ions with smaller masses 
(or, more correctly, smaller mass to charge ratio, m/z), produced by the 
fragmentation of the molecular ion, and that these fragment ions 
dominate the mass spectrum. As discussed in Section 5.2.1, the nature of 
these ionization processes means that the molecular ion is often produced 
in an excited state, with excess vibrational energy, and this leads to 
fragmentation of the weakest bonds in the molecule. In general, there is a 
lower degree of fragmentation when using CI than with EI, while ESI and 
FAB are comparatively "soft" ionization techniques and generally give 
rise to molecular ions only. 
The cation radical of the molecular ion can fragment to give 
daughter ions via the loss of either a radical or a neutral molecule 
(Scheme 5.3). The process does not have to stop here, and both 
B+and C+* can also fragment further, so that the peaks for ions with 
even smaller masses can arise from the fragmentation of either the 
parent or daughter ion. 
I 
Scheme 5.3 Fragmentation of 
the molecular cation radical 
Scheme 5.4 
The fragmenta- 
tion of hexane 
B+ + 
X' 
/(cation) 
(radical) 
W+'I , 
(molecular 
ion) 
C+' + 
Y 
(cation 
(neutral 
radical) molecule) 
We will now look at some of the most common fragmentation 
processes, starting with the fragmentation of alkanes, e.g. hexane, Cf,HI4 
(Scheme 5.4). 
CH3 -CH3 
. 
EI 
[CH3-cH3 
I" 
I 

Mass Spectrometry 
129 
For an alkane, the ionization process will involve the loss of an 
electron from a 0-bond, as shown in Scheme 5.4 for the loss of an elec- 
tron from the central C-C bond of hexane (the loss of an electron 
from all of the a-bonds in this molecule is almost equally probable, so a 
large number of fragments can be produced; Scheme 5.5). 
+ 'CHzCH2CH3 
+ 'CH~CH~CHZCH~ 
+ *CH2(CH2)3CH3 
In the EI MS of hexane, then, we would expect to see the molecular 
ion, m/z 86, as well as ions due to the fragmentation of each bond 
(Figure 5.7). 
'0°1 
57 
29 
43 
II 
i 
v & F v d T d  
. I 0  
~ 20 . 30 40 . 50 60 70 80 w'z 
This series of daughter ions differing in their mass by 14 is 
characteristic of the straight-chain alkanes (homologous series differing 
by a CH2 group). 
Fragmentations that give rise to stable carbocations will be parti- 
cularly favoured (Box 5.1). The order of carbocation stability is 
shown in Figure 5.8 and is related to the reduction in the positive 
Scheme 5.5 Alternative frag- 
mentation pathways for hexane 
Figure 5.7 
El MS of hexane 

130 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
charge on any carbon atom through electron donation (with the 
more electron-donating alkyl groups, the smaller the positive charge) 
or delocalization through resonance (in which case the positive 
charge is “spread out” over the molecule, with the more resonance 
forms the better). 
Tertiary > benzyl, 
ally1 > secondary > primary > CH,’ 
‘CH2 
I 
Figure 5.8 Order of 
carbocation stability 
One particularly stable carbocation is the tropylium ion. The tropylium 
ion is formed by loss of a leaving group from 7-substituted cyclohepta- 
1,3,5-trienes. The carbocation formed is cyclic, planar and has six 
n-electrons in the bonding IT molecular orbitals, i.e. it is aromatic. In 
fact, this ion is so stable that a hydride ion can be lost from cyclohepta- 
1,3,5-triene with relative ease (Scheme 5.6). 

Mass Spectrometry 
131 
Benzyl carbocation 
Tropylium ion 
4
3
 
i Cyclohepta- 1,3,5-triene 
of the benzyl cation to the 
H 
t 
- 
- 
Scheme 5.6 Resonance 
stabilization of the tropylium ion 
H 
You will not be surprised, then, to learn that the tropylium ion is the 
major peak found in the MS of 7-substituted cyclohepta- 1,3,5-trienes, 
but you may be surprised to find that the benzyl carbocation rearranges 
to the tropylium ion under MS conditions (Scheme 5.7). 
H 
$i 
L 
Scheme 5.7 
Rearrangement 
How we can be sure that this is happening, when both ions appear in 
the MS at m/z 91? This debate can be settled using carbon (13C) labelling 
of the benzylic CH2 atom. If the benzyl cation remains unaltered, 
subsequent fragmentation will lead to the loss of a labelled 13CH2+ unit of 
m/z 15 (1 3 + 2), but if the benzyl cation undergoes rearrangement to give 
the tropylium ion, the labelled carbon will become identical to the other 
carbon atoms in the ring and there will be a 1 in 7 chance of finding a 
labelled “CH+unit of m/z 14 (13 + 1) during subsequent fragmentations. 
A qualitative judgement can be made by comparing the MS of the 
tropylium and benzyl cations, generated from tropylium hexafluoro- 
phosphate and benzyl bromide, respectively, as shown in Figure 5.9. 

132 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
w 
120 
130 
63 
1 00 
% 
0 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
150 
160 
170 
180 d z  
Figure 5.9 The El mass spectra of (a) tropylium hexafluorophosphate and (b) benzyl bromide 
Scheme 5.9 Cleavage of the 
a,P-bond adjacent to a 
heteroatom 
As we can see, the MS fragmentation patterns are very similar and 
support the common cation theory [note that the ions at nz/z 79 and 8 I in 
Figure 5.9(b) are probably due to Br+ ; see Section 5.5.11. 
Other stable carbocations are those with an adjacent heteroatom, c.g. 
oxygen, which can stabilize the cation through resonance (Scheme 5.8). 
For molecules containing heteroatoms (0, N, C1, Br, etc.), a very 
common fragmentation is the cleavage of the a, P-bond (often referred to 
as cleavage p to the heteroatom). In such molecules, the lone pairs on the 
heteroatom will be the least tightly bound in the molecule, and it will be 
one of these electrons which is lost upon electron impact (Scheme 5.9), 
leading to cleavage P to the heteroatom. 
Some examples of cleavage p to a heteroatom are shown in the 
following figures. Figure 5.10 shows the ET MS of benzaldehyde (C7H60), 
which, in common with other aldehydes, loses H+due to P-cleavage, so 
we see the M + *  peak at m/z 106 and the [M-l]+peak at m / z  105 as the 
major peaks. The benzoyl cation is particularly stable owing to extensive 

Mass Spectrometry 
133 
electron resonance (Scheme 5.10), a fact that is reflected by the intensity 
of the peak due to this fragment. 
51 
77 
105 
Figure 5.11 shows the EI MS of 4'-hydroxyacetophenone (CgH802), 
with the expected M f *  peak at m/z 136. 
0 
II 
40 
60 
Figure 5.10 The El MS of 
benzaldehyde 
Scheme 5.10 Resonance 
stabilization of the benzoyl cation 
Figure 5.11 
4'-hydroxyacetophenone 
The El MS of 

134 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
1 
This compound can undergo P-cleavage in two different ways: to lose 
either the methyl group or the 4-hydroxyphenyl group (Scheme 5.1 l), and 
we can see peaks for both of the possible P-cleavage products in Figure 
5.1 1: [M-CH,]+at m/z 121 and [M-C6H40H]+at m/z 43. 
27 
1 00 
CH~CH~CHZCH~CI 
% 
0 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
9 5 d z  
Scheme 5.1 1 
vage pathways for 4'-hydroxy- 
acetop henone 
The two p-clea- 
HO 
+ 
[M - C6H40H]+ 
Figure 5.12 The El MS of I-chlorobutane 

Mass Spectrometry 
135 
Scheme 5.12 
p-Cleavage of a 
chloroal kane 
However, P-cleavage is not very common for haloalkanes, which tend 
not to form ions that have a positively charged halogen. Loss of halide 
radical is usually more common, and most haloalkanes give a major 
fragment of [M-X]+'; none of the expected P-cleavage peaks are 
observed. For haloalkanes such as 1-chlorobutane, which can form a 
cyclic ion, the major peak is due to loss of HCI by a two-step 
fragmentation, as shown in Scheme 5.13. The cyclic ion is also often 
observed in the mass spectrum (in this case formed by the loss of H to 
give the very small peaks at m/z 91 and 93). 
Scheme 5.13 Loss of hydro- 
gen and chlorine radicals from 
1 -chlorobutane 
You may have already come across the importance of six-membered 
ring transition states in organic chemistry, e.g. in the decarboxylation of 
P-keto acids (Scheme 5.14). 
Scheme 5.14 The decarboxyl- 
ation of B-keto acids 
Two other important fragmentations in MS also involve cyclic six- 
membered transition states: (i) the McLafferty rearrangement and (ii) the 
retro-Diels-Alder reaction. 
The McLafferty rearrangement is shown in Scheme 5.15. As an 
example, the peak at m/z 72 in the EI MS of heptan-3-one (representing 
a loss of 42 from the molecular ion, Mt*, m/z 114) (Figure 5.13) is 
formed, which is common in carbonyl compounds such as esters and 
ketones that have a hydrogen atom on the y-carbon to the carbonyl. 

136 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Scheme 5.15 The McLafferty 
rearrangement 
1 
57 
100 
% 
Figure 5.13 The El MS of 
heptan-3-one 
Scheme 5.16 The McLafferty 
rearrangement of heptan-3-one 

137 
Mass Spectrometry 
The Diels-Alder reaction results in a [4n: + 2x1 cycloaddition to give a 
six-membered ring. The reverse process, the retro-Diels- Alder fragmen- 
tation, results in ring opening, and is also common in the MS of six- 
membered rings containing a double bond (Scheme 5.17). 
Scheme 5.17 The retro-Diels- 
Alder fragmentation 
For example, the peak at rn/z 104 in the EI MS of benzo[c]pyran 
(M + *  m/z 134, Figure 5.14), representing a loss of 30 mass units (CHZO), 
is formed by the retro-Diels-Alder ring opening of the pyran ring 
(Scheme 5.18). 
Figure 5.14 The El MS of benzo[c]pyran (isochroman) 
Scheme 5.18 The retro-Diels- 
Alder fragmentation of benzo[c]- 
PY ran 

138 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
P-Cleavage next to the ester carbonyl is promoted by the ortho 
hydroxyl group, through a six-membered ring (Scheme 5.19). The radical 
cation produced, with m/z 120, is resonance stabilized and is observed as a 
major fragment in the ET MS. 
Having generated the molecular ion (and, of course, any daughter ions 
which have arisen due to its fragmentation, as discussed in Section 5.3), 
the next step is the analysis of all the ions present. In order to do this, the 
ions are generally ejected from the ion source, by repulsion or attraction, 
into a mass analyser. As with the ionization process, there are a number 
of means of analysing the mass of ions, and we will again look only at 
those which are most commonly employed. We will not consider the 
detection of ions, since this is mainly electronics, and will concentrate 
purely on how the ion output from the ion source is analysed to give 
ultimately the mass spectrum in the form we are familiar with. 
Since most mass spectrometers can usually utilize a range of ionization 
methods, the ion mass analysis methods generally characterize the type 

Mass Spectrometry 
139 
of instrument. The most common are: 
Magnetic sector mass spectrometers (and double-focusing mass 
Quadrupole mass filters. 
Ion trap mass spectrometers. 
Time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometers. 
spectrometers) . 
Ion cyclotron resonance-Fourier transform (ICR-FT) mass spectro- 
meters. 
5.4.1 Magnetic Sector Mass Spectrometers (and Double 
Focusing Mass Spectrometers) 
The very first mass spectrometers were magnetic sector instruments and, 
as the name suggests, these employ a magnetic field to analyse the ions 
produced in the ion source. The key equation (equation 5.1) relates the 
mass-to-charge ratio of the ion (m/z) to the magnetic field strength, B, the 
radius, r, of the circular path followed by the ions in a magnetic field, and 
the voltage used to accelerate the ions out of the ionization source, i t  
Since the radius, r, is fixed by the geometry of the magnet, this means that 
by varying the magnetic field (B) while keeping the accelerating voltage 
( V )  constant (or the other way round), we can scan through the mass 
spectrum. Ions of different m/z ratio have the required trajectory, and so 
pass through the collector slit, when the magnetic field satisfies equation 
(5.1) (see Figure 5.16). This arrangement has traditionally been the most 
used method for ion analysis, and gives a good separation of ions which 
differ by 1 mass unit, e.g. in Figure 5.10 the peaks at m/z 106 and 105. 
Figure 5.16 Schematic dia- 
gram of a magnetic sector mass 
spectrometer 

140 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Greater resolution can be achieved when a magnetic analyser is 
coupled with an electrostatic analyser (in a “double focusing” mass 
spectrometer). Using this combination of analysers, mass accuracies of 
around 1 part per million (ppm) can be obtained. However, magnetic 
sector instruments have relatively low sensitivity and are very expensive. 
5.4.2 Quadrupole Mass Filters 
A quadrupole analyser consists of two pairs of parallel rods. To one pair is 
applied a constant DC voltage (U) and an alternating (radiofrequency) 
voltage (V), and to the other pair is applied a DC voltage of opposite 
polarity and a radiofrequency voltage 180” out of phase with that on the 
other pair of rods. This arrangement acts as a mass filter, in a similar way 
to the magnetic analyser, but, in this case, separation of the ions requires 
the variation of U and V (whilst keeping the UjV ratio constant), thus 
changing the m/z ratio of the ions which achieve a stable trajectory in the 
field generated by the rods and so pass through the detector (Figure 5.17). 
Figure 5.17 Schematic dia- 
gram of a quadrupole mass filter 
Quadrupole mass filters can easily be combined with chromatographic 
techniques so are often the analysers used in GC-MS and LC-MS 
instruments (see Section 5.6). In general, quadrupole mass filters are often 
used to provide low-resolution spectra and are much cheaper and require 
less space than magnetic sector instruments. 
5.4.3 Ion Trap Mass Spectrometers 
The principles behind an ion trap mass spectrometer are similar to those of 
the quadrupole mass filter, except that the quadrupole field is generated 
within a three-dimensional cell using a ring electrode and no filtering of 
the ions occurs. All of the steps involved in the generation and analysis of 
the ions take place within the cell, and in order to detect the ions they 
must be destabilized from their orbits, by altering the electric fields, so 

Mass Spectrometry 
141 
that they exit the trap and are ejected in order of increasing m/z ratio to 
the detector. 
Major benefits of ion traps are their compactness, the ease with which 
they are coupled to chromatographic techniques (they are frequently 
employed in LC-MS), their high sensitivity and the ease with which MS- 
MS (see Section 5.7) can be performed. 
5.4.4 Time-of-flight Mass Spectrometers 
In time-of-flight (TOF) spectrometers, as the name implies, the mass 
spectrum is generated by separating the ions according to the time it takes 
them to reach the detector. Unlike the other techniques we have met, this 
separation takes place in a region in which there is no applied magnetic or 
electric field (“the field-free region”). In a time-of-flight mass spectro- 
meter, all ions of the same charge are given the same kinetic energy by 
accelerating them through a known potential difference. 
The kinetic energy (KE) of the ions is given by equation (5.2). If the 
kinetic energy is constant, the ions with smaller masses will have greater 
velocities (and so take the shortest times to reach the detector), while 
those with greater masses will travel more slowly and so take longer to 
reach the detector. Ions with the same charge will therefore reach the 
detector in order of increasing mass. 
KE = I / ~ w z v ~  
(5.2) 
TOF mass spectrometers are among the most sensitive of mass analysers 
and can operate up to very high molecular masses (very low velocities). 
5.4.5 Ion Cyclotron Resonance-Fourier Transform (ICR- 
FT) Mass Spectrometers 
Once again, this technique utilizes an ion trap in which the ions are 
trapped within a cell which is situated within a strong magnetic field at 
right angles to the trapping plates. Ions in such a strong magnetic field 
undergo ion cyclotron resonance, and move in a circular orbit 
perpendicular to the magnetic field direction, at a frequency (the 
cyclotron frequency) which is dependent upon their m/z ratio. The ions 
can be excited by a pulse of radiofrequency voltage applied at their 
cyclotron frequency and, when this pulse is switched off, the movement of 
the ions generates an image current in the detector plates which decays 
with time due to collisions (free induction decay). 
This process is somewhat similar to that involved in FT NMR (see 
Chapter 4) and we can acquire a number of scans, add them together, and 
perform a Fourier transform (which increases the signal-to-noise ratio). 
As we can measure frequencies very accurately, we can therefore measure 

142 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
the corresponding masses very accurately, and the ICR-FT MS is 
exceptionally useful in mass analysis (“high-resolution mass spectro- 
metry”). It is also particularly suited to MS-MS (see Section 5.7). 
5.5 
Mass Spectral Data 
5.5.1 Isotope Peaks 
When we calculate the relative mass of a molecule, e.g. in order to 
calculate the number of moles present in a weighed sample, we use the 
tables of average relative atomic masses, which take account of the 
percentage of each isotope in every sample and average out the molecular 
mass in the sample. However, mass spectral analysis gives the mass of 
each individual ion, with its particular combination of isotopes, rather 
than an average mass for all molecules present. Thus, the mass measured 
in a mass spectrometer will always differ from the average relative 
molecular mass of our compound (calculated using tables of average 
relative atomic masses) by an amount that is dependent on the mass of 
our compound, and this difference gets bigger as the mass of our 
compound increases. In order to calculate the relative mass of an analyte 
as measured in a mass spectrometer, we need to use a table of 
monoisotopic masses (Table 5.1). 
Table 5.1 
elements 
Relative masses and natural abundances for some commonly occurring 
Isotope 
Natural abundance (%) 
Relative mass (to 4 d.p.) 
‘H 
’ 2C 
I3c 
l60 
I8O 
”F 
31P 
32s 
33s 
34s 
36s 
14N 
15N 
1 7 0  
3 5 ~ 1  
3 7 ~ 1  
79Br 
81Br 
100.00 
98.89 
1.11 
99.63 
0.37 
99.76 
0.04 
0.20 
100.00 
100.00 
95.02 
0.75 
4.21 
0.02 
75.73 
24.47 
50.69 
49.31 
1.0078 
12.0000 
13.0034 
14.0031 
15.0001 
15.9949 
16.9991 
17.9992 
18.9984 
30.9738 
31.9721 
32.9715 
33.9679 
35.9671 
34.9689 
36.9659 
78.91 83 
80.91 63 

Mass Spectrometry 
143 
The ability of the spectrometer to measure the mass of individual 
molecules gives rise to more than one peak for each molecule containing 
one or more atoms with isotopes. For example, when we examine the 
mass spectrum for a molecule with an m/z of 609, such as reserpine 
(Figure 5.18), we can see the smaller isotopic peaks at m/z 610 and 61 1, 
as well as the molecular ion peak (MH+). 
l
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
 . . . .  
,
I
 I
.
 
.
I
,
,
,
.
,
,
,
 
600 
605 
610' ' 
' 
' 6 i  5 
620 
m/ 
The intensity of the isotopic peaks is related to the abundance of 
the isotope present and to the total number of atoms present in that mole- 
cule, i.e. it is related to the probability of finding that isotope in the 
molecule: the greater the abundance and the more atoms there are 
present, the greater the chance of finding an isotope and the more intense 
the isotopic peak. 
For instance, carbon has two naturally occurring isotopes, I2C with a 
natural abundance of 99.89% and 13C with a natural abundance of 
1.1 I%, so that roughly one in every 100 carbon atoms will be a 13C. In a 
molecule containing 10 carbon atoms there are 10 chances of finding a 13C 
atom, which adds up to a 1 in 10 chance that this particular molecule will 
contain one 13C, so that for a Clo molecule we should see a peak 
corresponding to M + 1 with an intensity of 1/10 of that of the molecular 
ion. For small to medium sized molecules (i.e. < 100 carbons) the most 
abundant peak is the one corresponding to exclusively I2C atoms; 
Figure 5.18 ESI mass 
spectrum of reserpine 

144 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Figure 5.19 ESI mass spec- 
for molecules of very much higher masses (e.g. proteins) we find that the 
peak with the highest abundance contains a number of 13C atoms. The 
same argument may be applied to all other elements present in any 
sample, and so what we see in any mass spectrometer is the isotope 
distribution present in the analyte. 
The isotope patterns of chlorine and bromine are worth particular 
mention. Chlorine has two isotopes of mass 35 and 37, in a ratio of 75 : 25, 
respectively, while bromine has two isotopes of mass 79 and 81 in an 
approximately 50: 50 ratio. If we examine the mass spectrum for 2- 
chlorobenzoic acid, with a molecular formula of C7H5C102 (Figure 5.19), 
we can see peaks at (MH + 1) and (MH + 2) corresponding to the presence 
of the I3C and 37Cl isotopes, respectively. 
,
.
'
'
.
l
.
.
.
.
I
-
.
.
'
I
'
.
.
.
,
.
.
.
'
I
.
'
.
.
I
.
.
 
145 
150 
155 
160 
165 
170 
d z  
1 
trum of 2-chlorobenzoic acid 
I; 
I 
- 
C1 &'"" 
The relatively intense isotope peaks separated by 2 mass units for C1 
or Br provide a rapid indication of the presence of these elements 
in an analyte. Dichloro and dibromo compounds give similarly 
distinctive patterns, as shown in Figures 5.20 and 5.21. Other elements 
have similarly recognizable isotopic patterns, e.g. sulfur, although none 
is as distinctive as those for C1 and Br. 

Mass Spectrometry 
145 
I 
Intensity ratio 1 : 1 
1 
Figure 5.20 Isotope patterns 
A 
for CI and C12 
1 
Figure 5.21 Isotope patterns 
1 
for Br and Br2 
5.5.2 Mass Accuracy 
Before we can discuss the issue of mass accuracy we must first consider 
what we mean by this term. If we examine Table 5.1 more closely, we see 
that the only element listed with an integral mass (i.e. a whole number) is 
12C, as defined by the IUPAC convention, and when we calculate the 
monoisotopic mass of an analyte we always find that it is not an integer. 
The decimal part of the mass is known as the mass defect because it 
causes the value to be non-integral. For example, when we use the values 
in Table 5.1 to calculate the relative mass for the molecular formula 
CIOH10N302, 
we obtain a mass of 204.0771, where the figure 0.0771 
is the “mass defect” of this compound. You can see that for isomers the 
mass defect will be exactly equal, and we require other techniques, such 
as MS-MS or fragmentation pattern analysis, to help us to distinguish 
these structures (see Section 5.7). We can, however, exploit the mass 
defect to our advantage if we can measure our mass (m/z) with sufficient 
accuracy. As there are only a certain number of isotopic combinations 
that can give rise to a particular value of the mass defect, we now have 
a potential means of determining molecular formulae. There is obviously 
a range of different molecular formulae that can fit any mass. For 
example, if we take the two formulae C12H16N204 
and C11H12N205 we 
can see that they both have the same relative molecular mass of 252. 
However, when we calculate the “accurate” masses of these com- 
pounds based on the masses given in Table 5.1, we see that they are 

146 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
252.1106 and 252.0743, respectively. Thus, the mass defects for these two 
species are different. If we could measure these masses to an accuracy of 
four decimal places, we could compare the measured mass against the 
theoretical mass and thereby determine the elemental composition of our 
sample. This process is known as mass analysis (but is often, wrongly, 
referred to as high-resolution mass spectrometry). 
The scale we use to measure mass accuracy is parts per million 
(ppm), which is a relative unit obtained by dividing the absolute error 
in the mass measurement by the relative molecular mass according to 
equation (5.3): 
(absolute mass error) x 1 O6 
relative molecular mass 
Mass error in ppm = 
(5.3) 
Thus, if we measure the mass of a compound with a relative molecular 
mass of 1000 to an accuracy of 0.001 mass units, we have measured its 
mass with an accuracy of 1 ppm. 
A very simple and useful rule to aid in the interpretation of the MS data 
of organic compounds relates to the fact that nitrogen has an even mass 
but an odd valency, whereas the valency and mass for the most abundant 
isotope of other elements are either both odd or both even. This gives us a 
very simple rule that we can immediately apply to any mass spectral data: 
the nitrogen rule, which is given in Box 5.2. 
5.6 
Hyphenated Mass Spectrometry Methods 
A great number of chromatographic techniques are available to the 
analyst for separating the components present in a mixture. Of these, only 
two are commonly interfaced to MS systems: high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC or LC) and gas chromatography (GC). 

Mass Spectrometry 
147 
In theory, the MS system used in these techniques is no different from 
any other detection system (e.g. a UV detector or flame ionization 
detection), except that it is a good deal more expensive. However, its main 
advantage over other detectors is the additional information about the 
analyte that it provides and the greater sensitivity it offers. 
The power of GC-MS and LC-MS techniques lies in their potential 
ability to take a mixture of many different compounds and provide 
structural information on each component. There is some overlap in the 
types of compounds that may be analysed using these two techniques, 
but, in the main, the role of both techniques may be considered to be 
complementary. In which circumstances then do we use GC-MS and in 
which do we use LC-MS? As a general rule, if the analyte is non-polar and 
therefore volatile, we would probably use GC-MS. On the other hand, if 
the analyte is polar and/or non-volatile, the most appropriate technique 
will probably be LC-MS. 
5.6.1 GC-MS 
GC, as a chromatographic technique, is naturally suited to MS because 
it produces analyte molecules that are already in the gas phase (a 
requirement for any MS analysis). Interfacing a GC system to an MS 
instrument is, therefore, relatively straightforward as the compounds 
eluting from a GC column have already been volatilized and merely 
require separation from the carrier gas and ionization (usually by EI or 
CI; Section 5.2.1) before mass analysis. 
The process of recording a mass spectrum is repeated many times 
during a GC run ( e g .  at a rate of 1 scan per second), and by recording 
the number of ions reaching the detector we obtain a total ion 
chromatogram (TIC). A TIC is very similar in appearance to a normal 
chromatographic trace produced when using any other sort of GC 
detector, except that we have a mass spectrum available for each point 
on the chromatogram. 
ET, as a relatively harsh ionization technique, will always cause 
fragmentation of the molecular ion and hence generate a more or less 
unique fragmentation fingerprint of the analyte. It is thus possible to 
perform a search against a library of standard MS spectra and, under the 
right circumstances, identify the analyte. This is a process that must be 
undertaken with care as false matches are often produced, but the ability 
of this technique to identify an unknown analyte from a known 
compound library, as a single shot experiment, is virtually unparalleled. 
The standard library of EI mass spectra is that produced by the American 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), which currently 
contains mass spectra for > 120,000 compounds. 

148 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
5.6.2 LC-MS 
LC-MS, as a technique, is very much dependent upon ionization (and 
ion vaporization) techniques that are suited to LC conditions, i.e. 
techniques where a relatively large solvent flow can be accommodated, 
which restricts us to just two ionization methods: electrospray ionization 
(ESI) and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCL). Both 
techniques are very similar in their modes of operation (see Section 
5.2.1), relying on the formation of a spray from a solvent flow at 
atmospheric pressure, and hence they are ideally suited to use in LC-MS 
applications. 
The power of LC-MS over MS as a single technique is the ability to 
separate out the components of a mixture and then provide MS data on 
each. The use of accurate mass LC-MS is increasing as it enables the 
molecular formula of the analyte to be determined as an additional piece 
of information in the structural elucidation jigsaw. 
5.7 
MS-MS 
There are circumstances where it is advantageous to know more 
information about our analyte than just its relative molecular mass, e.g. 
in cases where we have mixtures of isomers in which LC-MS will be 
unable to provide any further useful information. One way to obtain this 
useful structural information is to fragment the molecular ion, and this 
may be carried out either in the MS source or within the mass analysis 
device. For various technical reasons the second of these is a superior 
fragmentation technique and will always be used, when available, in 
preference to the in-source version. The term used to describe 
fragmentation in the mass analyser is MS-MS. Fragments formed 
using MS-MS techniques can be different from those formed using EI or 
CI, but they nonetheless follow a similar set of relatively simple rules (e.g. 
loss of H20 from aliphatic alcohols) and a particular fragmentation 
pattern is often characteristic of a particular structure. For MS systems 
based on a trapping principle, the MS-MS process does not need to be 
halted at the first stage, and further fragmentation of the fragments 
themselves maybe carried out - a process described by the term MS”. 

Mass Spectrometry 
i49 

150 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
Figure 5.22 El MS of A 
Figure 5.23 El MS of B 
Figure 5.24 The homologous 
series of alkyl 2-hydroxy- 
benzoates 

Mass Spectrometry 
151 
Figure 5.25 The ESI MS of 
sertraline hydrochloride 

Structure Elucidation Using 
All of the Spectroscopic 
Information Available 
152 

Structure Elucidation Using All of the Spectroscopic Information Available 
153 

154 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Structure Elucidation Using All of the Spectroscopic Information Available 
155 

156 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Structure Elucidation Using All of the Spectroscopic Information Available 
157 

158 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
As you might have expected beforehand, the NMR spectra have been 
the most useful in determining this structure, but they should not be used 
in isolation, since a combination of all the techniques provides a very 
powerful tool for structural elucidation. 

Structure Elucidation Using All of the Spectroscopic Information Available 
159 

160 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Structure Elucidation Using All of the Spectroscopic Information Available 
161 
Figure 6.14 
HMBC 
[2J(1H - I3C) and 3J(1 H - I3C)] 
NMR spectrum of unknown 6 
in CDC13 
Figure 6.1 5 Accurate mass 
APClt mass spectrum of 
unknown 6 

162 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Structure Elucidation Using All of the Spectroscopic Information Available 
163 

164 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Structure Elucidation Using All of the Spectroscopic Information Available 
165 

Further Reading and 
Useful Websites 
General 
D. Williams and I. Fleming, Spectroscopic Methods in Organic Chenzistr??, 
5th edn., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995. 
NMR 
T. D. W. Claridge, High- Resolution N M R  Techniques in Organic Chmi- 
istrj.il', Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1999. 
J. K. M. Saunders and B. K. Hunter, Modern N M R  Spc~troscop-v, 
A Guide,for Chemists, 2nd edn., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993. 
E. Breitmaier, Structure Elucidation by N M R  in Organic. Chemistr.v, 
Wiley, Chichester, 1993. 
IR 
K. Nakanishi and P. H. Solomon, Infrared Absorption Spcctroscop.i*, 
2nd edn., Holden-Day, San Francisco, 1977. 
Websites 
SDBSWeb: http://www.aist.go.jp/RIODB/SDBS/menu-e.htm1 
Webspectra: http://www.chem.ucla.edu/-webspectra/ 
166 

Answers to Problems 
167 

168 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Answers to Problems 
169 

170 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Answers to Problems 
171 

172 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Answers to Problems 
173 

174 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 

Subject Index 
Absolute error, mass 
spectrometry 
146 
Absolute method of 
id en ti fica t ion, 
UV-Vis 20 
Absorbance, UV-Vis 9 
A1 kanes, 
fragmentation 
128, 129 
Alkyl halides, 
fragmentation 135 
Amide I and amide I1 
36, 37 
Angle strain, NMR 83 
Aromatic carbonyl 
compounds, 
Woodward-Fieser 
rules 
18 
Arrow diagrams, 
NMR 69 
Atmospheric pressure 
chemical 
ionization 
127 
Bathochroinic 
shift 
13, 14 
Beer-Lambert law 8,9 
Bending vibrations 
unsaturated 
N-H 
36 
C-H 
43 
Biomolecules, 
ionization and 
analysis 125 
Carbocation 
Chemical 
stability 
130 
ionization 
123 
Chemical shift 
effect 59-63 
Chromophore 10 
P-Cleavage 
fragmentation 
132-1 34 
Colour 3, 12 
Comparative method of 
identification, 
UV-Vis 20 
Conjugation, effect of 
IR 37 
UV-Vis 11 
COSY spectra 85 
Coupling constant 
electronegative 
groups, effect 
of 
83 
groups, effect 
of 83 
electropositive 
Decoupled spectra 
83 
DEPT 103 
Diastereoisomers 78 
Dienes and trienes, 
Woodward-Fieser 
rules 
18 
Dihedral angle, 
NMR 81 
Double bond 
equivalents 4 
Double focusing 139 
Electromagnetic 
spectrum 2 
Electron density, 
NMR 58 
Electron impact 
122 
Electrospray 
126 
Enantiomers, 
NMR 78 
Energy level 
diagram 
56, 68 
Energy levels 1, 56 
Equivalent protons 78 
Exchange processes, 
NMR 64-65 
Excited states 1, 56 
Fast atom 
First-order spectra, 
Fingerprint region 42 
Fourier transform 25, 
Fragmentation 
bombardment 125 
NMR 75-76 
54, 141 
alkanes 
128, 129 
alkyl halides 
135 
p-cleavage 
carbocation 
McLafferty 
132-1 34 
stability 
130 
rearrangement 
retro-Diels-Alder 
tropylium ion 131 
135-1 36 
137 
Free induction 
decay 54 
Frequency 
2 
GC-MS 147 
High-resolution mass 
HMBC spectra 
107 
HMQC spectra 
105 
spectra 145 
175 

176 
Subject Index 
HOMO 11 
Hooke’s law 26, 27 
Hydrogen bonding, 
effect of 
38 
H ypsochromic 
shift 
13, 15 
Infrared 
spectroscopy 24-50 
Ion cyclotron 
resonance 
14 I 
Ion source 
121 
Isobaric species 145 
Isotope patterns, 
bromine and 
chlorine 
142. 
144, 145 
Karplus equation 81 
KBr disc 25 
Liquids, IR spectra 25 
LUMO 
11 
Magnetic 
anisotropy 61, 62 
Magnetic sector 
139 
Magnetogyric ratio 57 
Mass defect 
145 
Mass spectrometry 
Mass to charge 
ratio 
120 
Matrix assisted laser 
desorption 
ionization 
I26 
rearrangement 
120-151 
McLafferty 
135-136 
Microwave (rotational) 
spectra 2, 3 
Molar absorptivity 
(molar ex tinct ion 
coefficient) 9 
MS-MS 
148 
Nitro compounds, 
IR 42 
Nitrogen rule, mass 
spectra 
146 
NMR spectroscopy 
51-1 19 
NOE spectra 86 
Nuclear magnets 
55 
Nuclei 
deuterium, 2H 
56, 110 
I9F 56, 110 
15N 110 
31P 56, 110 
Nujol mull 25 
Off-resonance 
spectra 
100 
pH, effect on acidic and 
basic groups, 
UV-Vis 14 
pH indicators 16 
Planck’s constant 2 
Quadruy ole 140 
Quantum 2 
Raman 
spectroscopy 26 
Reagent gases, mass 
spectra 
124 
Retro-Diels-Alder 
fragmentation 137 
Ring strain, IR 41 
Rotational spectra 2,3 
Selection rules 
IR 26 
NMR 
55 
UV-Vis 
8 
Shoolery’s rules 62 
Simple harmonic 
oscillator 
2 7 
Solids, IR spectra 25 
Solvent 
NMR 52 
UV-Vis, effect of 
13 
Spectrometer, TR 
24 
Spin quantum 
number 55, 56 
Spin system 
AB 76 
ABX 76 
AX 72 
AX;! 73 
AX3 73 
Spin-spin coupling 66 
HAand HX 67 
geminal 69, 80, 83 
vicinal 69, 80-82 
C=C 41 
C-H 
28 
C=N 41 
C-0 
42 
C=O 3541 
Stretching vibrations 
N-H 
31 
N+-H 
33 
0-H 
29 
S-H 
33 
triple bond 33 
Substitution, in 
NMR 78 
Successive splitting, 
NMR 72 
Superconducting 
magnet 
53 
Thioketones, IR 42 
Time-of-flight 
14 1 
Total ion 
Transition, NMR 56 
Transition energy 
(relationship to 
frequency) 
2 
fragmentation 13 1 
chromatogram 
147 
Tropylium ion 
Undecoupled 
spectra 
100 
Units, NMR 59 
a, 
P-Unsaturated 
aldehydes and 
ketones, Woodward- 
Fieser rules 
18 
UV-Vis 
spectroscopy 7-23 
Vibrational spectra 2, 
3, 24 
Wavelength 2 
Wavenumber 2 
Woodward-Fieser 
rules 
17, 18 
X-rays, structure 
determination 2, 3 



