Language Families 
of the World
Professor John McWhorter
Columbia University
Literature & Language
Topic
Linguistics 
Subtopic
Course Guidebook

Published by
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westfields Boulevard | Suite 500 | Chantilly, Virginia | 20151‑2299
[phone] 1.800.832.2412 | [fax] 703.378.3819 | [web] www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2019
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no 
part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written 
permission of The Teaching Company.

i
Language Families of the World
PROFESSOR BIOGRAPHY
John McWhorter, PhD
Associate Professor of English 
and Comparative Literature
Columbia University
J
ohn McWhorter is an Associate Professor 
of English and Comparative Literature 
at Columbia University, where he teaches 
courses on linguistics, Western civilization, 
American studies, and music history. He 
earned his PhD in Linguistics from Stanford 
University, and he has taught at both Cornell 
University and the University of California, 
Berkeley. His academic specialties are 
language change and language contact. 
Dr. McWhorter is the author of numerous books, including The Power of 
Babel: A Natural History of Language; Doing Our Own Thing: The Degradation 
of Language and Music and Why We Should, Like, Care; Our Magnificent 
Bastard Tongue: The Untold History of English; What Language Is: And What 
It Isn’t and What It Could Be; The Language Hoax: Why the World Looks the 
Same in Any Language; Words on the Move: Why English Won’t—and Can’t—Sit 
Still (Like, Literally); and Talking Back, Talking Black: Truths about America’s 
Lingua Franca. He has also written a book on dialects and Black English, 
Word on the Street: Debunking the Myth of a “Pure” Standard English; four 
books on Creole languages; and an academic linguistics book entitled 
Language Interrupted: Signs of Non-Native Acquisition in Standard Language 
Grammars. Dr. McWhorter hosts Slate’s podcast Lexicon Valley and is a 
contributing editor to The Atlantic and The New Republic. 
In addition to his work in linguistics, Dr. McWhorter is the author of 
Losing the Race: Self-Sabotage in Black America; Authentically Black: Essays 
for the Black Silent Majority; and Winning the Race: Beyond the Crisis in 
Black America. He appears regularly on bloggingheads.tv and has written 
on race and cultural issues for The New Yorker, The Washington Post, The 

ii
New York Times, The Chronicle of Higher Education, The Wall Street Journal, 
the Los Angeles Times, The American Enterprise, Ebony, and Vibe. He has 
provided commentaries for All Things Considered and has appeared on Meet 
the Press, Dateline NBC, Politically Incorrect, The Colbert Report, Book TV’s 
In Depth, Talk of the Nation, TODAY, Good Morning America, The NewsHour 
with Jim Lehrer, and Fresh Air. 
Dr. McWhorter’s other Great Courses are The Story of Human Language; 
Understanding Linguistics: The Science of Language; Myths, Lies, and Half-
Truths of Language Usage; and Language A to Z. 
Language Families of the World
PROFESSOR BIOGRAPHY

Table of Contents
iii
Language Families of the World
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Guides
1	 Why Are There So Many Languages?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 2
2	 The First Family Discovered: Indo-European. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 7
3	 Indo-European Languages in Europe . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 11
4	 Indo-European Languages in Asia . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 15
5	 The Click Languages. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6	 Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa I. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 24
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 1–6 . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 28
7	 Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa II. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 30
8	 Languages of the Fertile Crescent and Beyond I . .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 34
9	 Languages of the Fertile Crescent and Beyond II. .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 38
10	 Nilo-Saharan: Africa’s Hardest Languages?. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 41
11	 Is the Indo-European Family Alone in Europe?. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 45
12	 How to Identify a Language Family . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 49
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 7–12. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 54
Introduction
Professor Biography. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i
Typographical Conventions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi
Course Scope . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

iv
13	 What Is a Caucasian Language?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
14	 Indian Languages That Aren’t Indo-European. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 59
15	 Languages of the Silk Road and Beyond. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 64
16	 Japanese and Korean: Alike yet Unrelated. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 68
17	 The Languages We Call Chinese. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 73
18	 Chinese’s Family Circle: Sino-Tibetan . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 77
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 13–18. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 82
19	 Southeast Asian Languages: The Sinosphere . .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 84
20	 Languages of the South Seas I. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 89
21	 Languages of the South Seas II. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 94
22	 Siberia and Beyond: Language Isolates. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 99
23	 Creole Languages. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
24	 Why Are There So Many Languages in New Guinea?. .  .  . . . . 108
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 19–24. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 112
25	 The Languages of Australia I . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 114
26	 The Languages of Australia II. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 118
27	 The Original American Languages I. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 122
28	 The Original American Languages II . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 127
29	 The Original American Languages III. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 131
30	 The Original American Languages IV. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 136
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 25–30. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 140
Language Families of the World
TABLE OF CONTENTS

v
Language Families of the World
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Supplementary Material
Quiz Answers. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
Bibliography. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
Image Credits. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
31	 Languages Caught between Families. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 142
32	 How Far Back Can We Trace Languages?. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 146
33	 What Do Genes Say about Language Families?. .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 150
34	 Language Families and Writing Systems. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 156
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 31–34. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 160
NAVIGATION TIP
To go back to the page you came from, PRESS Alt + ← on a PC or 
⌘ + ← on a Mac. On a tablet, use the bookmarks panel. 

vi
Typographical Conventions
This guidebook uses the following typographical conventions:
¯
¯ Italics are used for foreign-language words and for words cited as 
words (rather than used functionally; e.g., The word ginormous is a 
combination of gigantic and enormous).
¯
¯ Single quotation marks are used for meanings of words (e.g., Wife 
meant ‘woman’ in Old English).
¯
¯ Double quotation marks are used for pronunciations of words (e.g., “the 
other” versus “t’other”) and words used in a special sense (e.g., The 
“secret lives” of words are fascinating).
¯
¯ Slashes are used to indicate sounds (e.g., /b/).
Language Families of the World
TYPOGRAPHICAL CONVENTIONS

1
Language Families of the World
COURSE SCOPE
Language Families of the World
T
his course is dedicated to languages throughout the world, from the 
Indo-European languages that are likely familiar to the relatively 
obscure language isolates that belong to no particular family. Along 
with the Indo-European languages and language isolates, the course also 
looks at the languages of Africa, the Chinese languages, the languages of 
Papua New Guinea and Australia, Paleosiberian languages, Japanese and 
Korean, the languages of the South Seas, and more. 
Aside from looking at features of the languages themselves, the course 
describes successes and difficulties linguists have had in studying such 
disparate groups. By the end of the course, the instructor hopes to leave 
you with these four takeaways:
1	 The structures used by European languages are but one of many 
game plans through which humans can express themselves 
linguistically. The course looks at some of those many other setups, 
which are both interesting and successful.
2	 European languages are in no way more sophisticated or modern 
than other languages. If anything, many other languages can seem 
more elaborate than European languages.
3	 Language is always changing, and the distribution of today’s families 
shows this. Formerly, there were doubtless many more language 
families than today. The vast swaths of land that some language 
families now cover, speckled with smaller ones here and there, reflect 
the remnants of what was once more of a patchwork quilt. 
4	 That kind of change continues today, as ever more minority 
languages are no longer passed on to children. One of the most 
urgent tasks of modern linguists is to document what is left—that 
is, to record the diversity of the past as we move on to a more 
homogenous future.

Why Are There 
So Many Languages?
There are 7,000 languages in the world, 
and all likely developed from a single, 
initial source. This lecture looks at theories 
on the origins of language, how so many 
languages came to be, and what led to 
differences between them.
2
LECTURE 1

Language Families of the World
Lecture 1  Why Are There So Many Languages?
3
Theories on the Spread of Language
¯
¯ One theory on the emergence of human language surmises that it 
emerged multiple times, but this is uneconomical: Researchers do 
not propose that other species-wide traits arose several times, and no 
groups of non-speaking humans have been discovered.
¯
¯ It has also been proposed that language arose when humans made 
a leap into cultural sophistication. This is typically linked to the 
emergence of tools and art, and thus is now dated to the humans whose 
fossils have been found at the Blombos Cave in South Africa dating to 
100,000 years ago.
¯
¯ However, remains of Homo sapiens now date back as far as 300,000 
years. If Homo sapiens have been in existence for 300,000 years, 
language may essentially be that old as well, especially given that 
language is a species-wide trait, and no human groups now are 
language-less.
THE PETROGLYPHS OF WADI RUM 
DATE BACK OVER 12,000 YEARS.  

4
The Morphing of Sounds
¯
¯ When one group of humans splits off from another one, their versions 
of the language start drifting apart until they are no longer the same 
language. This fundamental changeability of language is difficult 
to detect within a lifespan, but each generation pronounces sounds 
slightly differently until a complete transformation has occurred.
¯
¯ Take, for example, sound changes, as in the word sock. It has three 
sounds: /s/, /ah/, and /k/. All three naturally change into different ones 
over time.
w
w
An /s/ can become /sh/, which can become /zh/, which can then 
become /z/.
w
w
An /ah/ can become an /aw/, which can become an /oo/, which can then 
become /u/.
w
w
A /k/ can become a /kh/, which can then drop away completely.
¯
¯ The combined effect of all of these changes in the word sock could be 
that sock morphs into shawk, then zhoo, and then the French-sounding 
jue. Notice that jue is a completely different word from sock.
The Morphing of Materials and Meaning
¯
¯ While sounds can change, words can also come together to create 
prefixes, suffixes, and new words entirely. For example, the suffix -ly 
emerged from the separate word like, as in, slow-like becoming slowly.
¯
¯ With the passage of time, prefixes and suffixes can lose meaning and 
qualify as new material that constitutes the words in a language that 
distinguish it from others.
¯
¯ Additionally, words’ meanings can drift into new ones over time. The 
words merry, bra, and pretzel all trace back to one original word in 
English’s distant ancestor that meant ‘short.’
Language Families of the World
Lecture 1  Why Are There So Many Languages?

Language Families of the World
Lecture 1  Why Are There So Many Languages?
5
The Language Family Tree
¯
¯ As humans have spread throughout the world, languages have 
proliferated into families.
w
w
Roughly speaking, the Indo-European family covers most of Europe 
and extends into Asia.
w
w
Africa has four main families.
w
w
Asia has the Altaic family (including Turkish and many others) 
stretching across it, plus a cluster in the east and southeast that includes 
Chinese, Vietnamese, and Thai.
w
w
The Austronesian family covers parts of Southeast Asia and out into the 
Pacific; it includes Indonesian, Tagalog, Maori, and Hawaiian.
w
w
Australia is home to two major families, while the island of New 
Guinea alone has about 25.
w
w
In the New World, there are roughly 10 families of Native American 
languages in North America, 7 in Mexico and Central America, and 
about 15 more in South America.

6
w
w
There are many additional families. The click languages comprise three 
families. The Georgian language is Caucasian, which covers three more. 
There are isolates everywhere, such as Basque, which has no relatives and 
must be the last living member of a now-extinct family.
¯
¯ These families are fascinatingly distinct from one another. For 
example, the click languages of Africa use the clicks as integral sounds, 
just like consonants and vowels. In North America, in many languages, 
everything in a sentence can be contained in a single word.
¯
¯ Some languages in North America have no regular verbs, as is the case 
with Navajo, while some languages in Australia have only three verbs, 
such as do, go, and come.
Learning from the Language Families
¯
¯ The language families of the world have much to teach about the past, 
present, and future of humanity. Navajo and its relative languages 
are similar to a small group of languages in Siberia, which helps 
researchers trace Native American peoples to a migration from Asia.
¯
¯ The Basque language in France and Spain is unrelated to any other 
language and sits surrounded by languages all from another family. 
That is a clue that languages related to Basque once spread across 
much more of Europe, and by extension, a whole different genetic 
group of people. Genetic research concurs with this hypothesis.
SUGGESTED READING
Bernard, Matthews, and Polinsky, 
The Atlas of Languages.
Pereltsvaig, Languages of 
the World.
SUGGESTED READING
Bernard, Matthews, and Polinsky, 
The Atlas of Languages.
Pereltsvaig, Languages of 
the World.
¯
¯ The languages of Polynesia 
are so similar that they 
almost seem like variations 
of the same language. 
This means that they 
haven’t been separate for 
very long, and indeed, all 
evidence shows that these 
were the final areas of the 
world occupied by humans.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 1  Why Are There So Many Languages?

The First Family Discovered: 
Indo-European
The Indo-European language family includes 
almost all of the languages of Europe and 
many spoken in Asia. In Europe, the Romance, 
Slavic, Germanic, and Celtic languages are 
Indo-European, as are Albanian, Greek, and 
the Baltic languages of Lithuania and Latvia. 
Only Basque, Finnish, Estonian, Hungarian, 
and the Saami language are of other families. 
In Asia, Armenian, the languages of Iran, 
and most of the languages of India are Indo-
European. This lecture provides an overview 
of the discovery of these languages and their 
characteristics.
7
LECTURE 2

8
The Discovery of Indo-European Languages
¯
¯ Indo-European was not the first group of languages that were noticed 
to be related. However, it is the first family that was the subject of 
extensive classification-minded research, which was the foundation 
of what became modern linguistics. The family is also especially well 
known because so many of its languages are extensively written and 
have been for a long time.
¯
¯ A widespread account of its emergence is that William Jones initiated 
Indo-European studies with an announcement before the Asiatic 
Society in 1786. However, though Jones’s statement had the most 
influence, the first person to make an equivalent proposal had been 
Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn in 1647. He proposed that Dutch, 
German, Latin, Greek, Persian, Slavic, Celtic, and Baltic all had an 
ancestor he called Scythian.
Characteristics of Indo-European Languages
¯
¯ A typical Indo-European language is similar to Latin. It divides 
components into subjects and objects. It has case suffixes on nouns, 
with meanings that mostly correspond to separate words in English:
Latin: Puer dat rosa-m puell-ae man-u.
English: The boy gives a rose to the girl by hand.
¯
¯ A typical Indo-European language also separates verbs into different 
conjugation classes and marks the person and number with suffixes. Indo-
European languages are strict about marking elements like case, plurality, 
or definiteness. Many languages in the world can leave such elements to 
context to a degree that most Indo-European languages do not.
¯
¯ Note that while it is typical for Indo-European languages to be much 
like Latin, not all fall under the same general umbrella. For example, 
some languages, like English and French, have lost many of the 
original suffixes.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 2  The First Family Discovered: Indo-European

Language Families of the World
Lecture 2  The First Family Discovered: Indo-European
9
Reconstruction of the Original 
Indo-European Language
¯
¯ Linguists have compared the living Indo-European languages 
and the ones that now survive only in writing, such as Latin, Old 
Persian, and Sanskrit. Using tendencies they have seen in how 
sounds change, linguists have traced backward to reconstruct what 
the father language, or Proto-Indo-European, would have been like. 
For example, linguists know that the Proto-Indo-European word for 
‘father’ was pǝter by tracing backward from the corresponding word for 
‘father’ in several languages.
¯
¯ Thousands of words have been reconstructed, as well as what many 
of the original suffixes would have been. Thus, linguists can even 
speculate about whole sentences. Linguists believe that Proto-Indo-
European was a language where the verb came last, rather than in the 
middle of a sentence. Such reconstructions, which are being done of 
many language families, can only be approximate.

10
¯
¯ The Proto-Indo-European language was not written. Some scholars 
think Proto-Indo-European would have been spoken in what is today 
Turkey and traces back to roughly 7000 BCE. However, this idea is 
losing influence, and most researchers now think that the original 
language was spoken by the Yamna people of what is today southern 
Ukraine from c. 4000 BCE.
¯
¯ There are two genetic markers that are present in Yamna skeletons and 
also in Europeans and South Asians, suggesting that a people migrated 
both westward and eastward. Genetic and archaeological evidence 
suggests that Yamna men in particular migrated west and mixed with 
local women starting around 3500 BC, imposing their culture and 
language in waves.
The Indo-European Language Today
¯
¯ Today, of the world’s 7.5 billion people, about 3 billion speak Indo-
European languages. Of the world’s largest 20 languages, 10 are Indo-
European: English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Hindi, 
Punjabi, Bengali, Marathi, and Russian.
¯
¯ This dominance includes the entire Western Hemisphere. The 
languages’ ubiquitous nature came about in large part because of the 
historical dominance of a few European countries as well as the success 
of Indo-Aryan people after their migration into South Asia.
SUGGESTED READING
Anthony, The Horse, the Wheel, and Language.
Fortson, Indo-European Language and Culture.
SUGGESTED READING
Anthony, The Horse, the Wheel, and Language.
Fortson, Indo-European Language and Culture.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 2  The First Family Discovered: Indo-European

The Indo-European languages of 
Europe reveal much about how different 
languages evolve. This lecture looks at 
quirks and interesting historical facts about 
the Germanic languages, the Romance 
languages, the Balto-Slavic languages, 
Albanian, and others.
11
LECTURE 3
Indo-European 
Languages in Europe

12
The Germanic Languages
¯
¯ The Germanic languages include German, English, Dutch, Swedish, 
Norwegian, and Danish, among others. The Germanic group dates 
back to the language spoken by the Goths, and in general, the 
languages are related to peoples of the northern part of Europe.
¯
¯ Some Germanic-language quirks show up in present-day English. 
Take this line of written dialogue, for example:
“We need to find some beaver pelts,” said Melvin.
¯
¯ It is very unlikely an English speaker would utter “said Melvin” in 
speech, yet that construction is often present in written English. The 
root of this quirk is that in Germanic languages, everything revolves 
around the verb. In the above example, the verb remains in what is 
known as the second position.
GREEK AND THE CELTIC LANGUAGES: 
THEN AND NOW
The Greek language presents an interesting status contrast 
between past and present. It was once widespread from Egypt 
to the fringes of India and served as the high language of the 
Roman Empire. Today, however, only 13 million people speak it.
Like Greek, the Celtic languages were once more widespread. 
Mummies discovered in Hami in what is now China wore the 
exact same cloth patterns as did Celts in what is now Austria 
in Europe, as well as plaid and twill, which first emerged in the 
Caucasus area. These mummies were tall with blonde hair, as 
Romans described Celts.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 3  Indo-European Languages in Europe

Language Families of the World
Lecture 3  Indo-European Languages in Europe
13
The Romance Languages
¯
¯ The Romance languages descended from 
Latin. There are roughly 36 of them, and 
they include French, Spanish, and Italian. 
The Romance languages offer interesting 
examples of how words evolve. Take, for 
example, Romance variations for the word 
key, shown below. They all spawned from 
the original Latin word clavis.
LANGUAGE
KEY
Franco-Provençal
clâ
French
clé
Occitan
clau
Catalan
clau
Spanish
llave
Romansch
clav
Piedmontese
ciav
Romagnol
cêv
Italian
chiave
Sicilian
chiavi
Sardinian
ciae
Portuguese
chave
Romanian
cheie
Aromanian
cljai
Istriot
ciave

14
The Balto-Slavic Language Family
¯
¯ The Balto-Slavic language family includes languages that are very 
difficult to master for non-native speakers. Its sub-branches are Slavic 
and the smaller Baltic branch, which includes Lithuanian and Latvian.
¯
¯ Languages like Russian include a great deal of sub-rules and 
irregularities amidst their basic complexity. Another example of this 
group’s complexity comes from the tones present in Lithuanian. For 
example, káltas with a falling tone means ‘chisel,’ while kãltas with a 
rising tone means ‘guilty.’
¯
¯ Additionally, a dialect continuum is present in the South Slavic 
languages. For instance, on the Dalmatian coast, the word meaning 
‘industrious’ is vridan. In western Bulgaria, the similar term vredan 
means ‘industrious’ or ‘harmful,’ while in southeastern Bulgaria, 
vraedan means ‘harmful.’
QUIRKS OF ALBANIAN
Albanian shows that mixed vocabulary is normal and not solely 
a quirk of English. It contains so many words from Latin, Greek, 
Slavic, and Turkish that it was the last branch of the Indo-
European languages discovered.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 3  Indo-European Languages in Europe
SUGGESTED READING
Barber, The Mummies of Urumchi.
Ostler, Empires of the Word.
SUGGESTED READING
Barber, The Mummies of Urumchi.
Ostler, Empires of the Word.

One-fifth to one-sixth of the world speaks 
one of the Indo-European languages of 
India. These languages are the children 
of Sanskrit, which was once thought to be 
essentially Proto-Indo-European itself. This 
lecture looks at facts about and traits of 
several of the Indo-European languages 
spoken in Asia.
15
LECTURE 4
Indo-European 
Languages in Asia

16
Contact and the Dravidian Languages
¯
¯ One Indo-European subset, the modern Indo-Aryan languages (Hindi, 
Urdu, Punjabi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, and Romani), can seem 
oddly unlike the European languages they are related to. Much of this 
is because languages affect one another through contact. At one point, 
there was a completely different group of languages, the Dravidian 
languages, spoken in India. Today, they’re spoken mostly in the 
southern part of India, but they used to be more widespread.
¯
¯ Speakers of early Indo-European 
languages, such as Sanskrit, met these 
Dravidian-speaking peoples. This 
led to an interesting result in that the 
resulting Indo-Aryan languages now 
seem very different from other Indo-
European languages. That is because 
Dravidian speakers in the region 
seasoned Dravidian with elements of 
the languages of the new people they 
had encountered.
The Indo-Iranian Languages
¯
¯ The Indo-Iranian group, falling under the Indo-European umbrella, 
covers several dozen languages, including Persian. A notable example 
of the Old Persian language is found on the Behistun Inscription in 
Iran, which boasts of the greatness of King Darius.
¯
¯ Like many Indo-European 
languages, Old Persian had 
many case and conjugational 
endings. Modern Persian is 
much like English in being more 
streamlined, as shown in the 
example translations at right.
ENGLISH
PERSIAN
I buy
mi-xar-am
you buy
mi-xar-i
he/she/it buys
mi-xar-ad
we buy
mi-xar-im
you folks buy
mi-xar-id
they buy
mi-xar-and
Language Families of the World
Lecture 4  Indo-European Languages in Asia

Language Families of the World
Lecture 4  Indo-European Languages in Asia
17
¯
¯ Many of the simpler Indo-European languages like modern Persian 
and English are less complex because they were largely learned by 
adults. Their atrophied language-learning abilities shaved away much 
of their unnecessary complexities.
¯
¯ There were other ancient Iranian languages, such as Sogdian, which 
shows how starkly the global significance of a language can change 
across history. Sogdian was for a time the lingua franca of the Silk 
Road, but today is represented by a small language called Yaghnobi 
in Tajikistan.
¯
¯ Modern Persian demonstrates the lack of fit between labels and 
languages, as well as how hopeless it is to starkly distinguish a 
language from a dialect. The Persian language is called Dari in 
Afghanistan and Tajik in Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. One dialect of 
Tajik is Bukharan or Bukhori, a Hebrew-influenced variety, spoken by 
Jews mostly in Uzbekistan but also Israel and the US.
¯
¯ Pashto is the most conservative Indo-Iranian variety. It has been 
recounted as especially challenging for English speakers serving in the 
military in Afghanistan.
The Armenian Subfamily
¯
¯ Armenian is another Indo-European subfamily spoken in Asia. It 
wasn’t discovered to be its own branch until 1877 because it has so 
many Iranian words that only about 450 original ones remain.
¯
¯ Its sound changes have been unusually deep. For example, the numbers 
one to seven are mek, yerku, yereq, chors, hing, vets, and yoth. These are 
quite unlike the numbers in Germanic and Romance languages, as 
well as early Indo-European languages like Latin and Sanskrit.

18
The Anatolian Languages
¯
¯ The Anatolian languages have an interesting story. In Turkey, starting 
just after the turn of the 20th century, documents were found in the 
earliest known evidence of Indo-European languages. They dated from 
as far back as the 16th century BCE. They are a test of Proto-Indo-
European reconstruction.
¯
¯ Studies on Hittite confirmed linguist Ferdinand de Saussure’s 
speculation that Proto-Indo-European had certain lost laryngeal 
sounds. He noted that most reconstructed verbs had three sounds: 
a consonant, a vowel, and a consonant, in that order. De Saussure 
proposed that those long vowels had begun as a throaty consonant that 
had then become an extension of the vowel that came before it.
¯
¯ Since the Anatolian languages are the oldest, one might expect their 
endings to be like Sanskrit’s, yet they aren’t. Hittite has many fewer 
tenses and no dual marking, where there are special markers for two of 
something as opposed to several.
¯
¯ It may be that the Anatolian languages simply shed all of this material 
for some reason. A more likely explanation is that the Anatolian 
languages represent what Proto-Indo-European was originally like and 
that it only took the Sanskrit route in a later branch.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 4  Indo-European Languages in Asia
SUGGESTED READING
Dalby, Dictionary of Languages.
Fortson, Indo-European Language and Culture.
SUGGESTED READING
Dalby, Dictionary of Languages.
Fortson, Indo-European Language and Culture.

19
LECTURE 5
It is possible (although not certain) that the 
first humans spoke a language which later 
proliferated into today’s click languages, 
although language change means 
that today’s click languages would be 
nothing like that first language. The formal 
name of the click languages is Khoisan, 
named after the San people (hunter-
gatherers) and the Khoi (pastoralists). 
They are spoken in southern Africa. They 
number a few dozen, and most are highly 
endangered.
The Click Languages

20
The Clicks
¯
¯ The clicks themselves are not 
decorations, but actual normal 
sounds. There are five basic click 
types, written with particular 
symbols (shown at right).
¯
¯ They make the difference in 
meaning between words just 
as the letters b, p, and c make 
the difference between bat, pat, and cat. The clicks are pronounced 
in combination with regular consonants, allowing a wider range 
of sounds than in a language like English. The clicks can also be 
pronounced pushing out or breathing in.
¯
¯ This functionality means that some of the Khoisan languages have 
the most sounds of any language in the world. One dialect of the !Xõo 
language has 43 clicks and 44 other consonants, while English has only 
about 30 consonants. The clicks leave a scar in the throat of speakers, 
which develops in children at an early age.
Branches of the Khoisan Languages
¯
¯ There is no real evidence that the click languages emerged from a 
single original one, unlike in the Indo-European family. Other than 
the clicks, there are only four words that the languages mostly have 
in common that could be traced to single original forms: the words 
for chin, lungs, throat, and wound. This could be due to speakers of 
the languages exchanging words over time rather than all of them 
being related.
¯
¯ The Khoisan languages actually divide into three families with 
different grammatical patterns: The northern one is something like 
Chinese, the central one is something like a European language with 
gender endings, and the southern group is something different again.
DENTAL
|
(from teeth)
ALVEOLAR
!
(tss)
PALATAL 
ǂ
(tsk)
LATERAL 
ǁ
(ckhl)
BILABIAL
ʘ
(kiss)
Language Families of the World
Lecture 5  The Click Languages

Language Families of the World
Lecture 5  The Click Languages
21
Emergence of the Clicks
¯
¯ It is difficult question to determine how the clicks emerged, as these 
languages are not written, and thus, linguists cannot see their origins 
in written form. Some have speculated that the clicks were first used as 
hunting calls, but this seems unlikely given that the clicks would alert 
the animals to humans’ presence.
¯
¯ However, there are two other cases of clicks in the world that suggest 
that the clicks emerged first as features in an alternate avoidance form 
of language. The only other click language that has emerged outside 
of southern Africa is in Australia, a variety of the Daman language 
used only with mothers-in-law. Clicks are also common in languages 
of a different family spoken in proximity to Khoisan, including various 
Bantu languages such as Zulu and Xhosa.

22
¯
¯ In these languages, there is a practice called hlonipha, in which a 
woman does not pronounce her in-laws’ names, or even syllables 
associated with those names. There are many ways people create 
hlonipha words, such as deleting a consonant. For example, in Xhosa, 
“I don’t want” is andifuni and could become andi-uni. One of the ways 
is to replace a sound with a click sound; for instance, the word that 
means ‘swing,’ lenga, is pronounced “|enga” with the dental click.
¯
¯ It is reasonable to suppose that these Bantu languages adopted clicks 
from Khoisan languages as an avoidance strategy as in Australia. Since 
then, however, the clicks have become part of normal language as 
well. One piece of evidence supporting this hypothesis is that hlonipha 
is used most extensively in the Bantu languages that have the most 
click sounds.
The World’s First Languages?
¯
¯ Evidence exists that the Khoisan languages may have been the world’s 
first. Two groups of click speakers are divergent genetically by 70,000 
years, which is when humans first left Africa.
¯
¯ It is reasonable to reconstruct that the clicks were present 70,000 years 
ago: That they only arose elsewhere for an unusual purpose and then 
were adapted by Bantu languages for that same purpose suggests that 
they would have emerged for a similar purpose in Khoisan itself. Since 
the hunter-gatherer lifestyle has been unchanged for tens of thousands 
of years, researchers might suppose that conditions at the root of their 
existence created the clicks.
¯
¯ Click languages were once more widespread in the region. There are 
two languages with clicks spoken quite far from the Khoisan area, 
which suggests that Bantu languages spread southward and eliminated 
what once were a larger number of click languages.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 5  The Click Languages

Language Families of the World
Lecture 5  The Click Languages
23
¯
¯ There are also other languages in Tanzania of a different family that 
don’t have clicks. However, they do have some words from a nearby 
click language for basic terms like the numbers four and five and the 
word for boy, suggesting that speakers of such languages once had 
wider influence on other people and their speech.
SUGGESTED READING
Suzman, Affluence without Abundance.
Vossen, The Khoesan Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Suzman, Affluence without Abundance.
Vossen, The Khoesan Languages.

24
Although some Indo-European languages 
diverge from the proto-language more 
than others, all of them are, with a certain 
amount of examination, identifiably 
variations on a pattern. This is not true 
of the Niger-Congo family in Africa. The 
Niger-Congo family comprises almost all 
of the languages native to Africa below 
the Sahara, and the majority on and 
considerably inward of the upper West 
African coast.
LECTURE 6
Niger-Congo: 
Largest Family in Africa I

Language Families of the World
Lecture 6  Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa I
25
Overview of Niger-Congo Languages
¯
¯ There are about 1,500 Niger-Congo languages by some counts. There 
are certainly 1,000, and perhaps 1 in 13 people worldwide speak a 
Niger-Congo language. They range from languages that can pack a 
whole sentence into one word to others that have very short words and 
use tones, very much like Chinese.
¯
¯ All of these languages trace back to a single proto-language, which has 
not been reconstructed in the detail that Proto-Indo-European has. 
It may have been spoken about 15,000 years ago. Only in the 1950s 
did anthropologist and linguist Joseph Greenberg classify all of these 
languages as belonging to one family.

26
¯
¯ In many Niger-Congo languages, such as Swahili, there are genders 
as in European languages, but in greater numbers. For example, 
Swahili nouns are marked for gender with a prefix (not a suffix), 
which is different according to eight features. Then, each prefix has a 
plural form.
¯
¯ Noun class prefixes also occur on adjectives and demonstratives as 
well, just as in languages like Spanish. This feature is traced to the 
proto-language because many of these prefixes are present in different 
forms in languages across the family.
¯
¯ Additionally, even in the languages 
that are grammatically like 
Chinese and don’t have prefixes, 
there are some vestigial semi-
prefixes, such as in the Fongbe 
language. These are ghosts of an 
earlier stage when these languages 
still had the original prefixes.
Swahili
¯
¯ Swahili is the most widely known Niger-Congo language. It is spoken 
widely in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, and a few other East African countries. It began as an obscure 
coastal language, but amidst trade with Arabs, it was chosen as the 
African language of trade.
¯
¯ There is evidence for this trade as far back as the 2nd century CE. 
A few of Swahili’s number terms are borrowed from Arabic (such as 
sita, meaning ‘six;’ saba, meaning ‘seven;’ and tisa, meaning ‘nine’) as 
well as many other words. Because Swahili has been used as a second 
language and as a language of trade for so many people, it is less 
difficult than other languages in its subfamily.
FONGBE
ENGLISH
nù
drink
ò-nù
mouth
kú
die
ò-kú
corpse
sá
crawl
à-sá
leg
Language Families of the World
Lecture 6  Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa I

Language Families of the World
Lecture 6  Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa I
27
The Bantu Subfamily
¯
¯ Swahili is a member of the largest subfamily of Niger-Congo 
languages, Bantu, with about 500 languages. Bantu languages are also 
typical of many Niger-Congo languages in having prefixes to mark 
person and number just as Romance languages do, but also to mark 
verb tenses.
¯
¯ Most Bantu languages below the Sahara are quite similar to Swahili in 
their grammatical plans. However, in the northwestern Bantu region, 
in Nigeria and Cameroon, the languages are much more different from 
one another.
¯
¯ This shows that the Bantu subgroup emerged in this area because the 
languages have had longer to become different from one another. The 
similarity of the languages farther south shows that they have not been 
there as long. This joins the spotty distribution of the click languages to 
show that Bantu speakers overran southern Africa relatively recently.
¯
¯ The Pygmy people of central Africa also once spoke languages now 
extinct; Bantu overran them as well. Scholars know this because many 
of their words for natural phenomena are different from any Bantu (or 
other Niger-Congo) words, and are thus remnants of languages they 
once spoke. In the same way, an earlier stage of Niger-Congo likely 
overran many other languages northward as well.
SUGGESTED READING
Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel.
Heine and Nurse, eds., African Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel.
Heine and Nurse, eds., African Languages.

28
QUIZ
LECTURES 1–6
1	 How many main language families does 
Africa have? [1]
2	 Is Australia or New Guinea home to more language families? [1]
3	 What was the Proto-Indo-European word meaning ‘father’? [2]
4	 Was the Proto-Indo-European language written? [2]
5	 From what language did the Romance languages descend? [3]
6	 What factors make the Balto-Slavic languages difficult to master? [3]
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 1–6
To go back to the page you came from, PRESS Alt + ← on a PC or 
⌘ + ← on a Mac. On a tablet, use the bookmarks panel. 
CLICK to navigate. 

29
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 1–6
7	 Who is the subject of the Behistun Inscription? [4]
8	 Why are languages learned by adults less complex? [4]
9	 What is the formal name of the click languages? [5]
10	 How many basic click types are there? [5]
11	 In the 1950s, who was responsible for classifying the Niger-Congo 
languages as one family? [6]
12	 What is the most widely known Niger-Congo language? [6]
See page 162 for answers.
CLICK to navigate. 

30
LECTURE 7
Niger-Congo: 
Largest Family in Africa II
The Niger-Congo family demonstrates 
some of the different language outcomes 
that can result from the same original 
materials. This lecture looks at a diverse 
array of Niger-Congo languages, 
including the approaches used by Fula, 
Swahili, and other languages. The lecture 
also discusses the ongoing work being 
undertaken to classify Niger-Congo 
languages.

Language Families of the World
Lecture 7  Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa II
31
The Fula Approach
¯
¯ The Fula language, spoken in many West African countries, has as 
many as 20 genders, most of which do not correspond to anything 
like shape, personhood, or sex. On top of this, within each gender, 
the suffix changes shape from noun to 
noun. In the class of round things, with 
orange the suffix is -re, but with other 
words in this class, the suffix takes other 
shapes (see table).
¯
¯ When adjectives are used, they often 
take a different suffix shape than the 
noun. For example, leemuu-re mau-nde means ‘big orange.’ Additionally, 
adding a plural suffix changes the first sound of the word: gor-ko means 
‘man,’ while wor-be means ‘men.’ A Fula speaker must know which 
noun class a word belongs to, what shape of the suffix to use, and how 
the word’s first sound might change when they add something to it.
FULA
ENGLISH
leemuu-re
orange
loo-nde
jar
tummu-de
calabash

32
Other Elements of Niger-Congo Languages
¯
¯ Some Niger-Congo languages, like Swahili, keep each unit of meaning 
separate instead of having long words containing multiple elements 
of meaning. However, in the Fon language of Togo and Benin, each 
concept gets a word to itself, which is how 
Chinese works.
¯
¯ Most Niger-Congo languages use tone 
(Swahili and Fula are rare exceptions). 
However, the languages that keep words 
short use it more heavily, as Chinese does. 
In Fon, just the tone makes the difference in 
meaning between words.
¯
¯ The tones can even indicate grammar. 
In the Edo language of Benin, using 
a different tone is the way to change a 
verb’s tense.
¯
¯ In the Bambara language of West Africa, a difference in tone makes 
the difference English makes with the words the and a. For example, bá 
means ‘a river’ and bâ means ‘the river.’
¯
¯ From a European perspective, it can seem as if a language that lacks 
lists of suffixes and prefixes is somehow simple. However, languages 
that don’t mark gender, case, and conjugation can be complex in 
other ways. For example, the Yoruba language of Nigeria has several 
different verbs meaning ‘to be,’ while English has only one.
Family Classification
¯
¯ Work on exactly which languages are Niger-Congo and what their 
relationships are continues. Initial appearances can be deceiving, and 
new techniques of analysis often reveal areas that need revision.
EDO
ENGLISH
ì mà
I show
í mà
I am showing
ì má
I showed
FON
ENGLISH
gbà
break
gbǎ
build
xù
sea
xú
bone
Language Families of the World
Lecture 7  Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa II

Language Families of the World
Lecture 7  Niger-Congo: Largest Family in Africa II
33
¯
¯ For example, just as the click languages are really three separate 
families, the Kordofanian languages of Sudan are at least four families. 
They were once treated as one because they are spoken in the same 
location by similar groups of people and share some words in common. 
However, languages can exchange words, meaning that what may look 
like common inheritance actually is not.
¯
¯ There are other cases in which it seems unlikely that some subfamilies 
of Niger-Congo actually belong to the family at all. The Ijaw 
languages in Nigeria have no trace of the noun class prefixes at all, 
and their verbs come at the end of the sentence instead of in the 
middle, which is odd for the Niger-Congo group. Some today think 
this suggests that the Ijaw languages were present before Niger-
Congo even came to the area and represent what pre-Niger-Congo 
inhabitants spoke.
SUGGESTED READING
Dimmendaal, Historical Linguistics and the Comparative 
Study of African Languages.
Heine and Nurse, eds., African Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Dimmendaal, Historical Linguistics and the Comparative 
Study of African Languages.
Heine and Nurse, eds., African Languages.

Languages of the Fertile 
Crescent and Beyond I
About 70,000 years ago, humans moved 
out of Africa to the Middle East. The 
next African language family probably 
descended from what those humans would 
have spoken—that is, the Afro-Asiatic 
family. Today, Afro-Asiatic, which includes 
about 300 languages, sits on top of Africa, 
covering the Sahara and extending into the 
Middle East. It includes six subfamilies. This 
lecture’s focus is on the Semitic subfamily, 
which includes Arabic and Hebrew.
34
LECTURE 8

Language Families of the World
Lecture 8  Languages of the Fertile Crescent and Beyond I
35
Arabic
¯
¯ Arabic is known for the beauty of its writing. However, the spoken 
aspect of the language is equally magnificent, in that Arabic is so 
multifarious. Modern Standard Arabic is an artificially preserved 
version of language, held fast as it was more or less when the Qur’an 
was written, although with new vocabulary.
¯
¯ In Arab-speaking locations, people exist in a world that deals with two 
languages: Modern Standard Arabic and the local variety, which is 
different in two ways.
w
w
One way they differ is in words. For example, the Modern Standard 
Arabic word for nose is anf. The Egyptian Arabic word is manaxir.
w
w
Then, the local Arabic varieties have a different grammar from the 
standard. In Standard Arabic, yamšiyan translates to ‘they walk.’ In 
Egyptian, the equivalent term is biyimšu.

36
¯
¯ In all, Arabic actually covers a dozen different languages. Arabic, as 
dominant as it is today, began as the obscure language of Bedouins. Its 
influence spread through Islam across the Middle East and into Africa.
¯
¯ The language of the ancient Egyptians was not Arabic but a different 
Afro-Asiatic language (fittingly called Egyptian). Additionally, the 
languages spoken by peoples elsewhere in North Africa were Berber 
ones, also another branch of the Afro-Asiatic family.
The Essence of Afro-Asiatic Languages
¯
¯ The defining characteristic of an Afro-Asiatic language is the use of 
words that consist of two, three, or four consonants. The vowels change 
according to tense, number, and other additions.
¯
¯ In Semitic languages, there are three consonants in a typical word, 
with vowels modifying the words. For instance, in Hebrew, kotev means 
‘he writes’ and katav means ‘he wrote.’ That triconsonantal root is 
known elsewhere in the world only in two Native American languages 
of California, and one of them inherited it from the other through 
contact.
The First Alphabet
¯
¯ The first alphabet was written in Afro-Asiatic. Manual laborers in 
Egypt figured out that one could use the first letter of a word indicated 
with a hieroglyphic to indicate a sound. For instance, a snake symbol, 
pronounced “nun” in Egyptian, could be used to signify the sound /n/.
¯
¯ The Phoenicians, who were maritime-focused traders, fashioned 
this into a writing system—the first to track with sounds rather 
than pictures. However, they spoke a Semitic language with the 
triconsonantal roots, in which the vowels seemed less important than 
the consonants. Thus spawned today’s Arabic and Hebrew systems, 
where the vowels are indicated only approximately.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 8  Languages of the Fertile Crescent and Beyond I

Language Families of the World
Lecture 8  Languages of the Fertile Crescent and Beyond I
37
Beyond Arabic and Hebrew
¯
¯ Arabic and Hebrew are but two of many Semitic languages. By 
chance, the others tend to begin with the letter a:
w
w
Akkadian is dead, but it was the language of the people known as 
Assyrian and Babylonian.
w
w
Aramaic was once used as a lingua franca by the king of Persia and 
throughout what it is now the Middle East. It is the language of 
portions of the Hebrew Bible, used for that source with the assumption 
that people of the time would be familiar with it. Aramaic is today 
used by scattered communities in the Middle East in varieties that have 
evolved into multiple distinct languages.
w
w
Amharic is the national language of Ethiopia. Its ancient language, 
like Modern Standard Arabic and Biblical Hebrew (or Latin), is Ge’ez, 
which evolved into not only Amharic but many obscure Semitic 
languages now spoken in Ethiopia.
w
w
Additionally, there are several languages spoken in the south of Arabia 
called South Arabian. They are all endangered.
SUGGESTED READING
Hetzron, The Semitic Languages.
Versteegh, The Arabic Language.
SUGGESTED READING
Hetzron, The Semitic Languages.
Versteegh, The Arabic Language.

Languages of the Fertile 
Crescent and Beyond II
Modern research suggests that the Semitic 
languages emerged in the Middle East. 
However, other Afro-Asiatic languages 
began and stayed in Africa. Those 
languages—particularly the Berber 
subfamily and three others—are the focus 
of this lecture.
38
LECTURE 9

Language Families of the World
Lecture 9  Languages of the Fertile Crescent and Beyond II
39
The Berber Subfamily
¯
¯ The Berber languages were spoken across North Africa before 
the spread of Arabic. The term Berber comes from the Greek word 
for barbarian. It is not preferred by most speakers, who refer to the 
language according to the name of 
the local variety, such as Tamazight 
and Shilha.
¯
¯ In these languages, words can have 
no vowel at all, as in the words from 
the Shilha variety shown in the table 
at right.
¯
¯ The next three subfamilies of Afro-Asiatic are less known to outsiders, 
in part because they tend to be unwritten. However, each subfamily 
contains vast numbers of interesting languages, and each subfamily 
can also teach a valuable lesson about the nature of language.
The Hausa Language
¯
¯ The most well-known language of the next three subfamilies is Hausa, 
which is one of the three indigenous lingua francas of Nigeria. (The 
other two are Yoruba and Igbo, Niger-Congo languages.)
¯
¯ Hausa teaches us how important a language can be despite 
unfamiliarity in the West. Hausa is also spoken in Niger, Benin, 
Ghana, Togo, Chad, and Cameroon, and is used by about 40 million 
people. It has been written since the 1600s, at first in Arabic script 
because Hausa’s original speakers were converted to Islam.
¯
¯ Hausa was the language of the Sokoto caliphate of the 19th century. 
Before that, in the medieval period, it was the language of the Hausa 
kingdoms. It has been the language of traders travelling as far as the 
Mediterranean.
SHILHA
ENGLISH
ks
feed on
fk
give
sχf
fade away
fqqs
irritate

40
The Omotic and Cushitic Languages
¯
¯ The Omotic languages are all deeply obscure beyond their area. 
However, they show how difficult it can be to chart relationships 
between languages beyond a certain time depth. Some researchers 
question whether Omotic is an Afro-Asiatic group at all.
¯
¯ Researchers have compared the modern Omotic languages, 
reconstructed what the words would be in the original Omotic 
language, and compared them to words in various Afro-Asiatic 
languages of other subfamilies. They have presented this as evidence 
that Omotic is akin to them. However, one counterargument goes that 
on this basis, one could trace Omotic back to Proto-Indo-European.
¯
¯ The Cushitic languages, too, are quite obscure, except for the Somali 
language spoken in Somalia. It has only been written since the 1970s, 
but it teaches that a language can be quite sophisticated even when not 
written. For example, Somali oral poetry has strict, elaborate rules.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 9  Languages of the Fertile Crescent and Beyond II
SUGGESTED READING
Johnson, “Somali Prosodic Systems.”
SUGGESTED READING
Johnson, “Somali Prosodic Systems.”

Nilo-Saharan: Africa’s 
Hardest Languages?
Africa can be roughly thought of as 
divided between Afro-Asiatic languages 
on the top and Niger-Congo languages 
on the bottom. A third band of languages 
runs across the middle (except for a spread 
northward in Chad) that belongs to neither 
family. These languages are classified as 
a separate family called Nilo-Saharan, 
comprising about 100 languages.
41
LECTURE 10

42
Overview of the Nilo-Saharan Languages
¯
¯ The Nilo-Saharan languages are even more different from one another 
than the Niger-Congo languages are. When Joseph Greenberg first 
classified African languages, he proposed 16 families, of which 12 are 
today considered Nilo-Saharan. This indicates how different from one 
another the different subgroups within Nilo-Saharan are.
¯
¯ The most widely known Nilo-Saharan languages are Fur, because it is 
the language of the people known as Darfur, and Maasai, because of 
the fame of the African Maasai people. Meanwhile, only a few Nilo-
Saharan languages are used significantly in writing: Luo, Kalenjin, 
Dinka and Nuer.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 10  Nilo-Saharan: Africa’s Hardest Languages?

Language Families of the World
Lecture 10  Nilo-Saharan: Africa’s Hardest Languages?
43
Unique Features of Nilo-Saharan Languages
¯
¯ Nilo-Saharan languages can be strikingly unlike European languages. 
For example, English features only about a dozen irregular plurals, like 
children, geese, and oxen. In Fur, as in many Nilo-Saharan languages, 
plurals are all irregular like this.
¯
¯ In the Dinka language of Sudan, just changing the pronunciation of a 
vowel changes the entire meaning of the word. For example, cól means 
‘mouse’ while cǒol means ‘charcoal.’
¯
¯ Many Nilo-Saharan languages lack the sound /p/. This is not unknown 
in languages—Standard Arabic has no /p/ sound, either—but the 
concentration of languages like this in the Saharan region is unusual. 
It may be because traditionally, people practiced lip-distorting 
procedures in this region, which could have discouraged the /p/ sound.
Languages and Archaeology
¯
¯ The words that Nilo-Saharan subfamilies have in common can be 
correlated with archaeological evidence to show the emergence of the 
family along with African humans’ technological development. One 
word is found in all the Nilo-Saharan subfamilies except two, which 
likely branched off very early from Proto-Nilo-Saharan. This means 
that the word is very old in the family.
¯
¯ Originally, the word roughly meant ‘to lead,’ and it is used in many 
languages to refer to handling animals. Another word that is found this 
widely in the family means ‘cow.’ This would place the origin of most 
of Nilo-Saharan near the emergence of the raising of livestock in the 
area, which archaeology dates to 9000 BCE.
¯
¯ Words like the one for ‘cultivated field’ have roots in fewer subfamilies, 
which are thought to be later branches. This word came along later in 
the family’s history, as does archaeological evidence for cultivation, in 
7000 BCE.

44
¯
¯ Then, the words in the subfamilies meaning ‘sheep’ and ‘goat’ came 
from Afro-Asiatic languages. This correlates with archaeological 
evidence that Nilo-Saharan speakers indeed inherited those animals 
from the north in 6000 BCE.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 10  Nilo-Saharan: Africa’s Hardest Languages?
SUGGESTED READING
Ehret, A Historical-Comparative 
Reconstruction of Nilo-Saharan. 
SUGGESTED READING
Ehret, A Historical-Comparative 
Reconstruction of Nilo-Saharan. 

Not every language spoken in Europe falls 
under the Indo-European family or Basque. 
This lecture looks at the intricacies of 
several such languages, including members 
of the Uralic family.
Is the Indo-European 
Family Alone in Europe?
45
LECTURE 11

46
Estonian
¯
¯ Estonian features three key traits. First, a sound in Estonian can be 
doubled and even tripled, and this can make the difference between 
words’ meanings. For example, sada means ‘hundred,’ saada means 
‘send,’ and saaada means ‘to get.’
¯
¯ Second, in Estonian, irregularity is almost the rule. It can be a highly 
difficult language for non-native speakers to pick up.
¯
¯ Third, Estonian is not a Slavic language, but one of the few languages 
in Europe that aren’t Indo-European. Namely, this language, and 
more famously Finnish and Hungarian, are part of a different family 
called Uralic. The Uralic family has a rather eccentric distribution, 
covering the cap of Europe and then stretching in fits and starts 
eastward into Asia.
¯
¯ The Uralic family has its roots in the Ural Mountains. From almost all 
of the Uralic languages, it is possible to trace words for certain trees, 
among them pine trees, the Siberian fir, and the elm.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 11  Is the Indo-European Family Alone in Europe?

Language Families of the World
Lecture 11  Is the Indo-European Family Alone in Europe?
47
The Sami Languages
¯
¯ An important subset of the Uralic family is the Sami languages, once 
known as Lappish. The Sami people were originally referred to as 
Finns until the name was switched to today’s Finns, who had a more 
settled lifestyle while the Sami were nomadic.
¯
¯ Sami is first recorded in about 1200 on a shovel found in a bog in 
Iceland. It features writing in Sami and Old Norse.
¯
¯ The modern distribution shows that the family was once much more 
widespread—another indication that Indo-European was an intruder. 
Additionally, Finnish and Estonian are closely related to two languages 
spoken much further east called Mari and Mordvin, meaning there 
were once likely similar languages spoken between them.
Hungarian
¯
¯ Another Uralic language spoken in Europe is Hungarian, located in 
areas far from Estonian and Finnish speakers. Hungarian speakers 
came from Siberia, arriving at their current region in 895.
¯
¯ There is a reference in 
ancient Greek literature 
to an Onogouroi people 
who had been driven from 
their native Siberia. This 
seems to be a version of the 
name Hungary, as opposed 
to what Hungarians call 
themselves, Magyar. The 
Uralic languages most like 
Hungarian are a few spoken 
in Siberia.

48
Uralic Characteristics
¯
¯ The Uralic languages are rather tidy in allocating each unit of 
meaning to one suffix. For example, in Spanish, a single suffix in 
the past can mean both ‘I’ and ‘past.’ In Finnish, by contrast, one 
suffix means ‘I’ while another one means ‘past.’ This is termed an 
agglutinative language, as opposed to a fusional language, which seems 
typical from an Indo-European perspective.
¯
¯ Turkish is also agglutinative, which was part of why for a long time 
some linguists thought the Uralic languages were part of a larger 
grouping including Turkish and its relatives, called Ural-Altaic. 
Hungarians preferred this idea out of admiration for Turkish history. 
However, this idea is now defunct.
¯
¯ Uralic languages do not assign arbitrary genders to nouns, which 
is quite unusual in Europe beyond English (and Basque). Uralic 
languages have elaborate lists of suffixes. In Finnish, for example, talo, 
meaning ‘house,’ takes various suffixes depending on whether one 
going into the house, leaving it, and so on.
The Health of the Uralic Languages
¯
¯ In 1949, author Mario Pei wrote that the futures of Hungarian, 
Turkish, and Finnish were dim. This seems an odd notion today.
¯
¯ Many smaller Uralic languages are 
indeed endangered; for example, 
the last speaker of Livonian died 
in the early 2010s. Regardless, the 
extinction Pei predicted of even 
larger languages has not come to 
pass. Uralic is an obscure family, 
but not a moribund one.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 11  Is the Indo-European Family Alone in Europe?
SUGGESTED READING
Abondolo, ed., 
The Uralic Languages.
Karlsson, Finnish.
SUGGESTED READING
Abondolo, ed., 
The Uralic Languages.
Karlsson, Finnish.

How to Identify 
a Language Family
Languages always change, and when 
offshoots of a language separate and 
change in different directions, the result 
is a family of descendants of what was 
once one language. This lecture looks at 
the methods and difficulties of identifying 
separate language families.
49
LECTURE 12

50
Identifying a Family: Polynesian
¯
¯ The fundamental trait of a language family is that it is possible to posit 
a protolanguage from which the modern languages developed via 
regular sound changes. These changes need to be seen operating not 
just in one word, but in a great many.
¯
¯ The languages of Polynesia are a useful demonstration, in that these 
languages are some of the world’s newest, many emerging only in the 
last millennium with the settlement of certain islands in the South 
Pacific.
¯
¯ As such, the languages differ to a modest degree, making it relatively 
easy to not only see that they are related, but to reconstruct what 
the father language would have been. The following shows different 
English words, their equivalents in Polynesian languages, and their 
ancestral protoform:
¯
¯ With the words corresponding to the English post, one can assume that 
if most of them have the letter p, then most likely the original language 
did as well. Thus, the Proto-Polynesian word for post was pou. Similar 
majority-rules principles can be used to reconstruct other words.
ENGLISH
post
forbidden
cry
stay
MAORI
pou
tapu
taŋi
hono
HAWAIIAN
pou
kapu
kani
hono
SAMOAN
pou
tapu
taŋi
fono
FIJIAN
bou
tabu
taŋi
vono
PROTOFORM
pou
tapu
taŋi
fono
Language Families of the World
Lecture 12  How to Identify a Language Family

Language Families of the World
Lecture 12  How to Identify a Language Family
51
Identifying a Family: Indo-European
¯
¯ Identifying relationships between languages usually isn’t as 
straightforward as with the Polynesian group, however. For example, 
one could listen to or read Hindi for weeks and never figure out that it 
had the slightest relationship to English.
¯
¯ Less obvious relationships between languages reveal themselves in 
a small collection of words that are most often used. This is because 
words used often are subject to the stasis of habit and therefore change 
more slowly than others. For example, the linguist Morris Swadesh 
composed a list of 100 concepts assumed to be shared by languages of 
any culture and used heavily. Among those concepts are the words for 
I, you, we, bird, and dog.
¯
¯ Related languages will not match up perfectly on Swadesh’s list, as 
chance means that languages will exchange words for others over 
time. For instance, English is alone in Indo-European in its use of 
dog rather than a word related to hound. However, if languages share 
cognates for a representative portion of these words, and the sound 
laws used for Polynesian can be applied to them, then the languages 
have a family relationship.
¯
¯ This allows linguists to know from words like father that there is an 
Indo-European family. To pick three examples, father is pater in Latin, 
vater in German, and athir in Irish.
¯
¯ Once relatively obvious cases like this are clear, linguists have a basis 
for charting less intuitive processes of change, such that they can 
reconstruct how the various languages in a family came to be the way 
they are without any explicit documentation of the processes happening.
¯
¯ For example, the Armenian word for bride, 
nu, began as a Proto-Indo-European word, 
snusos. The variations of the word daughter-
in-law, shown at right, is helpful for tracing 
the word snusos.
SANSKRIT
snuṣā
OLD ENGLISH
snoru
RUSSIAN
snokhá
LATIN
nurus
GREEK
nuós

52
¯
¯ Some of the words begin with sn- while others begin with n. It is more 
likely that several separate languages lost an s by ordinary sound 
erosion than that several separate languages somehow sprouted an s. 
Therefore, the word began with sn-.
¯
¯ To decide whether the first vowel was an o or a u, we choose u, because 
more of the words have u than o. Thus, the first word would have begun 
with snu-.
¯
¯ The second consonant is a bit harder to decide on. Here, some 
additional information provides a nudge the right direction. In many 
Latin words, the letter r between vowels had begun as s. In Russian, 
many /kh/ sounds trace back to s in earlier Slavic languages. This gives 
us another /s/ sound in the examples, so the assumption can be made 
that the first word began with snus-.
¯
¯ Because daughter-in-law is a feminine concept, languages like Spanish 
and Italian would point in a certain direction: The suffix -o is the 
masculine ending and -a the feminine one, so scholars would expect 
the original ending to have been -a. However, Latin and Greek have 
-ós and -us as masculine endings. In Armenian, when the word is given 
case endings, an o appears on the stem: nuo.
¯
¯ It is more likely that the ending was for some reason originally 
masculine and some languages corrected it than that some languages 
changed a feminine form to a masculine one. Thus, the Proto-
Indo-European word must have been snusos. Through comparative 
reconstruction, then, it is revealed that a word that is merely nu 
in Albanian today began as the longer, chunkier snusos. Indo-
Europeanists mark these hypothetical forms with an asterisk: *snusos.
Even without written records of earlier stages, linguists can 
reconstruct that seemingly disparate languages originated from a 
common ancestor—that is, they belong to a language family.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 12  How to Identify a Language Family

Language Families of the World
Lecture 12  How to Identify a Language Family
53
Identifying a Family: Uralic
¯
¯ Usually, identifying a family and the relationships within it requires 
proceeding with neither of the aids present in the Proto-Indo-European 
and Polynesian cases. For example, Finnish and Hungarian are 
members of the same family; however, this is little more evident from 
the languages as they are spoken today than the relationship between 
English and Hindi is, and records of older stages of these languages do 
not go back as far as Indo-European ones and are not as copious.
¯
¯ However, core words of the 
Swadesh list type reveal the 
relationship. There are cognates 
of this kind, and these similarities 
could not be accidental. (See 
section A of table.)
¯
¯ Additionally, there are regular 
sound change processes that 
shape the differences between 
Finnish and Hungarian 
cognates, showing that there 
was once a single language 
that later became the two (and 
others). (See section B of table.)
¯
¯ The Finnish ks is ironed out into a single 
consonant in Hungarian, and the k in 
Finnish is often an h in Hungarian. 
This means that the seeming unlikeness 
between words like Finnish’s kala and 
Hungarian’s hal for fish is actually 
illusory. Another rule is that p becomes 
f, just as in the Proto-Indo-European 
pater becoming the English father. (See 
section C of table.)
ENGLISH
FINNISH
HUNGARIAN
A
blood
veri
vér
hand
käsi
kéz
water
vesi
víz
what
mitä
mit
B
two
kaksi
kettő
three
kolme
három
six
kuusi
hat
C
fish
kala
hal
head
pää
fő (‘main’)
nest
pesä
fészek
SUGGESTED READING
Arlotto, Introduction to 
Historical Linguistics.
Crowley and Bowern, 
An Introduction to 
Historical Linguistics.
SUGGESTED READING
Arlotto, Introduction to 
Historical Linguistics.
Crowley and Bowern, 
An Introduction to 
Historical Linguistics.

54
QUIZ
LECTURES 7–12
1	 Do Niger-Congo languages that keep words short trend toward 
heavier or lighter usage of tones? [7] 
2	 Which Niger-Congo language is notable for its use of up to 20 
genders? [7]
3	 Arabic began as the relatively obscure language of which group of 
people? [8]
4	 What is the defining characteristic of an Afro-Asiatic language? [8]
5	 How many people use the Hausa language today? [9]
6	 Which Afro-Asiatic subfamily features words that can have no vowels 
at all? [9]
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 7–12

55
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 7–12
7	 How many languages comprise the Nilo-Saharan family? [10]
8	 What sound do many Nilo-Saharan families lack? [10]
9	 On what item was the earliest recording of the Sami language, and 
where was it found? [11]
10	 In general, how do the Uralic languages approach suffixes? [11]
11	 What is the fundamental trait of a language family? [12]
12	 Which linguist came up with the list of 100 concepts that are assumed 
to be shared by languages of any culture and used heavily? [12]
See page 163 for answers.

What Is a 
Caucasian Language?
The small and highly mountainous region 
of the Caucasus Mountains features 
dozens of very different languages (and 
likely featured more in antiquity). The 
languages here are called the Caucasian 
languages. The languages of the Caucasus 
are three separate families, with no 
demonstrable proto-language traceable as  
ancestral to the three.
56
LECTURE 13

Language Families of the World
Lecture 13  What Is a Caucasian Language?
57
The Three Families
¯
¯ The names of the families are less important than their existence, but 
there is a southern family, a northwestern family, and a northeastern 
family. The southern family is the smallest and includes Georgian, 
which is the only Caucasus language with any renown beyond the area.
¯
¯ Northwest Caucasian includes Kabardian and the Abkhaz language. 
Northeast Caucasian includes most of the languages of the area, 
including Lezgian, Tsez, Archi, and Avar.
The Area’s Diversity
¯
¯ Topography is why there are so many languages in such a small area. 
Mountains and valleys allow speakers to be separate from one another 
for long periods, such that languages have diverged considerably.
¯
¯ As linguist Johanna Nichols has documented, the languages spoken 
in higher elevations tend to be the most complicated. That is because 
of invaders: When people overrun others, the relocated people often 
learn the invaders’ language. Roughly speaking, people who fled into 
the mountains were more able to keep their own language, rather than 
learning a simplified form of another language as adults.

58
¯
¯ Within the Northeast Caucasian family, Tsezic languages branched off 
earliest and are spoken highest up; another subfamily is spoken lower 
in the mountains, and then another one is spoken even lower down.
Complexity and Features
¯
¯ The Caucasus languages are complex grammatically to an extent that 
can surprise speakers of languages like English. As languages rarely 
learned by outsiders, they have been able to amass massive elaboration.
¯
¯ Roughly speaking, Northwest Caucasian languages have very complex 
case marking on nouns. Northeast Caucasian languages have very 
complex verb markings. South Caucasian languages are complex in 
both their nouns and their verbs. In Archi, for example, a verb can occur 
in 1,502,839 different forms. Additionally, Caucasian languages have the 
fewest vowels of any human languages, Abkhaz being one example.
¯
¯ Other vowels come out based on what sound those vowels are next to. 
For example, Abkhaz speakers do use the sound /oh/, but it only comes 
out after sounds that involve putting your lips together, like /p/ and /b/. 
That means speakers create the sound /boh/ but not /bah/. In English, 
this is similar to how the word leaves is, at its base, the word leafs.
¯
¯ Caucasus languages also tend to have ejective consonants, where 
speakers release air more explosively than usual, creating the impression 
of spitting out the sound. It is possibly not an accident that these sounds 
thrive in languages spoken in such a mountainous region. Caleb Everett 
has shown that worldwide, ejectives are more likely in languages spoken 
at high altitudes because compressing air is easier when air is thinner.
SUGGESTED READING
Colarusso, A Grammar of the Kabardian Language.
McWhorter, What Language Is.
SUGGESTED READING
Colarusso, A Grammar of the Kabardian Language.
McWhorter, What Language Is.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 13  What Is a Caucasian Language?

Indian Languages That 
Aren’t Indo-European
This lecture focuses on non-Indo-European 
languages in India, namely the Dravidian 
languages. The Dravidian language family 
includes about 24 members, notably four 
prominent languages of southern India: 
Telugu, Kannada, Tamil, and Malayalam. 
These languages are no more related to 
the Indo-Aryan languages like Hindi than 
Finnish is to English.
59
LECTURE 14

60
History of the Dravidian Languages
¯
¯ The pattern of distribution of Dravidian languages suggests that the 
languages were once spoken much farther northward as well. Members 
like Kurukh are spoken in northeast India, while Brahui is spoken in 
Pakistan.
¯
¯ However, there is some evidence that the northern languages’ speakers 
may have moved there. Brahui and Kurukh folklore portray the groups 
as immigrants. Additionally, Brahui has many loaned words from 
Balochi, which arrived in the region around 1000 CE, but not from the 
ancient Iranian language Avestan, as other languages of the area that 
have been there much longer do.
¯
¯ Tamil has one of longest written documentations of the world’s 
languages. It is first attested in cave inscriptions mixing Prakrit and 
Tamil in the 3rd century BCE, and is attested in full in 1st century AD 
Buddhist writings.
¯
¯ There are so many Sanskrit-loaned words in Malayalam, Kannada, 
and Telugu that Western analysts long thought that they were Indo-
Aryan languages. This is a lesson that the essence of a language is its 
grammatical structure, not its word stockpile.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 14  Indian Languages That Aren’t Indo-European

Language Families of the World
Lecture 14  Indian Languages That Aren’t Indo-European
61
Dravidian Structure
¯
¯ Indo-Aryan languages were deeply influenced by speakers of 
Dravidian. As such, Dravidian languages roughly embody what 
distinguishes Indo-Aryan languages from other Indo-European ones.
¯
¯ Retroflex consonants are pronounced with 
the tongue curled backward. In Tamil, a 
retroflex n makes the difference between 
the words for mind and fragrance. In the 
same way, in Hindi, a retroflex d makes the 
difference between lentil and branch. 
¯
¯ Gender marking is based on different plans 
in Dravidian languages than in Indo-
European languages. Tamil divides nouns 
into rational groups (people and deities) and 
irrational groups (animals, children, and all 
else). Sadly, some dialects exclude women 
from the rational.
¯
¯ In Kurukh, verbs take different endings depending on whether a man 
or woman is talking. They also take different endings depending on 
whether a man or woman is being spoken to.
¯
¯ In Tamil, the standard/written variety maintains the stage the 
language was at in antiquity. Colloquial varieties represent how 
the language has evolved naturally. They are essentially different 
languages from the standard. This is a common situation in languages 
called diglossia. For example, to say male student, written Tamil uses 
maan ̣avan while colloquial Tamil uses maan ̣avε̃.
TAMIL
ENGLISH
mana
mind
ma a
fragrance
HINDI
ENGLISH
dal
lentil
al
branch

62
The Languages of the Andaman Islands
¯
¯ The Andaman Islands are part of an archipelago eastward of India. 
Even though their combined area is only about 2,500 square miles, 
there were originally 14 languages spoken on them by about 5,000 
people, comprising at least two and possibly more families.
¯
¯ The indigenous people are descendants of the first humans to 
make their way across southern Asia on their way to Indonesia and 
Australia. The proliferation of languages demonstrates how much 
language change can take place in 50,000 years. One of the languages, 
Sentinelese, is unknown because its speakers have all but entirely 
resisted contact with the outside world.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 14  Indian Languages That Aren’t Indo-European

Language Families of the World
Lecture 14  Indian Languages That Aren’t Indo-European
63
¯
¯ The language situation here was inevitably fragile in the face of 
contact with the modern world. Today, there are no speakers left of 
the larger family—the last one died in 2010—and only a few hundred 
speakers of the two or three living languages in the other family 
remain. The British established a penal colony in the 1860s, and since 
then most inhabitants have come to speak Hindi.
¯
¯ The Kusunda language of Nepal has been thought to have no living 
relatives. However, some of its words are very similar in shape to the 
equivalent words in some Andamanese languages, such as Juwoi. Since 
there would be no reason for contact between people in Nepal and 
Andaman Islands residents, this is likely evidence that Kusunda is a 
branch of the same language that seeded the Andaman Island families 
tens of thousands of years ago.
SUGGESTED READING
Emeneau, “India as a Linguistic Area.”
Krishnamurti, The Dravidian Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Emeneau, “India as a Linguistic Area.”
Krishnamurti, The Dravidian Languages.

Languages of the 
Silk Road and Beyond
The languages called Altaic are spoken 
across Asia, from Turkey through Mongolia 
to northeastern regions of Asia. These 
languages’ geographical as well as 
cultural relationship make them a natural 
fit for this lecture, which focuses on Turkish 
and its relatives, Altaic’s most famous 
members.
64
LECTURE 15

Language Families of the World
Lecture 15  Languages of the Silk Road and Beyond
65
Turkic Languages
¯
¯ Turkish is one of a group of languages quite similar to one another 
called, collectively, Turkic. This group began around Mongolia and 
spread eastward, then westward. Turkic was spoken by the Huns and 
by most members of Genghis Khan’s army, and it was the Khans’ court 
language. The Mughals who ruled India from the 16th through the 
19th century also spoke a Turkic variety.
¯
¯ Anatolia—today’s Turkey—was first occupied by early Indo-European 
speakers and then by Greeks, Anatolians (likely Hittite speakers), and 
Kurdish speakers. Turkic-speaking Seljuks and then the Ottomans 
took over, and Turkish was established there by the 1200s. Many of the 
Turkic languages are, to a considerable extent, less separate languages 
than a continuum of dialects shading into one another over a long 
distance.
¯
¯ In these languages, a suffix’s vowel changes according to the vowel 
in the word it is attached to. Turkic words can also have suffix 
sandwiches, in which what would be a whole sentence in English can 
be rendered by a single word.
¯
¯ The Turkic languages have been spoken amidst much linguistic and 
cultural contact with Persian and Arabic, and as a result, they have 
often taken on a great deal of vocabulary from Persian and Arabic. 
The written variety of Turkish under the Ottomans, for example, was 
barely recognizable as Turkic because it was so mixed a language. 
¯
¯ Kemal Atatürk, leader of Turkey starting in 1923, wanted to steer 
Turkey from Arabic to Western influence. He changed the script from 
Arabic to Roman and also instituted a purge of Arabic and Persian 
words, substituting Turkish words.

66
Mongolic Languages
¯
¯ The native languages of the Mongols who ruled much of the Western 
world in antiquity have not spread much because they ruled in Turkic. 
However, this group includes varieties of Mongolian and a few other 
languages, including one spoken as far east as Russia called Kalmyk.
¯
¯ Mongolian has a trait that lends a sense of how languages can focus on 
different facets of being human. For instance, both of these sentences 
say that it rained yesterday:
Eucegder borao or-lao.
Eucegder borao or-jai.
¯
¯ The first one, with -lao, means that the speaker knows that it rained 
because the speaker saw it. The second one, with -jao, is what a speaker 
would say if the speaker had been inside, walked outside, and saw 
evidence that it had rained, such as half-dried puddles.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 15  Languages of the Silk Road and Beyond

Language Families of the World
Lecture 15  Languages of the Silk Road and Beyond
67
¯
¯ This is analogous to the difference in English between “It rained 
yesterday” and “It must have rained yesterday.” However, Mongolian 
forces the speaker to express that difference more consistently, and 
the equivalence isn’t exact. This nuance is a type of mood, like the 
imperative and the subjunctive, called evidentiality.
Tungusic Languages
¯
¯ The Tungusic languages are a small, scattered group spoken in eastern 
China and parts of Russia, including Siberia. The one with a written 
history is Manchu, spoken by the people who ruled China for almost 
300 years until 1912. They teach a lesson: Rulers have often not ruled 
in their native language. As the Persians ruled in Aramaic and the 
Mongols ruled in Turkic, the Manchu ruled in Chinese (Mandarin) 
and kept their language to themselves.
¯
¯ However, they sent a large number of speakers to the Xinjiang 
province in the west to a garrison, and 30,000 of their descendants still 
speak a variety of Manchu there today. They outnumber people who 
speak all of the other Tungusic languages combined, vastly removed 
from where the languages emerged.
SUGGESTED READING
Johanson and Csató, The Turkic Languages.
Lewis, The Turkish Language Reform.
SUGGESTED READING
Johanson and Csató, The Turkic Languages.
Lewis, The Turkish Language Reform.

Japanese and Korean: 
Alike yet Unrelated
This lecture discusses the Japanese and 
Korean languages. Some linguists have 
proposed that Japanese and Korean are 
Altaic languages, but that proposal has 
had little success. Both languages have 
certain Altaic features, but this could be 
due to borrowing rather than inheritance. 
Japanese and Korean words do not trace 
back to ones in Altaic in any real way. 
However, there is likely some relationship 
between them.
68
LECTURE 16

Language Families of the World
Lecture 16  Japanese and Korean: Alike yet Unrelated
69
Japanese Writing
¯
¯ The Japanese writing system is both unusual and interesting. The word 
order is quite unlike what Indo-European speakers are used to. For 
example, the Japanese equivalent of saying “That girl bought a book at 
Disneyland” would translate to “That girl Disneyland at book bought.”
¯
¯ Writing Japanese requires knowing three different systems of writing, 
all used together. For example, in “That girl bought a book at 
Disneyland,” the words for girl, book, and buy would all be written 
in Chinese. The foreign word for Disneyland would be written with 
symbols corresponding to syllables. Finally, the words for grammar 
would be written in yet another system, also based on syllables.
¯
¯ The Chinese system is called kanji, the system for grammar words is 
called hiragana, and the system for foreign words is called katakana. 
Refer to the video or audio lesson for more details on the Japanese 
writing system.
その少女はディズニーランドで本を買った
Sono
shōjo
wa
Disneyland
de
hon o
kat -ta
That
girl
Disneyland
at
book
bought
“That girl bought a book at Disneyland.”

70
Other Features of Japanese
¯
¯ When using Western languages, speakers attend to person and number 
especially closely. In Japanese, one attends in the same way to issues of 
status. This is called the honorific aspect of the language. For example, 
how you would say something as simple as “I’d see him” varies 
according to your gender. Japanese requires more attention to gender 
than Western languages.
¯
¯ Sentences also change according to the status of the person you are 
talking to and the status of who you are referring to. An analogy is 
that you might say, “The king was dining,” rather than saying, “The 
king was having some grub.” This kind of difference is entrenched in 
everyday expression in Japanese.
¯
¯ Japanese also has three kinds of words: native words, ones derived 
from Chinese, and ones derived from other languages such as English. 
Often, there are three different words for the same concept but from 
these three sources, with the native one the humblest, the Chinese one 
more formal, and the Western one more cosmopolitan. For example, 
there are various ways to render hotel in Japanese:
METHOD
WORD
MEANING
Japanese-derived
yadoya
‘inn’
Sino-Japanese-derived
ryokan
‘Japanese-style hotel’
English-derived
hoteru
‘Western-style hotel’
Language Families of the World
Lecture 16  Japanese and Korean: Alike yet Unrelated

Language Families of the World
Lecture 16  Japanese and Korean: Alike yet Unrelated
71
¯
¯ This difference makes the writing system even more complicated, in 
that kanji can refer either to the native Japanese word or the Chinese-
derived one. Often, there are two Chinese-derived words borrowed at 
different periods in the history of Chinese. Thus, here are three ways 
to read the kanji for rice:
Korean Language Features
¯
¯ To learn Japanese after Korean or vice versa is to feel as if one is 
learning the same language with different words. They are similar not 
only in Altaic-style features such as having the verb at the end of the 
sentence, but in specifics of sentence structure such as the markers of 
topic and object and even the shape of the past marker.
¯
¯ Korean also has honorifics in the same way as Japanese, along with 
other features. The reason for this is not yet known. However, a 
promising idea from archaeology, history, and early attestations is that 
Japanese began as a mainland Asian language, perhaps Austronesian. 
Speakers of another language from northwards began speaking their 
language in “Japanese,” with their own words (Korean) and the new 
grammar (Japanese).
¯
¯ Korean requires attention to different shadings of consonants than 
English-only speakers are accustomed to. There is a difference between 
a /p/ sound pronounced with an aspirated versus a non-aspirated 
method—that is, how much the speaker “pushes” the sound out. Refer 
to the video or audio lesson to hear this in action.
METHOD
SYMBOL
WORD
MEANING
Native method
米
kome
‘rice’
Chinese method 1
外米
gai mai
‘imported rice’
Chinese method 2
米国
bei koku
‘rice-land’ (or ‘America’)

72
Korean Writing
¯
¯ Korean’s writing system is called Hangul. Half of the Korean 
language’s words are derived from Chinese, and the language was 
once written with Chinese. However, its modern writing system is quite 
unlike Chinese’s or Japanese’s. It was invented in 1443 by King Sejong.
¯
¯ It corresponds beautifully to the sounds of the actual language. For 
example, there are different letters for aspirated versus non-aspirated 
sounds. Thus, the writing systems of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean 
are quite distinguishable.
SUGGESTED READING
Miller, The Japanese Language.
Shibatani, “Japanese.”
SUGGESTED READING
Miller, The Japanese Language.
Shibatani, “Japanese.”
Language Families of the World
Lecture 16  Japanese and Korean: Alike yet Unrelated

The Languages 
We Call Chinese
The course now turns to the languages of 
East and Southeast Asia beyond Japanese 
and Korean. Several families occupy this 
space. This lecture focuses on a group 
that we conventionally think of as just one 
language: Chinese. However, that label 
actually corresponds to much more than 
one might suppose.
73
LECTURE 17

74
Overview of the Chinese Languages
¯
¯ In one East Asian language, the way to say introduce is jièshào. In another 
in the same area, the way to say it is gaaisiuh. These languages are as 
different as Spanish and Italian. They use the same writing system, 
however, and therefore you write both of the words the same way.
¯
¯ These languages are Mandarin and Cantonese Chinese. They are 
typically termed dialects of Chinese, but this is graphocentric. Because 
Chinese writing is based on words rather than sounds, Mandarin and 
Cantonese can be written with the same system.
¯
¯ The so-called Chinese dialects are different languages, just as the 
Romance languages are. They are the descendants of the Old Chinese 
language that existed 3,000 years ago, just as the Romance languages 
descended from Latin. The terms language and dialect are often used 
arbitrarily, in reference to culture and writing as well as speech. China 
is a classic case.
¯
¯ Mandarin is spoken by about 1 billion people in China, Taiwan and 
Singapore—that is, about every seventh person in the world. Seventy 
percent of Chinese speakers speak it. Cantonese is the next most 
prominent language, especially in America. That is because most 
Chinese immigrants to the US before 1965 spoke Cantonese.
¯
¯ Taiwanese is one variety of Min, spoken by more people than 
Cantonese. Shanghainese is an entire separate language, as different 
from Mandarin as Dutch is from German. Hakka, Gan and Xiang are 
less known outside China, but are all distinct as well.
¯
¯ These languages all exist in various dialects, many mutually 
unintelligible. Min, for example, is actually various languages. One 
could say that there are actually dozens of Chinese languages rather 
than seven. The writing system, however, encourages a sense that 
they are all one unit. Additionally, education and policy inculcate 
Mandarin, such that it permeates the other dialects to an extent, giving 
the illusion that there is a single “real Chinese.”
Language Families of the World
Lecture 17  The Languages We Call Chinese

Language Families of the World
Lecture 17  The Languages We Call Chinese
75
Tones
¯
¯ In Chinese languages, the pitch 
one utters a syllable on is as central 
to expressing meaning as different 
consonants and vowels are in English. 
For instance, Mandarin has several 
tones, in which the word ma has 
different meanings according to tone.
Compounds
¯
¯ Mandarin words are single syllables consisting of a consonant and 
a vowel, and some with a final n. Other dialects may have a wider 
selection of consonants at the end, but still, there are only so many 
of these single syllables possible. Even distinguished by tones, a 
language needs more than this equipment to cover tens of thousands of 
basic words.
¯
¯ Thus, in Chinese languages, combinations of two or more words—
compounds like blackboard and bluebird—are the default rather than 
possibilities as they are in languages like English. For example, movie 
is diàn yǐng, meaning ‘electric shadow,’ and the word for Mandarin 
Chinese is pǔ tōng huà, meaning ‘general connection talk.’
¯
¯ Many of these compounds do not make sense as combinations of their 
words and are simply chunks, like understand in English. One is the 
jièshào word mentioned earlier, which combines the words meaning 
‘put between’ and ‘continue.’ The word corresponding to thing, dōngxi, 
combines the words meaning ‘east’ and ‘west.’
MANDARIN
ENGLISH
má
‘rough’
mà
‘scold’
mā
‘mother’
mǎ
‘horse’
ma
‘huh?’
You can’t learn to read Chinese simply by memorizing what all of 
the symbols mean. Learners also have to know what they mean 
when combined.

76
Numeral Classifiers
¯
¯ In Chinese languages, whenever something is used with a number, 
you have to use a little word that corresponds to various qualities of 
the thing. For example, sān means ‘three.’ The table below lists just a 
few of the 25 or so words one must use to say that there are three of 
something.
¯
¯ These numeral classifiers are 
often irregular. For instance, 
one uses zhī not only with 
animals, but also with eyes 
and suitcases.
CHINESE
ENGLISH
sān
ge
háizi
‘three children’
sān
zhī
gǒu
‘three dogs’
sān
tiáo
yú
‘three fish’
sān
kē
shù
‘three trees’
sān
bǎ
dāo
‘three knives’
SUGGESTED READING
Norman, Chinese.
Wiedenhof, A Grammar of Chinese.
SUGGESTED READING
Norman, Chinese.
Wiedenhof, A Grammar of Chinese.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 17  The Languages We Call Chinese

Chinese’s Family Circle: 
Sino-Tibetan
Chinese is actually one branch of the 
Sino-Tibetan family. The other branch 
is Tibeto-Burman, including about 400 
languages spoken mainly in southern 
China, northeastern India, and Burma. 
This lecture looks at the Sino-Tibetan 
family’s roots and features.
77
LECTURE 18

78
Proto-Sino-Tibetan
¯
¯ The Sino-Tibetan protolanguage 
likely emerged in China, with 
Chinese developing via a 
movement northward. The rest 
of the language, making up 
the Tibeto-Burman subfamily, 
developed amidst a movement 
southward.
¯
¯ Most Sino-Tibetan languages are similar to Chinese in being based 
on single syllables, often with tone. This makes it hard to reconstruct 
Proto-Sino-Tibetan because so many of the original prefixes and 
suffixes have been worn off.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 18  Chinese’s Family Circle: Sino-Tibetan

Language Families of the World
Lecture 18  Chinese’s Family Circle: Sino-Tibetan
79
¯
¯ Linguists can reconstruct, by comparing many of the modern 
languages in the family, that the Proto-Sino-Tibetan word for eight was 
approximately baragjat. However, eight in modern Mandarin is just a 
shard of that original word, bā. The intermediate stage was, in Middle 
Chinese, pwæt. Thus Proto-Sino-Tibetan words were quite unlike their 
modern descendants.
Tibetan
¯
¯ As the family’s name suggests, the two biggest Tibeto-Burman languages 
are Tibetan and Burmese. Tibetan actually refers to roughly 25 different 
languages in Tibet and beyond that have developed from an ancestor 
now called Classical Tibetan.
¯
¯ These languages show another feature that makes it hard to trace back 
to Proto-Sino-Tibetan: how tone develops. Tonal distinctions often 
develop when a consonant erodes and leaves the tone behind. We tend 
to pronounce a vowel on a somewhat lower pitch after b than after a p, 
for example. Thus, we might say back on a lower pitch than pack, using a 
lower-pitched /baa/ sound and a higher-pitched /paa/ sound, respectively.
¯
¯ Over time, a natural change would be if the k wore off the end of the 
words. If it does, then the only thing distinguishing the words is the 
difference in pitch. As counterintuitive as that can seem to an English 
speaker, humans can process this normally just as they can process the 
difference between vowels and consonants. This is how tones emerge in 
a language.
¯
¯ Classical Tibetan was not tonal, but many of the modern Tibetan 
languages are. When a consonant wore off the beginning of words, it 
often left a tone behind, so that today, words are different only in tone 
that used to be different in terms of consonants. For example, in a 
Tibetan variety of Nepal, the word for sky is nam with a high tone. The 
word in Classical Tibetan is gnam.

80
Burmese
¯
¯ As is common in languages of South and Southeast Asia, to use 
Burmese is to speak quite differently from how you write. It is also 
common to speak in radically different ways depending on social 
context. Burmese writing is based on an early stage of the language, 
such that the difference between speech and writing is pronounced.
¯
¯ Additionally, Burmese is highly diglossic: The vocabulary of formal 
contexts and writing differs massively from that of informal speech, 
in the sense of English’s kids versus children and bag versus parcel, but 
to a much vaster extent. To speak Burmese is essentially to speak two 
languages, so-called high and low varieties.
The Nature of Grammar
¯
¯ It is easy to suppose that languages on the Chinese plan lack what 
is traditionally thought of as grammar. However, the other Tibeto-
Burman languages provide a useful lesson that there are many ways 
that a language can be complex. Some of the components of the 
sentence “I gave him one fruit” in Akha, of Burma, Thailand, Laos, 
Vietnam and China are shown in the table below.
AKHA
ENGLISH
ŋá
I
àj
he
bì ̰
gave
áshì (aspirated)
fruit
thì (aspirated)
one
Language Families of the World
Lecture 18  Chinese’s Family Circle: Sino-Tibetan

Language Families of the World
Lecture 18  Chinese’s Family Circle: Sino-Tibetan
81
¯
¯ One might assume, given that there are no endings to worry about, that 
the way to structure it would be ŋà bḭ̀  àjɔ̰̀  thì áshì, meaning, “I gave 
[him] one fruit.” However, the structure is actually different, featuring 
the verb at the end and the phrase “fruit one,” not “one fruit.” 
¯
¯ Additionally, Akha has classifiers, an object marker, a marker you use 
when the subject does something to an object, and then a marker at the 
end of the sentence to mark it as a declaration.
¯
¯ In sum, even a language without conjugations and a subjunctive can be 
quite complex in other ways. This is true of languages not only in Sino-
Tibetan but in other families of Southeast Asia as well.
SUGGESTED READING
Thurgood and LaPolla, eds., The Sino-Tibetan Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Thurgood and LaPolla, eds., The Sino-Tibetan Languages.
ŋà
nɛ
àj
áŋ áshì
thì
shì
bì ̰ ma
I
he
fruit one
gave
“I gave him one fruit.”

82
QUIZ
LECTURES 13–18
1	 Why are there so many languages in an area as small as the 
Caucuses? [13]
2	 What is one possible reason that ejective consonants thrive in the 
Caucuses area? [13]
3	 Which four Dravidian languages are prominent languages of 
southern India? [14]
4	 How are retroflex consonants pronounced? [14]
5	 Where did the Turkish languages begin? [15]
6	 Which Turkish leader was responsible for a purge of Arabic and 
Persian words, substituting Turkish words? [15]
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 13–18

83
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 13–18
7	 What three systems are involved in Japanese writing? [16]
8	 What is Korean’s writing system called? [16]
9	 Roughly how many people speak Mandarin Chinese? [17]
10	 What system is used in many Chinese languages to produce multiple 
meanings from the same word? [17]
11	 Where did the Sino-Tibetan protolanguage likely emerge? [18]
12	 Why is it difficult to reconstruct the Sino-Tibetan protolanguage? [18]
See page 164 for answers.

Southeast Asian Languages: 
The Sinosphere
There are three language families spoken 
in Southeast Asia just below the reach 
of Sino-Tibetan. It would be easy to 
suppose that Thai and Vietnamese are 
related, but they actually belong to two 
distinct families. Then, Hmong is part of 
yet another family. These families are 
called Austroasiatic, Tai-Kadai, and 
Hmong-Mien.
84
LECTURE 19

Language Families of the World
Lecture 19  Southeast Asian Languages: The Sinosphere
85
Overview
¯
¯ These languages seem almost oddly alike, and in turn, uncannily like 
Chinese. Typical of this region is monosyllabic structure, tones, and 
also a telegraphic essence, in which ordinary sentences can leave more 
to context than European languages.
¯
¯ When languages across families resemble one another structurally 
in this way despite their differing origins, it is called a sprachbund. 
Sprachbunds happen when a great many people in a region are bilingual 
or multilingual over long periods of time, such that the languages come 
to resemble one another. This shows that, along with origins, language 
contact is decisive in determining what languages are like.
¯
¯ There is reason to think that the main reason for the resemblance of 
these families is that Chinese has had a major impact on all three of 
the families spoken to the south of it. This sprachbund is called the 
Sinosphere. Chinese speakers migrated southward and made most of 
the languages of Southeast Asia quite different from what they were 
originally like.

86
The Hmong-Mien Family
¯
¯ The Hmong-Mien family consists of 
perhaps three dozen languages. The 
most immediately striking feature of 
these languages is how many tones they 
can have. The White Hmong variety 
has seven, and some have up to 12.
¯
¯ Through language reconstruction, 
linguists know these languages adopted 
features from Chinese. Reconstruction shows that Hmong-Mien 
languages used to have noun class prefixes like Swahili. There are 
more remnants of those in the Hmong-type languages, which have had 
less influence from Chinese, than from the Mien-type ones.
¯
¯ These languages are stippled throughout their area in a way that 
suggests that they were once spoken uniformly across the territory and 
were later displaced by an immigrating group. That group would be 
the Chinese. Hmong-Mien speakers live up in the hills, which suggests 
that the Chinese displaced them in the same way some Caucasian-
language speakers displaced others in the past.
The Austroasiatic Family
¯
¯ Vietnamese belongs to a family 
called Austroasiatic, about 150 
languages spoken in Southeast Asia 
and extending westward into India. 
¯
¯ Vietnamese is a typical Sinosphere 
language, with six tones and 
monosyllabic words that occur in 
many compounds. This is because 
northern Vietnam was a part of 
China for about 1,000 years before 
939 AD. 
Language Families of the World
Lecture 19  Southeast Asian Languages: The Sinosphere

Language Families of the World
Lecture 19  Southeast Asian Languages: The Sinosphere
87
¯
¯ The Chinese influence upon this family is clear in that while 
Vietnamese (and nearby languages) are of the Sinospheric profile, 
the languages of the family spoken farther away are much less of this 
type, such as the Munda languages in India and the Aslian languages 
spoken in the southern part of the Southeast Asian peninsula. They 
still have prefixes and/or suffixes, for example.
¯
¯ Many Austroasiatic languages also have a feature called register, which 
functions like tone to encode meaning differences between otherwise 
identical syllables. Tones and register differences transform from one 
into another, and when both disappear, they often leave behind many 
subtly different vowels. 
¯
¯ Austroasiatic languages have some of the largest numbers of vowels of 
any languages (in contrast to click and Caucasian languages with more 
consonants). Cambodian, for example, has about 30 different vowels 
including its diphthongs, as opposed to English having about 15.
The Tai-Kadai Family
¯
¯ Thai is one member of the 
Tai-Kadai family. It, too, is a 
typical Sinospheric language. 
However, the family is likely 
an offshoot of one that is quite 
unlike Chinese.
Chinese words permeate Vietnamese vocabulary in the same way 
as they do Japanese and Korean.

88
SUGGESTED READING
Enfield, A Grammar of Lao.
SUGGESTED READING
Enfield, A Grammar of Lao.
¯
¯ Because most of the 75 or so languages of the family are still spoken 
in southern China, it is apprarent that early speakers of this language 
family migrated southward from there as the Chinese expanded. 
Contact with Chinese (and other languages already affected by 
Chinese) made the languages Sinospheric.
¯
¯ It is very important in Thai to have a politeness particle at the end of 
a sentence, and the particles differ according to the speaker’s gender. 
For example. there are two ways to say “thank you” in Thai. The male 
version is kɔ̀ ɔp kun kráp, and the female version is kɔ̀ ɔp kun kâ.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 19  Southeast Asian Languages: The Sinosphere

Languages of 
the South Seas I
The Austronesian group is one of the 
world’s vastest and most widespread 
language families. The family consists of 
well over 1,000 languages that spread 
from Indonesia across the island of New 
Guinea, throughout the South Seas, 
eastward of Australia, and all the way to 
Easter Island.
89
LECTURE 20

90
Overview of the Austronesian Family
¯
¯ Scholars know that these widely separated languages are a family 
because they have words in common that can be used to reconstruct a 
protolanguage, as in the five languages shown below. (Tagalog is the 
main language of the Philippines, and Motu is a language spoken on 
the island of New Guinea.)
¯
¯ Austronesian is the group that the Tai-Kadai language family likely 
branched off from. The language that became Japanese in contact with 
Korean may also have been an Austronesian one.
¯
¯ It is difficult to give a single characterization to a family this large, 
just as there are few traits universal to the Niger-Congo languages. 
However, Austronesian languages often exhibit a feature unusual to 
most speakers of European languages: The verb comes first.
MALAY
TAGALOG
MOTU
FIJIAN
SAMOAN
ENGLISH
mata
mata
mata
mata
mata
eye
batu
bato
nadi
vatu
fatu
stone
kutu
kuto
utu
kutu
ʔutu
louse
ibu
inâ 
sina
tina
tinaa
mother
Language Families of the World
Lecture 20  Languages of the South Seas I

Language Families of the World
Lecture 20  Languages of the South Seas I
91
¯
¯ Austronesian languages often duplicate words for various meanings. 
In Indonesian, rumah rumah means ‘houses’ or ‘a bunch of houses.’ 
Duplication can also apply to a single syllable of a word (usually the 
first one) and create new meanings. For instance, in Tagalog, bili 
means ‘buy’ while bi-bili means ‘will buy.’
Origins
¯
¯ Given its distribution, one might assume that Austronesian originated 
in Indonesia, in the South Seas, or perhaps on the Asian continent. 
However, a family originated where it is the most diverse today because 
there has been the longest period there for languages to become 
distinct from one another.
¯
¯ By that rule, Austronesian must have spread from the small island 
of Taiwan because it consists of four subfamilies, three of which are 
on Taiwan. These Formosan languages once numbered 25, and the 
diversity among them is greater than among Austronesian languages 
elsewhere.
¯
¯ Further evidence for this is that Austronesian speakers from Asia to 
Oceania make a cloth out of pounding bark, and one of the trees used 
for this is the paper mulberry. The paper mulberry used by most of 
these people traces genetically to a variety that originated in Taiwan. 
The family may have actually originated on the coast of southern 
China, but the spread would have been from Taiwan.
Malagasy
¯
¯ Austronesian languages were spread to a considerable degree via 
sailing from one island to another, often over great distances. For 
example, one Austronesian language is spoken as far afield as Africa: 
Malagasy. Note that it has Austronesian cognates.

92
¯
¯ Genetically, the Malagasy people 
are a mix of Austronesian and 
Bantu, with later admixture of 
Indian laborers. The Malagasy 
also retain various Austronesian 
cultural traditions such as 
reliance on canoes, burying the 
dead in canoes, and aspects of 
music and dance.
¯
¯ The point of departure has been traced to Borneo: Malagasy is an 
offshoot of the Barito languages spoken there. The first migration 
to Madagascar was sometime in the early centuries AD. (The first 
unequivocal evidence of people is 490 AD.)
Language Migration
¯
¯ From Taiwan, Austronesian speakers 
sailed first to the Philippines. One 
indication of this is that Austronesian 
words—other than the ones from the 
Formosan languages—trace back 
to proto-language words for taro, 
breadfruit, banana, coconut, and other 
items indigenous to the Philippines 
and the surrounding region.
¯
¯ The dominant language of the Philippines is Tagalog, or Filipino. It is 
one of about 120 languages of these islands, acquiring its present-day 
status because it was indigenously spoken in the area of Manila.
¯
¯ The migration next moved farther southward and created another 
large group of languages. The most influential one became Malay, 
known in its modern standardized version as Indonesian. Indonesian is 
now spoken as a lingua franca by about 200 million people. Javanese is 
a close relative. 
Language Families of the World
Lecture 20  Languages of the South Seas I

Language Families of the World
Lecture 20  Languages of the South Seas I
93
¯
¯ Indonesian is one of the few languages of the world that does not have 
a great many prefixes, suffixes, or other constructions that distinguish 
subjects from objects or mark gender, number, or tense, and so on. It 
also does not feature tonal distinctions. That is because it has been a 
language of trade.
¯
¯ When Austronesian speakers spread throughout the Philippines and 
Indonesian areas starting about 6,000 years ago, there were already 
people living on the islands of the area. Thus, Austronesian languages 
took on many words and even aspects of grammatical structure from 
these other languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Adelaar and Himmelmann, eds., The Austronesian 
Languages of Asia and Madagascar.
Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel.
SUGGESTED READING
Adelaar and Himmelmann, eds., The Austronesian 
Languages of Asia and Madagascar.
Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel.
Indonesian and Javanese are among the 20 most widely spoken 
languages in the world.

Languages of 
the South Seas II
This lecture continues the course’s 
discussion of languages of the South Seas. 
A particular area of focus is the Polynesian 
languages, which emerged only within the 
past millennium. Languages in this group 
include Tongan, Samoan, Tahitian, Maori, 
and Hawaiian. The Polynesian languages 
are part of the Oceanic branch of the 
Austronesian language family.
94
LECTURE 21

Language Families of the World
Lecture 21  Languages of the South Seas II
95
The Polynesian Languages
¯
¯ The earliest people of the Polynesian culture were on Samoa and 
Tonga. Starting in about 1200 BC, they sailed in canoes, reaching as 
far eastward as Tahiti by about 100 AD. At this point, westward winds 
blocked canoe travel.
¯
¯ Ethnographer Thor Heyerdahl argued that the people who settled 
Polynesia more plausibly came from the west coast of South America. 
However, it has been discovered that between 1140 and 1260, the 
direction of the winds shifted amidst a temporary change in world 
climate, which allowed the settlement of New Zealand, Easter Island, 
and probably Hawaii.

96
¯
¯ Because the Polynesian languages have been separate for so little time, 
they are quite alike. Take, for example, their corresponding words 
meaning ‘bird’ and ‘canoe,’ shown below:
¯
¯ During the migration of the Polynesians, they left behind peoples who 
stayed put at the islands reached along the way. These are today’s 
Melanesians and Micronesians closer to the east coast of Australia.
¯
¯ The Polynesian languages’ parent group, Austronesian, consists of four 
subfamilies. Three are spoken on Taiwan. The fourth includes all other 
Austronesian languages.
¯
¯ That fourth subfamily consists of three branches: a western one that 
includes Tagalog and Indonesian, a central one that includes Timor’s 
lingua franca Tetun, and then an eastern branch in the South Pacific. 
The eastern branch is the Oceanic branch.
Oceanic Sounds
¯
¯ Oceanic languages have some of the smallest numbers of sounds of 
any languages of the world. For example, Hawaiian has only the five 
basic vowels a, e, i, o, and u, plus the consonants p, t, m, n, h, l, w, and a 
glottal stop.
¯
¯ Oceanic languages also tend to have relatively simple syllables, 
consisting mostly of consonant-vowel chunks without many consonant 
clusters. This leads to interesting renditions of words from languages 
like English. In Hawaiian, Christmas is Kalikimaka.
TONGAN
SAMOAN
TAHITIAN
MAORI
HAWAIIAN
ENGLISH
manu
manu
manu
manu
manu
bird
vaka
va’a
va’a
waka
wa’a
canoe
Language Families of the World
Lecture 21  Languages of the South Seas II

Language Families of the World
Lecture 21  Languages of the South Seas II
97
¯
¯ Languages with so few sounds, and therefore so few possible syllables, 
tend to have longer words, as multisyllabic combinations are necessary 
to have a vocabulary of perceptibly distinct words. Thus, Hawaiian 
famously refers to one type of fish as the humuhumunukunukuapua’a.
¯
¯ That begs the question: Why would any languages end up having so 
few sounds? One proposal is that as groups split off, they will naturally 
carry slightly less of the original language’s equipment with them, with 
there being fewer people to use and reinforce the entire body of what 
the language consists of. This would include sounds.
¯
¯ Evidence for this is that the click languages of Africa, probably 
descendants of the world’s first language, have the most sounds of any 
languages in the world. The Polynesian languages were the world’s last 
languages to form, created by small groups leaving their homelands. It 
may not be a coincidence that it is here that languages have the fewest 
sounds in world.
Oceanic Language Components
¯
¯ The Oceanic languages feature interesting pronoun setups. It may be 
hard for an English speaker to imagine that a language wouldn’t have 
a regular way of distinguishing he and she, but a great many make no 
such distinction regularly. Then, there are languages that have a much 
finer array of pronouns than an English speaker might imagine, like 
the Melanesian language Kwaio.
¯
¯ The term for we in Kwaio differs according to whether the speaker 
means to say “me and you” or “me and them.” Then, instead of there 
just being one set of plural pronouns, there are three, depending on 
whether one means two, three (or four), or more. Refer to the video or 
audio lesson for a further breakdown on this topic.

98
¯
¯ Oceanic languages are also more specific when it comes to possession 
than English. For example, take the Maori words for grandparent and 
grandchild: tupuna and mokopuna. The way to say “my grandparent” 
is tōku tupuna. Therefore, 
one might assume that to 
say “my grandchild,” the 
correct choice would be tōku 
mokopuna. However, this is 
not the case. There is actually 
a different form of my when 
used with grandchild.
¯
¯ This is one of the subtler aspects of grammar in languages like Maori 
(and other Polynesian ones, which have this feature). There are efforts 
to revive Maori and Hawaiian, and one of the most challenging 
features for learners to master is which form of possessive marking 
nouns use.
MAORI
ENGLISH
tupuna
grandparent
mokopuna
grandchild
tōku tupuna
my grandparent
tāku mokopuna
my grandchild
SUGGESTED READING
Heyerdahl, Kon-Tiki.
Lynch, Ross, and Crowley, The Oceanic Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Heyerdahl, Kon-Tiki.
Lynch, Ross, and Crowley, The Oceanic Languages.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 21  Languages of the South Seas II

Siberia and Beyond: 
Language Isolates
The Russian language is not indigenous 
to Siberia, and there are four patches of 
the area where languages are spoken 
that are not related to one another. For 
convenience, these are referred to as the 
Paleosiberian languages, but this does 
not refer to a group of related languages. 
They and other languages are a good 
introduction to the topic of language 
isolates, the subject of this lecture.
99
LECTURE 22

100
Paleosiberian Overview
¯
¯ Among the Paleosiberian languages, 
only one group constitutes an 
actual family: the small Chukotko-
Kamchatkan cluster. This is a 
handful of languages spoken by small 
groups, under threat from Russian.
¯
¯ One of them, Itelmen, has ejectives. 
This is very rare in this part of the 
world, and it has been suggested that 
this came from languages spoken here even before. Specifically, many 
Native American languages of the Pacific Northwest have ejectives.
¯
¯ Yukaghir covers two different languages spoken by groups that lead 
different lifestyles. Yukaghir may be related distantly to Uralic. 
Additionally, Nivkh is a single language spoken much further to the 
south, and Ket is a single language spoken further to the west.
¯
¯ These languages represent an earlier layer of language in this area, 
before the arrival of languages such as Russian, Uralic, and Turkic. 
They also allude to the fact that many languages of the world do not 
classify into families, and are instead isolates.
¯
¯ Sometimes, isolates are identifiably part of former families, such 
as Ket. Other times, linguists have lost all indication of what the 
language’s relatives may have been.
Ket
¯
¯ Ket is spoken today by only a few hundred people natively, on the 
banks of the Yenisei River in central Russia. It is related to no other 
languages today. The language is very complicated grammatically.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 22  Siberia and Beyond: Language Isolates

Language Families of the World
Lecture 22  Siberia and Beyond: Language Isolates
101
¯
¯ Ket is a lone survivor of the spread of other languages. Its speakers live 
in a swampy area that would have been less attractive to the nomadic 
people who otherwise spread westward and eliminated indigenous 
groups across Siberia.
¯
¯ Ket also once had relatives—that is, it was one member of a family. 
Linguists recorded several languages, now extinct, that were related 
to it. Thus, Ket is today an isolate, but is the sole survivor of what was 
once a family called Yeniseian.
Ainu
¯
¯ Among the languages called Paleosiberian, some linguists also include 
a language isolate of Japan called Ainu. Its inclusion occurs because 
it was once spoken not only in much of Japan but as far north as 
Sakhalin Island. That it does not happen to be spoken on the mainland 
is a flimsy reason for not including it from the Paleosiberian scattering.
¯
¯ Ainu has been essentially exterminated by Japanese. Today, almost 
no native speakers survive, with most speakers only knowing it as a 
second language and themselves advancing rapidly in age. Ainu varied 
enough across its homeland that some consider it to have been a family 
of different languages, now reduced to a single one that had served as a 
general standard.
¯
¯ Grammatically, Ainu parallels Altaic in a general sense, just as 
Japanese and Korean do. However, this may well be because of sharing 
(language contact) rather than common ancestry, and Ainu cannot be 
shown to have any living relatives.
¯
¯ Ainu is one of many languages that reveal that a language doesn’t need 
writing to have a literature. There were lengthy oral epics in Ainu, 
usually performed by women.

102
Basque
¯
¯ There is only one language 
isolate in Europe, Basque, 
which straddles southwestern 
France and northeastern Spain. 
Its grammar is quite unlike that 
of Indo-European languages.
¯
¯ Like Ket, Basque was once 
more widespread and likely 
was one member of a family of 
similar languages. The word 
Basque is a cognate of the word 
Gascony, referring to an area of 
France containing, but larger 
than, the area where Basque is 
spoken today.
LANGUAGE ISOLATES ACROSS THE WORLD
There are language isolates worldwide. Many Native American 
languages have, or had, no known relatives. Additionally, there 
is a language straddling India and Pakistan called Burushaski 
that is structurally unlike any Indo-European or even Dravidian 
language, and is related to no other living languages.
The first known writing is in an ancient language of the Middle 
East called Sumerian, which, despite its central role in the history 
of language and humanity, was related to no known language 
of the past or present. It too qualifies as a language isolate.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 22  Siberia and Beyond: Language Isolates

Language Families of the World
Lecture 22  Siberia and Beyond: Language Isolates
103
¯
¯ There are inscriptions of a language spoken in this area until perhaps 
the early Middle Ages, which are clearly a precursor or relative of 
Basque. For example, Basque for man is gizon, and in in Aquitanian 
inscriptions, the word is gison.
¯
¯ Basque has successfully fought for coexistence with French and Spanish. 
However, it is a survivor of an onslaught from Indo-European speakers 
millennia ago, a single branch alive of what was once a family tree.
Etruscan
¯
¯ Before Latin emerged and spread in Italy, the language spoken there 
was Etruscan. Etruscan civilization was a sophisticated monarchy with 
a literature. The Roman Empire built upon the Etruscan civilization 
that had been in the area previously.
¯
¯ Etruscan is known from about 13,000 inscriptions in a Greek-derived 
alphabet. Because some of them have accompanying translations into, 
for example, Greek, the language is partially known. Etruscan left 
words such as military, column, people, and tuba.
¯
¯ Etruscan neatly shows that language is inherently complicated, rather 
than only having become so with the emergence of modernity. It had 
ample case marking and rules like son being clan but sons being clenar.
¯
¯ Language isolates can often be assumed to be remnants of what once 
was a whole family. Etruscan demonstrates this: There are a few 
scantily attested ancient languages of Europe that Etruscan resembles 
too closely to be accidental. There was likely a family, today called 
Tyrsenian, that Etruscan was one member of.
SUGGESTED READING
Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language.
SUGGESTED READING
Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language.

Creole Languages
Social history has dictated that sometimes a 
people are forced to first create a makeshift 
kind of speech that isn’t full language, and 
then build this into a real language. That 
creates a language that is truly a new 
one. Linguists call such a creation a creole 
language. This lecture looks at several 
examples of creole languages.
104
LECTURE 23

Language Families of the World
Lecture 23  Creole Languages
105
Tok Pisin
¯
¯ When white people settled Australia, a makeshift language, or a 
pidgin, developed between them and the local inhabitants. This way 
of speaking came to be used between English speakers and other 
people encountered during the colonization of the islands eastward 
of Australia, and eventually, as a lingua franca between speakers of 
different indigenous languages.
¯
¯ Used extensively for decades, what was once a primitive pidgin became 
a full language—that is, a creole. There are various dialects of this new 
language; the one used in Papua New Guinea is called Tok Pisin. This 
language did not exist until the 19th century. It is genuinely a new one.
¯
¯ In Tok Pisin, words can have very different meanings than in English. 
Sapos, from the word suppose, means ‘if.’ Meanwhile, save is from the 
Portuguese saber and means ‘know.’
Jamaican Creole
¯
¯ Many creoles formed when African slaves were transported to 
European-run plantations. This is why the English of Jamaica is so 
distinct from Standard English. For example, below is a sentence from 
a folktale known as “William Saves His Sweetheart” along with its 
translation.
Unu sii dat tida gyal de kom ya, unu main mi tings, no tiek non gi im.
“If you see that other girl coming here, you watch my things, 
don’t bring any to her.”
¯
¯ The term unu is a word meaning ‘you all’ in the African language 
Igbo. The use of the words take and give to mean ‘bring’ comes from 
the way that certain African languages string verbs together in the 
same way.

106
¯
¯ The term tida, meaning ‘other,’ spawned because the colloquial British 
for “the other” can be pronounced “t’other.” Creoles often reveal 
features of varieties of a language that are otherwise less known.
French, Spanish, and Portuguese Creoles
¯
¯ There are also creoles based on French. Haitian is one of them. There 
was also until recently a French creole language spoken by descendants 
of African slaves in Louisiana.
¯
¯ There lives another such creole on the island of Mauritius near 
Madagascar in Africa. It shows how a creole makes a real vocabulary 
from just a few words. In French, the words foie (‘liver’), foi (‘faith’), 
and fois (‘time’) are 
all pronounced the 
same. However, in 
Mauritian, these 
words come out with 
the article fused to 
two of them, so that 
all three are different.
¯
¯ In Mauritian, lefwa does not mean ‘the liver,’ but just ‘liver.’ The term 
meaning ‘the liver’ is lefwa-la, with the article added. (In Mauritian, 
the article comes after, not before, the noun).
¯
¯ Additionally, there are creoles based on Spanish, such as Papiamentu 
in Curaçao, and Portuguese, such as the Cape Verdean language. 
Cape Verdean shows another way that a new language builds a 
vocabulary—through the process of reduplication, where a duplicated 
form of a word has a related-but-different meaning from the root. 
For example, in Cape Verdean, peli means ‘skin’ while pelipeli means 
‘stark naked.’
ENGLISH
FRENCH
MAURITIAN
liver
le foie
lefwa
faith
la foi
lafwa
time
fois
fwa
Language Families of the World
Lecture 23  Creole Languages

Language Families of the World
Lecture 23  Creole Languages
107
Complexity
¯
¯ Creoles are less complex than older languages, but they still have 
complexities. For example, the verb be in Saramaccan—a creole 
based on English, Portuguese, and two African languages spoken in 
Surinam—is more complex than English’s.
¯
¯ If a speaker says, “I am Jacob,” then the speaker uses the form da. 
However, if the speaker discusses possession and says that something is 
theirs or someone else’s, then there is no be word necessary at all. Yet, if 
the speaker stresses that 
something is theirs or 
someone else’s—as if to 
say, “The dog is mine!”—
then a different form of 
be is used than in neutral 
sentences.
SARAMACCAN
ENGLISH
Mi da Jacob.
I am Jacob.
Dí dágu u mi.
The dog is mine.
U mí a dí dágu!
The dog is mine!
SUGGESTED READING
McWhorter, What Language Is.
Sebba, Contact Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
McWhorter, What Language Is.
Sebba, Contact Languages.

Why Are There So Many 
Languages in New Guinea?
This lecture focuses on the languages of 
the island of New Guinea. Today, New 
Guinea is politically divided between a 
western half consisting of two provinces 
of Indonesia—formerly called Irian 
Jaya—and an eastern half which is an 
independent nation called Papua New 
Guinea.
108
LECTURE 24

Language Families of the World
Lecture 24  Why Are There So Many Languages in New Guinea?
109
Background on New Guinea
¯
¯ Humans arrived on New Guinea perhaps 70,000 years ago. The 
terrain is alternately mountainous, jagged, or swampy, and the coast 
has many islands, making groups relatively isolated from one another. 
This situation, where language has been morphing among groups 
who have been relatively separate from one another’s languages, has 
led to New Guinea being perhaps the most linguistically rich spot on 
the planet.
¯
¯ There are 750 Papuan languages, plus 200 or so Austronesian 
languages on the coasts, from when Austronesian speakers migrated 
on their way eastward. Most of these languages are spoken by a few 
hundred to a few thousand people.
¯
¯ The Papuan languages are not a single family. Rather, there are about 
two dozen families of languages, plus many isolates. About half of the 
languages do constitute a family called Trans-New Guinea, however. 
The families in New Guinea are a patchwork on the island, many as 
different from one another as Indo-European is from Uralic or Sino-
Tibetan is from Austronesian.
¯
¯ A better term for Papuan languages might be simply non-Austronesian, 
especially as some Papuan languages are spoken westward in 
Indonesia, while others are spoken eastward of New Guinea in the 
Solomon Islands.

110
Tracking Relationships
¯
¯ For tens of millennia, these languages have been diverging, mixing, 
going extinct, and changing constantly. This makes it practically 
impossible to chart the historical relationships between these languages 
in the way that one can with Indo-European ones.
¯
¯ The languages have been 
diverging for so very long 
that often, the only evidence 
of original relationships is in 
pronouns alone. Pronouns 
from various languages 
of the Trans-New Guinea 
family are shown in the table 
at right.
¯
¯ That separate languages would have the same sound pattern in 
these pronouns is difficult to ascribe to chance, and languages don’t 
borrow pronouns easily like this. Still, this is some of the only evidence 
that conclusively reveals the relatedness of these languages. The 
resemblances probably reflect that about 70,000 years ago, people 
reached New Guinea and populated it rather rapidly.
Characterizing a Papuan Language
¯
¯ To characterize a Papuan language beyond the pronouns is difficult, 
given the amount of variation. However, there are a few very common 
features among them. Papuan languages tend to have only a basic set 
of five or so vowels, and a few of them rival the Polynesian languages 
for the most vowel-low languages in the world.
¯
¯ Additionally, in many of these languages, when the subject changes 
as the speaker talks about something, it is indicated not only with the 
pronoun itself, but also with a marker that announces that the subject 
will now change.
ENGLISH
I
you
he/she
UNA
na
kan
er
EKAGI
na
ka
e
MIANMIN
na
ka
a
OKSAPMIN
no-g
go
o-g
BOSAVI
ne
ge
e
GENDE
na
ka
ya
ONJOB
na
ga
me
Language Families of the World
Lecture 24  Why Are There So Many Languages in New Guinea?

Language Families of the World
Lecture 24  Why Are There So Many Languages in New Guinea?
111
¯
¯ Most Papuan languages have the verb at the end of the sentence. Given 
how natural it feels for the verb to be in the middle to an English 
speaker, it’s easy to suppose that this order is somehow the default. 
However, verb-final languages are actually slightly more common. The 
default status of that order in a place like New Guinea makes it seem 
more plausible that subject-object-verb is the default order in language, 
as many linguists believe, possibly tracing back to the first language.
Unusual Traits
¯
¯ In a place where so very many languages have been developing for 
such a very long time, the languages often challenge an English 
speaker’s very sense of how a language could work. These languages 
can indeed surprise with what they lack.
w
w
In Berik, for example, there is one word for he, she, it, and they, as well 
as for both singular and plural you. This means there is only a plural 
pronoun in the first person, as in we.
w
w
In the Mai Brat language, there are no tense markers at all. To be 
specific about time, one uses actual words such as tomorrow, but there is 
no grammatical way to place a verb in the past or future.
w
w
In the Berik language, a verb has prefixes and suffixes that specify 
things like how big an object is; whether there was one, two, or three of 
them; its distance; and the specific time of day.
¯
¯ Most verbs in the Yele languge change shape in a random way that 
simply has to be learned depending on tense and other shades of 
meaning. Yele has 90 different sounds, over 1,000 prefixes and suffixes, 
and 11 different ways of saying on, 
depending on whether something 
is on a horizontal surface, a 
vertical surface, and so on.
SUGGESTED READING
Foley, The Papuan Languages 
of New Guinea.
Pawley, Attenborough, Golson, 
and Hide, eds., Papuan Pasts.
SUGGESTED READING
Foley, The Papuan Languages 
of New Guinea.
Pawley, Attenborough, Golson, 
and Hide, eds., Papuan Pasts.

112
QUIZ
LECTURES 19–24
1	 What is the most striking feature of the Hmong-Mien family? [19]
2	 What factor made members of the Tai-Kadai family Sinospheric? [19]
3	 What is the main language of the Philippines? [20]
4	 Where is it most likely that the Austronesian group originated? [20]
5	 What is the parent group of the Polynesian languages? [21]
6	 Why do Oceanic languages trend toward having longer words? [21]
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 19–24

113
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 19–24
7	 What is a language isolate? [22]
8	 What is Europe’s only known language isolate? [22]
9	 Are creoles full languages? [23]
10	 Where is Tok Pisin primarily spoken? [23]
11	 How many language families make up the Papuan languages? [24]
12	 What trait do many Papuan languages share with Polynesian 
languages? [24]
See page 165 for answers.

The Languages 
of Australia I
Australia was formerly home to about 
250 different languages. Today, only 
about 150 of them are spoken at all, and 
only about a dozen are being passed 
on to generations of children. Thus, the 
story of Australia’s languages is largely a 
matter of recounting a bygone situation 
than a current one, as English has all but 
exterminated the original diversity of 
languages on the continent.
114
LECTURE 25

Language Families of the World
Lecture 25  The Languages of Australia I
115
Vocabulary in Alternate Situations
¯
¯ The Australian languages do not constitute members of a single 
Australian family; rather, they constitute over two dozen families. 
Sorting out these families and reconstructing what the Proto-
Australian language was like is extremely difficult.
¯
¯ A staple of many Australian cultures has been the use of special 
alternate vocabularies in certain situations. Serving as an example is 
the Lardil language, which was spoken on an island off of the northern 
coast. During a male initiation ceremony, a special language called 
Damin was used.
¯
¯ Damin consisted of many fewer words than Lardil had—only about 
150—used with Lardil grammar. For example, Damin’s only pronouns 
were one for me and another for not me. Damin also had clicks, making 
it the only speech variety in the world with clicks outside of the click 
languages in Africa.
¯
¯ Similarly, the Queensland language Dyirbal used a similar alternate 
vocabulary with in-laws and cousins because they were within the 
circles of people who one might marry or be an in-law to. Thus, it was 
thought best to avoid contact with close relatives within that circle.
Reconstruction Difficulties
¯
¯ In Australian language usage, there has been comfort with a high 
degree of word substitution. This general tendency has extended 
to permanent, as opposed to ceremonial, usage. For example, 
intermarriage between groups has been quite common, leading to a 
great deal of multilingualism and language mixture.
¯
¯ The languages Ngandi and Rithargu are from different families. 
However, Ngandi shares more vocabulary with Ritharngu than with 
its own relatives, such as Nunngubuyu.

116
¯
¯ Considering that humans reached Australia about 65,000 years 
ago, with change having taken place over that entire period, tracing 
the relationships of these languages is a massive undertaking. It is 
especially difficult in Australia to decide whether features languages 
share are due to common ancestry or later influence.
Family Tree Fundamentals
¯
¯ There are very few words common enough among all Australian 
languages to be seen as protowords. Some of the few are nga (meaning 
‘I’), bu (meaning ‘hit’), na (meaning ‘see’), and wo (meaning ‘give’).
¯
¯ It is possible that there was not a single Proto-Australian language 
but several, especially given that New Guinea and Australia were 
contiguous until about 10,000 years ago. Nevertheless, there is no 
family likeness between the Papuan languages of New Guinea and 
those in Australia.
¯
¯ A family of languages called Pama-Nyungan occupies most of the 
Australian continent. The name comes from words for man in two of 
the subfamilies. A segment of the north contains about two dozen other 
families within a relatively small area. These are referred to as non-
Pama-Nyungan, but this is a description rather than a family name. 
The relationships between the non-Pama-Nyungan families are still 
being worked out.
¯
¯ Based on this distribution, it would 
appear that the first Australians 
migrated from the north, such that 
in that area, languages have had 
the longest to diversify. This would 
correspond to the fact that humans 
would have encountered Australia 
while travelling southward from 
Indonesia and New Guinea.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 25  The Languages of Australia I

Language Families of the World
Lecture 25  The Languages of Australia I
117
¯
¯ The Pama-Nyungan family represents a more recent spread, such that 
the languages are more alike than the non-Pama-Nyungan ones in the 
north. Pama-Nyungan languages are quite different from one another, 
but the family has been established on the basis of commonalities of 
vocabulary and some in grammar.
¯
¯ The family relationship is not as cleanly evident as that of Indo-
European languages. However, Australia demonstrates that it is 
unrealistic to expect the Indo-European degree of detail in, perhaps, 
most language families.
Australian Language Traits
¯
¯ Despite their diversity, Australian languages, partly because of endless 
contact, tend to exhibit certain traits across the continent. They 
tend to have relatively few vowels, often just a, i, and u. Additionally, 
Australian languages often lack the “hissy” sounds like /f/, /s/, and /sh/, 
as opposed to “stop” sounds like /p/, /t/, and /k/, and nasal ones like /m/ 
and /n/.
¯
¯ Word order in many Australian languages is largely free. The words 
can be in any order, except the word corresponding to is.
SUGGESTED READING
Dixon, Australian Languages.
———— , Edible Gender, Mother-in-Law 
style, and Other Grammatical Wonders.
SUGGESTED READING
Dixon, Australian Languages.
———— , Edible Gender, Mother-in-Law 
style, and Other Grammatical Wonders.

The Languages 
of Australia II
Various features of the Australian 
languages give a sense of how many 
different ways there are to be a language. 
Sometimes, they even show how many very 
different ways there are of being human 
in the bargain. These languages are very 
different from each other, but there are still 
certain hallmarks of Australian languages.
118
LECTURE 26

Language Families of the World
Lecture 26  The Languages of Australia II
119
Unique Features
¯
¯ In many Australian languages, there are very few verbs. For example, 
in Jingulu of the Northern Territory, there are only three verbs: come, 
do, and go.
¯
¯ The Guugu Yimithirr language of Queensland is distinctive first in having 
been the first Australian language documented by Europeans. However, 
the language is also interesting in that speakers do not think of things 
being in front of, behind, to the left of, and to the right of them. Instead, 
they think of objects as always being to the north, south, west, and east.
¯
¯ If a tree is in front of them and to the north, then they say it is north of 
them. Even when they turn around, they do not say it’s behind them; 
they still say it is to the north. This trait is connected to flat geography, 
in which case it is useful to keep careful track of geographical 
direction. Speakers of the language tend not to use this feature when 
living in towns.
¯
¯ Australian languages usually mark subjects in two ways: one for when 
there is an object in the sentence and one for when there isn’t. This 
means that these languages keep track overtly of whether a subject is 
acting on something or just undergoing something. This is called an 
ergative language.
Dyirbal Language Features
¯
¯ The features of the Dyirbal 
language serve as an interesting 
case study of the Australian 
languages. Dyirbal has four noun 
classifiers, which subdivide people 
and things in an interesting way. 
The classifiers are bayi, balan, 
balam, and bala. They mark four 
classes of noun.
CLASS 1 men, kangaroos, 
possums, bats, most 
animals
CLASS 2 women, fire, water, 
stinging animals, some 
other animals
CLASS 3 fruit and the trees that 
bear them
CLASS 4 inanimate objects and 
everything else

120
¯
¯ There are four reasons a language would split nouns up that way:
1	 Change over time. In an earlier stage of Dyirbal, there were many 
more classifiers that subdivided things into more categories, such as 
water, animals in general, stinging animals, and so on.
2	 Folklore, in which the Sun is thought of as female.
3	 Semantic extensions: With the Sun as female, it is natural to think 
of fire as female as well, as well as the burning sensation from 
being stung.
4	 Resemblances in sound.
¯
¯ The Dyirbal described above is actually extinct. The Dyirbal spoken 
by young people today uses a simplified system. Such simplification 
processes can occur naturally, but when they happen to such a degree 
within a short period of time, it is a sign that the language is no longer 
being used in its full, original form.
Mixed Languages
¯
¯ Another way that Australian languages change under modern 
conditions and threat from other languages is to evolve into mixed 
languages. Both creole languages—which grow from pidgins—and 
outright mixture have occurred in Australia.
¯
¯ When Europeans reached Australia, a pidgin English developed, 
which evolved into several creoles. One of them was Tok Pisin. 
However, another variety developed on Australia itself, and soon was 
used between Aboriginal groups themselves as a lingua franca. This 
language is called Kriol and is still used by Aboriginals.
¯
¯ Today, young people’s version of Australian languages mixes words 
and grammar from this Kriol and the indigenous language, creating 
what is essentially a new language.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 26  The Languages of Australia II

Language Families of the World
Lecture 26  The Languages of Australia II
121
The Tasmanian Languages
¯
¯ One story remaining is that of the languages of Tasmania, an island 
southwards of Australia. The island has been separated from Australia 
for about 12,000 years. Europeans documented about 12 languages 
spoken there. They only transcribed words and sometimes very 
basic grammar, and the actual names of the languages are lost. The 
Tasmanian languages consisted of about three distinct families.
¯
¯ Those languages were only spoken until the 1830s. The English largely 
exterminated the indigenous people and relocated those left to Flinders 
Island, where a mixed version of the Tasmanian languages developed. 
That, too, is long extinct. Some form of Tasmanian language, possibly 
this mixed version, was recorded in 1903 by an indigenous woman 
born on Flinders Island.
¯
¯ The Tasmanian languages are not a farther group of Australian 
languages—they are quite unlike them. This likely sheds light on an 
earlier situation in Australia. Human languages have been spoken 
there for about 65,000 years, while Pama-Nyungan languages are 
closely enough related that the family cannot have existed for longer 
than several thousand years.
¯
¯ Thus, it is likely the Pama-Nyungan speakers spread throughout most 
of Australia relatively recently, overtaking what would have been 
innumerable languages spoken there originally. Most of Australia’s 
linguistic map may have been as dense with distinct languages and 
families as the non-Pama-Nyungan region in the north is today. The 
Tasmanian situation 
may have reflected this 
original situation, with 
its dozen languages of 
three families spoken 
on an island not much 
bigger than Ireland.
SUGGESTED READING
Dixon, Australian Languages.
———— , Edible Gender, Mother-in-Law 
style, and Other Grammatical Wonders.
SUGGESTED READING
Dixon, Australian Languages.
———— , Edible Gender, Mother-in-Law 
style, and Other Grammatical Wonders.

Before the arrival of white people in North 
America, there were about 300 distinct 
languages spoken. About 200 of those 
languages are no longer spoken, about 50 are 
barely hanging on, and only about a dozen 
will likely be spoken by 2050. That dozen 
includes Navajo, Cree, Ojibwe, Inuktitut, Hopi, 
Lakhota, Choctaw, and Apache. However, 
within the United States, about half of speakers 
of Native American languages are Navajo 
speakers, of which there are about 170,000. 
Roughly 350,000 total people speak any 
Native American language.
The Original 
American Languages I
122
LECTURE 27

Language Families of the World
Lecture 27  The Original American Languages I
123
Migration History
¯
¯ The most recent research suggests that Native Americans’ ancestors 
migrated from northeastern Asia (Siberia) across to modern-day 
Alaska. What is today the Bering Strait was a landmass linking Asia 
and North America, termed Beringia. Archaeological, biological, 
and genetic evidence suggest that around 1,000 Asians migrated to 
Beringia about 23,000 years ago, but were blocked from crossing to 
North America by ice for several thousand years.
¯
¯ About 15,000 years ago, the ice melted and allowed passage into North 
America. There is controversy as to whether the migrants spread via 
land, through the middle of North America and southward, or entered 
the continents from the Pacific coast.
¯
¯ Archaeological evidence of the Clovis culture, typified by a type of 
arrowhead and other tools, dates from around 13,000 years ago at 
various sites in North America. This represents the earliest settlements 
of Native Americans.
¯
¯ The El Monte site in southern Chile possibly complicates this account 
in that it has remains of human habitation that date to almost 15,000 
years ago. This would be too early for a migration that supposedly 
began at that point in Alaska.
Family Relationships
¯
¯ Native American languages exhibit massive diversity. Predictably, their 
classification has been difficult and quite controversial.
¯
¯ The so-called textbook account recounts that linguist Joseph 
Greenberg proposed in 1987 that Native American languages fell 
into three families: one composed of Arctic languages spoken by the 
Inuit, called Eskimo-Aleut; another spreading from Alaska down 
to the American Southwest that includes Navajo, called Na-Dene; 
and another including all of the hundreds of other languages, called 
Amerind.

124
¯
¯ However, historical linguists have almost universally rejected this 
system. Rather, it is agreed that Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene are 
families, but that what Greenberg classified as Amerind really 
comprises a great many separate, unrelated families.
The Amerind Controversy
¯
¯ Greenberg’s evidence for Amerind being a family was based on a 
tendency among these languages for words for I to contain the letter 
n and words for you (in the singular) to contain the letter m. Other 
linguists have claimed that the number of Native American languages 
with this pattern could be a matter of chance, especially given that 
languages might borrow pronouns and that pronouns in general tend 
to use nasal sounds.
¯
¯ Additionally, a disciple of Greenberg’s, Merrit Ruhlen, has noticed 
that many so-called Amerind languages have words for child, son or 
brother, and daughter or sister that seem to suggest an original set. Most 
specialists on Native American languages reject this as evidence that 
Amerind is a family.
¯
¯ They are correct in terms of the technical definition of what a 
language family is: The Amerind languages cannot be shown to have 
descended from a single protolanguage via regular sound changes the 
way Proto-Indo-European can. There is no set of cognates that all 
or most of these languages share in common. There is no complex of 
grammatical features the Amerind languages have in common, either.
¯
¯ However, given how small the Beringian population was, it is quite 
plausible that the Native American languages stem from a small 
number of original languages. Here, it is relevant that speakers of 
Eskimo-Aleut languages and Na-Dene languages have a distinct 
genetic imprint different from that of speakers of the other Native 
American languages. It is possible that the latter languages descended 
from a single original one.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 27  The Original American Languages I

Language Families of the World
Lecture 27  The Original American Languages I
125
¯
¯ Despite that, after such a long period of time, the likenesses between 
these languages would have diluted to such a degree that a family 
relationship could only be dimly perceptible. Thus, the Amerind 
languages are probably descendants from a single source. However, 
that probably does not render them a family at this late date.
¯
¯ Rather, in the conventional sense, there are about 10 major families 
of Native American languages. The Amerind group is about eight 
families, rather than a single family. There are also about 20 other 
smaller families and various isolates.

126
Na-Dene
¯
¯ The Na-Dene family includes Navajo as well as Apache, a similar 
language, and less well-known languages spoken to the north. Most of 
the languages belong to a subfamily called Athabaskan.
¯
¯ This family is unique in that it has 
become increasingly accepted that 
it traces to speakers of the Yeniseian 
languages like Ket. There are many 
words that are unexpectedly similar, 
such as the words for foot and stone.
¯
¯ Additionally, Ket and Navajo are dazzlingly complex in similar ways. 
In Ket, words often sandwich together assorted elements of meaning 
indicated with often a single sound. Navajo operates in a similar 
fashion. Another similarity is that both languages have tones.
¯
¯ Navajo and the other Na-Dene languages are useful in showing that 
indigenous languages tend to be more, not less, complex than written 
ones. In Navajo, verbs are all irregular. The forms differ according to 
tense and other factors in ways different for each verb. For instance, 
below are five different versions of the term for carry.
ENGLISH KET
NAVAJO
foot
ki ʔs
kee’
stone
tə ʔs
tsé
PRESENT
PAST
FUTURE
REPETITIVE
SUBJUNCTIVE
teeh
tį
tééł
tééh
tééł
SUGGESTED READING
Mithun, The Languages of Native North America.
Ruhlen, The Origin of Language.
SUGGESTED READING
Mithun, The Languages of Native North America.
Ruhlen, The Origin of Language.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 27  The Original American Languages I

This lecture and the next cover some of 
the larger families of North America and 
some lessons they teach about language in 
general. The Eskimo-Aleut languages, the 
Algonquian languages, and the Penutian 
family are areas of focus in this lecture.
The Original 
American Languages II
127
LECTURE 28

128
Eskimo-Aleut
¯
¯ The Eskimo-Aleut languages are spoken in Alaska, northern Canada, 
Greenland, and parts of eastern Siberia. In other words, this family is 
spoken in and near the Arctic. This family was the last to emerge: The 
first humans to inhabit the area came in a second wave from Beringia 
about 5,000 years ago, and were replaced by new populations that 
arrived 2,800 and then 1,000 years ago.
¯
¯ This family consists not of a single language with various dialects, 
but essentially three such languages, within two of which dialects are 
so divergent as to essentially be different languages. Aleut is a single 
language. Yupik varies considerably from one location to another, 
as does the language often called Greenlandic or Inuktitut spoken 
eastward.
¯
¯ In Greenland and Canada, Greenlandic is a co-official language with 
the dominant ones, and therefore remains a living language. However, 
in Alaska and Russia, where Yupik and Aleut are afforded no such 
status, the languages are all but extinct.
¯
¯ These languages have unusually long words, often containing the 
information English would require an entire sentence for. This is called 
polysynthesis. For instance, Iminngernaveersaartunngortussaavunga would 
be the full sentence “I should stop drinking.”
Algonquian
¯
¯ The Algonquian group of languages was spoken, among other places, 
on the East Coast. For this reason, it is Algonquian languages that 
Native Americans most familiar in American history most often 
spoke. The language of Squanto at Plymouth Rock was Naragansett, 
Pocahontas spoke Powhatan, and the original inhabitants of New York 
spoke Munsee.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 28  The Original American Languages II

Language Families of the World
Lecture 28  The Original American Languages II
129
¯
¯ Thus, many words from Native American languages in English 
originated in these languages. An example is squash, which originated 
in Naragansett’s askutasquash, meaning ‘thing eaten raw.’
¯
¯ Interestingly, there are languages related to the Algonquian ones 
spoken in northwestern California. This shows that Algonquian 
languages were likely once more 
widespread. It also means that 
properly speaking, the family is one 
that includes Algonquian and these 
other languages. That family is 
called Algic.
Penutian
¯
¯ California is home to 78 different languages. A great many of them 
belong to a family called Penutian, whose composition has been highly 
controversial: It consists of what many would consider six or more 
separate families.
¯
¯ Even by conservative estimate, California is home to five different 
language families, plus isolates suggesting there were once even 
more. The question is why. One reason may be that languages in 
the area were closely associated with their region, such that it was 
largely forbidden to speak a language outside of its territory for 
interpretational purposes.
¯
¯ This discouraged languages replacing one another. It also discouraged 
the lexical mixture common in, for example, Australia, and 
encouraged languages to diverge from one another and even become 
different ones. The West and East dialects of Greenlandic are quite 
divergent for a similar reason: There was a taboo on using one 
another’s words.

130
¯
¯ Penutian languages illuminate the complexity of Native American 
languages in showing that indigenous languages can have the case 
marking best known from Indo-European languages like Latin, Greek, 
and Russian.
¯
¯ In these languages, intricate rules a native speaker would have 
difficulty explaining are common. These are languages that speakers 
were often required not to speak in school, and which are almost all as 
a result now extinct.
SUGGESTED READING
Golla, California Indian Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Golla, California Indian Languages.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 28  The Original American Languages II

The Original 
American Languages III
This lecture continues the course’s 
discussion of original American languages. 
Topics discussed include the Iroquoian 
and Hokan language groups, Tanoan 
languages, and the death of languages.
131
LECTURE 29

132
Iroquoian
¯
¯ The names of many of the Iroquoian 
languages—such as Cayuga, Seneca, 
Oneida, Mohawk, Erie, and Huron—
suggest where this family of languages 
has been spoken. Of them, only two, 
Cherokee (in Oklahoma, Arkansas, 
and North Carolina) and Mohawk (in 
Canada and northern New York) are 
viable. The others will soon be extinct.
¯
¯ The relative vitality of Cherokee is due partly to the fact that it has its 
own writing system. A Cherokee silversmith who spoke no English, 
Sequoyah, was impressed by whites’ “talking leaves” and invented a 
writing system for his language in the 1820s.
¯
¯ He first tried to have separate symbols for each word, but realized 
that was unwieldy. Then, he created not an alphabet but a syllabary. 
Sequoyah was illiterate, however, and thus the symbols do not 
correspond with their Roman values. Regardless, most Cherokee were 
soon literate in their language, and a great deal of material has been 
published in it.
A peculiar feature of the Iroquoian languages is that they tend not 
to have consonants that require putting the lips together—that is, 
there are no /p/, /b/, /f/, or /m/ sounds. Those sounds are simply 
missing, despite that from a European perspective, they seem basic 
to language itself. This is a highly unusual feature in terms of the 
world’s languages.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 29  The Original American Languages III

Language Families of the World
Lecture 29  The Original American Languages III
133
Hokan
¯
¯ Whether the West Coast’s Hokan languages 
form a family is not firmly established. They 
have a scattered distribution pattern. They 
“feel” like several separate families, perhaps 
related in the way that Amerind languages 
likely are.
¯
¯ However, one general Hokan trait is that 
prefixes often carry richer meaning than 
those in European languages. For example, in 
Central Pomo, there was a range of prefixes. 
The following is a list of them and what they meant:
¯
¯ Used with a verb, such as the one for mix, these prefixes were central to 
rendering the vocabulary a full one. For instance, h-yól meant ‘to add 
salt or pepper.’
PREFIX
MEANING
sh-
with a handle
cha-
by slicing
h- 
by poking
qa- 
by biting
ba- 
orally
‘- 
by fine hand action, such as with the fingers
s- 
by sucking
chh-
involving vegetative growth
da- 
by pushing with the palm
m- 
with heat
sha-
by shaking

134
A Smaller Family
¯
¯ The Tanoan languages are a small family, spoken in Kansas, 
Oklahoma, Texas, and New Mexico. They provide a sense of the 
degree of loss involved in the extinction of most Native American 
languages in that even in such obscure corners, there are amazing 
ways of constituting a language.
¯
¯ Kiowa is spoken in Oklahoma, and the way it 
handles the singular and plural is interesting. 
If you were learning how to do the plural 
in Kiowa, then you’d think it was pretty 
straightforward from the word skunk.
¯
¯ However, the term for wings is seemingly 
confusing. What does that suffix mean if 
it makes a plural for skunk but a singular 
for wing? The confusion would continue as 
you learned how this suffix worked for horse 
and bone.
¯
¯ In Kiowa, that suffix means roughly the opposite of the default 
number. Skunks are usually encountered alone, and so the suffix 
makes it plural. Wings are usually encountered in pairs, so the suffix 
makes it singular. Nouns fall into classes in Kiowa in which the suffix 
differs in this way.
The Death of Language
¯
¯ Native American languages are useful in showing how much is lost 
when a language dies in terms of how these magnificently complicated 
grammatical systems gradually decay as new generations are not raised 
speaking the language daily throughout their lives.
KIOWA ENGLISH
tâl 
skunk
tâl-g
skunks
c’ól
wings
c’ól-g
wing
cę̂
horse
cę̂-g
horses
thǫ́:sè
bones
thǫ́:sè-g
bone
Language Families of the World
Lecture 29  The Original American Languages III

Language Families of the World
Lecture 29  The Original American Languages III
135
¯
¯ Gros Ventre was an Algonquian language of Montana. Before its last 
speakers passed on in the early 1980s, even they no longer spoke the 
language fully. For example, the plural of duck was different, based on 
using a different plural ending on the wrong word. This ending was 
misused with other words as well, such as the word for pine tree.
¯
¯ In the Pipil language of El Salvador, there was originally an ending 
used to make the future, which today’s speakers have largely let go in 
favor of using a different, easier construction. Though the new version 
is easier to use, it means the language is diluted, especially with much 
more of this kind of change happening throughout the language.
¯
¯ Complexity could also be lost when speakers of different languages 
were forced together into reservations. When English and French 
speakers encountered speakers of various massively complex languages 
in the Pacific Northwest, a pidgin emerged based on words from the 
Chinook language and others. However, this pidgin, even when spoken 
fluently to the point that it was almost an actual language, lacked 
almost all of what made the indigenous ones interesting.
SUGGESTED READING
Grenoble and Whaley, eds., Endangered Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Grenoble and Whaley, eds., Endangered Languages.

The Original 
American Languages IV
Native Americans continued their 
migration beyond North America to 
inhabit Central and South America as 
well. There are now about seven families 
local to Central America and about 15 
more in South America.
136
LECTURE 30

Language Families of the World
Lecture 30  The Original American Languages IV
137
Whistled Speech
¯
¯ As in North America, the families of Central and South America have 
been diverging for too long for there to be a Central American or 
South American type of language in any overarching way. However, 
many languages of the Otomanguean family resemble Chinese in 
having small words that are distinguished by tones.
¯
¯ Speakers of these languages have often used special whistled languages 
for long-distance communication. Whistled languages are found 
worldwide, generally in mountainous or heavily forested locations.
¯
¯ Chinantec, for instance, has seven tones, and also short and long 
vowels. The syllable ta, for example, can mean many different things, 
from ladder to foot to full sentences. In Chinantec, the whistled 
speech is used only by men. Worldwide, these whistled varieties are 
disappearing, supplanted by telephones, radio, and modern media.
Arawak and Cariban
¯
¯ Two families of South America are Arawak and Cariban. Both stretch 
up into the Caribbean.
¯
¯ The Garifuna language of northern Central America is interesting in 
two ways. First, it is Arawakan out of its normal range. Second, it has a 
great deal of Cariban vocabulary.
¯
¯ The reason is this: Several centuries ago, Garifuna arose on the 
Caribbean islands of Dominica and St. Vincent. Men from South 
America, speaking the Carib language, invaded these islands, killed 
the men, and married the women, who spoke an Arawakan language.
¯
¯ The women learned Carib only partly, retaining their own grammar, 
and this is what they passed on to children. The result was a new 
mixed language with Arawak grammar and a lot of Carib vocabulary.

138
¯
¯ There were two more wrinkles. 
First, for a long time, the men 
used the Carib language among 
themselves. Second, the Carib the 
men were speaking was a pidgin 
Carib, used with other groups 
in South America. Therefore, 
Garifuna emerged as a mixture 
between a pidgin and a real 
language.
South American Language Traits
¯
¯ South American languages are among the world’s least completely 
documented. Some groups are still all but unreached by outsiders, and 
comprehensive fieldwork has begun only in recent decades.
¯
¯ In many South American languages, one must be especially explicit 
in indicating the sources of information one imparts. This is called 
evidential marking. In a 
language like Tuyuca spoken in 
the Amazon of Colombia and 
Brazil, there are five different 
suffixes indicating how one 
knows what one is stating. 
For instance, take the suffixes 
shown in the table at right, 
which are used when saying, 
“He played soccer.”
¯
¯ South America is home to the 
most exotic word orders ever 
discovered, which were once 
considered impossible. In a few 
languages, the object comes first, then the verb, and then the subject. 
In the Brazilian language Hixkaryana, the way to say “A boy caught a 
fish” translates roughly to “Fish caught boy”: Kana yannimmo biryekomo.
TUYUCA
MEANING 
OF SUFFIX
díiga apé-wi
I saw him.
díiga apé-ti
I heard him.
díiga apé-yi
I see his shoe print on 
the field/his sweaty shirt 
on the bed.
díiga apé-yigɨ
I’ve been told.
díiga apé-hĩyi
One assumes.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 30  The Original American Languages IV

Language Families of the World
Lecture 30  The Original American Languages IV
139
Lack of Numbers
¯
¯ The Pirahã language of the Amazon has no words for numbers. The 
word hói means ‘small amount’ and the word hoí means ‘a slightly 
bigger amount,’ but they do not correspond to one and two.
¯
¯ It is common for hunter-gatherer groups to have no, or very few, 
numbers. This is especially common where such groups have survived 
in large numbers, namely South America and Australia.
The Jarawara Language
¯
¯ The Jarawara call themselves “We, the real people” in their language. 
They consider their language a separate language from two others 
spoken in nearby villages, which are actually varieties of the same 
language, mutually intelligible with the Jarawara variety. Jarawara is 
spoken only by about 170 people, and this appears to have been the 
situation since very long ago.
¯
¯ There are many features in the language that Westerners would not 
expect. For instance, there are only four vowels: a, e, i, and an o that 
sounds more like /aw/.
¯
¯ There are also only 11 consonants, which lead to only so many possible 
word shapes, and neither tones nor compounding have been adopted 
as a solution. Instead, homonymy is simply more common than in a 
European language. Mai means both ‘sun’ and ‘thunder.’ Jomee means 
both ‘dog’ and ‘jaguar.’
¯
¯ If no gender is specified, feminine 
endings are used, not masculine. 
There are also no pronouns for 
he, she, or it. Additionally, there is 
no pronoun for they, except if the 
things are living.
SUGGESTED READING
Dixon and Aikhenvald, eds., 
The Amazonian Languages.
Everett, Language.
SUGGESTED READING
Dixon and Aikhenvald, eds., 
The Amazonian Languages.
Everett, Language.

140
QUIZ
LECTURES 25–30
1	 What is the only language to feature clicks outside of Africa’s click 
languages? [25]
2	 Do Australian languages trend toward higher or lower levels of word 
substitution? [25]
3	 How many noun classifiers does the Dyirbal language have? [26]
4	 How does the Guugu Yimithirr language handle directions? [26]
5	 How many distinct languages were spoken in North America before 
the arrival of white people? [27]
6	 How many people speak a Native American language today? [27]
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 25–30

141
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 25–30
7	 How are the Eskimo-Aluet languages sometimes able to contain an 
English sentence’s worth of information in a single word? [28]
8	 Which of the Eskimo-Aluet languages is a co-official language in 
Greenland and Canada? [28]
9	 Which of the two Iroquoian languages are still viable? [29]
10	 In the Hokan languages, are prefixes more or less detailed than those 
in European languages? [29]
11	 Have South American languages been well documented? [30]
12	 What factors have led to the decline of whistled speech? [30]
See page 166 for answers.

Languages Caught 
between Families
Categories in phenomena related to 
human beings tend to be inherently fuzzy. 
This is true of the difference between 
language and dialect, and also between 
language families. There are languages 
that have arisen via the combination of 
languages from two families, creating a 
language that one could see as belonging 
to both families.
142
LECTURE 31

Language Families of the World
Lecture 31  Languages Caught between Families
143
Examples of Language Combinations
¯
¯ In Ecuador, indigenous men speaking the Native American language 
Quechua learned Spanish working outside of their villages. They 
spontaneously created a language expressing their new identity as 
people connected both to village and urban life. This language, known 
as Media Lengua, consisted of Spanish words used with prefixes and 
suffixes and grammar from Quechua.
¯
¯ On both sides of the American border with Canada, the offspring 
of unions between French fur traders and Native American women 
identified as neither French nor Cree but as both, as did their 
language. Roughly, they used French nouns with Cree verbs and 
much else.
¯
¯ Roma in many parts of Europe developed a language for use among 
themselves that used words from Romani (an Indo-Aryan language 
like Hindi) with English’s grammar.
¯
¯ This kind of language is rather common, and yet they have yet to 
acquire an official name, even among linguists. They are often called 
mixed languages, but this is too general, as all languages contain 
some elements from others. It is perhaps more accurate to call them 
intertwined languages.
Creoles versus Intertwined Languages
¯
¯ There is a distinction between intertwined languages and creoles, 
which roughly combine words from a dominant language with 
grammar from the language of subordinated people forced to learn 
the dominant one. The difference is that creoles grow from what start 
as pidgin varieties—that is, the kind of speech produced by adults who 
only know fragments of a language.

144
¯
¯ As such, even when the pidgin flowers into an actual language, that 
language is not simply one language’s words and another language’s 
full grammar. Intertwined languages are as if two languages parented 
a third language.
¯
¯ The difference between Media Lengua and another contact language 
based on Spanish illustrates this. Palenquero Creole Spanish is spoken 
in one village in Colombia by descendants of African slaves. The slaves 
spoke the Bantu language Kikongo.
¯
¯ Both Spanish and Kikongo divide nouns into largely arbitrary genders 
and require that the gender be marked also on adjectives, pronouns, 
and so on. Both also have extensive verbal prefixes and suffixes. 
However, Palenquero relies much less on these grammatical features. 
It has much of Spanish’s vocabulary but not all of it, and its grammar 
only faintly resembles that of Kikongo. It is relatively easy to learn the 
basics of Palenquero.
¯
¯ Palenquero began as a pidgin variety and grew into a new language 
influenced by, but not determined by, Spanish and Kikongo. Media 
Lengua, however, is cleanly made up of Spanish’s words and all of 
Quechua’s grammar. It is as hard to learn Media Lengua as it is to 
learn Quechua itself.
English
¯
¯ English’s vocabulary is highly mixed, and the vast majority of English 
words are borrowed from Norse, French, and Latin. However, 
English’s grammar is also highly mixed. English inherited a portion 
of its grammar from the Celtic languages spoken by the inhabitants of 
England before Germanic speakers arrived.
¯
¯ However, to contrast with intertwined languages, English is not simply 
words from some other language (or several) superimposed on the 
original grammar of English. For one, while most English words are 
from the other languages, the basic ones are from English itself, like 
brother, hand, fish, and so on.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 31  Languages Caught between Families

Language Families of the World
Lecture 31  Languages Caught between Families
145
¯
¯ Additionally, English grammar is affected by Celtic but is still 
essentially Germanic. This shows that mixture between language 
families (and subfamilies) happens to degrees and in different ways. 
Mixture itself is a norm. Intertwined languages are simply hybrids. 
Creoles are the products of breakdown followed by hybridizing. The 
results are different.
Speaking “In” Another Language
¯
¯ A variation on this kind of family straddling is when a language retains 
all of its words, but uses them grammatically in the way that another 
language does, as if one were speaking a language “in” another one.
¯
¯ The Tucanoan family is of South America and includes a language 
called Tucano. Meanwhile, the Tariana language is from the Arawak 
family, and it is essentially an Arawak language spoken in Tucanoan. 
This is because its grammatical patterns are those of Tucanoan rather 
than ordinary Arawak languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Bakker and Mous, Mixed Languages.
Meakins, Mixed Languages.
SUGGESTED READING
Bakker and Mous, Mixed Languages.
Meakins, Mixed Languages.

How Far Back Can 
We Trace Languages?
How far back can we trace languages? Certainly, 
families themselves are related in the same way 
as languages and subfamilies are. Likely, all of 
the world’s language families ultimately descend 
through sibling relationships from a single original 
language (or at most a few). However, the 
exigencies of language change make it difficult to 
chart languages’ relationships even within single 
families.
As such, proposals for macrofamilies—proposed 
language groupings—have been controversial, 
with many professional linguists squarely rejecting 
the very attempt to even chart such relationships. 
However, it would be hard to say that the quest for 
macrofamilies has not yielded any scientific success.
146
LECTURE 32

Language Families of the World
Lecture 32  How Far Back Can We Trace Languages?
147
An Attempt at Describing the World’s 
First Language
¯
¯ Linguists Merritt Ruhlen and John Bengston have made an attempt 
to work out what the world’s first language would have been like, and 
they have proposed a list of supposedly original words.
¯
¯ For example, they propose that the first word for two would have been 
pal, via comparing words in the world’s languages such as Russian’s 
pol (meaning ‘half’), Quecha’s pula (meaning ‘both’), Nubian’s bar 
(meaning ‘twin’), and Malayalam’s pāl (meaning ‘part’).
¯
¯ Because p and b are variations on the same sound, as are l and r, it is 
easy to see the likeness between these various words and their similar 
meanings. However, given the restricted number of sounds in human 
language and their combinations, it is inevitable that accidental 
cognates emerge between any two.
¯
¯ Additionally, human language almost certainly traces back at least 
100,000 years and likely much longer. The first language would 
have changed immensely since then due to natural processes. For 
example, the Proto-Algonquian word meaning ‘winter’ was peponwi. In 
modern Cheyenne of Montana and Oklahoma, the word is the vastly 
different aa’, based on natural step-by-step change patterns over just 
1,500 years.
¯
¯ Ruhlen and Bengston refer, where possible, to comparisons between 
not just languages, but proto-languages. If relationships between 
families are found, then the strongest evidence will be between the 
proto-languages, at which point not as much divergence would have 
happened as did when the two languages proliferated into families. 
However, even here, the state of research on most protolanguages is 
not as advanced as for Indo-European, and thus the research remains 
problematic.

148
The Nostratic Macrofamily Proposal
¯
¯ Some linguists believe that there is evidence of a Nostratic 
macrofamily. Adherents differ in which families they include, but 
typical members are Indo-European, Uralic, Altaic, Afro-Asiatic, 
Kartvelian, and Dravidian. Variations on this idea include the 
Paleosiberian languages and extend to Eskimo-Aleut. The proto-
language would possibly have existed 10,000–15,000 years ago in the 
Fertile Crescent after the last Ice Age.
¯
¯ For example, pronouns change less than most other words over time 
and are not readily exchanged between languages. The pronouns in 
these groups bear interesting similarities. In addition, Nostraticists 
have presented many reconstructed vocabulary items.
¯
¯ Researchers determining language relationships must be alert to the 
difference between inherited versus borrowed features. However, under 
regular conditions, languages are less likely to borrow words for core 
vocabulary, except in cases where one group is especially dominant 
over the other one psychologically. As such, it seems significant that 
the Proto-Indo-European word for water was wed while the Proto-
Uralic one was wete. The Proto-Dravidian one was wet plus an 
unknown vowel.
Many language-change specialists feel that it is futile to trace 
relationships between languages farther back than about 10,000 
years. This, however, can be seen as overcautious, and respectable 
research suggests that certain language families of Eurasia trace 
back to a single ancestor.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 32  How Far Back Can We Trace Languages?

Language Families of the World
Lecture 32  How Far Back Can We Trace Languages?
149
The Tai-Kadai Family
¯
¯ There have long been proposals that the Tai-Kadai family, despite 
being so Sinospheric in structure today, is related to Austronesian. The 
evidence consists of various cognates between Tai-Kadai and Proto-
Austronesian, or more properly, the protolanguage of Austronesian 
languages other than the ones spoken in Taiwan.
¯
¯ The case became stronger with the discovery of a Tai-Kadai language, 
Buyang, which still has words of two syllables, rather than the 
Chinese-style single-syllable words. Many of its core words correspond 
closely to Proto-Malayo-Polynesian words. For instance, manùk in 
Buyang and manuk in Proto-Malayo-Polynesian both mean ‘bird.’
SUGGESTED READING
Campbell and Poser, Language Classification.
Ruhlen, The Origin of Language.
SUGGESTED READING
Campbell and Poser, Language Classification.
Ruhlen, The Origin of Language.

What Do Genes Say 
about Language Families?
With the transcription of the human 
genome, it has become possible to trace 
human migration through genetic material. 
Genetic research has largely confirmed 
what language families suggest, while 
sometimes helping resolve questions the 
families’ distribution leaves unanswered, 
and at other times leaving surprises.
150
LECTURE 33

Language Families of the World
Lecture 33  What Do Genes Say about Language Families?
151
Glottochronology
¯
¯ Glottochronology is a school of thought that approaches language 
change with the goal of charting relationships between families. 
Linguist Morris Swadesh’s list, for example, was created within a 
proposal that languages lose, on average, 14 out of 100 of the list’s 
words over 1,000 years.
¯
¯ This would allow linguists to calculate that related languages whose 
Swadesh list words differ by 30 words have been separate for 2,000 
years. Ones that differ by seven words have been separate for only 500 
years, allowing for the charting of their family relationships.
¯
¯ This method has been criticized as not taking into account that 
languages can borrow words from one another at unrelated rates. For 
example, Icelandic and Norwegian are both descendants of Old Norse. 
In Icelandic, the rate of change per millennium has been about 4 in 
100 words, while in Norwegian it has been about 20 per 100.
¯
¯ However, this is because Norwegian has borrowed many words from 
Danish and Low German. A revised version of glottochronology by 
Sergei Starostin in 2002 filters out the borrowings from Norwegian 
and finds that the rate was about 5 per 100 words. Hence, there are 
linguists today who consider glottochronology useful in cases where it 
is possible to distinguish native words from borrowings.
¯
¯ In a recent controversy, glottochronology-related methods have placed 
the birth of Indo-European in present-day Turkey over 8,000 years 
ago. However, some specialists insist that linguistic and archaeological 
analysis, which places the birthplace in the Ukrainian steppes 6,000 
years ago, must be given greater weight.

152
Genetics and Europe
¯
¯ Genetic research from the laboratory of David Reich at Harvard has 
shown that Europeans are descended from three waves of migration, 
only two of which are reflected in today’s language families. First were 
the hunter-gatherers, who arrived about 40,000 years ago.
¯
¯ Around 8,000 years ago, a wave of farming people from northern 
Eurasia arrived, related to Siberians and Near Easterners. Finally, 
starting about 5,000 years ago, the Yamnaya of the Russian steppes 
arrived. They were also farmers and were technologically more 
advanced than the former group.
¯
¯ The Yamnaya brought the Indo-European family to Europe. The 
northern Eurasian farmers would have spoken other languages. It is 
impossible to know how many families these would have been, but it 
is likely that Basque, unrelated to any other language today, was one 
of them. The languages of the original hunter-gatherers are possibly 
completely lost, although Basque people have an unusually strong 
genetic imprint from them, such that Basque may be descended from 
this original group.
Genetics and India
¯
¯ India is occupied primarily by Indo-European languages in the north 
and Dravidian languages in the south. Genetic evidence as late as the 
2010s mysteriously indicated no gene flow into India within the past 
12,000 or so years, but this was based only on mitochondrial evidence.
¯
¯ More recently, Y-chromosome evidence from 20 different groups in 
and around India has shown, instead, that people from the Caspian 
Sea area arrived in India about 4,000 years ago. The evidence suggests 
that the invaders were mostly men. Dravidian languages are scattered 
somewhat northward; the new data supports the idea that Dravidian 
speakers were indeed the original inhabitants, displaced by Indo-
Aryan speakers.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 33  What Do Genes Say about Language Families?

Language Families of the World
Lecture 33  What Do Genes Say about Language Families?
153
¯
¯ Some have speculated that Dravidian speakers only later migrated 
northward amidst Indo-Aryan speakers, but there is ancient genetic 
Indo-Aryan and Dravidian mixture throughout India, suggesting 
that Dravidians were the original inhabitants even in the north. This 
joins evidence from inscriptions of the Indus Valley civilization of 
northwestern India that the Indo-Aryan migration seems to have 
displaced. Linguists have hypothesized that the inscriptions are in a 
Dravidian language.
Genetics and Family Clusters
¯
¯ There are two main areas in which cultural unity suggests a single 
language family but the languages themselves are too dissimilar to 
be grouped that way, actually evidencing multiple distinct families. 
Genetic data has given reason to suppose that in both cases, there may 
have been a single family that became several.
¯
¯ The click languages constitute three families that show distinct 
structural patterns and vocabularies, and some specialists hypothesize 
that the clicks emerged in one family and then spread to the others 
via contact rather than shared ancestry. However, a study by Jennifer 
Baker, Charles Rotimi, and Daniel Shriner shows that the speakers 
of all three families share a genetic imprint. That the clicks would 
only have spread from one family to exactly the two whose speakers 
were akin to them—and not to other surrounding languages—is a less 
economical explanation than that one original family with clicks gave 
birth to several.
¯
¯ Similarly, among the languages of the Caucasus, the Northwestern 
and Northeastern families have been shown to have some kinship, but 
the Kartvelian group has seemed unrelated. Genetic analysis shows a 
kinship between speakers of all three.

154
Genetics and Polynesia
¯
¯ The Austronesian family includes a subgroup called Oceanic, within 
which there are the Micronesian, Melanesian, and Polynesian groups. 
The Polynesian languages are somewhat unlike the Melanesian and 
Micronesian ones. They make much less use of prefixes or suffixes 
than Austronesian languages usually do.
¯
¯ Genetic data provides a possible reason for this. It has traditionally 
been supposed that the Polynesian islands were settled from the nearby 
Melanesian ones, but actually, genetic data reveals that the first 
settlement was directly from Taiwan (via the Philippines). Only later 
did migrants from Melanesia add to the mix, and the data suggests 
that these migrants were men.
¯
¯ Thus, at a certain point, men would have invaded the islands and 
learned the local languages imperfectly. This would explain the more 
streamlined aspect of languages in Polynesia, which before had no 
explanation.
Genetics and Surprises
¯
¯ In the Afro-Asiatic family, it has been difficult to establish that one 
of the subfamilies, Omotic, actually belongs. The likenesses shown 
between Omotic words and those of other Afro-Asiatic subfamilies 
are ones also identifiable between the Omotic words and Proto-Indo-
European. The study by Baker, Rotimi, and Shriner has shown that 
genetically, Omotic speakers do not group with Afro-Asiatic speakers, 
which may be evidence that Omotic is an independent family.
¯
¯ There have also been surprises related to Native American languages. 
The same study reveals no genetic relationship between speakers of 
languages like Navajo (the Na-Dene family) and speakers of Yeniseian 
languages in Siberia.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 33  What Do Genes Say about Language Families?

Language Families of the World
Lecture 33  What Do Genes Say about Language Families?
155
¯
¯ There were two migrations from Siberia into the Arctic. Today’s Inuit 
are descendants of a second one (called the Thule) only about 1,000 
years ago. The first migrants (called the Dorset) arrived 4,500 years 
ago, kept to themselves rather than interbreeding with other Native 
American groups, and went extinct after the second migration, about 
700 years ago.
¯
¯ The modern Inuit genetically parallel speakers of the Paleosiberian 
language family Chukotko-Kamchatkan, suggesting another Native 
American-Siberian parallel. However, caution is necessary in 
correlating genetic and linguistic data.
¯
¯ In some cases, genetic data leads to conclusions flatly untenable with 
other facts. A detailed genetic survey of Britain has shown no genetic 
imprint from Norse speakers. However, the rich presence of Norse 
words in English, along with ample historical and archaeological 
documentation of the Norse invasion and presence, would seem to 
negate this finding.
SUGGESTED READING
Joseph, “How Genetics Is Settling the Aryan Migration Debate.”
Rutherford, A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived.
SUGGESTED READING
Joseph, “How Genetics Is Settling the Aryan Migration Debate.”
Rutherford, A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived.

Language Families 
and Writing Systems
In many ways, writing systems are quite 
dissimilar to the spoken languages being 
written. Writing is known indisputably to 
have emerged independently in three 
places: the Near East, China, and among 
Mayans. Those three families of writing do 
not parallel spoken language families in 
any meaningful way.
156
LECTURE 34

Language Families of the World
Lecture 34  Language Families and Writing Systems
157
Cuneiform Writing
¯
¯ Cuneiforms are first attested in about 3500 BCE in what is now Iraq 
and Iran. Clay tokens from Susa (dating to 8000 BCE) correspond to 
early cuneiform, and therefore are thought to have been the precursor 
of the writing system. They were stored in containers with impressions 
of the tokens on the lid, and then the impressions came to be seen as 
useful symbols.
¯
¯ Numbers were the first thing written. The idea of writing about things 
and actions came afterward.
¯
¯ The Behistun Inscription in Iran describes the military exploits of 
King Darius, who ruled Persia from the late 500s BC when it was a 
wide-ranging empire. The inscription was meant to communicate 
widely and, using cuneiform, renders the text in three languages, 
which were Old Persian, Elamite, and Babylonian Akkadian.
¯
¯ However, it is important to realize that there was no cuneiform 
language. The system was used to write countless languages from 
many families by a great many empires over about 3,000 years. Thus, 
to see a cuneiform tablet is to see a writing system rather than a 
language.
Hieroglyphics
¯
¯ Another writing system began in Egypt around the same time as 
cuneiforms emerged eastward. The hieroglyphics were the writing 
system not for Arabic, but for the Egyptian Coptic language, a now 
extinct member of the Afro-Asiatic family.
¯
¯ Symbols could stand for concepts, but as often as not, for metaphorical 
extensions of the concepts, such as the pictogram for hand coming to 
also stand for power.

158
¯
¯ There were also symbols for consonants, sometimes used to reinforce 
symbols used for concepts. The symbol for mouth (ro) also stood for 
the /r/ sound. For example, in this symbol, there is a branch plus the 
symbols for h and t. The word hti̛  meant ‘carve’ or ‘retreat’ in Coptic. 
With the knife, the symbol meant ‘carve,’ and with a pair of legs, it 
meant ‘retreat.’
Development of Alphabets
¯
¯ As natural as it seems now to have symbols corresponding to single 
sounds, humans have never intuited this immediately when creating 
writing systems from the ground up. Furthermore, the development of 
an alphabetic system did not correspond to what the languages being 
first written were like.
¯
¯ Cuneiforms and hieroglyphics first had symbols corresponding to 
syllables. This did make sense for Afro-Asiatic languages, whose words 
are based on their consonants staying put while the vowels change 
around them. However, this system was also applied to Old Persian 
later, which is an Indo-European language.
¯
¯ Additionally, Egyptian workers initiated using letters—pictographs 
used for their first sound— for the whole writing system. The 
hieroglyphic symbol for house, for example, was recruited to stand 
for b because the Semitic root for house begins with a b. This is called 
Proto-Canaanite writing, and was discovered in a turquoise mine 
in the Sinai. However, these workers presumably spoke Afro-Asiatic 
languages as well. The alphabet wasn’t a response to anything about 
their own language.
¯
¯ The Phoenicians, a trading people, took this system over in about 900 
BCE. They passed this system to the Greeks, who adopted some signs 
to indicate vowels. This probably was due to the fact that vowels are 
more important in distinguishing roots in an Indo-European language. 
This was the first true alphabet, and it developed into various 
alphabets throughout Europe and the Middle East.
Language Families of the World
Lecture 34  Language Families and Writing Systems

Language Families of the World
Lecture 34  Language Families and Writing Systems
159
Other Languages and Systems
¯
¯ Aramaic, Mayan, and Chinese writing are other interesting case 
studies. Aramaic, a Semitic language, served as a lingua franca from 
about 1000 BCE through to a few centuries into the Common Era. It 
was used for external communication by the Persians, for example. As 
such, its writing system had an impact beyond what one would expect 
given the language’s marginal status today.
¯
¯ Chinese writing is used for Japanese despite the two languages being 
entirely unrelated. It was used to write Korean in the past as well.
¯
¯ As for Mayan writing, the Mayan hieroglyphics were used only for 
that language in that territory. Some theories suggest that cultural 
change diffuses horizontally, on the globe, more easily than vertically 
because of geographical and climatological issues. However, there is no 
identifiable reason that the Mayans developed writing but the Aztecs 
in Mexico and the Incans of South America did not.
The main takeaway is that writing gives very little indication of the 
relationship between languages and their families. The essence 
of language is how it is spoken, not how world history happens to 
have encoded it on paper.
SUGGESTED READING
Coe, Breaking the Maya Code.
Rogers, Writing Systems.
SUGGESTED READING
Coe, Breaking the Maya Code.
Rogers, Writing Systems.

160
QUIZ
LECTURES 31–34
1	 What components went into the Media Lengua language? [31]
2	 From which three languages are the vast majority of English words 
borrowed? [31]
3	 Do pronouns change more or less than most other words over 
time? [32]
4	 In most circumstances, are languages more or less likely to borrow 
words for core vocabulary? [32]
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 1–34

161
Language Families of the World
QUIZ FOR LECTURES 31–34
5	 According to research from David Reich’s laboratory, how many 
waves of migration are Europeans descended from? [33]
6	 Which wave of migration brought the Indo-European family to 
Europe? [33]
7	 In the cuneiform system, what were the first things to be written? [34]
8	 Is cuneiform a language or a writing system? [34]
See page 167 for answers.

162
QUIZ ANSWERS
LECTURES 1–6
1	 Four.
2	 New Guinea (which roughly 25 language families call home) has 
more than Australia (which has two major families).
3	 pǝter.
4	 No.
5	 Latin.
6	 Depending on the language, the use of tones, variations between 
dialects, sub-rules, and irregularities all factor in to the difficulty of 
this language group.
7	 King Darius.
8	 Adults are less easily able to pick up new languages than younger 
people, so they tend to shave off language complexities.
9	 Khoisan.
10	 Five.
11	 Joseph Greenberg, a linguist and anthropologist. 
12	 Swahili. 
Language Families of the World
Quiz Answers
Click here to go back to the quiz.

163
Language Families of the World
Quiz Answers
LECTURES 7–12
1	 Heavier usage of tones.
2	 Fula.
3	 Bedouins.
4	 The use of words that consist of two, three, or four consonants.
5	 Approximately 40 million.
6	 The Berber subfamily.
7	 Roughly 100.
8	 The /p/ sound.
9	 A shovel. It was found in a bog in Iceland.
10	 They assign each unit of meaning to one suffix, making them 
agglutinative.
11	 That it is possible to posit a protolanguage from which the modern 
languages developed via regular sound changes.
12	 Morris Swadesh. 
Click here to go back to the quiz.

164
LECTURES 13–18
1	 Topography, which allowed different speakers of different languages 
to exist separately.
2	 The thinner air makes for easier air compression.
3	 Telugu, Kannada, Tamil, and Malayalam.
4	 With the tongue curled backward.
5	 Around Mongolia.
6	 Kemal Atatürk.
7	 A Chinese system (kanji), a system for grammar (hiragana), and a 
system for foreign words (katakana).
8	 Hangul.
9	 Approximately 1 billion.
10	 Tones.
11	 China.
12	 Many of its prefixes and suffixes have worn off.
Language Families of the World
Quiz Answers
Click here to go back to the quiz.

165
Language Families of the World
Quiz Answers
LECTURES 19–24
1	 Their wide variety of tones. (Some have up to 12.)
2	 Contact with Chinese and other languages already affected by 
Chinese.
3	 Tagalog.
4	 Taiwan.
5	 Austronesian.
6	 Relative to most other languages, the Oceanic languages have fewer 
sounds, so multisyllabic combinations are necessary to have distinct 
words in the vocabulary.
7	 A language that does not classify as part of a family.
8	 Basque.
9	 Yes.
10	 Papua New Guinea.
11	 Roughly two dozen.
12	 Having relatively few vowels.
Click here to go back to the quiz.

166
LECTURES 25–30
1	 Damin.
2	 They trend toward higher levels of word substitution.
3	 Four.
4	 Speakers refer to objects as being to the north, south, east, or west of 
them, rather than in front of them, behind them, or to their side.
5	 Roughly 300.
6	 Roughly 350,000.
7	 They use unusually long words. (The practice is called polysynthesis.)
8	 Greenlandic.
9	 Cherokee and Mohawk.
10	 The prefixes are more detailed in the Hokan languages.
11	 No. (Some groups still haven’t had much contact with outsiders, and 
comprehensive fieldwork has only recently begun.)
12	 Telephones, radios, and modern media.
Language Families of the World
Quiz Answers
Click here to go back to the quiz.

167
Language Families of the World
Quiz Answers
LECTURES 31–34
1	 Spanish words used with prefixes, suffixes, and grammar from 
Quechua.
2	 Norse, French, and Latin.
3	 Pronouns change less than most other words over time.
4	 In most circumstances, languages are less likely to borrow words for 
core vocabulary. (An exception is when one group is psychologically 
dominant over another.)
5	 Three.
6	 The Yamnaya migration. (It came from the Russian steppes.)
7	 Numbers.
8	 A writing system.
Click here to go back to the quiz.

168
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abondolo, Daniel, ed. The Uralic Languages. London: Routledge, 1998.
Adelaar, Alexander, and Nikolaus P. Himmelmann, eds. The Austronesian 
Languages of Asia and Madagascar. London: Routledge, 2005.
Anthony, David W. The Horse, the Wheel, and Language. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2007.
Arlotto, Anthony. Introduction to Historical Linguistics. New York: Lanham 
Press, 1972.
Bakker, Peter, and Maarten Mous. Mixed Languages: 15 Case Studies in 
Language Intertwining. Amsterdam: Uitgave IFOTT, 1994.
Barber, Elizabeth Wayland. The Mummies of Urumchi. New York: W.W. 
Norton, 2000.
Campbell, Lyle, and William Poser. Language Classification: History and 
Method. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Coe, Michael D. Breaking the Maya Code. New York: Thames & 
Hudson, 1992.
Colarusso, John. A Grammar of the Kabardian Language. Calgary: 
University of Calgary Press, 1992.
Comrie, Bernard, Stephen Matthews, and Maria Polinsky. The Atlas of 
Languages. New York: Facts on File, 2003.
Crowley, Terry, and Claire Bowern. Introduction to Historical Linguistics. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Crystal, David. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Language Families of the World
Bibliography

169
Language Families of the World
Bibliography
Diamond, Jared. Guns, Germs, and Steel. New York: W. W. Norton, 1997.
Dimmendaal, Gerrit J. Historical Linguistics and the Comparative Study of 
African Languages. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2011.
Dixon, R. M. W. Australian Languages: Their Nature and Development. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
——— . Edible Gender, Mother-in-Law style, and Other Grammatical Wonders. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Dixon, R. M. W., and Alexandra Aikhenvald, eds. The Amazonian 
Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Ehret, Christopher. A Historical-Comparative Reconstruction of Nilo-Saharan. 
Cologne: Köppe, 2001.
Emeneau, Murray. “India as a Linguistic Area.” In Language in Culture 
and Society, ed. by Dell Hymes, pp. 642–653. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1964.
Enfield, N. J. A Grammar of Lao. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2007.
Everett, Daniel. Language: The Cultural Tool. New York: Pantheon, 2012.
Foley, William A. The Papuan Languages of New Guinea. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Fortson, Benjamin W. Indo-European Language and Culture. Malden, MA: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
Golla, Victor. California Indian Languages. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2011.
Grenoble, Lenore A., and Lindsay J. Whaley, eds. Endangered Languages: 
Language Loss and Community Response. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998.

170
Heine, Bernd, and Derek Nurse, eds. African Languages: An Introduction. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Hetzron, Robert. The Semitic Languages. London: Routledge, 1987.
Heyerdahl, Thor. Kon-Tiki: Across the Pacific in a Raft. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1990.
Johanson, Lars, and Éva Á. Csató. The Turkic Languages. London: 
Routledge, 1998.
Johnson, John William. “Somali Prosodic Systems.” In Horn of Africa 2, 
pp. 46–54. 1979.
Joseph, Tony. “How Genetics Is Settling the Aryan Migration Debate.” In 
The Hindu, June 16, 2017.
Karlsson, Fred. Finnish: A Reference Grammar. London: Routledge, 1999.
Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju. The Dravidian Languages. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Lewis, Geoffrey. The Turkish Language Reform. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2002.
Lynch, John, Malcolm Ross, and Terry Crowley. The Oceanic Languages. 
London: Routledge, 2002.
McWhorter, John H. What Language Is. New York: Gotham, 2011.
Meakins, Felicity. “Mixed Languages.” In Contact Languages, ed. by 
Peter Bakker and Yaron Matras, pp. 159–228. Berlin: Mouton De 
Gruyter, 2013.
Miller, Roy. The Japanese Language. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1967.
Mithun, Marianne. The Languages of Native North America. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Language Families of the World
Bibliography

171
Language Families of the World
Bibliography
Norman, Jerry. Chinese. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Ostler, Nicholas. Empires of the Word. New York: Harper Perennial, 2006.
Pawley, Andrew, Robert Attenborough, Jack Golson, and Robin Hide, 
eds. Papuan Pasts: Cultural, Linguistic, and Biological Histories of Papuan-
Speaking Peoples. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 2005.
Pereltsvaig, Asya. Languages of the World: An Introduction. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Rogers, Henry. Writing Systems: A Linguistic Approach. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2005.
Ruhlen, Merritt. The Origin of Language. New York: John Wiley, 1994.
Rutherford, Adam. A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived. New York: 
The Experiment, 2017.
Sebba, Mark. Contact Languages. New York: St. Martin’s, 1997.
Shibatani, Masayoshi. “Japanese.” In The World’s Major Languages, ed. by 
Bernard Comrie. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Suzman, James. Affluence without Abundance: The Disappearing World of the 
Bushmen. New York: Bloomsbury, 2017.
Thurgood, Graham, and Randy LaPolla, eds. The Sino-Tibetan Languages. 
London: Routledge, 2003.
Versteegh, Kees. The Arabic Language. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1997.
Vossen, Rainer. The Khoesan Languages. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Wiedenhof, Jerome. A Grammar of Chinese. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins, 2015.

172
IMAGE CREDITS
titles. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . © mrPliskin/iStock/Getty Images Plus
maps . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . The Teaching Company Collection
3. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . © bpperry/iStock/Getty Images Plus
13. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . © bitlaurent/E+/Getty Images
159 . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . © ivosar/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Language Families of the World
Image Credits

