The Arabic Language and
National Identity
A Study in Ideology
YASIR SULEIMAN
EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY PRESS

© Yasir Suleiman, 2003
Edinburgh University Press Ltd
22 George Square, Edinburgh
Typeset in Goudy by
Koinonia, Manchester, and
printed and bound in Great Britain by
The Cromwell Press, Trowbridge, Wilts
MPG Books Ltd, Bodmin, Cornwall
A CIP Record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0 7486 1707 8 (paperback)
The right of Yasir Suleiman to be identified as author
of this work has been asserted in accordance with
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
For Tamir and Sinan

Acknowledgements
  viii
1 The Arabic Language and National Identity: Aims and Scope
1 Aims of the Study: The Disciplinary Context
1
2 What is National Identity?
4
3 Theoretical and Empirical Scope
9
4 Organization of this Book
12
2 Setting the Scene
1 Definition: The Achilles Heel
16
2 Two Modes of Defining the Nation
20
3 Two Types of Nation, Two Types of Nationalism
23
4 Language and National Identity
27
5 Conclusion
33
3 The Past Lives On
1 Introduction
38
2 In Praise of Arabic
42
3 Óikmat al-ÆArab: Wisdom of the Arabs
47
4 La˙n: Solecism
49
5 ÆAjam and ÆArab
55
6 The Arabs as a Nation (umma): Further Evidence
64
7 Conclusion
66
4 The Arabic Language Unites Us
1 Introduction
69
2 From Ottomanism to Turkism: The Turkification of the Ottoman Turks
70
3 From Ottomanism to Arabism: Preliminary Remarks
79
3.1
The Placards
82
3.2
Resisting Linguistic Turkification
85
3.3
The Intellectuals Speak
89
Contents

4 Ibrahim al-Yaziji: From Immediate Aims to Underlying Motives
96
5 Conclusion
109
5 Arabic, First and Foremost
1 Introduction
113
2 Under the Banner of Arabic
117
3 SatiÆ al-Husri: Arabic, First and Foremost
126
3.1
Populism: A Question of Style
126
3.2
Nation, Language and Education
128
3.3
Defining the Arab Nation
131
3.4
Arab Nationalism and the Ideologization of Language
134
3.5
Nation, Language and Religion
140
3.6
Between the Standard and the Dialects: The Case for
Linguistic Reforms
142
4 Zaki al-Arsuzi: The Genius of the Arab Nation Inheres in its
Language
146
5 Conclusion
158
6 The Arabic Language and Territorial Nationalism
1 Introduction
162
2 The Arabic Language and Territorial Nationalism:
Antun SaÆada and Regional Syrian Nationalism
164
3 The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism:
Early Beginnings
169
4 The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism:
Full Elaboration
174
4.1
The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism:
Salama Musa
180
4.2
The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism:
Taha Husayn
190
4.3
The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism:
Luwis ÆAwad
197
5 The Arabic Language and Lebanese Nationalism:
A General Introduction
204
5.1
The Arabic Language and Lebanese Nationalism:
ÆAbdalla Lahhud
207
5.2
The Arabic Language and Lebanese Nationalism:
Kamal Yusuf al-Hajj
210
6 Conclusion
219
contents

7 Conclusion: Looking Back, Looking Forward
1 The Arabic Language and National Identity: Looking Back
224
2 The Arabic Language and National Identity: Looking Forward
228
Notes
232
Bibliography
Works in Arabic Cited in the Text
249
Works in Other Languages Cited in the Text
260
Index
270
contents

This book builds on research I have carried out over the past decade. Many
people have helped me during this period, not all of whom I can acknowledge
here. I would however like to express my thanks to Ramzi Baalbaki, Youssef
Choueiri, Rachid El-Enany, Ronak Husni, Emad Saleh, Muhammad Shaheen
and Iman Soliman for their help in securing some of the works upon which this
book is based. Ramzi Baalbaki’s help in securing some of Kamal Yusuf al-Hajj’s
publications was crucial in expanding my discussion of Lebanese nationalism. I
am particularly grateful to him.
I am also grateful to Bill Donaldson, Carole Hillenbrand, Ibrahim Muhawi
and Bill Roff for reading the entire manuscript and making many valuable
comments. Their perceptive remarks have improved the manuscript on all
fronts. I am also indebted to Ivor Normand, my copy-editor, for his meticulous
reading of the text. Needless to say, the responsibility for any remaining errors is
entirely mine.
In carrying out the research for this book, I have benefited from a number of
small grants from the British Academy, the Carnegie Trust for the Universities
of Scotland and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. I am grateful for this financial
assistance, which enabled me to visit a number of libraries in the Middle East
and elsewhere.
I cannot fully acknowledge the contribution of my family to this project. As
usual, Shahla has been a tower of strength. She pursued references for me on her
trips to the Middle East. She has also ensured that our two sons, Tamir and
Sinan, were kept busy. Her computing expertise got me out of trouble on several
occasions. For all this, I want to thank her.
Finally, Tamir and Sinan were the real power behind this book. Their interest
in it was enormous. They asked the real questions: What is nationalism? What
has language got to do with nationalism? And why is nationalism so important
as to make a father devote so much time away from his family to studying it? To
them, I owe a debt of gratitude for showing understanding and patience.
Acknowledgements
— viii —

— 1 —
The Arabic Language and National Identity:
Aims and Scope
1
1. aims of the study: the disciplinary context
Nationalism is a thriving field of study in which a variety of disciplines partici-
pate. Historians, political scientists, sociologists, social anthropologists, social
psychologists, political geographers and others have all delved into different
aspects of this field. This reflects the complexity and the elasticity of the pheno-
mena of nationalism and of the durability of the interests they generate across
disciplinary boundaries. It must, however, be said that this multiplicity of theor-
etical perspectives has generated a corresponding multiplicity of discourses,
none of which can claim the prerequisite universality necessary to allow us to
talk about a theory of nationalism with any confidence. Broadly speaking, what
we have so far are two types of study. First, there are those that seek to generalize
out of a limited evidential base by proposing a set of explanatory ideas which
can then be tested against further data outside the base in question. These studies
are then refined, extended or restricted both empirically and theoretically, but
they can never completely escape the limitations inherent in their empirical
sources or the theoretical perspectives which inform them. And there is no
reason why they should. What we have here, therefore, are restricted approaches
to the study of nationalism, not a theory of nationalism or theories of national-
ism, although the term “theory” is used in this sense from time to time. A
paradigm example of this is Gellner’s modernist or functionalist approach,
which is best suited to the study of the rise and development of nationalism in
industrialized societies, or, it may be argued, just to a sub-set of these societies.
The present study of the Arabic language and national identity does not belong
to this genre in the study of nationalism.
The second type of approach is restricted to a particular nationalism, dealing
with it in isolation or in relation to other interacting or comparable
nationalisms. The study of Arab, Turkish, Greek or other named nationalisms
exemplifies this approach. The interest of the researcher here is to describe and
explain the observed phenomena by utilizing the insights of studies of the first
type. Additionally, studies of this second type may serve as test cases for the
insights generated by general approaches. They define the empirical limits of

the arabic language and national identity
— 2 —
these general studies or circumscribe their excessive explanatory claims.
Progress in the study of nationalism requires the two types of study. It is
impossible to imagine that general approaches to the study of nationalism can
be conducted in an empirical vacuum, or that studies of specific nationalisms
can proceed without any recourse to theoretical insights. The present study
belongs to the second type of approach. It aims to provide a reading of a limited
site of nationalist discourse – that pertaining to the Arabic language and national
identity – as a contribution towards a general understanding of the pheno-
menon of nationalism in the Arab Middle East. This study will also contribute
to the understanding of the phenomenon of nationalism in its language-related
dimension. A prime example of this kind of study is Joshua Fishman’s pioneer-
ing monograph Language and Nationalism (1972) which, unfortunately, hardly
figures in standard works on nationalism even when language is directly invoked.
The study of nationalism in the Arab Middle East has made great strides in
the last few decades. First, advocacy in favour of a particular nationalism or the
apologetic defence of it gave way to a more objective outlook. This danger of
confusing the subjective with the objective is particularly present when the
nationalist turns into a student of nationalism, thus producing a discourse which
aims to (1) valorize the status quo, (2) sanction and instigate a particular brand
of nationalist behaviour, or (3) convert the decision-makers in a centre of
political power to a particular nationalist cause. Second, description in the
study of the topic under investigation has increasingly given way to a more
analytical and explanatory orientation. This has in turn led to an increased
sophistication in the standard of argumentation and counter-argumentation. It
has also led to the development of a sharper interest in cross-cultural compari-
sons, at least in the regional context. Third, the study of nationalism in the
Arab Middle East has sought to extend its disciplinary scope beyond its
traditional domain of history and politics, although it continues to be domin-
ated by historians and political scientists. Anthropologists and sociologists have
participated from the edges in a way which has enhanced our understanding of
the social processes involved in the internalization, negotiation and contes-
tation of national identities. Fourth, some students of nationalism in the Middle
East have sought to widen the kinds of data which can be subjected to study and
analysis. The call to use newspaper articles and other kinds of non-orthodox
materials, for example graffiti, in the study of nationalism represents a bold
attempt at trying to reshape the scope within which this enterprise has hitherto
been conducted.
But there are also glaring weaknesses, the most prominent of which is the
reluctance to take the study of nationalism in the Arab Middle East into the
wider cultural arena of literary production, the arts, film, music, sports, tourism,
festivals, school textbooks, architectural styles, naming practices, maps, stamps

aims and scope
— 3 —
and other media of symbolic expression. There is perhaps a feeling among
historians and political scientists that data from these domains are fickle and
subject to deliberate manipulation. Moreover, scholarly tradition considers the
above media of symbolic expression to fall at the margin of the scope of history
and politics, which thus far have dominated the study of nationalism in the
Arab Middle East. This problem, however, is not entirely the making of the
historians or the political scientists. It is also partly the responsibility of
specialists in the above domains of inquiry, who have done very little to show
how their disciplines can inform the study of nationalism. Considerations of
academic worth are central here. For example, it is unlikely that any serious
literary critic would consider the study of the interaction between nationalism
and literature to be the kind of material from which scholarly reputations are
made. A study of this kind would be considered more relevant to an under-
standing of social and political history than to the study of literature in its
creative mode. The same ethos may also apply in art history, architecture, music
and film studies. Falling between disciplines with different intellectual agendas,
some nationalist phenomena in the Arab Middle East have been left out of
consideration, thus curtailing our understanding of nationalism in this impor-
tant part of the world.
Another glaring gap in the study of nationalism in the Arab Middle East is
the absence of a serious study of the most important of all systems of functional
and symbolic expression: language. It is indeed remarkable that, to the best of
my knowledge, a study of this kind has not been produced, not even in Arabic,
although limited studies touching on aspects of language and nationalism do
exist (see Bengio 1998, Chejne 1969, Holes 1993, Mazraani 1997 and Suleiman
1993, 1994, 1996b, 1997, 1999b, 1999d). I say this because of the centrality of
language in articulations of nationalism in the Arab Middle East. This is true of
Arab nationalism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It is also true of
Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism in the first half of the twentieth century and
beyond (see below). This lacuna is all the more glaring because, when set in a
comparative regional context, the study of language and nationalism in the
Arab Middle East deserves greater attention. Witness the enormous interest in
this subject in Turkish nationalism and Hebrew nationalism, which have
succeeded in promoting themselves as paradigm cases against which other
nationalisms may be judged.
The responsibility for this lacuna does not belong to the historians or
political scientists alone, although so far they are the ones who have dominated
the study of nationalism in the Arab Middle East. A historian or political
scientist is aware of the functional and symbolic roles of language, but does not
usually study language per se or in any of its hyphenated modes. In a world of
disciplinary specialization, this is regarded as the task of the linguist. But

the arabic language and national identity
— 4 —
linguists are hemmed in by the imperatives of their discipline. They tend to
be interested in the theoretical foundations of linguistics or the generation
of descriptive studies for individual languages or portions of languages.
Hyphenated approaches such as psycho-linguistics or socio-linguistics (henceforth
“sociolinguistics”) answer to two masters, which tend to pull them in different
directions and, more often than not, assign those who profess expertise in them
to the margins of the parent disciplines.
The closest approach to a linguistics-related field of study which can
investigate the question of language and national identity is sociolinguistics,
provided we conceive of this discipline as being “essentially about identity, its
formation, presentation and maintenance” (Edwards 1988: 3). But this discipline
is handicapped in a number of ways in its treatment of Arabic. First, Arabic
sociolinguistics tends to be interested in the functional capacity of the language
rather than in its symbolic connotations. By treating the language as a means of
communication first and foremost, Arabic sociolinguistics misses the opportun-
ity to tap into a layer of meanings and symbolic values that may otherwise be
available to the researcher. Second, the interest in quantitatively based analyses
in Arabic sociolinguistics (and in sociolinguistics generally; see Cameron 1997)
creates a bias, driven by logico-positivist impulses, against studies which do not
rely on this mode of investigation. Studies of this kind can therefore be easily
dismissed as “unscientific” or “pseudo-scientific”. Third, Arabic sociolinguistics
in its quantitative mode is handicapped by the invisibility of national identity as
a prominent factor in the theoretical impulses which historically informed this
discipline (Labov 1966, 1972). Arabic sociolinguistics of the 1970s and 1980s in
particular created aspects of the Arabic language situation – particularly dialectal
and sociolectal variation – in the image of the urban-based, North American
model on which it relied for its inspiration (see Walters 2002). This was under-
standable at the time when the thrust of this research was to test the
applicability of the Labovian model outside its original context.
The primary aim of the present research is therefore to fill the above gap,
thus contributing to the study of nationalism in the Middle East from a cross-
disciplinary perspective. Another aim of this study is to encourage Arabic
sociolinguists to delve into other aspects of language and national identity from
a qualitative perspective. Finally, it is hoped that this work will highlight the
importance of symbolic meaning in the study of nationalism.
2. what is national identity?
There is nothing novel in saying that identities are complex, variable, elastic
and subject to manipulation (cf. Maalouf 2000). This is the position in all the
disciplines which deal with identity, whether as a collective or personal unit of

aims and scope
— 5 —
analysis. This multi-dimensional nature of identity, and its mutations across
disciplinary boundaries and theoretical paradigms, makes it difficult to account
for its meaning. It is therefore not my intention to contrive a concept of identity
which can be applied uniformly throughout the present study. This is not
possible; and, at any rate, such a task is beyond my competence. It may therefore
be useful to repeat here what I said in a previous study on the Arabic language
and national identity (Suleiman 1997: 127):
Being so wide-ranging in scope, it is not surprising that the concept of identity defies
precise description. This fact should not however deter us from delving into those
questions of collective affiliation which constitute the scope of identity, not least
because of the persistence of this notion as an operative factor in all aspects of human
life. In a sense it would be impossible to understand man as a social being without
invoking a category of thought similar to what we describe by the notion of identity.
A degree of conceptual vagueness is therefore inevitable, but not so cripplingly as to
deny us the possibility of an informed treatment of identity-related subjects.
Broadly speaking, collective identities are anchored in relation to such
variables as genealogy, age, gender, sexuality, class, occupation, locality (be it
regional, district, village and so on), tribe, clan, religion, confession or sect,
ethnicity, nationality or state citizenship. The fact that these and other vari-
ables normally appear as discrete members of a list does not mean that collective
identities are neatly segmented along similar lines. Furthermore, the fact that
we talk about collective identities as categories of social definition should not
mask the principle that these identities are experienced at the personal level,
and that it is the individual who experiences these identities and gives them
meaning in his or her social and cultural setting (see Cohen 1994). It is by
virtue of this principle that we can say that collective identities weave in and
out of each other in different ways at different times depending on the salient
features of the situation in which a person finds him- or herself. However, this
principle of mutation does not mean that collective identities are unstable, albeit
that some are amenable to change more quickly than others. For example, occu-
pational, class, local and state identities may undergo change more easily than
religious or national identities, but this does not make the former set of identities
unstable or chameleon-like. Even when identities seem to have undergone
significant change, residual impulses continue to emanate from them, thus
making them able to serve as the basis of individual or collective action.
As I have mentioned, the aim of this book is to consider conceptualizations
of national identity in the Arab Middle East as these coalesce around Arabic.
This limitation of scope demands some explanation of how national identity is
deployed here. Smith identifies what he calls the five “fundamental features” of
national identity (1991: 14): “1. an historic territory, or homeland; 2. common
myths and historical memories; 3. a common, mass public culture; 4. common

the arabic language and national identity
— 6 —
legal rights and duties for all members; 5. a common economy with territorial
mobility for members”. Smith states that this concept of national identity is
based on a “peculiarly Western concept of the nation”, justifying this by the fact
that the “Western experience has exerted a powerful, indeed the leading, influ-
ence on our conception of the unit we call the ‘nation’” (ibid.: 9). Although the
first three “fundamental features” above allow for the definition of national
identity without reference to political community or state, the last two features
imply a denial of this possibility. This denial is problematic for the study of
national identity in the Arab Middle East. National identity in this part of the
world may straddle state borders, and more than one ethnicity (politicized cultural
identity) may coexist within the same state. This denial is also problematic
because it is not possible to say that there exist throughout the Arab Middle
East “common legal rights and duties” or a “common economy with territorial
mobility” for all the people of the area. Such rights, duties and economic mobil-
ities as do exist in the Arab Middle East are invariably related to the multiplicity
of states as independent legal entities. If accepted, the above specification of
national identity would rule as unwarranted the positing of supra-state and sub-
state national identities. In particular, it would declare as unwarranted all talk
about an Arab national identity. The whole concept of an Arab national
identity would be in doubt, questioning with it the validity of more than a
century of embryonic and fully fledged nationalist thinking. At best, the Arab
nationalist discourse would be one not about an Arab identity per se, but about
an Arab national consciousness as a precursor to this identity. At worst, the
above concept of national identity would declare Arab nationalist thinking
misguided and bogus.
Accepting the above specification may also be taken to imply that national
identities can be quickly induced if states are created over territories whose
populations share the first three fundamental features. The fact that a state can
endow people with “common legal rights and duties” and that it can extend to
them the right to “territorial mobility” and participation in a “common economy”
must, logically speaking, imply that national identities can be fabricated in a
very short time. There should therefore be little difficulty in producing an
Egyptian, Lebanese or Syrian national identity that is exclusive of other
national identities. The fact that this is not entirely the case testifies to the
inadequacy of the above specification of national identity.
To avoid the above problems, the concept of national identity must be
formulated in different ways to suit the imperatives of different sociopolitical
contexts. For the Arab Middle East, this would require the division of the above
set of fundamental features into two components. Features 1 to 3 in Smith’s list
are necessary for the establishment of a cultural concept of national identity.
However, for such an identity – sometimes called ethnicity – to exist, there

aims and scope
— 7 —
should also obtain a political consciousness that is capable of making these
features available for deployment in the political arena, including the establish-
ment of a common state. The existence of the state, embodied in features 4 to 5
in Smith’s list, is necessary for the creation of national identity in the political
sense. As we shall see later, both types of national identity are presumed to exist
in the Arab Middle East.
To help frame the discussion of national identity which will follow, I will
highlight a number of principles which inform the present study. First, I believe
that Grew (1986: 35) is fundamentally right when he asserts that national identity
is not “simply a natural growth” among the people who exhibit it. National
identity is a construct, in both the intellectual and the historical senses. It is
fashioned out of history, or, more correctly, interpretations of history. The in-
volvement of the elite in fashioning it is absolutely fundamental to formulating
its intellectual foundations and, also, to popularizing it as the basis of mass poli-
tical action. These observations will be borne out in this study (see Chapter 3).
Second, in recent discourse on the construction of national identity, such
terms as “imagined”, “invented” and “myth” have come into vogue to describe
different aspects of the nation. While the empirical and theoretical utility of
these terms cannot be denied, I agree with Schöpflin (1997: 26) that “there are
clear and unavoidable limits to invention and imagination” in constructing
national identity. Schöpflin specifies “resonance” as the criterion which sets
this limit. Imagination, invention and mythologizing work only to the extent
that they can successfully exploit authentic and highly significant aspects of the
culture of those for whom a particular national identity is being constructed.
Resonance applies within these limits, which are invariably rooted in the past.
Smith (1997: 56) comes to more or less the same conclusion, although he
pushes the literal meanings of “invention” and “imagining” too far when he
declares that the “golden age” which a particular nationalism manipulates “is
not a form of invented tradition, nor is it made up of ‘shreds and patches’, nor
again is it merely an imagined community”.1  Using Smith’s findings (ibid.: 58),
we may unpack the content of Schöpflin’s concept of “resonance” by saying that
it relates to those aspects of the culture in a nationalist discourse that are
characterized by “authenticity, rootedness, continuity, dignity and destiny”.
Third, as used in the present work, the concept of national identity emerges
from the ideological articulations of nationalism (cf. Miller 1995: 17–47).
Hence my concern with the range of ideas which intellectuals, educators and
people of letters have put forward to describe the role of Arabic in forming,
promoting and maintaining various conceptualizations of national identity in
the Arab Middle East. While answering to a predescriptive or “objective” reality,
these ideologies aim at elaborating and redefining national identity for particular
political purposes. Using functionalist models of description and explanation in

the arabic language and national identity
— 8 —
the social sciences, we may say that nationalism as ideology aims at the
externalization and objectification of national identity as a prerequisite for its
internalization by members of the putative nation in its newly refashioned form.
The fact that advocacy is central to ideology in this sense is inevitable. In
addition, treating ideology as discourse, we may say that concepts of national
identity are subject to varying interpretations by members of the (putative)
nation. It is ultimately they who can act upon it and convert it into reality.
Whether they do act on it or not, and if they do whether their effort will be met
with success or not, is epistemologically immaterial here.
Reiterating the point made above, in this study I am more concerned with
nationalism as ideology than as a mass movement or mode of political action,
although the categorial distinction between the two is normally more honoured
in the breach than in the observance. It is important that we bear this
restriction in mind to avoid the fallacy of category-hopping. This fallacy may
take the form of arguing that if the Arab nation is indeed defined by its langu-
age, and since Arabic is common to all Arabs, then why is it that the Arabs are
politically divided? The response to this is a simple one: the ideological assertion
of x does not necessarily mean that x will be acted upon to achieve a given
political objective. By choosing to concentrate on nationalism as ideology,
rather than as movement, the present study takes a neutral stand as to whether
the Arabic language is capable of bringing about the political unity much
desired by the more politically active among the cultural nationalists in the
Arabic-speaking world.
Fourth, the ideological conceptualization of national identity in the Arab
Middle East is constructed in two ways. On the one hand, it exploits the power
of contrast by invoking a significant Other. This contingent view of identity is
based on the premise that difference is essential for the maintenance of bound-
aries between nations. Termed “playing the vis-à-vis” by Boon (1982, cited in
Cohen 1994: 11) in anthropology, this mode of conceptualization of national
identity is most evident in the early articulations of Arab nationalism which
tended to be visualized in relation to Turkish nationalism within the Ottoman
Empire (see Chapter 4). This is also the case in some statements of Egyptian and
Lebanese nationalism (see Chapter 6) which posit Arab nationalism as the
significant Other. On the other hand, national identity in the Arab Middle East
is sometimes articulated without direct reference to a significant Other. Com-
parisons with other nationalisms are intended not to emphasize difference and
contrast but to add further substantiation to a pertinent feature of national
identity. This positive approach to the ideological articulation of national
identity is best exhibited in the more mature versions of Arab nationalism (see
Chapter 5). In practice, the two modes of conceptualization of national identity
tend to be mixed.

aims and scope
— 9 —
Fifth, although the interaction between language and national identity is a
feature of many nationalisms, this is by no means a universally accepted premise
(see Chapter 2). Furthermore, it is not always clear what the nature of this
interaction is. Some scholars treat language as an ingredient in a mixture of
factors that make up the national self. Others treat it as a component in a set of
features that define this self. There are also those who talk of language as a
marker or attribute of national identity, rather than as an ingredient or com-
ponent of it. Scholars of this persuasion sometimes employ the alternative terms
“badge” or “emblem” to signify this relationship.2 This multiplicity of terms
indicates a lack of clarity in the study of nationalism. Rather than making
tenuous distinctions between these terms, the present work will utilize them
with little distinction.
Sixth, in conducting this study I am aware that, for some, “national identity
[is] hardly an attractive subject of study in a world that had so cruelly
experienced it as nationalism, imperialism, militarism, and racism” (Grew 1986:
33). This sense of “awkwardness” (ibid.: 39) about national identity – which is
sometimes mixed up with national stereotypes or views about the existence of a
national character or mind – should not, however, mask the great achievements
of nationalism, not least the creation of many monuments of high culture in
many societies (see Chapter 2). It is also the case that national identities will
not disappear off the face of the earth if they are made the target of an academic
boycott. It is therefore not feasible or desirable to replace the scholarly scrutiny
of national identity by burying our academic heads in the sand. It is in this spirit
that the present study is conducted and offered. And, in offering it, I am aware
that any national identity is far more complex than the inevitably reductive
descriptions one finds in the literature.
3. theoretical and empirical scope
The scope of the present study is restricted in two ways. First, it deals mainly
with standard Arabic, the language of writing and formal oral expression. Refer-
ence to colloquial Arabic, the language of everyday speech, is made whenever
this is invoked by the nationalist ideology under consideration. This is, for
example, the case in some articulations of Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism.
Reference to colloquial Arabic takes several forms. Some supporters of standard
Arabic tend to dismiss the colloquial as a corrupt and base form of the language
which is unworthy of marking the Arab national identity. The argument goes
that a people with a proud heritage and high aspirations for the future cannot
possibly accept such a variety as an ingredient of their national identity.
Standard Arabic only can serve in this capacity. This is typically the case in
Arab nationalism. However, some Arab nationalists believe that colloquial

the arabic language and national identity
— 10 —
Arabic can serve as a source of neologisms and other terminologies which the
standard language lacks. They therefore argue that colloquial Arabic should be
exploited for this purpose. Territorial nationalists divide between those who
support the colloquial and those who favour the standard form of the language,
although the upper hand in the debate between them tends to be for the latter.
Witness the fact that standard Arabic continues to be the official language in all
Arab countries, in spite of the efforts of the colloquialists to promote their
favoured varieties. Being aware that the gap between the two forms of the
language is a source of pedagogic concern in Arabic-speaking countries, sup-
porters of the standard call for reforms to simplify the way Arabic grammar is
taught in schools. They also call for using standard Arabic in teaching at all
levels of the school curriculum and in higher education as well. The fact that
these suggestions have been mostly ignored – and that those who support the
standard rarely use it in everyday speech – does not undermine the symbolic
status of the language for most Arabic-speakers.
The dominance of the standard in nationalist discourse is understandable. In
spite of its overtures to folk culture, nationalism tends to favour high culture.
Some would actually say that the sociopolitical status of high culture in modern
societies is part and parcel of the growth of nationalism. If, as Benedict
Anderson claims in Imagined Communities (1991), the growth of nationalism is
intimately interwoven with the workings of print capitalism, it follows that, as
the medium of writing, standard Arabic has a head start over the colloquial (see
Holt 1996).
But this is not the only reason for the dominance of standard Arabic in the
nationalist discourse in the Arab Middle East. Although nationalism is associ-
ated with modernity and modernization, it always seeks to establish its creden-
tials as an ideology and movement by locking into a past heritage, a “golden
age”, of which it can be very proud. Relying on standard Arabic, nationalism in
the Arab Middle East can define for itself a usable past, a source of tradition and
authenticity which can enable it to stand its ground in relation to other
nationalisms inside and outside its immediate geographical context. Being
stigmatized in the Arabic intellectual tradition, and having very few literary or
other texts to its name, colloquial Arabic cannot provide the nationalists with a
usable past which they can interpret and manipulate to their advantage. No
wonder, therefore, that the cause of the colloquial was espoused only by a few
modernizers in territorial nationalism who wished to separate their own concept
of nationalism from the Arab past. But, since it is not possible to achieve this
separation without causing a rupture with Islam, the basis of the religious
identity of the majority of Arabic-speakers, any attempt to replace the standard
by the colloquial as the marker of a particular territorial nationalism is
inevitably met with religious opposition.

aims and scope
— 11 —
In geographical terms, the scope of the present study is restricted to the Middle
East, effectively the Levant and Egypt. The fact that most ideological articula-
tions of nationalism in the Arabic-speaking world originated in this area explains
this restriction. Arab nationalism developed in the Levant first while under
Ottoman rule, and only later found its way to other parts of the Arabic-speaking
world. Egyptian and Lebanese nationalisms are the result of their own special
environment. This is not the place to delve into the conditions which instigated
these nationalisms. The following statement by Gershoni and Jankowski (1986:
81) sums up very well the kind of areas where such an instigation may be sited:
Profound structural crises, severe political and social upheavals, fundamental social
changes, the resultant loss of stability and self-confidence, a collective sense of the
collapse of an old order and the impending advent of a new era – these are the
elements that characterise those transitional periods of history during which human
beings, particularly intellectuals, feel impelled to try to establish a new collective
image for their society.
These conditions obtained in North Africa in the first half of the twentieth
century, at the time when both the Arab Middle East and North Africa were
engaged in a struggle against the ruling colonial powers, mainly Britain and
France. The language issue was involved in both struggles, but more so in North
Africa owing to the colonial policy of promoting French over Arabic in educa-
tion and the institutions of the state. Here, the fight for Arabic was endowed
with the symbolism of noble resistance. It was also considered an integral part of
mass political action against the colonial power. The immediate aim of this
fight was trying to eliminate the Otherness of Arabic, the indigenous language,
against the hegemony of French, the colonial tongue. But, rather than disap-
pearing after independence, the Otherness of Arabic continued in a somewhat
muted way under the banner of taÆrÈb (Arabization/Arabicization), with some of
the promoters of French in this period being the very elite who, before
independence, had fought against its hegemony. The situation in the Middle
East was different. Although it came under attack from Turkish, French and to
a lesser extent English, standard Arabic never lost its commanding position
among those to whom it was a common language.
The challenge for Arabic in North Africa was further complicated by the
existence of another indigenous language, Berber. The Berber-speaking popu-
lations in Algeria and Morocco supported Arabic against French during the
nationalist struggle for independence in the first half of the twentieth century.
But the situation changed after independence. Berber-speakers started to assert
their own identity through an increased emphasis on their language, thus cur-
tailing the resort to Arabic as a marker of an interethnic national identity in
these countries (see Tilmatin and Suleiman 1996). The fact that no other
significant indigenous language existed in the Arab Middle East to challenge

the arabic language and national identity
— 12 —
the commanding position of Arabic – with the exception of Kurdish in Iraq (see
Blau and Suleiman 1996) – meant that the emphasis placed on the language in
the construction of national identity could proceed in Egypt and the Levant
unfettered by interethnic rivalries in this area.
Another factor characterizes the difference between the Middle East and
North Africa. In the Arab Middle East, the emphasis on Arabic in the construc-
tion of national identity allows the nationalists to create a distinction between
their brand of nationalism and Islamic nationalism. This was particularly the
case in Arab nationalism, which sought to allocate faith to the domain of
private religiosity. It is also true of Egyptian nationalism and some articulations
of Lebanese nationalism. This appeal to language in the Arab Middle East is
intended to enable the non-Muslims, namely the Christians, to participate in
the life of the nation as full members rather than as the members of a margin-
alized religious community. In North Africa, particularly Algeria and Morocco,
the situation is different. Language divides, but religion unites (see al-Jabiri
1995) – I am of course not including the small Jewish community in Morocco in
this characterization. It is therefore strategically more prudent to emphasize the
ties of faith in articulations of national identity in North Africa, although
Tunisia may be different in this domain. This appeal to religion is signalled most
strongly in Morocco, where the monarch carries the title of amir al-mu’minin
(Commander of the Faithful).
The above differences between the Middle East and North Africa constitute
part of the rationale for concentrating on the Arab Middle East alone in the
present work. The fact that this part of the Arabic-speaking world was also the
cradle of the most dominant and best-articulated pronouncements of national
identity in the modern world constitutes another reason, as the present study
will bear out.
4. organization of this book
Building on the above discussion of national identity, the aims and the theor-
etical and empirical scope of the present study, this book is divided into five
substantive chapters and a conclusion. Chapter 2 provides an elaboration of
some of the points raised here in Chapter 1, the introduction. It delves into
some aspects of nationalism for the purpose of delimiting the scope of the study
further, and to isolate a set of concepts which will be utilized in the ensuing
chapters. The first part of the chapter is aimed at students of language, particularly
Arabic, who may not be familiar with the discourse on nationalism in the social
sciences. The second part of the chapter explains for the benefit of non-linguists
the difference between the functional and symbolic dimensions of language and
how these may be exploited in articulating a particular nationalism.

aims and scope
— 13 —
Chapter 3 deals with aspects of the past which satisfy the condition of
resonance in dealing with the issue of Arabic and national identity in the modern
world. Statements in praise of Arabic as a unique language in the doctrinal
sense, and as a language with unsurpassed qualities in comparison with other
languages, are highlighted. The chapter shows how these statements formed the
foundations of a view of the Arabs which declares them as the wisest of all
nations. This attitude was a factor in inducing an anti-Arab feeling, with lingu-
istic overtones, among the non-Arab Muslims in medieval times. This in turn
motivated a defence of the Arabs in which the language as a marker of group
identity played an important part.
Chapter 4 moves the discussion to the modern period. It looks at the
development of the Arab national identity and how this relates to language
within the Ottoman Empire. In historical terms, the focus is mainly on the
second half of the nineteenth century and the first two decades of the twentieth
century. The discussion shows how the development of Arab nationalism
responded to the development of Turkish nationalism, and how the emphasis
on Arabic in the former was the counterpart of the emphasis on Turkish in the
latter. “Playing the vis-à-vis” is, however, not the only mode of defining the Arab
national identity during this period. This is shown through an examination of
the work of Ibrahim al-Yaziji, whose interest in Arabic and its nationalist conno-
tations derives from the set of values the language can autonomously sustain.
Chapter 5 deals with two major statements of Arab nationalism in its cultural
mode. These are provided by SatiÆ al-Husri and Zaki al-Arsuzi. In these and
other statements of Arab nationalism, language is constantly invoked as a
paradigmatic, if not the most paradigmatic, factor in defining Arab national
identity. In spite of this common feature, the emphases of the above statements
are different. Thus, while al-Husri tends to invoke history as the second basis of
his nationalist ideology, al-Arsuzi invokes a kind of linguistic philosophy which
sees in the lexico-semantic resources of the language a vindication of the
uniqueness of the Arabs and the innateness of their genius.
Chapter 6 is devoted to a discussion of territorial nationalism in the Arab
Middle East and how this relates to the language issue as a factor in the
conceptualization of national identity. In particular, emphasis is placed on Antun
SaÆada’s Syrian Nationalism, Egyptian nationalism and Lebanese nationalism.
Language figures in all of these nationalist ideologies, but in different ways. In
some cases, it is only one marker among other equally important markers. In
other cases, the language is subjugated to more important markers, for example
the environment. In yet other cases, the language is denied any definitional
function whatsoever.
Chapter 7, the Conclusion to this study, provides a general statement of the
main themes raised in earlier chapters. It also points to other dimensions of the

the arabic language and national identity
— 14 —
interplay between language and national identity in the Arabic-speaking world
which would benefit from further studies of the kind presented in this book.
Being about language and national identity, rather than how national
identity is marked or enacted in language, the present work will not investigate
the truth claims of the assumptions about Arabic or other languages made by
nationalist or prenationalist thinkers. Arabic does not constitute the data for
this book, but pronouncements about Arabic as a marker of national identity
do. Views to the effect that Arabic is more beautiful, logical, concise or difficult
to learn than other languages will not be challenged by demanding supporting
evidence or by producing evidence to the contrary. These and similar views will
be accepted at face value. The same will also apply even when a statement
about Arabic is factually suspect. Linguists may find this methodological stance
irritating, but it is one that is consistent with the kind of research to which this
study belongs, an example being Joshua Fishman’s magisterial monograph
Language and Nationalism (1972).
In providing a reading of a large number of pronouncements on language and
nationalism in the Arab Middle East, I often had to deal with texts that are
extremely opaque or hopelessly amorphous. Most of these texts have hitherto
not been subjected to analysis of the kind presented here. Deciphering the
meanings of these texts has been one of the major research objectives of this
work. Generating a coherently organized body of data which can be subjected to
further scrutiny and analysis by interested scholars is another objective of this
research. Thus, what the reader may perceive as clear and coherent sets of ideas
in the following pages are often the result of a great deal of textual spadework at
the levels of analysis, synthesis and systematization. The discussions of al-Arsuzi
(Chapter 5, section 4) and al-Hajj (Chapter 6, section 5.2) provide examples of
where analysis and synthesis proved particularly challenging.
The present work does not seek to defend a particular nationalist ideology
against its rivals. In this respect, a neutral stance is adopted. It was, however,
judged to be important to convey to the reader the affective force involved in the
enunciation of the various nationalist ideologies dealt with in this work. This
decision reflects the fact that task-orientation and motivation is a major feature
of all nationalisms. At times, some of the ideas expressed may be judged to be
based on prejudice or bias; but this should not be taken as an expression of the
views of the present writer. Students of nationalism often have to deal with
prejudice and bias in their data. However, those who are coming to this work
from a different angle may be disconcerted by my reluctance to rebut or denounce
what are seen to be prejudiced views. Little can be done about this beyond what
has just been said.
I have assumed in this work that the reader is familiar with the basic facts of
the Arabic language situation. It may, however, be useful to reiterate some of

aims and scope
— 15 —
these here for the benefit of readers whose expertise lies outside Arabic and
Middle Eastern studies. Arabic is the common language of well over 300,000,000
speakers in the world. Most of these speakers live in the Arabic-speaking
countries of the Middle East and North Africa. The status of Arabic as a world
language is connected with its being the language of the Qur’an and the Islamic
sciences which support its interpretation as a text and source of legal pronounce-
ments for Muslims. Broadly speaking, the Arabic language situation is charac-
terized by diglossia: the existence of a formal or “high” variety, and the vast
array of dialects which constitute the informal or less formal or “low” variety.
The bulk of this work is directed at the “high” variety, to which I have referred
as standard Arabic to distinguish it from the colloquial or “low” variety
whenever the contrast between the two is invoked. In contexts where this is not
the case, the term “Arabic” is used without any qualification to designate the
standard or “high” variety. At times, the term “Arabic” is used to refer to the
totality of the Arabic varieties, without distinguishing between standard and
colloquial. The context will make this clear.
Finally, a few features of the present work are in need of explanation. First,
the endnotes in some chapters are intended to provide background material for
the different constituencies of readers at whom this book is aimed. Second, in
certain places I have included Arabic material in the body of the book or in
endnotes. I have done this for three reasons: (1) to help the reader establish the
full meaning of terms with approximate translations in English, (2) to support
what may be regarded as improbable assertions when rendered in English, and
(3) to convey to the reader the flavour of some of the texts under analysis.
Third, I have used full transliteration in the Bibliography, but declined to do so
in rendering names in the text for reasons of accessibility to those readers who
are not specialists in Arabic. Technical terms, however, are rendered with full
transliteration as also are titles and quotations in Arabic. Finally, the dates in
parentheses next to the names of people mentioned in the text indicate the year
of death of the person concerned. The Muslim year precedes the Common Era
date.

—16 —
Setting the Scene
2
1. definition: the achilles heel
The concepts of “nation”, “nationalism” and “nationality” – as well as their
composite correlatives “national character, national consciousness, national
will and national self-determination” (Snyder 1954: 7) – have been the subject
of debate by political scientists, sociologists, anthropologists, historians, lawyers,
educators and social psychologists. Scholars from these backgrounds approach
these notions from different perspectives dictated by varying methodological
viewpoints and discipline-orientated theoretical considerations as to the kinds
of data which constitute their particular scope. It is therefore not surprising that
definition is the Achilles heel of nationalism studies, as emphasized by Ander-
son (1991), Hobsbawm (1983), Smith (1991) and Snyder (1954), to mention
but a few of the leading scholars on the subject. The only epistemological con-
solation here is that this situation is typical of other branches of the humanities
and social sciences where equally complex, varied and, thus, malleable pheno-
mena constitute the topic of investigation. I will therefore eschew the problem
of definition in this chapter by providing a framework of analysis to guide the
reader in discerning the meanings of terms rather than to define these in an
essentialist manner.
I am of course aware that such an approach may be seen as a flight from
rigour. My reply is a simple one: the pursuit of definitional rigour as an ultimate
criterion in nationalism studies would lead to the dissipation of intellectual
energy and, more seriously, to the collapse of meaning, imperfect though this is,
for little or no gain at all.1  Declining to discuss the role of Arabic in the
formation of national identity because of the absence of watertight definitions
of the concept of nation and its derivatives would be tantamount to denying the
historical and political meanings of a host of culturally seminal discussions of
the topic in modern Arab(ic) discourse. The aim of this study is indeed to
establish the meanings of these discussions, while acknowledging that the basic
concepts in terms of which these meanings will be explicated are not clearly
defined. As Edwards (1988: 1) points out, “Questions of language and identity
are extremely complex. The essence of the terms themselves is open to discussion

setting the scene
—17 —
and, consequently, consideration of their relationship is fraught with diffi-
culties.”
Before launching this explication, it may be useful to outline some of the
factors which render nationalism such a difficult concept to define in a rigorous
manner. One factor is the difficulty of defining the term “nation” itself, owing
to (1) the novelty or modernity of nations as sociopolitical constructs in histor-
ical terms, which, nevertheless, seems to contradict the “subjective antiquity” of
the nation “in the eye of nationalists” (Anderson 1991: 5); (2) the different types
of nation that have come into existence during the past two centuries; (3) the
specific social and political environments associated with the emergence of
different nations which have given rise to historically contingent factors in
nation-formation, such that factors relevant in one period in history may not be
so relevant in another, even when these factors appear to be similar or labelled
by the same terminology; and (4) the inevitable variety of approaches that have
been developed to study this phenomenon which, according to Liah Greenfeld
(1992: 7), is “the source of the conceptually evasive, protean nature of national-
ism and the cause of the perennial frustration of its students”.
In this connection, Hobsbawm (1990: 6) is right when he points out that the
attempt to fit nations as “historically novel, emerging, changing, and … far from
universal entities into a framework of permanence and universality” (i.e. that of
objective nationalism) has led to essentialist criteria for defining the nation that
are “fuzzy, shifting … ambiguous, and as useless for the purposes of the traveller’s
orientation as cloud-shapes are compared to landmarks”. In addition to the
inevitable changes in the meaning of nationalism in the course of history, this
term has been subjected to what Snyder (1954: 9) aptly describes as a “process of
naturalization and nationalization” across linguistic and political boundaries.
This has led to its extension to sociocultural terrains that are sometimes vastly
different from each other, or from the one that has acted as their initial
referential anchor.2 This feature of nationalism has led Smith (1991: 79) to
describe it as “chameleon-like” and as being able to lend itself to “endless
manipulation”, depending on the specific nature of the context in which it is
applied. The combination of these factors makes the process of linguistic and
cultural translation, and, therefore, conceptual generalization in the study of
nationalism a very precarious one indeed. Furthermore, these factors highlight
the vagueness of the various understandings of the nation and its technical
derivatives in the literature. Anderson (1991: 5) characterizes this situation in
terms of what he calls the paradox of the “formal universality of nationality as a
socio-cultural concept [versus] the irremediable particularity of its concrete
manifestations”.
Definitions of nationalism are also complicated by the complexity of the
relationship between nationality and ethnicity3  on the one hand, and the

the arabic language and national identity
—18 —
nation and the state on the other. Thus, it is not always easy to tell when
ethnicity ends and nationality begins, or whether or not the existence of the
sovereign state is a necessary criterion for the existence of the nation as a recog-
nizable or even legal entity (see Chapter 1). To this may be added the important
theoretical difference between nationalism as an ideological construct, or an
elite-generated set of organizing doctrines, and the same term in its capacity as a
designation for the emergence of national consciousness as a movement or mass
phenomenon. This distinction between ideology and movement is particularly
important since, as Hobsbawm (1990: 11) points out, “official ideologies of
states and movements are not guides to what is in the minds of even the most
loyal citizens”, a view shared by Breuilly (1993: 63), who states that “nationalist
ideology is neither an expression of national identity … nor the arbitrary
invention of nationalists for political purposes”. The fact that nation-formation
is a process which takes place over a long period of time rather than being an
event with a defined beginning and end adds to the intractability of defining
the nation.
It is therefore invariably difficult to specify the “point in the process at which
a sufficient portion of a people has internalised the national identity in order to
cause nationalism to become an effective force for mobilising the masses”
(Connor 1990: 100). These difficulties amply justify Gellner’s (1983: 2) caution-
ary note that definitions of “nationalism, nation, nationality and state must be
applied with common sense”. The force of this cautionary note is particularly
pertinent in the Arab context, where the existence of pan-Arab nationalism as
a supra-form of national self-definition among Arabic-speaking peoples adds to
the weight of the terminological discrimination which scholars of nationalism
have to apply. The need for this discrimination is highlighted in the following
statement on the subject (Sharara 1962: 227):
There are four words which people confuse whenever they talk of nationalities. These
are: nation (umma), fatherland (watan), people (shaÆb), and state (dawla). They
frequently use the word “state” when they mean “nation”, and talk of “fatherland” to
signify “people” or else speak of “people” when they intend the “nation”, without
distinction between the meaning of these vocables, or precise realization of what they
denote, or a firm grounding in the differences between the respective concepts.
But if nation and its terminological derivatives are not amenable to precise
definition, will the notion of “identity”, which occurs as a qualified substantive
in the title of this book, fare any better? The answer to this is a definite “No!”
(Chapter 1, section 2). To begin with, social identities, of which national identity
is only one, are varied and complex. They additionally include “familial,
territorial, class, religious, ethnic and gender” identities (Smith 1991: 4), which
are as difficult to define as national identity is. In addition to the fact that these
identities are not fixed in time or social space, they often overlap with each

setting the scene
—19 —
other in ways which defy systematization. Thus, regional identities may overlap
with class-based ones which, together or separately, may override gendered self-
definition or vice versa. In some cases, religious and ethnic identities are closely
allied to each other, although these identities may not coincide with single
territorial associations. The Druze in the Middle East who are territorially spread
over three states – Israel, Lebanon and Syria – exemplify this point. The pro-
minence of identities as modes of self-identification may also vary from situa-
tion to situation, depending on the saliency of those features of the situation
which the individual judges to be relevant. This makes identities negotiable, to
use a common term in the literature. In addition, it is important not to think of
identity in terms of sameness, or as an essentialist and, therefore, reductive
concept which projects national self-definition as a grid of boxed associations.
But it is also important not to let the methodological commitment to
“context[s] of opposition and relativities” (Tonkin et al. 1989: 17) deny the
efficacy of characterizing aspects of identity in ways which invoke objective
properties relevant to it. Appropriating Gellner’s (1983: 2) cautionary note
above, we may say that definitions of identity, especially national identity,
“must be applied with common sense”. A good example of this attitude in the
context of Arab identity is provided by Hudson, who, having identified
Arabism and Islam as the two main components of this identity, proceeds to
qualify his conclusions as follows (1977: 54):
There is, in short, such variety of expression of Arabism and Islam, and such toler-
ance of diversity and multiple identifications within each … that few generalizations
about the behavioural consequences of these identities are valid. Nor is it right to
conclude that the existence of such pluralism negates the communal solidarity
implicit in the ethnolinguistic and religious bonds which the Arabs share. The valid
conclusion is simply that Arabs feel strongly that such feelings do not preclude a
variety of other identifications, practices, and ideologies, nor are they precluded by
them.
Yet, in spite of these definitional difficulties, nationalism or national identity
is an important force in modern-day society, as it has been over the past two
centuries. To understand the saliency of national identity and its function in
the modern world, Smith (1991: 163) provides the following explanation
which, being of a general nature, will be assumed as one of the background
premises of this study:
Transcending oblivion through posterity, the restoration of collective dignity
through an appeal to a golden age; the realisation of fraternity through symbols, rites
and ceremonies, which bind the living to the dead and fallen of the community:
these are the underlying functions of national identity and nationalism in the
modern world, and the basic reasons why the latter have proved so durable, protean
and resilient through all vicissitudes.

the arabic language and national identity
—20 —
2. two modes of defining the nation
In spite of the above difficulties in specifying the technical meaning of nation,
nationality and nationalism, two principal modes of defining the nation exist
in the literature. The first mode is generally referred to as the objective definition
of the nation. The second mode is designated as the subjective definition.
Although the choice of the terms “objective” and “subjective” is an unfortunate
one, owing to their being technically loaded, the following discussion will set
out the sense in which these two types of definition are deployed in the
literature. Other modes of defining the nation exist, including the boundary and
the ethno-symbolic approaches which will be dealt with below.
Objective definitions of the nation revolve around the specification of a set
of criteria in terms of which individual nations can be characterized.4  These
criteria usually include territory, state, language, common culture and history.
Religion is sometimes added to these criteria, usually as a corollary, although
the situation may vary from case to case. In its strong form, the objective
definition of the nation stipulates that if, and only if, the full set of designated
criteria apply to a given group of people, the group concerned can be treated as
a nation proper. This may be exemplified by Joseph Stalin’s (1994: 20)
definition of the nation as a “historically constituted, stable community of people,
formed of a common language, territory, economic life, and psychological make-up
manifested in a common culture” (original emphasis). Stalin (ibid.: 21) categor-
ically states that it is “only when all these characteristics are present together that we
have a nation” (original emphasis); hence the assignation of this definition to the
strong variety type. The weak form of the objective definition obtains when no
stipulation is offered to the effect that the full set of designated criteria must
apply to a group before the group in question is established as a nation. This
means that the set of designated criteria may apply in its entirety or only in part
to a particular group; and yet, in the latter case, this is considered to be suffi-
cient to confer on the group concerned the status of nation. In most situations
of this type, an element of national consciousness as a constitutive ingredient in
the formation of national identity is an absolute requirement. An example of
this type of objective definition, in which national consciousness is explicitly
invoked, is offered by Krejcí and Velímsky (1981: 44–5):
There are … five objective factors which can contribute to the identification of a
group as a nation: territory, state (or similar political status), language, culture and
history. When positive answers to all of these criteria coincide there can be little
doubt that the respective community or population is a nation; then usually the
sixth, subjective criterion, national consciousness, is also present. But there are
situations where some, or even most of the objective criteria are missing and yet the
community feels itself to be a nation … The subjective factor of consciousness is the
ultimate factor which eventually decides the issue of national identity.

setting the scene
—21 —
Objective definitions of the nation fail to recognize the complexity of group
identity as an act of shifting and overlapping self-ascription, depending on the
contextually determined factors of setting and interlocutor(s). In this connec-
tion, Hobsbawm (1990: 8) gives the example of a person living in Slough (near
Heathrow airport in England) who, “depending on circumstances”, may think
of him- or herself as “a British citizen, or (faced with other citizens of a different
colour) as an Indian, or (faced with other Indians) as a Gujarati, or (faced with
Hindus and Muslims) as a Jain, or as a member of a particular caste, or kinship
connection, or as one who, at home, speaks Hindi rather than Gujarati, or doubt-
less in other ways”. Continuing with the same line of argument, Hobsbawm
(ibid.) points out how people can “identify themselves as Jews even though they
share neither religion, language, culture, tradition, historical background,
blood-group patterns nor an attitude to the Jewish state”. This seems to have
been the position adopted by Sigmund Freud, who, as Connor (1994: 203) tells
us, “made clear that his [Freud’s] own sense of Jewishness had nothing to do
with either religion or national pride … [but was bonded to] … many obscure
and emotional forces, which were the more powerful the less they could be expressed
in words” (original emphasis). A similar view is held by Ibrahim (1981/2), who
states that some people identify themselves as Muslims in spite of the fact that
they deviate from the fundamental teachings of Islam. Liah Greenfeld general-
izes this criticism by saying that there are “important exceptions to every
relationship in terms of which nationalism has ever been interpreted – whether
with common territory or common language, statehood or shared traditions,
history or race” (1992: 7).
The appeal to national consciousness as a deciding factor in the formation of
nations is equally problematic. On the one hand, it reduces national identifi-
cation as an act of self-ascription to the option of belonging to a single nation or
nationality, when, as was observed earlier, identity is both compositionally com-
plex and historically variable. On the other hand, by presupposing the nation,
national consciousness emerges as an after-the-event type of criterion, rather than
one with real predictive power. Likewise, the objective definition of the nation
diverts attention from the nation itself as a problematic construct; in the words
of Reynolds (1984: 252), “since the nation exists, belief in it is seen not as a
political theory but as a mere recognition of fact”. I am also inclined to agree with
Karl Deutsch (1966: 97), who emphasizes the role of communicative efficiency
– within a context of complementary social communication – over the mere fact
of the existence of objective criteria as an important factor in nation formation:
The usual descriptions of a people in terms of a community of languages, or charac-
ters, or memories, or past histories, are open to exception. For what counts is not the
presence or absence of any single factor, but merely the presence of sufficient
communication facilities with enough complementarity to produce the overall result.

the arabic language and national identity
—22 —
The subjective mode of defining the nation – sometimes referred to as the
voluntaristic approach, to contrast it with the involuntaristic nature of
objective definitions – emphasizes the role played by will in nation-formation.
To use Renan’s much-celebrated formula, the nation under this approach is “an
everyday plebiscite”. For example, in recent discussions of the status of Scotland
as a nation in its own right within the United Kingdom, the writer Andrew
Marr (quoted in Scotland on Sunday, 29 November 1998, p. 8) states that
“fundamentally, Scotland is a nation because it believes itself to be one”, thus
adding to the concept of “will” the element of “belief” in a group’s nationhood
as a supporting factor. Gellner (1983: 53) criticizes the subjective definition
because of its elasticity: “If we define nations as groups which will themselves to
persist as communities, the definition-net we have cast into the sea will bring
forth too rich a catch”. The subjective definition may also be criticized because
the existence of will among members of a group cannot be unequivocally
established before the emergence of the nation itself, whether in political or
even cultural terms (see Chapter 5, section 3 for a similar view by al-Husri). Will
therefore emerges as an a posteriori rationalization in the study of nationalism
rather than as one of its predictive concepts. In addition, subjective definitions
are in principle based on the theoretical downgrading of the role played by
objective factors in nation-formation, in spite of the fact that this role can be
shown to be empirically relevant in some cases.
These difficulties have led some scholars to conclude that “no scientific
definition of the nation can be devised” (Edwards 1988: 14), whether in
subjective or objective terms. In response to this theoretical dilemma, some
scholars, for example Barth (1969) and Armstrong (1982), have shifted the
emphasis from criteria that characterize the constitution of the group internally
to the role of boundaries and boundary-maintenance in keeping groups apart in
the ethnic and national spheres – what has been referred to as “playing the vis-
à-vis” in Chapter 1 (section 2). In general terms, these scholars have tended to
focus on exclusion rather than inclusion in group-definition, by highlighting
boundary-enhancing factors and mechanisms. The adoption of this position is
said to allow the student of nationalism to account for vertical change in the
constitution of a particular national identity through time, as well as for
horizontal variations in that identity across geographical space, so long as the
boundary between a particular group and other groups remains substantially
uninfringed. Furthermore, the fact that boundaries are socially constructed
under this approach enables the student of nationalism to give prominence to
the nation as a cultural unit, without having to link it to a politically sovereign
territory or state. Finally, the boundary approach has the virtue of widening the
scope of factors – sometimes called border guards – which can be deployed in
group-definition, including symbolic ones of which language is a prime

setting the scene
—23 —
ingredient. As Hutchinson and Smith (1996: 10) point out, “myths and symbols
play a vital role in unifying populations and ensuring their continuity over
many generations”. In fact, “symbols, customs and ceremonies” are so important
that Smith (1991: 77) treats them as “the most potent and durable aspects of
nationalism”. He (ibid.) further explains their role in articulating nationalist
ideology as one of embodying the “basic concepts [of nationalism], making them
visible and distinct for every member, [and] communicating the tenets of an
abstract ideology in palpable, concrete terms that evoke instant emotional
responses from all strata of the community”.
Interest in the role of symbols and myths in nation-formation and group
boundary-maintenance is one of the main contributions of the ethno-symbolic
approach to the study of national identity. A basic tenet of this approach is the
interdependence of groups and boundaries, and the importance of boundary
mechanisms as “cultural markers of difference” which, “like all things at
boundaries, … must be visible to members of the group and to non-members”
(Nash 1989: 10) to be effective barriers of inclusion and exclusion. Symbols as
boundary pointers may include dress, language, architecture, food, music, ritual
calendars, rites de passage, taboos, ceremonials, holidays, national anthems, flags,
cenotaphs and tombs of unknown soldiers, among many others. In addition to
their function as badges of difference and as devices which permit the
“purposeful confusion of meaning” (Horowitz 1985: 218), socially constructed
symbols of this type play an important role in maintaining the internal cohesion
of the group and in guarding its identity. The fact that most of these symbols are
ambiguous or even fictive (in the sense of being socially constructed or fabri-
cated), at least at the level of selection and canonization, is not the issue here,
since it is precisely this ambiguous and fictive nature of the symbols which
makes them versatile and effective for deployment in nationalist ideology (cf.
Balibar and Wallerstein 1991).
3. two types of nation, two types of nationalism
Broadly speaking, two types of nation are recognized in the literature: the civic
or political nation and the cultural or ethnic nation. The former type is often
associated with Western nations, paradigm examples of which are France and
the Netherlands. The latter type is associated with nations in Eastern Europe
and Asia, although the German nation is the best-known example of this model
in the literature. The difference between the political (or “old nation”) and the
cultural nation (or “newer nation”) is said by Seton-Watson (1981: 4) to reside
in the fact that while, in the former, “the state came first, then national con-
sciousness, and then the nation”, for the latter national consciousness came
first, “then the nation and the nationalist consciousness, and last the state”. The

the arabic language and national identity
—24 —
fact that these two types of nation are analytically distinct does not preclude
their occurrence as components of the same nationalism, although the way in
which the civic and the ethnic are mixed will vary from case to case (see Chapter
4, sections 2 and 3).5 This constant typological mixing and remixing is one of
the reasons why the “nation proved an invention on which it was impossible to
secure a patent” (Anderson 1991: 67).
Smith (1991: 9) characterizes the civic or political nation in terms of its
possession of “compact [and] well-defined territories”. These are often pro-
jected, in literary and other forms of communication and exhortation, as the
repositories of collective (interpersonal as well as intergenerational) memories,
the sites of heroic achievements and the arena of proud aspirations in a seamless
progression of history which unites the past with the future through an active
and nationally self-aware present (see Chapter 3, section 1). A civic or political
nation is further characterized as a “community of laws and institutions with a
single political will” (ibid.: 10) in which all members enjoy the same rights and
obligations as equal citizens before the law. Finally, the effective application of
this legal and political equality of members must depend on a “common civic
culture and ideology” (ibid.: 11) which includes, among other things, shared
symbols and myths and the existence of a system of education whose task is to
enhance socialization and communication across class, regional, religious and
gendered boundaries as well as encouraging political participation within what
Deutsch (1966: 96) calls a community of “complementary habits and facilities
of communication”. The importance of print-languages and literacy as factors in
the formation of the civic nation is organically connected to this system of mass
education.
The ethnic or cultural nation starts from the premise of presumed common
descent, which makes the nation a kind of super-fictive family to which all its
members irrevocably belong (see Chapter 5, section 2 for references to common
descent in the context of Arab nationalism). Under this concept of the nation,
once an Arab or German, always an Arab or German, regardless of whether one
lives in the native lands of the nation or in diaspora. This concept of the nation
is further underpinned by a presumed common culture and a set of traditional
values which provide the basis for group-mobilization in the political sphere.
Mobilization of this kind is an elite-led activity in which lexicography,
philology, archaeology, material culture, folklore, architecture and “political
museumising” (Anderson 1991: 183),6 among other things, encapsulate the
data which may undergo a process of mythologization, symbolization and meta-
phorization in the name of the nation. And although the existence of the state
as a politico-legal unit in the nation’s homeland is the ideal form of national
self-realization, cultural nationalists subscribe to the view that the state and the
nation are categorially different (though not categorically distinct from each

setting the scene
—25 —
other). As Hutchinson (1987: 13) points out, “the cultural nationalist perceives
the state as accidental, for the essence of the nation is its distinctive civilisation,
which is the product of its unique history, culture and geographical profile”.
This view is shared by another student of nationalism, Carlton Hayes (1960: 5),
who states that “cultural nationalism may exist with or without political
nationalism” as a force for political unity and independence.
The distinction between political and cultural nationalism in the European
context is generally exemplified by reference to the French and German
conceptions of the nation. Thus, while the French understanding of the nation
is said to be “state-centred and assimilationist”, the German view of it is pro-
jected as “Volk-centred and differentialist” (Brubaker 1992: 1). While the
French consider their nationhood as the “creation of their state”, the Germans
treat it as the “basis of their state” (ibid.: 184). In both forms of nationalism, the
cultural and the political are important, although they move in different direc-
tions on their respective historical axes: from the cultural to the political in
German nationalism and from the political to the cultural in French nationalism.
In most Arab countries, the pull of cultural (pan-Arab) nationalism counter-
balances in varying degrees the imperatives of the political nationalism of the
sovereign state, and vice versa (see Chapter 6, sections 5.1 and 5.2). Or, as
Tütsch (1965: 31) puts it, “Pan-Arab nationalism, local nationalism inside the
partly artificial borders of the … Arab states [state nationalism], and regional
nationalism [for example, Syrian Socialist National Party ideology] grow side by
side in competition to [sic] each other”.
There are different interpretations of cultural nationalism in the literature.
For Kohn (1945) and Gellner (1983), cultural nationalism is a reactive move-
ment, or defensive response, on the part of the educated elites, against externally
generated challenges to the existing order of the community and its traditional
belief systems. Cultural nationalism is said by Kohn to arise in the non-Western
world in conditions of “backward … political and social development” (1945:
329), mirroring in this respect German nationalism which “substituted for the
legal and rational concept of citizenship [in the Western, civic concept of the
nation] the infinitely vaguer concept of ‘folk’” (ibid.: 331). While accepting
the above interpretation of cultural nationalism as a “defensive response … to
exogenous modernization”, Hutchinson (1987: 32) treats it as a movement for
“the moral regeneration of the historic community” within an overall frame-
work of authentic, tradition-cognizant modernization (ibid.: 16). This explains
the fact that advocates of cultural nationalism tend to be educators and
scholars, people of letters and artists who form cultural societies and publish
newspapers, journals and magazines to mobilize the community – publicly or
illicitly through pamphlet propaganda – both culturally and politically (see
Chapter 3, sections 2–4 for Turkish and Arab nationalism). To achieve this

the arabic language and national identity
—26 —
aim, cultural nationalists must perform the paradoxical task of reading
modernity into tradition at the same time as treating tradition as an expression
of modernity. They do this through a double move of particularizing the modern
as a manifestation of the native spirit, and generalizing the traditional as an
expression of the universal impulses of that spirit (see Chapter 6, section 4 and
associated sub-sections for this tendency in Egyptian nationalism). This double
move involves universalizing tradition and nativizing modernity in a way which
enables the moral and sociopolitical regeneration of the nation to take place.
As do its interpretations, attitudes towards nationalism also vary. While most
scholars are content to study nationalism as a multiplex phenomenon of history,
politics, law, anthropology, sociology and psychology, some scholars approach it
from the perspective of the effects it has on communities, whether these effects
are intended or not. Elie Kedourie (1966) provides one of the most scathing
attacks on nationalism from this perspective, although he does not consistently
separate the movement from the ideology in his critique. Kedourie attacks
nationalism as an ideology because it makes the nation as a historically,
politically and sociologically “obscure and contrived” construct seem “simple and
transparent” (ibid.: 9). Nationalism is also criticized for the belief it engenders
in its followers that nations are unique blocks of humanity; for transforming
language from an instrument of communication into a “political issue for which
men are ready to kill and exterminate each other” (ibid.: 70); for making
“extremely difficult the orderly functioning of a society of states” (ibid.); for
mixing language with race (linguism) as emblems of a politically impregnated
identity; for being the invention of “literary men who had never exercised
power, and appreciated little the necessities and obligations incidental to inter-
course between states” (ibid.: 70–1);7 for operating in a “hazy region, midway
between fable and reality” (ibid.: 71); for making “use of the past in order to
subvert the present” (ibid.: 75); for looking “inwardly, away from and beyond
the imperfect world” in a manner which “ultimately becomes a rejection of life”
(ibid.: 87); for fomenting “civil strife between the generations” (ibid.: 101);8
and for disrupting “whatever equilibrium had been reached between the
different groups [in the community], [by] reopen[ing] settled questions and …
renew[ing] strife” (ibid.: 115). Kedourie concludes his attack on nationalism by
saying that “The attempt to refashion so much of the world on national lines
has not led to greater peace and stability. On the contrary, it has created new
conflicts, exacerbated tension, and brought catastrophe to numberless people
innocent of all politics” (ibid.: 138).
Although Gellner (1983: 125) rejects Kedourie’s attack on nationalism for
being anti-historical, for believing that nationalism is a “contingent, avoidable
aberration, accidentally spawned by European thinkers”, rather than seeing it as
a phenomenon that is “inherent in a certain set of social conditions [which], it

setting the scene
—27 —
so happens, are the conditions of our time”, he nevertheless agrees with
Kedourie that “nationalism has often not been so sweetly reasonable” (ibid.: 2)
and that, in a “nationalist age, societies worship themselves brazenly and openly”
(ibid.: 56) and, one may add, chauvinistically. Gellner, however, provides his
own critique of nationalism as an ideology, rather than a movement or pheno-
menon, on the grounds that it “suffers from pervasive false consciousness” (ibid.:
124). First, “it claims to defend folk culture while in fact [seeking to forge] a
high culture” (ibid.). Second, “it claims to protect an old folk society while in
fact helping to build up an anonymous mass society” (ibid.). Third, it “preaches
and defends continuity, but owes everything to a decisive and unutterably
profound break in human history” (ibid.: 125). And, fourth, “it preaches and
defends cultural diversity, when in fact it imposes homogeneity both inside and,
to a lesser degree, between political units” (ibid.). This is why, Gellner tells us,
the “self-image” of nationalist ideology and “its true nature are inversely
related” (ibid.).
Anderson (1991: 141) considers attacks on nationalism of the kind launched
by Kedourie’s to be one-sided. He points out how the emphasis on “fear and
hatred of the Other” as ugly projections of nationalism ignore the fact that
“nations inspire love” which, when associated with self-sacrifice for the
community, extends into various forms of literary expression, including poetry,
prose, music, dance and the arts. Anderson is also indirectly critical of Gellner’s
inability to appreciate fully the role of myths and symbols in nation-formation,
believing them to be deviations from the historical truth rather than motifs
whose aim is to mould reality. By concentrating on “what is [rather than] what
people believe is” (Connor 1978: 380, original emphasis), Gellner denies himself
the opportunity of accessing discourse from a critical perspective to derive what
may be called rhetorical meanings in which historical and sociological truth is
not a prime consideration. Hobsbawm (1990: 12) recognizes this point when he
states that “nationalism requires too much belief in what is potentially not so”.
Renan makes a similar point when he says: “getting its history wrong is part of
being a nation” (quoted in Hobsbawm, ibid.). Finally, from the perspective of
this work, Kedourie’s attack on nationalism suffers from a deficient under-
standing of the function of language in society. He tends to emphasize its
communicative role and to downgrade its symbolic yield, although the latter is
central in a number of domains, including those of personal and group identity.
4. language and national identity
Whether objectively or subjectively defined, and whether or not one character-
izes it in boundary or ethno-symbolic terms, the nation is often associated with
language as a marker of its identity. Students of nationalism who emphasize the

the arabic language and national identity
—28 —
language–national identity link, in the German Romantic tradition advocated
by Herder and Fichte, point to the fact that language is the most important
instrument of socialization, of making humankind human. In particular, they
point to the fact that language-acquisition takes place in a speech community,
that language and thought are inseparable and that languages are different from
each other, and that these facts stamp the individual and the community with
an imprint that is uniquely their own. The primordiality of language as a “given”
of national identity in some ideological constructions is rooted in origins that
are untraceable in the depth of time: “No one can give the date for the birth of
any language” (Anderson 1991: 144). The durability of living languages as
markers of national identity derives from their imagined immutability, in spite
of the fact that they are constantly changing in the lexical, grammatical and
phonological spheres. In the Middle Ages, the rationale behind the belief in the
primordiality of language was rooted in religious belief: the biblical idea of a
common origin for humankind and of the existence of a pre-Babel common
tongue were instrumental in giving currency to the belief that the “post-Babel
differentiation of language [was] the first step in the formation of races and
peoples” (Bartlett 1994: 198). This kind of emphasis on the role of language in
defining group identity has led some scholars, notably Kedourie (1966: 71), to
charge that “there is no definite clear-cut distinction between linguistic and
racial nationalism”, and that it was “no accident that racial classifications were,
at the same time, linguistic ones” (ibid.: 72). The persistence of this charge
shows the hold which ideas about language and nationality in the German
Romantic tradition still have in the study of nationalism. This is despite the fact
that a scholar as great as Max Müller rejected as unscientific all attempts to infer
race, a genetic concept, from language, which is not inherited.
For scholars in the German Romantic tradition, language mirrors the soul of
the nation and, as such, is the most effective way of apprehending the spirit of
the community (see Chapter 5, section 2 for similar views by al-ÆAlayli and al-
Bitar).9 Interest in language as an attribute of identity within and outside this
tradition was to a great extent responsible for the preoccupation with lexico-
graphy, philology and comparative and historical linguistics in Europe, particu-
larly Germany, in the nineteenth century. Anderson (1991: 71) believes that
work in these areas was “central to the shaping of nineteenth-century European
nationalism”. He is also of the view that bilingual dictionaries, by virtue of the
visible equality they created between the vernaculars on the one hand, and
between these and the languages of antiquity on the other, created an “egalitar-
ianism among languages” (ibid.: 71), as well as the “conviction that languages
were, so to speak, the personal property of quite specific groups … and … that
these groups, imagined as communities, were entitled to their autonomous place
in a fraternity of equals” (ibid.: 84).

setting the scene
—29 —
Within this framework of close association between language and national
identity, the defence of one’s language emerges as a defence of the set of values
it encapsulates and transmits from one generation to another. This is why
Fichte calls for cleansing the German language from the impurities represented
by borrowed words which would contaminate its inner fabric and, inevitably,
infect the soul of the glorious German nation (see Chapter 4, section 2 for
similar views in Turkish nationalism). Fichte argues that “to take abstract, life-
less Latin terms into German would have a deadening effect [on German, and]
would lead Germans to ascribe some of the alien values associated with [these
Latin terms] to their German ‘equivalents’” (Breuilly 1993: 60). Hobsbawm
(1990: 56) calls the interest in language-purification “philological nationalism”
which, he claims, “obliged German scientists to translate ‘oxygen’ into ‘Sauer-
stoff’, and today is inspiring a desperate French rearguard action against the
ravages of franglais”. To explain the strength of this primordial association
between language and nation, Hobsbawm refers to the two paradigmatic cases of
Germany and Italy, which he describes in the following way (ibid.: 102–3):
For Germans and Italians, their national language was not merely an administrative
convenience or a means of unifying state-wide communication … or even a
revolutionary device for bringing the truths of liberty, science and progress at all … It
was more even than the vehicle of a distinguished literature and universal
intellectual expression. It was the only thing that made them Germans and Italians,
and consequently carried a far heavier charge of national identity than, say, English
did for those who wrote or read that language.
Language interlocks with national identity in other subtle ways. As the
primary means of socialization, language enables the individual, through the mere
fact of early childhood acquisition and lifelong formal and informal education,
to participate in the life and culture of the community across the horizontal axis
of social space – by creating communities of intercommunicating individuals in
present time – and the vertical axis of social and intergenerational time (cf. Hayes
1960). Language carries out this role in what Fishman (1980: 87) describes as a
“peculiarly sensitive web of intimacy and mutuality”. In particular, language
acts as the medium for connecting the past to the present and the future, thus
bestowing on the past by virtue of its durability or pastness a “weight of author-
ity, legitimacy and rightness” (Nash 1989: 14) which, in turn, accrues to language
itself through the power of close association and intellectual transmission.
Language also plays a part with other communication facilities – including
“learned habits, … symbols, memories, patterns of land holding and social strati-
fication, events in history, and personal association” in enabling nationality as a
“complementarity of social communication” to come into being (Deutsch 1966:
97). Identification with a language and loyalty to it are aims of nationalism; it
seeks to inculcate them in its members through literacy and education.

the arabic language and national identity
—30 —
 In delivering these functions, language is the medium which makes the
nation as an “imagined community” imaginable. It connects the individual in
social time and social space to fellow nationals whom he or she will never hear
of, meet or know. Furthermore, language confers on the community the
property of being “simultaneously open and closed” (ibid.: 146). It is open
because “one’s ‘mother’ tongue is not necessarily the language of one’s ‘real’
mother” (Balibar 1991: 99), which leaves the door open for others to join the
nation, particularly in its political interpretation, through the act of language-
learning in adult life. As Hobsbawm (1990: 21) explains in the context of French
civic nationalism, “in theory it was not the native use of the language that made
a person French … but the willingness to acquire this”. A similar situation
seems to have obtained for “the hispanophone founder of the Basque National
Party (PNV) … [who] had to learn [Basque] as an adult” (ibid.: 119). The same
was the case for SatiÆ al-Husri, the greatest ideologist of pan-Arab nationalism
in the twentieth century, who switched from Turkish to Arabic only as an adult
(see Chapter 5, section 3). This seems to hold true for Ziya Gökalp, the most
important ideologue of modern Turkish nationalism, who is said by some to be
of Kurdish origin (see Chapter 4, section 2). Ibrahim (1981/2: 70–1) cites an
example from Egypt during the 1967 war, when the police instituted tough “stop
and search” measures in Cairo and other major Egyptian cities to prevent Israeli
spying activities. Ibrahim tells the story of an Egyptian behaving suspiciously
who had to rely on confirmation of his identity by members of his neighbour-
hood to escape arrest by the Egyptian police, in spite of the fact that he had a
valid Egyptian identity card on him. In contrast, a Frenchman was able to
escape arrest because he addressed the police in Arabic, broken though this was.
Paradoxical as it may seem, the nation as an imagined community is concep-
tualized as a closed construct partly by virtue of language itself. As Anderson
(1991: 148) explains, acquisition per se is not the issue in examples of this kind;
what matters is the fact that acquisition needs to take place in time: “What
limits one’s access to other languages is not their imperviousness but one’s own
mortality. Hence a certain privacy to all languages” (emphasis added).
The close connection between language and national identity is sometimes
cast within a framework which emphasizes the non-uniqueness of the former in
characterizing the latter. This non-uniqueness receives a variety of interpreta-
tions in the literature. It may be taken to mean that language and nation do not
mutually imply one another. Max Weber (1948: 172–3) spells out this principle
by emphasizing three facets of the language–national identity link: (1) “a ‘nation’
is not identical with a community speaking the same language”; (2) “a common
language does not seem to be absolutely necessary to a ‘nation’”; and (3) “some
language groups do not think of themselves as a separate ‘nation’”. It also means
that language is but one marker of national identity among a set of markers

setting the scene
—31 —
which may include such attributes as territory, common culture and descent,
shared memories and so on. In multilingual societies, people may be competent
in more than one language, to which they may be attached in competing or
complementary ways. There are also situations, especially among illiterate persons
in remote areas of the world, where people are not even aware of the proper
name of their language. Brass (1991: 26) tells us that, in such areas, people “may
very well go on speaking their language and cultivating their fields without
becoming concerned that their language is being neglected and without
developing any sense of solidarity”. Brass (ibid.: 70) also reminds us that “many
people, if not most people, never think about their language at all and never
attach any emotional significance to it”. Hobsbawm (1990: 57) expresses this
point more memorably when he says that “where there are no other languages
within earshot, one’s own idiom is not so much a group criterion as something
that all people have, like legs”. This same point is reiterated by Edwards (1988:
47), who states that: “it is with group contact that linguistic identity issues
become most pressing”. We also know that people do change their languages
voluntarily. Such a change is not as catastrophic for the individual as some
national romantics would like us to believe. While accepting that language
plays an important role in national identity formation, Karl Deutsch (1966)
nevertheless believes that it does so most effectively when allied to other factors
which together help create complementary channels of social communication.
In some cases, complementary channels of communication may exist in spite of
language, not because of it. Deutsch illustrates this by citing the example of a
German-Swiss newspaper editor who stated in his autobiography that he had
more in common with French-Swiss people than with Austrian Germans (pre-
sumably owing to the existence of extralinguistic complementary channels of
communication in Switzerland): “The French-Swiss and I were using different
words for the same concepts, but we understood each other. The man from
Vienna and I were using the same words for different concepts, and thus we did
not understand each other in the least” (ibid.: 97).
There are also examples from the history of nationalist movements which
show that unity of language cannot prevent secession, as happened in relation
to English and Spanish in North and Latin America respectively. In other cases,
the injection of language as a criterion of national identity is a late addition in
some nationalist movements. In Ireland, Irish became an issue in the nationalist
movement only after the establishment of the Gaelic League in 1893. In
Finland, language did not become an issue in the nationalist movement until
around 1860. The linguistic element in the Catalan nationalist movement came
to the fore only around the middle of the nineteenth century. Hobsbawm (ibid.:
62) tells us that “the influx of Francophone foreigners into the rural communes
of Flanders [in the nineteenth century] was resented more for their refusal to

the arabic language and national identity
—32 —
attend mass on Sundays than on linguistic grounds”. In some cases, religious
conversion can be a decisive factor in shaping different identities for commun-
ities who share the same language, as happened with the Croats and the Serbs as
a result of their allegiance to Roman Catholicism and Orthodoxy respectively.
The non-uniqueness of language does not, however, challenge the fact that
language can serve as a most effective marker of identity, of boundary between
groups. Language has been used in this capacity since ancient times. The Greeks
used it to distinguish themselves from the “barbarians”, those who could not
speak Greek and therefore were unintelligible. In the conflict between Gilead
and Ephraim (Judges 12:4–6), friend was told from foe by the correct articu-
lation of the word shibboleth. The use of medical Arabic terms by Jewish doctors
in Poland instead of Latin ones, used by Christian doctors, may have been
deployed as a border guard, or marker of ethnic identity (Armstrong 1982).
Similarly, the use of the Hebrew script by Jews to record aspects of their theology
in Arabic in Spain and elsewhere in the Arab-controlled areas in North Africa
and Asia may be viewed as an attempt at ethnic differentiation. However, it is
only in the age of nationalism that language starts to assume the function of a
marker of national identity.
To be fully effective, the role of language as a boundary marker or guard
requires a distinction between two functions of language: the communicative or
instrumental and the symbolic which, although interrelated in ordinary
language use, are nevertheless analytically distinct (cf. Chapters 3 and 4); this is
clear from the continued salience of the latter function even in the absence of
the former. Edwards (1988: 18) stresses this distinction, pointing out that ignor-
ance of it “can lead to lack of clarity and, indeed, misdirection of effort among
linguistic nationalists”. The role of language as a marker of group boundary is
therefore associated more with its symbolic than its communicative function.
Some students of nationalism believe that interest in the functional allocation
of languages to particular communicative domains (what is called status-planning
in sociolinguistics) and language reform (what is called corpus-planning in
sociolinguistics) acquire greater significance in a speech community in propor-
tion to the dominance of the symbolic over the communicative function in the
community in question. Anderson (1991: 13) expresses this figuratively in a
different context by the apparently paradoxical formula “the deader the langu-
age, the better” (see Chapter 4, section 4). The symbolic significance of language
explains the demand by the majority group in a multilingual community to
accord its language official primacy over other co-territorial languages (see
Chapter 4, sections 2 and 3). In situations of this kind, language becomes a
symbol of power and domination. It is this symbolic function of language which
underlies the revival of Hebrew in Palestine at the beginning of the twentieth
century, since at the time Hebrew was communicatively restricted to a small set

setting the scene
—33 —
of domains and was by no means the language either of the Jewish inhabitants of
that country or of those Jews who came to live in it during that period. It is also
the significance of this symbolic function which made the Irish national
movement after 1900 launch its “doomed campaign to reconvert the Irish to a
language most of them no longer understood, and which those who set about
teaching it to their fellow countrymen had only themselves begun to learn very
incompletely” (Hobsbawm 1990: 110). The importance of the symbolic func-
tion as a category in its own right is also evident in the attitudes of the children
of emigrants to the language of their ancestry, which Gellner (1964: 163)
regards as an expression of the Three Generations Law whereby the “grandson
tries to remember what the son tried to forget”. Edwards (1988: 48) exemplifies
this by Italian-Americans who “may still feel themselves different from others in
the larger society, even though Italian may be only a symbolic cultural entity”.
The importance of the symbolic function of language is further exemplified by
the 1975 findings of the Committee on Irish Language Attitudes Research which
revealed that “strong sentimental attachments to Irish were not accompanied
by language use, nor by desire to actively promote it, nor yet by optimism
concerning its future, among the population at large” (ibid.: 51). To deal with
this function of language, Eastman and Reese (1981: 113–14) suggest the term
“associated language” in the context of ethnicity, which they define as follows:
“An associated language may comprise a set of shared lexical terms, involve the
use or knowledge of just the name of the language which the group’s ancestors
may have spoken, or it may be a particular language used by all members of the
group in all situations”.
Finally, the symbolic function of language is not restricted to its verbal
dimension alone; it also extends to its written manifestation. This is particularly
true of Arabic, whose script plays an important role as a boundary marker,
particularly vis-à-vis the Latin and Cyrillic scripts which have gained at its
expense by the “defection” to these scripts of Turkish, Malay and a host of other
languages in Central Asia and sub-Saharan Africa – including Somalia which,
ironically, is a member of the Arab league. Yet, in spite of these defections, the
Arabic script still functions like Chinese characters to create a community out
of signs not sounds, not just with respect to the Islamic culture at whose centre
the Qur’an stands, but also in the context of the civic and cultural concep-
tualizations of the nation in the Arabic-speaking countries.
5. conclusion
The aim of the above discussion was to provide a general overview of some of
the main issues in the study of nationalism, as a prelude to outlining a
framework for setting up the major parameters which will guide the discussion

the arabic language and national identity
—34 —
of the role of Arabic in articulating national identity in this work. This I will do
in the present section, albeit briefly.
To begin with, the term “nation” will be used in this study to cover both the
civic-political or territorial nation within the boundary of the sovereign state,
for example the Egyptian or Lebanese nation (see Chapter 6), and the cultural-
ethnic nation as associated with pan-Arab nationalism, the foremost proponent
of which in the Arab context is SatiÆ al-Husri (see Chapter 5, section 3). Antun
SaÆada’s concept of the Syrian nation partakes of the political and the cultural
currency of nationalist ideology (see Chapter 6, section 2), although, by insist-
ing that the state is a factor in nation-formation, Syrian Nationalism leans more
towards the political than the cultural conception of the nation.
The importance of observing the above distinction between the cultural and
the territorial forms of nationalism is particularly significant here owing to the
precariousness of the sociocultural translation that is inevitably involved in
transferring an intellectual discourse, the discourse on national identity in the
Arab Middle East, into a foreign language, English. The ill-formedness of the
basic notions of nationalism in European and Arabic discourses on the subject
adds a further element of indeterminacy in the present project. Using as an
analogy Victor Hugo’s notion of translation – in the technical sense – as an act
of violence against the recipient nation and its language (Lefevere 1992), we
may say that the transfer of the Arabic discourse on nationalism into English will
inevitably involve conceptual and linguistic violence against both the source
and target cultures and their languages. It is therefore important to minimize this
violence as much as possible to avoid falling into the Procrustean trap of judging
the Arabic concepts of nation (umma and shaÆb) and nationalism (qawmiyya
and, sometimes, jinsiyya) as though they were exact equivalents in all instances
of their European, particularly English, counterparts (see Khalafalla 1981).
It is also important to avoid reading nationalist ideologies in the Arab
Middle East as though they were echoes of their European counterparts. To
illustrate this point, I will consider the emphasis on folk culture and the
vernacular in the latter. In connection with folk culture, Gellner (1983: 57)
mentions how nationalism “usually conquers in the name of a putative folk
culture. Its symbolism is drawn from the healthy, pristine, vigorous life of the
peasant, of the Volk.” Unlike many other scholars, however, Gellner is careful
to point out that this image of nationalism represents an inversion of reality,
since nationalism in fact aims at forging a high culture instead of defending the
folk culture it avows to promote. In the Arab nationalist context, whether one
actually talks about political or cultural nationalism, the emphasis is mainly on
high culture, not folk culture; this is organically linked to an attitude which
favours the standard over the dialectal forms of the language as the vehicle for
publicly sanctioned cultural expression in the diglossic language situation so

setting the scene
—35 —
paradigmatically characteristic of Arabic. This bias towards high culture is
confirmed by the comparatively low status which oral, folk literature has within
the Arab literary canon. It is also reflected in the less-than-flattering attitude
towards the peasant (fallÅ˙) in classical and modern Arabic literature. In his
book Modern Arabic Literature and the West (1985: 27), Badawi points out how
in the “classical Arabic tradition the villager, the tiller of the soil, was more
often than not an object of contempt … Agriculture, al-filÅ˙a, was definitely
considered one of the lowest occupations, suitable only for the meanest of
human beings.” He adds that “it was the beauty of nature, and not the beauty of
the life of the fallÅ˙ who lived in close proximity with nature, that was the
object of the poet’s praise. Likewise, it was the garden, not the gardener, which
elicited a positive response from the numerous poets who composed countless
poems about gardens in Islamic poetry” (ibid.: 28). Not even the intervention of
the Romantic movement at the beginning of the twentieth century could alter
this well-entrenched attitude, which derives its currency from a set of socio-
cultural beliefs of great antiquity and authority. With the weight of tradition
fully and aggressively ranged against it, folk culture in the Arabic-speaking
countries stands little chance of being considered a worthy fount for the propa-
gation and maintenance of nationalist ideology, especially of the cultural type,
although state nationalism seems more amenable to exploiting this culture to its
advantage. The fact that rural varieties are stigmatized in Arabic-speaking
countries, for example Jordan and Palestine (Suleiman 1993, 1999b), is another
piece of evidence that supports the thesis under consideration here (cf. Chapter
3, section 3).
The role of the vernacular (for example, French, German and so on) as a
formative force in the rise of European nationalisms is historically different from
articulations of national identity in the Arab Middle East. First, whereas the rise
of the vernaculars in Europe was connected to the religious upheavals of the
sixteenth century and to the attendant translation of the Bible from Latin into
these vernaculars, the emphasis on the standard in nationalist ideology among
Arabic-speaking peoples was the result of a radically different set of socio-
political circumstances. These included exogenous challenges of various kinds
and intensities, the drive for modernization and the struggle for political inde-
pendence in which the language was seen as a boundary marker between the in-
and out-groups. The fact that the Qur’an, Islam’s primary sacral text, was in
Arabic acted as a centripetal force of internal cohesion on the linguistic front,
unlike in Europe where the Latin Bible was the source of centrifugal vernacular-
ization. Furthermore, whereas the Latin Bible, in spite of its antiquity and
textual authority, was essentially a translation, the Qur’an is not. The fact that
the Qur’an is seen as the word of God verbatim meant that it was considered
untranslatable (cf. al-Bundaq 1980 and Shumali 1996). As Anderson (1991: 14)

the arabic language and national identity
—36 —
points out, there is no concession in this context “of a world separated from
language that all languages are equidistant (and thus interchangeable) signs for
it”. This set of doctrinal principles meant that there were no calls for rendering
the Qur’an into the dialects, which, had they materialized and been imple-
mented, could have led to the emergence of an Arab(ic) vernacularizing trend
in the European mould. To this we may add the fact that whereas the gap
between classical and medieval Latin in the post-Renaissance period was widen-
ing as a result of the purifying interventions of the humanists, the gap between
the standard and the spoken varieties in the Arabic-speaking countries was, if
anything, slowly shrinking in the nationalist era (in the nineteenth and twen-
tieth centuries) owing to the spread of literacy and the ongoing simplification of
the language grammatically and stylistically. In other words, while the widening
gap between the two forms of Latin in the post-Renaissance period created a
space which the vernaculars could communicatively fill, the shrinking gap
between the standard and the local varieties, at least at the level of reception,
made this less of a possibility for Arabic.
Second, whereas print technology under Anderson’s analysis (1991) was
instrumental in turning the vernaculars into national languages on the Euro-
pean scene, the same cannot be said of Arabic in its sociopolitical milieu. Thus,
while it is true that print technology brought to Arabic a much wider field of
“exchange and communication” than it previously had, it is nevertheless not
true that it “created” this field, as happened with the vernaculars in the
European context (ibid.: 44). While the textualization of Arabic into visible
marks preceded the introduction of print technology, textualization of the Euro-
pean vernaculars was in an important sense the outcome of this technology.
Print technology gave these vernaculars their “new fixity”, which in the fullness
of time helped confer on them an “image of antiquity” (ibid.). The situation in
Arabic was almost the reverse. Print technology did not confer on Arabic an
“image of antiquity”. On the contrary, it challenged this image by injecting a
feeling of modernity into its written manifestations. However, by making
Arabic available to a territorially extended readership, print technology did
foster a feeling of a community in the present among those who had access to
the fruits of its loom.
Definitions of the nation in the Arab Middle East follow a variety of
approaches. In some cases, they subscribe to the objective mode of defining the
nation. This is the case in al-Husri’s brand of Arab nationalism, whereby
language and history are treated as the two ingredients which define Arab
national identity (see Chapter 5, section 3). As we shall see later (Chapter 5,
section 2), al-ÆAlayli and al-Bitar follow a watered-down version of this approach,
but they veer towards a subjective mode of defining the nation. This is clear from
the hesitation these two scholars express as to whether all the criteria they list

setting the scene
—37 —
for defining Arab national identity are necessary in such a definition. In some
cases, a boundary or contingent mode of defining the nation is invoked. This is
particularly evident in defining the Arab national identity in the Ottoman
Empire (see Chapter 4, section 3). In this context, Arab national identity is
generally defined in relation to Turkish national identity, with Arabic and
Turkish acting as the primary sources of national identification respectively.
This mode of defining the nation is also invoked in some articulations of
Egyptian nationalism where the significant Other is Arab nationalism (see
Chapter 6). In this respect, Egyptian nationalism seems to build on an anti-
Arab tradition designated as shuÆËbiyya in medieval Islamic society (see Chapter
3, section 5).
Finally, in discussing the role of Arabic in the formation of national identity
in the Arab Middle East, reference will be made to both the symbolic and the
functional roles of the language. In spite of their being categorially distinct,
these two roles of the language normally occur together in nationalist discourse.
In some cases, the symbolic role is given visibility over the functional. This was
particularly the practice in pronouncements on Arab national identity during
the Ottoman period. In other cases, the functional role is promoted over its
symbolic counterpart. This is particularly characteristic of Arab nationalism as
set out by al-Husri (see Chapter 5, section 3). In yet other cases, for example in
al-Arsuzi, the functional is delivered through the symbolic powers of signi-
fication which the language possesses. These and other issues in the present and
the preceding chapter will guide much of the following discussion.

—38 —
The Past Lives On
3
1. introduction
The presentness of the past is a defining feature of the discourse of all national-
isms, as is the presumed pastness of their present. In this discourse, the past and
the present enact the drama of continuity and change as they characterize the
emergence of the modern nation, its development, successes, trials and
tribulations (cf. al-Husri, årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fi al-wa†aniyya wa-l-qawmiyya, 1984a:
37, 67–73). The past plays an authenticating and legitimizing role; it signals
continuity, cohesion and, therefore, a feeling of intimacy and belonging between
members of the nation. It confers on the nation the appearance of vertical unity
in diachronic time, thus enabling it to counterbalance the horizontal diversity
of cultural and physical spaces in synchronic time. In a way, the past is part of
that essential mortar which keeps the building blocks of the modern nation
anchored to each other and attached to some imagined or real roots. As Joshua
Fishman puts it (1972: 70), the “long ago is a desirable point of departure” in
nationalist discourse because it is “relatable to religious and temporal glories”,
“uncontaminated by the currently stigmatized [foreign or] anti-models”, and
“for the man in the street, any claims made for it are less confirmable, [thus
making it] infinitely more manipulable” than other models which the present
on its own may commend. It is this flexibility of the past which makes it suitable
for the culling of group-identity symbols with the power to evoke and motivate.
It is also this flexibility which enables nationalists to avoid the paralysing fixity
of, and the excessive reverence for, the past.
For the nationalists, the past is the storehouse of old glories, common
suffering, dim memories and other distant and authenticating voices which are
imagined to have left their imprint on a variety of cultural products – including
language – whose significance in the present varies from nation to nation, and,
in the history of the same nation, from time to time (for the role of the past in
Arab nationalism, see al-ÆAli 1986, al-ÆAysami 1994, Farah 1994, Freitag 1994,
al-Nuss 1994, al-Qaysi 1986, Tarabishi 1993, Zurayq 1959). The past provides
the nation with an authenticating image of its present self which makes it feel
secure within its own definitional frames of reference. Nationalists therefore use

the past lives on
—39 —
the past as the basis of an energizing dynamism which enables the community
they address to mobilize for the purpose of defending itself against externally
generated challenges, while, at the same time, embracing change and projecting
it as part of the inner fabric of this past in an almost seamless progression of
history into the present and beyond. This attitude towards the past is displayed
to full effect in the “manifesto” of the First Arab Students’ Congress, held in
Brussels in December 1938 (in Haim 1962: 101):1
It is the new Arab renaissance which pervades the Arab nation. Its motive force is
her glorious past, her remarkable vitality and the awareness of her present and future
interests. This movement strives continuously and in an organized manner toward
well-defined aims. These aims are to liberate and unite the Arab homeland, to found
political, economic, and social organizations more sound than the existing ones, and
to attempt afterward to work for the good of the human collectivity and its progress.
Coupled with the emphasis on modernization, which directed change in
modern nationalist discourse often represents, the past provides the nation with
motivational impulses of a formational kind whose aim is to achieve task-
orientated goals of an integrationist and sociopolitical nature (cf. al-Husri’s årÅ’
wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-tÅrÈkh wa-l-ijtima, 1985e: 9–19). This function of the past is
echoed by Joshua Fishman when he says that, in nationalist discourse, the past
is “mined, ideologised, and symbolically elaborated in order to provide deter-
mination … with respect to current and future challenges” (1972: 9). This
interest in the past to cast and recast modern nationalisms explains the constant
inventing and reinventing of traditions in nationalist discourses,2 in which the
museum plays an important re-presentational part, giving rise to what Benedict
Anderson aptly describes as “political museumising” in the new and even not-
so-new nations (1991: 183). The role of tradition in nationalist discourse is also
recognized by Nash (1989: 14), who states that it “bestows upon the past a
weight of authority, legitimacy and rightness” which, in turn, bestow “upon the
most humble member of the group a pedigree, allowing him to identify with
heroic times, great deeds, and a genealogy to the beginning of things human,
cultural and spiritual” (see Chapter 2, section 1).
Paradoxical though it may seem, the mining of the past in nationalist
discourse makes nationalism Janus-like, in that it is as much forward-looking as
it is backward-orientated. This point is forcefully recognized in Arab nationalist
discourse, an example of which is the following statement by Nuseibeh (1956:
62–3): “In periods of transition and transformation, a nation’s vision of itself is
beclouded and confused. Then most of all it needs men who by profound insight
into the soul of the past heritage, by comprehension of the problems of the
present, and by vision of the future can synthesize an amorphous mass of ideas
and aspirations in the task of reconstruction.” Fishman (1972: 9) expresses the
same point when he states that nationalism “seeks to derive unifying and

the arabic language and national identity
—40 —
energizing power from widely held images of the past in order to overcome a
quite modern kind of fragmentation and loss of identity”. It is this back-
projection of the present into a mythic or real past which infuses the socio-
cultural and politico-operational aims of nationalism with authenticity and
motivational force within the modernization project. We may express this
differently by saying that the forward-projection of the past into the present
endows modernization with an authenticity which can transcend the appeal to
the material benefits of this modernization as the main legitimating force within
nationalism. The success of a nationalist movement or ideology will therefore
depend, in part, on reining in the conflicting forces of authenticity and
modernization in the community in a manner which enables change to take
place without appearing to jettison the legitimizing element of tradition.
The role of the past in constructing nations and nationalisms has been
recognized by major scholars in the field. One such reference will suffice here.
Anderson (1991: 11) states that the nations to which the nation-states “give
political expression always loom out of an immortal past”. The primordiality of
language, the fact that “No one can give the date for the birth of any language”
(ibid.: 144), makes it the most suitable and, perhaps, most authenticating
cultural product for expressing the link of a nation with the past in what Fishman
(1980: 87) calls “a peculiarly sensitive web of intimacy and mutuality”. It is,
however, necessary in relating the present to the past in the study of nationalism
to be aware of the lure of what Hobsbawm (1990: 74) calls “retrospective
nationalism”, the unwarranted reading into the past of modern nationalist
trends, symbols and currents. Breuilly (1993: 61) also warns against this tendency
in nationalist discourse: “The notion of a return to the spirit of the past was
often accompanied by a historical perspective which read the appropriate trends
into events. Figures in the past became instruments of the national destiny or
obstacles in its path.” An example of this retrospective nationalism in Arab
nationalist discourse is provided by the Egyptian linguist Ibrahim Anis in his
pioneering work al-Lugha bayn al-qawmiyya wa-l-ÆÅlamiyya (1970).3 Basing him-
self on specious evidence to construct the past in the image of an ideologized
present, Anis concludes that “Arab nationalism emerged before Islam on the
basis of language alone” (ibid.: 176), and that the Arab nationalist credentials of
the Christian poet al-Akhtal (90/708) assured him of the enviable position of
“state poet” (ibid.: 178) at the court of the (Muslim) Umayyad caliph ÆAbd al-
Malik Ibn Marwan (86/705). This spurious evidence consists of recounting how
the Muslim caliph did not object to al-Akhtal appearing in his court drunk and
wearing a cross round his neck, and of the latter’s disparaging remarks to his wife
about her bishop being as ritually unclean as his (the bishop’s) donkey’s tail. This
so-called evidence also extends to a line of poetry which al-Akhtal directed at
one of his enemies, lampooning him for the fact that his mother was not of pure

the past lives on
—41 —
Arab stock.4 This retrospective nationalism on the part of Ibrahim Anis culmin-
ates in his statement that “the boundaries of Arab nationalism [in the early
Islamic period] were defined by the spread of the Arabic language” (ibid.: 190),
and that “wherever the language took root, Arab nationalism did the same”
(ibid.).
A term that is often used to describe the group symbols which nationalists
cull from the past to construct modern nationalisms is myth (cf. Chapter 1,
section 2). Hugh Seton-Watson (1981: 5) refers to this use of the past as “histor-
ical mythology”, which he characterizes as a “mixture of truth and fantasy, a
simplified version of a nation’s historical past”. Gellner (1983: 56) expresses a
similar view: “The cultural shreds and patches used by nationalism are often
arbitrary historical inventions. Any old shreds and patches would have served as
well” (cf. Chapter 1, section 2 and n. 1). He adds (ibid.): “The cultures
[nationalism] claims to defend and revive are often its own inventions, or are
modified out of all recognition”. Although it cannot be denied that invention
and arbitrariness are characteristic of the attempt to relate the present to the
past in nationalist discourse, it is nevertheless the case that a blanket statement
of the kind offered by Gellner fails to describe the complexity of the situation
which falls within its scope. The most telling criticism of this statement is its
failure to recognize fully that what matters in assessing these “shreds and
patches” from the past is – strictly speaking – not their empirical truth or falsity,
but their efficacy as transformed and elaborated instruments or symbols of
ethno-cultural and political mobilization in pursuit of national objectives. In
addition, the fact that certain symbols may or may not have universal currency
as factors which promote national identification leaves unexplained their
predominance as ingredients which can and do promote such identification in
many nationalisms. As Overing (1997: 1) points out, “the use of the term ‘myth’
is more a judgmental than a definitional or propositional procedure: its
attribution requires a judgment having to do with standards of knowledge or its
organization”. Finally, the fact that there are cases in nationalist discourse where
the reference to the past is rooted in a reality which, though mediated and
constructed, is not entirely fictional or mythical further challenges Gellner’s
position. References to the role of Arabic in nationalist discourse constitute a
prime example of this fact. Therefore, to avoid the connotations of the term
myth in the literature on nationalism, it may be more appropriate sometimes to
refer to certain elements of the past as imagined or constructed, but only if being
imagined or constructed is not in this context categorially opposed to being real.
The aim of this chapter is to examine the Arabic intellectual tradition in
premodern times (before Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798) with a view to
isolating those aspects of this tradition which are directly related and relatable
to the theme of language and group identity in Arab nationalist discourses in

the arabic language and national identity
—42 —
the modern period. My interest here is that of the cultural historian who is more
concerned with trends in time rather than in chronology per se, although the
two cannot be separated from each other: trends do take place in time. In
carrying out this task, vigilance against retrospective nationalism – the reading
of the modern nationalist trends into the articulations of the role of the
language in defining an Arab identity in premodern times – will be exercised.
But this vigilance should not lead to over-vigilance or paranoia, thus diluting
the force of some of those aspects of the Arabic intellectual tradition which
appear to embody ingredients of group identity that are akin to pronouncements
of a similar nature in nationalist discourses. Although similarity is different from
sameness, the following discussion will show that the past does not always have
to be invented to support the claims made in a particular nationalism. As
Gershoni and Jankowski (1997: xxv) state, “nationalism is simultaneously real
and imagined, authentic and invented, concrete and discursive”; and yet the
“differentiation between imagination and reality in the study of nationalist
thought is specious [owing to the fact that] nationalist imaginings become part
and parcel of nationalist reality, and attempts to separate them only obscure an
understanding of the phenomenon” (ibid.: xxv–xxvi). The discussion of various
modes of nationalist discourse later in this study will serve as ample proof of the
premise which the title of this chapter signifies: the past is often alive and
kicking. It is this which enables elements in the past to be endowed with
“resonance” of the kind described in Chapter 1 (see section 2).
2. in praise of arabic
Praise of a group’s language is a well-known phenomenon in pre/proto-
nationalist, nationalist and postnationalist discourse, although the rhetorical
purpose of this praise may vary from one period to another. In prenationalist
discourse, such praise often has a religious, ethnic or even local dimension. In
nationalist discourse, praising a group’s language often aims at internal cohesion
and/or external differentiation for sociopolitical purposes of integration and
task-orientation. In postnationalist discourse, the same phenomenon may aim
at political consolidation or the expansion of socioeconomic benefits for the in-
group at the expense of out-groups within or outside the state. The aim of this
section is to outline a set of themes which are often adduced in the literature as
evidence of the special status of Arabic in relation to other languages in its
premodern (pre-nineteenth-century) cultural milieu, particularly insofar as these
relate to the discourse on nationalism in the Arab context.5
It is a well-known fact that the prestige of Arabic in the world derives from
the role of the language as the medium of the Qur’an and that of the vast
intellectual tradition to which Islam has given rise since its appearance on the

the past lives on
—43 —
world stage in the seventh century. The Qur’an reflects on this in often lauda-
tory terms. Thus, in Qur’an 12:2 the point is made that Muhammad’s revelation
was in Arabic: “innÅ anzalnÅhu qur’Ånan Æarabiyyan” (“We have sent it down as
an Arabic Qur’an”). This is made in the form of an emphatic statement (indi-
cated by innÅ preceding the verb anzalnÅhu) which sets out God’s will and His
desire in a way that favours the language in cosmic terms. This fact is underlined
in Qur’an 26:195, where the language of the revelation is described as “perspi-
cuous” Arabic (mubÈn), thus signalling its quality to those who wish to consider
the veracity of God’s message to humankind. In Qur’an 14:4, God states as a
general principle the fact that every messenger was made to address his people
in his and their own language, which fact confers on Arabic and its native
speakers a special place in Islamic cosmology. This principle explains why the
revelation was sent to Muhammad in Arabic, and not in another language
(Qur’an 41:44): “wa-law jaÆalnÅhu qur’Ånan Æajamiyyan la-qÅlË lawlÅ fußßilat
ÅyÅtuhu ’a’aÆjamiyyun wa-Æarabiyy” (“Had We sent this as a Qur’an [in a language]
other than Arabic, they would have said: ‘Why are its verses not explained in
detail? What! A foreign (tongue) and an Arab Messenger?’”). The opposition
between Arabic and foreign languages (Æarabiyy versus aÆjamiyy) in the context
of the revelation is further accentuated in Qur’an 16:103, where the language of
those who accuse the Prophet of fabrication is said to be of the latter kind. By
drawing this contrast, the Qur’an puts Arabic in a favoured position as the com-
municative medium for expressing God’s universal truths; it further establishes
the task of expressing falsehood vis-à-vis the Qur’an as the communicative
function of other languages. This is why the language of the Qur’an (39:28) is
said to be devoid of any crookedness.
Considered together, these portions of the Qur’an provide a clear picture of
the elevated status Arabic has in Islam. This status is amplified further in the
Prophetic ˙adÈth (traditions) literature. In one such ˙adÈth, the Prophet is reported
to have related to his cousin and the fourth rightly guided caliph, ÆAli, that the
angel Gabriel descended from heaven and said to him: “O Muhammad! All
things have a master: Adam is master of men, you are the master of Adam’s
descendants, the master of the Rum [Byzantines/Greeks] is Suhayb [Ibn Sinan,
one of the Prophet’s companions of that origin], the master of the Persians is
Salman [al-Farisi, a companion of the Prophet of Persian origin], the master of
the Ethiopians is Bilal [Ibn Rabah, a companion of the Prophet of that origin],
the master of the trees is the lotus (sidr), the master of birds is the eagle, the
chief of months is Ramadan, the chief of weekdays is Friday and Arabic is the
master of speech” (cited in Goldziher, 1966, vol. 1: 195). In another ˙adÈth, the
Prophet is reported to have established a clear link between three elements of
his mission: the fact that he is an Arab, that the Qur’an is in Arabic and that
the language of Heaven (janna) is Arabic. The combination of these elements

the arabic language and national identity
—44 —
constitutes the basis for enjoining all Muslims to love the Arabs: “a˙ibbË al-
Æaraba li-thalÅth: li-annÈ Æarabiyy, wa-l-qur’Ån Æarabiyy wa-kalÅm ahl al-janna
Æarabiyy” (“Love the Arabs for three reasons: because I am an Arab, the Qur’an
is [revealed in] Arabic and the speech of the people of Heaven is Arabic”: al-
Tufi 1997: 246). It is therefore not surprising that the Prophet exhorts his com-
munity to learn Arabic and to aim at stylistic excellence in their Arabic speech.
It further explains why knowledge of Arabic grammar is regarded by the con-
sensus of the ulema as a collective obligation (far∂ kifÅya) on the Muslim com-
munity, and as personal obligation (far∂ Æayn) on those who wish to specialize in
the legal sciences.6 The emphasis on Arabic in the Qur’an further reflects the
privileged position of the language among the Arabs of pre-Islamic Arabia as
the medium of their most highly prized cultural product, poetry – for it is primarily
in response to the status of poetry that the principle of the inimitability of the
Qur’an (IÆjÅz al-qur’Ån) is formulated.7 The fact that the Qur’an was revealed in
Arabic is treated in the literature as proof to the Arabs of its divine origin, in
addition to its being an argument against their attempts to deny that Muham-
mad was God’s true Messenger.8
This linkage between Islam, the Arabs and the Arabic language is given full
expression by the linguist Abu Mansur al-ThaÆalibi (430/1038–9) in the short
introduction to his book Fiqh al-lugha wa-sirr al-Æarabiyya (1938).9 Al-ThaÆalibi
reiterates this linkage in a series of related premises and conclusions. First, he
states that since whoever loves God will also love His [Arab] Prophet, and
whoever loves the Arab Prophet will also love the Arabs, it follows that who-
ever loves the Arabs will love the Arabic language, in which the best Book
(Qur’an) was revealed and communicated to the best people among the Arabs
and non-Arabs (Æajam). Second, al-ThaÆalibi states that whoever God guides to
Islam will believe that Muhammad is the best of all Messengers, Islam the best
of all religions, the Arabs the best of all nations (umam) and the Arabic lan-
guage the best of all languages and tongues. Third, because God has honoured
Arabic by making it the language of His revelation to the best of His creation
(Prophet Muhammad) – to which may be added the fact that it is the language
of Muhammad’s best followers in this world and the hereafter – it is inevitable
that God will preserve this language until the end of time. This is done by a
group of scholars – among whom al-ThaÆalibi implicitly includes himself – who
renounce the pleasures of this world and devote themselves selflessly to the
pursuit of this aim.
This triad of religion (Islam), the people (Arabs) and the language (Arabic)
is reiterated by the Andalusian rhetorician Ibn Sinan al-Khafaji (460/1067–8)
in his book Sirr al-faßÅ˙a (1982).10 An interesting feature of al-Khafaji’s
treatment of this triad is the emphasis he places on the relationship between the
people and the language over that of the relationship of religion to either of its

the past lives on
—45 —
partners. In this context, al-Khafaji posits an organic relationship between the
language and the people (qawm), whereby the high prestige of the language
reflects the unsurpassable qualities of the people. Al-Khafaji’s views on this topic
may be expressed by the following gist translation of a passage from his book
(1982: 52):
The superiority of the Arabic language over other languages is part and parcel of the
superiority of its Arab speakers as a nation (umma) unsurpassed by other nations in
quality of character. It is therefore not unreasonable to assume that if the Arabic
language is indeed the creation of the Arabs by convention it is bound to reflect the
quality of their character. In claiming this, I am not driven by blind allegiance to
either the language or its speakers.
Al-Khafaji isolates a number of features which he believes justify assigning to
Arabic a communicative status higher than that attributed to other languages.11
First, Arabic is said to have a vast and rich lexicon – in comparison with other
languages such as Greek (rumiyya) – partly due to its proclivity for synonymy.
As Goldziher (1966, vol. 1: 195) writes: “When seeking to demonstrate
conclusively the richness of Arabic, the Arabs had always boasted [sic] of the
unequalled variety of synonyms in their language”. Second, Arabic is charac-
terized by communicative economy, in the sense that it deploys minimal
linguistic resources to convey meanings with high informational content; this
idea, as an application of Occam’s razor principle, may be expressed differently by
saying that, in comparison with other languages, Arabic can do more with less.
This is said to be most evident in translation into and out of the language,
whereby (1) an Arabic target text tends to be shorter than its corresponding
source text, and (2) a foreign target text tends to be longer than its Arabic
source text. Third, Arabic has extremely well-developed rhetorical resources
which, when combined with the preceding two features, make it possible to
improve the meanings of texts that are translated into it. The converse of this is
also true: Arabic texts translated into other languages are said to suffer from
serious translation loss, owing to the fact that these languages are rhetorically
impoverished in comparison with Arabic. In supporting this claim, al-Khafaji
relies on the evidence of a bishop called Abu Dawud, who is said to be equally
proficient in both Arabic and Syriac. According to this bishop, when a Syriac
text is translated into Arabic its stylistic quality tends to improve, but when an
Arabic text is translated into Syriac it tends to lose much of its stylistic quality
because of the – comparatively speaking – impoverished resources of the language.
Fourth, Arabic is characterized by a phonological structure which does not en-
courage the occurrence of successive consonants that belong to the same place
of articulation. This property of the language endows it with articulatory ease,
which the principle of lightness (khiffa) in the Arabic grammatical tradition
expresses.12

the arabic language and national identity
—46 —
Whether the above claims about Arabic are factually true is not the issue
here. What matters for our purposes is that these “properties” of the language
are treated as an expression of the “superior qualities” of the Arabs in compari-
son with other peoples. One of these qualities is generosity, which sets the Arabs
apart from the Indians, Ethiopians, Turks and, especially, the Persians and
Byzantines, who see little shame in being stingy. Another quality of the Arabs is
sound intuition and penetrating judgment, which enable them to surpass even
the Greeks in wisdom. The Arabs are a proud and honourable people, whose
endurance, patience and courage make them supremely equipped to deal with
the hardships of the desert and to triumph over the testing conditions which
characterize its physical and social milieu. The Arabs – men and women, young
and old – are further characterized by loyalty and the ready willingness to give
succour to whoever seeks their help and protection.
This (untestable) interaction between language and group characteristics is
extended to grammar and the use of pure Arabic. It is to this ingredient in the
Arabic intellectual tradition that I will turn next, but not before adducing some
evidence which shows that the correct application of grammatical rules in speech
is regarded as a highly prized attribute. Thus, it is reported that the second
caliph ÆUmar urged the Muslim community to learn the correct forms of speech
because they enhance a person’s wisdom, mental powers and honour.13 The
jurist ÆAmr Ibn Dinar (126/743–4) – who, significantly, is of Persian origin –
reiterates the same theme when he says that the acquisition and application of
the correct forms of Arabic is an honour which brings a person public recogni-
tion.14 The historian Abu al-Hasan al-Mada’ini (225/839–40) subscribes to the
same view when he says that the ability to deploy Arabic correctly can com-
pensate for the absence of other desirable attributes in men.15 This is exactly
what the judge al-Awqas (169/785) nurtured, for although he was unbearably
ugly he was, we are told, still able to rise to the position of judge in Mecca
owing, among other things, to his ability to use pure and correct Arabic. The
sources report how, on one occasion, this judge was more concerned about a
drunken man’s ungrammatical use of the language than his breaking the Islamic
prohibition on the consumption of alcohol.16 Thus, instead of reminding him of
the serious nature of the latter offence and punishing him for it, he proceeded to
correct his ungrammatical language.
The above views reflect the importance of the link between language, religion
and people in the Arabic intellectual tradition. Although many of the views put
forward by al-Khafaji are scientifically unwarranted, thus deserving the
appellation “myth”, what is important here is not their factual truth or falsity
but their rhetorical or symbolic value as assertions of ethnic distinctiveness and
superiority. The role of language in underpinning these assertions indicates its
capacity to be used as an attribute of national identity in the modern period.

the past lives on
—47 —
3. ÓIKMAT AL-ÆARAB: wisdom of the arabs
The principle of ˙ikmat al-Æarab (wisdom of the Arabs) lies at the heart of gram-
matical analysis in the Arabic intellectual tradition. It creates an important link
between “the language” and “the people”, who are originally taken to mean the
Arabic-speakers of Central Arabia (Najd and the immediately surrounding areas)
up to (approximately) the middle of the ninth century. In particular, this prin-
ciple is related to the explanatory part of the grammatical enterprise – as opposed
to its descriptive portion – which is dubbed taÆlÈl (roughly “causation”) in the
sources, although, strictly speaking, causation does cover descriptive aspects of
the language as well (Suleiman 1999c). Broadly speaking, causation aims at
providing explanations, rationalizations or justifications that set out why cer-
tain significant features of the language are the way they are. This is generally
done by offering various types of Æilla (cause) which specify that “x is the case
because of y”. Some of these causes are more plausible/testable than others in
empirical terms, but this should not detain us here. Suffice it to say that the study
of causation concerns the methodological foundations of Arabic grammatical
theory. The fact that the “wisdom of the Arabs” principle is anchored to this
level in Arabic grammatical thinking indicates the centrality of the link
between people and language in the Arabic intellectual tradition.
As the starting point for dealing with this association between language and
people in the context of causation, I will consider aspects of the seminal study
by  Ibn al-Sarraj (316/928) of the grammatical structure of the Arabic language,
al-UßËl fÈ al-na˙w (1985). Ibn al-Sarraj begins this study by pointing out that
Arabic grammar is inductively derived by the (earlier) grammarians from the
speech of the Arabs, as these were originally defined (see preceding paragraph).
In so doing, the grammarians identified the conventions and purposes/aims
which the earliest speakers of the language had initiated. Grammar establishes
these conventions and purposes by using two types of cause. The first type cor-
responds to what is called grammatical rule in common parlance or traditional
grammar. The second type of cause – called Æillat al-Æilla, the cause of the cause,
or meta-cause – seeks to provide explanations for causes of the first type. Thus,
whereas a first cause may take the form of a statement to the effect that “the
subject occurs in the nominative, and the object in the accusative”, the second
type of cause seeks to explain why this is actually the case in the language. The
ultimate aim of causes of the second type is said to be twofold: (1) to infer the
wisdom of the Arabs as this is embodied in the first causes, and (2) to explain
the divinely sanctioned superiority of Arabic over other languages.
This view of causation is shared by Abu al-Qasim Zajjaji (337/948) in his
book al-∂Å˙ fi Æilal al-na˙w (1959). Al-Zajjaji divides the causes into three types:
pedagogic, analogical and argumentational-theoretical, allocating to them the

the arabic language and national identity
—48 —
two tasks of description and explanation in grammar (see Suleiman 1999c,
Versteegh 1995). Although al-Zajjaji does not explicitly anchor his discussion
of these causes to the “wisdom of the Arabs” principle, it is nevertheless clear
that his study serves the two aims established by Ibn al-Sarraj. The gist of al-
Zajjaji’s position is that Arabic grammar (in the postdescriptive sense) uncovers
the inherent structural correlations, patterns and symmetries that exist in the
language (Suleiman 1990), and that it is these structural correlations, patterns
and symmetries which signal the intrinsically refined qualities of both the
language and its speakers.
The idea that the task of grammar is to capture the inherent properties and
patterns of the language, and that the postdescriptive articulation of these
properties and patterns in grammatical treatises corresponds to their predescrip-
tive counterparts, is reiterated by Ibn Jinni (392/1002) in al-KhaßÅ’iß (n.d.) as
part of the overarching theme of the “wisdom of the Arabs” principle in gram-
matical theory. Like the famous grammarian al-Khalil, Ibn Jinni believes that
the Arabs display a sound intuitive knowledge of the inner patterns of their
language which, on occasion, they can articulate explicitly, though often with-
out deploying the technical terminology of the grammarians. This shows that
the Arabs are in tune with the inner pulse of their language, and that they have
a well-developed intuitive knowledge of its inherent properties. An example of
this type in the literature concerns al-Mu’arrij (195/811) of the Bedouin tribe of
Sadus who is reported to have said: “I came from the desert and knew nothing of
the rules of the Arabic language, my knowledge was purely instinctive and I first
learnt the rules in the lectures of Abu Ziyad al-Ansari al-Basri” (cited in
Goldziher 1966, vol. 1: 108).
Viewing this type of evidence from the perspective of the association of
language with people, I agree with the observation made by Bohas et al. (1990)
that “in Ibn Jinni’s opinion speakers are grammarians without knowing it, and
capable, thanks to their inherent wisdom, of making the very generalizations
which the professionals of grammar try to formulate” (ibid.: 29). Although
modern linguistic theory would rule that the Arabs are not unique in this
respect, what really matters here is the fact that an association is established
between the speakers’ intuitive knowledge of the structure of their language and
the wisdom principle mentioned above. Also, what matters here is not the
factual truth or falsity of the evidence given in support of this association, but
the fact that this association is asserted and used as a guiding criterion in the
conduct of linguistic inquiry, regardless of whether this inquiry is pursued in an
autonomous or a non-autonomous fashion.
Ibn Jinni is a firm believer in the superiority of Arabic over other languages.
To support this view, he adduces a number of linguistic arguments of a fairly
complex nature, which I will leave out of consideration here.17 But he also resorts

the past lives on
—49 —
to reporting the evidence of grammarians whose acceptance of the superiority of
Arabic involves a comparative dimension based on their competence in other
languages and their knowledge, directly or indirectly, of the grammars of these
languages. One such report is provided by Ibn Jinni’s famous teacher, the
grammarian Abu ÆAli al-Farisi (377/987) who, as his name indicates, is of
Persian origin. Ibn Jinni states that this grammarian considered Arabic to be a
finer language than Persian, and that he was supported in this by other gram-
marians, including al-Sijistani (255/869), who was the teacher of the famous
linguist al-Mubarrad (285/898). By tracing his views to al-Mubarrad, Ibn Jinni
confers on them a legitimacy which the longevity of tradition and the weight of
authority make very compelling in their cultural milieu.
Clearly, the view from causation in establishing the link between language
and people is an extremely interesting one. This link is underpinned by the
“wisdom of the Arabs” principle in two very important ways. On the one hand,
it is this principle which is thought to give the language its internal equilibrium
and symmetry (see Suleiman 1991), and its balance and harmony, as structural
imprints of the genius of the people who, in the mists of time, were its pro-
genitors. On the other hand, through the acts of description and explanation,
causation recaptures the ingredients which make up this wisdom. Under this
interpretation, causation becomes a process of discovery and confirmation of
what is already there – the wisdom of the Arabs. By starting from the wisdom of
the Arabs as a foundational premise, and then returning to it as a reconstructed
fact through the twin instruments of description and explanation, Arabic
grammar assumes a set of values, cultural and methodological, which make it
the mediating link between the language and the people in identity terms. This
is an important finding of this research because it anchors this link at a level of
intellectual abstraction which radiates beyond grammar into a host of neigh-
bouring disciplines whose data are linguistic in nature. I will return to this point
in section 5 below.
4. LAÓN: solecism18
The association of language, religion and people is further articulated through
the vast body of literature on la˙n in the Arabic intellectual tradition,19 although
the relationship of la˙n – henceforth, solecism for ease of reference – to the
components of this triad tends to vary from time to time, with prominence
being given to language and religion at times and to language and people at
others. Broadly speaking, solecism designates deviations from the correct norms
of the language, whether these deviations are systematic or unsystematic in
nature. What is interesting about solecism, however, is that it draws attention
to the role of the anti-norm – for this is what solecism represents in systemic

the arabic language and national identity
—50 —
terms – as an important reminder of the linguistic and, more significantly from
our perspective here, the extralinguistic connotations of the norm as an emblem
of group identity. Seen as a kind of “malfunction” on the linguistic and socio-
linguistic levels, solecism acts as a reminder of the correct and corrective func-
tions of linguistic norms as descriptive and pedagogic tools which protect the
language from corruption and ensure its vitality as a symbol of a groupness
rooted in a pristine past. We may refer to this orientation as “linguistic funda-
mentalism” here, but only if the term “fundamentalism” is used in a neutral
sense rather than with its negatively loaded connotations in the Western
discourses on Islam in the modern world. Solecism therefore has two dimen-
sions: the dimension of the present, in which the anti-norm is located; and the
dimension of the past, from which the norm emanates. It is there, in that
pristine past, that the wisdom of the Arabs as a predescriptive canon first
applied. And it is only by returning to that past that the purity of Arabic and
the wisdom of its people can be excavated and reconstructed as a first step in
moulding the present in the image of the past.
Let us explain how these broad-brush statements apply to the discussion of
solecism in the literature. In the beginning, during the early Islamic period,
solecism was seen in a predominantly religious context, in which it was
considered as a deviation from the true path. This is explicitly stated in the
˙adÈth literature. Overhearing the corrupt speech of one of his followers, the
Prophet is reported to have asked members of the community to correct him
because his utterance represented a deviation (∂alÅl) from the correct path. It is
also reported in the literature that the second caliph ÆUmar punished his son for
the occurrence of solecism in his speech, and that he ordered Abu Musa al-
AshÆari, his governor in Yemen, to punish one of his clerks for having com-
mitted a solecism in a letter he composed for the caliph (Anis 1960: 18). Some
scholars, we are told (cf. al-Anbari n.d.: 46), took these stories to indicate that
the caliph regarded deviation from the correct norms of the language as a
punishable offence. In a similar vein, the famous jurist al-Hasan al-Basri (110/
628) is reported to have considered the occurrence of solecism in reciting the
Qur’an to be an act of fabrication – albeit unintended – against God, as did al-
Sikhtyani (131/748–9), who used to ask God’s forgiveness every time he com-
mitted an act of solecism (cf. al-Tufi 1997: 251). Al-Hasan al-Basri is also
reported to have considered solecism in the speech of an imÅm to be a valid
reason for removing him from office (Ibn ÆAbd Rabbih 1928, vol. 2: 18). This
explains the many references in the literature which highlight the need to apply
correct iÆrab (short-vowel case endings) in reciting the Qur’an. It is reported in
this connection that the Prophet had enjoined the Muslim community to do so,
as did the caliph Abu Bakr and the Prophet’s companion Ibn MasÆud.
The repugnance of solecism to early Muslim society is summed up by the

the past lives on
—51 —
famous linguist Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali (69/668), who says that it has the same
foul smell as rotting flesh or meat. Abu al-Aswad further expresses his horror
and dismay that some of the street vendors and merchants of Basra could run
successful businesses in spite of the occurrence of solecism in their speech. This
censuring attitude is also displayed by the caliph ÆUmar, who admonishes a group
of men for the occurrence of solecism in their speech more than he does their
bad arrow-shooting skills, although learning this skill, together with swimming
and horsemanship, is strongly commanded by the Prophet to his community.
This censuring attitude towards solecism receives its ultimate expression in the
Arabic intellectual tradition in the refusal to treat the body of ˙adÈth literature as
a valid source of data for linguistic analysis, in spite of the fact that this litera-
ture constitutes the second source, after the Qur’an, for the derivation of legal
rulings. The occurrence of solecism in this literature owing, in part, to the
involvement of non-Arab Muslims in the transmission of the corpus of ˙adÈth is
given as the reason behind this attitude.
It is in this context of censuring solecism and promoting correctness in
speech, particularly in relation to the recitation of the Qur’an, that Arabic
grammar had its early beginnings at the hands of Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali.
Although the circumstances of this event vary from one report to another in the
literature, one thing is certain: the development of grammar was intended as a
corrective measure to arrest the spread of corruption in the language; it further
represented an attempt at recapturing the linguistic essence of that highly prized
pristine past before it was too late to do so, hence the designation “linguistic
fundamentalism” earlier. At a different level, grammar may be seen as a fulfil-
ment of God’s will in the Qur’an, of His promise to preserve the Qur’an, which
can be securely achieved only by preserving the language in which it was revealed.
However, two of the reports which set out the conditions that occasioned the
formal beginning of grammatical activity in early Islam are particularly signifi-
cant because of their confluence on one matter. The first of these has the caliph
ÆAli attributing the occurrence of solecism in Arabic to the linguistic contact
between the Arabs and Muslims of non-Arab origin (aÆÅjim, sing. Æajam). The
second report makes the same point, but is attributed to Ziyad Ibn Abih (53/
673), the Umayyad governor of Basra in southern Iraq who was renowned for
the purity of his speech or eloquence (faßÅ˙a). What is significant about these
reports is that they locate – in a boundary-setting manner (cf. Chapter 1, section
2) – the source of solecism outside the community of original Arabic-speakers,
attributing it to the linguistic contact which the military successes in early Islam
brought about.20 This theme of linguistic contact endured well beyond this
period, as is evident from the oft-quoted statement – reiterated by the famous
philosopher al-Farabi (339/950) – which describes the limits the grammarians
set as a guiding principle for eliciting linguistic data for grammatical analysis.

the arabic language and national identity
—52 —
Because of the importance of this statement, it is given in full below (see
Suleiman 1999c: 22–3):
Linguistic data were not accepted from the tribes of Lakhm or Judhama because they
neighboured the Egyptians and the Copts; nor from QudaÆa, Ghassan or Iyad because
they neighboured the people of Syria who were predominantly Christian and used
languages other than Arabic in their ritual prayers; nor from Taghlib and Namir
because they neighboured the Byzantines who spoke Greek; nor from Bakr because
they neighboured the Nabat and the Persians; nor from ÆAbd al-Qays because they
lived in Bahrain, thus mixing with the Indians and Persians; nor from Azd of ÆUman
because they mixed with the Indians and Persians; nor from the people of Yemen
because they mixed with the peoples of India and Ethiopia and because Ethiopians
were born amongst them; nor from Banu Hanifa, the inhabitants of Yamama or
Thaqif or those of Ta’if because they mixed with the foreign merchants who resided
in their countries; nor from the townships of Hijaz (˙Å∂irat al-ÓijÅz) because the
language transmitters noticed that their language was corrupted by mixing with
members of foreign nations (ghayrihim min al-Æumam).
The importance of the principle of linguistic contact as a solecism-inducing
factor is well established in the Arabic grammatical tradition. In the eighth and
ninth centuries, and even earlier, this principle received two expressions vis-à-
vis data-elicitation and collection. On the one hand, in pursuance of the
principle of purity of speech (fasaha), some linguists used to travel deep into the
desert to reside among Bedouin tribes who were thought to have avoided
contact with non-Muslim Arabs or Arabs who had mixed with them, especially
in the newly established centres of Basra and Kufa. On the other hand, the
grammarians collected data from some Bedouins who attended the markets that
sprang up around Basra, especially al-Mirbad, provided that the informants in
question were thought to have shunned contact with city-dwellers. The sources
report that shepherds, hunters and raiders were particularly favoured, although
the financial rewards, such as they were, offered to these informants sometimes
led to professional abuse and data-fabrication.21 These practices are indicative of
the importance attached to the pure form of the language in the Arabic
intellectual tradition, both as a repository of the wisdom of the Arabs in bygone
times and as a boundary-setting device between the various groups, social and
ethnic, which made up Muslim society of the day. This purity of language had
an additional sociopolitical dimension, which is publicly expressed in the
custom of sending the sons of caliphs in the Umayyad period to live in the
desert to learn to speak Arabic correctly in preparation for assuming office later
in life. However, this did not happen all the time. In this connection, the
sources tell us that the caliph al-Walid Ibn ÆAbd al-Malik (96/715) committed
many errors in his speech, and that his father ascribed this to the fact that he did
not send him to the desert to learn the pure speech of the Bedouins.
In addition, the above practices shed light on an important feature of Arab

the past lives on
—53 —
nationalist discourse in the modern period (see Chapter 1, section 5): the almost
complete absence in most of this discourse of a return to, or the eulogization of,
the speech of the peasant (“or of some other but equally sheltered population”)
who, in the literature on nationalism, is/are regarded as “noble and uncon-
taminated” and, therefore, as having “kept his/their language pure and intact”
(Fishman 1972: 69; see also Chapter 2, section 5). The Arab nationalist
discourse is not entirely unique in this respect; witness the return to Sanskrit
rather than the language of the peasant in Indian nationalism. It is, however,
interesting to note that the emphasis placed on the language of the sheltered
Bedouin in the first centuries of Islam – in what may be regarded as one of the
earliest examples of status language-planning in the sociolinguistic literature22 –
does represent a kind of return in earlier times to a formal or symbolic analogue
of the peasant in modern nationalist discourse. It is as though, by having had
the return to the past performed at an earlier stage in the Arabic intellectual
tradition, Arab nationalist discourse could not recreate this same return again.
More importantly, the emergence of a more glorious, heroic and recent past in
the period following the rise of Islam provided the modern nationalist elite with
an even more unifying and evocative point of reference than the one afforded to
the Arab linguists in the eighth and ninth centuries. The past is a relative
concept: this is particularly true here. Modern Arab nationalism returns to a
past in which a codified, elaborated and cultivated form of the language had
been achieved through the work of the grammarians centuries earlier. At this
point of contact, the symbolic peasant had already disappeared as an embodi-
ment of the “noble and uncontaminated” folk so much beloved by nationalists.
For the grammarians, the past was much earlier, prior to their finishing the task
of codification, elaboration and cultivation. In this past, the Bedouin did exist
as a “noble and uncontaminated” construct, but this was no nationalist age.
The point was made earlier in this section that the Umayyad period (661–
750) brought about a change in the attitude towards solecism. Whereas the
association between language and religion was paramount in the early Islamic
period, greater weight started to be given to the association of language and
people in the Umayyad period. It is, however, important not to think of these
two kinds of association as mutually exclusive within the triad of language,
religion and people established above. This is why, in the first sentence in this
paragraph, I have talked about a change in, not of, the attitude towards solecism.
This change in attitude towards solecism seems to have had a sociopolitical
dimension. The sources are full of anecdotes which show how solecism was seen
as a defect which can undermine the public standing of a person in whose
speech it occurred. This applied as much to caliphs as to other members of the
bureaucracy. Thus, the sources tell us how the Umayyad caliph ÆAbd al-Malik
Ibn Marwan likened solecism to a face ravaged with smallpox, and how the

the arabic language and national identity
—54 —
stress of having to avoid solecism in his Friday sermons turned his hair white
prematurely. ÆAbd al-Malik is also reported to have said that whereas correct
language enhances the status of a commoner, solecism detracts from the status
of a nobleman,23 so much that he himself used to avoid using solecisms in speech
even when the context demanded it, as in joke-telling where authenticity
required replication and imitation of corrupt speech. By contrast, ÆAbd al-Malik’s
son al-Walid, who became caliph after his father’s death, was a notorious
la˙˙Åna (a person who habitually committed solecisms in his speech), a fact which
made him the butt of jokes even in his own court. In one such well-known case,
al-Walid is reported to have asked a Bedouin who his father-in-law was, saying:
“man khatanaka?” (“Who circumcised you?”) instead of the correct form “man
khatanuka?” (“Who is your father-in-law?”). When the Bedouin answered that he
was circumcised by a Jew, al-Walid started to laugh. The Bedouin did not take
the caliph’s implied insult lying down. He told the caliph that what he (the
caliph) actually meant to say was not khatanaka, but khatanuka, and then
proceeded to tell him who his father-in-law was.24 In another story, we are told
how the caliph ÆUmar Ibn ÆAbd al-ÆAziz (101/720) corrected al-Walid’s Arabic
in public when the latter attempted to correct one of his own servants. So
repugnant was solecism to ÆUmar Ibn ÆAbd al-ÆAziz that he used to refuse to help
beggars if they committed solecism when asking for help or charity. It may be
interesting to note here that a similar attitude towards beggars existed among
some Arab nationalists in modern times (see Chapter 4, section 3).
So important were the sociopolitical implications of solecism that the famous
al-Hajjaj (95/714), governor of Iraq, sent the grammarian Yahya Ibn YaÆmar
into exile because the latter, at the insistence of the former, dared to point to
instances of solecism in the governor’s recitation of the Qur’an.25 Knowing how
repugnant solecism was to al-Hajjaj, one of his officials, a certain Kathir Ibn
Kathir, committed a gross grammatical error in his presence on purpose. The
sources tell us that this was a ruse by the crafty official to force al-Hajjaj to fire
him to avoid being forced to accept a posting which he did not fancy.26 To avoid
the ignominy of committing solecisms in public, a non-Arab court poet would
sometimes secure the services of a professional reciter, who would read his
poetry for him in public without error. Fear of committing solecism also led to
an exaggerated pronunciation of some Arabic phonemes by non-Arabs, especially
/˙/, /Æ/ and the emphatic sounds /†/, /∂/ and /Ω/. Finally, the censuring attitude
towards solecism meant that it was tolerated, or was thought to be appropriate,
only in the language of slave girls and young and coquettish women. And, in the
society of the day, no man worthy of the name would dare stoop so low!
The above discussion highlights aspects of the Arabic intellectual tradition
which show the strong association of language, religion and people. In parti-
cular, it shows the value accorded to correct language use in this triad, and how

the past lives on
—55 —
the emphasis on this permeated linguistic, sociolinguistic and legal facets of this
tradition. Worthy of note in this context is the strong assumption in the Arabic
intellectual tradition that the ability to speak Arabic without solecism was an
important consideration in public, especially political, life. The discussion also
highlights how language was seen as a boundary-setting device at the social and
ethnic levels. By ascribing the onset of solecism to the linguistic contact
between the Arabs and non-Arab Muslims, the Arabic intellectual tradition
endows language with functions of ethno-cultural groupness which it later
assumed more forcefully (see Chapters 4 and 5). It is to this aspect of the
association of language, religion and people that I will turn next.
5. ÆAJAM and ÆARAB27
Contrastive group self-identification by means of ethnic labels is an ancient
phenomenon. The Greek term ethnos, from which the word “ethnicity” and its
derivatives originate, is the paradigmatic ethnic label par excellence. Tonkin et
al. (1989) provide an interesting analysis of the development of the meaning of
this term. Roughly speaking, the term was initially used to signify groups of
animals, but was later extended to refer to groups of warriors, the Furies, the
Persians and foreign or barbarian peoples. In the New Testament, the term is
used to refer to non-Christians and non-Jews, as an equivalent of the term goyim.
At a later stage, the meaning of the term ethnos was rendered by the word gentile
to signify group otherness, particularly in the religious sphere. But, in a strange
twist of semantic development, the term later (fifteenth century onwards) started
to mean Greek Orthodox, as it now signified the otherness of this group as a
religious millet in the predominantly Muslim Ottoman Empire. Similar contras-
tive self-identification is practised by other groups whose claim to fame may not
have the same pedigree as that of the ancient Greeks. Gypsies, as Rom, contrast
their own world to that of the gaje. As Hechter (1986: 276) points out, “Gypsy
survival is due to strongly held Gypsy beliefs that the gaje world is polluted, and
only the Rom are clean”. The term baljikiyyin (Belgians) used in Jordan to refer
to Jordanian citizens of Palestinian origin belongs to this category of ethnic
labels (see Suleiman 1999b).
Returning to ethnos, Tonkin et al. (1989) tell us that the full meaning of this
term as an ethnic label of contrastive self-identification emerges from its place
in a lexical network of related terms, including the Latin genus, populus, tribus,
natio, barbarus and civis whose legacy in “modern Romance languages, and in
English, is a complex and rich moral vocabulary, laid out along dimensions of
inclusion and exclusion, dignity and disdain, familiarity and strangeness” (p. 13).
Of particular interest for our purposes here is the use of the derived adjective
ethnikos, in early Christian times, as a close synonym of barbaros which signified

the arabic language and national identity
—56 —
“those who spoke unintelligible languages” (ibid.), thus making language the
ethnic symbol and boundary-setting device par excellence. An awareness of this
function of language and its ethical and moral implications is found in the
Arabic intellectual tradition, hence the rejection by Ibn Hazm (456/1064) of
Galen’s belief in the superiority of Greek and in the inferiority of other
languages which are likened to the barking of dogs or the croaking of frogs.28
Armstrong (1982: 5) emphasizes this function of language and its moral and
ethical connotations when he states that terms like “goyim, barbaroi and nemtsi
all imply [a] perception of the human incompleteness of persons who could not
communicate with the in-group, which constituted the only “real men”. Usually,
in their original application such terms singled out one or two alien neighbours,
and by reference to such aliens, large ethnic groupings came to recognize their
own relatively close relationship.” Within this framework of usually boastful
inclusion and deprecating exclusion, the failure of the out-group to come to
grips with the language of the in-group is seen as a fault in the former, rather
than as a result of any impenetrability which this language may have. As a rule,
linguistic impenetrability is usually ascribed to the language of the out-group,
which is often considered an obstacle to the progress of civilization as an
avowed aim of the in-group and its civilizational mission in history. The atti-
tude towards Japanese by some Europeans provides an interesting example here:
the Basque Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier (1506–52) is said to have described
this language, on account of its difficulty, as an “invention of the devil” whose
aim was to impede the progress of Christianity. Similarly, some Arabists
expressed the view that the grammar of numerals in Arabic was an invention of
the devil to torture those who wished to learn the language.
The above contrastive self-identification between the Arabs and the non-
Arabs (Æajam), as constructed by the former, may be illustrated by the following
incident from the early period of Islamic history. It is reported in the sources
(see Arslan 1994) that the Banu Taghlib, a Christian Arab tribe from the
Arabian Peninsula, refused to pay the poll-tax to the second caliph ÆUmar on
the grounds that they were Arabs who could not be treated like non-Arabs
(Æajam) (ibid.: 292). In the end, they agreed to pay double the going poll-tax rate
on condition that their payment was treated as a form of charitable contribution
and not as poll-tax which, the Banu Taghlib argued, the infidels among the
non-Arabs (aÆlÅj, singular Æilj) had to pay (ibid.: 292). What is interesting about
this report is the contrastive ethnic self-definition of Arab versus non-Arab
which the Banu Taghlib invoked, in place of the religion-based one of Muslim
versus non-Muslim, to justify the non-payment of the poll-tax. In the process,
the Banu Taghlib constructed a matrix of group self-definition which was more
complex than the binary one operated by the caliph. Whereas the caliph oper-
ated in terms of a binary distinction between Muslims and non-Muslims, the

the past lives on
—57 —
Banu Taghlib operated in terms of a four-way distinction between Muslim Arab,
Muslim non-Arab, Arab non-Muslim and non-Arab non-Muslim, and that they
did not regard themselves to be on the same par as this last group. On the
contrary, the fact that they used the term Æajam in an unqualified manner in
their interaction with the caliph indicates that they regarded themselves to be
on a par with Muslim Arabs. Also, the fact that the caliph was willing to
tolerate the above classification and its implications for the principles which
governed his tax policy, even if his reasons for this were administrative and
political, indicates the residual power which the bonds of Arabness in its tribal
context held in the early Islamic period.
In the Arabic intellectual tradition, the term Æajam and its derivatives are
best understood in the context of the network of semantic relations outlined in
the preceding two paragraphs.29 In particular, this term serves the ethno-cultural
function of group exclusion conveyed by the two ethnic labels ethnos (in its
premodern meaning) and barbaros, although not always with the same negative
connotations.30 The term Æajam is used in pre-Islamic discourse to refer to non-
Arabs (cf. Nuseibeh 1956: 12), and this sense is preserved in the Qur’an where
the term occurs four times (16:103, 26:198 and 41:44 (twice)) to designate a
binary group classification between Arabs and non-Arabs on the basis of lan-
guage. In adopting this mode of classification, the Qur’an must have followed
established usage. The juxtaposition of aÆjamÈ (relative adjective of Æajam) to
ÆarabÈ in this usage constitutes a kind of sign in semiotic terms, in which the one
term recalls the other in a relation of mutual implication. In addition, it is clear
from the sequential ordering of the terms in this sign, and their pragmatic
loading in their texts, that the term aÆjamÈ is the marked category, in the sense
that it signifies what is – in terms of the Qur’an as revelation – a deviation from
the standard or norm, ÆarabÈ, in the same way as the feminine gender is generally
treated as the marked category in relation to the unmarked masculine gender in
grammatical analysis. This markedness of aÆjamÈ is signalled by the fact that the
Qur’an is manifestly in Arabic. It is also signalled by the fact that ÆarabÈ is the
referentially specific term, whereas aÆjamÈ is the non-specific one. In other
words, while we know that ÆarabÈ signifies a relationship with the Arabic language,
we do not know for certain the language or languages signified by aÆjamÈ,
although Persian may be the primary language in this category. If so, ÆarabÈ must
be treated as a term of positive and specific inclusion, while, in contrast, aÆjamÈ
must be viewed as a term of exclusion, residual inclusion or inclusion by default.
Looked at from a different angle, ÆarabÈ is a term of in-groupness, while ÆajamÈ is
a term of out-groupness. The fact that language is treated as the classificatory
principle which makes possible the above distinctions shows powerfully the
importance attached to language in the Arabic intellectual tradition as a symbol
of ethno-cultural identity and as a boundary-setting device. Hourani (1983:

the arabic language and national identity
—58 —
260) describes this situation in the following terms: “as far back in history as we
can see them, the Arabs have always been exceptionally conscious of their
language and proud of it, and in pre-Islamic Arabia … there was a unity which
joined together all those who spoke Arabic and could claim descent from the
tribes of Arabia”. Playing the vis-à-vis constitutes the very substance of the
distinction between Æarab and Æajam in the literature.
The conversion of many non-Arabs to Islam in the wake of the Islamic con-
quests generated contradictory implications for this linguistically based group
identification. The prestige of Arabic as the language of the Qur’an was now
significantly enhanced by its deployment in new communicative domains,
notably those of the new sciences, the administration and the military. This
made Arabic an even more potent symbol of group identity for its speakers and,
self-contrastively, for those of the newly conquered populations, especially the
elite. For the former, Arabic became an empowering symbol of prestige, inclu-
sion and in-groupness. For the latter, Arabic became a symbol of exclusion and
(their) out-groupness, a function it never served before. This new situation
represents a subtle, but important, modulation in what may be called, following
Bourdieu (1992), the dynamics of the ethno-linguistic market at the time.
Whereas in pre-Islamic and early Islamic Arabia the populations in the territories
the Arabs acquired later did not identify themselves as non-Arabs or non-Arabic
speakers, this picture started to change after the conquests in that the identity of
the populations in these territories began to be formulated in such terms. Whereas
before the conquest the populations of the conquered territories defined them-
selves principally by what they were – or by what they were not, but without
reference to the Arabs – after the conquest they started to define themselves,
albeit not exclusively, by what they were not by reference to a new and command-
ing classificatory principle represented by the Arabs and their language.
But it is normal in situations of this kind for the linguistically dispossessed,
especially the elite, to start acquiring and cultivating the new resource, as
happened with IsmaÆil Ibn Bulbul – a Persian vizier to the Abbasid caliph al-
MuÆtamid (279/892) – who, in speech and writing, “indulged in the most choice
linguistic finesses in order to pass more easily as a full Arab” (Goldziher, 1966,
vol. 1: 133). In a situation of this kind, a new dynamic begins to develop,
leading to a reworking of the basis upon which in-groupness and out-groupness,
inclusion and exclusion, are constructed. That this in fact happened in Muslim
society is evidenced by the subtle changes in meaning which the word Æajam
seems to have acquired. Whereas Æajam earlier meant being non-Arabic-speaking,
particularly of Persian origin, later the term started to signal speaking the langu-
age with difficulty, or speaking it with characteristic interferences from the
mother-tongue. Although this mutation in meaning may be thought to repre-
sent a reduction in the efficacy of language as a group symbol of contrastive self-

the past lives on
—59 —
identification, it however does not challenge the definitional role of language as
a boundary-setting device – hence the existence of attempts in the literature to
outline stereotypical mother-tongue interferences into Arabic as a means of
maintaining group-identity boundaries.31 It is, I believe, in this context (fourth/
tenth century) that the reference to Arabic as lughat al-∂Åd, the language of the
phoneme /∂/, assumes its maximal definitional function or significance, although
as a term it may have been in existence at the time of the Prophet.32 This
definitional function of /∂/ is reflected in a poem by the famous poet al-Mutanabbi
(354/965), who considers himself the most honourable person among his own
people, who, in turn, are said to be the pride of all those who spoke the ∂Åd.33
The definitional potential of /∂/ is also commented on by Ibn Jinni in his famous
book Sirr ßinÅÆat al-iÆrÅb (1993, vol. 1: 214–15), in which he says: “let it be
known that /∂/ belongs to the Arabs alone; it is rarely [if ever] found in the
speech of the Æajam”. This presumed distinctiveness of a group’s language is often
found among other nations, although it may not always be signalled by a special
term of the kind under consideration here. Witness the claim made by the
French nationalist writer, Charles Murras (1886–1952), to the effect that no
Jew or Semite could achieve complete mastery of the French language to the
extent that he could appreciate the full beauty of Racine’s line in Bérénice:
“Dans l’orient désert quel devint mon ennui” (cited in Kedourie 1966: 72).
Calling Arabic lughat al-∂Åd is not just a matter of signalling the distinctive-
ness of the language by claiming that /∂/ is unique to it (al-Jahiz, quoted by
ÆUways 1977: 245 and al-Khafaji 1982: 56). It is, more significantly, a way of
renaming the language, of giving it a new label that is derived not from the
name of the people who originally spoke it or the area where it was originally
spoken, but from the articulatory difficulty which the phoneme in question is
said to present to hapless foreigners striving for mastery of the language.34 Under
this reading, the phoneme /∂/ becomes an authenticating emblem, a border
guard and a defining symbol of group identity, signalling, as Anis (1970: 201)
indicates, who does or does not belong to the in-group. This explains, Goldziher
tells us (1966, vol. 1: 115), why “mistakes in language by [Muslims of non-Arab
origin] were derided in the most offensive manner and people appeared outraged
when a foreigner presumed to criticize an Arab in matter of Arab language and
poetry”,35 in spite of the fact that “the most eminent grammarians and the most
eager researchers into the treasures” of the Arabic language were of non-Arab
lineage. This also explains the existence of statements in the literature which
set out stereotypical renditions of /∂/ that characteristically signal membership
in a particular ethnic group.36 Here again, language provided a criterion for
contrastive group definition which, as shall be explained in the next chapter,
survived well into the modern period. Witness the use of the term lughat al-∂Åd
and al-mutakallimËn bi-l-∂Åd in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to

the arabic language and national identity
—60 —
refer respectively to Arabic and Arabic-speakers as a group that is distinct from
Turkish and Turkish-speakers (see Chapter 4, sections 3–4). Witness also the
survival of this term in modern Arab culture as a boastful name for Arabic, and
its use as a name for at least one journal devoted to research on the language, al-
ÎÅd, published in Baghdad in the second half of the twentieth century.
Much of this contrastive self-identification by means of language took place
in a sociocultural context dominated by shuÆËbiyya (cf. al-Duri 1981) and its
anti-Arab polemic in which Persians, Nabat (Nabataeans), Copts and Berbers
participated.37 Roughly speaking, shuÆËbiyya designates “a movement within the
early Muslim society which denied any privileged position of the Arabs”
(Enderwitz 1996: 513–16).38 ShuÆËbiyya attacks on the Arabs covered rhetoric,
oratory, weapons, military skills, genealogy and – most important from the per-
spective of this research – language, which has caused Anis (1970: 192) to
describe shuÆËbiyya as a linguistic conflict (ßirÅÆ lughawÈ). The attacks on Arabic,
which Goldziher (1966, vol. 1: 192) similarly dubbed “linguistic shuÆËbiyya”,
aimed at various aspects of the language, but they were all intended to challenge
the claims of superiority attached to it by the Arabs and non-Arab grammarians
alike (cf. section 3 above). One such attack took the form of an apocryphal
˙adÈth in which the Prophet is claimed to have said: “If God intends a matter
which demands tenderness he reveals it to the ministering angels in … Persian,
but if He wishes for something demanding strictness He uses Arabic” (Goldziher
1966, vol. 1: 157). In another version of this tradition, tenderness and strictness
are replaced by pleasure and anger respectively (ibid.).39 The difficulty, however,
in assessing the full extent of the shuÆËbiyya attacks on the Arabic language is
that very little of the literature on this topic has come down to us. And, since
most of what we know can only be reconstructed from the rebuttals offered by
the opponents of shuÆËbiyya – whether of Arab or non-Arab lineage – who rose
in defence of the Arabic language, I will concentrate on these works, particu-
larly those of Ibn Durayd (321/933), al-Anbari (327/938), Ibn Faris (395/1004)
and al-Zamakhshari (538/1143) because of their immediate relevance.40 It should
be noted, however, that many of the references to the superiority of Arabic over
other languages made in sections 2 and 3 above belong to this anti-shuÆËbiyya
discourse.
Ibn Durayd’s rebuttal of the shuÆËbiyya claims in his book al-IshtiqÅq provides a
suitable starting point for this discussion because of its twin preoccupation with
genealogy and language (in particular, etymology), which, as Goldziher (1966,
vol. 1) rightly observes, constitute the main targets of shuÆËbi polemic. The
main thesis in al-IshtiqÅq is that Arabic proper names are embedded in an
etymology which defines what may be called linguistic genealogies by means of
derivational networks (ishtiqÅq) whose roots lie in the lexical stock of the
language.41 Thus, the extensive etymologies which make up the bulk of al-

the past lives on
—61 —
IshtiqÅq are offered not as an exercise in lexicography but as a way of refuting the
claim that Arabic names are derivationally rootless and, therefore, arbitrary.
This refutation is further taken to represent a denial of the claim that the
famous grammarian al-Khalil had said that Arabic names are etymologically
arbitrary, which claim is used by the shuÆËbiyya as a basis for their attacks on
Arabic. Although the point is not explicitly made in al-IshtiqÅq, for Arabic
names not to be derived from a native lexical stock would be unthinkable
because it would amount to a denial of the principle of the wisdom of the Arabs,
and it is this principle which Ibn Durayd is ultimately defending. This is clear
from the attempts made by Ibn Durayd to show that the social context often
plays an important role in the choice of a name – for example, calling a newly
born baby boy Ramadan because he was born during this month – a fact which
makes names of this kind sociolinguistically significant and culturally
motivated. The statement that “the Arabs have systems of naming their male
off-spring” (Ibn Durayd 1958: 5) sums up this point well. This interest in names
in modern nationalist discourse is evident in Turkish (see Chapter 4, section 2)
and Arab nationalism (see Chapter 5, section 2), albeit in a mode of
engagement different from that of Ibn Durayd.
This principle of the wisdom of the Arabs is also invoked in al-Anbari’s
defence of the occurrence of a∂dÅd, words with the same phonological form but
opposite meanings,42 in his book of the same name (1987). The charge here –
which al-Anbari attributes to a party peddling heresy, falsehood and contempt
for the Arabs – is that words of this type can lead to communicative difficulties
and even failure. This, the charge goes, shows the deficient wisdom of the Arabs
and their meagre rhetorical abilities. It also shows a lack of regard for the need
to maintain a relationship of exclusive mutual implication between the signifier
and the signified in words as signs.
Al-Anbari provides an interesting defence of Arabic, based on the principle
of the wisdom of the Arabs, which shows the deficient reasoning of the propon-
ents of shuÆËbiyya. First, he points out that this party shows little appreciation of
the role which linguistic co-textuality and situational contextuality play in the
processing of speech and the recovery of meaning. This failure in understanding
how language works reduces it to a notational system devoid of all creativity.
Second – and this is only implicitly given by al-Anbari – by combining homo-
nymy and synonymy into one category called a∂dÅd, the Arabic lexicon acquires
expressive resources, limited though these may be, which other languages lack.
Third, some a∂dÅds express a close semantic relationship between the sets of
words they involve, thus signalling a core meaning in both; this may be exem-
plified by the word mu˙tall in contemporary Arabic, which refers both to the
occupier (Israel) and the occupied (Palestinians) as in historical Palestine. Fourth,
some a∂dÅds are the result of dialect-mixing; for example, the word jawn came to

the arabic language and national identity
—62 —
mean both “white” and “black” as a result of such mixing. The fact that in some
cases it is not possible to establish the cause(s), Æilla(s), which is/are responsible
for the occurrence of a given a∂dÅd item in the language does not refute the
principle that the Arabs are a wise people (ibid.: 7–8, gist translation): “If
someone asks about the cause behind calling a man rajul, and a woman imra’a …
you should answer as follows: this is because of causes that are known to the
Arabs, but which we have failed to discover, completely or in part. The Arabs
cannot be said to have ceased to be knowledgeable because we [the grammar-
ians] are unable to state with clarity the causes behind their speech.” It is
interesting to note in this connection that this conclusion was rejected by al-
Arsuzi in his attempt to anchor Arab nationalism in relation to Arabic (see
Chapter 6, section 4).
Ibn Faris’ response to the shuÆËbiyya attacks on Arabic are embodied in his
treatise al-ÍÅ˙ibÈ fÈ fiqh al-lugha (1993). Some of the themes he dealt with were
discussed earlier (see section 2), namely in the defence of synonymy in Arabic.
Reference was also made above to the role of this synonymy in enriching the
Arabic lexicon and the effect this has on translating into and out of the
language – views which the Andalusian linguist Ibn Sinan al-Khafaji shared
with Ibn Faris in what may have been, for the former, a similar shuÆËbiyya milieu
in Muslim Spain in the fifth/eleventh century. The use of iÆrab (short-vowel
case endings), which endows the language with syntactic flexibility through free
word order, is regarded by Ibn Faris as a distinguishing feature of Arabic, as is the
capacity of the language to deploy a host of rhetorical devices. Although all
languages do serve the communicative functions to which they are put, none, so
Ibn Faris believes, does so more economically and elegantly than Arabic.
Al-Zamakhshari’s rebuttal of shuÆËbiyya is given in the beautifully crafted
introduction to his famous book al-Mufaßßal fÈ al-na˙w (1840).43 The fact that al-
Zamakhshari felt impelled to write about this topic, well after the sociopolitical
embers of this movement had subsided in the sixth/twelfth century, shows – as
Goldziher (1966, vol. 1: 191) rightly observes – the enduring nature of linguistic
shuÆËbiyya. However, this time the nature of the encounter between the propon-
ents and opponents of Arabic across the shuÆËbiyya lines takes a fairly new
direction. First, there is a clear and open identification of shuÆËbiyya by name in
al-Mufaßßal, whereas, in the works I have discussed earlier, references to this
movement were effected by allusion. Second, there is a strong identification
between Arabism and Islam. This identification is extremely important in view
of the attention given to this issue in Arab nationalist discourse in the twentieth
century (see Chapter 5, section 5).44 Third, the bankruptcy of shuÆËbiyya is
signalled by the absence of any attacks it made against Arabic in any language
other than Arabic itself, which – al-Zamakhshari argues – shows the unassail-
able position of the language. As Norris (1990: 47) wittily points out, “even the

the past lives on
—63 —
most fanatical shuÆËbÈ expressed his sentiments in the tongue first spoken by the
Arabian lizard-eaters he so despised”. A similar charge is levelled in the twen-
tieth century against the proponents of the vernacular (ÆÅmiyya) in its various
dialectal forms (see Chapter 6), who hardly ever use it to expound and popular-
ize their views (cf. Shakir 1972). Fourth, and this is the most significant point,
al-Zamakhshari’s defence is not a defence of Arabic per se but of Arabic
grammar, especially as it pertains to iÆrab (short-vowel case endings). The gist of
al-Zamakhshari’s defence in this connection is that knowledge of Arabic gram-
mar is a prerequisite to the study of the Islamic sciences, particularly the law.
Al-Zamakhshari emphasizes this because of claims made by the proponents of
shuÆËbiyya in which they belittle the value of grammar, or even reject it.
It is of course true that, by defending Arabic grammar, al-Zamakhshari
defends the Arabic language and, indirectly, reaffirms the validity of the “wisdom
of the Arabs” principle which stands as a bulwark against the attacks of
shuÆËbiyya. But there is more to this defence than that. This defence shows the
increasing abstractness of the debate over Arabic, and the increasing finesse
with which it is now articulated. In a sense, al-Zamakhshari’s ultimate defence
of the language does not reside in what the introduction to al-Mufaßßal actually
says, but in the very act of inscribing/producing al-Mufaßßal itself, a book in
which the nuts and bolts of grammar are set out. It is as though, by shifting the
defence of the battle line from an immediate concern with the language to a
concern with the grammar of the language, one shifts the symbolism of ethno-
cultural groupness from language as a fully living system of communication to
grammar as a representational device. In diachronic terms, this reflects a passage
in the symbolism from productivity to increasing fossilization, which accurately
reflects the changing status of Arabic over the centuries as a medium of
communication. Although the idea in nationalist discourse that the deader a
language the greater its symbolic power in constructing group identity does not apply
here – because Arabic was never a dead language, contrary to what Shivtiel states
(1999: 131) – the fact remains that, by endowing grammar with symbolism of
this kind in the Arabic intellectual tradition, the passage from a premodern and
a prenationalist age to a modern and nationalist one in the nineteenth century
is made much easier. This is why Arab authors in the second half of the twen-
tieth century were still engaged in fighting battles against what was called
modern shuÆËbiyya with almost total disregard for historical discontinuities
(Bayhum 1957 and 1962, al-Bazzaz 1962, al-Fikayki 1968).45 This was especially
true of the 1980s in Iraq during the Iran–Iraq war (cf. al-Khatib 1983, al-
Shahhadh 1990, ÆAbd al-Tawwab 1990, Muhammad 1990, ÆAbd al-Mu’min
1990, Dhihni 1990). Symbols strike a deep chord in a people’s psyche. This is
the source of their durability, and this is why the past in nationalist discourse
lives on and can loudly resonate.

the arabic language and national identity
—64 —
6. the arabs as a nation (UMMA): further evidence
It is clear from the above discussion that the role of Arabic as a symbol of ethnic
identity in premodern times is culturally and historically sanctioned. Evidence
for this role is derived from a variety of sources, including the religious and the
linguistic sciences. References to this role are available in the Qur’an and ˙adÈth
literature. In the latter, Imam Malik reports that the Prophet considered
competence in Arabic to be the basis for identifying a person as an Arab: “O
people! God is one, and your father is one. No one inherits Arabic from his
father or mother. Arabic is a habit of the tongue. He who speaks Arabic is an
Arab” (cited in Anis 1970: 180). It is remarkable that the definition of Arabism
in the last sentence has been included, almost verbatim (see Chapter 5, section
2), as part of the definition of the Arab nationalist ideology of the BaÆth party
and the Arab nationalist movement (cf. Arab BaÆth Party Constitution in Haim
1962, and al-Husri 1968). This highlights the strong association which exists
between language and people in the conceptualization of group identity in Arab
culture, although the historical roots of this association are usually framed in an
Islamic context. This is made clear by the famous jurist Imam ShafiÆi (204/820)
in his RisÅla, in which he points out that a Muslim ceases to be an Arab if he has
no competence in the language, and that he becomes an Arab if he acquires the
language. Al-ShafiÆi is clearly arguing against descent or lineage as a defining
criterion of Arabness, but this is not the only view on this matter in the Arabic
intellectual tradition. In the eighth/fourteenth century, the jurist al-Shatibi
(789/1388) put forward the opposite view in his book al-IÆtißÅm, arguing that
linguistic competence in Arabic does not make a person ethnically/racially Arab,
owing to the abiding importance of lineage among the Arabs as an authenti-
cating criterion of identity.46
The strength of the language-and-people association is further reflected in
various ingredients in the Arabic linguistic tradition. Some linguists establish
an organic link between the collective character of the Arabs and the qualities
of their language, insisting on the superiority of the latter over other languages
(section 2). The patterned regularities of Arabic are seen as a reflection of the
wisdom of the Arabs (section 3). The discussion of solecism and how it was
induced by linguistic contact between Arabs and non-Arabs in the wake of the
Islamic conquests highlights the role of Arabic in defining ethnic and social
identities (section 4). The shuÆËbiyya attacks on Arabic and its grammar reflect
the role of the language as an emblem of identity, and the desire to challenge
that role to undermine the cultural and ethnic hegemony of the Arabs.
Considering this range of associations between language and people – and their
historical and cultural depths – it is no accident that Arab nationalists in the
modern period (following Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798) turned to

the past lives on
—65 —
language as the primary criterion in defining the cultural and sociopolitical
identities of the Arabic-speaking peoples. I will deal with this topic in the next
two chapters, but not before showing here that this attempt at collective self-
definition by reference to language is not without precedent in historical and
sociopolitical discourse in the Arabic intellectual tradition.
One of the best treatments of this topic is offered by the historian al-MasÆudi
(345/956) in his books al-TanbÈh wa-l-ishrÅf and MurËj al-dhahab wa-maÆÅdin al-
jawhar. Al-MasÆudi approaches the topic of the definition of the nation (umma)47
with due historical care, arguing that different criteria of nationhood assumed
different degrees of definitional prominence at different periods in history.
Thus, while the existence of a unified or unitary political power over a defined
territory was a criterion of nationhood in ancient times, this was less so in later
periods. For al-MasÆudi, the three defining properties of a nation are its natural
disposition or character (shiyam †abÈÆiyya), sociocultural constitution (khuluq
†abÈÆiyya) and language (alsinatuhum). Although it is not possible to specify the
meanings of these terms precisely – for example, al-MasÆudi designates language
(sometimes variably) as lisÅn or lugha – and although the term “nation” here
cannot be regarded as a synonym of the same term in the modern sense,48 there
is no doubt that language for him constitutes the most important criterion in
defining nationhood. Both Khalidi (1975) and Nassar (1992) emphasize this
point. Khalidi sums this up as follows (1975: 89–90):
The concept of a nation for [al-MasÆudi] is largely linguistic. Language is the most
important constituent of a nation. Land is a minor factor since certain nations, the
Turks for instance, split and migrated but still retained their nationhood. A unitary
kingdom is also of minor importance since some nations, e.g. the Persians, were
living in politically fragmented kingdoms but were still described as Persians. Physical
and other characteristics played an important role in the earliest times but we hear
less of this in later periods. In other words, while certain factors like land and a
unitary kingdom were important in the early period of world history, they ceased to
have much importance thereafter, while language remained the most important single
constituent of nationhood. (emphasis added)
This objective definition of nationhood is adopted by the philosopher al-
Farabi (339/950), using more or less the same terms as al-MasÆudi: similarity in
social make-up or constitution, natural character or disposition and a shared
language and speech.49 However, there are two subtle differences between al-
MasÆudi and al-Farabi. First, while the former approaches the definition of the
nation from a historical perspective, the latter deals with this unit from the
perspective of the political philosopher whose approach may be considered as a-
historical or a-chronological, although it cannot be divorced from history.
Second, although al-MasÆudi is aware of the contrastive self-definition of nation-
hood which his criteria generate, he nevertheless does not articulate this fact

the arabic language and national identity
—66 —
explicitly. By contrast, al-Farabi explicitly mentions the role of these criteria in
inducing internal cohesion within the nation and external differentiation in
respect to other nations. Awareness of this differentiational function of the
criteria indicates an appreciation in the Arabic intellectual tradition of the role
which a boundary approach to the definition of the nation may play in the
discourse on the subject (see Chapter 1, section 2).
7. conclusion
It is clear from the discussion in this chapter that the role of Arabic as a symbol
of group identity in premodern times is sanctioned in a variety of domains and
intellectual enterprises. It is part of the linguistic thinking of the Arabs, the
religious sources and Islamic theology. It is also part of the historical and social
discourse on what makes up a group and what keeps it apart from other groups,
of the internal bond between its members and the external boundary between
itself and other groups. It is therefore not surprising that Arab nationalist dis-
course in the modern period has resorted to language, owing to its “resonance”
in Arab culture, as the mainstay of an Arab national identity. It is also not
surprising that the modern formulations of this role are sometimes framed in a
manner reminiscent of premodern sentiments vis-à-vis the language, as the
following quotation from Qunstantin Zurayq’s seminal treatise (al-WaÆy al-
qawmÈ, 1938) on Arab nationalism illustrates (cited in Nuseibeh 1956: 69–70):
It is the duty of the nationally conscious [Arab] to ponder his language in order to
know its genesis and how it spread and to comprehend its superior qualities over
other languages and the special endowments which enabled it to achieve complete
mastery over … vast regions. For every language possesses a unique genius and attri-
butes which distinguish it from other languages. And the Arabic language among all
other languages has shown great vitality in its meticulous structure, the extent of its
dissemination, and its flexibility, which has fitted it to serve an efficacious instru-
ment for expressing the various arts and sciences. For all these reasons it behoves us
to try to discover the secret of this vitality and to lay our hands on the unique powers
which our language represents in order to utilize these powers in organizing our
present and building our future.
The above references to the “superior qualities [of Arabic] over other langu-
ages” and its “special endowments” in matters of communicative “vitality”,
“meticulous structure” and “flexibility” are modern reformulations of old themes,
showing how the past lives on and how it interacts with the present in nationalist
discourse. The fact that language is seen in these reformulations as the key to
unlocking a power and a vitality which can organize the present and build the
future indicates the strength of the assessment of its motivational role in Arab
nationalist discourse. It is to this theme that I will turn in the next chapter.

the past lives on
—67 —
This “communion of the past and the present” vis-à-vis the language is
regarded by Arab nationalist thinkers as a “source of strength” in their socio-
political modernization project (ibid.: 78). Language is thought by most
nationalist thinkers to be best suited of all the ingredients of Arab nationalism
to create this communion. In comparison with other ingredients, it requires but
a modicum of intervention and invention before it can be pressed into active
service as a symbol of shared identity. Evidence for this, from a totally different
context, may be indirectly derived from Charles Ferguson’s (1972) treatment of
the attitudes and beliefs which Arabic-speakers display towards the language
situation in present-day Arab societies. One of these attitudes, called “myths”
by Ferguson,50 revolves around a host of beliefs which enunciate the superiority
of Arabic over other languages in a variety of spheres, including the beauty of its
rhythmical cadences, its “grammatical symmetry and ‘logical’ structure” (ibid.:
377), the “vastness and richness of its lexicon” (ibid.) and its “sacred character”
(ibid.: 378). Although this attitude towards the language is little more than an
imagined construct (I prefer this to the term “myth”), being similar in this
respect to the attitudes which speakers of other languages hold about their own
languages, Ferguson recognizes its relative uniformity among Arabic-speakers
(ibid.: 375): “Although the Arabic speech community is very large numerically,
and spread over a vast expanse spatially, the myths about the language are rela-
tively uniform throughout the community”. It is this uniformity of the attitudes,
rather than their empirical truth or falsity, which matters in Arab nationalist
discourse and what, ultimately, makes language the most efficacious symbol of
group identity to them.
Contrasting this with the role of historical tradition in the nationalist
enterprise, Nuseibeh obliquely argues – following Renan – that “oblivion, even
historical error [may be essential factors] in the creation of a nation” (ibid.).
Nuseibeh (ibid.: 80) is aware that historical traditions are “in themselves a two-
edged weapon: they contribute to solidarity by keeping alive memories of
common historical antecedents and to dissipation by resuscitating unsavoury
historical episodes in which every history abounds”. This is why selection,
recasting and even invention are important features of nationalist discourse,
although the extent to which intellectual acrobatics of this kind need to be
practised varies from one nationalist ingredient to another. Nuseibeh’s views on
this topic in relation to history in nationality-formation are interesting and still
as valid today as they were half a century ago; they also provide us with a fitting
end to this chapter, taking us back full circle to where we began (ibid.: 79):
The truth is that historical tradition is a factor contributing to integration provided it
is presented in the right way. That is to say, it is not so much a question of creating
the present in the image of the past as it is re-creating the past in the image of the
present. The pretence of this mental debauchery claiming to be history rather than

the arabic language and national identity
—68 —
political propaganda becomes less sinful when we take into account the sincerity of
those who preach it and the formidable difficulties inherent in preaching historical
truth.
In modern times, the debate over the origins of Arab nationalism has tended
to focus on its formative impulses. As pointed out in Chapter 2, many Arab
writers on the topic consider language as one of the most important impulses in
this nationalism, and they trace its operative roots back to the rise and spread of
Islam. The importance of the language in this context is acknowledged by
Antonius in his classic treatment of this nationalism, The Arab Awakening
(1938). However, Antonius places the origins of this national awakening in the
Western-inspired linguistic and literary renaissance in the Levant in the
nineteenth century. But his analysis is challenged by Zeine (1966), who argues
that the term “awakening” is a misnomer. He states that the Arabs’ sense of
collective identity – rooted as it was in the range of themes discussed in this
chapter – was in no need of being woken up in the nineteenth century, for it
was fully alive in spite of the four centuries of Ottoman rule of the Arabic-
speaking peoples. As evidence of how the past can be made to live on, Zeine’s
position, which I will quote below in full, is an interesting one, not least because
it seeks to eliminate the much-quoted phrase “Arab awakening” from the
discourse on Arab nationalism (1966: 146):
If by Arab awakening be meant the awakening of Arab consciousness and Arab
identity, i.e. al-ÆurËba, then the term “awakening” is a misnomer. Throughout the four
centuries of Ottoman rule, the Muslim Arabs never ceased to think of themselves as
Muslims and as Arabs and they, certainly, did not forget their Arabic language.
By holding this view, Zeine builds on that assessment of Arab national
identity which seeks to ascribe its genesis culturally to impulses that predate the
modern period. An example of this assessment is provided by Albert Hourani
(1983: 260):
That those who speak Arabic form a “nation”, and that this nation should be
independent and united, are beliefs which only became articulate and acquired
political strength during the [twentieth] century. But as far back in history as we can
see them, the Arabs have always been exceptionally conscious of their language and
proud of it, and in pre-Islamic Arabia they possessed a kind of “racial” feeling, a sense
that, beyond the conflicts of tribes and families, there was a unity which joined
together all who spoke Arabic and could claim descent from the tribes of Arabia.

—69 —
The Arabic Language Unites Us
LißÅnu al-∂Ådi yajmÆunÅ1
4
1. introduction
One of the aims of Chapter 3 was to show that Arabic has many of the ingre-
dients which make it eminently suitable to play the role of one of the primary
markers of national identity in the modern period. In dealing with this theme,
the resonance of Arabic (see Chapter 1, section 2), reference was made to the
position of the language as the focus of a host of cultural conceptualizations
which projected it as the source of pride of its speakers and as the evidence of
their positive moral character and value system (cf. Saliba 1993). The point was
also made that the belief in the systematic nature of the language was taken to
provide an indication of the fine qualities of the mental make-up of its speakers
(see Chapter 3, section 2). In addition, Arabic was viewed as a major boundary-
setter between the Arabs and the non-Arabs in the increasingly expanding
empire in the first few centuries of Islam (see Chapter 3, section 5). This
inevitably made it the target of attacks by non-Arab members of the Muslim
community, who charged that it was mainly through borrowings from other
languages that Arabic was able to overcome its Bedouin past and become the
language of a cultural heritage which, though Arabic, was not specifically Arab.
The fact that many non-Arabs were involved in the analysis and codification of
the language was given as an example of the veracity of this view.
It may, however, be suggested that for these latent group-identity impulses to
be triggered and to become endowed with overtly nationalist meanings, a speci-
fically modernizing input, whether political or cultural, would have to come
into play. It is generally agreed (see Tibi 1997: 80) that the Napoleonic
invasion of Egypt in 1798 heralded the onset of this input on both the political
and cultural fronts in Egypt itself and, indirectly, beyond Egypt in the Arabic-
speaking lands.2 As a manifestation of an increasingly hegemonic Europe, this
invasion foreshadowed the introduction in the Levant of other modes of Euro-
pean cultural penetration in the form of modern printing presses, the develop-
ment of journalism, the translation of literary and scientific works, and the
production of new translations of the Bible into Arabic (cf. Thompson 1956).
These developments were sustained by the increasing spread of literacy,

the arabic language and national identity
— 70 —
political liberalization in the form of the Tanzimat administrative reforms in the
Ottoman Empire in the nineteenth century (cf. Davison 1963) – although these
progressed in fits and starts – and the increased contact with the West in the
commercial and political spheres at the sub-state level in the Levant.
There is common agreement among scholars of Arab nationalism that
Greater Syria was the main arena in the development and promotion of this
Arab nationalist ideology and movement. It is also generally agreed that Arab
nationalism first started as a cultural phenomenon (see Chapter 2, section 3)
but later developed into a more overtly political movement at the beginning of
the twentieth century (cf. Tibi 1997: 61, 66, 116). The transition from the
cultural to the political mode of conceptualization and action in this national-
ism occurred as a result of the Turkification policies of the Young Turks,3
following their ascendance to power in the Ottoman Empire in 1908. This view
sees the transition from Ottomanism to political Arabism as a reaction to the
transition from Ottomanism to political Turkism among the Turkish elements
in the Ottoman Empire.
The aim of this chapter is to examine the implications of the above view in
relation to the role of the Arabic language in articulating two major issues in
Arab nationalism: those of identity and modernization in the second half of the
nineteenth century and the first two decades of the twentieth century. To set
the scene for this discussion, I will show how the mirroring phenomenon between
Arab and Turkish nationalism on the political front at the beginning of the
twentieth century also obtained at the linguistic level in the second half of the
nineteenth century. One of the aims of this chapter will therefore be to show
that Arab cultural nationalism was to some extent a reaction to Turkish cultural
nationalism, as was the case between these two nationalisms on the political
front. It should not, however, be concluded from this that I take a sequential
cause-and-effect view of the relationship between these different forms of
nationalism in the Turkish and Arab contexts – with Turkish nationalism in
the cultural and political domains giving rise to their counterparts in the Arab
sphere – or that the cultural in these two nationalisms is divorced from and
always precedes its political counterpart. Such a sequential cause-and-effect
view of the phenomena under consideration here would be too simple an
explanation for the multi-faceted complexity of nationalism in any context.
2. from ottomanism to turkism: the turkification of the
ottoman turks4
The transition from Ottomanism, the view that the Turkish elements of the
Ottoman Empire were Ottoman first and Turkish second, to Turkism, the view
that they were Turkish first and Ottoman second, was a slow process which

the arabic language unites us
— 71 —
spanned the nineteenth century, with points of high intensity occurring at
various times in the second part of that century. The core of this transition con-
sisted of various attempts to define group identity in ways which constructed the
Turks as a nation – in the cultural sense of this term – standing apart from other
groups in the Empire, particularly the Arabs. Language was the main instrument
in this enterprise in symbolic and functional terms.
This was not a fortuitous choice. First, it is consistent with the general
tendency in the nineteenth century to construct nationality on linguistic grounds,
following the German model; this was true of ethnic groups in the Balkans
under the Ottoman Empire as it was of other groups outside this sphere of
political influence in Central Europe. The choice of language for collective self-
definition thus reflects the modernity of the age. It further constitutes a
symbolic and material step towards reversing the waning fortunes of the Empire
in an increasingly combative and acquisitive context of imperialistic power rela-
tions in which Europe was in ascendance. Second, the promotion of language
over religion as the marker of group identity enables its advocates to construct a
new sociopolitical definition of the collective self which decentres co-religionists
in the state, the majority of the Arabs, and centres co-native speakers outside it,
mainly the Turks in Central Asia. This in turn helps create a concept of national
territory which encompasses groups and communities outside the borders of the
Ottoman Empire. Third, the facts that Turkish was full of Arabic and Persian
words which often maintained their original grammatical categories, and that
Turkish poetry followed the rules of Arabic prosody, provided the advocates of
the new identity with a highly productive opportunity to practise their purifica-
tion tendencies in a publicly visible manner. Fourth, in a period not unaccus-
tomed to sudden changes in the political fortunes of high officials, autocracy,
external threats, internal turmoil, intrigue and counter-intrigue, and censorship,
language in the Ottoman Empire served as a most useful conduit for setting out
what are essentially political views of a discernibly schismatic and irredentist
character.
It may be said that a major problem facing the advocates of Turkism in its
cultural mode was altering the Turks’ view of themselves as Turks. In the
nineteenth century, the term “Turk” had negative connotations (see Landau
1981, Lewis 1968). Heyd (1950: 76) tells us that this term was used to designate
its referent as a “rude [and] uneducated villager”, and that this usage was
reflected in a number of proverbs which, according to Gökalp, originated in the
big urban centres. Evidence of this attitude is further found in some British
writings of the period (see Kushner 1977: 20). These negative views of the
Turkish collective self are confirmed by Turkish writers during the second part
of the nineteenth century. The famous Turkist Shemseddin Sami wrote in his
six-volume encyclopaedic dictionary Kamus-ül-AÆlam (1890–1900) that “some

the arabic language and national identity
— 72 —
peoples who are of Turkish origin do not accept this name [Turk] and consider it
to be an insult” (quoted in Kushner 1977: 21). During the same period, the
writer Ahmed Midhat published a series of articles in the newspaper Iqdam in
which he deplored the self-contempt with which some Turks regarded them-
selves and other fellow Turks. He believed that this attitude “prevented the
emergence of a national consciousness” and a “sense of pride in one’s nation”
(ibid.: 30). The issue facing the Turkists was therefore one of changing the
image of the Turk in his own eyes, particularly in Istanbul and the other big
urban centres. In dealing with this issue, the Turkists hit on language as the
linchpin of a host of themes to advance their aims.
A formative but mediated input into this process of instilling Turkishness
into the Turks – what I have called “the Turkification of the Ottoman Turks” in
the title of this section – derived from the work of the Orientalists. Publications
on various aspects of Turkish history and culture started to appear in the
nineteenth century, and these had an enthusiastic reception among the elite,
particularly the Turkists. One such work is by the Frenchman Joseph de Guignes,
Histoire générale des Huns, des Turcs, des Mongoles, et autres Tartares occidentaux
(Paris, 1756–8). Another is by a Polish convert to Islam, Mustafa Celaleddin
Pasha, Les Turcs anciens et modernes, published in Istanbul in 1869. However, by
far the most influential work in this category was Arthur Lumley Davids’ A
Grammar of the Turkish Language (London, 1832), which provided the first
systematic treatment of the spoken varieties of Turkish inside and outside the
Ottoman Empire, in addition to information about the history and culture of
the Turks, all cast in a discourse full of admiration and respect for them. Works
by other Orientalists claiming linguistic and ethnic relations between the Turks
and other peoples (for example, the Finns, Hungarians and Estonians) who were
said to form a Turanian group enjoyed great currency among the Turkists.
Kushner summarizes the net effect of these works in the following words (1977:
10): “The scholarly works of Orientalists acquainted Ottoman Turks with their
language and ancient history, and with the contemporary Turkic-speaking
peoples living outside the boundaries of the Empire in Central Asia, the Volga
Region, the Caucasus and Iran.”
The Orientalist input into the formation of Turkish identity, indirect though
this was, triggered an interest in two types of constructed continuity: (1) a
historical continuity with a past linking the Ottoman Turks with their presumed
ancestors in pre-Islamic times, and (2) a synchronic cultural-cum-linguistic
continuity with other Turkish-speaking peoples outside the borders of the Otto-
man Empire. These two constructed continuities in turn generated a concept of
national territory, the ancestral homeland, which encompassed areas outside
the control of the Ottomans in Central Asia. Linguistic work on the language
varieties spoken in this imagined territory, which came from authors inside and

the arabic language unites us
— 73 —
outside the Ottoman Empire, became a deliberate act of “nationalist philology”
in the cultural sense of this phrase (see Chapter 1). Travellers, traders, immi-
grants and even dervishes – who used in their devotional prayers a more rustic
form of Turkish than the hybrid Ottoman Turkish variety – unwittingly played
an indigenizing role in this nationalist philology. Interest in Turkish folk litera-
ture in the nineteenth century, under the influence of the German Romantics,
provided another domain through which this nationalist philology began to be
advanced. This multi-source interest in the language found expression in the
Turkish-language press and other forms of printed material published in the
second half of the nineteenth century.
 The interest in this identity-orientated form of nationalist philology, coupled
with the drive towards modernization in the nineteenth century, was respon-
sible for suggestions and practices whose aim was to modernize the language by
(1) simplifying it and (2) equipping it with the necessary lexical resources to
enable it to cope with the demands of an age of fast-moving technological
developments. The introduction of a new educational system and the institu-
tion of administrative reforms in the first half of the nineteenth century, aided
by the development and popularity of the press, motivated simplifications in
style in Ottoman Turkish; they also led to the publication of new grammars,
lexica and textbooks. Ordinances and edicts were promulgated in this period to
make mandatory the shift from an old, highly formal and ornate style of official
communication to a more simple and functional style. Interest in the
simplification of the language also covered what was perceived to be the chaotic
orthography of Ottoman Turkish owing to the inadequacy of the Arabic script
for rendering the phonemic, particularly vowel, distinctions peculiar to that
language. This immediately brought to the fore the question of the linguistic
hegemony which Arabic exercised over Turkish, a hegemony that is particularly
reflected in the lexical domain in the guise of many borrowings which Turkish
had incorporated from Arabic. For some Turkists, effective modernization in
the form of orthographic simplification and lexical enrichment could be achieved
only by turning to the sources of modernity in the West and, for reasons of
authenticity and national self-assertion, to the indigenous culture of the
Turkish speakers themselves. This double move began to marginalize Arabic
and to cast it aside as an Other’s language in the two areas that mattered:
modernization and identity-formation.
Let us consider how this distancing strategy was brought about, and how it
turned into a form of action against which the Arabists in the Ottoman Empire
felt impelled to produce a counter-reaction. This distancing strategy manifested
itself in an intricate web of causes and effects that ultimately led to the parting
of the ways, first culturally and then politically, between the Arabs and the
Turks in the Ottoman Empire. This is why the following discussion will not be

the arabic language and national identity
— 74 —
chronologically organized, since the main interest here is in the general trends
that obtained in this period rather than in the onset and dissolution of any
particular suggestion, measure or event. In this context, it is important to remind
ourselves of one of the points made earlier in this section, namely that debates
about language in the Ottoman Empire had as much to do with non-linguistic
agendas as they had with linguistic ones, if not actually more at times.
One of the points raised by the Turkists concerned the name of the language,
whether it was Ottoman or Turkish. Needless to say, the Turkists championed
the latter designation on the grounds that their language is structurally related
to other Turkish varieties outside the Ottoman Empire, notwithstanding the
fact that it is orthographically and lexically indebted to Arabic and Persian. The
Turkists also argued that Ottoman was the name of the state, and that this
should not be confused with the name of the language. To give effect to this
chain of reasoning, they published textbooks, grammars and dictionaries which
referred to the language as Turkish; they also published many articles in the press
which traced the connections between Turkish and other Turkic languages or
varieties outside the Ottoman Empire, both synchronically and diachronically.
The debate over the name of the language was essentially a debate over
identity, in particular which of the three aspects of the identity of the Turks
came first: the Ottoman, the Islamic or the Turkish. This debate took as its
point of reference the idea that language is the marker of identity par excellence
and that, therefore, it is the ultimate boundary-setter between the different socio-
political groups in the state. Defending one’s language against other languages
thus emerged as a defence of one’s identity, which increasingly came to be desig-
nated in national terms. If Turkish is the marker of Turkish identity, it must
therefore serve as the foundation of a Turkish national culture; and if this means
purging the language from external influences, even those that are derived from
the languages of co-religionists, then so be it. Shemseddin Sami expresses this
view in the magazine Sabah (8 August 1898, quoted in Kushner 1977: 62):
The first symbol of a nation and a race, its foundation, and its common property,
shared equally by all its members, is the language in which it speaks. People speaking
one language constitute one nation and one race. Each people and nation must
therefore first of all bring order into its language.
The last sentence in the above quotation is tantamount to declaring that the
injection of order into Turkish, which in social-value terms is the non-linguistic
equivalent of linguistic systematicity, must include purging it of excess Arabic
borrowings at the lexical and grammatical levels. Since the domination of
Turkish by Arabic turned the former into a composite or hybrid language
which, lexically and grammatically, is neither the one nor the other, then this
demands an interventionist policy to restore order to the language. In doing

the arabic language unites us
— 75 —
this, the Turkists sometimes marked words in dictionaries as Arabic, Persian or
Turkish to signal the foreignness of the former two. In forming new words, they
suggested the use of lexical items derived from Arabic and Persian roots, pro-
vided that the words concerned were not in active use in these two languages, or
have meanings that are different from their meanings in the donor language.
And when Necib Asım in 1900 proposed a list of fifteen sources for the lexical
expansion of the language, Arabic occurred as number thirteen, just before
Persian and European languages.5 The sentiment exhibited in this rank ordering
of possible donor languages or sources for Turkish lexical expansion was expressed
by one Turkist journalist and writer, Said Bey, as follows (ibid.: 63; al-Husri
ascribes the same view to Diya Pasha in Mu˙Å∂arÅt fÈ nushË’ al-fikra al-qawmiyya,
1985: 98): “Let the one who seeks Arabic go to the Arabs, those who seek
Persian, to the Persians, and the ‘Frenks’ to ‘Frengistan’; but we are Turks and
we need Turkish”.
This attitude towards Arabic did not go unchecked. A group of Ottoman
Turks, the most notable among them being a famous teacher of Arabic called
Haci Ibrahim Efendi, took it upon themselves to challenge the Turkists. Haci
Ibrahim pointed out that since the state is Ottoman, not Turkish, the language
therefore is Ottoman, not Turkish, thus at a stroke denying the validity of the
argument that the name of the state and the language need not be congruent.
The Ottomanists also argued that the historical depth of the contact between
Turkish and Arabic gives the lexical items borrowed by the former from the latter
an authenticity that far exceeds the nebulous connections between the Turkic
languages (of Turkey and Central Asia) which are constructed on the basis of a
dim and distant past. In addition, Arabic borrowings are borrowings from a rich
and beautiful language, being different on this level of sociolinguistic values
from the “crude and deficient” (Kushner 1977: 65) lexical items which the
Turkists wished to borrow from other Turkic languages. Removal of Arabic
words and rules of grammar from the language is therefore bound to reduce the
sociolinguistic prestige of Turkish and its functional efficacy as a means of
communication: “If we do this we shall have to speak without a language”,
declares Haci Ibrahim (ibid.).
The Ottomanists further argued that Arabic is the universal language of
Islam as well as the tongue of the Arabs, who are a numerically important group
in the Ottoman Empire. As Muslims, the Turks needed Arabic for religious and
spiritual purposes. Arabic was also important for sociopolitical reasons, since its
rejection as a source for Turkish would be seen by the Arabs as a symbolic “slap
in the face” and as an attempt to undermine the bonds of Ottomanism that
brought the two groups (the Turks and the Arabs) together.
The Turkists responded by insisting on the separation of language and
religion. They pointed out that the Bosnians and Albanians maintained their

the arabic language and national identity
— 76 —
religion (Islam), but without sanctioning the same linguistic input from Arabic
into their languages as exists in Turkish, and without insisting on knowledge of
Arabic as some of the Turkish Ottomanists did. Haci Ibrahim also argued that
knowledge of Arabic cannot be regarded as a “criterion for good faith” (ibid.:
69), since Christian Arabs know and use Arabic but are not Muslims.
Many of the ideas of the Turkists found expression in the works of Ziya
Gökalp (1875–1914), the main theoretician of Turkish nationalism, although
Gökalp did not espouse some of the extremist positions on lexical purification
and orthographic reform advocated by members of this group. Gökalp held the
view that language was the marker of national identity, and that, therefore, the
“Turkish nation [is] the totality of Turkish-speaking Muslims” (Heyd 1950:
100). Gökalp further believed that the revival of the Turks socially and cultur-
ally as a nation was dependent on the revival of their language. In practical
terms, this implied an extension in the functional domains allocated to the
language to all aspects of the life of the nation, including literature and religious
practice. In the latter sphere, Gökalp advocated the replacement of Arabic by
Turkish in all aspects of the ritual prayer, except those that demand direct
reference to the Qur’an itself, a position which he felt was consistent with the
teachings of the Imam Abu Hanifa (150/767), whose legal school was dominant
in Turkey. Such an extension was consistent with the nationalist doctrine in its
German Romantic mode in terms of which “religious worship should be con-
ducted in the language of the people” (ibid.: 102). Writers must therefore write
in simple language. For this to happen, the language must undergo a controlled
lexical cull to rid it of some of the foreign words (mainly Arabic and Persian)
that have entered it, especially when these demand adjustments to the
morphological and syntactic rules of the language. This call for simplification
was motivated by a non-linguistic objective which looks at language as the
“touchstone of nationality” and which “regards independence in the sphere of
language as a necessary condition to political independence” (ibid.: 115).
By the beginning of the twentieth century, the debate between the Otto-
manists and the Turkists was effectively won in favour of the latter. Turkish
became the subject of national pride, and writers started to extol its virtues as a
pleasant, harmonious and precise language with fixed word order and few excep-
tions. The enhanced status of Turkish during the last quarter of the nineteenth
century was reflected in its adoption as the official language of the state in the
short-lived 1876 constitution, which additionally stipulated that knowledge of
Turkish was a condition for election to Parliament and for employment in
government administration. Turkish was also declared an obligatory subject in
all schools in the Empire, including all the foreign schools which for a long time
enjoyed special privileges granted to them under the Capitulations. The declared
intention behind the imposition of these measures may be expressed as follows:

the arabic language unites us
— 77 —
linguistic diversity in the state can lead to sociopolitical fragmentation and
uneven development. It is therefore essential to spread knowledge of the official
language as a bond of affiliation between all Ottomans and as the medium of
communication between the state and its citizens. Knowledge of Turkish was seen
as an instrument of identity-formation, political consolidation and moderniza-
tion. At another level, however, this emphasis reflected fear of political
disintegration and the “awareness that the Turks were the only real support of
the state” (Kushner 1977: 96). Some Turkists were aware of the need to tread
lightly in dealing with Arabic-speakers. Thus, one writer wrote in the magazine
Iqdam in 1899: “There is no doubt how greatly important it would be in these
times … to attempt at least to teach Turkish to all people of the Ottoman
Empire, so that no one but the Arabs would know a language other than Turkish”
(ibid.: 95). The Turkification policy which the Young Turks imposed on the
Arab provinces on coming to power in 1909 may therefore be viewed as an
intensified continuation of a trend whose beginnings had started much earlier
in the nineteenth century. Rather than representing a break with the past, the
Young Turks articulated some of the dominant Turkist themes in the Hamidian
period (1876–1908) to their logical conclusions. It may therefore be possible to
say that the overt attempts to Turkify non-Turks in the post-1909 period were
not an aberration but the realization of a dominant sociopolitical trend in the
Ottoman Empire in the preceding half-century.
Let us now consider the implications of what has been said above for the
development of Arab nationalism from its cultural beginnings in the nineteenth
century to its transformation to an avowedly political movement in the first two
decades of the twentieth century. To begin with, the debate over the status of
Turkish in the Empire was part and parcel of a larger debate about non-
linguistic matters, which included the status of the Ottoman Turks vis-à-vis
other groups in their sociopolitical sphere. As the largest non-Turkish group in
the Empire, and as the group whose language was the target of lexical culls in
spite of its being the medium of religiosity and spirituality for the Turks, the
Arabs were implicated in a debate not of their own making. It can therefore be
legitimately assumed that many of the issues raised in this debate heightened
the Arabs’ perception of their own – first cultural and then political – identity
in a reactive and boundary-setting mode of ethnic/national interaction. I believe
this must have been the case because of the interethnic elite contact which
existed in the various centres in the Empire. In particular, the fact that many
Arabic-speaking Ottomans lived in Istanbul and knew Turkish made it possible
to (1) monitor the debates which filled the Turkish-medium newspapers at the
time, and (2) pass on the content and aims of these debates to their compatriots
in the Arabic-speaking provinces (cf. al-ÆUraysi 1981). As Khalidi (1991: 60)
points out,

the arabic language and national identity
— 78 —
In pre-1914 Istanbul, at any one time there were normally several thousand Arab
government officials, military officers, students, businessmen, journalists, and visitors.
Most were drawn from the élite of the Arab provinces … and they were arguably as
influential a group of Arabs as any in the Middle East, albeit lacking the direct
contact with the rest of their own society and its local politics, which their counter-
parts at home retained. An Arabic-language paper [al-Óa∂Åra, Civilization], published
in Istanbul by Shaykh ÆAbd al-Hamid al-Zahrawi, was influential in all Arabic-
speaking regions, with its articles reprinted in the Cairo, Beirut, and Damascus press.
Taking the Turkists’ argument first, their insistence on treating the Turkish
language as a marker of a specifically Turkish identity had its counterpart in the
insistence by Arabists that Arabic delivered the same function in its cultural-
cum-political domain. It may even be argued that, because of the religious signi-
ficance of Arabic for Islam, its long and distinguished history and its penetration
of Turkish both lexically and grammatically, Arabic was felt by Ottoman
Arabists to be better placed than Turkish to play the role of identity-marker (cf.
al-æUraysi 1981). Furthermore, the Turkists’ argument that language comes
before religion as a factor in identity-formation may be seen to have played into
the hands of those who promoted Arabic as that ingredient which unites all the
Arabic-speaking peoples regardless of their religious affiliation. This is exactly
the position taken by Christian Arabists, although the position of the Muslim
Arabists may not have always been as clear-cut. In addition, the Turkists’ view
of a national territory that is geographically coextensive with the spread of the
language found its counterpart among Arabists, who started to adopt a defini-
tion of the national territory that completely or partially overlapped with the
limits of the language, with Egypt in particular forming the target of many of
these inclusive or exclusive attempts at limiting the national territory (cf.
Tauber 1993: 264–7). Finally, the incessant calls by the Turkists to wrest
Turkish from the lexical and grammatical clutches of Arabic, and the antagon-
istic tone of those calls sometimes, must have infused the debate over language
policy in the Empire with the emotional charge that is often necessary to trigger
the appropriate counter-response, as we shall see later.
It may also be argued that the position of the Turkish Ottomanists con-
tributed to this cumulation of mirror-image effects. By highlighting the special
status of Arabic both as a lexical resource for Turkish and as the language of
Islam, the Ottomanists underlined its prestige in the eyes of its speakers. Some
even argued that, while the Turks had the upper hand over the Arabs in
military and administrative terms, the Arabs had commanding cultural and
literary superiority (cf. al-Husri’s Mu˙Å∂arÅt fÈ nushË’ al-fikra al-qawmiyya,
1985b: 111). As Zeine (1966: 10–11) points out, the “Arabs were proud that the
Arabic language – their most cherished and precious heritage, after Islam –
remained the spiritual language of the Turks”. Furthermore, by pointing out

the arabic language unites us
— 79 —
that the anti-Arab(ic) feeling peddled by the Turkists was bound to drive a
sociopolitical wedge between the Arabs and the Turks,6 the Ottomanists high-
lighted what the Arabists may have privately thought. Seen as concessions by
the Ottomanists, the above arguments may have functioned on the Arabist side
not as attempts at reconciliation only, but also as an admission of differenti-
ation. If this is the case, their role must be seen as delaying, but not stopping,
the inevitable on the national front. The Turkification policies of the Young
Turks provided the final spur.
3. from ottomanism to arabism: preliminary remarks
The debate over the Turkish language culminated in the Turkification policy of
the Young Turks after their effective takeover of power in 1909, following their
Revolution in July 1908. Although the application of this policy was wide-
ranging, in this work I am only interested in the language-planning implications
of this policy for the shift from covert to overt political nationalism in the
Arabic-speaking provinces of the Empire. This policy aimed at the maintenance
of the Empire by making power the preserve of the new Turkish elite and by
countering all secessionist tendencies among non-Turks, particularly the Arabs.
But instead of producing the intended result, this policy succeeded in alienating
the Arabs (who originally enthusiastically welcomed the Young Turk Revolu-
tion)7 and in providing the spur which transformed the hitherto largely cultural
nature of their nationalist movement into an increasingly overtly political one.
The success of this transformation derived from the existence in the nineteenth
century in (Greater) Syria of facilitating conditions – what Deutsch (1966: 96)
has called rudimentary “complementary facilities of communication”– brought
about by the spread of education and the emergence of a literary renaissance
(nah∂a) rooted in the indigenous past. Coupled with these two factors, the rise
of journalism, the improvement in postal services and other means of
communication, the expansion in the number of printing presses and the
betterment in the quality of their output all conspired to create a print culture
in Syria which sought to harness the modernizing impulse in the emerging
national milieu to its authenticating roots.
 According to George Antonius (1938) – and in this he is not alone – the
seeds of the Arab nationalist idea were first politically cultivated, though with
no immediate yield, by Ibrahim Pasha (son of Muhammad Ali, governor of Egypt)
during his occupation of Syria between 1832 and 1840.8 In pursuing his political
and dynastic ambitions, Muhammad Ali, through his son Ibrahim, tried to make
his territorial claims coextensive with the spread of the Arabic language in its
Middle Eastern context (excluding North Africa). This de facto recognition of
the role of language as a boundary-setter in nation-state-building by Muhammad

the arabic language and national identity
— 80 —
Ali is implicitly recognized by Palmerston in a letter dated 21 March 1833, to
the British Minister at Naples, in which he wrote: “[Muhammad Ali’s] real design
is to establish an Arabian kingdom including all the countries in which Arabic is
the language” (quoted in Antonius 1938: 31, emphasis added). More or less the
same point was made a year earlier by the British Consul at Alexandria who, in
January 1832, reported that “[Muhammad Ali’s] immediate object is to establish
his authority firmly in the Pashaliks of Acre and Damascus; after which to
extend his dominion to Aleppo and Baghdad, throughout the provinces, where
Arabic is the language of the people, which he calls the Arabian part of the Empire”
(ibid.: 25, emphasis added). It is therefore not surprising that Ibrahim Pasha,
who unlike his father spoke Arabic, once said about himself: “I am not a Turk. I
came to Egypt when I was a child, and since that time, the sun of Egypt changed
my blood and made it all Arab” (quoted in Hourani 1983: 261). Although one
needs to be careful not to interpret such statements as a recognition of the
existence of the Arab nationalist idea in Syria in the first half of the nineteenth
century, or of the seriousness in identity terms of Ibrahim Pasha’s self-declared
Arabness, the fact still remains that these statements constitute a recognition of
the latent power of the language in promoting the idea of Arabness and the
political benefits that may accrue from harnessing its power for real tasks.
Ibrahim Pasha’s attempt to appeal to the Arabs’ Arabness failed because, among
other things, it was an idea that came ahead of its time in a region where other
forms of group identity were dominant. However, the anticipatory force of this
attempt as a projection of things to come cannot be ignored, especially when
coupled with the increasing flow at the time in Egyptian printed materials
coming into Syria9 and the support given to education in this province by
Ibrahim Pasha, limited though this was.10
Recognizing the importance of print culture and education long before these
ideas were given currency in the study of nationalism by Benedict Anderson in
his classic study Imagined Communities (first published in 1983), George Antonius
(1938: 40) wrote: “Without school or book, the making of a nation is in modern
times inconceivable” (see Cleveland 1997 for a discussion of this point). In the
context of Arab nationalism, the expansion of the educational system in Syria
in the second half of the nineteenth century – whether through the implemen-
tation of the provisions of the education law of 1869 (cf. Tibawi 1969: 168), the
increase in and the revitalization of community schools along religious lines or
the introduction of missionary schools11 – led to a linguistic and literary revival
which created its own momentum. The use of Arabic as the medium of instruc-
tion in parts of this system gave the language an added boost. Dictionaries and
encyclopaedias,12 classical Arabic literary texts, textbooks for schools and trans-
lations of foreign works started to appear in editions whose quality (especially
those produced by the Jesuit Press) and affordability appealed to an expanding

the arabic language unites us
— 81 —
and more discerning reading public. Two new translations of the Bible into
Arabic appeared – an American-sponsored Protestant translation and a French-
sponsored Jesuit translation – each with its own distinctive style, but both
aiming at casting the source text in a form of Arabic that was both accessible
and dignified to suit its status as a Sacred Book (see Chapter 6, section 4.2 for
Taha Husayn’s suggestion in relation to the Arabic version of the Bible used by
the Coptic Church in Egypt). Aided by the popularity of journalism, a new
Arabic style started to develop which, while rooted in the sources of its own
grammatical tradition, aimed at lexical simplicity and reduced stylistic ornate-
ness. This new feature of the language was seen as part of the modernizing
impulse of an educated elite who, after the 1860 civil strife in Lebanon, sought
to stress the common interests between Christians and Muslims by promoting the
bonds between them created by, among other things, that very same language.
Special mention must be made here of the adoption of Arabic as the medium
of instruction for all subjects in the American missionary schools in Lebanon,
the success of which led to the introduction of Arabic in the French mission
schools whose pupils were mostly drawn from the Maronite community (see
Tibi 1997: 100).13 In particular, reference must be made to the Syrian Protestant
College – now the American University of Beirut – which used Arabic in this
capacity from its inception in 1866 until 1882, when it began to be replaced by
English.14 The use of Arabic in this college was promoted not for any nationalist
reasons per se by its American masters, but for reasons that are germane to the
Protestant philosophy of encouraging the use of the vernacular in all aspects of
the missionary enterprise,15 and – only indirectly – for the effect which any
nascent nationalist consciousness may have had on promoting the work of the
mission, particularly among Muslims whose bonds of common faith with
Ottoman Turks had to be modulated and redirected.16 It is no accident, therefore,
that one of the big debates – initiated by the weekly al-Nashra al-usbËÆiyya in
1881 – about whether to use Arabic or a foreign language as the medium of
instruction more or less coincided with the shift from Arabic to English in the
educational process at the Protestant College. It is also no accident that one of
the reasons given in this debate for the use of Arabic as a medium of education
related to the need to train individuals who could serve the missionary cause. In
an interesting article in this debate, the Lebanese ÆAbdallah Jabbur (1991: 18–
19) put forward the view that training the native missionaries and others in
Arabic was necessary to enhance their ability to “bring the good news/good
tidings” to “all the Arabs”, since if the Bible was not delivered to them they would
remain ignorant and bereft of “civilization proper”. It is interesting to note here
that a secularist form of this argument is present in most articulations of
Lebanese nationalism in the twentieth century (see Chapter 6, sections 5.1–2).
Jabbur further stressed that the adoption of foreign languages as the medium of

the arabic language and national identity
— 82 —
instruction in schools would lead to fragmentation in the body of a nation
whose group identity was premised on the unity of its language.
The fact that Arabic was used as the language of instruction for the modern
sciences, including medicine, in the Protestant College meant that American
missionaries had to learn the language and to use it in teaching and in the
production of textbooks, whether newly written or in translated form.17 This
expansion in the functional domains of the language was significant in two
important ways. First, it led to a lexical revitalization of the language, although
it also raised questions about its efficacy in pedagogic terms. Second, the use of
the language in teaching the modern sciences by Western teachers bestowed on
it a stamp of modernity by a constituency which, for Ottoman subjects,
emblematically represented the sources of that modernity in its original
environment. It is therefore not surprising that the above period was dubbed the
“golden age” in the history of the language in institutional terms (see Dumat
1991: 97–103). It is also not surprising that the change from Arabic to English
as the language of instruction was the subject of criticism in the press at the
time, and may actually have been partly responsible – although I cannot prove
this point – for the publicized delay in the implementation of this policy in the
teaching of medicine in 1881 (see Khuri 1991: 28). Opposition to this change
was not restricted to native Arabic-speakers only, but extended to some Ameri-
can faculty members at the College, leading to the resignation of Cornelius van
Dyck (1818–95) when his compatriot George Post (1838–1908) won the battle
for the change.18 The following quotation from Tibi (1997: 101) provides a
balanced assessment of the contribution of the American mission schools,
intended or not:
The American missionaries only modernized Arabic to have a more suitable means at
hand for their religious activities. It was an entirely unintended consequence of their
work that the revival of the national language inaugurated a literary renaissance, but
this naturally suited the missions in that the movement gradually undermined the
loyalty of the Arabs towards the Ottoman Empire.
3.1 The Placards
Considering the increasing awareness of the role of language as a marker of
group identity and as the medium which can replace religious affiliation as the
common bond par excellence between Muslims and Christians in Syria, and
considering the literary revival which this interest spawned in the second half of
the nineteenth century, it is not surprising that the adoption of Arabic as an
official language in the Ottoman Empire was one of the main demands pursued
by the elite at the time, long before the active promotion of Turkification by the
Young Turks in 1909 and after. The best and, in a sense, the most dramatic
expression of this demand occurred in the third of a series of placards which

the arabic language unites us
— 83 —
clandestinely appeared in Damascus, Beirut, Tripoli and Sidon in the second
half of 1880 and the first half of 1881 (see Zeine 1966: 171–3 for the texts of
three of these placards).19 In a clear reference to the attacks on Arabic by the
Turkists, and in rousing language full of references to past Arab glories, the third
placard (dated 14 January 1881) considers the plight of Arabic under the Turks
to be second only to their attacks on the sharÈÆa (sacred law); the opening part of
this placard reads as follows (for a full translation of the placard, see Tibawi
1969: 165):
O people of the fatherland! You are aware of the injustice and oppression of the
Turks. With a small number of themselves they have ruled over you and enslaved
you. They have abolished your sacred law (sharÈÆa) and despised the sanctity of your
revered books … They have passed regulations to destroy your noble language.
The authors of the placard went on to urge the Arabs to correct these injus-
tices by the sword, referring to their Turkish oppressors as ÆulËj al-turk, which
Tibawi translates as “uncouth Turks” (ibid.). This translation fails to capture
the additional ideas in the word ÆulËj of the “bully”, the “unbeliever” and the
“person who does not speak Arabic or speaks it but with a foreign accent”. What
is interesting for us here is the last of these meanings, because it allows us to
associate the word ÆulËj with the foreignness of a person as displayed in his or her
speech. This meaning of the word ÆulËj (singular of Æilj) signals strong colloca-
tional associations with the word Æajam (see Chapter 3, section 5).20 A well-
known example of this in the literature is the reference to Ziyad al-AÆjam (d.
718/19), court poet to the Khurasani leader al-Muhallab Ibn Abi Sufra (82/
701), as Æilj aÆjam by virtue of his non-Arab (Persian) extraction and his heavy
Persian accent (see Fück 1980: 42–3). Another example occurs in the report
about the refusal of the Christian Arab tribe of Banu Taghlib to pay the poll-tax
(see Chapter 3, section 5).
This placard is also important because it lists the recognition of Arabic as an
official language in Syria as the second – after autonomy – of the three demands
which its authors call on the Turks to grant the Arabs, or (and this is another
interpretation of the placard) for the Arabs to wrest from the Turks by the use of
force: “Secondly, recognition of the Arabic language as official in the country
[Syria] and of the right of those who speak it to complete freedom in publishing
their thoughts, books and newspapers, in accordance with the demands of
humanity, progress and civilisation” (see Tibawi 1969: 165–6). The wording of
this demand is extremely interesting. On the one hand, it links denying the
language an official status to the imposition of censorship, and the reversing of
the former to the lifting of the latter, as though to signal that it is only through
the native tongue that a person can achieve true and meaningful freedom of
thought. On the other hand, the wording suggests that a person’s status as a full

the arabic language and national identity
— 84 —
human being, as well as the attainment of progress and modernization in a
society, are dependent on recognizing the linguistic and freedom-of-expression
rights of a group. As such, this demand shows a level of sophistication in framing
the philosophico-linguistic roots of Arab nationalism that has hitherto gone
unrecognized in the literature. The fact that such a level is achieved in the case
under consideration here is all the more remarkable because of the textual
demands of brevity and directness required in the placard as a linguistic genre.
Two linguistic features of the placards are worthy of comment. First, the style
of these placards was varied to put the authorities off the scent of their authors.
Grammatical errors were also deliberately committed for the same reason (see
Tauber 1993: 16). Second, in reporting on these placards to the British chargé
d’affaires in Istanbul, the Acting Consul-General John Dickson in Beirut wrote
(see Zeine 1966: 64): “The language … in which some of these placards are
couched would show that they are the composition of educated persons.
Competent judges of Arabic declare the style to be of the purest kind, such as
only those acquainted with the Koran and Arab poetry would use …”. The
reference to poetry is significant because of the utilization of six lines from
Ibrahim al-Yaziji’s famous ode (see section 4 below) as a closing coda in the third
placard, notwithstanding the fact that Dickson’s report, despatched on 3 July
1880, predates this placard. The identification of a Qur’anic influence in the
placards is even more significant because it seems to have led the British and
French consuls in Beirut to conclude that the placards were the work of Muslims,
not Christians (Tibawi 1969: 167). We now know of course that this is wrong,
because one of the placards was written by Faris Nimr (c. 1854–1951),21 a
Christian from Lebanon. What is particularly significant, however, is the
“sectarian views” on language-production held by the two consuls. The implicit
assumption by the two consuls that the Qur’anic flavour of the style of the
placards indicates Muslim authorship is contradicted by the adoption of the same
style by Christian Arabs (see section 4).
Students of Arab nationalism treat the placards as one of the first overtly
political expressions in the history of the movement, although these placards
had little popular support at the time. In addition to autonomy and the recogn-
ition of Arabic as an official language in Syria, the placards demanded that Arab
soldiers serve in their local areas in the Arabic-speaking provinces, preferably
under Arab officers. These demands remained at the very heart of the Arabs’
conditions for a political settlement with the Turks in the Ottoman Empire.
They were adopted by the many secret and public organizations – cultural and
political – which sprang up in various parts of the Empire to defend the Arabs’
rights to full equality with the Turks, especially after the rise of the Young Turks
to power in 1909 and their vigorous imposition of the policy of Turkification in
the Arabic-speaking provinces. What concerns us below is the language issue in

the arabic language unites us
— 85 —
the programmes of the Arab organizations; but this will be preceded by a short
outline of the Turkification policies of the Young Turks as they relate to
language (see also the discussion in section 2 above).
3.2 Resisting Linguistic Turkification
Extreme elements among the Young Turks sought to save the Empire by assimil-
ating non-Turkish groups – using coercion if necessary – into Turkish culture
and language, hence the term “Turkification”. Being the largest and one of the
most politically suspect groups, the Arabs were the primary target of this policy.
Turkish was imposed as the language of instruction in all state schools. Turkish
teachers were appointed to teach Arabic grammar through Turkish, a practice
to which the Arab teachers had to conform. One of the pupils at the lower
secondary school in Damascus at the turn of the twentieth century reported how
his Turkish teachers spoke Arabic with a Turkish accent, and how the Turkish
teachers were unable to distinguish between the masculine and the feminine in
their teaching (see al-Afghani 1971: 23). At the secondary school in Damascus
(Maktab ÆAnbar), a famous Arabic-language scholar and man of letters – Shaykh
Tahir al-Jaza’iri (1852–1920)22 – was replaced by a Turkish teacher (ibid.: 24).23
The Arabic grammar curriculum was the same as that taught in the Turkish-
speaking schools in the Turkish part of the Empire. This meant that Arabic was
taught to Arab pupils not as a native language, but as a foreign one. This was
particularly the case in the state schools which were predominantly attended by
pupils of Muslim background; non-Muslim pupils fared better because they
attended their denominational schools which, under Ottoman law, enjoyed a
measure of freedom in educational policy denied to state schools. The use of
Arabic was outlawed both inside and outside the classrooms at all times. A pupil
caught using the language was publicly shamed and subjected to corporal punish-
ment. Arabic was also outlawed in the courts and in all correspondence with the
government administration. All members of Parliament had to be proficient in
Turkish. Inflammatory articles appeared in the Turkish-medium press attacking
the Arabs and their language, and threatening them with enforced linguistic
Turkification. The editor of the Turkish newspaper ÊanÈn wrote (see Tauber
1997: 56–7): “The Arabs do not stop prattling in their language and they are
total ignoramuses in Turkish, as if they were not under Turkish rule. The govern-
ment is obligated in such a case to force them to forget their language and to
learn the language of the nation that is ruling them.” Another Turkish writer
declared (ibid.: 57): “The government is obligated to force the Syrians to leave
their homes and to turn the Arab countries, especially the Yemen and the Hijaz,
into Turkish settlements in order to spread the Turkish language, which must
become the language of religion”.
This attitude towards Arabic and the Arabs is further reflected in an article

the arabic language and national identity
— 86 —
written in ÊanÈn by one of the (government) hand-picked Turkish members of
Parliament representing Baghdad, in which he expressed his surprise that none
of the (Arab) native inhabitants of Diwaniyya (outside Baghdad) could talk to
him in Turkish. An Arab newspaper took him to task over this, saying that what
was more strange was that the member of Parliament could not speak the
language of the people he represented (see al-Afghani 1971: 32). Arab students in
Istanbul had to endure racial taunts by their Turkish teachers. One of the Turkish
officers at the military academy in Istanbul is reported to have said to an Arab
cadet in his class: “Be certain that Turkish is better for us than Islam and that
racial zealotry is one of the best things in society” (see Tauber 1993: 58). These
and similar attacks on the Arabic language represented an intensification of the
views (see section 2 above) that were in circulation during the Hamidian period
(1876–1909). They further reflected the derision with which the Arabs were
regarded by some Turkists, as the following terms of abuse or “ethnic slurs” (see
Allen 1983, Muhawi 1996 for this notion) in their discourse testify: “scrounging
Arabs” (to refer to the Arabs of Hijaz), “filthy Arab”, “dumb Arab” (to refer to a
stupid person), “an Arab wog” (to refer to a black animal, especially a dog, or to
a slave), and “getting the hell out of Damascus” (to refer to a place whose people
one cannot stand).24 Resisting these views and discursive practices was one of
the imperatives of the Arab national movement.
One mode of resisting Turkification was overtly political in nature, in the
sense that it was embodied in the programmes of the many societies – secret and
not so secret – and cultural and literary clubs which the Arabs established inside
and outside the Ottoman Empire in the three or so decades before the outbreak
of the First World War (see Mahafza 1980 and Ra’uf 1986). Broadly speaking,
this mode of action consisted in calling for making Arabic, alongside Turkish,
an official language of the state in the Arabic-speaking countries. This demand
is articulated in the programme of the Decentralization Party (established in
1912/13). Article 14 of this programme states: “Every province will have two
official languages, Turkish and the local language” (Tauber 1993: 124). Article
15 continues: “Education in each province will be provided in the language of
its residents” (ibid.). Article 14 in the programme of the Reform Society of
Beirut states: “The Arabic language will be recognized as an official language
within the province [Syria]. It will be recognized as an official language, in
conjunction with the Turkish language, in the Parliament and the Senate
[Upper House]” (ibid.: 139). The Reform Society of Basra advocated the imple-
mentation of similar policies. Article 19 in the constitution of this society states:
“The local Arabic shall be the official language in all affairs of the [province of
Basra] and among its inhabitants. The same shall apply to every courthouse, and
all announcements shall be written in Arabic” (ibid.: 167). Article 24 states:
“Officers knowing Arabic shall be employed in their own country …”, and

the arabic language unites us
— 87 —
Article 25 states that “All sciences and arts shall be taught in our schools in
Arabic …” (ibid.). The status of Arabic as an official language was also the
subject of one of the resolutions of the 1913 Paris Congress,25 in which Arab
elites met to press their demands on the Young Turks government in Istanbul.
Paragraph 5 in the resolutions of this congress states: “The Arabic language
must be recognized in the Ottoman Parliament and the Parliament must decide
that it will be an official language in the Arab [provinces]” (ibid.: 193), although
this formulation later underwent a subtle change in the form in which it was
transmitted to the European powers: “The Arabic language must be recognized
in the Ottoman Parliament and considered official in the Syrian and Arab coun-
tries” (ibid.: 194). In the same year, the Decentralization Party issued a four-
point manifesto outlining its demands. Points 2 and 4 in this manifesto deal
with the language issue. The former reads as follows (ibid.: 206): “Freedom in
educational issues. Most important is that all education should be in the Arabic
language and that its administration should be the responsibility of the local
councils.” The latter states: “The Arabic language will be recognized as official
in all the Arab [provinces], and the government activities in these provinces
will be conducted in Arabic. No official will be employed in the Arab provinces
unless he is one of their residents and can speak Arabic well …” (ibid.: 206).
The Young Turks understood the non-linguistic ends behind these linguistic
demands, and they sought to frustrate their implementation. Thus, in a meeting
of some of the Young Turk leaders in January 1914, it was decided to “implement
the policy of Turkification of all non-Turkish races in the country by elimin-
ating the nationalist societies that were founded in it …” (ibid.: 225).
This measure was judged to be necessary to stave off the increasingly assertive
proclamations put out by some of the Arab societies. In one such proclamation
(1913),26 the Arab Revolutionary Society (al-JamÆiyya al-Thawriyya al-
ÆArabiyya) – an offshoot of the Qa˙†Åniyya society founded in 1909 – called for
“complete Arab independence” from the Ottoman Empire (for the full text of
the proclamation, see Zeine 1966: 176–7), instead of the decentralization
solution which the majority of the Arab societies were calling for at the time.
The proclamation attacks the Turks and praises the Arabs in language that is
both evocative and rousing, thus emphasizing the instrumental role of language
in task-orientated terms in the nationalist enterprise. It lists many of the
grievances of the Arabs and calls on them to get rid of the Turks, whom it
describes as ÆulËj with all the connotations that accrue from such a term (see
section 3.1 above).27 What is important about this proclamation from our per-
spective, however, is the view of the Arabic language it presents and the direct
manner in which it responds to the Turkification policy in its linguistic domain.
First, the proclamation refers to the Arabic language as one of the ingredients
– in addition to common territory and interests – which make the Arabs a

the arabic language and national identity
— 88 —
nation in their own right. In pursuing this theme, the proclamation treats
Muslims, Christians and Jews as a unity, declaring that “religion belongs to God
alone”. It further reminds members of these faith communities that at least they
can communicate with each other in a language that is their own, but they
cannot do so with the Turks. Second, the proclamation treats the enmity of the
Turks to Arabic – the language of God’s Arabic Qur’an and that of God’s true
Arab Prophet – as a nullification of the bond of faith between the Arabs and the
Turks. Referring to the suggestions made by the Turkists to use Turkish in the
call to prayer and in performing the ritual prayers (see section 2 above), the
proclamation treats this as an attempt to undermine the position of Arabic as
the primary language of Islam. The proclamation then declares that Turkish is
unfit to act in this capacity: it is a fabricated, counterfeit or hybrid language, and
the best parts of it are actually stolen from the sacred Arabic tongue and the
sweet Persian tongue. Third, the proclamation makes clear that the Arabs
cannot progress without independence and without using their language in
education, business and all legal provisions.
The second mode of resisting Turkification was through the active promo-
tion of Arabic culture and the Arabic language. One of the best representatives
of this trend was the Arab Revival Society (established in Istanbul in 1907),
which later had to change its name to the Syrian Revival Society to comply
with government orders to remove the word “Arab” from its title after the
imposition of Turkification. The aim of this society, which had a branch in
Damascus, was to spread Arabic culture. It did so by organizing meetings at
which members studied the Arabic language, Arabic literature and history. On
Thursday nights, we are told (see al-Afghani 1971: 37), members of the society
would meet to read and discuss a poem from Abu Tammam’s famous classical
collection DÈwÅn al-ÓamÅsa. Discussions were conducted in standard Arabic, no
matter how difficult this was for some members. In their enthusiasm for standard
Arabic, members agreed to remove all Turkish borrowings from it in response, it
would seem, to the attempts by the Turkists to purge Turkish of Arabic words.28
Members also agreed to use this high form of Arabic at Istanbul cafes, and to
replace the Persian numerals traditionally used in backgammon by their Arabic
equivalents, although this does not seem to have had a long-lasting communi-
cative effect (witness the currency of the Persian numerals these days). Thus,
instead of using shesh-pesh, for example, they would use arbaÆa-khamsa (four-
five). Some members went so far as to refuse to offer beggars any charity until
they had asked for it in standard Arabic, the formulae for which members of the
society would teach them (cf. Chapter 3, section 4 for a similar practice by the
Umayyad caliph ÆUmar Ibn ÆAbd al-ÆAziz).
This enthusiasm for standard Arabic was also exhibited in the establishment of
the little-known Society of Eloquence (JamÆiyyat al-IfßÅ˙) in Beirut, whose main

the arabic language unites us
— 89 —
aim was to encourage the use of the standard language. Some Arabists went even
further. Al-Afghani (ibid.: 166) tells us of an attempt by the Lebanese Amin
Nasir al-Din in 1901 to cast all the news in his newspaper in poetry. One issue
contains three short poems describing a snowstorm in Jizzin (in Lebanon) and
the destruction it caused, a visit of a foreign frigate to Beirut and a meeting of
the Austrian Parliament in Vienna in which the Speaker delivered an obituary
of Queen Victoria that drew the ire of the opposition, who, in return, expressed
their support for the Boer against the English.
A third mode of resisting Turkification before and after the rise of the Young
Turks was the resort to poetry to rebut the attacks mounted by the Turkists
against the Arabs and Arabic. An example of this is a poem by the blind
Palestinian poet, Sulayman al-Taji al-Faruqi, which he addressed to Sultan
Muhammad Rashad, successor of Abdul Hamid after the 1909 Young Turk
revolution; in it, he reminds the Sultan of the Arabs’ past glories and their
innately excellent character, before he tells him that the neglect of Arabic and
the ban on using it in the schools had led to its decline (ibid.: 44). Amin Nasir
al-Din considers the attacks of the Turkists against the Arabs in whose language
the Qur’an was revealed as no more than an expression of inferiority on the part
of the Turks (ibid.: 49). Another poet, Fu’ad al-Khatib (ibid.), attacks the Turks
for maligning the language of the Qur’an, and he rejects their claims that the
Arabs’ attempts to modernize their culture through their language are a form of
dissension or civil strife in the Empire. The Lebanese poet ÆAbd al-Hamid al-
RafiÆi (ibid.: 45) describes the Turks as a bunch of hypocrites who feign love of
Islam, treating their attacks against Arabic as the best evidence of this hypocrisy.
3.3 The Intellectuals Speak
Let us now consider the contribution of some members of the intellectual elite
whose ideas on language are important for an understanding of the sociopolitical
situation in the Ottoman Empire between 1876, the beginning of Abdul Hamid’s
reign, and the end of the First World War. Lest the reader think that the
language issue was always cast in a nationalist framework, I will begin by con-
sidering the contribution of two Islamist reformers, Jamal al-Din al-Afghani
(1839–97) and ÆAbd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi (1854–1902). Both of them
believe that the Muslims constitute one nation. However, al-Kawakibi differs
from al-Afghani in assigning political primacy in this nation to the Arabs by
virtue of their close association with Islam, including the fact that Arabic is the
language of the Qur’an. Of the twenty-six points he lists to outline the “excellent
qualities of the Arabs”, three relate to their language (see Haim 1962: 79–80;
the second number indicates the original number in the list as given by Haim):
(1/19) “Their [the Arabs’] language, of all the languages of the Muslims, takes
greatest care of knowledge; it is preserved from extinction by the noble Qur’an”;

the arabic language and national identity
— 90 —
(2/20) “The language of the Arabs is the language common to all the Muslims,
who number 300 million souls”; and (3/21) “The language of the Arabs is the
native language of 100 million people, Muslim and non-Muslim”. It is interest-
ing to note here that the last point shows an awareness on al-Kawakibi’s part of
the role of language in creating non-religious bonds of identity, although the
main thrust of his argument remains religious in character. As Zeine (1966: 70–
1) rightly says, al-Kawakibi’s “bitter attacks against the Turks do not make him
an Arab nationalist”.
Likewise, al-Afghani’s recognition of the role of language in creating group
bonds which are perhaps as strong as, if not actually stronger and more lasting
than, those created by adherence to the same faith does not make him a
nationalist thinker in the traditional sense:
There are two kinds of bond between people: the bond of language and the bond of
faith. The bond of language is the basis of nationality (jinsiyya). Language is more
stable and more permanent than faith [in this regard]. Witness the fact that some
nations had changed their religion twice or even three times during a thousand years
without this affecting their linguistic or national unity. We can therefore conclude
that the bonds of language are more lasting than the bonds of faith in human life.
(quoted in al-Bazzaz 1993: 543)
Nor does the fact that al-Afghani advised Sultan Abdul Hamid to make Arabic
the official language of the Ottoman Empire to strengthen the Islamic character
of the state make him an advocate of Arab nationalism. However, this interest
in language on the part of al-Kawakibi and al-Afghani serves to show the extent
to which non-nationalist elites were aware of the affiliative role of language and
of the need to harness its power for political purposes. We may illustrate this
point by reference to al-Afghani. Hourani (1983: 118) states that al-Afghani’s
reasoning in this connection was motivated by the following conviction: “if only
the Ottomans had adopted the Arabic language as that of the whole empire, its
people would have had two links [religion and language] instead of one, and it
would have been united and strong”.
The language issue was also dealt with by Muhammad Rashid Rida (1865–
1935), an Islamist thinker whose views on the nature of the Islamic revival and
the political means of achieving it changed with the changes in the political
scene during his adult life. However, it would be true to say that his views on the
role of language in identity-formation remained more or less the same through-
out his long and active career as the editor of the famous newspaper al-ManÅr
(1898–1935). In his excellent study of this period in Rida’s life, Muhammad
Salih al-Marrakishi (1985: 456–69) identifies four areas in the linguistic debates
at the time to which this thinker contributed: (1) the relationship between
Arabic and Islam; (2) the Turks and Arabic; (3) the struggle between standard
Arabic and the colloquials; and (4) the establishment of a language academy to

the arabic language unites us
— 91 —
oversee the protection and modernization of the language. Since only the first
two points relate to the scope of this study and fall within the interests of the
period under consideration here (1876–1918), I will restrict myself to them only.
Rida established a relationship of mutual dependency between Arabic and
Islam. He believed that Islam depended on Arabic and Arabic depended on
Islam in an organic and indissoluble manner.29 This led him to the view later in
his career that knowledge of Arabic was a necessary condition for being a full
Muslim. In putting forward this view, Rida invoked the authority of the famous
jurist Imam ShafiÆi (150/767–204/820), although he exaggerated his views on
this topic. So organic was the relationship between Arabic and Islam that Rida
considered any attack on the former to be an attack on the latter in a modern
form of shuÆËbiyya. He therefore attacked the Ottoman Turkists and the Young
Turks for seeking to undermine the language. In an article he published in al-
ManÅr in 1913, he castigated the Young Turks for failing to spread Arabic as the
most important language of the Empire. Arabic, he believed, was more worthy
of sponsorship and promotion than Turkish in the Empire for five reasons (ibid.:
461): (1) Arabic is the language of the Qur’an, and the Qur’an is the primary
source of Islam, which is the official religion of the Empire; (2) Arabic is the
language of the Islamic sharÈÆa, which is the basis of legality in matters of personal
and civil law in the Empire; (3) Arabic is the language of the majority of
Ottoman subjects; and, since the majority of the Arabs do not know Turkish, it
is incumbent on the Turks to learn Arabic for the efficient running of the state;
(4) Arabic is needed by most Ottoman subjects for reasons of faith and the
performance of religious duties; and (5) Arabic is the most important source of
Turkish, so knowledge of Arabic is necessary for a full knowledge of the Turks’ –
by implication, derivative – language.
Towards the end of the First World War, Rida’s hitherto Arab Ottomanist
views started to change in the direction of a more assertive Arab Islamist out-
look. Whereas before he had campaigned for an Ottoman state in which the
rights of the Arabs were respected, and the position of Arabic was recognized
and operationalized in the terms set out above, now he started to advocate a
more Arabist position in which, implicitly, the role of the language had to be
slightly modified. He outlined his views on this matter in terms in which a
relationship of equivalence between Arabism and Islam was established (quoted
in Hourani 1983: 301): “I am an Arab Muslim and a Muslim Arab … My Islam
is the same in date as my being Arab … I say, I am an Arab Muslim, and I am
brother in religion to thousands upon thousands of Muslims, Arabs and non-
Arabs, and brother in race to thousands upon thousands of Arabs, Muslims and
non-Muslims.” In this respect, Rida shifts to a position similar to al-Kawakibi’s.
On the one hand, he considers the Arabs – the majority of whom are Muslims –
to be the core component in a revived Islam. On the other hand, he believes

the arabic language and national identity
— 92 —
that the ties of language and culture create bonds of unity between Muslim and
non-Muslim, mainly Christian, Arabs.
A different kind of contribution to the debate about language and identity,
in the context of Turkification, was offered by ÆAbd al-Ghani al-ÆUraysi (1891–
1916) and Amin Abu Khatir. Both of these writers were Arabist Ottomanists in
their declared intentions, although this may not have been more than an
attempt on their part to hedge their bets until such a time as the fortune of the
Empire was finally decided. ÆAbd al-Ghani al-ÆUraysi’s contribution to the
burgeoning scholarship on Arab nationalism has been little studied, perhaps
because his life was cut short by his Turkish executioners in 1916 in Beirut,
along with other suspected leaders of the increasingly politicized Arab national
movement. His main contribution to the debate over Arab nationalism was
through his articles in the newspaper al-MufÈd, which he partly owned and
published under the titles LisÅn al-ÆArab and FatÅ al-ÆArab whenever the
authorities ordered it to be shut down (see Khalidi 1981).30 The first of these
surrogate titles, which may be translated as The Voice of the Arabs, is interesting
because of the lexical associations it makes with language through the meaning
of the word lisÅn as “tongue” (as in speech), and the identity of the name itself
with the title of the best-known Arab dictionary, Ibn Manzur’s LisÅn al-ÆArab. It
is important to note here that al-ÆUraysi’s views on the language issue in the
debate over Arab national identity are explicitly framed in the context of resist-
ing the Turkification policies of the Young Turks in all spheres of application.
In carrying out this task, al-ÆUraysi (1981) tells the Turks that the Arabs are the
lifeline of the Empire and, in a play on words, that al-MufÈd is an Arabist
newspaper, fa-l-mufÈd ÆarabÈ, which semantically doubles up as “what is bene-
ficial for the Empire is Arab/of Arab nature”. He also reminds the Turks that
their anti-Arab Turkification policies render them Islamic renegades (al-atrÅk
al-ΩÅlimÈn al-kafara, ibid.: 162), supporting his view in this connection – though
not in the particular context of this quotation – by quoting eleven of the
Prophet’s ˙adÈths (traditions) which equate full belief in Islam with the love of
the Arabs (ibid.: 65). It is significant that the last two of these ˙adÈths deal with
the sanctity of Arabic and its special place in Islam (ibid.): “God has not sent a
revelation to any of the Prophets except in Arabic”, and “He who among you
can speak Arabic should not speak Persian”.
Perhaps al-ÆUraysi’s best-known views on language and national identity
occur in his Paris Congress speech (20 June 1913), in which he raised the
question of whether the Arabs had the right to form a [national] group (hal li-l-
Æarab ˙aqq jamÅÆa) (ibid.: 107):
According to political science, groups do not deserve to have this right unless,
following the German model, they have linguistic and racial unity; or, following the
Italian model, they have historical unity and unity in customs and traditions; or,

the arabic language unites us
— 93 —
following the French model, they have a common political will. If we consider the
case of the Arabs from all these perspectives, we will find that they [the Arabs] have
unity of language, race, history, traditions, customs and political ambitions. It is
therefore an inalienable right of the Arabs, supported by the full weight of political
science, to form a group, a people (shaÆb) and a nation (umma).
It is interesting that al-ÆUraysi does not list religion as one of the ingredients in
the formation of a group at any of the above (ill-defined) levels, in spite of the
fact that he considers religion as a factor that unites the Arabs and the Turks in
Ottoman citizenship (wa†aniyya)31 but not nationality (jinsiyya). It is also inter-
esting to note in this connection that al-ÆUraysi declares on a few occasions that
full citizenship in the Ottoman Empire is meaningless without the recognition
of nationality. This explains al-ÆUraysi’s appeal to all Christian, Jewish and
Muslim Arabs to work together in pursuit of their legitimate national rights as first
and foremost an Arab group. It is also interesting that al-ÆUraysi is fully aware of
the important voluntarist element in nationality-formation – what Renan called
the “daily plebiscite” in his conception of the nation (see Chapter 2, section 2). It
is this awareness which enables us to treat al-MufÈd as an instrument for
moulding the ingredients of Arab nationalism as the basis of a task-orientated
programme of action, wherein the purposeful willing of the nation to come into
existence will lead to its concrete existence at some future point. In addition, it
is interesting to note that al-æUraysi treats the unity of language as the most
important ingredient in constituting the Arab nation. Considering this, it is
incumbent on the Arabs to resist the Turkification policies of the Young Turks.
This resistance may be pursued through a variety of means. Foremost among
these is pressing the Ottoman authorities to recognize Arabic as the primary
official language, before Turkish, in the Arabic-speaking provinces in the schools,
the courts, the army and the public administration. In articles in al-MufÈd on
this topic, al-ÆUraysi demands that this recognition be enshrined in the consti-
tution of the Empire, rather than having it promulgated in ministerial edicts or
bye-laws which can be changed at the whim of whoever is in power, at any time
(ibid.: 21).
Second, al-ÆUraysi calls on the Arabs to force the foreign schools in the
Arabic-speaking provinces, particularly the French-sponsored ones, to give Arabic
the status it must have as the national language of the people whose children
study at these schools (ibid.: 230 and 215–17). Al-ÆUraysi argues that since
language is the primary means of acculturation in the schools, it is important
that Arab children should be taught through their language, rather than the
languages of others, if they are to emerge as full members of their community.
Recognizing the importance of language as a factor in nation-formation and
modernization, al-ÆUraysi calls for the promotion of three languages in all
schools in Syria, in the following order: Arabic (the national language), Turkish

the arabic language and national identity
— 94 —
(the official language) and a foreign language which could be either French or
English.
Third, al-ÆUraysi calls on the Arabs to show loyalty towards their language.
He therefore calls on them to shun the use of foreign languages in their personal
and public lives, including the pretentious use of French in business cards, a
practice so prevalent that even those who do not know French have started to
follow it (ibid.: 206). He also launches a bitter attack against the postal services
in Beirut which use Turkish and French, but not Arabic, in their public notices
and note-headed telegraph papers. In an article in al-MufÈd (ibid.: 204–6) called
Tafarnus al-Æarab (The Francophonization of the Arabs)/Tafarnas al-Æarab (The
Arabs have become Francophonized) – thought to have been penned by al-ÆUraysi
– the use of French is ridiculed, and contrasted with the care and respect which
the French and the English bestow on their languages in communicating with
others. To drive this point home, al-ÆUraysi tells his readers that he witnessed
this pride in one’s national language on several occasions. On one such occasion
(ibid.: 206), an English visitor to Beirut is said to have refused to use French
with a Lebanese hotel-owner, insisting that the owner look for an interpreter to
mediate between them. But he also tells them, with great pride and enthusiastic
approval, how an Arab official refused to talk to his Turkish superior in Turkish
outside office hours, insisting that once outside the municipality building where
he worked he would use Arabic only.
Fourth, al-ÆUraysi calls on the Arabs to shun the use of ornate language and
pompous personal titles in their writing, which he regards as an abhorrent impor-
tation from the Turks whose wont it is. In an article entitled “Glorification [of
the Other] is a Sign of Humbleness and Submissiveness”, al-ÆUraysi calls on the
Arabs to reject the linguistic practices of the Turks, where the elevation of the
addressee and self-deprecation on the part of the addresser is the norm between
people of different social standing.32 Al-ÆUraysi regards this antiquated practice
as a deviation from the more egalitarian norms of expression which the Arabs
applied in addressing their caliphs and, even, Prophet Muhammad himself. Lest
this be regarded as an idle call on the part of al-ÆUraysi, he makes the point that,
since the persistence of external appearances can change the essential qualities
of an object, the frequent use of pretentious language and pompous titles can
change the moral character of those who indulge in it. Hence the title of the
article above. It is interesting to note here that the Turkists were aware of this
fact and that they sought to simplify the highly formal style in their language in
official documents (see section 2).
Let us now turn to Amin Abu Khatir, for whom the Islamic identity of the
state was not strongly engaged as a central agent in its political constitution. In
an interesting article in the Egyptian magazine al-Muqta†af (October 1913),
Amin Abu Khatir (1854–1922)33 offered a very perceptive analysis of the

the arabic language unites us
— 95 —
relationship between language and national, as opposed to civic, identity and
applied this to the situation in the Ottoman Empire. Abu Khatir takes as his
starting point the inadequacy of defining national identity in racial terms. He
also regards as inadequate all attempts to define national identity in terms of
common interests, a shared past history, shared customs or a common citizen-
ship. Language, argues Abu Khatir, is the criterion of national identity par
excellence, so much so that the status of a language in the world may be con-
sidered as a shorthand for the status of the nation that speaks it (see Khuri 1991:
139). In a thinly veiled reference to the Turkification policy of the Young
Turks, Abu Khatir points out that a self-respecting nation would fight to the
bitter end to defend its language against all aggressors who seek to undermine it
by outlawing its use in education, in the courts and in dealings with all organs of
the state. Abu Khatir expresses this in a metaphoric way, stating that “since it is
not possible to convince a person of sound judgment that he should have his
head cut off, by the same token it is not possible for any set of laws to convince
[metaphorically, force] a nation to abandon its language” (ibid.: 140).
Abu Khatir argues that some politicians consider decentralization as the best
solution to the problems facing nationally composite states, of which the
Ottoman Empire is one. Under such a solution, the languages of the different
nationalities would be recognized as equal partners, and each would have its
own sphere of operation based on demographic and geographic factors. Abu
Khatir argues that although this solution may work in the short term, it will not
do so in the long term. He points out that since the efficient running of state
affairs will perforce demand the use of one language, there is no eschewing the
fact that one of the languages in such a composite state would emerge as the
official language, and that the speakers of that language will inevitably emerge
as the favoured nation. Abu Khatir argues that this situation would create a
two-tier citizenship: a first-class citizenship for those whose language is chosen
or emerges as the official language, and a second-class citizenship for the rest.
Compromise over linguistic issues in status-planning terms (see section 4 below)
cannot therefore be effected in ways which can achieve equality of prestige and
privileges between nations. In this scheme of things, linguistic survival is
equivalent to biological survival, with the clear implication that only the fittest
in both cases will survive or win. In another thinly veiled reference to the post-
Paris Congress discussions about the recognition of Arabic as an official langu-
age in the Arabic-speaking provinces in the Ottoman Empire, Abu Khatir urges
the Arab representatives who were sent to negotiate with the Young Turks in
Istanbul not to compromise over the legitimate and nationally life-sustaining
demands of their people. He suggests that it is the Arabs’ right, under any system
of natural justice, to defend their language against the Turkification policies. He
also points out that the Young Turks should heed this and grant the Arabs their

the arabic language and national identity
— 96 —
linguistic and other rights, on the basis of a principle of equality, if they wish the
Empire to survive. Should this not happen, then the Young Turks must be
prepared either to use force to Turkify the Arabs, or accept that the Arabs will
use force to achieve their independence. That the latter was considered the
more likely result, and that such a conclusion could occur soon, was in no doubt
in Abu Khatir’s mind.
It is clear from what has been said in this and the preceding section that the
Ottoman Empire was in a no-win situation similar to that which the Austro-
Hungarian Empire faced in the second half of the nineteenth century (see
Anderson 1991: 84–5). As with German vis-à-vis Hungarian in the latter sphere,
Turkish acquired the double status of a “universal-imperial” and a “particular-
national” language in relation to Arabic and other languages in the Ottoman
Empire. This presented the authorities with an insoluble dilemma. The more
they sided with Turkish and supported it, the greater the resistance of Arabic and
other speakers against the language and the Empire. Similarly, the more con-
cessions the authorities made to Arabic and other languages, the greater the
dismay and enmity which the Turkish-speakers felt towards these languages and
their speakers, and the greater the demands made by the speakers of these
languages for further concessions. Against this background, the analysis given
by Abu Khatir above seems to characterize well the dilemma facing the Otto-
man Empire.
4. ibrahim al-yaziji: from immediate aims
to underlying motives34
The title page of George Antonius’ classic study The Arab Awakening: The
History of the Arab National Movement, published in London in 1938, carries as
an epigraph in beautiful Arabic calligraphy the first hemistich of the first line of
the ode composed by Ibrahim al-Yaziji (1847–1906): tanabbahË wa-stafiqË ayyuhÅ
al-Æarabu (“Arise, ye Arabs and Awake!”).35 This was not fortuitous. It was meant
to signal some of the main themes in Antonius’ assessment of the emergence of
the Arab nationalist idea in the second half of the nineteenth century. In parti-
cular, Antonius intended it to highlight the cultural nature of this nationalism
in its initial stages, although he was aware that culture and politics cannot
always be separated from each other, even if it was intellectually possible to
posit the view that a cultural awakening is a prerequisite of nationalism in its
political mode. More specifically, the choice of this hemistich draws attention
to the role of literature as a means of communicating the nationalist idea which,
Antonius (1938: 60) points out, was “borne slowly towards its destiny on the
wings of a renascent literature”. It further underlies the linguistic component in
this nationalism; for, if Ibrahim al-Yaziji is remembered for anything at the

the arabic language unites us
— 97 —
beginning of the third millennium, he is certainly remembered for his call for
and contributions to the revival of the Arabic language towards the end of the
nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth. As William Cleveland
says about Antonius, he believed that language was the “most decisive feature of
the Arab nation, and his analysis of the twin concepts of language and culture
serves as the foundation of his claim that an Arab nation exists” (1997: 69).
Antonius’ views on the emergence of Arab nationalism have been subjected to
critical inquiry in recent years (see Cleveland 1997, Haim 1953, Hourani 1981,
Kirk 1962 and Lukitz 1984). One criticism of his work concerns his views on
agency and periodization, in particular his attribution of the formal beginnings
of this nationalism to the work of the enlightened elites of the Syrian Scientific
Society which was established in Beirut in 1857 and whose membership was
drawn from Christians, Druze and Muslims.36 Another criticism concerns the
significance he attached to the work of the missionary schools in the Levant in
the nineteenth century (see section 2), and to the role of the Christians of
Lebanon in propagating this nationalism. One argument states that “while
education has been a potent factor in the awakening of the Arab Near East, the
role of missionary education in the national-political enlightenment of the Arab
youth in the second half of the nineteenth century has been greatly exagger-
ated” (Zeine 1966: 46–7, original emphasis). Another argument states that
nationalism “did not exist in the minds of the masses of the people of the Near
East at that time” (Zeine 1966: 59–60), and that the Christians of Lebanon were
“first and foremost” interested in emancipating “the Lebanon [original emphasis]
from the Turkish yoke” (ibid.: 60). Some scholars, notably Ernest Dawn (1991),
have gone even further. Dawn (ibid.: 11) considers the prevailing ideology of
Arab nationalism to be a twentieth-century creation, and that this ideology was
a “development from Islamic modernism”, although some Christian Arabs
participated in it. These are interesting issues to pursue, but their investigation
and assessment lies beyond the scope of the present study. Instead, I will
concentrate in this section on the ideas put forward by Ibrahim al-Yaziji for the
revival of the Arabic language,37 using them as a test case for showing that
Antonius’ views on the cultural nature of Arab nationalism in the second half
of the nineteenth century and the role of the language as the major ingredient
in this nationalism are not wide of the mark. By discussing the work of Ibrahim
al-Yaziji below, I also hope to show the extent to which the cultural roots of
Arab nationalism had developed during the second half of the nineteenth
century, and the contribution made by this important Christian thinker in
propagating this nationalism. In addition, this discussion will demonstrate that
high style and Qur’anic references are not the preserve of Muslim writers, thus
contradicting what the British chargé d’affaires in Istanbul intimated in his
commentary on one of the Beirut placards (see section 3.1).

the arabic language and national identity
— 98 —
In pursuing this task, I will use as an organizing framework some of the
insights of language-planning, which were indirectly applied above. On the one
hand, these insights enable us to treat Ibrahim al-Yaziji’s work on the revival of
the Arabic language as an example of corpus-planning which, in his case, applies
mainly to lexical elaboration and the simplification of pedagogic grammars as
the twin channels of linguistic modernization.38 His defence of standard Arabic
against the dialects may be interpreted as a matter of status-planning,39 but only
in the weak sense of this concept owing to the futility in practical policy terms
of the calls to replace the standard by a dialect or dialects in the Arab context
(see Chapter 6). On the other hand, this framework allows us to relate issues of
corpus-planning to the non-linguistic ends they are often intended to serve. As
Robert Cooper (1989: 35) reminds us in his excellent study of language-plan-
ning in its social context,
Language planning is typically carried out for the attainment of nonlinguistic ends
such as consumer protection, scientific exchange, national integration, political
control, economic development, the creation of new élites or the maintenance of old
ones, the pacification or cooption of minority groups, and mass mobilization of
national or political movements … Definitions of language planning as the solution of
language problems are not wrong, but they are misleading. They deflect attention from
the underlying motivation of language planning. Inasmuch as language planning is
directed ultimately toward the attainment of nonlinguistic ends, it is preferable … to
define language planning not as efforts to solve language problems but rather as
efforts to influence language behaviour. (emphasis added)
In corpus-planning terms, most of al-Yaziji’s interest in the revival of the
Arabic language concerns the imperative of enhancing its communicative
potential in a fast-moving world of new ideas and inventions emanating from an
increasingly hegemonic West. Al-Yaziji believed that although the Arabic of
his day was characterized by lexical deficiency, this deficiency was due not to
any lack of lexical resources on the part of the language per se but to the state of
its speakers who, over centuries of misrule and neglect, had led impoverished
lives materially and otherwise. He expresses this diagnosis in a variety of ways,
all revolving around the theme that the vitality of a language derives from the
vitality of its people. This analysis premises a true revival in the fortunes of the
Arabic language on a genuine revival in the state of its people without, how-
ever, denying that attempts by the elite to revive the language can be a factor in
the general revival of its people. In the latter mode of this revival, language
becomes an important instrument of social change. It is this interactive and
reiterative nature of the relationship between language and people which
underpins al-Yaziji’s firm belief in the necessity of his and similar proposals for
enriching the lexicon of the Arabic language by exploiting its morphological
resources to coin new terms, appropriating disused words to designate new con-

the arabic language unites us
— 99 —
cepts, extending the meanings of some words to encompass related meanings
and Arabising/Arabicising foreign words.
In the field of grammar, al-Yaziji’s corpus-planning suggestions mainly
pertained to the need to produce new streamlined and simplified pedagogic
grammars which can help language-users deploy it correctly, whether in speech
or in writing. This interest in the communicative functionality of grammars is
also evident in his end-of-session address to the 1890 graduates of the Patri-
archate School in Beirut. He called on them to tailor their interest in grammar
to their communicative needs, lest the excessive preoccupation with the former
deflect them from the active use of the language as an instrument of scientific
and cultural modernization. Al-Yaziji further devoted his attention to correct-
ing mistakes made by writers in the press media in a series of articles he pub-
lished in his magazine al-ÎiyÅ’ in 1905 and elsewhere. He justified this activity
by pointing to the long reach of the press media as a diffuser of new usages and
as the surrogate legitimizer of grammatical errors.
Let us now turn to the non-linguistic ends behind these corpus-planning
activities, to what I have called in the title of this section the underlying motives
that lie behind the immediate or declared aims of language-planning proposals.
The two overarching themes here are, first, the role of language as the marker
par excellence of the identity of its Arabic-speakers as a nation in their own
right, and, second, the importance of placing the efforts to revive the language
within a modernization framework in which the promotion of a rational
attitude and a scientific outlook in Arab life have pride of place. Interest in
these two ingredients in the modernization framework is evident from the
attempt in al-Muqta†af (a popular Egyptian journal) in 1881 to define some of
the operative concepts in the art of rational debate for the benefit of its readers
(see Khuri 1991: 27). These included mujÅdala (argument), mukÅbara (refusal to
admit one’s untenable or erroneous position), muÆÅnada (argumentation out of
ignorance), mughÅla†a (sophistry), munÅqa∂a (contradiction), muÆÅra∂a (fallacy
of asserting the consequent) and ghaßb (rejecting the opponent’s premises before
they are validated). It is as though by defining these terms the editors of al-
Muqta†af,  YaÆqub Sarruf (1852–1927)40 and Faris Nimr (c. 1854–1951), were
trying to provide some of the standards for producing and assessing the debates
their and other newspapers initiated at the time, an example of which is an
article in al-Muqta†af in 1882 (ibid.: 54–7). The fact that these terms had
currency in various branches of the Arabic intellectual tradition bestows the
desired authenticity on their modern applicability.
The key point in the first theme (language and identity) is the repeated
assertion by al-Yaziji that language and nation are two sides of the same coin. In
a series of articles published in al-BayÅn in 1897–8, al-Yaziji posits an equi-
valence relation between language and nation (al-lugha hiya al-umma bi-ÆaynihÅ,

the arabic language and national identity
— 100 —
Khuri 1993a: 62). He spells this out by pointing to the role of language as the
carrier of a nation’s cultural and scientific heritage and as the boundary-setter
between itself and other nations (hiya al-faßl al-fÅriq bayna umma wa-umma,
ibid.). The Arabic language is therefore projected by him as the only effective
bond between the members of the nation (fa-hiya Æillat al-∂amm al-˙aqÈqiyya,
ibid.), a bond whose integrative power far exceeds that of the disintegrative
influences of race, religion and customs, as well as transcending the conditions
of political, economic and social division which characterize the community of
Arabic-speakers (ibid.). This view of the connection between language and
nation underlies al-Yaziji’s belief – expressed in al-ÎiyÅ’ in a series of articles
published between 1899 and 1900 – that the very existence and vitality of a
nation depends on the existence and vitality of its language. Al-Yaziji returns to
this theme in his discussion in al-ÎiyÅ’ (1901–2) of the relationship between the
standard and the dialectal forms of Arabic, where he declares that the former is
the sine qua non of the Arab nation (fa-lÅ baqÅ’ li-umma bi-dËn lughatihÅ, ibid.:
232).
Al-Yaziji’s view of the role which language plays in defining national iden-
tity, exaggerated though this may be in some of its formulations,41 is consistent
with the claims made by Antonius about the relationship between these two
constructs in Arab nationalist thinking. It is this identification between nation
and language which causes al-Yaziji to decry the use by some Arabic-speakers of
foreign greetings terms, such as bonjour and bonsoir, in place of the rich array of
greetings terms in Arabic (see al-ÆUraysi’s views on this matter in section 3.3
above; see also Chapter 5, section 2 for similar views by al-ÆAlayli). Al-Yaziji
believes that those who use the foreign terms need to be educated in the love of
the homeland and in the importance of developing a positive self-image in
relation to other nations which, in the full sweep of history, are less culturally
endowed than their Arab nation. In a different place in al-BayÅn (1897–8), al-
Yaziji points to the danger posed by foreign schools which, by promoting their
own national languages among Arabic-speaking pupils, create bonds of affilia-
tion between these pupils and the nations whose languages they learn at the
expense of their native tongue and the bonds of nationhood it generates.42 This
phenomenon was commented on in the same vein by Muhammad Kurd ÆAli,
President of the Arab Academy in Damascus and author of Khi†a† al-ShÅm
(1926, vol. 4), who wrote (quoted in Tibawi 1969: 178): “We have met [in our
travels in Greater Syria] men and women educated at foreign schools who
became neither Arabs nor Europeans: they speak at home a language other than
their own, and exhibit sentiments other than those of the Syrian, nay, they hate
their own tradition and history and their country is black in their eyes”.43
In setting out these views, al-Yaziji constantly refers to the Arabs as an umma
(nation), albeit a stateless one. This term occurs in his writings hundreds of

the arabic language unites us
— 101 —
times, sometimes correlated with the word al-lugha (the language) and at others
with the word lughatunÅ (our language) as its defining ingredient. Al-Yaziji is
aware of the political division of the Arabic-speaking peoples into different
entities and spheres of imperial or colonial influence, but this does not stop him
from identifying these people as one umma in the cultural sense of this term.
Evidence for this can be derived from two directions. On the one hand, al-Yaziji
believes that the dangers facing Arabic in the lands directly controlled by the
Ottomans, as a result of their increasingly Turkifying tendencies, are com-
parable in national-identity terms to those facing the language in the French-
occupied countries of North Africa. There is no doubt that, for al-Yaziji, the
countries of North Africa and the Arab Middle East form the constituents of
this nation. A reference to this occurs in his reflections on the phenomenon of
stress (nabr) in Arabic phonology, where he provides evidence for his views on
this linguistic phenomenon from the dialects of the Levant, Egypt, North Africa
and the Arabian peninsula.
On the other hand, al-Yaziji is of the opinion that Egypt is an important part
of the “Arab nation” (al-umma al-Æarabiyya, Khuri 1991: 53) – or just the nation
(al-umma), as he generally calls it – although in one or two places he designates
the people of Egypt as the Egyptian nation. Thus he points out that, of all the
Arabic-speaking lands, Egypt is best qualified to lead the language-revival
movement in the modern period (ibid.: 62). This explains the various calls he
made to the Egyptian elites and the Egyptian government to set up a language
academy to lead the effort to revive the language lexically and grammatically
and to protect it against the corrupting influences of foreign languages and the
colloquials. The fact that al-Yaziji was aware of the many obstacles facing such a
project, including the reluctance of the Egyptian elite and official bodies to
place Egypt in a sphere of Arab national identity, is significant: it shows the
extent to which he believed Egypt to be an integral part of the Arab nation.
This belief was reflected in the comments he made on a language conference
held in Cairo towards the end of the nineteenth century to deal with issues of
lexical revival facing Arabic at the time as a result of the influx of foreign
terminologies. While welcoming this initiative as one which dealt with a “grave
matter” facing the nation, al-Yaziji was critical of the conference organizers,
who restricted participation in it to the Egyptians only. Al-Yaziji argued that
since the issue concerned all Arabic-speakers, not just the Egyptians, participa-
tion in the conference should have been made open to all those who were
competent to contribute to the debate, regardless of their citizenship. He believed
that this would have enhanced the work of the conference, since Egypt on its
own did not possess the necessary expertise in foreign languages to be able to
discuss issues of language contact and lexical revival single-handedly. Al-Yaziji
went even further, deploring the restrictive policy of the organizers as a form of

the arabic language and national identity
— 102 —
“autocracy” (istibdÅd, ibid.: 59) which undermined the “bonds of unity” (Æurwat
al-wi’Åm, ibid.) between the Egyptians and other groups of Arabic native
speakers. It was also a policy which went against the grain of Arab history
during the golden age of Arabic translation when the Abbasid Caliph al-
Ma’mun (218/833) used non-Arabs to transfer into Arabic the lore of other
nations. In short, al-Yaziji believed that although the aim of the conference was
a legitimate and laudable one, the restriction of participation in it to the Egyp-
tians only went against (1) the spirit of national affiliation generated by the
language, (2) the general thrust of Arab culture at that moment in its history
when it embodied the very ideals the modern Arab renaissance wished to exca-
vate, revive and recreate, and (3) the principles of cooperation and democratic
participation which a rejuvenated Arab nation had to espouse and vigorously
promote if it was to advance forward on a sure footing.
Let us now consider the second theme in the non-linguistic ends of al-Yaziji’s
work on the revival of the Arabic language: the promotion of a rational and
scientific outlook in Arab life. Point (2) in the preceding paragraph provides a
suitable entry into this topic. It signals that any revival of the language as a
central component in the modernization of the Arab nation must be rooted in a
proper appreciation of the role of the past as a motivating factor, linguistic guide
and source of authenticity. Consideration of the past glories of the language and
its speakers is sufficient to fill the modern Arab with pride and to confirm him
in the conviction that his language has the necessary resources to partake in the
modern Arab renaissance fully and constitutively (cf. Chapter 3, section 1). For
this to happen, a determined attempt must be made to excavate Arabic lexica
and related works to discover the dormant resources of the language for task-
orientated ends in the linguistic and, indirectly, non-linguistic spheres of
modernization. Al-Yaziji is nevertheless aware that such an attempt must not
degenerate into an “imitation” which slavishly reveres the past without tapping
into its empowering potential.
This reference to the past is sometimes used not just to authenticate a
modern solution to a perceived problem, but also as a strategy of protecting the
language against interferences from foreign proper names. In his discussion of
Arabicization, al-Yaziji states that all borrowed materials must either be made to
conform to the phonological and morphological patterns of the language, in
which case they melt into it and lose much of their foreign identity, or they are
deliberately made to signal their foreign origin. The latter strategy, which may
be called foreignization or exoticization, is proposed for proper names, although
this necessitates the introduction of new symbols in the Arabic script (see
Chapter 5, section 2 for al-Bazzaz’s opposition to the use of foreign names in
public notices). Al-Yaziji justifies this expansion in the script by invoking a
similar solution which Ibn Khaldun proposed in his Muqaddima to transcribe

the arabic language unites us
— 103 —
words borrowed by Arabic from Berber, Turkish and European languages. By
making this reference, al-Yaziji legitimizes the present in terms of innovative
and authoritative aspects of the past, thus bestowing on his own proposal the
seal of innovation in a double move of authenticity and modernization. Re-
creation of innovative aspects of the past in the present is considered by al-
Yaziji no more than a reinvigoration of the latent capacities of the nation
which, when harnessed properly, can lead to its revival as a leading member in
the community of modern nations.
A major aspect of modernization for al-Yaziji is the promotion of science, the
method and its results, as a regenerative force in the life of the nation. Thus, his
writings are full of references to the importance of science for the advancement
of civil and political life (see Chapter 6, section 4.1 for a somewhat similar
attitude by Salama Musa in the context of Egyptian nationalism). In particular,
science is seen by him as a source of power for any nation in promoting its own
interests and in resisting the pressure from other nations. Al-Yaziji, however, is
mainly interested in science as a mode of reasoning and investigation, as  method;
and this enables him to treat science as one indivisible element which applies to
the humanities and non-humanities alike. He sets out his views on this matter
in the first issue of the magazine al-ÊabÈb (The Physician/Doctor), relaunched in
1884 following the suggestion of its first editor, Dr George Post (see section 3),
after a period of withdrawal from circulation. Al-Yaziji takes this opportunity to
proclaim an expansion in the readership of the magazine to include merchants
and shopkeepers, farmers, pharmacists, doctors, poets and prose-writers, civil
servants and those engaged in formal oral delivery (ibid.: 20). There is no doubt
that al-Yaziji sought to expand the original readership (physicians/doctors) of
the magazine for reasons of commercial viability, but his main motivation was
one of promoting an attitudinal, if not actually a behavioural, change in his
intended elite readership – and, through them, other members of the nation –
in which science as a method rules supreme. This is clear from his editorial
policy in al-Bayan, launched in Egypt in 1897, where a wide readership was
aimed at to ensure that this attitudinal vision reached as wide a section of the
national elite as possible.
The point that interests us most in all of this is the place of language in this
new vision. By making the Arabic language the topic of many of his essays in his
various magazines with their expanded readership, al-Yaziji aims to save it from
routinization, from the normal conception of it as a decentred medium of
communication to a centred view of it as an object of modernization, and as the
medium through which the promotion of science as method is effected. In this
scheme of things, language starts to assume a heightened symbolic visibility in
addition to its communicative functionality, as was the case in Turkish
nationalism, where Gökalp “sought to make the national revival of the Turkish

the arabic language and national identity
— 104 —
language … a stepping-stone to a similar renaissance in other fields of culture
and social life” (Heyd 1950: 110). Thus, if the Arab nation is to emerge as a
nation on a par with other modern nations, it must attend to science as method
and to its national language as a subject or domain to which this method can be
applied, and through which the results of this method can be communicated.
To press the claim that Arabic can be the object of scientific study, al-Yaziji
stresses in several of his articles the systematic nature of the language and the
fact that, in spite of its diachronic mutability and synchronic variability, it is
rule-governed. And, to show that this indeed is the case, he sets out his
observations on the systematicity of Arabic in the first issue of the relaunched
al-ÊabÈb, published in 1884, although the title of this magazine may at first
suggest that language is one of the least likely candidates as a topic for promul-
gating the principle of the indivisibility of science as a method. And, since most
of al-Yaziji’s views on the systematicity of Arabic are no more than reiterations
of the Arab grammarians’ descriptions of the language, the application of the
scientific method here receives the authentication of tradition which, as I have
explained earlier, is a defining feature of modernization as conceived by this
proponent of modernity.
It may, however, be argued that al-Yaziji chose language as the topic of his
discourse on science as method because of his own personal expertise on this
subject, and that, consequently, one should not read too much into this choice.
While it is undeniable that al-Yaziji was first and foremost a linguist, it is widely
acknowledged that he had considerable expertise in astronomy, about which he
wrote and which, we assume, he could have chosen as the topic for promulga-
ting his conviction that science as method is the most highly prized possession
of any developed nation. The fact that al-Yaziji chose not do so indicates that
his selection of language as a test case for promulgating his views on science and
nation-building is deliberate, not accidental.
Al-Yaziji’s commitment to the scientific method as an important attitudinal
ingredient in the modernization of the Arab nation is organically linked with
the espousal of a rational attitude which considers the validity of a thesis or
point of view before it considers the motives behind it. Here again, al-Yaziji
chooses a linguistic controversy to highlight his views on the matter. The
controversy in question revolved around the call in Egypt towards the end of
the nineteenth century, mainly by British civil servants (see Chapter 6, section
4.1), to (1) use the colloquial in place of the standard as the medium of formal
education, and (2) replace the Arabic alphabet by a Roman one. Proponents of
these two proposals argued that the adoption of these two measures would
enable the Egyptians to deal with the problem of illiteracy and, therefore,
modernization in an effective way. Unlike other critics of these proposals, al-
Yaziji refused to reject them a priori for being motivated by non-linguistic ends

the arabic language unites us
— 105 —
rather than purely linguistic ones. Instead, he tried to establish whatever merits
they had on linguistic grounds, and then proceeded to refute them. For example,
al-Yaziji concedes that the adoption of the colloquial may indeed be conducive
to an accelerated promotion of science in Egypt, but he argues that a revived
standard form of the language can do the same while, additionally, preserving
the Arabs’ link with their cultural heritage as a component in the definition of
national identity.
The attempt to highlight this rational mode of argumentation is a deliberate
one on the part of al-Yaziji. He refers to it in several places in his essays. One
such reference occurs in his review in al-ÊabÈb (1884) of Dozy’s Supplément aux
Dictionnaires arabes. Before proceeding to criticize this dictionary, al-Yaziji
reminds his readers of the great service which Dozy had rendered to all Arabic-
speakers by compiling this work, then adds that his own espousal of the scientific
attitude imposes on him the obligation of evaluating this work in a balanced but
critical manner (Khuri 1993a: 39). This critical attitude as a mode of thinking
extends to the Arab cultural products of the past as it does to those of the
present, even when in the present they are penned by the author himself or by
his father. Thus, some of al-Yaziji’s articles in al-ÎiyÅ’ for the years 1905–6 deal
with the linguistic errors that he and his father had made in their poetry. Al-
Yaziji specifies these errors, outlines their sources, then proceeds to correct
them, aiming all the time to show that the adoption of science as method means
constant vigilance which, when aided by a rational attitude, leads to accepting
legitimate refutation even when the object of this refutation is one’s own ideas.
Al-Yaziji regarded imparting the scientific and rational approach as the
primary objective of modern education in the Arabic-speaking lands. But he
also believed that this approach can be effective only when coupled with an
outlook on language which places it at the centre of all intellectual endeavours.
To illustrate these themes, I will refer to the end-of-session address to the gradu-
ates of the Patriarchate School in Beirut, which al-Yaziji was invited to deliver
in July 1890 (see Jeha 1992: 85–105).
The main theme in this address is the importance of espousing the scientific
approach as a mode of inquiry and as a form of scholarly behaviour. As a mode
of inquiry, the scientific approach characterizes learning as a lifelong activity
with commitment to accepted standards of proof and counter-argumentation, as
well as to standards of enunciation in which obfuscation and doubtful evidence
are rejected. As a mode of scholarly behaviour, the scientific approach imposes
on its practitioners the need to avoid personal criticism. But it also requires
them to be open to criticism, which they should never deflect whenever it is
justified. However, for all of these values to be realized, the practitioners of the
scientific approach must always strive to express themselves in clear and precise
language which, inevitably, demands that they familiarize themselves with as

the arabic language and national identity
— 106 —
much as they need of the linguistic sciences. Language, the Arabic language, is
therefore central to the success of the scientific approach as a medium of
modernization. This is why al-Yaziji declares that in every nation competence
in one’s language is given priority over all other sciences, and that this should be
the norm among the educated elite in the Arab nation (see Chapter 6, section
5.2 for a similar view by Kamal al-Hajj in the context of Lebanese nationalism).
The fact that al-Yaziji received many linguistic questions from his readers about
correct usage must have been seen by him as an indication of the importance
attached by these readers to competence in the language and as a vindication of
his above views. Al-Yaziji must also have considered the fact that the questions
he received at al-BayÅn and al-ÎiyÅ’ came from inside and outside the Arabic-
speaking countries (Egypt, Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Hijaz, the
Argentine, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Italy and the Philippines) as a
confirmation of his view that the Arabs formed a nation in the cultural sense,
regardless of their citizenship status or geographical distribution. In addition,
the fact that many of the questioners from outside Egypt were, judging by their
names, Christian served to show that the defining function of Arabic in
national terms cut across religious affiliations.
Let us now consider some of the strategies which al-Yaziji deployed in setting
out his views on language and national identity, and in propelling Arabic-
speakers on the road to modernity. As far as the issue of language and identity is
concerned, al-Yaziji deliberately employs the term aÆÅjim and its derivatives (see
Chapter 3, section 5) to designate non-Arabic-speakers and their languages.
Often, the context makes it clear that the term aÆÅjim includes all non-speakers
of Arabic regardless of their religious affiliation. This has the effect of creating
an equality in Æujma (foreignness) between the Turks, whom al-Yaziji wished to
distinguish from the Arabs in national-identity terms, and others, including the
speakers of English and French in whose colonial or imperial spheres of
influence the Arabs lived. To underline the identity difference between the
Arabs and the speakers of other languages, al-Yaziji additionally uses the term
lughat al-∂Åd (the language of ∂) to designate the Arabic language and all the
linguistically based connotations that accrue from this expression (see Chapter
3, section 5).
By using the above two terms, al-Yaziji invokes their historical and cultural
legacy of differential self-identification in a way which telescopes the present
into the past and uses the latter to inform parallel situations in the former.
Furthermore, he uses these two terms to frame his description of the occurrence
of linguistic corruption in the Arabic of his day as la˙n (solecism), thus creating
another platform from which to invoke the resonant potential of the past. In
one of its implications, the term la˙n implies the existence of a foreign agency
behind the linguistic corruption (see Chapter 3, section 4). It also implies the

the arabic language unites us
— 107 —
need to put in place counter-measures to protect the Arabic language against
marauding linguistic influences, hence the references by al-Yaziji in this context
to Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali (see Chapter 3, section 4), who was entrusted with
the first major corpus-planning project in the early Islamic period. The use of
the term la˙n additionally places al-Yaziji’s effort to revive the language in a rich
historical context, endowing it with a strong motivational force by virtue of its
indirect connection with the preservation of the language of the Qur’an. Al-
Yaziji warns his readers that failure to protect their language from the effects of
solecism may turn it into a laughable, hybrid dialect on a par with Maltese,
whose linguistic identity is not certain.
The above link with the language of the Qur’an is not accidental in al-
Yaziji’s work. A survey of his essays in the various magazines he published shows
that one of his favourite strategies in motivational terms consisted of quoting
the Qur’an directly or of creating intertextual links with it for the effect these
will have on his readers. First, these references are intended to create bridges of
unity between al-Yaziji, a Christian, and his intended audience, the majority of
whom are most probably Muslim. By creating intertextual links with the
Qur’an, al-Yaziji intends to turn its text into a national linguistic-cum-cultural
asset that belongs to all Arabic-speakers regardless of their religious affiliation.
This has the effect of communicating to al-Yaziji’s Muslim readers the idea that,
although the Qur’an unites them with the Turks doctrinally, it does not do so
linguistically or culturally, and that it is in these two arenas, through the text of
the Qur’an, that the Muslim and Christian Arabs come together as one nation
in the face of the Turks. To show how extensive these intertextual links are, I
will list some of the numerous statements made by al-Yaziji together with the
Qur’anic material they recall (the translations below, especially those of the
Qur’anic material, are approximate):
1.
hal atÅ ÆalÅ al-sharqi ˙Ènun mina al-dahri lam yarjiÆ li-l-Æilmi fihi ßadÅ (Khuri 1993a: 19)
Has not the East/Orient (sharq) passed through a period of time when science had
no mention (lit. echo) in it?
1a. hal atÅ ÆalÅ al-insÅni ˙Ènun mina al-dahri lam yakun shay’an madhkËrÅ (Qur’an 76:1)
Has not man passed through a period of time when he had not been mentioned?
2.
wa-yaßilËna fÈ khidmatihi ÅnÅ’a al-layli bi-a†rÅfi al-nahÅr (ibid.: 52)
And they (those who serve the cause of science) work day and night in its service.
2a. wa-min ÅnÅ’i al-layli fa-sabbi˙ wa-a†rÅfi al-nahÅr (Qur’an 20:13)
And glorify thy Lord night and day.
3.
yawma lÅ yanfaÆu mÅlun wa-lÅ banËna illÅ man atÅ AllÅha bi-qalbin salÈm (ibid.: 53).
The day when wealth and sons will not avail, but he alone will prosper who
brings with him to God a sound heart.
3a. yawma lÅ yanfaÆu mÅlun wa-lÅ banËna, illÅ man atÅ AllÅha bi-qalbin salÈm (Qur’an
26:88–9)

the arabic language and national identity
— 108 —
The day when wealth and sons will not avail, but he alone will prosper who
brings with him to God a sound heart.
4.
li-yaq∂iya AllÅhu amran kÅna mafÆËlÅ (ibid.: 82)
God may accomplish that which had been decreed.
4a. wa-lÅkin li-yaq∂iya AllÅhu amran kÅna mafÆËlÅ (Qur’an 8:42)
But God may accomplish that which had been decreed.
5.
wa-l-salÅmu ÆalÅ man ittabaÆa al-hudÅ (ibid.: 123)
Peace be to him who follows the guidance.
5a. qad ji’nÅka bi-Åyatin min rabbika, wa-l-salÅmu ÆalÅ man ittabaÆa al-hudÅ (Qur’an
20:47)
We have come with a Sign from your Lord. Peace be upon him who follows the
guidance.
The above discussion shows that language for al-Yaziji is the leitmotif around
which a range of interrelated themes coalesce. It is the ingredient which makes
a community a nation. In so doing, language cuts across racial and religious
modes of self-definition among Arabic-speakers. Language is also the subject in
terms of which the twin themes of modernization – science as method and
rationality – are promoted in symbolic and communicative terms. Language thus
emerges as the means of bringing about an attitudinal change in the modern
Arab nation, and acts in its revived form as a symbol for that modernity.
Considering all of these features, it is not surprising that Antonius suggested
language as the linchpin of establishing the Arabs as a nation in the cultural
sense. The fact that al-Yaziji sought to canonize Arab nationhood in poetry –
the Arabs’ primary mode of literary expression – in his famous ode alluded to at
the beginning of this section adds to his role as one of the founders of Arab
nationalism.
To understand the depth of al-Yaziji’s commitment to his views on language,
identity and modernization, I shall consider them briefly in relation to two
major debates in the intellectual circles towards the end of the nineteenth
century and the beginning of the twentieth century. One debate, initiated by
the weekly al-Nashra al-usbËÆiyya in 1881, deals with the use of foreign languages
for learning non-language-based subjects in the schools. A similar debate took
place at the time, and it dealt with the replacement of Arabic by English as the
language of instruction at the American Protestant College in Beirut in 1882
(see section 3). Opinions on the issue of using foreign languages were divided
between those favouring their use and those who rejected it, with each group
adducing arguments in favour of their position based on the role of language in
identity-formation and modernization. The second debate revolved around
Arabic diglossia, and which of the two varieties, the standard or colloquial, should
be promoted in status-planning terms in Arabic-speaking countries. Again, this
debate was framed by reference to the two categories of identity and moderniza-

the arabic language unites us
— 109 —
tion. These two debates, and the host of self-definition issues with which they
interlocked, show the sociopolitical importance of the language in the period
under consideration. Al-Yaziji’s views must be seen as part and parcel of this
general atmosphere among the elites, one of whose strands was to consider the
ways and means by which their people could develop and catch up with the
West. However, on a different level, these debates show that al-Yaziji held to
his views in spite of the currency of alternative orientations on the linguistic
modernization front which he could have, if he so wished, adopted. What is
remarkable about al-Yaziji’s position, therefore, is the consistency and dogged
determination with which he expressed it. Equivocation is not his trait. He
believed that Arabic was the marker par excellence of the national identity of
its speakers, as well as the means of delivering the coveted results of modern-
ization in all spheres in a thoroughly modernized and modern idiom. The fact
that al-Yaziji pursued the first of these themes from a base in Egypt, at a time
when the country was more absorbed in its own territorial identity (see Chapter
6), further underlines his Arabic-based nationalist credentials.
Considering the extensive nature of the evidence that has been marshalled
above, it is not surprising that George Antonius regards Ibrahim al-Yaziji as one
of the earliest proponents of Arab nationalism in its cultural mode, a view
reiterated more recently by Mikha’il ÆAwn (1983). The fact that Antonius
failed to consider al-Yaziji’s contribution to this nationalism beyond the refer-
ences he made to his famous ode may have contributed to this linguist’s relative
invisibility in the burgeoning scholarship on Arab nationalism in the West. It is
for reasons of wanting to rectify this lacuna in the study of Arab nationalism
that I have devoted a large portion of this chapter to considering aspects of al-
Yaziji’s thinking. This discussion has also shown the following: (1) the sophisti-
cated nature of Arab nationalism in its cultural mode during the last two
decades of the nineteenth century, (2) the organic interactions between langu-
age, nationalism and modernization, (3) the role of the past in underpinning
this triadic interaction, and (4) the attempt to invoke the linguistic medium of
the Qur’an as a national bond that overrides the differences in religion among
the Arabs.
5. conclusion
In this chapter, I have tried to show that, for the study of Arab nationalism to
proceed properly, it must consider the development of this phenomenon, on
both the cultural and political levels, in the wider context of the emergence of
Turkish and, to a lesser extent, other (Balkan) nationalisms in the Ottoman
Empire in the last quarter of the nineteenth and early decades of the twentieth
century. In particular, I have tried to suggest that the double trajectory of the

the arabic language and national identity
— 110 —
Turkifying trend in the Ottoman Empire – which was first aimed at the Turks
before culminating as a policy objective that was coercively targeted at the
Arabs – played a crucial role in the shift from the cultural to the political in the
development of Arab nationalism. The above discussion has also tried to show
that the analysis of this shift cannot be complete without considering the role of
language in it both materially and emblematically. Language in this context
emerged as the object of modernization in material terms and as the vehicle
through which the fruits of modernization in other spheres can be expressed and
promoted in the Empire. But language was also used emblematically as the
marker of group identity which increasingly expressed itself in national terms.
In debates about this, language served as the site of contestation in relation to
which issues of group inclusion and exclusion could be articulated without
incurring the full wrath of the censor. The use of language in this manner was
considered as a manifestation of the language-planning principle which says
that most of the so-called linguistic debates about language reform in the world,
whether of the status or the corpus type, are ultimately aimed at non-linguistic
ends. This is certainly true of the call for Arabic and Turkish reforms which were
used as a blatant camouflage for putting forward views of a covertly political
nature.
The increasing politicization of the language issue in Arab nationalism
depended on the successful excavation of the Arab heritage. The connections
between Arabic and Islam were projected in a nationalist guise that had the full
support of the Prophet’s traditions. Reference to the foreignness of the Turks
was articulated intertextually by invoking the boundary-setting meaning of
carefully chosen and strategically sited expressions from that heritage, including
the terms Æajam, Æilj and lughat al-∂Åd. Poetry, the Arabs’ primary art form, was
pressed into service to express a cultural identity that is nationally sui generis.
But poetry was also used for motivational effect. Complaints about the neglect
of Arabic in education and the state apparatus were expressed in poetry to
criticize the Turks and to shame the Arabs into action. This occurred in poems
specifically composed for this purpose, as well as in placards and proclamations
which sometimes began by quoting a line of poetry and ended by quoting a few
more. None of this would have happened without the emergence of a literary
renaissance which was sustained by an expanding school system consisting of a
state sector, an indigenous private sector and a foreign or missionary sector. The
increasing popularity of journalism and the introduction of modern printing
presses with greater and better output fed into this renaissance and derived
support from it. In this increasingly complex web of cultural innovations and
nascent political developments of a nationalist kind, Arabic emerged as that
ingredient which unites Arab Muslims and Christians into a new identity that
separates them from the Turks. This process was accelerated after the rise of the

the arabic language unites us
— 111 —
Young Turks to a position of seemingly uncontested power in 1909. Secret socie-
ties and cultural clubs championed the cause of the language for the symbolic
significance it has in Arab life and heritage, and for its efficacy as a conduit for
expressing overtly nationalist demands. In expressing these demands, some
nationalist thinkers showed themselves familiar with the various modes of
defining national identity in Western political thought. This does not mean
that Arab nationalism was an importation from the West. A careful assessment
of the roots of this nationalism is bound to show that it is more home-grown
than transplanted from the outside, although “home” here must be understood
as the Ottoman Empire in all its diachronic and synchronic complexities.
Western ideas were important as the framework in terms of which the emerging
conception of an Arab nation could be formulated and presented to the outside
world for the purpose of achieving specifically political aims.
On a different level, the above discussion is intended to serve as a critique of
the study of Arab nationalism which, thus far, has suffered from the lack of an
integrative theoretical perspective and, more cripplingly, the reluctance to
adopt a view of the phenomenon which expands the types of data which can
shed light on it beyond their current historical and political limits (cf. Hutch-
inson and Aberbach 1999). In particular, although language has often been
acknowledged as the primary feature of Arab nationalism, and as the surrogate
channel through which suppressed political ideologies can make themselves
visible, little work has been done on its role in this phenomenon. This has, in
my view, led to an impoverished understanding of Arab nationalism – and other
territorial nationalisms in the Arabic-speaking countries, for that matter –
although the studies by Armbrust (1996), Baron (1997) and Suleiman (1993,
1994, 1996b, 1997, 1999a, 1999b) have offered a way forward which this work is
intended to pursue.
Finally, the move from the cultural to the political in the development of
Arab nationalism in the period under consideration in this chapter may be
interpreted as a move from the covertly and indirectly political to the overtly
and directly political in nation-formation. Or, looked at as a back-projection
from the present to the past, this development may be visualized as a move from
what is overtly and directly political to what is overtly and directly cultural. The
idea that cultural nationalism can be “purely cultural”, in the sense of being
devoid of any political impulses, is therefore not possible without denying the
open-endedness of cultural signification. Furthermore, it is not possible to insist
that the “cultural” in cultural nationalism is purely cultural without denying the
fact that what the sender sends, and what the receiver receives and reconstructs,
may not always be identical. It may therefore be more helpful in the study of
nationalism to say that the cultural can never be ascertained to be devoid of
political meanings, in the anthropological sense of the term “political”, and that

the arabic language and national identity
— 112 —
the political can never be ascertained to be devoid of cultural signification, in
the anthropological sense of the term “cultural”. What matters therefore in the
study of nationalism is the assessment of the mix of these two dimensions at any
one stage in the development of a given nationalism, rather than ascertaining
the existence of their logically impossible mutual exclusion.

—113 —
Arabic, First and Foremost
fa-lisÅnunÅ al-Æarabiyyu khayru muwa˙˙idi1
5
1. introduction
The status of Arabic as a marker or ingredient of an Arab national identity
which distinguishes speakers of the language from the Turks within the
Ottoman Empire was set out in Chapter 4. Initially, language delivered this
function in a predominantly cultural mode of collective self-definition which,
nevertheless, was not devoid of sociopolitical overtones. The imposition of
Turkification as a policy objective in the last years of the Ottoman Empire
helped transform this nascent Arab nationalism into a more overtly political
one. Arab cultural clubs and societies were established to pursue a variety of
overtly or covertly nationalist aims within the Empire, building in this effort on
the achievements of a cultural and literary revival which gave the Arabs a sense
of pride in their past heritage (see Chapter 3). Poets, lexicographers, linguists,
essayists, teachers and students participated in this revival, benefiting in this
process from the increased contact with the West at a rate – and at a level and
of a quality – unprecedented in the past. Language was central in this newly
emerging enterprise of contrastive self-definition. It was the ingredient which
separated the Arabs from the Turks. And, by virtue of its seemingly non-
political nature, it served as the conduit for setting out ideas which could escape
the ever-alert eye of the censor, who was not reluctant to exercise his authority,
as happened several times to al-ÆUraysi’s newspaper al-MufÈd (see Chapter 4,
section 3). However, the separation of the Asian part of the Arabic-speaking
world from the Ottoman Empire at the end of the First World War marked a
subtle change in the role of language in self-definitional terms. Whereas before
the break-up of the Empire the language was pressed into service primarily as a
criterion which externally bounded the Arabs, it was now increasingly projected
as an ingredient which bonded them internally. Using the words of the
celebrated Egyptian poet Ahmad Shawqi (1868–1932), which he uttered in a
different context, Arabic started to be promoted as a metaphorical “fatherland”
or “homeland” (wa-mÅ al-Æarabiyyatu illÅ wa†an), as the soil in which a group’s
national identity is rooted and to which it gives sustenance and life.
The idea that language is a marker of national identity was not restricted to

the arabic language and national identity
— 114 —
men of letters only in the last few decades of the Ottoman Empire. It was
articulated in studies of a more schematic nature long before the collapse of the
Empire after the First World War. As early as 1870, Francis al-Marrash (1836–
73) distinguished between the two concepts of wa†an (the place to which a
person belongs, the fatherland) and umma (the group of which a person is a
member, the nation), without insisting on the necessity of the fatherland and
the nation being united under the jurisdiction of a single, unitary state (see
Nassar 1994: 212–14). In discussing the application of the latter concept in the
context of Greater Syria, al-Marrash points to the role played by language – in
addition to customs and the belief in common interests that override faith
boundaries and sectarian differences – in defining national identity. The impor-
tance of the language ingredient in this concept of the nation, although limited
by the other two factors, is evidenced by the attacks al-Marrash mounted
against those who code-switched to foreign languages in their speech or those
who favoured these languages in attitudinal terms (see Chapter 4, sections 3–4
for similar views). It is also signalled by the fact that he deplores the dialectal
differences between the Syrians which, we must assume, he considers a danger
to the linguistic bond that unites them.
The distinction between fatherland and nation is also made by the Egyptian
Azhari educator Hasan al-Marsafi (1815–90) in his short treatise RisÅlat al-kalim
al-thamÅn (A Treatise in Explanation of Eight Terms), first published in Cairo in
1881. The eight terms dealt with in this treatise are: umma (nation), wa†an
(common territory), ˙ukËma (government), Æadl (justice), Ωulm (tyranny), siyÅsa
(politics), ˙uriyya (freedom) and tarbiya (education). Of these terms, “nation”,
“fatherland” and “education” – particularly the first and the last – receive most
attention. The other terms are dealt with sparingly, especially “politics”, which
is dealt with in passing only. Since the main interest in the present work lies in
issues of language and national identity, I will restrict myself here to al-Marsafi’s
definition of the nation insofar as it relates to language as its major ingredient. It
may be helpful before launching this discussion to point out that al-Marsafi’s
RisÅla was most probably intended as a reflection on the emerging national
culture in Egypt. Al-Marsafi’s RisÅla is therefore a confirmation of the currency
of the above concepts in Egypt in the second half of the nineteenth century
rather than an attempt to inject them into Egyptian political life during that
period. It is, however, not always easy to understand what al-Marsafi actually
means by a particular term. This reflects (1) the inherent indeterminacy of
these terms conceptually, (2) their recency in Arabic sociopolitical discourse,
(3) the loose formulations in which the author sometimes casts his explana-
tions, owing to the dictation method he used in composing his RisÅla because of
his blindness, and (4) the poor quality of the first printed copy of this treatise. It
further reflects the desire by al-Marsafi to fit these terms into a mould which

arabic, first and foremost
— 115 —
suited Egypt’s sociopolitical realities in the last two decades of the nineteenth
century. In particular, it signals the desire to establish Egypt as a modernizing
nation-state on a par with other developed states, without regard to the bonds of
religion which may unite it with the Ottoman Empire.
Al-Marsafi defines the nation as a “group of people with a common bond
which, induction tells us, may be language, territory, or faith” (1984: 63). Al-
Marsafi then tells us that nations united by a common language have a greater
claim to nationhood than those united by territory and faith. He explains this
by invoking the innate nature of language in human life on the individual level
and its character as an inalienable property of its speech community on the
social. As the major instrument of socialization, a common language creates
affiliative bonds between its speakers and sets them apart from the speakers of
other languages (see Chapter 2, section 4). So important is the role of language
as a barrier and facilitator of inter-nation communication that al-Marsafi
compares different linguistically defined nations to non-communicating animals
(al-˙ÅyawÅnÅt al-Æujm) until they learn each other’s language. Although a major
criterion of nationhood, the existence of a common language does not neces-
sarily correlate with the existence of a single state with political jurisdiction
over those who speak the language concerned in the territory they inhabit.
It is however not clear whether, according to al-Marsafi, all those who speak
Arabic constitute one nation, in spite of the fact that the kind of Arabic this
author reveres and wishes to promote through education is standard Arabic, the
language of the Qur’an, rather than the “corrupt” dialects which are infected by
solecism (see Chapter 3, section 4). Al-Marsafi’s commitment to this form of
the language is evidenced by (1) the emphasis he places on simplifying the way
it is taught to learners to enable them to use it more correctly in public life, and
(2) the blistering attack he launches against the imams of mosques whose Friday
sermons are replete with grammatical errors. There is, however, no mention in
the RisÅla that the Arabs constitute one nation by virtue of the fact that they
share a common language. The term al-umma al-Æarabiyya (the Arab nation)
occurs once only in this work (p. 162), but not to specify the nationhood of this
nation by reference to the linguistic criterion. Moreover, although the term al-
Æarab (the Arabs) occurs a few times in the RisÅla, it is nevertheless used to refer
to the Bedouin inhabitants of Egypt – reflecting the usage of the time in Egypt
and the influence of Ibn Khaldun’s terminology on the author – rather than
“the Arabs” in Arab nationalist discourse. But if al-Marsafi does not explicitly
recognize the existence of an Arab nation, he equally does not rule it out. If
anything, it is more likely that al-Marsafi would be more willing to entertain the
existence of an Arabic-speaking nation – considering his views on the lack of
unity among Muslims historically – than one based on Islam. The fact that the
term al-umma al-mißriyya (the Egyptian nation) is used by this author a few times

the arabic language and national identity
— 116 —
does not contradict this conclusion, owing to the fact that this term is often
anchored in relation to the criterion of territory. And since, he tells us, this
criterion is not as effective as its linguistic counterpart in the formation of
nations, the above conclusion concerning the role of language as a basis of an
Arab nation, albeit a latent one, remains intact.
The view that language is an ingredient in nation-formation, and that
Arabic plays this role for its speakers, was promoted by other writers before the
collapse of the Ottoman Empire. One such writer was æUmar Fakhuri (1895–
1946)2 in his book Kayfa yanha∂ al-Æarab? (How Can the Arabs Rise?) – first
published in Beirut in 1913 and reissued in 1981 – in which he puts forward the
view that language is one of the “highest manifestations of nationalism” (1981:
141), in combination with common origin and common history. Another writer
whose views on the topic are worthy of mention is Salah al-Din al-Qasimi
(1887–1916),3 who worked tirelessly to promote the teaching and learning of
Arabic as a means of resisting the Turkification policies of the Young Turks (see
Chapter 4, section 3). His interest in this field was motivated by the conviction
that language is a component of nationalism, that the Arabs constitute a nation,
and that since the “surest way of bringing about the demise of a nation is
eliminating its language” it was incumbent on the Arabs to defend their language
against the Turkifying policies of the Young Turks (1959: 45).
But these and other attempts at linking nation with language in the Arab
context remain vague when it comes to deciding whether or not all those to
whom Arabic is a common language belong to the same nation. One of the first
and perhaps clearest pronouncements on this issue was made by Najib ÆAzury
(1873?–1916) in his book Le Réveil de la nation arabe dans l’asie turque (published
in Paris in 1905), in which he set out his ideas on Arab independence from
Turkish domination (see Wild 1981). ÆAzury believed that the Arabs in the area
east of Suez constituted one nation, regardless of their religious and sectarian
differences, and that this nation should form an independent kingdom under
the leadership of a member of the Khedival dynasty in Egypt. But he specifically
excluded from the scope of this nation the Arabic-speaking peoples of North
Africa and Egypt, in spite of the fact that they shared with the Arabs in Asia the
same language which, in this context, he regarded as a factor in nation-
formation. The exclusion of the countries of North Africa may be explained by
the fact that they were under French domination at the time, and that any
attempt to include them in his project would have earned him the enmity of the
French, whose support he needed in the struggle against the Ottoman Empire.
His exclusion of Egypt, which was under British control at the time, may also
have been motivated by considerations of a similar nature as well as by his
dislike for the Egyptian leader Mustafa Kamil, whose pro-Islamic and pro-
Ottoman policies ÆAzury regarded as false. But he also argued that the Egyptians

arabic, first and foremost
— 117 —
do not qualify for inclusion in this Arab nation owing to their different racial
origins (he says they are descended from an African Berber family), the well-
defined geographical borders of Egypt, and the fact that before the incorpora-
tion of Egypt into Islam the Egyptians did not speak Arabic. The last of these
arguments is a curious one, since the same may be said of other communities in
the projected Arab nation in Greater Syria and Iraq. This view, however, is fully
understandable in its own political context as set out in the preceding few lines.
However, the fact that he called for his proposed Arab kingdom to be headed by
a member of the Khedival dynasty in Egypt indicates his willingness to leave the
door open for Egypt to be part of this kingdom.
The main aim of this chapter is to investigate a set of contributions which
goes beyond ÆAzury by seeking to incorporate into one nation all those to whom
Arabic is a common language in the Middle East and North Africa. Advocates
of this ideology, which is referred to in the literature as pan-Arab nationalism –
or Arab nationalism for short – treat language as one of the major ingredients in
nation-formation. For some, Arabic is in fact the major ingredient which binds
the Arabs to each other internally and which sets them apart from other
nations. The two nationalist thinkers whose views will constitute the bulk of
this chapter are SatiÆ al-Husri and Zaki al-Arsuzi. However, before dealing with
these two thinkers, I will discuss the contributions of a few important, though
less seminal, modern writers to show the depth of the trend in modern Arab
thought which associates national identity with language.
2. under the banner of arabic
The first writer I will deal with is the Lebanese linguist and jurist al-Shaykh
ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlayli (see BaÆalbaki 1984, Dimashqiyya 1984, Khuri 1984, Mruwwa
1984, SaÆd 1984 and Tarhini 1985), whose modernizing work on various aspects
of the Arabic language is part and parcel of his belief in its role as a factor in
Arab nationalism (see Chapter 4, section 4). Al-ÆAlayli’s (b. 1914) major work
in this field is Dustur al-Æarab al-qawmi (The Arabs’ National Constitution), first
published in 1941 and twice reprinted since, the last time in 1996 (all
references below are to this edition). This is an interesting work because of the
range of views on Arab nationalism that it contains. It is also interesting because
the author sought through its elevated style and its unusually fully vowelled
script to signal aesthetically and grammatically the type of Arabic he wished to
promote in the national enterprise: a standard language that was grammatically
correct and, hence, capable of invoking the linguistic sensibilities of the Arabs
in all the Arabic-speaking countries. This rich symbolism of the book reflects
the author’s view of this work as the national “constitution”, of and for the
Arabs.

the arabic language and national identity
— 118 —
Although al-ÆAlayli does not spell out how his book functions as a
“constitution”, the following may offer some explanations. It is the national
constitution of the Arabs by virtue of the fact that it recognizes the status of
Arab nationalism as an intuitively felt component of Arab subjectivity. In this
sense, Arab nationalism predates, historically and logically, all the studies
which seek to explain it or, more correctly, uncover it. As such, Arab nation-
alism can be said to exist independently of the theoretical and descriptive
accounts which deal with it. Furthermore, his book is the national constitution
for the Arabs because it sets out to objectify this intuitive nationalism by
reference to nationalism in the West, but without imposing the special pro-
perties of the latter on the former.
In spite of the emphasis this work lays on careful and correct (linguistic)
enunciation, there are at least two major problems in dealing with it. These
concern, first, the vagueness with which some of its major concepts are
articulated, and, second, the lack of consistency it exhibits in dealing with the
role of some of the factors at work in nation-building. An example of the first
problem is the definition of Arab nationalism al-ÆAlayli gives (1996: 101):
Arab nationalism is the feeling by the Arabs of becoming aware of their full social
existence in an intuitive (or subjective) way rather than in an objective manner, so
much so that [1] their imagining of the Arab community as a psychological and life-
sustaining (or biological) construct is always intensely present in their lives emo-
tionally, and [2] every Arab instinctively and compulsorily experiences the strong
and wide-spread bonds [in this community] in a way which helps him psychologically
internalise the visible existence of the community concerned.
Al-ÆAlayli points out that this is not a definition in the logical sense of the term,
but an attempt to capture those aspects of Arab nationalism which predate it
epistemologically, that is, independently of all the attempts to explain it in the
literature. This definition further reflects al-ÆAlayli’s essentialist belief that
Arab life is characterized by a “mystical quality” which informs Arab nationality
in a formative manner; hence the references in the above definition to the
instinctiveness and intuitiveness of Arab nationalism and the almost mystical
quality which imbues the definition concerned. Al-ÆAlayli further believes that
the Arabs differ in this respect from the West which “sold its soul to the devil of
uncompromising rationality”, leading to what he calls confusion (balbala) and
restlessness (qalqala) in Western thought. This extends to the literature on
nationalism, which has failed to provide watertight definitions of the nation,
nationality and nationalism for universal or even for particular application.
Under this view, it may be argued that the above vagueness in the definition
of Arab nationalism does no more than reflect the inherent vagueness of the
phenomenon designated by this concept in its generic form and particular
context (see Chapter 2, section 2 for similar views). Rather than exhibiting any

arabic, first and foremost
— 119 —
methodological failure on the part of al-ÆAlayli, the vagueness of his definition
of Arab nationalism is projected as unavoidable. This position on the part of al-
ÆAlayli is worthy of highlighting because it serves as an example of similar views
in the discourse on Arab nationalism. Thus, in an article first published in 1940,
Michel ÆAflaq (1993a) – the founder and one of the leading ideologues of the
Arab BaÆth Party – deplores as reductive and intellectually subversive the
attempts in Arab nationalist discourse to define Arab nationalism by using
categories imported from the West and applied to this nationalism in a way
which does violence to it. In a memorable statement of his views, Aflaq (1993a:
80) declares that “the Arabs do not need to learn anything new to become
nationalists. On the contrary, they need to forget most of what they have
learned [about nationalism] to regain that direct link they once had with their
pure and authentic [nationalist] disposition. Nationalism is not a science, but a
matter of memory, a living memory.” In two further articles published in 1940,
Aflaq refers to Arab nationalism as an “act of love before everything else”
(1993b: 74) and as a “sweet fate” (1993c: 76) in an attempt to signal his view
that (1993a: 79) “the biggest danger to Arab nationalism is the extreme
preoccupation with abstract thought [about what it means]”.4
Let us now turn to the lack of consistency in al-ÆAlayli’s Constitution before
discussing his views on the role of language in nation-formation. In some cases,
the inconsistency takes the form of outright contradiction. This is characteristic
of his views on the relationship between the nation and the state, which he
regards as categorially distinct from each other in the sense that the former is a
“natural” phenomenon while the latter is an artificial construct. Thus, whereas
he says that “a nation cannot exist without a state” (1996: 96), he later tells us
that a nation can lose its independent state without losing its status as a nation
in its own right (ibid.). In other cases, the lack of consistency takes the form of
assessing the contribution of a particular nation-building factor in different
ways. Thus, while he says that the existence of natural geographical borders is a
factor, but not a primary one, in nation-formation, he later treats this same
factor as the most important element in nation-building, perhaps under the
influence of the ideology of the Syrian National Party of Antun Saæada (see
Chapter 6, section 2). This lack of consistency extends to the role of language
itself in nation-formation. Thus, whereas he says that language is more
important than geography in nation-formation (ibid.: 90), he later tells us that
it ranks third after geography and common interests in this enterprise (ibid.:
110). There is, however, no doubt that, overall, al-ÆAlayli treats language as one
of the most important ingredients in the formation of Arab nationalism, as I will
explain below.
Al-ÆAlayli’s interest in the role of Arabic in nation-building pertains mainly
to its communicative function, with some consideration for its symbolic

the arabic language and national identity
— 120 —
significance. This lack of concern with the symbolic dimension of the language
is consistent with al-ÆAlayli’s views on Arab nationalism, which exclude
religion in the traditional sense from its scope. Thus, Constitution lacks the usual
references in the Arab nationalist discourse to the symbolic significance of
Arabic in its capacity as the language of the Qur’an. The absence of these
references is all the more conspicuous owing to the pre-eminence of al-ÆAlayli as
one of the leading Muslim jurists of Lebanon in the twentieth century. But it is
the identity of this thinker as an Arab nationalist from Lebanon which holds
the key to explaining why he chooses to exclude religion as a factor in Arab
nationalism. Being aware of the divisive nature of religion in the Lebanese
context, the author excludes it as a factor in Arab nationalism, although he
recognizes the need to include its spiritual dimension and moral imperatives as
part of the fabric of the Arab nation. He expresses these views by saying that
“religion has no place in nationalism” (ibid.: 150), and that “religion is the
cause of all the catastrophes between the sons of the same nation, even the same
town” (ibid.). In this respect, he is different from the Lebanese nationalist
Kamal Yusuf al-Hajj, whose views will be dealt with in Chapter 6 (section 5.2),
and more akin to the Arab nationalist thinkers al-Husri and al-Arsuzi, as we
shall see below.
Al-ÆAlayli describes the role of language in nation-formation in four ways:
(1) language plays the greatest role in nation-formation (ibid.: 90), and it is the
mainstay in any stable national structure (ibid.: 104); (2) language is a national
habit (ibid.: 110); (3) language is not a product of race (ibid.: 90), which
amounts to a rejection of linguism (see Chapter 2, section 3); and (4) language
is a necessary but not sufficient ingredient in nation-formation. The other
ingredients of Arab nationalism in the order in which al-ÆAlayli lists them are
(after language): common interests, geography, common origin or race, common
history and common customs and traditions. However, al-ÆAlayli later divides
these factors implicitly into two categories: a primary category, incorporating
geography, common interests and language in this descending order of impor-
tance; and, a secondary category incorporating the rest, whose function is to
strengthen the working of the primary factors although they are not essential
constituents in defining the nation. This classification of the factors and their
ranking within the primary category contradicts the above description of the
role of language in nation-formation in two ways. On the one hand, it
compromises the position of language as the mainstay of nationalism by placing
it after geography and common interests in the primary category, as has been
pointed out earlier in this section. On the other hand, the treatment of
language as a “national habit” (ibid.) has the effect of removing it from the
primary category and assigning it to the less important secondary category or, at
least, of casting doubt on the legitimacy of assigning it completely to the

arabic, first and foremost
— 121 —
primary category of nation-formation ingredients. In spite of these contradic-
tions, there is no doubt that language for al-ÆAlayli remains one of the most
significant affiliative bonds in Arab nationalism.
Al-ÆAlayli points out that language delivers two important functions in the
nationalist enterprise. The first function is that of serving as a medium of
communication between those to whom it is a common tongue. By virtue of this
function, language creates bonds of affiliation between its users through the
exchange of ideas and experiences. And, as the means of recording the nation’s
history and past glories, in addition to articulating its culture and vision of the
future, language underpins these affiliative bonds and envelops them in such a
way that it becomes in itself a mirror of the nation’s feelings and thinking. In
playing this role, language brings its socializing function to bear on the
development of members of the nation in a way which no other nation-forming
ingredient can match. The second function of language, which is not unrelated
to the first, is that of serving as a boundary-setter between its speakers and
others (see Chapter 2, section 2). Al-ÆAlayli expresses this role of language by
pointing out how people tend to be drawn to those whose languages they share,
and how they may shun or ignore those whose languages they do not know.
Owing to the importance of language in nation-formation, al-ÆAlayli believes
that it is incumbent on the Arabs to nurture their language in at least two ways.
First, it is the duty of the specialists among them to simplify the language, to
improve the methods for teaching it, and to provide the tools which can protect
it against foreign infiltration and internally induced ossification, particularly in
the lexical field. It is in fact this realization on the part of al-ÆAlayli which made
him one of the most prolific writers on all aspects of the Arabic language. Thus,
in addition to his seminal publications Muqaddima li-dars lughat al-Æarab (1938,
published when he was 24 years old), al-MuÆjam (1954) and al-MarjiÆ (1963), al-
ÆAlayli published dozens of articles in many newspapers and magazines in
Lebanon and elsewhere in the Arabic-speaking world (see a list of these articles
in Tarhini 1985). Second, al-ÆAlayli believes that the Arabs must dedicate
themselves completely to their language and they must shun any form of
allegiance to other languages. In their ardent zeal for Arabic, the Arabs must
treat with “contempt and loathing” (1996: 103) any Arab who uses a foreign
language in preference to his own sacred and sublime tongue. In his dedication
to Arabic, al-ÆAlayli believes that in the context of Arab nationalism the
Cartesian principle “I think, therefore I am” must be replaced with the maxim “I
think in Arabic, therefore I am an Arab” (ibid.: 126–7).
Although this is nowhere explicitly stated in Constitution, there is no doubt
that al-ÆAlayli’s attack on foreign languages is intended as an attack on those
who treat French in Lebanon as a surrogate national language alongside Arabic,
their native tongue, or even in preference to it. In this sense, al-ÆAlayli’s views

the arabic language and national identity
— 122 —
on foreign languages are a culmination, in the intensity with which they are
expressed, of earlier views concerning the divisive role that foreign languages
played in Greater Syria in the second half of the nineteenth century and the
early part of the twentieth century. In this respect, al-ÆAlayli is the true heir of
al-ÆUraysi (see Chapter 4, section 3) and Ibrahim al-Yaziji (see Chapter 4,
section 4). On a different level, al-ÆAlayli’s attack on foreign languages in the
Arab context must be interpreted as an attack on those who wish to promote
extraterritorial bonds of affiliation with the speakers of the languages
concerned, for example the French in the Lebanese context (see Chapter 6,
section 5), or those who seek to promote what he regards as outmoded forms of
territorial nationalism as an alternative to an all-inclusive Arab nationalism
(see Chapter 6).
It should not, however, be understood from this that al-ÆAlayli disapproves of
all types of territorial nationalism in the Arab context. He distinguishes
between two types of territorial nationalism: (1) Arab territorialism, which he
conditionally approves of insofar as it considers itself a step towards overall
Arab nationalism and works vigorously to promote it, and (2) what he calls
geological-archaeological territorialism. He categorically rejects this form of
nationalism because, being schismatic and a fossilized form of self-definition, it
seeks to undermine and replace Arab nationalism as a form of group identi-
fication; examples of this type of nationalism are Phoenicianism in Lebanon,
Pharaonism in Egypt and Assyrianism in Iraq (see Chapter 6). Addressing the
proponents of these “reprehensible” territorial nationalisms, al-ÆAlayli invokes
the language factor in nation-formation to make the point that, since the
languages to which these nationalisms hark back are dead languages, these
nationalisms themselves must be declared dead too. Unlike Arabic, which is a
living language, the languages to which these ossified nationalisms refer failed
to withstand the challenges posed by other languages. In marked contrast to
these languages, Arabic expanded its pool of speakers through conquest or
through more peaceful exchanges between the Arabic-speakers and other
communities. These facts make Arabic more suitable than any of the pur-
portedly alternative languages to be the standard-bearer of Arabism as the only
viable form of national identification in the Arabic-speaking lands.
These ideas on language and national identity have found their way into the
early work of Nadim al-Bitar (1948–93). This writer describes the community of
ideas and feelings created by language using terms that are peculiar to al-ÆAlayli
in his Constitution, including ÆadwÅ (for the spread of ideas) and taÆaßßub (for
uncompromising dedication to the Arabic language). In some cases, he merely
paraphrases what al-ÆAlayli says: “language is the mainstay of any stable national
structure” (al-Bitar 1993: 192 and al-ÆAlayli 1996: 104). And: “language is no
more than thoughts and feelings masquerading as words” (al-Bitar 1993: 191

arabic, first and foremost
— 123 —
and al-ÆAlayli 1996: 34). The fact that an important nationalist thinker like
Nadim al-Bitar (1979, 1981, 1982) seems to follow in the footsteps of al-ÆAlayli
in explaining the role of language in nation-formation testifies to the
importance of the latter’s contribution to this area in Arab nationalist thought.
Al-Bitar highlights the two functions of language in nationalism: the
communicative and the differential or boundary-setting. By means of the former,
a nation comes together as a result of the transfer of ideas and feelings vertically
through time and horizontally across space. The existence of a print culture
which covers the four corners of the Arabic-speaking world is a testimony to
this power of the language. Through the latter function, a nation sets itself apart
from other nations. So important is language for differential identity in
nationalist thought that what is peculiar to a nation is hardly ever adequately
translatable into another language (see also Chapter 6, section 5.2). Although
al-Bitar does not pursue this point beyond these limits, it may be argued on the
basis of what he says here that the “untranslatability of the Qur’an” thesis –
which is widely held in the Arabic intellectual tradition – is but an expression of
the peculiarly Arab (national) character of the text of the revelation. In this
respect, he follows in the footsteps of al-Yaziji (see Chapter 4, section 4). In
addition, al-Bitar believes that language is worthier than a nation’s indepen-
dence for its survival. Thus, a nation which loses its independence may one day
regain it. But, if a nation loses its language, it will surely perish and die. This
explains the attempts by diasporic communities to preserve their languages,
whether functionally for in-group communication or symbolically for marking
the self against the other or for linking that self with its ethnic past (see Chapter
2, section 4). The fact that al-Bitar seems to be primarily concerned with the
functional (or communicative) role of language in national self-identification,
and only tangentially interested in its symbolic potential, further shows the
affinities between him and al-ÆAlayli, whose views on this issue were set out
above.
This similarity also extends to al-Bitar’s position towards territorial nation-
alism in its two forms above. Thus he rejects the schismatic type of this
nationalism, which he believes was aided and abetted by the colonial powers to
undermine the affiliative force of Arab nationalism. This, al-Bitar argues, is the
reason behind what he calls the shuÆËbÈ (see Chapter 3, section 5) attacks on the
Arabic language, which took the form of promoting the colloquials as media of
communication and as symbols of national identity at the state level. However,
his position concerning the second type of territorial nationalism, which
considers itself as a step on the way towards full Arab nationalism and state
unity, is a little more equivocal. Being aware that the Arabs in the second half
of the twentieth century were divided into several political entities, he had little
choice but to recognize that as long as these entities worked towards achieving

the arabic language and national identity
— 124 —
full Arab unity, then their brand of nation-statism may be tolerated. Al-Bitar
was prepared to tolerate this form of territorial nationalism as long as it remained
of a transitory character. And, in order to make sure that what is avowedly
intended to be transitory does not become permanent, he believes that it is
incumbent on entities of this type (1) to promote the idea of a single Arab state
as a nationalist political objective, and (2) to strengthen the forces of unity
between the Arabs, particularly on the language front. To achieve this aim,
measures of the kind suggested by al-ÆAlayli above must be put in place and
vigorously pursued.
However, al-Bitar is aware that this is a precarious position to take. This is so
because, more than any other Arab nationalist thinker I know of, he is fully
alive to the role of the state, whether this is intended or not, in creating a
sociopolitical dynamic within its own sphere of influence which can alter the
course of Arab nationalism. His views on this matter are guided by his reading of
history, wherein political unity in the past was regarded as the factor which
endowed particular groups of people with common bonds that were later put to
use as ingredients in nation-formation in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Applied to language in the Arab context, it would be possible to say that its
unifying role on the national level in the modern period was the result, rather
than the cause, of earlier political unity which projected it as a language of
widespread communication in its heyday. The fact that this was the case in the
past must surely indicate that it can happen again in the future, but in the
opposite, schismatic direction. Al-ÆAlayli was aware of this, but he sought to
counter it by taking an essentialist interpretation of Arab subjectivity and Arab
nationalism. Under this view, Arab nationalism, once formed, is not subject to
change, at least in a radical way. Unlike al-ÆAlayli, al-Bitar is an avowed
relativist and, as such, he is aware of the malleability of identity and of the
mutations it can undergo in response to the factors at work in its own socio-
political sphere. This means that none of the ingredients of nationalism he lists
in the Arab context (common race, common language, common history,
common territory, common literature, common culture, customs and traditions,
common interests, and the idea of one state) is immune to change, though some
are more resistant to manipulation by the state than others. Of all these
ingredients, language is the one which is most resistant to manipulation. It is
this fact which makes al-Bitar recognize Arabic as the principal affiliative bond
in Arab nationalism.
The view that Arabic is the principal centripetal force of Arab unity capable
of countering the centrifugal power of the territorial state is embedded in the
discourse of the BaÆth Party, and in that brand of Arab nationalism which the
late Egyptian President Nasser adopted in the wake of the dissolution of the
union between Egypt and Syria in 1961. Thus, article 9 of the constitution of

arabic, first and foremost
— 125 —
the BaÆth Party declares that the “official language of the [projected Arab] state, as
well as that of all the citizens, is Arabic” (Arab BaÆth Party 1962, “Constitution”).
This article further adds that Arabic “alone is recognised in correspondence and
in teaching”. Article 10 defines an Arab as one “whose language is Arabic, who
has lived on Arab soil, or who, after having been assimilated to Arab life, has
faith in his belonging to the Arab nation”. A similar position is taken by
President Nasser in al-MÈthÅq al-wa†anÈ (the National Charter), in which he
declares that the unity of language, history and aspirations (in this order)
between the various Arab peoples reveals the unity of the Arab nation and
point to its ability to overcome the political differences between the Arab states
(see Nassar 1994: 318–99). This unifying role of the language explains the
enormous interest in cultivating it as a medium of communication. Thus, in the
canon of Arab nationalism, cultivating the language becomes an article of faith,
as Ziyada (1950) states when he calls on Muslim and Christian Arabs to study
the Qur’an for its linguistic qualities, although for the former it is additionally
the source of their faith (see Chapter 4, section 4). The unifying role of Arabic
further explains the calls made by influential proponents of Arab nationalism to
protect it against infiltration by linguistic practices imported – directly or
indirectly – from outside. An example of this is the call made by the Iraqi
scholar and statesman ÆAbd al-Rahman al-Bazzaz (1956), who deplored the use
of foreign names in shop signs (including cinemas, theatres, hotels and so on) in
cities like Cairo, Baghdad and Beirut. Al-Bazzaz also deplored the importation
of the Western practice in vogue among some women in Arab society of using
their married names in preference to the indigenous Arab practice of keeping
their maiden ones. Believing that naming practices are language-cum-culture-
bound, and that it is the duty of the Arabs to protect their culture and the
naming philosophy (falsafat al-asmÅ’) embedded in it (see Chapter 3, sections 2–
3 for related views on names in nationalism), al-Bazzaz further deplored the use
of new and fashionable female names, for example Ahlam, Gharam, Ibtisam and
Hiyam in preference to such names as al-Khansa’, Asma’, Khawla, Fatima and
Khadija, which are culturally and historically sanctioned. The question of names
as a linguistic practice which can act on reality to further the political objectives
of Arab nationalism is taken up by al-Basir (1993b) in an article concerning the
reference to the Gulf as the Persian Gulf. In this article, first published in 1965,
al-Basir argues that the weight of historical and geographical evidence supports
the alternative name, the Arab or Arabian Gulf, and that this is the name
which the Arabs must use and promote to counter the effort by the aÆÅjim
(Persians and other foreigners) who use the rival label (Persian Gulf).
The above discussion shows that the early attempts at framing nationalism in
relation to language took two forms. Some writers on this topic failed to specify
whether or not all those to whom Arabic is a common language constituted a

the arabic language and national identity
— 126 —
single nation. Francis al-Marrash and Hasan al-Marsafi belong to this category.
Other scholars were more specific, for example Najib ÆAzury, who explicitly
excluded Egypt from the scope of his concept of an Arab nation. It was
suggested above that these conceptualizations of the membership of the Arab
nation were usually dependent on the nature of the political context in
reference to which they were framed. This approach is particularly relevant for
al-ÆAlayli and al-Bitar, who, in formulating their views, were aware of the role
played by French and the colloquial in some expressions of Lebanese
nationalism. As such, these conceptualizations must be regarded as historically
contingent, as – in theory – all other such conceptualizations are. Later attempts
at discussing the role of language in nation-formation – for example, those by al-
ÆAlayli and al-Bitar – made the nation coextensive with the community of
Arabic-speakers in the countries of the Middle East and North Africa. The most
famous attempt at formulating Arab nationalism in these terms was provided by
SatiÆ al-Husri, to whose ideas I will turn next.
3. satiÆ al-husri: arabic, first and foremost
3.1 Populism: A Question of Style
SatiÆ al-Husri (1880–1968) is the most influential exponent of the ideology of
Arab nationalism, which – rather than its political manifestations – will be the
subject of this section.5 Al-Husri’s sustained advocacy of this ideology in a
period extending over four decades was delivered through prose which has the
quality of immediacy, of face-to-face interaction. This stylistic feature is consis-
tent with the genesis of many of his writings as public lectures to audiences of
mixed professional backgrounds and educational achievements at different
kinds of fora in the Arabic-speaking countries, including cultural clubs, schools,
teacher-training colleges, universities, institutes of advanced higher education,
and radio audiences. This is reflected in the structure of his discourse, often
consisting of short sentences and of brief paragraphs, and in the use of lexical
cues which highlight this mode of communicative interaction, for example “at
any rate” (årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-wa†aniyya wa-l-qawmiyya, 1984a: 27), “Gentlemen!
Can you believe that …?” (ibid.: 51, 52), “At this very moment, I am looking at
the report …” (Óawl al-wa˙da al-thaqÅfiyya al-Æarabiyya, 1985i: 15), and many
others. It is also reflected in his resorting to (1) formulaic and slogan-like
repetitions (al-dawla shay’ wa-l-umma shay’ Åkhar, 1985d: 30, which may be
rendered as “the state and the nation are two different things”), (2) ideational
reiterations (al-ÆurËba fawq al-jamÈÆ, 1985d: 49, and al-ÆurËba awwalan, 1985f:
134, which may be rendered as “Arabism first and foremost”), and (3) the clever
use of extended analogies and engaging metaphors as heuristic aids to fix an idea
in the minds of his audiences, for example the likening of nations to great rivers

arabic, first and foremost
— 127 —
(ibid.: 19), or the view that the pull of the national language is similar to that of
the forces of gravity (1985j: 208). Through these and other stylistic devices like
the use of well-sited couplets, the reader enters into an oral-like communion
with al-Husri wherein this thinker performs the role of the educator and
teacher, in which he excelled in his life before and after the actual dissolution of
the Ottoman Empire in the wake of the First World War. This mode of delivery,
which often relates the content of the verbal and non-verbal interactions he
had with real or imagined interlocutors in face-to-face communication – at
times involving his son Khaldun – is consistent with his brand of populist
nationalism in whose propagation al-Husri is prepared to use all manners of
means, including explanation, persuasion, inculcation, indication, wooing and
enthusing, to address both the mind and the heart of his audiences (cf. Óawl al-
qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, 1985j: 16). Hence the description of his brand of
nationalism as populist.
On a different level, this oral-like quality of al-Husri’s discourse exhibits his
interest in linguistic performance as a mode of purposeful action (saying is
doing), whose aim is to bring about an attitudinal change in the interlocutor for
social or political ends. While personally shunning politics in the sense of
practice, which he calls “low politics”, al-Husri’s discourse is still political in the
“high” sense: it is intended to motivate people to achieve the political ends
lying behind the cultural nationalism which he firmly espouses. In this scheme
of things, al-Husri conceived of style as a means to an end, rather than as an end
in itself.6 In adopting this position, al-Husri conforms to his own stipulation
that the mission of literature in the formative stage of nation-building is one of
education and mobilization rather than one of achieving artistic elegance,
beauty and excellence for their own sake. This orientation on al-Husri’s part
does not spring from the fact that he spoke Arabic with a foreign accent, for
there is no doubt that he had a great facility in the language, and that he
devoted himself to it completely after he had made the break with Turkish as his
chosen medium of intellectual expression in 1919.7 We also know that, when
al-Husri made this linguistic break with his past, there was no going back on his
new Arabic-linked identity (see Cleveland 1971: 14).
This shift from Ottoman Turkish to Arabic marked a significant break in al-
Husri’s thought, but without causing a complete rupture in it. In this context,
the break was not just a linguistic one in the sense of exchanging a particular
communicative code for another, but a paradigmatic one in which a particular
mode of conceptualizing the nation, where language was treated as a secondary
factor, was replaced by another in which it was adopted as the primary criterion
of nationhood. Thus, whereas al-Husri the Ottomanist could say: “We cannot
accept the concept of the Germans [the German definition of the nation by
reference to language] because language is the least of the ties which bind the

the arabic language and national identity
— 128 —
Ottomans to one another” (translated from Turkish and quoted in Cleveland
1971: 38), al-Husri the Arabist repeatedly declared that the Arabs constitute a
nation by virtue of their sharing the same language, in addition to their having
a common history. The break in al-Husri’s thinking represented a replacement
in ideological terms of the French voluntarist idea of the nation, in which the
state is a necessary condition of nationhood but language is not, by the German
culture-orientated concept of the nation, in which the state is not a defining
criterion but language is (see Chapter 2, section 3). Whereas before the end of
the First World War al-Husri believed that the preservation of the Ottoman
Empire as a nation-state for all the disparate groups it encompassed – regardless
of their religious, ethnic or linguistic backgrounds – required the adoption of a
French-style concept of the nation, the final defeat of the Empire in that war
and the emergence of new states on its territory which resorted to language for
self-legitimation led al-Husri to espouse the German model of nationhood. The
fact that this German concept of the nation was judged to be the most appli-
cable model in the Arab context – wherein fragmentation had to be replaced by
unity as a political objective – gave greater significance to Arabic as an
ingredient in this enterprise. With hindsight, al-Husri could now reinterpret his
experiences as a state official in the Balkans in a way that publicly recognized
the power of language as a bond of nationality, whereas previously he had
tended to downgrade his assessment of this role, as has been pointed out above.
This shift from the French to the German mode of conceptualizing the nation is
summed up in the formula which al-Husri never tires of repeating: “al-dawla
shay’ wa-l-umma shay’ Åkhar” (1985g: 30), “The state and the nation are two
different things”. The fact that the two may sometimes coincide is not con-
sidered to be definitionally relevant by al-Husri, a view equally forcefully held
by al-ÆAlayli and, to a certain extent Nadim al-Bitar, whose ideas were dealt
with in the preceding section.
3.2 Nation, Language and Education
Nowhere is the continuity in al-Husri’s thought before and after the dissolution
of the Ottoman Empire more evident than in his belief in the role of education
as an instrument of modernization and nation-building. In the person of al-
Husri, the role of the nationalist thinker and the educator exist side by side, not
as autonomous or independent entities, but as vigorously interacting ones.8
Education, for al-Husri, can be meaningful only if it is truly nationalist in
character, at the level both of content and of practice. This explains why the
only official functions al-Husri the Arabist accepted in Syria, Iraq and Egypt
were all in the educational field, where he could use his position and influence
to promote nationalist education without getting directly involved in politics in
the “low” sense of the term. However, this continuity in the transition from

arabic, first and foremost
— 129 —
Ottomanism to Arabism in al-Husri’s career was marked by a subtle change in
his educational thinking. Whereas a voluntarist conception of the nation tends
to be liberal and democratic, targeting the individual before the community in
the educational enterprise, the cultural approach to the nation inverses this
order of priorities by giving more weight to the community over the individual
in pedagogic terms. This shift further requires giving more weight to sociology
over psychology in the pedagogic field. The fact that al-Husri was able to
accomplish this shift in pedagogical outlook in his Arabist phase signals an
intellectual reconciliation with Ziya Gökalp, the philosopher of Turkish
nationalism (see Chapter 4, section 2), with whom al-Husri debated the relative
weight of psychology and sociology in the educational field. Thus, while Gökalp
felt that sociology is more in tune with his brand of cultural nationalism, al-
Husri felt that psychology was more consistent with his voluntarist conception
of the Ottoman nation.9 This move in outlook on the part of al-Husri made
itself felt in his educational policies in Iraq, which, Cleveland tells us (1971:
63), “limited the scope of individual initiative and provided a coherent,
controlled national ideology throughout the school system”.
When al-Husri made the shift to Arabism as a cause and an ideology, he
espoused it completely and in an unwavering manner. This is clear from his
interest in a series of educational issues in the language sphere. One such issue is
his insistence on Arabizing the curriculum in Syria after the collapse of the
Ottoman Empire by making Arabic the sole language of instruction in the
schools, and by setting up a committee to find Arabic equivalents for foreign
terms, be they Turkish or European in origin. The same Arabizing drive was
relentlessly pursued in Iraq, where he sought to restrict the financial and
educational autonomy of the foreign-sponsored schools, which, for obvious
reasons, pursued their activities in a manner not fully cognizant of Arab
nationalism and the role of the Arabic language in it. In a similar fashion, al-
Husri decided to remove the teaching of foreign languages from the primary
schools in Iraq (see Chapter 6, section 4.2 for a similar position in Egyptian
nationalism). In arguing his case against his opponents, al-Husri states that the
introduction of foreign languages into the curriculum at this stage is detrimental
to national education because it takes time away from the national language
without serving the practical or cultural needs of the community in an effective
manner. He further points out that, since the difference between Arabic and
the major European languages is so great, the introduction of these languages in
the primary schools is bound to lead to confusion in learning terms. This is
further complicated by the diglossic nature of Arabic, which means that Arab
children have to learn the grammar of the fuß˙Å form of the language in
situations that are less than ideal in acquisition terms (see årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-
Æilm wa-l-akhlÅq wa-l-thaqÅfa, 1985c: 68–9). Al-Husri supports these arguments

the arabic language and national identity
— 130 —
by saying that the teaching of foreign languages at the primary stage in Europe,
even in situations where multilingualism obtains, as in Geneva, is delayed at
least until the end of the primary phase to avoid any confusion in language-
learning terms between the native language and the other co-territorial
languages. There is also a sense in which the removal of the foreign languages
from the primary schools represents for al-Husri a break with the colonial past,
since it was the policy of the colonial powers to promote their languages in the
countries they occupied to serve their own self-interests rather than those of the
peoples they ruled. An example of this in the Arab context was the French in
Algeria, who, al-Husri tells us (see A˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-tarbiya wa-l-ijtimÅÆ, 1984b: 87),
considered the primary role of education to be the promotion of the French
language to encourage feelings of allegiance towards France.
In the same vein, al-Husri also rejected the call by the Egyptian thinker Taha
Husayn to introduce Greek and Latin as compulsory subjects in the higher
education system in Egypt (see Chapter 6, section 4.2). Using the above
arguments concerning the need to devote time to learning the national language
– which, by virtue of its diglossic nature and the complexity of its pedagogic
grammars, is a demanding task – al-Husri aimed to counter alternative orienta-
tions at forging a national identity for Egypt which took it outside its Arab orbit
and the challenges of modernization this urgently demanded.10 In particular, al-
Husri considered the call to introduce these two languages into higher
education a false attempt to attach Egypt to, or to attach to it, a European and
Mediterranean conception of national self which negates, or at least weakens,
its Arab identity. In addition, al-Husri believed that the promotion of Greek
and Latin would, first, take away from the time available to the teaching of
modern European languages and, second, induce a classicism and elitism that
looked to the past, rather than to the future where the thrust of modernization
in the Arab context ought to lie. Furthermore, by rejecting Taha Husayn’s
position on Latin and Greek, al-Husri sought to oppose the slavish tendency
among Arab educationalists and other elites to formulate their views and
policies on grounds that are pertinent to the West rather than to the realities of
their own situation in its historical and properly modernizing context. Thus, al-
Husri insisted that the arguments advanced by some European educationalists
for the validity of Greek and Latin within their education systems cannot be
transferred to the Arab context with its own different historical and cultural
particularities. Al-Husri wanted to impress on his audience the need to consider
as a maxim of modernization that what is good for Europe is not necessarily good
for the Arabs. And this extends to the conceptualization of the nation, where it
is essential to adopt those views of it which fit the Arab context, although these
views may not be completely watertight in theoretical or empirical terms.

arabic, first and foremost
— 131 —
3.3 Defining the Arab Nation
Let us now turn to al-Husri’s conception of the nation. To begin with, this
conception is characterized by two features. First, it is cultural rather than
overtly political (see Chapter 2, section 3). Second, it belongs to the objective
rather than the subjective variety of definitions of the nation (see Chapter 2,
section 2).
The first feature implies that the state is not a necessary or even a sufficient
condition for the constitution of the nation. A nation can exist without being
associated with a state that is exclusively coterminous with it. Also, the
existence of the state does not guarantee that the people who live under its
sovereignty constitute a nation in their own right. This is sometimes referred to
as “the German mode of defining the nation” in the literature. It is, however,
important not to draw the conclusion from this association that al-Husri
identifies his conception of the nation with the views of the German Romantics
on the topic. Thus, although al-Husri shares with Herder, Fichte and Arndt the
view that language is the main ingredient of nationhood, he differs from the last
two in his refusal to ascribe to Arabic and the Arabs the status of “original”
language and “original” people as these two thinkers did for German and the
Germans (see section 4 on this issue). In addition, al-Husri adamantly refuses to
turn his interest in language as an ingredient of nationalism into what Kedourie
(1966) calls “linguism” (see Chapter 2, section 3), wherein ideas of race and
language are said to coincide, or are used to construct a platform from which to
launch claims of racial superiority towards other nations and their languages.
Finally, al-Husri does not direct his nationalist fervour against an external
Other in the same way as some of the German Romantics do in their vehement
denunciation of France and the French language. It is with these provisos in
mind that I refer to al-Husri’s conception of the nation as being in the German
mode.
This endogenous versus exogenous orientation in thinking about the nation
extends to al-Husri’s objective definition of the Arab nation in terms of
language and history. In this definitional enterprise, al-Husri is mainly inter-
ested in what binds the Arabs internally rather than in what marks them
externally from other nations and groups. Within this framework, the external
marking of the Arab nation becomes a function of its internally generated self-
definition rather than the other way round. This endows the Arab nation with
a degree of national self-sufficiency in existential terms which is not defini-
tionally or logically contingent on the existence of a differentiated Other –
what is sometimes called “playing the vis-à-vis” (see Chapter 1, section 2). This
to some extent underlies al-Husri’s refusal to accept the general interpretation
in the literature on Arab nationalism and modernism that the Napoleonic
invasion of Egypt – as a projection of a different Other – marked a turning point

the arabic language and national identity
— 132 —
in the cultural history of the Arabic-speaking people; it further explains his
refusal to treat this invasion as formatively instrumental in developing the
conditions which prepared the ground for the rise of this nationalism later in
the nineteenth century. Al-Husri, however, does not deny that Napoleon’s
invasion acted as a catalyst in this direction; but that is the end of the story (cf.
årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-tÅrÈkh wa-l-ijtimÅÆ, 1985e: 45–79).
Part of the rationale behind the discussion of the role of Arabic in group-
identity formulations in premodern times in this work (Chapter 3) is to lay the
grounds for claiming that al-Husri’s view on the commanding role of Arabic as
an ingredient of the national self in modern times is – in spite of being
traditionally associated with the German Romantics – ultimately rooted in its
own historical and cultural milieu. Two implications flow from this. The first is
that the Arabic intellectual tradition provides al-Husri with a definition of the
collective self in relation to language which he could utilize in a subtle, but
effective, manner in promoting his own nationalist ideas. Although al-Husri
does not explicitly tap into this tradition, giving an impression of almost
complete ideological modernity, he must of course have known that a definition
of the Arab collective self in relation to language would strike a chord with the
elite, and that it would satisfy the criterion of “resonance” by tapping into deep-
rooted attitudes towards the language on a more popular level (see Chapter 1,
section 2). The second implication makes the German Romantic influence on
al-Husri as much one of implying modernity as it is one of substance in
theoretical terms. The fact that Germany was the most highly regarded Euro-
pean power at the popular level among the Arabs in the nineteenth century and
most of the twentieth century, and that its condition of national fragmentation
in its formative stage most resembled that of the Arabs during this period, must
have acted as a catalyst in promoting al-Husri’s vision of what constitutes the
Arab nation.
Let us now consider al-Husri’s objective definition of the Arab nation. To
begin with, in comparison with most other definitions (for example, al-ÆAlayli’s
and al-Bitar’s above), al-Husri’s definition is compositionally minimalist in that
it refers to language and shared history (in that order) as the ingredients of this
nationalism. In discussing the relationship between these two ingredients, al-
Husri employs the following formula (which he repeats in several places in his
writings): “Language constitutes the life of a nation. History constitutes its
feeling. A nation which forgets its history loses its feeling and consciousness. A
nation which forgets its language loses its life and [very] being” (Mu˙Å∂arÅt fÈ
nushË’ al-fikra al-qawmiyya, 1985b: 51). Al-Husri further likens language to the
key which can enable an imprisoned nation to free itself (cf. årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ
al-wa†aniyya wa-l-qawmiyya, 1984a: 68). The importance of language in the
definition of Arabness on the individual and collective self levels is clear from

arabic, first and foremost
— 133 —
the following statement by al-Husri (årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya,
1985d: 46):
Every Arabic-speaking people is an Arab people. Every individual belonging to one
of these Arabic-speaking peoples is an Arab. And if an Arab does not recognize this,
and if he is not proud to be an Arab, we must look for the reasons that make him take
this position. His position may be the result of ignorance: in that case we must teach
him the truth. It may spring from a false consciousness and deception: in that case we
must awaken him and guide him on the right path. It may be the result of excessive
egoism: in that case we must try to limit his egoism. But under no circumstances
should we say: “He is not an Arab as long as he does not wish to be one, does not
accept his Arabness or is disdainful of it”. He is an Arab whether he wishes to be one
or not in his present condition. He is an Arab: an ignorant, unaware, recalcitrant or
disloyal Arab, but an Arab all the same. An Arab who lost his consciousness and
feelings, and may have even lost his conscience.
The following statement by al-Husri, which further reveals the role of language
in framing his nationalist ideology, amplifies the above specification of who an
Arab is (al-ÆUrËba awwalan, 1985f: 14–15):
Every individual who belongs to the Arab countries and speaks Arabic is an Arab. He
is so, regardless of the name of the country whose citizenship he officially holds. He is
so, regardless of the religion he professes or the sect he belongs to. He is so, regardless
of his ancestry, lineage or the roots of the family to which he belongs. He is an Arab,
[full stop].
Arabness is not restricted to those who can trace their origin back to the Arabian
Peninsula; nor is it restricted to Muslims alone. It encompasses every individual who
belongs to the Arab countries: whether he is Egyptian, Kuwaiti or Moroccan;
whether he is Muslim or Christian; whether he is Sunni, Twelver Shi’ite or Druze;
and whether he is Catholic, Orthodox or Protestant. [Regardless of what he is,] he is
a son of the Arab nation as long as he belongs to the Arab lands and speaks Arabic.
The above is tantamount to saying: “Tell me what your language is, and I will
tell you who you are”. But al-Husri’s interest in language as a nationalist
ingredient is far more cognizant of its functionality than of its power of
symbolism. Al-Husri is decidedly more interested in the role of language as a
means of communication in the nationalist enterprise than in its symbolic
connotations, although he is deeply aware of the role of symbols (flags, ceno-
taphs, border points, national anthems, stamps, coins and so on) in formulating
a view of the national self. This is why al-Husri considers the death of a
language to be genuinely tantamount to the death of the nation whose tongue it
is. Nations for al-Husri are living or natural organisms, in the social sense of the
term, and their vitality must therefore be reflected in the vitality of the
languages they speak. Similarly, the weakness of a language is indicative of the
weakness of the national spirit among its people. Language is therefore not just
an ingredient of the nation, but a barometer through which the condition of the

the arabic language and national identity
— 134 —
nation can be gauged. But what does it mean to say that al-Husri is interested in
the functional power of language in defining the nation? How is this function-
ality ideologized in al-Husri’s conception of Arab nationalism?
3.4 Arab Nationalism and the Ideologization of Language
The starting point for al-Husri in this matter is the role of language as that
factor of differentiation which sets the boundary between man and beast. As a
cognitive resource, language is the instrument of thought, which ceases to exist
without it. In addition, language is a means of socialization which bonds the
individual to a particular culture through child-rearing practices and experiences
at an early age. In this social capacity, language further serves as a means of
communication between the members of a particular community, thus facilitat-
ing the transmission of ideas and feelings between them and creating a feeling of
interpersonal intimacy in the process. As such, a language is a bonding agent
between those who speak it, bringing them closer to each other while, at the
same time, setting them apart from those who speak other languages. And, for
the purposes of this study, language is that factor which makes a people a nation
by enabling them to imagine themselves as a community that is internally
bonded and externally bounded, both synchronically and diachronically.11
Language is also the carrier of a nation’s culture, as this is expressed through its
literature and other modes of linguistic production. It is language as the
outcome of a common history and as the forger of cultural unity which creates
the will in a people to become a nation, thus contradicting Renan on this
matter, rather than the other way round. This is a clever move on the part of al-
Husri because it enables him to acknowledge the role of “will” in nation-
building, while at the same time claiming that this voluntarist mode of defining
the nation is but a product of the nation as a cultural construct at whose heart
lies the formative power of language. Under this interpretation, language remains
primary while will becomes secondary. Furthermore, language is considered as
the antecedent from which will flows as a consequent or second-order bonding
agent which can enhance the functional role of language as the nation-
formation factor par excellence.
This logical, even causal, ordering of factors at play in nation-formation
remains rhetorical in nature, in the sense that it is not possible to show in a
factually convincing or empirically testable manner that language is indeed the
antecedent, and will is the consequent, in nation-building. This challenges the
repeated assertions by al-Husri that his theory of a language-based Arab nation-
alism is historically valid, in the sense that it can transcend the evidential base
from which it is derived, at least in its German manifestation. To achieve this,
al-Husri deploys three strategies. The first admits that his theory is historically
contingent and, therefore, applies within a non-universalist and, to a certain

arabic, first and foremost
— 135 —
extent, eclectic framework. It is therefore a restricted theory of nationalism,
mainly fashioned to suit the Arab context (see Chapter 1, section 1). The
second strategy consists of providing evidence from within the realm of the
Ottoman Empire, in which the seeds of Arab nationalism were embedded, to
show that language is the criterion of nationhood par excellence. The third
strategy consists of reinterpreting what is projected as counter-evidence by his
opponents, and doing so in a way which turns this evidence into data that
corroborate rather than falsify his theory. In the following discussion, I will deal
with the last two strategies insofar as they apply to the role of language in
nationalism. The first strategy will not be considered here because of its quasi-
theoretical nature.
The second strategy is best illustrated by considering examples from within
the realm of the Ottoman Empire before its dissolution after the First World
War. The primary example in this respect is the Turkification of the Ottoman
Turks in matters of language, literature and history which served the cause of
Turkish cultural nationalism. It was pointed out in Chapter 4 (section 2) that
this cultural nationalism laid down the foundations for a Turkish political
nationalism, and that the latter in turn enhanced the later progress of the
former under Atatürk. The fact that Turkish was used as a national bond
between those to whom it was a common language, inside and outside the
Ottoman Empire, is regarded by al-Husri as a confirmation of the efficacy of
language as an identity-marker. In addition, the fact that Turkish was made to
undermine the bond of religious brotherhood between Ottoman Turks and
Ottoman Arabs who professed Islam provides further evidence of this role of
language in nation-formation. This same pattern was evident in the Balkans,
especially within those Ottoman communities which belonged to the Orthodox
Church. It was also evident among the Albanians, who resorted to language in
constructing their national identity, thus overriding their division into Muslims
and Catholics, on the one hand, and undermining the religious bond which
held between the Muslims among them and the Ottoman Turks, on the other.
Within the Balkan context, the Greeks are said to constitute an interesting
example of the above trend of relying on language, as an ingredient of culture,
in framing their national identity. Al-Husri puts forward the view that the
Greek language and the Orthodox faith were both relevant in keeping Greek
identity alive in the Ottoman Empire, but that language was more significant in
this enterprise than religion. Whereas the Greeks were distinct from the Turks
in both language and religion, they were distinct from other Orthodox
communities inside the Empire in language alone. This the Greeks never tired
of using to their advantage, in all affairs of the Church, at the expense of other
Orthodox communities, for example the Bulgarians. In addition, language was
the major factor deployed by the Greeks as an organizing principle in resisting

the arabic language and national identity
— 136 —
the attempts to bring them into the Russian sphere of influence towards the
close of the nineteenth century. Al-Husri adds that it was the pull of language
and common culture, aided by that of religion, which led to the incremental
expansion in the areas brought under Greek sovereignty in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. Areas newly liberated from under Ottoman control
joined other already independent Greek areas with which they shared a
linguistic bond over and above the religious one.
This trend of putting language before religion in constructing national
identity in the Balkans is said by al-Husri to have been exhibited very clearly in
the Bulgarian context. He explains this by reference to the double dominance
over the Bulgarians by (1) the Turks in the political domain, and (2) the Greeks
in the cultural sphere. In their struggle for national independence, the Bulgar-
ians first sought to liberate themselves from the cultural hegemony which the
Greeks – through the Orthodox Church and its associated institutions and
liturgical practices – exercised over them. This effort consisted of attempts which
revolved around establishing Bulgarian as the language of education, culture and
religion. Al-Husri sketches out the methods used by the Bulgarians to achieve this
aim. Schools which taught in Bulgarian, not Greek, started to appear towards
the middle of the nineteenth century. This had the effect of turning what had
previously been a spoken language into a written one around which a thriving
cultural industry of dictionary-making, grammatical scholarship and translation
coalesced. Most significant in the last domain was the translation of the Bible
from Greek into Bulgarian during this period. Calls to use Bulgarian in the
Church liturgy started to appear, but they were met by stiff Greek opposition on
the grounds that Greek was a language of the Scriptures and, therefore, the only
legitimate one for articulating it in formal church settings. To overcome this
opposition, calls were made to establish a Bulgarian Orthodox Church, which
would differ from its Greek counterpart in matters of language only. Exploiting
the political situation which made them administratively subject to an
Ottoman Empire that was keen to weaken the Greeks, the Bulgarians in 1870
obtained a Royal Decree from the Ottoman Sultan permitting them to establish
their own Church. The effect of this was to strengthen Bulgarian culture and to
underpin the movement for political independence from the Ottoman Empire
by exploiting religion as a motivating factor in it. Al-Husri further tells us that
this same pattern obtained in Romania, where a Romanian language-based
cultural independence from Greek hegemony eventually led to political
independence from the Ottoman Empire.
The situation in Yugoslavia provides an interesting case study for testing the
limits of al-Husri’s theory of nationalism. In dealing with the historically,
politically and religiously complex situation in this area, al-Husri is sometimes
more cautious about positing a direct and formative link between language and

arabic, first and foremost
— 137 —
nation-formation – or he is less assertive about the finality of this link. This
reflects the awareness on his part that history, in particular, can work in the
opposite direction to language in nation-formation. One feels, however, from
the tenor of al-Husri’s treatment of the subject, which was made public for the
first time in 1948, that he is hopeful that the course of future events will confirm
the historical adequacy of his theory – or its predictive power, to use a more
accurate concept. This is evident from his statement that “the feeling of
national unity in Yugoslavia is sufficient to overcome [all the forces of division
in this country] and to put an end to all local-territorial tendencies” (Mu˙Å∂arÅt
fi nushË’ al-fikra al-qawmiyya, 1985b: 83). The fact that what al-Husri expected,
suspected or strongly hoped would be the case has been shown by the events of
recent years to be more in the realm of wishful thinking than in the domain of
historical reality may be taken as a refutation of his theory of nationalism, at
least insofar as it claims that language is the primary factor in nation-formation.
It is, however, not very difficult to imagine how al-Husri might have
responded to this criticism. On the one hand, he might have pointed to the
cautious note of his predictions, and to the fact that history, which is the second
factor in nation-formation under his theory, has on this occasion assumed
greater formative power over language. To make this point, al-Husri would have
had to show and explain that historical differences between the constituent
members of Yugoslavia (Serbs, Slovenes, Croatians and Bosnians) played a more
dominant role than the unifying power of language, or that these differences
were far too great to be overcome by the unifying power of language. On the other
hand, al-Husri might have pointed to Yugoslavia as a test case which proves the
empiricism of his theory in the Popperian sense of the term, that is, its ability to
refer to factual situations against which it can be judged. Yugoslavia might have
been further projected as yet another example which shows the limits of al-Husri’s
theory, or its non-universality, a point he himself openly admits in a pre-emptive
move to deflect any anticipated criticism. But he might also have deployed
counter-strategies of the type he employed to reject the following supposedly
recalcitrant cases, which are said by his critics to refute the theoretical and
descriptive adequacy of his theory concerning language in nation-formation.
These cases divide into two categories. The first category involves the
secession of one territory from another, in spite of the linguistic bond that holds
between them. This includes (1) the separation of the United States of America
from Great Britain, and (2) the separation of the countries of Latin America
from Spain and Portugal, although this will not be dealt with here because it
replicates the arguments applicable to (1) above. The second category involves
the unity of multilingual states, for example Belgium and Switzerland, against
the expectation of fragmentation along linguistic lines as predicted, or projected
to happen, under al-Husri’s theory. Al-Husri acknowledges the suggestive power

the arabic language and national identity
— 138 —
of these examples, but he still considers them to be in line with his theory. To
explain this, al-Husri resorts to analogy as one of his favourite rhetorical devices
to convince his audience that what may seem to be refuting evidence is in fact
misdirected and not properly interpreted. Thus he likens the above examples to
smoke which rises up in the atmosphere in seeming refutation of the law of
gravity, although in fact its behaviour is in total conformity with this law. Let us
now consider the above chosen examples in more detail.
Al-Husri’s treatment of the USA consists of four elements. The first element
is based on the idea that, since the USA seceded from Great Britain before the
age of nationalism, it cannot be validly treated as a refuting evidence of his
theory. This is one of the major premises of nationalism studies which al-Husri
uses to promote his theory in a number of places in his extensive output on the
subject, although he does this selectively. The second element considers the
independence of the USA as the result of the desire on the part of those who
were behind it to rid themselves of the unfair tax-raising policies and other
economic restrictions which the British sought to impose on them. They were
aided in this by the physical separation of the USA from Great Britain. This is
essentially an argument from history which, al-Husri reminds us, is a relevant
factor in his theory. However, the fact that physical separation was invoked as
an aiding factor in this process is seen by some critics of al-Husri as an admission
on his part that geography, contrary to what he repeatedly asserts, is a relevant
factor in nation-formation. The third element seeks to challenge the general
view that the language of the USA was exclusively English throughout its
history. He does this by introducing an implicit distinction between the
“official” language and the language of the home in the USA, and another
distinction between the majority language and other minority languages in the
country. Thus he argues that, although English was the language of the states
which formed the original federation, these were later joined by other states in
which Spanish or French, not English, was dominant. Although English had
the upper hand in this situation, it nevertheless was not the only language. This
situation of linguistic diversity continued to exist under the influence of waves
of immigrants who introduced their languages into the country and kept them
alive through further immigration injections, community schools and associa-
tions, and migrant literatures. Al-Husri believes that this situation of linguistic
diversity weakens the argument that English was a binding force, of the type he
posits in his theory, between the USA and Great Britain.12 The fourth element
shows al-Husri’s ingenuity in arguing his case. It consists of a turning of the
tables against his critics by pointing out that, if the Americans can still agree to
live together in a united state, in spite of their linguistic diversity, then how
much more it behoves the Arabs to be more determined to achieve the same
kind of unity, in view of their linguistic unity.

arabic, first and foremost
— 139 —
Let us now deal with the second category above. Al-Husri considers the unity
of Belgium, in spite of the country’s bilingual character, to be the result of its
history and the distribution of its two languages, French and Flemish. He points
out that the intense rivalry between France and Britain in the nineteenth
century was instrumental in establishing Belgium as a buffer-state whose
territorial integrity was essential for the balance of power between the two
competing nations and the cause of peace in Europe. In the linguistic realm, the
intricate distribution of the two languages in Belgium, whereby their speakers
live cheek by jowl not only in the big urban centres but also in the smallest of
villages, has meant that no sensible separation of the two language communities
can be achieved without a demographic upheaval on a massive scale. Turning to
Switzerland, al-Husri points to its status as a buffer-state that keeps its more
powerful neighbours apart as an important factor in its political unity (see also
Chapter 6, section 5.2). Furthermore, the fact that the various language
communities in Switzerland enjoy full control over their own affairs – except
defence and foreign relations – within a vastly devolved system of government
has ensured the continuity of the union between them. Al-Husri concludes that
the special character of these two examples is too limited in empirical terms to
constitute a refutation of his theory. In addition, al-Husri invokes the theore-
tical premise of the categorial difference between nation and state to claim that
Switzerland and Belgium are states, not nations.
Al-Husri (see årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-wa†aniyya wa-l-qawmiyya, 1984a: 75–81)
reiterates these arguments in his critique of the Egyptian thinker Taha Husayn,
who cites the above cases to argue that language cannot form the basis of
nation-formation between Egypt and the other Arabic-speaking countries (see
Chapter 6, section 4.2). In a similar manner, al-Husri refuses to concede any
ground to Lutfi al-Sayyid (see Chapter 6, section 3), Hafni Mahmud Pasha and
the writer Ihsan ÆAbd al-Quddus, who cite the history of Greece, Turkey and
the USA respectively in support of their views that language is not an ingred-
ient in nation-formation in the Arab context. Al-Husri also rejects as bogus all
the attempts to construct Egypt’s identity in Eastern, African, Mediterranean,
Pharaonic or Islamic terms. He declares that Egypt is an Arab country because
its language is Arabic, and that being Arab in national terms does not deny
Egypt’s past and the role this past may play in modulating its identity (see
Chapter 6, sections 3, 4, 4.1–2). Al-Husri acknowledges that some Egyptians
may feel a bond with their Pharaonic past, but this is a bond with a past that is
linguistically dead. And since language is the vehicle and substance of culture,
the only bond that the Egyptians can meaningfully have in national-identity
terms perforce goes through this language. Egyptian culture, according to al-
Husri, must therefore be defined as Arab culture; and, since Egypt shares its
language with other Arabic-speaking countries, it must therefore share this

the arabic language and national identity
— 140 —
culture with them too. This is a significant result for al-Husri, who stresses that
“the unity of culture guarantees all forms of unity” (årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-
wa†aniyya wa-l-qawmiyya, 1984a: 81). Thus, the linguistic unity of Egypt enables
the Egyptians to overcome the divisions which religion may induce between
them. Furthermore, the unity of Egypt with other Arabic-speaking countries
opens the possibility for Egypt to assume a leadership role which it would
otherwise be denied. The call “Egypt for the Egyptians” turns out under this
analysis to be against Egypt’s interests, both internally and externally. Al-Husri
concludes his argument by claiming that, as an exercise in self-generation, a
territorially conceived national identity for Egypt is short-sighted and miscon-
ceived. The fact that such a statement cannot be properly tested is of no
concern to al-Husri.
The attempt by al-Husri to downgrade the role of religion as a factor of
national identity in Egypt, a point on which he goes far beyond the limits
advocated by Taha Husayn, is symptomatic of his secular conception of Arab
nationalism. Al-Husri’s reading of the history of nationalism in the Balkans is
seen as a historical confirmation of this view. Al-Husri believes that this
situation, in what is essentially a Christian sphere of religious identification, is
applicable in the Islamic context. A paradigm example of this is the fragmenta-
tion of the Ottoman Empire into separate entities, in spite of the unity of
religious belief between the Turks and the majority of the Arabic-speaking
Ottomans under its jurisdiction. Al-Husri sees this as a vindication of his
theory, and he therefore approves of the separation between nation-formation
and religion which is one of the cornerstones of Turkish nationalism under
Atatürk. To the best of my knowledge, this approval of Atatürk is rarely echoed
by other Arab nationalists.
3.5 Nation, Language and Religion
Al-Husri’s views on the secular character of Arab nationalism hold enormous
interest for political scientists and scholars of nationalism. In the present work,
however, I will restrict myself to the way in which these views impinge on the
interaction between language and religion in al-Husri’s thinking. To begin with,
al-Husri believes that, in the age of nationalism, religion can be an effective
factor in nation-formation when it is of the exclusivist type, for example
Judaism, thus allowing for the coincidence of language with religion in nation-
formation. This is not applicable to universal religions like Christianity and
Islam, owing to the multilingual nature of their faith communities. However, it
would be wrong to conclude from this that al-Husri denies that religion can play
a role in nation-formation. Any role which religion plays must nevertheless be
articulated through its contribution to the language, by spreading and
protecting it against fragmentation. Thus, al-Husri claims that the role of Islam

arabic, first and foremost
— 141 —
in nation-formation is relevant only to the extent that it enhances the position
of Arabic as the factor around which conceptualizations of the Arab nation can
coalesce. In this context, the fact that Islam turned Arabic into the language of
a vibrant culture, and led to the Arabization of many communities, is a relevant
factor in Arab nation-formation. But, he adds, this does not make Arabic an
Islamic language in national-identity terms, that is, in the sense of serving as a
focal point in the calls for Islamic unity as an alternative to Arab unity. Islam is
a relevant factor in Arab nationalism insofar as it was involved in drawing,
through the spread of Arabic, the boundaries within which the nationalist idea
can be activated and promoted in modern times. Islamicized but non-Arabized
parts of the realm of Islam fall outside the scope of this idea.
This decoupling of religion, on the one hand, from nation and language, on
the other, explains two important features of al-Husri’s projection of Arabic as
the ingredient of national identity par excellence in the Arab context. The first
feature concerns the absence of the usual references to Arabic as the language of
the Qur’an in setting out the case of the importance of the language in cultural
terms. In addition, this feature is represented in the refusal to exploit for
ideological ends the references to the language in the Qur’an itself and the body
of the ˙adÈth literature (see Chapter 3, section 2). These references are conspi-
cuous by their uncompromising absence, unlike the references to the role of
literature in forming the national culture.
The second feature consists of breaking what al-Husri implicitly considers as
the Muslim monopoly over the language by emphasizing the role it plays in the
life of the Christian Arabs. In particular, he highlights the use of the Bible in
Arabic by the Christian Arab communities, a trend in which the Protestant
missions in Lebanon played a leading role through their epoch-making trans-
lation of the Bible and use of the local language in the liturgy (see Chapter 4,
section 3). In addition, al-Husri highlights the fact that it was the Christian
Arabs of the Levant who, through their formative participation in the literary
renaissance of the nineteenth century, have made of Arabic in modern times a
language worthy of serving as the marker of an Arab national identity and as the
medium of cultural and scientific modernization. By so doing, Christian Arabs
provided their Muslim compatriots in the Ottoman Empire with the means
through which they could fashion a collective identity for themselves that
finally broke the bond of religious identity between them and Ottoman Turks.
Thus language, not religion, came to be the highest common denominator
between the Arabs in national terms.
Al-Husri’s insistence on language rather than religion as a common bond of
national identity among the Arabs is clearly designed to override the religious
differences existing between them. The fact that religious and denominational
identifications were used by the French authorities in Alexandretta (the Hatay

the arabic language and national identity
— 142 —
region in south-western Turkey) to break up the linguistically based unity of the
population in this area, in order to produce a census count in which the Turks
were a majority, is seen by al-Husri as an example of the divisive potential of
religious and sectarian affiliations. This explains al-Husri’s rejection of all forms
of religious and sectarian identification in the national body politic, as the last
quotation above sets out. However, by ignoring the fact that language may also
divide as much as religion does in the Arab world, at least insofar as the exist-
ence of other sizeable language communities is concerned (for example, the
Berbers and the Kurds), al-Husri fails to offer a comprehensive argument in
favour of his view that Arabic is the highest common denominator in the
formation of the Arab nation.
3.6 Between the Standard and the Dialects: The Case for Linguistic Reforms
The search for the highest common denominator in Arab nation-formation via
language is responsible for al-Husri’s rejection of all tendencies which promote
the dialects at the expense of the standard language. Thus, he rejects the view
which calls for the formation of as many Arab nation-states as there are
perceptibly overarching Arab dialects. He also rejects the view which correlates
the present boundaries of the Arab states with discrete linguistic boundaries of
the dialectal kind. Applying the nationalist principle that “language defence is
nation defence”, al-Husri sets out to show the untenability of the above views,
which the Syrian National Socialist Party of Antun SaÆada (see Chapter 6,
section 2) puts forward to counter his language-based Arab nationalism. Al-
Husri argues that the so-called nation-state dialects (for example, Iraqi, Syrian,
Lebanese or Egyptian Arabic), on which his opponents confer the status of
languages, are linguistic labels of little empirical validity beyond their descrip-
tive and geographical domains. Thus, what is traditionally called Iraqi Arabic is
no more than an idealized form of a dominant dialect of Baghdad and the areas
surrounding it. This dialect is different from the dialect of Mosul, in the same
way as the dialect of Aleppo is different from that of Damascus, although the
latter is erroneously referred to as Syrian Arabic. What we have, according to al-
Husri, is a dialect continuum which does not correlate with the borders of the
Arabic-speaking states. Al-Husri further points out that, if the principle of
dialect difference as a correlate of state boundaries demarcation is to be applied
throughout the Arabic-speaking countries, we would end up with far more states
than we presently have. Not only would this lead to more fragmentation than
even the supporters of Antun SaÆada are willing to countenance, but it would
also make a mockery of any attempt to construct a theory of Arab national
identity in relation to language. And, in the absence of another equally
effective principle of nation-formation, the Arab nation would cease to exist.
Thus, what the Arabs need is a unified language which can in turn unify them,

arabic, first and foremost
— 143 —
an instrument of fusion rather than fission. Or, as al-Husri puts it, the Arabs
need a “unified and unifying language” (“lugha muwa˙˙ada wa-muwa˙˙ida”, in FÈ
al-lugha wa-l-adab wa-ÆalÅqatihimÅ bi-l-qawmiyya, 1985h: 30), rather than a series
of dialect-languages which will lead to further fragmentation in the Arab body
politic.
In defending this “unified and unifying language”, al-Husri rejects the view
that the standard language and the dialects will go the way of Latin and its
daughter languages. Al-Husri argues that the two situations are vastly different.
Standard Arabic, unlike Latin, never lost its dominance in its linguistic heart-
land. This dominance was maintained through the close association between
Arabic and Islam in the capacity of Arabic as the language of the Qur’an. Thus,
even when the Arabs came under the control of the Ottomans, whose rule
lasted almost half a millennium, standard Arabic never lost its position of
dominance in relation to Turkish. This ensured the continuity of the language
as the medium of education and culture. Furthermore, in spite of the diglossic
nature of the Arabic language situation, the standard language remained intelli-
gible to the elite and, in modern times, gained access to an expanding number of
school-educated people. The media, press and electronic, have enhanced this
trend. If anything, the trend will be towards convergence, not divergence, in
intelligibility between the local varieties and standard Arabic. This, al-Husri
believes, will be achieved through a middle form of Arabic in which the
standard is cross-fertilized with the dialects (ibid.: 30).
This vehement defence of the standard language contrasts sharply with the
lukewarm defence al-Husri provides against the calls to replace the Arabic
script by a Roman alphabet. In the literature on the subject, the argument is
always made that changing the Arabic script would inevitably lead to a massive
rupture with the cultural heritage of the Arabs. The point is also sometimes
made that the Turks were able to implement the reform of the script because of
an impoverished cultural legacy (whatever that means), a situation which did
not pertain to the Arabs. Al-Husri does not mention either of these two
arguments, especially the former. Rather, he points out that any such change
must take place under conditions of national unity and must be sponsored by a
leadership that has the political will, power and resources to implement it. But,
since none of these conditions exists in the Arab context, the calls for the
reform of the script are bound to lead to friction, division and the dissipation of
national energy which is better spent pursuing the goals of unity and modern-
ization.
Clearly, al-Husri objects to the calls to change the script not on grounds of
principle, but on the basis of expedience. The impression one gets from what he
says is that he would have gone along with this change if the conditions in the
Arabic-speaking countries were different. If so, this raises the question as to why

the arabic language and national identity
— 144 —
al-Husri would espouse such a change. The answer may partly lie in the fact that
al-Husri does not believe that the way a language is written is one of its
inalienable linguistic properties, the implication being that a change of the
script does not mean a change of the language as a system sui generis. Although
al-Husri does not explicitly make this point, it is not unreasonable to assume
that he would accept it. The evidence for this may be derived from his view that
the “Arabic language is one thing, and traditional Arabic grammar is another”
(see A˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-tarbiya wa-l-ijtimÅÆ, 1984b: 53). This is a sophisticated view of
the language which goes against the naive-realist, or God’s-truth, grain of the
Arabic grammatical tradition (see Suleiman 1999c). But such a view of language
is not in itself sufficient to make a thinker who regards it as a criterion of the
nation accept the abandonment of its script lightly. We must therefore assume
that al-Husri’s lukewarm opposition referred to above is the result of something
deeper. Although we do not have evidence for it, it is possible that al-Husri
would have linked such a change to the imperatives of national unity and
modernization, to counter the tendency among the Arabs to look back to a past
in which religion, rather than the secularized forces of language and history,
provided the underpinnings of the future. This, however, will remain in the
realm of speculation.
Al-Husri seems to subscribe to the principle that, like charity, modernization
in a linguistically defined nation must begin at home by reforming the language
itself. Al-Husri considers this principle a part of the strategic edifice of his
nationalist theory. In tactical terms, however, the reform of the language is
considered by him as the best means of defence against external attack, or as a
corrective remedy which can energize the language and make it more suitable to
deliver at an enhanced level of nationalist participation. Writing almost half a
century ago, al-Husri says that Arabic is going through a “stage of change and
transformation after a period of stagnation and inertia” (FÈ al-lugha wa-l-adab
wa-ÆalÅqatihimÅ bi-l-qawmiyya, 1985h: 7), and that this requires the input of all
those with an interest in the language, whether linguists or non-linguists. It is
for this reason, and because of his interest in Arabic as the mainstay of his
nationalist theory, that al-Husri delves into matters of linguistic reform.
Al-Husri’s reforms are informed by three principles. The first principle
involves the need to reach a rapprochement between the dialects and the
standard language; this is important to prevent the diglossic situation of Arabic
from turning into a multilingual state of inter-nation differentiation rather than
remaining one of intra-nation variation. He thus calls for negotiating the
difference between the two forms of the language through active grammatical
and lexical intervention, in a two-pronged process of levelling up and levelling
down. Language, al-Husri argues, is a living object which must respond to the
needs of its users if it is to survive and develop. And, since it is not realistic to

arabic, first and foremost
— 145 —
expect the standard to replace the dialects in one fell swoop, it is therefore
prudent to seek a middle kind of Arabic which can bring this goal into the realm
of possibility.
The second principle declares that traditional Arabic grammar, whether in
its descriptive or pedagogic form, is different from the grammar of the language
in the predescriptive sense. Although this is a methodologically sound prin-
ciple, al-Husri invokes it not for its empirical value but to pre-empt the charge
that his ideas on grammatical reform would distort the structural integrity of the
language. His intention, he declares, is the simplification of pedagogic grammar,
not the distortion of the language as a self-contained system. This may at times
involve a different presentation of the facts of grammar from the one tradition-
ally available in traditional pedagogic grammars. It may sometimes involve
offering semantically based definitions of grammatical categories, in place of the
traditional definitions which invoke the formal, or inflectional, character of
words in constructions. At other times, the required simplification may be
achieved by eliminating the various kinds of causes (see Chapter 3, section 3)
that make the formal acquisition of grammar such a chore to the learners. In
some cases, the simplification of grammar must respond to the clearly perceived
needs of the speakers. A good example of this is the need to introduce what al-
Husri calls a possessive article into Arabic grammar to encode the idea
expressed by mÅl in Iraq, dhyÅl in Morocco, bitÅÆ in Egypt, ˙agg in the Arabian
Peninsula, and shét in Syria (ibid.: 118–19). Al-Husri is, however, aware that
none of these proposals for simplification can succeed without challenging “the
conservative spirit” (ibid.: 67), and the “paralysis of familiarity” (ibid.), that
pervade Arabic grammatical thinking.
The third principle declares that lexical, particularly terminological, develop-
ment in Arabic is not possible without admitting the following: (1) Arabic has
an impoverished terminological stock to designate the never-ending stream of
scientific concepts in the modern world; (2) this impoverishment is not one of
lexical resources per se, but of lexical inertia and a feeling of linguistic smugness
which wrongly interprets the static vastness of the Arabic lexicon as a sign of its
dynamic richness; and (3) the surest way of plugging the terminological gap in
Arabic is to espouse the modern sciences in an active and formative way, rather
than in a passive and summative manner. To achieve the goal of lexical
innovation, the resources of the language – including derivation, Arabicization
and the much-neglected blending – must be pressed into service. In pursuing
this task, the linguists can take advantage of the conventionality of terms as
labels, to seek equivalents in Arabic which designate their concepts without
necessarily translating them faithfully. They can also take advantage of the fact
that the lexical currency of a term can eliminate any feeling of “strangeness” or
“foreignness” which may be associated with it during the initial stages of its

the arabic language and national identity
— 146 —
introduction. The cause of lexical reform may be enhanced further by working
towards lexical harmonization between the Arabic-speaking countries. As an
example, al-Husri gives the names of the calendar months which differ between
the various Arab countries. Al-Husri calls for the standardization of these names,
giving preference to the indigenous ones over their borrowed counterparts.
Al-Husri’s views on the role of language in nation-formation reflect a multi-
plicity of influences. There is first the influence of the German Romantics.
Second, al-Husri’s direct experience of life in the Balkans and in the Turkish
part of the Ottoman Empire provided him with confirmation of the efficacy of
this connection between language and nation. The fact that Arabic was a high-
prestige language in the eyes of its speakers meant that its role as the mainstay of
his nationalist thinking needed little demonstration or validation. In tapping
into these sources of theoretical argumentation and empirical validation, al-
Husri was mainly interested in the functional, as distinct from the symbolic, role
of the language. He was also able to frame his nationalist views in secular terms,
thus marginalizing almost to the point of extinction the connection between
Arabic and Islam. Al-Husri was very adept at negotiating his way through
competing theoretical positions. Thus he never allowed the legitimizing power
of the past to overwhelm his commitment to modernization. Each had its role,
but he was more interested in modernization as a twin force of nation-formation
than in investing the future with the authenticity of the past. To this end, he
projected his treatment of the role of Arabic in nation-formation onto a canvas
of European history, which he had to interpret in such a way as to ascribe to his
views the legitimacy of modernity and the power of future promise. The path of
nation-formation, modernization and secularization is well trodden. Europe has
paved the way. The Arabs can follow, but only if they can make the kind of
attitudinal adjustments and task-orientation shifts explained above.
4. zaki al-arsuzi: the genius of the arab nation inheres
in its language
Although he was a contemporary of al-Husri – and also a strong believer in the
role of Arabic as the criterion which defines the Arabs as a nation – the Syrian
Zaki al-Arsuzi (1900–68) is almost unknown in Western scholarship on Arab
nationalism. References to him tend to concentrate on the overtly political and
irredentist dimensions of his ideology (cf. Khadduri 1970). References to the
central role which language plays in his thinking are almost completely absent
in this scholarship (cf. Suleiman 1997: 135–7). The situation in Arab(ic)
scholarship on the nation and nationalism is only marginally better (see Ahmad
1981, ÆAla’ al-Din 1971, Barakat 1977/8, Nassar 1994 and Nuh 1994), in spite
of the fact that al-Arsuzi’s ideas started to appear in print in the early 1940s, and

arabic, first and foremost
— 147 —
that his complete works (six volumes, totalling some 3,000 pages) have been
available since the mid-1970s. It is interesting to note in this context that,
despite their abiding interest in the language and their common belief that the
Arab nation is defined by it, al-Husri and al-Arsuzi do not refer to each other. It
is as though a wall of silence exists between them. If one reads al-Husri on his
own, one would be excused for thinking that al-Arsuzi does not exist, and vice
versa. In this world of disjunctive nationalist theorization, al-Husri emerges as
the winner. It is his ideas rather than those of al-Arsuzi which have defined for
us the conceptualization of the Arabic language as the nationalist ingredient par
excellence.
It would be interesting from the viewpoint of the history of ideas, in any full
treatment of Arab nationalism, to try to understand how this situation arose.
Here, a few points related to language will suffice. First, although al-Husri and
al-Arsuzi are both masters of repetition as a didactic strategy in the dissemina-
tion of their ideas, and although both ideologues pepper their discourses with
anecdotes for a similar purpose, al-Arsuzi’s use of Arabic seems to be self-
defeating: it excludes rather than includes. It is a barrier to be overcome on the
way to effective communication, rather than an enabler of communication. It is
also elitist rather than populist. And it sometimes displays the awkwardness of
literal translation, rather than the transparency of a discourse whose ultimate
aim is to promote task-orientated ideas and to motivate those at whom these
ideas are aimed to act. Second, al-Husri’s easy flow of ideas is consistent with
the view of the language in the Arab nationalist discourse as the medium of
modernization and as the subject of modernization itself. Although al-Arsuzi
subscribes to this modernizing view of Arab nationalism, he nevertheless places
on it a different interpretation, as we shall see later, which somehow demands a
use of the language that harks back to a more traditional stylistic engagement.
This sometimes gives al-Arsuzi’s discourse an old-fashioned flavour that is
suggestive of the past, at a time when the nation was being directed by the elite
towards a future based on the insights of Western models of development and
progress. Third, while al-Husri is interested first and foremost in the functional
role of Arabic in nation-formation, al-Arsuzi is concerned with its symbolic
capacities. This difference between them accounts for the transparency of al-
Husri’s discourse and the obscurantism and opaqueness of al-Arsuzi’s. Fourth,
although both al-Arsuzi and al-Husri favour an objective definition of the
nation, and although they both refer approvingly to Fichte’s ideas on the role of
language in nation-formation, unlike al-Husri, al-Arsuzi fails to harness the
wealth of empirical data which other national and historical contexts seem to
provide in support of this thesis. As a result, al-Husri appears more historically
well informed in comparison with al-Arsuzi, whose ideas come across as parochial
and, at times, nationally self-indulgent, if not actually racist. This disparity

the arabic language and national identity
— 148 —
reflects the wider difference between them as to the place of the Arab nation
and its language in relation to history. Whereas for al-Husri the historicity of
Arabic and the Arab nation is a given fact, al-Arsuzi places both almost outside
history, as the discussion in this chapter will show.
The central idea in al-Arsuzi’s nationalist thinking is that of the revival of
the Arab nation in modern times. The implication here is that an Arab nation
existed in the past, whose roots al-Arsuzi locates in pre-Islamic and early Islamic
times, although on balance the former period seems to carry more weight in
nation-formation terms for him. The key to this revival is the rediscovery and
re-enactment in modern times of the initial impulses and intuitions embodied
in the language lexically, phonologically and grammatically. This revival will
further enable the Arabs in the modern period to reconnect with the innate
character and genius (Æabqariyya) which their ancestors in the pre-Islamic and
early Islamic times embedded in the language. According to this view, Arabic is
the storehouse of an original and specifically Arab view of the world, which
must be made manifest if the Arab nation is to regain its vigour and to
reposition itself as a leading nation of the world.
Implicit in this view, however, is the belief that the Arab nation lost its
direction on the way to modernity from that glorious period of pure engagement
with the universe. Al-Arsuzi reflects on this in different parts of his complete
works, and he ascribes it to the mixing of races which took place in the wake of
the Islamic conquests. In the linguistic sphere, this led to the occurrence of
solecism, which is said to have weakened the link between the Arabs and the
original impulses inherent in their language. On the meta-linguistic level of
grammatical description and explanation, the involvement of the non-Arabs in
the codification of the language has meant that they failed to realize fully, owing
to linguistic interference from their mother-tongues, the special character of the
language as the embodiment of the Arabs’ view of life and as the structural
articulator of their status as a special nation among nations (see Chapter 3,
section 5). In this category of scholars, he mentions by way of exemplification
some of the foremost thinkers and men of letters in the Arabic intellectual
tradition, including Ibn al-MuqaffaÆ, Avicenna, al-Farabi and al-Ghazali, and he
refers to them by a set of “othering” epithets (ibid.: 278): al-aghyÅr (the others or
strangers), al-dukhalÅ’ (aliens or impostors), and al-aÆÅjim (non-Arabs). But al-
Arsuzi fails to demonstrate how this linguistic interference manifested itself in
the act of describing and explaining the inner structure of the language. He also
fails to square this charge with the view he holds that Arabness is a matter of
culture not race. As a result, his ideas on language and nation smack of the
“linguism” which Kedourie rightly criticizes in his study of nationalism (see
Chapter 2, section 3). Furthermore, none of the thinkers al-Arsuzi mentions
can be identified as a professional linguist, although some have delved into

arabic, first and foremost
— 149 —
matters of language from time to time. And, to cap it all, some of the most
fundamental insights in al-Arsuzi’s thinking on the Arabic language can be
traced back to the work of linguists who are not racially Arab, particularly Ibn
Jinni, who was of Greek stock (see Chapter 3, section 3). The following
discussion, which is inevitably technical in character, will outline the broad
parameters of this link with the past on the linguistic front.
One of the most important of these insights is the assumption of correspon-
dence between the sound (lafΩ) and the meaning (maÆnÅ) of the Arabic word as
a bi-unity of these two constituents. The implication here is that the relation-
ship between the acoustic and semantic contents of the Arabic word is not
arbitrary or conventional, but natural and motivated. Ibn Jinni (al-KhaßÅ’iß, vol.
2: 152) expresses this property of the Arabic lexicon by talking about the
contiguity (imsÅs) of sound and meaning in Arabic words. He considers this
property as further evidence of the “wisdom of the Arabs” principle, which is
central to his thinking and to the entire project of Arabic grammatical theory
(see Suleiman 1999c and Chapter 3, section 3). In some cases, the natural
connection between sound and meaning is said to be obvious or may require
some interpretation and manipulation. In other cases, it is not possible to
establish an unequivocal link between these two components of the word. But
this does not deter Ibn Jinni from offering the principle of contiguity as an
established fact of the Arabic language. Deviations from it are explained by him
as examples of the inability of the later generations of Arabic-speakers to
fathom the depths of the language, or as the result of the untraceability of the
original insights which the Arabic-speakers of old had at the moment of
linguistic inception (al-KhaßÅ’iß, vol. 2: 164). This principle has never lost its
intuitive appeal down to the present day. Witness the comment by the Leban-
ese poet Rashid Salim al-Khuri that he can assign meaning to individual letters
of the Arabic alphabet, and al-ÆAqqad’s response that, while this may be true in
very many cases, it does not apply across the board.
Let us now consider how the principle of contiguity works by explaining
some of the examples given by Ibn Jinni in the second volume of his KhaßÅ’iß.
Ibn Jinni begins this discussion by citing the views of al-Khalil (175/791) and
Sibawayhi (188/803), the two foremost grammarians in the Arabic linguistic
tradition, to establish the intellectual pedigree of his ideas and to give them
credibility in the eyes of his readers. The fact that the second of these gram-
marians is of Persian origin gives the lie to al-Arsuzi’s charge that non-Arabs
suffered from a congenital inability to understand the inner structure of the
language owing to their racial origin.
The principle of contiguity is said to apply at different levels. On the level of
word morphology, Ibn Jinni states that some morphological patterns are seman-
tically iconic. For example, the pattern faÆalÅn is said to signify iconically the

the arabic language and national identity
— 150 —
ideas of disturbance (È∂†irÅb) and movement (˙araka), as in naqazÅn (leaping in
the air out of fright) and ghalayÅn (boiling, for water). Another morphological
pattern of the same type is faÆfaÆa, in which the reduplication of faÆ is said to
signify iconically the idea of reiteration or repetition, as in zaÆzaÆa (to shake
violently or to rock) and jarjara (to jerk or pull back and forth). A less obvious
application of the principle of contiguity is said to apply to the morphological
pattern istafaÆala, signifying request. Ibn Jinni states that since the verb at incep-
tion was used to signify an action that had already taken place – in the sense that
the verb as articulatory action follows the action it denotes in the real world – it
follows that (1) the request for an action in the real world should precede the
action itself, and (2) the request part of the verb should iconically precede the
verb itself. We may explain this by reference to the verb †aÆima (to give food)
and its request form ista†Æama (to ask for food), wherein the prefix ista- precedes
the verb †aÆima in its modified form (†Æama). Ibn Jinni points out that although
the element of iconicity is not immediately apparent in this morphological
pattern and in the examples that realize it, owing to the fact that it does apply at
a more abstract level than usual, it is nevertheless no less real or valid than its
counterparts. What we have here, he argues, is an extension of iconicity by
analogy with other more clear-cut examples of the type mentioned above.
The contiguity principle is said to apply at the level of phonological structure
too, in the sense that the phonological make-up of the word and/or the
arrangement of the consonantal phonemes reflect(s) the meaning of the word
concerned iconically. Taking the verb jarra (to pull) as an example, Ibn Jinni
(vol. 2: 164) says that, as a tense consonant (produced with greater muscular
effort and breath force), j occurs initially in the word because it mirrors the fact
that the initial stage in pulling an object is the hardest and, therefore, the one
which requires the greatest expenditure of energy. This is followed by the trill r,
which is repeated to signify the act of pulling and to recreate iconically the fact
that in pulling an object on the ground it often bounces up and down as
reflected in the articulation of the r itself. Contiguity is said to apply at a more
abstract level in the phonological domain. An example of this is the verb
ba˙atha (to look for, to search). Ibn Jinni (ibid.: 163) states that the thick
release of occlusive b resembles the sound produced by striking the earth with
one’s palm. The consonant ˙, by virtue of its husky quality, is said to resemble
the sound made by the lion or the wolf when it digs the earth with its claws.
Finally, the consonant th is said to resemble the sound made when the earth is
scattered. Ibn Jinni (ibid.) says that this is not a matter of speculation, but a fact
which can be discerned by noting the similarity between speech and the
extralinguistic reality it recreates.
The principle of contiguity through iconicity is said to apply with greater
clarity and frequency in the lexical domain. The main idea here is that of

arabic, first and foremost
— 151 —
associating distinctions in the semantic imports of pairs of related words to
particular consonants in their phonological structure. Thus, the distinction
between kha∂ima (to munch, in respect of soft-textured foods) and qa∂ima (to
gnaw, in respect of hard-textured foods) is correlated with the fact that kh is
phonetically “lax” (produced with less muscular effort and breath force) and q is
“tense” (produced with greater muscular effort and breath force). The phonetic
feature lax vs tense is said to apply in other examples to explain how the meaning
of a word correlates iconically with its sound. Thus, the difference between
cutting lengthwise, signified by qadda, and cutting breadthwise, signified by
qa††a, is said to correlate with the quality of d as tense and † as lax, and that this
in turn iconically reflects the fact that it takes more effort to cut an object
lengthwise than it does breadthwise. Similarly, the difference in meaning
between qasama (to divide) and qaßama (to pound) is iconically correlated with
the fact that s is more lax in comparison with ß.
The principle of contiguity can be extended further to cover, among other
things, the correlation between the canonical inflectional endings u (∂amma)
and a (fat˙a) and their grammatical functions in marking the agent and patient
respectively. Ibn Jinni (vol. 1: 49) states that since u is phonetically stronger
than a (in terms of the muscular effort and breath force required to produce
them), and since the agent is the doer of the action whereas the patient only
receives the action concerned, it follows that the stronger inflectional ending u
is assigned to the agent and the weaker ending a to the patient (see Suleiman
1999c). Although the iconicity of this correlation operates on the abstract
plane, it is argued that it is no less real than the other kinds of iconicity
obtaining in the language. In this context, the question of contiguity may be
envisaged as a matter of correlation between the grammatical meaning of the
inflectional endings under consideration and the amount of energy required to
produce them in articulatory terms.
Let us now consider how the principle of contiguity was appropriated and
extended by al-Arsuzi, and how he came to regard it as his personal creation.
Al-Arsuzi’s starting point is his characterization of Arabic as a primary (bidÅ’È)
and original (badÈ) derivational language. Using a terminology that is highly
reminiscent of the work of the great Swiss linguist Saussure, he characterizes the
Arabic word as a bi-unity of acoustic and mental images which mutually imply
each other (ßËra ßawtiyya-mar’iyya, al-Mu’allafÅt al-kÅmila, vol. 1: 71). However,
he differs from Saussure radically in declaring that the relationship between the
two sides of the Arabic word is not arbitrary or conventional, but natural. In this
respect, Arabic, as the Semitic language par excellence, is said to be different
from all other languages, particularly those of the Indo-European family, in that
whereas these languages are subject to the laws of historical development,
Arabic is not. In setting out this comparison, al-Arsuzi wishes to challenge the

the arabic language and national identity
— 152 —
German Romantics’ view that German is the original language, without how-
ever denying their insight that language is the mirror of a nation’s soul. And his
frequent unflattering references in this context to French, a language he knew
very well, are intended to show that the language of the colonial power in Syria
at the time is inferior to the Arabic language. This reflects al-Arsuzi’s loathing
of, and hostile attitude to, France, which he held responsible for the loss of his
native Alexandretta to Turkey in 1939.
The view that the bond between the two sides of the word is natural, not
arbitrary, is not new to al-Arsuzi. It existed in different forms in different cultures
at different times. However, al-Arsuzi expands this view by extending the range
of naturalness beyond its confined and obvious domain of onomatopoeia. In this
expanded usage, nature covers three senses which constitute the sources of
Arabic words. First, there is the imitation of the sounds of nature, pertaining to
a particular object, in the acoustic image of a given set of related words. An
example of this is the family of words which, according to al-Arsuzi, derive from
the consonantal string f(a)q as the acoustic image of the sound of boiling water.
The semantic import of this phonological string, al-Arsuzi tells us, is that of
compression and explosive release. This impression is encoded in the semantic
import of the following words: faqaÆa (to open, to gouge out) as in faqaÆa al-
dumla (he opened the abscess), faqa˙a (to open) as in faqa˙a al-kalbu Æaynayh
(the puppy opened its eyes for the first time), faqasa (to hatch), faqaÆa (to
explode, to burst), faqara (to pierce, perforate) and faqasha (to break, to crush,
to shell). Other words are assigned to this family; but this will not concern us
here. All of these words, we are told, are formed by adding a consonant to the
underlying root consisting of f(a)q. The same semantic import is said to accrue
to a related set of words in which the q in f(a)q is replaced with j. Examples of
this are the words fajja (to open, to cleave, to gorge), fajara (to cleave, to break
up), faja (to open) and fajana (to open).
However, for this analysis to apply, we must entertain two properties of the
Arabic language which, according to al-Arsuzi, have not been fully recognized
in the history of Arabic grammatical theory. The first is the replacement of the
traditional organization of the Arabic lexicon into predominantly triliteral
consonantal roots by a new principle of word-formation in terms of which words
are derived from more atomic roots mirroring the sounds of nature (wherever
applicable). Al-Arsuzi suggests (al-Mu’allafÅt al-kÅmila, vol. 1: 234–5) that this
principle of classification never materialized because of the involvement of the
non-Arabs in codifying the language, who, owing to linguistic interference from
their native tongues, failed to see the extent to which this principle applies (see
Chapter 3, section 5). No evidence is produced in support of this charge. The
second property is the ability of the Arabic consonants and short vowels to be
associated with semantic imports (qÈma bayÅniyya, ibid., vol. 1: 86) of a general

arabic, first and foremost
— 153 —
nature, as the following example from the consonantal portion of the language
is said to show. The consonant b in Arabic is said to be associated with the
semantic import of becoming clear or visible (ibid.: 88), as in badara (be
obvious), badÅ (to appear), bara˙a (to become generally known), baraza (to
come into view), bazagha (to break forth) and balaja (to dawn). The fact that
this association does not consistently apply to all words beginning with b in the
Arabic lexicon does not seem to bother al-Arsuzi in the slightest. Furthermore,
the fact that what is at best a vague tendency is raised to the status of a general
lexical principle does not seem to impinge on al-Arsuzi’s desire to enunciate his
brand of linguistic philosophy. Vagueness and over-generalization also apply to
al-Arsuzi’s characterization of the semantic import of the short vowels, for
example u (∂amma), which he says expresses “continuous activity” (al-Mu’allafÅt
al-kÅmila, vol. 1: 85) by virtue of the strong muscular effort required to produce
it in comparison with the other short vowels in the language.
The second source of words in Arabic is the spontaneous, and thus natural
(as opposed to contrived), expressions of human feelings and emotions. An
example of this is the expression of pain Åkh, from which is derived the words
akh (brother), ukht (sister) and ukhuwwa (brotherhood) as if to suggest the
familial bond between members of the family, and the help and succour they
give each other when they are in distress (ibid.: 305). Another example is the
string farra (to fly away, to flee, to gleam), which al-Arsuzi considers to be the
root of the word for happiness or joy (fari˙a) by virtue of sharing the conson-
antal string f(a)r with it. The semantic import of fari˙a is said to conjure up a
feeling of freedom and joy similar to that experienced by birds when they hover
high in the sky (ibid.: 116). To support this association, al-Arsuzi gives the
Arabic idiom †Åra min fara˙ih (lit. “He flew as a bird out of joy”), which
correlates the experience of joy with the act of flying like a bird. The same
consonantal string f(a)r is said to be the base for the word faras (horse), to
signify the speed of the object it signifies. The fact that the associations men-
tioned above are, at best, speculative or suggestive does not seem to figure in al-
Arsuzi’s pronouncements on the nature of the Arabic language.
The third source of Arabic words is a set of sounds which are produced in the
mouth for no specific communicative function. An example of this is the string
b(a)t, in which the release of the alveolar occlusive t suggests the idea of the
cutting off or severing of an object (ibid.: 306). Thus, out of this string, the
words batta (to cut off, to sever, to decide), batara (to cut off), bataka (to cut off)
and batala (to cut off) are derived. Al-Arsuzi gives other examples of other roots
and their associated families of derived words to support his analysis, but none of
these can turn the speculative and suggestive nature of this analysis into an
established fact.
Al-Arsuzi points out that the nature-bound character of Arabic, awareness of

the arabic language and national identity
— 154 —
which was displayed at its best in the pre-Islamic period, should not however
obscure the fact that the language is equally rooted in Heaven. Hence the
numerous references to al-mala’ al-’aÆlÅ (the heavenly host) as the other source
of the Arabic language by al-Arsuzi. The linchpin in this part of al-Arsuzi’s
theory is the story of the creation of Adam from adÈm (the surface of the earth)
as his name indicates, and the reference in the Qur’an that God taught Adam
the names of all His creation. The Arabic language, like Adam, straddles the
divide between what al-Arsuzi calls nÅsËt (the world of ordinary human beings)
and lÅhËt (the world of the heavens). Al-Arsuzi supports this interpretation by
saying that the Arabs are the source of the Semitic race (sÅmÈ); and, since the
name of this race is related both to that of heaven (samÅÆ) and to the verb samÅ
(to ascend), it follows that the Arabs and their language have their source and
destiny in the sphere of the heavenly host. In this respect, the Arabs are
different from the Aryan race and its Indo-European languages in that the latter
are rooted in this world, the nÅsËt, as opposed to the lÅhËt of Arabic and the
Arabs.
Al-Arsuzi uses the above analyses to launch the idea that the genius of the
Arabs inheres in their language (hence the sub-title of this section). This makes
Arabic different from all other languages, including its sister Semitic languages,
which have lost their connection with the original sources of their inspiration.
The true renaissance of the Arabs in the modern period must therefore begin by
“reviving” the Arabic language, to enable them to uncover the vision of life
internalized in it in all its pristine manifestations. The “idea that the Arabic
language can unlock the primordial world of meanings which came into being
at the very beginning of time” is said by al-Arsuzi to place the Arab nation in “a
unique position unattained by any other nation” (Suleiman 1997: 136). The
derivational structure of the Arabic lexicon into overlapping families of words is
seen to reflect the organization of the Arabs into a nation of individuals held
together by relations of common descent, compassion and common purpose.
Al-Arsuzi constructs this vision of the Arab nation by looking at the
connection between the constituent members of the following set of words:
umm (mother), ra˙m (womb) and akh (brother). The word for “nation” in
Arabic is umma, which signifies the ideas of motherhood and goal-orientation –
by virtue of its root meaning: umm (mother) and amm (to lead the way) – at one
and the same time, as if to capture the views of common historical ancestry and
shared aspirations that are associated with the ethnic conceptualizations of the
nation. And, since the relationship between brothers, sisters and other members
of the extended Arab family is designated by the term ÆalÅqat al-ra˙m, literally
“womb relationship”, an additional meaning is added to the signification of
umma through the root r-˙-m (to be compassionate; the Compassionate as an
attribute of God) to reveal at one and the same time the ideas of compassion

arabic, first and foremost
— 155 —
and Godliness which the root signifies. In a similar vein, the word which
signifies the meaning of solidarity between various members of the nation is
ukhuwwa, whose stem meaning akh (brother) captures this relationship by
virtue of its phonetic similarity to the interjection of pain (Åkh). On the basis of
what has been said above, the Arab nation in its ideal form now emerges as a
familial, goal-orientated community among whose members relations of
compassion and solidarity obtain by virtue of divine intervention and action.
The derivational structure of Arabic and its rootedness in the sounds of
nature is said by al-Arsuzi to be the key to shedding light on the relationship
between the Arabs and other nations, which in turn can enable scholars to
reach a conclusion as to the origins of humanity. Al-Arsuzi exemplifies this by
the words for “man” in Arabic, Hindi and Latin: rajul, raja and rex (this is
actually the word for “king”, not “man”, in Latin) respectively. He says that
these words can be traced via the stem rajja in Arabic (to shake), as in rajja al-
ar∂ (He stamped on the ground and caused it to shake), to the root r, which
echoes this meaning through its trilling articulation in the mouth. Arabic under
this analysis is projected as the storehouse of connections between languages
and as the instrument which can unlock some of the most complex and funda-
mental secrets of humanity. This in turn shows that Arabic is superior to all
other languages.
Let us pursue how the revival of Arabic – in the sense of reactivating the
vision it lexically and structurally embodies – can lead to the revival of the Arab
nation. In addition to explaining this, the following discussion will serve to
show the continuities between al-Arsuzi’s thinking and aspects of the Arabic
grammatical tradition I have outlined above. First, we may mention al-Arsuzi’s
view that the inflectional ending u is stronger than a, which Ibn Jinni gave as
the reason for assigning the former to the agent and the latter to the patient. Al-
Arsuzi introduces a new twist in this line of argument by saying that the associa-
tion of a – as in kataba – in the canonical form of the verb with the perfect (in
Arabic mÅ∂È, past), and u – as in yaktubu – with the imperfect (in Arabic
mu∂ÅriÆ, present), reflects the priority of the present over the past in the division
of time. And, since the mu∂ÅriÆ form of the verb also signals the future, it follows
that the Arabs are more orientated through their language towards the present
and the future than they are towards the past (al-Mu’allafÅt al-kÅmila, vol. 1:
185, 331). This in turn shows that the Arabs are by their very nature a
progressive people (taqaddumÈ), and not a reactionary nation (rajÆÈ). Second, al-
Arsuzi puts forward the view that the structural priority of the verbal sentence
(sentence beginning with the verb as the signifier of action) over the nominal
sentence (sentence beginning with the noun) in Arabic reflects the importance
the Arabs attach to action in life (ibid.: 328). This in turn shows the dominance
of the dynamic over the static in Arab life. Al-Arsuzi gives other examples of

the arabic language and national identity
— 156 —
how the revival of Arabic in the above sense, rather than in its usual meaning of
coining new terms, can lead to re-enacting the impulses of a glorious past in the
present; but the above examples will suffice to show how this is supposed to
work in al-Arsuzi’s thinking.
This centrality of language in the modern Arab revival now acquires a new
dimension that is consistent with the root meaning of the word Æarab itself. Al-
Arsuzi puts forward the view that the word Æarab is derived from the root Æarra,
which is used to signify a male ostrich uttering a cry, thus associating the word
Æarab with articulation and enunciation in nature (ibid.: 360). The word Æarab is
formed by adding the sound b to this root, albeit in a modified form. And, since
b is a bilabial sound whose articulation takes place visibly at the external
extremity of the vocal tract, the choice of this sound adds the meaning of
“clarity” to its underlying root. The meaning of the word Æarab, according to this
analysis, may now be glossed as “to speak clearly”; and it is this meaning which
underlies the grammatical signification of the word i’rab in the sense of “to use
desinential inflections correctly”.
Although al-Arsuzi in the analysis given in the preceding paragraph is still
operating within the traditional semantic norms of the Arab grammatical tradi-
tion vis-à-vis the meaning of the word Æarab and its derivatives, he nevertheless
goes beyond this tradition in claiming that this word is derived from Æarra. In
putting forward this view, al-Arsuzi pays little attention to the fact that the
meaning of Æarra he adopts is one of the most marginal significations of this root.
Al-Arsuzi invokes this tradition further, particularly in the interpretation put
on it by al-Jahiz when he considers the quality of bayÅn (clarity, purity) in
Arabic as the criterion which separates the Arabs from other nations, the Æajam.
Under this view, the Arabs are said to be different from other nations not by
virtue of having Arabic per se, but owing to the quality of bayÅn which inheres
in the language in a unique and unequalled way (ibid.). This explains al-Arsuzi’s
insistence on treating the dialects as degenerate forms of Arabic owing to (what
he believes to be) their defective character in matters of bayÅn. Al-Arsuzi regards
this to be self-evident and, therefore, in no need of proof or demonstration.
The general trend in Arab nationalist thought is to treat Arabic as the
marker of the Arab national identity and as the medium of modernization
which, in itself, is in need of modernization to enable it to become the
communicative instrument of a flourishing and nationally conscious Arab life
in the modern period. Although al-Arsuzi has sympathy with this trend,
championed by al-Husri and other nationalist thinkers, the thrust of his
language-based nationalist ideology is markedly different. Arabic for al-Arsuzi is
not just the marker of an Arab national identity in the lands in which it is the
dominant language; it is also (and more significantly) the means through which
this identity can be revived, enriched and reasserted by invoking the view of life

arabic, first and foremost
— 157 —
it encapsulates lexically and grammatically. As al-Arsuzi keeps repeating in his
publications, the Arabs’ genius as explained above resides in their language, and
it is only by rediscovering the sources of this genius that the Arabs as a nation
can relaunch themselves in the modern period. Reviving the language, for al-
Arsuzi, therefore becomes a precondition for reviving the Arabs as a nation.
Furthermore, this revival is the guarantee of authenticity which the nationalist
spirit must dig out and engage in an age of blind and imitative modernization.
True Arab modernization, for al-Arsuzi, cannot be achieved without
reinvigorating the future direction of the nation with the formative, language-
based impulses of its past. Clearly, what al-Arsuzi is calling for is a radically
different engagement with the language than has hitherto been proposed in the
Arab nationalist literature. This is what makes him different from all the other
thinkers I have dealt with in this chapter. To this may be added the fact that the
particular nature of al-Arsuzi’s appeal to language, and his attempt to locate the
period of unmediated engagement with it, the period of fi†ra, mainly in the pre-
Islamic period, highlights the thoroughly secular nature of his brand of Arab
nationalism. Al-Arsuzi’s references to Islam as a system of thought, and to the
Prophet Muhammad as a national hero, bolster the secular nature of this
ideology. This in turn is intended to override the sectarian differences between
the Arabs which the French colonial policy tried to utilize in its administration
of and control over Syria.13
A full understanding of al-Arsuzi’s nationalist thought cannot, however, be
achieved without placing it in its historical context. First, by fronting language
in the way he did as the criterion of nation-formation in the Arab context, al-
Arsuzi aims to challenge the French view of the nation which tends to
downgrade the role of language in nation-building. This in turn enables him to
put sufficient epistemological distance between his thinking and French
thought on the subject, thereby signalling a disjunction in the history of Syria
between its pre- and postcolonialist life, on the one hand, and the colonial
legacy of France on the other. Hence the many dismissive references in his work
to the French language and the role which France played in handing over the
Alexandretta region to Turkey. This further explains why, at least in part, he
suggests that the Syrian education system replace French by English as the
primary foreign language.
Second, al-Arsuzi’s nationalist theory is intended to reject the claim made by
some German Romantics that German is the “original” language. It is also
intended to counter the claim made by the Turkish nationalists, through the
“sun-language” theory, that Turkish is the mother of all languages. Al-Arsuzi’s
attitude towards Turkish is conspicuous by its absence, not only because of his
enmity towards Turkey but also because he believes that it is ludicrous that the
Turks as Æajam would ascribe such a claim to their language. The place of being

the arabic language and national identity
— 158 —
original (badÈ) and primary (bidÅ’È) accrues to Arabic, and to Arabic alone, in al-
Arsuzi’s thinking. Al-Arsuzi is aware of the racial connotations of his views, but
he does not consider them to be racist. In this respect, he wishes to distance
himself from the racist tendencies of German nationalism in the twentieth
century, but without forgoing the claim that under his theory Arabic is, and is
capable of being shown to be, the original and primary language in the manner
set out earlier in this section.
Al-Arsuzi’s impact on Arab nationalist thinking has been negligible, in spite
(or because) of the acrobatics of his linguistic theorizing. To begin with, for al-
Arsuzi’s brand of Arab nationalist thought to be accepted, his radical critique of
the Arabic lexical tradition would have to be accepted. This would require a
complete overhaul of the principles upon which the Arabic lexicon is based,
particularly the dismantling of the dominant triliteral root-orientation of this
lexicon. In this respect, al-Arsuzi’s ideas require the rejection of a tradition
sanctioned by the authority of the entire Arabic grammatical polysystem.
Second, al-Arsuzi’s alternative system seems to work more through the power of
speculation than demonstration. It is only by harnessing the power of sugges-
tion, tenuous semantic overlaps and symbolic representation that we can make
al-Arsuzi’s ideas begin to work in support of his nationalist ideology. Third, al-
Arsuzi’s views of Arabic are both reductive and essentializing. The idea that the
Arabs have a more or less fixed view of life that is internalized in the lexical,
phonological and grammatical structure of their language is tantamount to
linguistic fundamentalism. Furthermore, the idea that the most spontaneous
expression of this view is located in pre-Islamic and early Islamic times amounts
to a kind of historical fundamentalism which may lead to ossification, in spite of
the fact that its intention is one of ascribing an authenticity of a secular hue to
the nationalist philosophy it seeks to enunciate. Fourth, al-Arsuzi’s language-
based philosophy runs uncomfortably close to a view of national categories that
is not completely devoid of racial overtones, as he himself admits to have been
the case in the early years of his thinking. The fact that his views are far-fetched
and, in many ways, airy-fairy has contributed to the neglect they have suffered.
5. conclusion
The role of Arabic as the marker and the ingredient of the greatest importance
in the formation of the Arab national identity is a major theme in the literature
on the topic. Early pronouncements on the subject were either vague as to the
membership of the Arab nation, or sought to circumscribe this membership to
meet with the political exigencies of the prevailing political situation at the
beginning of the twentieth century. An example of the former is the definition
of the nation by reference to language by al-Marsafi (section 1). An example of

arabic, first and foremost
— 159 —
the latter attitude is the attempt to limit membership in the Arab nation to the
Arabic-speaking countries in Asia by Najib ÆAzury (section 1). These pro-
nouncements gave way to a clear and unequivocal association between language
and nation in all the Arabic-speaking countries in Asia and Africa in the work
of al-ÆAlayli (section 2), al-Bitar (section 2), al-Husri (section 3) and al-Arsuzi
(section 4). It is in the work of these authors, particularly al-Husri, that the
association of language and nation in the Arab(ic) context culminated. This
association is invariably linked to an objective mode of defining the nation. If
the “will” is important in forming the nation, it is because it represents the prior
existence of the nation as a cultural entity, rather than the other way round.
There is general agreement among these nationalist thinkers on the secular-
ist nature of Arab nationalism. The association between language and national
identity, in place of the old association between religion/sect and group identity,
was promoted to override the faith differences between the Arabic-speaking
peoples, a theme well represented in the fairly extensive body of poetry as a
meta-nationalist discourse on the Arabic language. In this respect, Arab nation-
alism develops from its earlier roots in the work of the renaissance (nahda)
writers in the nineteenth century, for example Ibrahim al-Yaziji (see Chapter 4,
section 4). Recourse to the language is further consistent with the position of
Arabic as a marker of identity in earlier times. However, one of the main
advantages of utilizing language in the conceptualization of Arab subjectivity is
the fact that the objective of modernization which the renaissance writers
launched could be pursued without encumbrance from the limiting confines of
the past. For this modernizing project to succeed, the language must be seen to
be functionally able to respond to the terminological, pedagogic and other
communicative needs of the Arabs. To achieve this goal, Arabic itself had to
undergo modernization both grammatically and lexically. This interest in the
functional role of a living and thriving language explains the little explicit
interest there is in the work of these scholars in the symbolic significance of
Arabic, with the exception of al-Arsuzi. It also explains the interest in reform-
ing the language and invigorating it by the above scholars, particularly al-Husri.
Of the nationalist thinkers dealt with in this chapter, al-Husri stands out as
the most influential figure in Arab nationalist thought. Unlike al-ÆAlayli or al-
Arsuzi, his style is characterized by immediacy and communicative efficiency.
This is why he is referred to as the populist Arab nationalist thinker par
excellence in the literature. Al-Husri shows himself to be aware of the power of
language not just to unite but also to communicate. This is why his ideas had
such currency in the second half of the twentieth century, and why they
generated controversy in the daily and weekly press in Lebanon and Egypt in
particular. In comparison, al-ÆAlayli and al-Arsuzi can be a real chore for the
ordinary reader. The use of semi-classical language by the former, and abstract

the arabic language and national identity
— 160 —
and vague expressions by the latter, meant that their message failed to get
through to the intended audience, the Arabs themselves, who at the time did
not enjoy the same level of literacy as exists in the Arab world today.
Al-Husri also distinguished himself above the others in adopting a historical,
some might say pseudo-historical, approach to dealing with Arab nationalism.
In particular, he sought to support his ideas on the nature and direction of this
nationalism by evidence he drew eclectically from other contexts, especially
European history. This strategy was most effective in the treatment of the
relative weight of language and religion in nation-formation. In setting out his
observations, al-Husri adopted a descriptive tone, which then served as the basis
for prescription in the Arab nationalist context. Furthermore, al-Husri’s
reflections on the origins and course of European nationalism are used to
identify general tendencies which he then uses to argue in favour of his own
ideas on Arab nationalism. History is important for al-Husri, not because it can
enable the nationalist thinker to resurrect the past, but because it objectifies the
nationalist ideology and makes it amenable to empirical investigation. Outright
speculation is not a mode of investigation which he uses or of which he
approves. In this respect, he is different from al-Arsuzi, whose approach to Arab
nationalism may be said to be “philosophical”, “metaphysical” and “a-historical”
rather than positivist and historical. The interesting thing, however, is that
both scholars regard their approaches to the study of Arab nationalism as the
only way of building the basis upon which the modernization project of the
Arab nation can proceed. For al-Husri, the discovery of historical trends enables
the Arabs to step into the future armed with knowledge of what is historically
possible and relevant and what is not. For al-Arsuzi, the past – but not just any
past, as I have explained above – is the basis for deciphering and calling back
into service what may be metaphorically called the “genetic code” of the nation
in sociopolitical terms. It is this code alone which can guarantee that the future
of the Arab nation will be built on secure grounds. Whereas modernity for al-
Husri is located in the future, but with reference to the past, for al-Arsuzi
modernity is based on a past without which it cannot take root in the future.
The highly speculative nature of al-Arsuzi’s thinking on language and
nationalism strains the linguistic parameters within which the Arabic gramma-
tical tradition works. The reduction of triliteral roots to biliteral ones cannot be
sustained in descriptive terms. In particular, this alternative view of the Arabic
lexicon works through suggestion rather than solid empirical analysis. This view
is also motivated by an extralinguistic objective whose aim is to promote a
particular type of nationalist enunciation in which language has pride of place
in a semi-philosophical mode of thinking. On a different level, al-Arsuzi’s ideas
are intended to counter the claims made in Turkish nationalism as to the
antiquity of Turkish and to its ability to act as the source of all human languages

arabic, first and foremost
— 161 —
– what is traditionally known as the “Sun Theory” by Turkish nationalists. The
fact that Turkish cannot be shown to articulate a conceptual network of
nationalist meanings similar to those culled from Arabic by al-Arsuzi is seen as
proof of the falsity of the Turkish claims mentioned in the preceding sentence.
In pursuing this line of thinking, al-Arsuzi further aims to settle some political
scores in the arena of cultural nationalism insofar as this involves Arabs and
Turks. The Arabs appear as a more legitimate nation than the Turks on the
stage of human history. This makes the loss of al-Arsuzi’s native Iskandarun
(Alexandretta) to the Turks all the more unbearable. It may also be a factor
behind his views on Arabic and nationalism which, as I have pointed out in the
preceding section, border on linguistic racism.
The association of language with nation in Arab nationalism is an example
of the phenomenon of cultural nationalism (cf. Hutchinson 1987). In this
respect, Arab nationalism is cast in the German mode of defining the nation,
without however espousing its racial overtones – the only exception here being
al-Arsuzi. This type of nationalism is seen to fit the Arab context best. First, it
represents a continuation of the main impulses of this nationalism in the
Ottoman period which, not unexpectedly, came to be the dominant impulse in
post-Ottoman Turkish nationalism. Second, the lack of insistence on the state
as a precondition of nation-formation in cultural nationalism suits the Arab
context in which political fragmentation, not political unity, is the norm. Aware-
ness of the role of the state in promoting or depressing cultural nationalism is
recognized by some of the scholars dealt with in this chapter, particularly al-
Bitar. It is also recognized by al-ÆAlayli, al-Arsuzi and al-Husri, although their
views on the subject are offered more in passing acknowledgement of this
element – particularly for al-Husri’s – than as a serious engagement with this
most important topic, as we shall see in the next chapter.

—162 —
The Arabic Language and
Territorial Nationalism
6
1. introduction
In Chapter 5, an attempt was made to investigate how language was utilized in
promoting a concept of nationalism in the Arabic-speaking countries in which
standard Arabic was the primary ingredient. Emphasis in this attempt was
placed on the contributions made by SatiÆ al-Husri (section 3), Zaki al-Arsuzi
(section 4) and, to a lesser extent, ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlayli and Nadim al-Bitar
(section 2). The role of other ingredients in the definition of Arab nationalism
– for example, history, culture, customs and traditions, geography and common
interests – is acknowledged by these writers, but none of these ingredients is said
to have the primacy of language in this nationalism, with the exception of,
possibly, history for SatiÆ al-Husri. It would therefore be correct to say that Arab
nationalism is based on the premise that those who share Arabic as their
common language belong to the same nation. Suffice it to say that, by promoting
this view of Arab national identity, Arab nationalism succeeded in shaping the
ideological terrain in the Arab Middle East in such a way that alternative
territorial nationalisms were impelled to deal with this ingredient in setting up
their defining principles. They did so by employing a host of strategies whose
aim ranges from denying the definitional role of language in nation-formation
to relegating it to the level of a support factor that is secondary to other more
primary factors, be they geographical or state-orientated in character.
This conceptualization of identity in Arab nationalist thinking is anchored
(1) to those elements in the history of the Arabic-speaking peoples which lend
support to the language-based mode of definition of national identity, and (2) to
the ideas of the German Romantics (see Chapter 3). Viewed from the perspec-
tive of these two formative impulses, the Arab nation emerges as a construct
that is sanctioned by the past and supported by evidence drawn from the course
of nationalism in modern European history. To this must be added the contri-
bution of the struggle between the Arabs and the Turks in the Ottoman Empire
in the second half of the nineteenth century and the first two decades of the
twentieth century (see Chapter 4). In this context, Arab nationalism in its early
stages appears as a response to the rise of Turkish nationalism in the Ottoman

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 163 —
Empire. Being products of more or less the same milieu, both nationalisms follow
the same model of nation-formation whereby language plays the defining role.
It was also pointed out in Chapter 5 that one of the main themes in the Arab
nationalist discourse is the separation of the nation and the state, in the sense
that the latter is not established as a precondition of the former in ideological
terms. Time after time, the point is made that, although the state may enhance
the cause of Arab nationalism, it nevertheless does not enjoy the same status as
language in nation-formation. This valorizing attitude towards the state in the
Arab nationalist discourse reflects the situation of political division between the
Arabic-speaking countries. It is important to note here, however, that the
attempt to fashion a nationalist ideology that is in tune with its own historical
and political imperatives is also present in the set of alternative nationalisms
which I have dubbed “territorial” in the title of this chapter, as we shall see
below. Nevertheless, these nationalisms differ from Arab nationalism in the
conviction that the state is an absolute criterion of the nation.
The term “territorial nationalism” in the present work covers a host of
nationalist pronouncements which have in common the correlation of a parti-
cular ideology with a specific geographical area in the Arabic-speaking world. In
some cases, the area in question is more or less identical with the boundaries of
a given state, for example Egypt or Lebanon. In other cases, the area in question
is regional in character. An example of this type is Antun SaÆada’s Syrian
Nationalism, whose territorial scope includes the countries of the Fertile Crescent
(Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine and Syria) and Cyprus (see section 2 below).
In some cases, territorial nationalism is expressed through a principle of
environmental determinism, as in Egyptian nationalism in the first three decades
of the twentieth century (see section 3), Lebanese nationalism as promulgated
by Jawad Bulus (1899–1982) in his LubnÅn wa-l-buldÅn al-mujÅwira (Lebanon
and the Surrounding Countries, 1973), or (to a somewhat lesser extent) Antun
SaÆada’s Syrian Nationalism (see section 2). In other cases, territorial national-
ism is tied to the state and the structure of political authority it possesses, as in
Kamal al-Hajj’s brand of Lebanese nationalism, whose aim is to produce an
ideological rationalization of the confessional basis of the Lebanese state (see
section 6.2 below). In some cases, territorial nationalism constitutes a rejection
of Arab nationalism; this is represented by Syrian Nationalism and some articu-
lations of Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism. In other cases, territorial nation-
alism considers itself an ally of Arab nationalism; this is the position of Jamal
Hamdan, whose study Shakhßiyyat mißr (The Character of Egypt) sets out his
views on this matter in great detail. Other expressions of territorial nationalism
do exist, but they will not concern us here.
Although the present chapter will be (mainly) restricted to articulations of
territorial nationalism in Egypt and the Levant in the twentieth century, the

the arabic language and national identity
— 164 —
impulses of these nationalist ideologies are located in the preceding century. In
the Levant, territorial nationalism had as its precursor the ideas of Butrus al-
Bustani (1819–83), whose notion wa†an (used interchangeably with bilÅd or
iqlÈm, roughly patrie) is geographically and socioculturally defined to include
Greater Syria. Al-Bustani believes that the environment in which a people lives
helps to mould their character and make out of them a broadly cohesive unit
with common interests. This sense of social cohesion is strengthened by – but is
not dependent on – the existence of a common language and shared customs
and traditions which can enable the people concerned to neutralize the forces of
division existing between them (see Nassar 1994: 347–60). In putting forward
this interpretation of wa†an as a self-contained socio-geographical entity, al-
Bustani intended to make Greater Syria the focus of loyalty and solidarity of and
between the people who lived in it, and to do so in a way which could overcome
the divisive influence of the religious and sectarian differences that were
responsible for much of the intercommunal strife in Mount Lebanon in his day.
In Egypt, RifaÆa al-Tahtawi (1801–73) paved the way for the emergence of
territorial nationalism in the twentieth century. He did so by constructing a
vision of an Egyptian nation that is territorially defined and politically anchored
to a powerful and modernizing state. The existence of a common language and
shared customs and traditions between the Egyptians is said to strengthen this
nationalism without, however, uniquely identifying it. Being an ideological
rationalization of the status quo in Egypt during al-Tahtawi’s lifetime, this con-
cept of Egyptian national identity is made to include religion, thus reflecting the
Islamic character of the country and its connections with the Ottoman Empire,
of which Egypt was formally a part.
The aim of this chapter is to deal with those articulations of territorial
nationalism in the Arabic-speaking countries of the Middle East in which lan-
guage is invoked in identity-formation. To this end, this chapter will deal with
Antun SaÆada’s regional Syrian Nationalism (section 2), Egyptian nationalism
(section 3, and section 4 and associated sub-sections) and Lebanese nationalism
(section 5 and associated sub-sections). In line with the overall design of this
book, the interaction between language and a given territorial nationalism will
be placed in its historical and political context.
2. the arabic language and territorial nationalism:
antun saÆada and regional syrian nationalism
In his major work NushË’ al-umam (1994), Antun SaÆada (1904–49) reiterates
the point that the nation has been the subject of competing theoretical con-
ceptualizations in different nationalist discourses. The reason behind this, he
points out, is the attempt by nationalists to fashion a concept of the nation that

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 165 —
suits their own situation and the internal or external challenges facing their
people. This may be explained as follows. As a sociological fact, a particular
nation partakes in one way or another of the universal or semi-universal charac-
teristics of the generic phenomenon to which it belongs. However, the political
state of the nation means that this generic concept is packaged to suit the
particularities of the situation to which it is to be applied. As a result, the nation
emerges as the outcome of the interplay between the general and the particular,
whereby the former is projected as the domain of sociology and the latter is
visualized as the realm of politics. Although SaÆada asserts that his book NushË’
al-umam (The Genesis/Rise of Nations) is a work of “pure sociology” (1994: 17),
there is no doubt that the political situation in Lebanon to which it responds
had a determining effect on the view of the nation it puts forward.
This situation is characterized by the identitarian duality of Lebanese nation-
alism and Arab nationalism. The fact that Lebanese nationalism in its early
stages was mainly supported by Christians, particularly Maronites, led SaÆada to
the view that this nationalism was irretrievably sectarian in character. Similarly,
the fact that Arab nationalism was mainly supported by the Muslims led SaÆada
to the conclusion that Arab nationalism was a variant of Islamic nationalism.
Viewed from these two perspectives, SaÆada’s Syrian Nationalism may be seen as
an attempt to provide an alternative mode of definition which can overcome
the confessional configurations of Lebanese national identity. This explains
SaÆada’s strong opposition to the above two forms of conceptualization of national
identity. It also explains his espousal of a nationalist ideology that is thoroughly
secular and thoroughly Syrian in character.1 Furthermore, it explains why he
declares that both Lebanese and Arab nationalism are reactionary (1993) and
bankrupt (1976) ideologies which are out of tune with the spirit of the age and
the abiding forces which have helped shape the Syrian national character over
the centuries.
SaÆada states that he set out “to fight” Arab nationalism because it promotes
what he calls a “false sense of Arabness” (1993: 185). Syrian Nationalism, says
SaÆada, believes in a “genuine Arabness” (ibid.) in which it is prepared to play a
leading role on the basis of cooperation between what are distinct Arab nations
in an Arab world that seeks integration, not assimilation, between its constitu-
ent members. In a similar fashion, SaÆada declares that the Syrian Nationalists
chose “to fight” Christian Lebanese nationalism because it is the creation of the
colonialist “will” and the realization of sectarian politics. By promoting the idea
that Lebanon is the eastern frontier of the Christian West, Lebanese national-
ists adopt an isolationist and false identity for Lebanon (1993: 196) that denies
the historical and cultural links between it and the rest of Syria. In addition,
Lebanese nationalism denies the environmental basis upon which these links
are constructed.

the arabic language and national identity
— 166 —
One of the most important principles in SaÆada’s concept of the nation
concerns the role of the physical environment in shaping the character of a
people and in creating different groups among humankind. Broadly speaking,
the environment delivers this function through the boundaries it provides
between regions, the climatic conditions which obtain in each region, the kind
of soil each region has, and, finally, its topography. This view is generally dubbed
“environmental determinism” in the literature. As we shall see below (section
4), environmental determinism plays an important role in formulations of
Egyptian nationalism.
SaÆada’s environmental determinism consists of two components: (1) the
earth is made up of different geographical regions and physical environments,
and (2) these environments determine the distribution of human beings into
distinct groups. He supports these two components by pointing out that “were
our earth but one vast plain of equal climatic conditions and without such
physical boundaries as deserts, mountains, rivers and seas, it would have been
self-evident that mankind would have formed one big society” (1994: 50). Yet
SaÆada does not ignore the importance of what he calls the “psychological and
individual” factors (ibid.: 55) which a group can bring to bear in moulding the
environment to its needs, thus creating its own distinctive history. He expresses
this element in his thinking by saying that “there can be no people where there
is no land, no group where there is no physical environment, and no history
where there is no group” (ibid.). Under this view, history emerges as the creation
of a group whose character is shaped by the environment of the territory on
which it exists. As a historical phenomenon, the nation therefore partakes of
the interaction between the group – as a social entity with common interests
and psycho-physical characteristics – and its physical environment, with the
emphasis being put on the latter in nation-formation.
But a nation is more than just a social group (mutta˙ad ijtimÅÆÈ) who share a
common life within a well-defined territory. What makes a nation different from
other social groups – whether they are defined in terms of village, city or country
– is the involvement of political will as a “vital element” in bringing it about
(1994: 191). Although SaÆada does not make the distinction, it seems necessary
that nation-building as a political enterprise be kept distinct from nation-
formation as a sociological phenomenon in his thinking. Whereas nation-
formation is largely the outcome of the interaction of a given group with its
environment, and the influence which this environment indelibly has on them,
nation-building is the outcome of the will of the group concerned to achieve
political unity by creating a single state on its territory. Although the state in
this sense is not definitional of the nation as a sociological fact, in political
terms it constitutes the crown which the nation aims to acquire for itself to
protect its own interests. For this to be achieved, a nation must nurture its own

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 167 —
nationalism in its capacity as the socio-psychological fusion of the love of the
motherland, a keen awareness of the common interests of the group, and the
readiness on the part of the group concerned to defend and protect these two.
What is significant from the perspective of the present study is the exclusion
of language as a criterion in the definition of the nation in Syrian Nationalism.
On the ideological level, this constitutes a rejection of the Arab nationalist idea
which considers language as the sine qua non of the nation, or as the factor
which marks it externally in relation to other nations. Language in Syrian
Nationalism is considered as a necessary condition for the existence of human
society, in the same way as other species or sub-species in the animal kingdom
must have recourse to a means of communication to take care of their needs.
SaÆada expresses this point by saying that language is not the cause of society,
but its outcome; it is the result of people coming together to form a group, rather
than the reason why the group concerned comes into being in the first place.
But he also acknowledges that a common language can aid nation-formation
and nation-building by spreading the culture of the nation to its members, and
by linking these members to earlier generations of the same nation. A common
language can also serve these functions by making it possible for members of the
nation to pursue common goals and interests more easily than would otherwise
be the case if they did not share the same language. It is often difficult to escape
the feeling in dealing with SaÆada’s thinking on the position of language in
nation-formation that he is more than prepared “to have his cake and eat it”.
Sharing a common language under this analysis may be treated as an
attribute (ßifa) of the nation, but not as an ingredient (Æunßur) which makes all
those who speak the language concerned belong to the same nation. SaÆada tells
us that the disjunction between language and nation at the level of identity is
supported by the existence of more than one nation in communities that speak
the same language. Thus, not all those who speak Arabic, Spanish or English
constitute one nation. By the same token, different national literatures with
their own specific flavours do exist through the same language community. SaÆada
also states that the opposite is equally true. A nation may possess more than one
language and one literature, which it may share with other nations beyond its
borders without this leading to the fragmentation of the nation concerned. That
a nation must have access to a common language for general use is understand-
able; but this is different from saying that this common language makes the
nation concerned one with other nations that speak the same language.
SaÆada believes that the fallacy of defining the nation linguistically was
promulgated by the Germans to justify the acquisition of territories where
pockets of German-speakers existed outside the borders of Germany. Linguistic
nationalism, therefore, was developed by the Germans not through objective
study and sound reflection, but as a camouflage for territorial expansion, the

the arabic language and national identity
— 168 —
implication here being that Arab nationalism can promote a similar attitude
among those who espouse it. It is therefore the duty of Syrian Nationalists to
refute the claims of Arab nationalism, and to fight it as an ideology which
condones territorial expansion. The Syrians, SaÆada states, have survived many
changes of religion and language throughout their long history. Thus, rather
than being absorbed into a nation of Arabic-speakers, the Syrians have injected
their vigour and vitality into Arabic by translating into the language knowledge
they had accumulated through their contact with other peoples and nations.
Rather than losing their identity to the Arabs and fusing it into a prefabricated
Arabic, the Syrians assimilated Arabic and its original speakers into their
national character in a way that is consistent with similar assimilations they had
performed in earlier times. Thus, if Arabic is the national language of the Syrians,
it is so only in its Syrianized form. Furthermore, consideration of situations
elsewhere in the world shows that the pursuit of language as the marker of the
national self may lose its intensity after independence has been achieved.
Ireland is a case in point. SaÆada points out how the Irish language went into
decline after the creation of the Irish Free State in 1921, thus reversing a long-
standing tradition which sought to utilize the language as a marker of Irishness
during the long and hard struggle for independence from the British.
By citing this example, SaÆada wishes to imply that the treatment of language
as a marker of the nation is contingent on the factors existing at the time when
this association is made, and that this definitional role is weakened considerably
when the conditions giving rise to it lose their potency. According to SaÆada,
therefore, language is an accidental property of the nation rather than a
definitional criterion of it. Syrian Nationalists believe that this shows the fallacy
of the linguistic nationalist principle that language is worthier than territory. In
Syrian Nationalism, the opposite is true. Faced with the loss of its language or its
territory, a nation will always choose to retain its territory. Without it, the
nation concerned will cease to exist. The same is not true of language. The
Syrians, we are told, changed their language several times throughout their
history, but by sticking to their homeland they have succeeded in preserving
their own identity.
Like al-Husri’s and al-Arsuzi’s, SaÆada’s nationalist thinking is not without
problems, chief among which is the mixing of sociology and advocacy. It is
therefore not always easy to know where SaÆada the sociologist speaks and where
his nationalist alter ego enunciates. Another problem is the lack of clarity as to
where the nation as a sociological fact begins, and where it ends in relation to
its political manifestation in the state. On one level, it seems that the will of the
nation to achieve political unity is the factor which distinguishes it from sub-
national units within its realm. But until this will is realized, it is hard to
distinguish between social groups that are nations and those that are not. If so,

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 169 —
how can the Syrian nation be defined? The answer to this may be framed in
relation to the boundaries which the Constitution of the Syrian National Party
sets, although these boundaries were subjected to change by SaÆada at different
points in his career. In terms of this position, the Syrian nation may be said to
consist of those people who live or have lived within these boundaries. But this
begs the question; for, in terms of the environmental determinism which
characterizes this nationalism, we must be able to establish how those who live
or have lived within these boundaries are all marked by a set of environmentally
induced characteristics which, though not necessarily uniform, are still cohesive
enough to distinguish them from other nations. Apart from a few remarks, no
attempt is made to deal with this issue, perhaps because SaÆada intended to
return to it in his book NushË’ al-umma al-sËriyya, which has never been
published. SaÆada’s rejection of language as a marker of the nation may therefore
be said to be the outcome of his desire to distance himself from Arab nation-
alism ideologically, rather than as the logical outcome of the principle of
environmental determinism upon which he premises his thinking. On a different
level, this rejection reflects SaÆada’s awareness of how Arab nationalism plays
out on the Lebanese political scene by eliciting an alternative and sectarian
mode of national self-definition, namely Christian Lebanese nationalism.
3. the arabic language and egyptian nationalism:
early beginnings
Egyptian territorial nationalism operates within the domain of the state. This
explains the lack of an intense preoccupation with the state at the ideological
level in this nationalism. Instead, the main goal of this nationalism is the forma-
tion of a self-conscious nation in the territory ruled by the state. Like other
territorial nationalisms in the Arab Middle East, Egyptian nationalism in the
period under consideration here projects itself as a form of identification that is
more authentic than other competing nationalisms, be they linguistic or religious
in orientation. In particular, Egyptian nationalism promotes itself as an alter-
native to Arab and Islamic nationalism, which are not without their supporters
in the Egyptian cultural and political space.
The early beginnings of Egyptian nationalism go back to the start of the
nineteenth century, with the French occupation (1798–1803) playing a moti-
vating role in stirring the beginnings of a political consciousness in the country
(see Ahmed 1960: 2, Suleiman 1996b: 26). The rise to power of Muhammad Ali
in 1805 and his ensuing reforms, especially in the educational field, heralded a
period of modernization unparalleled in the modern history of Egypt. One of
Muhammad Ali’s crowning achievements in this field was the establishment in
1835 of the School of Languages (Dar al-Alsun), whose task was to produce

the arabic language and national identity
— 170 —
translations from European languages into Arabic (see al-Shayyal 1951). The
vigorous translation programme of this school constituted a boost to the func-
tional role of Arabic as an instrument of modernization. This new-found status
of the language was further strengthened in symbolic terms by the use of Arabic
alongside Turkish in a new functional domain: al-WaqÅ’iÆ al-mißriyya, the official
Egyptian Gazette. Later, Arabic replaced Turkish altogether as the sole language
of this important publication, thus reflecting the rising fortunes of the language
and its implicit role as the official language of the state. These achievements
constituted a vindication of the view expressed at the beginning the nineteenth
century by Shaykh Hasan al-ÆAttar (c. 1766–1835) to the effect that the “power
of language” can be used as “an instrument in awakening the mind of Egypt”
(Ahmed 1960: 5). This is one of the most abiding themes in Egyptian
nationalism.
Muhammad Ali appointed al-Tahtawi to the headship of the School of
Languages. From the perspective of the present work, al-Tahtawi’s contribution
inside and outside this school proved to be of seminal importance in the
development of Egyptian nationalism. First, he was responsible for the massive
expansion in the functional domains which Arabic was made to serve. He did
this through the subject range of the translations he commissioned, which
brought the language face to face with new fields of knowledge and lexical
expression. To respond to these challenges, al-Tahtawi felt the need to
modernize the language to make it more amenable to deliver the extralinguistic
modernization programme championed by Muhammad Ali. In practical terms,
this meant the introduction of new vocabularies in the form of borrowings from
European languages, expanding the semantic domain of words in active use, or
activating those words that had lain dormant for a long time by deploying them
in new lexical domains. In addition, al-Tahtawi turned his attention to the task
of developing new Arabic-language materials for use in the expanding school
system in Egypt. In particular, he is generally credited with the pioneering use of
tables to summarize points of grammar in the teaching of Arabic language, as
evidenced by his al-Tu˙fa al-maktabiyya fÈ taqrÈb al-lugha al-Æarabiyya (in vol. 5,
1981), which contains around forty-seven such tables.
Second, influenced by French thought on the role of geography in moulding
communities and by the need to give legitimacy to Muhammad Ali as the
sovereign ruler of Egypt in the face of the rival claim to authority attributed to
the Ottoman Sultan, al-Tahtawi called on his countrymen to make a distinction
between “brotherhood of country” and “brotherhood of religion”, complemen-
tary though these two forms of identification were. In pursuing this distinction,
al-Tahtawi showed a keen interest in the history of Egypt and displayed a great
pride in its Pharaonic past and the potential of this past in motivating the
Egyptians to regain their ancient glory, a theme to which I will return later in

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 171 —
discussing Egyptian nationalism in the 1920s and early 1930s. As Gershoni and
Jankowski (1986: 11) point out, al-Tahtawi “was perhaps the first modern
Egyptian writer to view the entire civilized history of Egypt as a continuum and
to formulate an embryonic theory of an Egyptian national character that
extended from the ancient Egyptians to his contemporaries”. Al-Tahtawi
believed that it was the role of education to impart these ideas to the Egyptian
youth, inculcating them with the idea of ˙ubb al-wa†an (the love of the
fatherland) which, as Hourani (1983: 78–9) points out, “acquires the meaning
of territorial patriotism in the modern sense” (see also ÆAbd al-Malik 1983, al-
Qirni 1995: 5–32).
The ideas that Egypt is distinct from other entities with which it shares ties of
religion or language, and that language is an important element in society –
functionally as an instrument of modernization and symbolically as the embodi-
ment of that modernization – constitute the two most important components of
al-Tahtawi’s legacy to the development of Egyptian nationalism. Witness the
impact these ideas had on Muhammad ÆAbdu (1849–1905) and Ahmad Lutfi al-
Sayyid (1872–1963). So important was the language issue for Muhammad
ÆAbdu that he declared it to be second only to the reform of religious thinking in
his scheme of things: “My second purpose has been the reform of the way of
writing the Arabic language” (Hourani 1983: 141). This interest in the language
found greater expression in the nationalist thinking of Lutfi al-Sayyid, to whose
ideas I will turn next.
Lutfi al-Sayyid believed that Egypt was a distinct nation whose people are
linked not by religion or language, but by the conditions of their continuous
history, their existence in a well-defined territory and the common interests
that hold between them. Lutfi al-Sayyid was not opposed to the idea of a
community based on Islam or Arabic, but he thought that any such community
should be premised on the existence of distinct nations that cooperate with
each other without fear of assimilation. For Lutfi al-Sayyid, the Egyptian nation
“was something concrete and definite” (Ahmed 1960: 107), as concrete and
definite as the land on which it exists. This feature of Lutfi al-Sayyid’s thinking
has led Hourani to observe with characteristic insight that “what is original in
Lutfi’s writing is his physical consciousness of Egypt and its countryside” (1983:
177). Hourani continues: Lutfi al-Sayyid “evokes the sights and sounds of the
cotton fields, paints in bright colours the virtues and happiness of the good
peasant, and exhorts the younger generation to respond to the beauty of nature”.
The purpose of this mode of writing was to form the political consciousness of
the Egyptians and to mould their character in favour of an ideology which
promoted the nation as the basis of group loyalty and solidarity. Education
through the national language was considered the means to achieving this aim.
This view of education puts language at the heart of Lutfi al-Sayyid’s

the arabic language and national identity
— 172 —
nationalist thinking. As the editor of the newspaper al-JarÈda between c. 1908
and 1914, he used his position to advance a range of views on the reform of the
Arabic language. Commenting on this aspect of Lutfi al-Sayyid’s work, Ahmed
(1960: 105) believes that “his contribution to the enrichment of the language
will probably be his chief legacy as a sociological writer”. Lutfi al-Sayyid believes
that Arabic belongs to the Egyptian nation, and that a nation which neglects its
language and does not seek to develop it lexically and stylistically lacks an
awareness of itself and respect for it. This fact behoves the Egyptian nation to
preserve its language and to develop it to meet its own modernization needs.
Preservation does not however mean ossification, nor does modernization mean
the wholesale importation of lexical resources from other languages. What is
required is a strategy which allows the Egyptian nation to strike a happy
medium between, first, the traditionalists and the modernizers, and, second, the
colloquial and the standard. The ultimate aim of this will be to reform Arabic
and to make it the language of science, which does not belong to any one nation
to the exclusion of others. To do this, Arabic must be endowed with an ever-
expanding stock of scientific terms to enable it to address the needs of its users.
The battle between the linguistic traditionalists, as Lutfi al-Sayyid defines
them, and the modernizers is one of attitude towards the past and how it relates
to the present and the future. The traditionalists insist that the lexical purity of
the language must be preserved by coining native technical terms to designate
new inventions and concepts.2 Failure to follow this principle will lead to a flood
of foreign terms, which will compromise the cultural and structural integrity of
the language. By holding this position, the traditionalists clearly display a keen
awareness of the role of symbolism in conceptualizing issues of linguistic change
as emblematic manifestations of larger change in society. What is ultimately at
stake here is the attempt to fashion a concept of language and nation that is
rooted in the past and that will remain true to it. Foreign lexical imports are
believed to undermine this position; that is why they must be resisted.
The modernizers, on the other hand, believe that borrowing terms from
other tongues is consistent with the history of the Arabic language. Lutfi al-
Sayyid, who considers himself to be among the modernizers, points out that the
Qur’an itself contained borrowed terms, and that during the age of translation
in the medieval period the Arabs borrowed many terms from Greek, Persian and
Sanskrit even when at times they had native equivalents to these terms.
Borrowing is therefore not a sign of weakness or corruption, but of strength and
the desire to advance forward, hence the use of such phrases as IlÅ al-amÅm
(“Forward, March!”) and RaqqË lughatakum (“Develop Your Language!”) as
titles for some of Lutfi al-Sayyid’s articles in al-JarÈda in 1913 (1945, vol. 1: 126,
134). Furthermore, borrowings from European languages will represent a case of
lexical restitution whereby the Egyptians will reclaim new terminologies in lieu

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 173 —
of the terms which the Europeans borrowed from Arabic in the past. Borrowing
from European languages thus becomes a case of quid pro quo, and not a sign of
linguistic weakness as the traditionalists may think.
Borrowings may be done directly from the donor languages, or indirectly via
the colloquial which often incorporates the names of new objects well before
these names are subjected to scrutiny by linguistic authority. The involvement
of the colloquial in this process of lexically replenishing the standard requires
some adjustment in the attitude towards the former in society. Lutfi al-Sayyid
therefore insists that a new mode of thinking must be developed whereby the
colloquial as the site of linguistic corruption is nevertheless considered as a
reservoir of lexical and grammatical resources which may be used to enrich and
reform the standard. To this end, Lutfi al-Sayyid established it as an aim of the
nation to effect a rapprochement between the colloquial as the language of
speech and the standard as the language of writing. This will lead to creating a
middle language between these two forms of Arabic in a double trajectory of
lexically enriching the standard and grammatically correcting the colloquial. In
national terms, the new language will represent an important, perhaps the most
important, factor in the advancement of the Egyptian nation. It will do so by
harnessing the living power of the colloquial to the sanctioned authority of the
standard as the language of research and scientific exchange.
Some critics have dubbed Lutfi al-Sayyid’s call to create a middle language to
bridge the difference between the colloquial and the standard tamßÈr al-lugha,
the Egyptianization of Arabic (al-RafiÆi 1974: 54–66). They have been helped
in this by Lutfi al-Sayyid’s use of the term al-lugha al-mißriyya (the Egyptian
language) to refer to the spoken Arabic of Egypt (1945, vol. 1: 247), and by his
calls to Egyptianize education and Western civilization. The fact that Lutfi al-
Sayyid did not seem to have challenged this term (tamßÈr al-lugha) may have
been the reason behind its currency as a feature of his thinking to this day. This
acquiescence on his part – if it is correct – may reflect a belief that a distinct
Egypt in national terms would be better served by having a language that is
more or less its own, at least in its lexical flavour. There is, however, no way of
establishing whether Lutfi al-Sayyid did in fact hold such a belief. What is
certain is that Lutfi al-Sayyid was not a supporter of the colloquial, which he
held in some contempt as a corrupt form of Arabic. This attitude on his part
may be exemplified by his reaction to the use of the colloquial on the stage
(1945, vol. 2: 143, translation in Wendell 1972: 280):
I saw this on the stage of the ÆAbbas Theatre when the Abyad troupe presented four
plays which had been translated into poetry in the colloquial tongue by the late …
ÆUthman Bey Jalal. I saw the great crush of people, the enthusiastic applause, and the
tremendous acclaim which greeted these popular plays. I saw everyone [so transported]
except for myself and a few of my friends who were of the same mind; who felt

the arabic language and national identity
— 174 —
depressed by the spectacle of [this sick language gaining in strength], jostling the
literary language, and forcing it out of the stage; and who were oppressed by having to
listen to solecisms [affecting the ends of words].
We may gauge the strength of this interest in the language as a factor in the
formation of the Egyptian national consciousness by considering the response in
Egypt to the decision by the British to make English or French the medium of
instruction in the Egyptian schools. At the secondary level, this resulted in
reducing the number of hours devoted to instruction in or through Arabic
between 1893 and 1907 (see ÆAli 1995: 97–8). The journalist ÆAbdalla al-
Nadim (1844–96) published an article in the journal al-TankÈt wa-l-tabkÈt,
entitled I∂ÅÆat al-lugha taslÈm al-dhÅt (“Language Loss is Surrendering the Self ”),
in which he called upon the Egyptians to hold on to Arabic instead of
surrendering themselves to foreign languages (ibid.: 114–15). The same cause in
its wider ramifications was taken up by other journalists and newspapers of the
day, including Mustafa Kamil (1874–1908), whose al-LiwÅ’ was the scourge of
those who promoted foreign languages over Arabic, be they of British or Egypt-
ian origin.
The above discussion shows that, although language was regarded as an
important element in Egyptian nationalism in the early stages of its develop-
ment, it is nevertheless not raised to the status of a characteristic principle of
this nationalism in definitional terms. This excludes the possibility of positing a
common nationalism that ties the Egyptians to other Arabic-speaking peoples
outside Egypt, as pan-Arab nationalism later demanded. However, language is
accorded a pivotal role by Egyptian nationalists as an instrument of modern-
ization and as the object of modernization itself (see Suleiman 1996b). This
view of the language invokes both its functionality and its power of symbolism.
The above discussion also shows the deep desire among the Egyptian nation-
alists to reform the language by bringing it closer to the colloquial, the spoken
language of the people. And all of this is framed within a concept of the nation
that is territorially based, conscious of its past history and determined not to let
religion be one of its defining ingredients (cf. Gershoni and Jankowski 1986:
13). This set of associations will constitute the main thrust of the next section.
4. the arabic language and egyptian nationalism:
full elaboration
The idea that Egypt is a distinct nation that is historically unique and rooted in
its geography was the product of a long period of gestation in the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. Commitment to this concept of Egypt operated
even when the tie of religion was invoked as an instrument of ridding the
country of British occupation. This was the case with Mustafa Kamil, who never

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 175 —
wavered in his belief in the uniqueness of Egypt, even when he turned to Islam
as a means of promoting extraterritorial links with the Ottomans to oppose the
British (see æAmara 1976, Nasr 1984). However, the idea that the Egyptian
national character was determined by the environment and the social setting to
which this gave rise came to the fore as a site of full intellectual elaboration
later, mainly in the 1920s and early 1930s. The contribution of Muhammad
Husayn Haykal (1888–1956)3 to the development of this aspect of Egyptian
nationalism was of paramount importance in giving it wide currency, princi-
pally through the newspaper al-SiyÅsa al-usbËÆiyya, which started to appear in
1926. Other intellectuals participated in this enterprise, as we shall see in the
next two sections.
My aim in this section is a limited one: it is to outline the main themes which
dominated the articulations of Egyptian nationalism in its territorial form in the
period mentioned above. In carrying out this task, I will concentrate on the way
language was dealt with in these articulations, painting as much of the socio-
cultural context as necessary. It must be noted, however, that the advocates of
Egyptian nationalism did not all speak with one voice. Variations existed
among them, but they were all agreed that the Egyptian national character was
culturally distinct, historically unique and environmentally determined, and
that only by accepting this characterization of their collective personality could
the Egyptians determine a course of action which, if followed, would lead to the
realization of their aspirations of comprehensive and sustainable modernization.
Clearly, the task of these advocates was twofold. First, they sought to chisel out
of the data available to them a blueprint of the Egyptian national character
which responded to the cultural politics of the day, as represented in the 1919
popular revolution, the creation of parliamentary democracy in 1922–3 and the
enormous pride which the Egyptians felt in their past (Pharaonic) history as a
result of the discovery of the tomb of Tut-Ankh-Amon in 1922.4 The ending of
the Caliphate by the Turkish leader Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in 1923, and the
strong advocacy of a Turkish territorial nationalism, aided the cause of the
Egyptian nationalists (1) directly by ringing the death knell of the idea of an
Islamic nation, and (2) indirectly by giving credence to the ideology of Egyptian
nationalism in its territorial mode. Second, the advocates of Egyptian
nationalism sought to popularize their brand of national identity as the basis of
task-orientation among Egyptians. Their aim here was to convert the ideo-
logical into a motivating task-orientated force in the service of the nation and
that of state-building.
The principle of environmental determinism is a central premise in Egyptian
nationalism. Broadly speaking, the main thesis in this principle revolves around
the idea that the physical and climatic conditions of the Nile Valley have
endowed the Egyptians with group characteristics which made them distinct

the arabic language and national identity
— 176 —
from those who surround them. In Egyptian nationalism, this principle was
employed as an instrument to underpin the following claims: (1) a direct
psychological and racial link exits between modern-day Egyptians and their
ancestors, whose civilization came into pre-eminence under the Pharaohs six
millennia ago; (2) the Egyptians are different from the Arabs, with whom they
share a common language, Arabic; (3) the Egyptians are different from their co-
religionists, mainly Muslims; (4) Egypt’s great powers of assimilation have
enabled it to absorb waves of immigrants and to stamp their mental make-up
with the indelible imprint of its character. The popularization of this image of
Egypt was channelled through the press. It was also channelled through the
school system, particularly in civics books.
The point of interest for us in all of this is the way in which the above
constellation of ideas was applied to the role of Arabic in the conceptualization
of Egyptian nationalism. The first and most fundamental strategy was to argue
that language is not a valid marker of national identity, by citing examples
where this is presumed not to be the case. In this context, Muhammad Amin
Hassuna pointed out that Arabic is not the language of one Arab nation/people
(shaÆb) but of different Arab nations (see Husayn 1983, vol. 2: 151). Muhammad
ÆAbdalla ÆAnan expressed the view that Arabic came to Egypt with the invading
Arabs and that, as such, it does not make Egypt an Arab country (ibid.: 152–4).
Arabic in this context was sometimes thought to be similar to Latin, which gave
birth to the Romance languages, the implication being that the different Arabic
dialects could develop fully in the same direction if they were allowed into
writing. This point is reflected in an item by Tawfiq ÆAwwan in SiyÅsa al-
usbËÆiyya in 1929 (cited in Gershoni and Jankowski 1986: 220):
Egypt has an Egyptian language; Lebanon has a Lebanese language; the Hijaz has an
Hijazi language; and so forth – and all of these languages are by no means Arabic
languages. Each of our countries has a language which is its own possession: so why do
we not write it as we converse in it? For the language in which the people speak is the
language in which they also write.
The point behind this is a simple one: even if language could be admitted as
a marker of the nation in abstract terms, Arabic could not play this role because
it is not a single language but a set of related languages which ought to be
inscribed in writing. Furthermore, owing to the fact that Egypt has its own
environmentally determined national character, and since language is an attri-
bute and instrument of this character, it logically follows that the Arabic of
Egypt must perforce be different from the Arabics of other environmentally
determined nations in the Arabic-speaking world. That ÆAwwan does not
recognize the distinction between language and dialect above is not the issue
here, for what is important in what he says is the fact of his asserting the claim
he puts forward, not its factual truth. This mode of argumentation by formal

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 177 —
logic, of claiming that something is true by definition, is the second strategy of
dissociating language from nation in discussions of self-identity in Egyptian
nationalism.
A third strategy in this field consists of adducing empirical evidence, or
interpretations of such evidence, which purport(s) to show that the special
character of Arabic in Egypt is the result of the interference made by the
linguistic substratum in the language (see ÆUmar 1970, 1998).5 This substratum
is made up of Coptic, which is said to represent a demotic form of the language
of the Pharaohs, ancient Egyptian. The argument runs that Egypt’s powers of
assimilation ensured that the spoken Arabic of Egypt was impregnated with
structural (phonological and grammatical) and lexical properties that reflect
this substratum, and that it is these properties which explain the difference
between the Arabic of Egypt and that of other Arabic-speaking regions which,
by the same token, reflect their own linguistic substrata. It is not difficult to see
in this a reflection of the claim made by some Coptic Egyptian nationalists, for
example Murqus Samika, that all Egyptians are Copts, but some happen to be
Muslims and others Christians (see Husayn 1983, vol. 2: 148).6 Some Coptic
nationalists went beyond this, calling for the revival of the Coptic language to
replace Arabic among the Copts and, it seems, non-Copts. One such writer
expressed the view that, in the same way that a person cannot belong to two
churches, a true Egyptian cannot be loyal to two languages (see Kilani, n.d.: 51–
4). This view did not go unchallenged. Some Copts countered it by pointing out
that Coptic should be restricted to the monasteries, and that the Copts should
devote their attention to mastering the Arabic language as the national
language of Egypt. Some writers of this persuasion believed that the danger to
the Copts came not from Arabic but from European languages, which the
missionaries used as a bait to convert the Copts to their churches.
The place of Arabic in Egyptian nationalism was a major issue in discussions
of the kind of literature which the Egyptian writers must develop to reflect and
mould the Egyptian national character and Egyptian national culture. The
debate over this issue was based on four premises. The first stipulated that
literature is the marker (ÆunwÅn) of a nation’s culture and civilization (Haykal
1986: 112). The second stipulated that, although science and philosophy are
the means of knowledge par excellence, literature represents the spirit or
“nectar” of these two domains and all other domains of human knowledge
(ibid.: 24). The third premise stipulated that the political and the literary-cum-
cultural go hand in hand in all national movements, and that the latter provides
a guarantee of survivability to the former. As Husayn points out, unlike political
revolutions, literature cannot be easily eliminated in society (ibid.: 12). The
fourth premise stipulated that while Egyptian national literature cannot and
must not ignore its roots, it nevertheless must reflect and seek to develop the

the arabic language and national identity
— 178 —
new national spirit. To do so, Egyptian literature must be rooted in its Egyptian
environment, both physical and social. It must seek to describe the beauty of
Egypt and the effect of the Nile environment on the Egyptian people. It must
also mine the greatness of ancient Egypt for motivational effect. It must
additionally seek to achieve this by espousing a realist and a naturalist approach
which extols the virtue of the peasant and reflects the uprightness of his moral
character as accurately as possible.
The debate about realism and naturalness brought to the fore the question of
the kind of language which this literature must adopt. Some nationalists put
forward the view that the desired realism and naturalness of the content of this
new literature must be reflected in the realism and naturalness of its language.
The point was made that the literary plausibility of the fellah (peasant) would be
severely compromised if his normal speech was replaced by the formal register of
the written language.7 Niqula Yusuf raised this issue in 1929 in al-SiyÅsa al-
usbËÆiyya, particularly with respect to the language of the theatre (see Muhammad
1996: 163). Some nationalists advocated the wholesale use of the colloquial in
all literary genres as a solution to this problem. Witness the views put forward
on this matter by Tawfiq ÆAwwan which I mentioned earlier. Similar views were
expressed by Ibrahim JumÆa, who was mainly interested in developing an
Egyptian children’s literature (ibid.: 162). JumÆa held the view that Egyptian
writers must abandon their traditional attitude of favouring the standard form of
the language over the colloquial, and that this change must go hand in hand
with the rejection of the traditional styles and themes of Arabic literature.
Egypt, it was pointed out by Niqula Yusuf (ibid.: 163), had its own environment
which differed radically from the desert environment of the Arabs, and this
difference was reflected in its language. Implicit in this view is the claim that, as
a desert language, Arabic was and remains a Bedouin language, and as such it
cannot be suitable for the modern needs of Egypt.8
Other writers were far less radical in their attitude towards the language issue.
Haykal in particular did not condemn the use of the colloquial on the stage,
although he did not wish to see it as the only medium in this literary genre. He
believed that the use of the colloquial on the stage would prove to be a stopgap
measure which, by analogy, would also be the case vis-à-vis the use of this
variety for dialogue in the novel and the short story. The standard language, he
believed, would eventually have the upper hand in the contest with the
colloquial, owing to the spread of literacy and to the development of a simpli-
fied form of the written language. The fact that Haykal’s prediction for the
language of the stage has proved to be inaccurate is not the issue here. What
matters is his attitude towards the standard, which was very favourable and
rooted in an awareness that Arabic is not just a means of literary expression but
also an instrument of cultural defence against foreign influences which may

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 179 —
dilute the authenticity of the Egyptian national character. This fear was expressed
most vociferously by a group of nationalist writers who called for a reduction in
the reliance on translation and foreign literatures (Muhammad 1996: 164–6).
Haykal believed that, although Arabic needed lexical, grammatical and stylistic
modernization, it still represented the best link between the Egyptians and their
literary and religious heritage. A national literature cannot ignore its literary
past. It also cannot ignore the contribution made by the founding texts of its
culture, including the Qur’an, to its evolution and development. Not even
French, English or German literatures were able to sidestep their own heritage
or history. Hence the continued relevance of Christianity, Greece and Rome to
these literatures. Egypt must take heed of that.
The above discussion shows that, although language was not considered a
definitional ingredient of Egyptian nationalism, it was nevertheless an issue of
great importance for the Egyptian nationalists in the 1920s and the early 1930s.
Some wished to bring to an end the identity association between Egypt and
other Arabic-speaking countries by promoting the colloquial as the medium of
writing and wider communication. In putting this forward, the proponents of
this view invoked the environmentally determined character of this dialect.
The majority of the nationalists, however, adopted a solution similar to that
advocated by Lutfi al-Sayyid (see section 3). It consisted of modernizing the
Arabic language by making it more receptive to lexical borrowings from the
colloquial and foreign (mainly European) languages. The aim of this suggestion
was to bridge the difference between the language of speech and writing by
creating a middle language that can serve the two functions. It was envisaged
that the new language would be closer to the standard than to the colloquial,
and that the creation of an Arabic Language Academy would be a significant
step in achieving this goal (see al-JamiÆi 1983).9 In addition to proposing new
terminologies, it was suggested that such an academy would spearhead the
compilation of dictionaries of a general and specialized nature. It was also thought
that the Academy would bring forward suggestions for various language reforms,
including those of the script (see Eliraz 1986).
By the late 1930s, the tide of Egyptian nationalism had started to turn in a
more Arabist direction (see Gershoni and Jankowski 1995). The movement in
this direction was gradual and, sometimes, mediated through an enhanced
appreciation of the role Islam plays in the constitution of Egyptian society.
Muhammad Husayn Haykal contributed to this by recanting most of his earlier
views on Egyptian nationalism, particularly his earlier enthusiasm for the
Pharaonic past of Egypt, which was now replaced as an object of study by Egypt’s
Islamic and Arab past (see Husayn 1983, vol. 2: 170–2).10 A similar change
occurred in the thinking of Muhammad ÆAlluba, who declared that Egypt was
an Arab country by virtue of, among other things, the Arabic language (ibid.:

the arabic language and national identity
— 180 —
173–5). This move was represented symbolically in the layout of al-SiyÅsa al-
usbËÆiyya itself (see Husayn 1983, vol. 2: 172). In its early years, the cover page
of this newspaper appeared with Pharaonic decorations and the Common Era
date only. The Islamic date was included in the inside pages only, alongside the
Common Era date. Later, the newspaper omitted the Islamic dates completely.
In the early 1930s, the Pharaonic decorations were dropped and replaced by
caricatures. In its last stage, the newspaper had developed an Islamic visual
identity, which it signalled by stating the Islamic date of publication only on the
front page.
The strength of the Arabist idea as an alternative form of national identi-
fication did not, however, succeed in expunging Egyptian nationalism from the
Egyptian cultural and political scene. My aim in the following three subsections
is to show the sustained pull of this nationalism by examining the work of three
Egyptian intellectuals who have contributed significantly to elucidating the
relationship between language and nation in Egypt in the twentieth century:
Salama Musa (1887–1958), Taha Husayn (1889–1973) and Luwis ÆAwad (1915–
90).
4.1 The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism: Salama Musa
Many of the ideas raised in the preceding section received the sustained
attention of Salama Musa, whose hard-hitting style is characterized by a simpli-
city and clarity designed to motivate his Egyptian readers to espouse the ideals
of modernization and nation-building he sought to promote. Salama Musa was a
prolific writer who, like other Egyptian nationalists, understood the power of
journalism in popularizing their nationalist cause. He wrote more than forty
books, not all of which are directly relevant to the theme of the present work.
Of these books, I will concentrate on al-Yawm wa-l-ghad (Today and Tomorrow,
first published in 1928), Mißr aßl al-˙a∂Åra (Egypt is the Source of Civilization, first
published in 1935) and al-BalÅgha al-Æaßriyya wa-l-lugha al-Æarabiyya (Modern
Rhetoric and the Arabic Language, first published in 1945, with revised and
expanded editions in 1953 and 1958). Although the ideas in these works show
some slight variations, they are nevertheless consistent in ideology and zeal in
spite of the thirty-year period separating the first publication above from the
second revised edition of the last publication in the list.
Salama Musa conceives of the last chapter of al-Yawm wa-l-ghad as an investi-
gation into the identity of the Egyptian nation; in particular, whether Egypt
belongs to Europe and shares with it its culture, or whether it belongs to the
East, to whose heritage it must remain true. He observes that, in the nineteenth
century and the first two decades of the twentieth century, Egypt seemed to be
unsure as to whether it belonged to Europe or to the East. Having considered
the issue, Salama Musa dismisses out of hand the idea that Egypt belongs to the

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 181 —
East. He declares emphatically that the ascription of an Eastern identity to
Egypt is an absurdity which must be resisted and ridiculed (al-rÅbi†a al-sharqiyya
sakhÅfa, 1998: 660). Egypt belongs to Europe, not the East; and, if it belongs to
the East, it does so only in the sense that it was once part of the Byzantine
Empire, which to all intents and purposes is the bedrock of European civiliza-
tion. He further points out that even Arabic, which might be thought of as an
Asiatic and therefore Eastern language, contains well over 1,000 words from
Greek and Latin. Similarly, al-Azhar, which is often considered the bastion of
Islamic learning in Egypt and the rest of the Muslim world, was itself established
by a European, Jawhar al-Siqilli, who was of Slav origin. Also, medieval Arabic
culture was not different from ancient European culture, since both took their
impetus from Greek philosophy. Salama Musa goes even further, claiming that
Islam itself is almost a branch (madhhab) of Christianity (ibid.: 668). In Mißr aßl
al-˙a∂Åra, Salama Musa declares that Egypt is the fountainhead of human
civilization, and that European civilization and culture owe a great deal to
Egyptian civilization and culture. Furthermore, the Egyptians are more bio-
logically or racially related to the Europeans than to other Eastern nations. For
all of these reasons, none of which Salama Musa substantiates, Egypt cannot be
said to be part of the East. It should be noted here that the East which Salama
Musa has in mind above is the Far East, as his references to China and Japan in
al-Yawm wa-l-ghad indicate. In seeking to deny the claim that Egypt belongs to
the East, Salama Musa sets out to counter the idea promoted by some Egyptian
intellectuals to the effect that, by banding together, the nations of the East can
resist European power and encroachment, and that they can enlighten Europe
about the spirituality it had lost in its rush for industrialization.
Salama Musa is no less dismissive of the attempts to build Egyptian national
identity on religious grounds. He declares that the religious bond in nation-
building is a “gross impertinence” (al-rÅbi†a al-dÈniyya waqÅ˙a shanÈÆa, ibid.: 662)
which is unbecoming of civilized nations in the twentieth century. Religion
clashes with science and offers views of the world that are antithetical to
progress. Religion, points out Salama Musa, is a matter for the individual, who
may not believe what others believe. In their attitude towards religion, the
Egyptians should emulate the Turks, who discovered during the First World
War that the Islamic bond is meaningless politically and otherwise. What is
needed in Egypt is a secular outlook based on scientific socialism, a favourite
concept of Salama Musa, rather than the futile harping on the religious bond
which is ineffective and divisive as a form of national identification. As a
Christian Copt, Salama Musa was aware that a religiously anchored national
identity in Egypt was bound to split the Egyptian body politic along religious
lines into, mainly, Muslims and Christians. To avoid this, a bond other than
religion must be established as the basis of the national identity of Egypt.

the arabic language and national identity
— 182 —
In a manner reminiscent of the position in extreme forms of Egyptian
nationalism, Salama Musa dismisses as misguided all the attempts to base Egypt-
ian identity on Arab foundations. He declares that the Egyptians owe no loyalty
to the Arabs. The Arabs are said to be less advanced than the Egyptians, thus
making their culture unsuitable as a model for modern Egyptians, although it
may be of archaeological interest similar to that which some people evince in
the civilization of ancient Mesopotamia. In literature, Egyptian writers must
eschew the temptation to emulate Arabic style and Arab themes. Interest in
Arabic literature is time-wasting and leads to dissipating the creative energies of
these writers. Arabic literature is said to contain obscene elements which can
corrupt the morality of those Egyptians who may be exposed to it. This litera-
ture is also said to reflect the ethos of a society which was steeped in Bedouin
life, bloodthirsty and dictatorial – so dictatorial, in fact, that even the Pope
appears to be a model of democracy in comparison with Arab and Muslim rulers.
Emulation of Arabic literature on the linguistic level may also lead to favouring
form over content among Egyptian writers. It may also encourage the adoption
of a style of writing in which linguistic pomposity and ornate rhetoric replace
content as the standard by which an artwork can be judged. Should this happen,
Egyptian literature would be shunted into the culture of the dark ages to which
Arabic culture is said to belong.
Emulating classical Arabic literature is also dangerous because it bestows on
the defective Arabic language the mantle of literary legitimacy which it does
not deserve. As a lexically defective and grammatically unduly complex language,
standard Arabic cannot serve as the medium of the national literature of Egypt.
It should therefore give way to a refined colloquial language, which is living and
authentic. Asserting this point, Salama Musa declares that standard Arabic is a
dead language which cannot compete with the colloquial as the true mother-
tongue of the Egyptians. What is, however, interesting is that Salama Musa
himself did not use this language in his writings. In this respect, he is similar to
the proponents of the standard language who hardly use it in everyday speech.
Salama Musa believes that the alternative to the Arab bond in the formation
of national identity cannot be the link which the modern Egyptians have with
their ancient ancestors, dubbed Pharaonism in the literature. In spite of this,
Salama Musa believes that the Pharaonic legacy is far more beneficial to the
modern Egyptians than the Arab legacy in the formation of their identity and
the building of their nation. To begin with, the Pharaonic legacy belongs to the
forefathers of the modern Egyptians, who still carry in their blood the genetic
make-up of these ancestors. Modern Egyptians can take pride in this legacy
which, Salama Musa declares, makes Egypt the source of human civilization
(Mißr aßl al-˙a∂Åra being the title of one of his books). By studying ancient
Egypt, modern Egyptians will provide their nationalism with the “nourishment”

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 183 —
it needs (1947: 31 and 90). This is why every attempt should be made to train
Egyptians in Egyptology, to write books on ancient Egypt in Arabic, to expand
the Pharaonic history offerings in Egyptian schools, to make films which display
the splendour that was Egypt, to erect Pharaonic-style statues in Cairo and to
transport some of the Pharaonic monuments to the city to give it an ancient
Egyptian atmosphere. Salama Musa is aware of the symbolism of these recom-
mendations, which he exploits in his book Mißr aßl al-˙a∂Åra by including figures
that display aspects of ancient Egyptian art and items of material culture. Being
aware of the importance of language in nation-formation and nation-building,
Salama Musa states that Coptic, the demotic partner of the ancient Egyptian
language, is not dead but is embedded in features which it has injected into
Arabic. Coptic is alive in the monasteries of the Coptic Church; all it needs to
regain its authentic textual identity is for a patriotic monk to devise an ancient
Egyptian script to replace the Greek alphabet used in writing it.
Armed with this spirit of renewal provided by the Pharaonic legacy, modern
Egypt must seek its modern identity by aligning itself with European culture to
which it properly belongs. This orientation carries with it certain obligations on
the cultural and political level. By hankering after the East, points out Salama
Musa, the Egyptians must accept that the Europeans have every right to be
contemptuous of them, and that they have no right to hate the Europeans (inna
al-ajÅnib ya˙taqirËnanÅ bi-˙aqq wa-na˙nu nakrahuhum bi-lÅ ˙aqq, 1998: 671). The
way out of this is for the Egyptians to espouse European culture completely, as
the Turks have done under Atatürk. Being aware of the power of symbols in
nation-formation, Salama Musa calls on the Egyptians to replace the fez by the
European cap, as the Turks had done. In addition, the Egyptians must seek to
Egyptianize the foreigners living among them, thus giving them a stake in the
future of the country which will help release their creative energies in the
project of modernization. Egypt must also shed all the institutions of the past,
including al-Azhar. Egypt must additionally develop its own literature and
language to reflect its own unique national identity. And, in an obvious inter-
textual reference to the Qur’an, Salama Musa calls on the Egyptians to turn
their faces towards Europe in fashioning for themselves a new identity: fa-l-
nuwalli wujËhanÅ sha†r ËrËbÅ (“Let us turn our faces in the direction of Europe”,
ibid.: 675), which recalls God’s order to the Prophet Muhammad and to all his
followers in the Qur’an to turn their faces in prayer in the direction of the
Sacred Mosque in Mecca: fa-walli wajhaka sha†ra al-masjid al-˙arÅm wa-˙aythu mÅ
kuntum fa-wallË wujËhakum sha†rah (“Turn then thy face in the direction of the
Sacred Mosque, and wherever you are turn your faces in that direction”, Qur’an
2:144).
Clearly, Salama Musa believes that the modernization of Egypt along
European lines should be the goal of Egyptian nationalism. In its broadest

the arabic language and national identity
— 184 —
characterization, this modernization must have as its aim moving Egypt from an
agricultural mode of life and the preoccupation with literature, to an industrial
age in which science, not literature, has pride of place. Language is seen as an
important element in this modernization, but this does not elevate it to the
status of a defining marker of the nation. Most of Salama Musa’s ideas on this
issue are found in his book al-BalÅgha al-Æaßriyya wa-l-lugha al-Æarabiyya (Modern
Rhetoric and the Arabic Language), which, by fronting modern rhetoric in the
title, indicates where the author’s interests and sympathies lie. This ordering of
the two components of the title suggests an oppositional relation between them
which the book seeks to resolve in favour of the “modern rhetoric”.
Salama Musa’s thesis in this work is that the Arabic language in Egypt is one
of the most important factors behind the backwardness of the country in social
and other spheres. The lexical poverty of the language in designating modern
objects and concepts means that the Egyptians continue to live in a pre-
industrial age of agricultural practices and habits, and that their mentality as a
result is “ancient, fossilized, dull and backward-looking” (Æaqliyya qadÈma,
jÅmida, mutaballida tanΩur ilÅ al-mÅ∂È, 1964: 8). This mentality is reflected in
fossilized modes of expression, and the tendency to replace logical argumenta-
tion by linguistic gymnastics, in traditional Arabic rhetoric. Language in this
case is the outcome of its social milieu. But it is also the case that the social
milieu is the outcome of language. The reform of society and its modernization
cannot therefore proceed without reforming and modernizing the language of
the society concerned. Similarly, the reform and modernization of the language
is bound to lead to the reform and modernization of the society to which it
belongs. By explaining where the backwardness of Arabic lies, and by providing
ideas for dealing with this backwardness, Salama Musa aims to contribute to the
project of Egyptian modernization and nation-building.
Salama Musa states that traditional Arabic rhetoric (al-balÅgha al-taqlÈdiyya)
pushes Arabic discourse towards sentimentality and emotionalism. It also
encourages a kind of linguistic arrogance which leads to assigning the highest
value in stylistic expression to linguistic artistry and the use of outlandish meta-
phors, ornate figures of speech and skilfully crafted but artificial metonymies.
The application of this style in literature makes the writer a slave to these
outmoded norms of rhetorical expression, thus yielding a literature of slavery
(adab ÆubËdiyya, 1998: 559) and one full of hot air and linguistic bubbles (adab
al-faqÅqÈÆ, ibid.: 560). What is needed in Egypt according to Salama Musa is a
different kind of literature, a literature in which language is the means of rational
expression rather than the end of artistic achievement. This new literature must
also be able to address the ordinary people of Egypt in a language which they
can understand and consider as their own. For this to happen, Egyptian writers
must fashion a language in which words say what they are intended to say, a

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 185 —
language in which vagueness is reduced to a minimum. To achieve this, an
attempt must be made to purify this language from the over-abundance of syno-
nyms and near-synonyms which are so characteristic of Arabic. In addition, the
new language must be fit for expressing the modern needs of the Egyptians and
capable of releasing their creative energies. Following the suggestion made by
Sir William Willcocks in 1893 in a lecture he delivered at the Azbakiyya Club
in Cairo (see SaÆid 1964: 32–40), Salama Musa held the view that this ideal
language was the colloquial, not the standard.
Willcocks argued that the ornate style of standard Arabic works like a drug
on the Egyptians, depriving them of their creativity and critical abilities. He
also argued that, being a second language to the Egyptians, standard Arabic
requires years of learning and formal instruction, and more often than not the
process ends without the full mastery of the language. Very few writers in Egypt
can write Arabic correctly, and many Egyptians cannot understand it at all.
Some industrial accidents in Egypt were the result of this defective competence
in the reception and processing of written documents. Egyptians live in a world
of translation involving their mother-tongue and standard Arabic. This linguistic
duality (or diglossia) slows the Egyptians down intellectually and mentally, and
it is the single most important factor in the absence of scientific creativity and
innovation among them. Having established the problem facing Egypt on the
linguistic front, Willcocks argued that the solution to this problem is a simple
one: it consists of turning the spoken language of Egypt into its language of
science and culture. By adopting this course of action, Egypt would only be
replicating the process in Europe which turned the vernaculars into the languages
of writing, reading and high culture. And, in a manner reminiscent of this
process in Europe, Willcocks produced a translation of the Bible into colloquial
Egyptian. Salama Musa praises this translation, pointing out that the simplicity
of its style and its rootedness in Egyptian life and culture make it superior to the
translation of the Bible into standard Arabic. For all these reasons, Salama Musa
believes that Egypt is indebted to Willcocks, who, by implication, provides an
excellent argument for the call to Egyptianize foreigners in Egypt so that the
nation can avail itself of their expertise and innovative spirit.
Salama Musa also argues that the artificiality of standard Arabic, its difficulty
and the fact that its adoption dissipates the force of Egyptian nationalism in
identity and modernization terms by creating links with other Arabic-speaking
countries are but part of the problem facing Egypt on the linguistic front. In
addition, the fact that the language is stamped by the indelible imprint of the
desert environment which nurtured it in its early stages of development means
that Arabic is unable to handle the needs of modern life. In the Arabic-speaking
world, words have such a hold on speakers that they often base their linguistic
and non-linguistic practices and behaviour on the effect these words have on

the arabic language and national identity
— 186 —
them. We are told that by using the word thuÆbÅn (lit. snake) in Arabic to
designate the eel, the Egyptians have deprived themselves of a great source of
food because of the negative connotations of the word thuÆbÅn (1964: 36). Also,
the absence of any poetry on the swan in Arabic – although it is the subject of
fabulous poetic and musical compositions in other cultures – is said by Salama
Musa to be the result of the ugly-sounding name, bajaÆa, it has in Arabic (ibid.).
Arabic also contains a set of words which are said to have been responsible for
many crimes, including the so-called crimes of honour, in Egypt. These are first
and foremost “linguistic crimes” (jarÅ’im lughawiyya lÅ akthar, ibid.: 60). Salama
Musa states that words of this kind have an intoxicating effect on their users,
both speakers and hearers, owing to the fury (junËn, ibid.: 61) they generate in
them. This set of words includes damm (blood), tha’r (revenge), intiqÅm
(vengeance) and Æir∂ (honour). These and similar words belong to a socially
harmful archaeology of linguistic signification (a˙Åfir lughawiyya, ibid.: 47),
which further includes terms that designate and sanction superstitions, the abuse
of others and the promotion of war and oppression in society. Salama Musa
claims that the hypnotic effect of these words on their users (tanwÈm mighnÅ†ÈsÈ,
ibid.: 63) is such that they correlate with the prevailing social conditions and
practices of Arabic-speaking communities. Living under the spell of Arabic, the
Egyptians are locked into a world of meanings which is inimical or, to say the
least, not conducive to modernization. To argue the point, Salama Musa corre-
lates the moral values of a society with the number of words it has to designate
aspects of these values, the implication being that the larger the stock of words
which designate these aspects in a language, the greater their preponderance in
society. He presents his conclusions in a list format which I reproduce here to
keep the visual effect (ibid.: 62):
We are as virtuous as the number of words which designate virtue in our
language.
We are as depraved as the number of words that designate depravity in our
language.
We are as logical in our behaviour as the number of words that designate
logic in our language.
We are as muddleheaded as the the number of words that designate
muddleheadedness in our language.
Egypt, points out Salama Musa, must take heed of the above correlations by
acting in a way which can increase its fund of positive and morally uplifting
terms while, at the same time, weeding out the negative and morally corrosive
ones which act like a poison in society. By so doing, the Egyptians can purify
their language, raise it to a higher status and harness its power in the modern-
ization enterprise. Words are not just emblems (shiÆÅr, ibid.: 103), but a form of
action which the Egyptians must exploit to move forward on the social, political

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 187 —
and religious fronts. Clearly, language is the key to modernization and develop-
ment in Salama Musa’s thinking. But it also reflects this modernization and
development on the lexical and other fronts. What Egypt needs, therefore, is a
double movement whereby modernization and development in the linguistic
and non-linguistic spheres can proceed together and aid each other. If so, the
question arises as to the kind of modernization and reform which Arabic must
undergo to be able to participate fully and positively in non-linguistic modern-
ization.
As a first step towards answering this question, Salama Musa begins by
outlining some of the problems which face the language lexically, stylistically,
pedagogically and orthographically. On the lexical front, Salama Musa declares
that Arabic as a means of scientific expression is dead (lughatunÅ al-Æarabiyya min
nÅ˙iyat al-ÆulËm mayyita, ibid.: 94). The answer to this problem lies in borrowing
new terms from other languages, rather than coining equivalent terms from the
native stock of the language itself. Borrowing can bring Arabic closer to other
languages, which, in this case, are bound to be the European languages of learn-
ing and science. The injection of these borrowed terms will spread the spirit of
modernity in the language. On the cultural level, this can be justified by the fact
that other languages borrowed from Arabic in the past. On the stylistic front,
the challenge facing Arabic is one of replacing the traditional Arabic rhetoric
by modern rhetoric. In particular, the main task here is one of replacing the
artificial artistry of the former by the precision of the latter. Salama Musa
expresses this point by considering logic as the greatest quality in the modern
rhetoric he is advocating. Meaning and the clarity with which it is conveyed
must be promoted over form and whatever artistry may be moulded into it as per
the traditional norms of expression. On the pedagogic front, grammar-teaching
must be simplified, at least in the initial stages of the curriculum. This simpli-
fication may encompass eliminating those features of the language that are
known to cause problems to the learners, for example the desinential inflections,
the dual, and some forms of the broken plural. It may also take the form of
promoting only reading at the primary-school level, leaving the far more complex
skill of writing until later. This would equip the learners with the essential
literacy skills they are most likely to need in their adult life. A more imaginative
teaching approach than that practised in the schools is also needed. But this will
require an organizational change of policy, whereby the traditional restriction of
Arabic-language teacher-training to the conservative and Azhar-led Teacher
Training College (Kulliyyat Dar al-ÆUlum) is lifted in favour of allowing other
agencies to provide the needed teachers (see next section for a discussion of this
point). To enrich the pool of available teachers, non-Muslim Egyptians must be
allowed to teach the language in state schools, contrary to the practice in force
at the time which restricted it to Muslims.

the arabic language and national identity
— 188 —
On the orthographic front, the Arabic script is charged with being too
unwieldy to apply in teaching and learning the language in a grammatically
correct manner, owing to the absence of the short-vowel diacritics in normal
writing. It is also considered as one of the causes for the backwardness of Egypt
in the pure and applied sciences, the acquisition of which is essential if Egypt is to
enter the industrial age with confidence. To deal with these problems effectively,
Egypt must, first, overcome its linguistic conservatism which ascribes to language
a sanctity it does not merit. Second, Egypt must adopt the Roman alphabet in
its capacity as a condition of modernity (1964, 1955). The advantages of adopt-
ing this solution are manifold. It will enable Egypt to shake off the legacy of the
past and to orientate itself towards the future, as happened in Turkey, which
took the initiative in this regard. The application of this solution will also
ensure that the Arabic of Egypt will become truly Egyptian, thus taking Egypt
outside the orbit of the Arab nationalist idea on the cultural and political
spheres. The adoption of the Roman script will additionally have the effect of
bringing Egypt closer to European culture by eliminating the psychological
distance which the Egyptians feel exists between their culture and that of
Europe. And, by virtue of the fact that European culture is the dominant culture
of the modern world, the Egyptians will become part of this culture instead of
continuing to stand outside it. As a result, the dichotomous distinction between
East and West (sharq wa-gharb, 1964: 144) will lose its hold on the minds of the
Egyptians.
As far as the sciences are concerned, the Roman alphabet will enable the
Egyptians to borrow scientific terms from Europe more easily, and in a way
which makes the internal composition of these terms transparent and more
amenable to exploitation in generating new terminologies. The adoption of this
alphabet is said by Salama Musa to be a condition for Arabizing and Egyptian-
izing the sciences. So, convinced of the validity of this assertion, he declares
that without Romanizing Arabic writing the sciences will never be Arabized
(lan tastaÆrib al-ÆulËm illÅ idhÅ istaltan al-hijÅ’ al-ÆarabÈ, ibid.: 166). The borrowing
of terms from European languages in all spheres of human knowledge will
additionally have the effect of making the learning of these languages easier to
accomplish by the Egyptians. For all these reasons, the adoption of the Roman
alphabet would constitute an “enlightened leap into the future” (wathba fÈ al-nËr
na˙w al-mustaqbal, ibid.: 145).
The above discussion shows the centrality of language in Salama Musa’s
thinking. Two features of this thinking are important from the perspective of
the present work. First, language is not considered as a criterion of national self-
definition on the Egyptian political or cultural scene. This precludes the possibi-
lity of launching a national identity for Egypt which exploits the affiliative
bonds that Arabic may create on a pan-Arab level. To ensure that such a link

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 189 —
could not be activated, Salama Musa calls for turning the colloquial into the
national language of Egypt. Second, the importance of the language issue in the
thinking of Salama Musa is part and parcel of the importance he attaches to
modernization in all spheres of life in Egypt. Language here is the instrument
through which modernization can be communicated. But it is also one of the
instruments though which modernization can be induced and effected. To carry
out this latter function, language itself must become the subject of moderniza-
tion. And, since the modernization project Salama Musa advocates seeks to
bring Egypt into the orbit of European culture, Arabic must be brought into this
orbit by replacing the Arabic script by the Roman alphabet.
As has been said above, Salama Musa expresses his ideas in a hard-hitting
style which reveals an unrivalled commitment and zeal for the modernization of
Egypt as the national project par excellence. For him, modernity not tradition is
the name of the game. However, tradition for Salama Musa is not the same
thing as the past in all its accumulations, although the two are related. This
explains his enthusiasm for the culture of ancient Egypt and its potential for
taking the country outside the Arab and Islamic orbits into a terrain that is
more sympathetic to European ideas.11 Salama Musa reiterates these ideas in
several of his publications, and in different places in each publication. Some of
the articles setting out these ideas were initially published in the press over a
long period of time. The net effect of these factors on the epistemological level
is one of eclecticism rather than one of systematic treatment and thought.
Salama Musa is not a theoretician of modernization but a popularizer of it. He is
therefore not concerned if his ideas are not always consistent. Witness the fact
that, although he calls for replacing standard Arabic by Egyptian colloquial as
the national language of Egypt, he nonetheless seems to direct most of his
linguistic-reform proposals towards the former. Witness also the fact that he
himself does not use the colloquial in writing. This lack of consistency further
characterizes his view of human language. On the one hand, he believes that
language is not just a component of culture but is its creator. Most of his argu-
ments about the harm which Arabic causes to Egyptian society (∂arar al-lugha,
ibid.: 51, 55) are based on this premise. However, when it suits him, Salama
Musa (ibid.: 171) claims that language is no more than an instrument of
communication, referring to it as adÅ (instrument) and wasÈla (a means of). As
such, language may be subjected to deliberate changes and modifications without
infringing its cultural character and the system of symbolic values it serves in
society (cf. section 5.2). One such modification is the use of the Roman
alphabet in place of the Arabic script in writing.
Salama Musa shares with other Egyptian nationalists the belief that Egypt
has its own national identity which it does not share with other countries
surrounding it. Egypt is not Arab, although Arabic is its language and the

the arabic language and national identity
— 190 —
language it shares with others in the Arabic-speaking world. Egypt is not
Islamic, although Islam is the religion of the majority of its population and the
faith they share with their co-religionists outside Egypt. Egypt is Egyptian and
European. Its Egyptianness derives from its physical environment and the effect
this has had on its people since the times of the Pharaohs. Its Europeanness
derives from the long-lasting contacts it has had with Europe, and the fact that
the culture of ancient Egypt informed the cultures of ancient Greece and Rome.
Modernization in the linguistic and non-linguistic spheres must reflect the
confluence of these factors. This will ensure its authenticity and sustainability.
It will also ensure the revival and survival of Egypt as a worthy heir to its glorious
past.
4.2 The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism: Taha Husayn
Commonalities of thought exist between Taha Husayn and Salama Musa. Both
writers believe that Egypt must form the focus of national loyalty and socio-
political solidarity among all Egyptians, regardless of their religious beliefs or
ethnic backgrounds, and that this is a precondition for achieving full national
independence. Both writers also believe that European civilization and culture
represent the standard by which other civilizations and cultures are judged in
the modern world. Egypt therefore has no interest in staying outside the realm
of European civilization and culture in its progress towards full independence.
As a matter of fact, Egypt would betray its own history and civilizational legacy
to the world if it were to stay outside the scope of modern European culture,
owing to the fact that the very foundations of this culture were influenced by
ancient Egypt itself (see sections 5.1–2 below for a similar view). Under this
scheme of thought, espousing European culture on the personal and national
level in Egypt is no more than a return to the roots of Egyptian culture itself.
Finally, both Salama Musa and Taha Husayn agree that language is an impor-
tant element in the national life of Egypt. They passionately believe that the
modernization of Egypt must include the modernization of the language itself, if
not actually begin with it. However, there are important differences between
these two writers on this and other matters, as we shall see below.
In outlining Taha Husayn’s thinking on the connection between language
and Egyptian nationalism, I will base my argument principally on his key
publication Mustaqbal al-thaqÅfa fÈ mißr (The Future of Culture in Egypt (1944),
first published in 1938), which Hourani (1983: 327) describes as “his most
important work of social thought [if not possibly] his only work of systematic
thought”. To understand the context for this work, it may be pointed out that it
was written in the wake of the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian treaty which officially
ended the British occupation of Egypt, and the 1937 Montreux Convention
which ended the system of legal privileges given to foreigners in Egypt, known

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 191 —
as the Capitulations. This context is highlighted in the opening sentence of The
Future of Culture (1944: 5). Its implications for Egypt are set out in the intro-
duction to the book as follows (cited in Hourani 1983: 327):
I felt, as other Egyptians did … that Egypt was beginning a new period of her life: she
had obtained some of her rights, and must now set herself to important duties and
heavy responsibilities … We live in an age which can be defined as one in which
freedom and independence are not an end to which peoples and nations strive, but a
means to ends higher, more permanent, and more comprehensive in their benefits.
The first problem facing Taha Husayn in meeting this challenge is that of
defining the national identity of a territorially distinct and officially indepen-
dent Egypt. The starting point in this process consists of acknowledging that
Egypt is linked to the countries surrounding it with ties of language, religion,
geography and history. But this is soon followed by denying that unity of
language and religion can serve as the basis of political unity. Taha Husayn
declares this to be a historical truth which receives support from Islamic history
itself. He points out that, beyond the initial stages of Islamic history, no attempt
was made in the lands of Islam to base political unity on religion or language.
The Muslims were divided between different polities which viewed each other
with suspicion and which vied with each other for political and economic
interests. Muslims (more accurately, Muslim rulers and elites), declares Taha
Husayn, understood that “religion is one thing and politics is another” (1944:
21), and that the first basis for establishing political unity is common interests.
Egypt absorbed this lesson well before other Muslim nations, and was quick to
restore its status as an independent political entity in the first few centuries of
Islam.
The second step in fashioning an Egyptian national consciousness on the
part of Taha Husayn consists of rejecting the belief, held by some Egyptians,
that Egypt is part of the East. In this respect, he is similar to Salama Musa, with
whom he shares the view that Egypt belongs to Europe and not to the East in
cultural terms. This similarity extends to the belief on the part of these two
authors that talk about an Eastern identity for Egypt is an absurdity. Taha
Husayn goes so far as to say that this talk represents the ultimate absurdity in the
definition of the national character. To make this argument stick, Taha Husayn
defines the East, as does Salama Musa, in terms of the paradigmatic cultures of
China, Japan and India. Under this definition, Egypt and the countries of the
Near East are said to belong to Europe culturally, since they share very little
with these cultures. This linkage is justified by the interactive influences
throughout history between Greek and Roman cultures, on the one hand, and
the cultures of the Near East, including that of Egypt, on the other. Under this
view, geography as a determining factor in nation-formation is subordinated to
culture and common interests in shaping national identity. There is, however,

the arabic language and national identity
— 192 —
some ambiguity in this position, for elsewhere in The Future of Culture (1944:
55) Taha Husayn fronts geography as a primary factor in defining the Egyptian
national identity, alongside language and history. The influence of geography is
further invoked by Taha Husayn to allay the fears of those among his com-
patriots who feel that, by aligning itself culturally with Europe, Egypt may end
up losing its own cultural uniqueness. In response, Taha Husayn argues that this
is unlikely to happen. The Egyptian character is known for its moderation, and
this forms the ultimate guarantee that the espousal of European culture by the
Egyptians will aim at integration and not assimilation. This moderation of the
national character was formed by the moderate climatic conditions which Egypt
enjoys (ibid.: 392), although we are not told how this was brought about. The
Egyptians therefore have nothing to fear from European culture, especially as
Egypt at the time of the publication of The Future of Culture in 1938 was moving
in the direction of full independence.
Education is posited as the most secure basis for bringing about this cultural
redefinition of the national identity in a manner which preserves and enhances
the national unity of Egypt. But, to do so, the educational system in Egypt must
be subjected to close scrutiny at all levels, and to targeted reforms which
encompass structures, curricula and the provision of a teacher-training regime
that is in step with the modern aspirations of the country. The issue of language
is placed at the heart of this national project, which Taha Husayn sketches out
with passion and bold determination. As a matter of fact, the predominance of
the language issue in this project warrants considering The Future of Culture in
part as a book about the modernization of Arabic and the teaching of Arabic
language in the context of a project of national self-definition. The importance
of language in this project springs from its being the medium of thought and
socialization. In this capacity, language serves as a boundary-setter and as a
criterion, among others, of inclusion and exclusion. Language is also important
because it is the vehicle which creates the links between the present and the
past, and between these two and the future, thus ensuring the continuity of the
nation. Because of this, language education must be brought under the purview
and control of the state, which must ensure that the language of the people is
taught to the people in all schools in Egypt. In particular, Taha Husayn considers
it as one of the duties of the state to insist that Arabic is taught in all the foreign
schools in Egypt, and that this should be supported by putting in place a strict
regime of inspection and assessment to guarantee that the policies set out by the
state are vigorously pursued and implemented.12 The importance of the national
language in his thinking is further reflected in the call he made to eliminate all
teaching of foreign languages in the primary stage in state schools. He argued
that this step will ensure that maximum time is devoted to the teaching of
Arabic, which is not an easy task owing to the diglossic nature of the language

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 193 —
and the pedagogic burden this imposes on both learners and teachers. We are
told that this step will have the additional virtue of (1) eliminating the
competition which the foreign languages pose for the national language, and (2)
removing the socially determined lure these languages have for Egyptians at
such a young and impressionable age.
The success of this policy will ultimately depend on the kind of teaching of
Arabic language offered in the schools. Taha Husayn points out that, for many
learners, Arabic is a dreaded subject which excites a lot of antipathy and very
little enthusiasm. The reason for this is partly located in the undue concentra-
tion on grammar as a means of teaching the language. Taha Husayn criticizes
this approach as one which substitutes teaching about the language for teaching
of the language per se. By turning grammar into the object of language-teaching
and learning, the Egyptian schools dangerously confuse the means with the ends
in this endeavour. Language-learning becomes a matter of parroting grammatical
rules in artificial language settings. This fossilized attitude towards the language
is said to be allied with a view of rhetoric which encourages the learners to
imitate high style slavishly. Rhetoric under this scheme ceases to be an instrument
of stylistic creativity and turns into an exercise in linguistic embellishment
which pursues the sound of the word at the expense of its meaning. As a result,
Taha Husayn points out, learners often say things which they do not under-
stand, simply because what they say seems to satisfy the demands of this false
rhetoric. As a form of “linguistic absurdity” (ibid.: 248), traditional rhetoric
must therefore be assigned to the dustbin of history. In this respect, he is at one
with Salama Musa.
Taha Husayn also argues that part of the problem of teaching Arabic is not
the grammar of the language itself but the complex way it is set out in the
manuals devoted to it. Making an implicit distinction between the grammar of
the language in the predescriptive sense and its grammar in the postdescriptive
sense, Taha Husayn assures his readers, who may be inclined to treat his ideas
with suspicion, that simplifying the latter in no way infringes the linguistic
integrity of the former. Grammar in the predescriptive sense is inherent in the
language itself, whereas grammar in the postdescriptive sense is the creation of
the grammarians, and as such it is open to critical evaluation and modification.
The early Arabs understood this distinction, which is reflected in the differ-
ences between the various schools of grammar in the Arabic linguistic tradition.
It is also reflected in some of the calls for simplifying or reforming this grammar.
Taha Husayn points out that failure to reform the grammar, under the pretext
that any reform of this kind would willy-nilly constitute an infringement of the
integrity of the text of the Qur’an, will inevitably lead to depressing literacy in
the schools and to heightening the danger which the colloquial poses to the
standard form of the language in Egypt.

the arabic language and national identity
— 194 —
However, Taha Husayn is at pains to point out that his call to simplify
Arabic grammar is intended not to bring the standard closer to the colloquial or
to insinuate that the former should replace the latter – a position adopted by
Salama Musa and other Egyptian nationalists – but to protect the standard
against linguistic corruption and the challenge which the colloquial poses to it.
As one of the most ardent supporters of the standard, in which he revelled as a
student and as an accomplished writer, Taha Husayn never wavered in his
support for it. Thus, he rejected the call to use the colloquial in writing in a
most forceful manner, pointing out that its use in this domain will lead to
destroying the cultural links which bind Egypt to other Arabic-speaking
countries (1982). Later in his career, when the Arab nationalist idea started to
be given official backing in Nasser’s Egypt, Taha Husayn considered the above
call as tantamount to an attack on the very basis which underlies the project of
Arab unity (1957). This partly explains why he took strong exception to those
critics from Syria who accused him of being more interested in Egypt’s
Pharaonic past than in its Arab heritage (1985). Taha Husayn’s rejection of the
colloquial is further motivated by his conviction that it is unfit for literary
expression, and that its adoption would deprive the Egyptians of a link with
their literary heritage. And, since literature is an important element in nation-
building, Egypt cannot afford to let go of its standard language.
This protectionist attitude towards the standard extended into opposition to
the proposals to replace the Arabic script by the Roman alphabet, as was
suggested by Salama Musa and other radical Egyptian nationalists. However,
Taha Husayn was careful not to let his support for the Arabic script be
translated into a rejection of the much-needed reforms of the script concerned.
Reforms were needed, but these should not aim at solving the problems of the
desinential inflections by dropping them altogether from the language. Taha
Husayn believed that this problem can be solved by combining orthographic
reforms with grammatical reforms of the kind suggested by Ibrahim Mustafa in
his book I˙yÅ’ al-na˙w (The Revival of Grammar), first published in 1937. In the
introduction he wrote to this volume, Taha Husayn praises the author for his
courage in tackling a subject which excites strong emotions among specialists
and lay people alike. He also compliments him on equating the revival of
grammar with a kind of reform whose aim is (1) to promote the correct use of
the language in speech and writing, and (2) to encourage the interest in
grammar as a scholarly enterprise. In The Future of Culture, Taha Husayn pushes
these two arguments further, pointing out that the reform of grammar is needed
to turn standard Arabic from a near-foreign language in Egypt to a fully func-
tioning native one. It is also needed to ensure the survival of grammar itself as a
living discipline of inquiry. The Egyptians, he says, have a choice: they either
reform the sciences of the Arabic language to ensure its survival and the survival

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 195 —
of these sciences; or they preserve these sciences as they are, thus causing their
death and the death of the language they are intended to serve. The reform of
grammar is also necessary because, without it, the reform of the system of
education in Egypt itself will not be possible. And, since education constitutes
the backbone of culture, it follows that the failure to reform grammar will
compromise the very foundations upon which this culture is based. Further-
more, since the material progress of a society is dependent on the extent to
which this progress is rooted in a strong and secure culture, it follows that the
failure to reform grammar will compromise the very foundations upon which
this progress is premised. This chain of arguments, exaggerated though it may
be, demonstrates the extent to which Taha Husayn regards the language issue as
a core ingredient in the life of Egypt and the modernization project it ought to
follow. It also explains his conviction that Egypt has the right to reform its
national language without formal consultation with, or the agreement of, other
Arabic-speaking countries.
It is this centrality of the language in Taha Husayn’s thinking which explains
his aggressive attitude towards al-Azhar, the most famous institute of Islamic
learning in the Muslim world. Taha Husayn considers it dangerous that al-
Azhar, as one of the bastions of bigoted conservatism in Egypt, had acquired for
itself the mantle of the guardian of Arabic, and that it had managed to promote
itself as the body with sole authority over it in matters of grammatical reforms
and teacher-training. The view of Arabic as the language of Islam underlies this
acquisition of cultural and political hegemony on the part of al-Azhar. Taha
Husayn considers the basis upon which this hegemony is based to be bogus: it is
both historically unwarranted and out of touch with the modern conceptual-
ization of the language. In arguing this point, Taha Husayn acknowledges that
Arabic is the language of Islam par excellence, but he refuses to translate this
fact into an admission that this is the sole or most important function of the
language. Arabic is additionally the language of daily interaction, the vast
intellectual heritage of the Arabs and the national language of Egypt in the
modern world. Taha Husayn uses this to argue that there is no reason why al-
Azhar should have the right of veto over any proposed reforms of Arabic
grammar. There is also no reason why it should continue to have the final say in
how the provision of Arabic-language teacher-training is delivered in the
Egyptian schools. Control of these and other matters related to Arabic must
therefore be wrested from the hands of al-Azhar and allocated to the state,
where they properly belong.
To underpin this conclusion, Taha Husayn argues that the linking of Arabic
to Islam, while doctrinally valid and culturally significant, obscures the fact that
many nations operate with a linguistic duality in which the language of faith is
different from the language of everyday life and culture. This is as much true of

the arabic language and national identity
— 196 —
Christianity as it is of Islam. The coincidence of the two linguistic functions in
the case of Arabic must not therefore be used to outlaw its reform, since the
reform concerned aims at the language in its capacity as the medium of culture,
national identification and everyday life only. It follows from this that al-Azhar
as a religious institution has no right to impose its authority on the speakers of
the language. This is particularly true since the authority al-Azhar claims for
itself is not historically sanctioned. Arabic was codified centuries before al-
Azhar came into existence, with participation from scholars of different ethnic
and linguistic backgrounds, most of whom came from outside Egypt. Attempts
to reform the Arabic language in the early periods of Islam proceeded with little
or no interference from the political authorities of the day. In addition, al-Azhar
is not qualified to act as the authority in matters of language-maintenance and
reform in the modern world. It lacks the freedom of opinion which the debate
over these matters requires. It is out of touch with the modern sciences. It has
no knowledge of historical and comparative linguistics. It has no knowledge of
the Semitic languages. For all these reasons, Taha Husayn declares that the
policy of assigning Arabic-language teacher-training to al-Azhar and its asso-
ciated institutions, principally Kulliyyat Dar al-ÆUlum, must be abandoned
(compare section 4.1 above). Other institutions of higher education, including
the University of Cairo, must be given a role in the delivery of this policy. Being
modern and more attuned to the full range of the linguistic sciences, these
institutions can serve as the channel of implementing the desired reforms. They
can also serve to break the monopoly of power, functionally and symbolically,
which the conservative al-Azhar holds over the cultural life of Egypt. In this
new situation, al-Azhar will no longer be able to enforce its authority by
accusing its opponents of being unbelievers and enemies of Islam. By denying it
this coercive instrument, al-Azhar will learn to realize the limits of its power. In
the long run, this will be to the benefit of al-Azhar and Egypt.
Arabic for Taha Husayn is the language of all the Egyptians, regardless of
their religious affiliations. It is as much the national language of the Muslims as
it is the language of the Christian Copts. He therefore believes that it is
incumbent on the Coptic Church to ensure that its ministers are competent in
the language, which is not always the case. It is also the duty of the Coptic
Church to make sure that its followers have available to them worship materials
in correct and elegant Arabic. Taha Husayn regrets the fact that the Arabic
used in Coptic worship does not meet with this standard. He refers to the
language used in this domain as “broken Arabic which is not in keeping with
the dignity of Christianity” (ibid.: 360–1). He also regrets the fact that the
Arabic translations of the Bible used in the Coptic churches do not rise to the
standard attained in the English, French or German translations. This demands
that this be rectified. So desperate was Taha Husayn to see this happen in Egypt

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 197 —
and elsewhere in the Arabic-speaking world that he is reported to “have offered
to help in rewriting [the liturgies] so that the Arab Christians could worship in
good Arabic” (Hourani 1983: 334).
In assessing The Future of Culture, Hourani observes that “this book, while
being a final statement of a certain type of purely Egyptian nationalism, marks
the first step towards the merging of Egyptian in Arab nationalism” (ibid.: 335).
This perceptive observation may help explain Taha Husayn’s uncompromising
support for the standard, and his dismissive attitude towards the colloquial as a
corrupt variety which cannot be dignified with the term “language”. It may also
explain the fact that, although he once or twice calls Arabic the “Egyptian
language” (1944: 68, for example), he generally refers to it as the Arabic
language or, sometimes, as “our Arabic language” (ibid.: 197 for example). Thus,
although Taha Husayn declares that Arabic is one of the defining features of
Egyptian national identity, he does not seek to define it in such a way as to
make it distinct from the same language in other Arabic-speaking countries, as
did Salama Musa and other Egyptian nationalists (see section 3). The Egypt-
ianization of Arabic called for by other Egyptian nationalists is definitely off the
agenda for him, but its modernization is not. Also, unlike other Egyptian
nationalists, Taha Husayn does not see Egypt as distinct from the surrounding
countries. He believes that an independent Egypt has a duty towards its Arab
neighbours, and that it can execute this by inviting Arab students to come to
study in Egypt or by opening Egyptian educational institutes in these countries.
This correlates with his pride in the literary heritage of the Arabs, and in the lip
service he pays to the Pharaonic legacy of Egypt as a factor in defining its
national identity (1985). The cumulation of these ingredients in his thinking
does not, however, amount to an espousal of Arab nationalism, even when Egypt
under Nasser championed this ideology. In spite of this, Taha Husayn’s name is
sometimes reviled by his opponents on the Islamic side. His statement that
religion and the state are two different things, and his stinging attack on al-
Azhar, have contributed to this in no small measure.13
4.3 The Arabic Language and Egyptian Nationalism: Luwis ÆAwad
Although the 1920s and early 1930s constituted the heyday of Egyptian terri-
torial nationalism, it would be wrong to conclude that articulations of this
phenomenon disappeared from the Egyptian political and cultural scene as a
result of the strengthening of the Islamic mood and the ties of Arabism towards
the end of this period. In the latter sphere, Arabic started to emerge as the factor
which binds Egypt in ties of identity with other Arabic-speaking countries. The
idea that Egypt is Arab because its people speak Arabic assumed the same
importance in this new vision of the nation, as did the environment in earlier
articulations of Egyptian nationalism. The following statement by the writer

the arabic language and national identity
— 198 —
Ibrahim ÆAbd al-Qadir al-Mazini (1890–1949), published in 1937, illustrates
this vision (cited in Gershoni and Jankowski 1995: 118–19):
Nationalism is nothing but language. Whatever the nature of a country may be, and
however deeply embedded in antiquity its origins may be, as long as peoples have one
language, they are only one people … Every language has its own modes and methods,
modes of thought and methods of conception … In this regard, the sons of each
language conform to and resemble each other and are distinguished from the sons of
every other language.
In this context, it may be pointed out that the work of Luwis ÆAwad (hence-
forth Lewis Awad) represents an attempt to challenge, or even deny, this link
between language and national identity as the criterion of national self-
definition for Egypt. He sets out his views on this topic in two books. The first,
Plutoland, was published in 1947. In the introduction to this experimental
collection of poetry, Lewis Awad advocates the adoption of Egyptian colloquial
Arabic as the language of literature in Egypt. And he does so with a vehemence
that is reminiscent of the forceful views on the topic expressed by Salama Musa
two decades earlier (see section 4.1 above). The second work is Muqaddima fÈ
fiqh al-lugha al-Æarabiyya, (Introduction to the Foundations of the Arabic Language),
which was published in Egypt in 1980. In 1981, this book was the target of
censorship as a result of a court case which found against its author.14 Its critics
charged that Lewis Awad expressed views that were inimical to some of the
deeply held beliefs of the Muslim community, mainly the inimitability of the
Qur’an. The main point of interest for us in the present work, however, is the
range of views which the author advances to decouple the language factor from
that of national identity in the Egyptian cultural and, by implication, political
sphere. It is not insignificant in this regard that the Introduction was published
during the Sadat period (1970–81), when Egypt veered towards an “Egypt first”
policy in response to the Arab boycott following its peace treaty with Israel in
March 1979.
Let us consider the above two works, starting with Plutoland. In the first
sentence of the introduction to this collection, Lewis Awad declares that Arabic
poetry died a death in Egypt with the demise in 1931 of the Poet Laureate
Ahmad Shawqi, whose neo-classical style was out of tune with Egyptian
modernity and Egypt’s sense of enduring identity. He later develops this theme
by stating, triumphantly, that it would be more accurate to say that Arabic
poetry in Egypt never died because it was never alive there. The evidence for
this, he declares, lies in the fact that Egypt had failed to produce one poet of
repute between what he refers to as the “Arab occupation” of Egypt in 640 and
the “British occupation” of the country in 1882. The reason for this, we are told,
is the status of Arabic as an external attribute and artificial tongue of the
Egyptians, who failed to digest it in the way that living creatures naturally digest

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 199 —
their food. Instead, the Egyptians developed a language which, in spite of its
Arab roots, is different from pure Arabic in its phonology, morphology, syntax,
lexicon and prosody. The problem for Egypt, however, is that its own sons do
not seem to accord this language – the people’s language – and the poetry
produced in it the status and cultural significance they deserve. By equating the
British occupation of Egypt with the Islamic conquest of the country, Lewis
Awad aims to underline what he sees as the foreignness of Arabic in Egypt. He
also aims to say, in a manner reminiscent of the claim made by Willcocks (see
section 4.1 above), that the creativity of the Egyptians cannot be unlocked
without their relying on their native tongue, this being the colloquial.
Behind this constellation of ideas is a clear political message: the struggle for
full political independence in Egypt must proceed together with the struggle to
rid the Egyptians of the hegemony which Arabic exercises over their cultural
life. Hence the references to Arabic culture in Egypt as a colonizing culture
whose language the Egyptians must seek to destroy and replace by what Lewis
Awad calls, tongue in cheek, the “base” or “vulgar” language of Egypt
(mun˙a††a, 1947: 9) which the colloquial epitomizes. This linguistic revolution
is necessary if Egypt is to escape from the rotten cultural influences it has
suffered for 4,000 years at the hands of successive foreign rulers, the Arabs
included. It is only by returning to its Pharaonic past that Egypt can regain that
sense of creativity which it so badly needs in the modern age. It is also by
recognizing that Arabic and the colloquials will inevitably go the way of Latin
and the Romance languages that the Egyptians will take the necessary steps to
aid the progress of this development. As a contribution to this enterprise from
someone whose feel and command of standard Arabic are very weak (1947: 19),
Lewis Awad wrote his memoirs of his student days in Cambridge (MudhakkirÅt
†Ålib baÆtha, 1965) in colloquial Arabic. In the introduction to Plutoland, Lewis
Awad also relates how he promised himself never to use standard Arabic in
writing, but points out with feelings of remorse and shame that he failed to keep
this promise.15 In the introduction to his memoirs, he adumbrates that he had
not actually failed, for the promise he made was intended to refer to creative
writing only (1965).
Lewis Awad considers the link between Arabic and Islam to be the main
obstacle on the way to achieving the above goal of creating out of the colloquial
an autonomous Egyptian language (lugha mißriyya, 1947: 12). He argues that the
creation of such a language will not undermine Islam as a religion, although it
may help bring about the much-desired outcome of depriving orthodoxy of its
linguistic power and authority in society. Also, the creation of an Egyptian
language will not necessarily lead to the diminution in the status of standard
Arabic. The two languages and their literatures can exist side by side. Being,
however, aware of the religious significance of Arabic and of his status as a

the arabic language and national identity
— 200 —
Christian Copt, Lewis Awad considers it more appropriate and effective if the
banner in this enterprise be carried by a Muslim Egyptian rather than himself.
By putting forward this view, Lewis Awad displays a clear understanding of the
role of Arabic in moulding Egyptian subjectivity. This view also highlights a
clear understanding of the sectarian-based link between language and subject-
ivity, at least at the symbolic level, in the life of Egypt and among intellectuals
of the same mindset and inclinations as Lewis Awad.
Let us now turn to the Introduction, which was published more than thirty
years after Plutoland. In spite of the fact that the findings of this book – often
speculative and controversial, as will be shown below – are radically different
from those of any other work on Egyptian nationalism, it is still primarily
dedicated to negating the link between Arabic and Egyptian national identity.
The starting point for this work revolves around the assumption that most of
the similarities between Arabic and other Indo-European languages are not the
result of lexical borrowing, important though this was in the history of relations
between them, but are the outcome of the genealogical relationship which
holds between them. The same is also true of the similarities between Arabic
and ancient Egyptian, which is a member of the Hamitic family of languages. If
this is the case, then all of these languages are cognates. To support this
conclusion, Lewis Awad applies what may be construed in very broad terms as a
glottochronological approach, the aim of which is normally to calculate the
point in time at which cognate languages have started to diverge from each
other. The fact that Lewis Awad does not seem to be aware that this is more or
less what he is trying to do – in spite of the fact that glottochronology is a highly
controversial methodology in historical linguistics – should not detain us here.
What matters from the perspective of the present research is the way in which
Lewis Awad deploys the above assumption to argue (1) that the Arabs
originated from outside the Arabian Peninsula, (2) that Arabic is not unique,
and (3) that Arabic cannot be used as an instrument of national identification.
Concerning the first point above, Lewis Awad believes that the similarities
between Arabic and the Indo-European languages, which he sets out at some
length in his book (pp. 139–459), belong to the core of the language (ßulb al-
aßlÅb, 1993: 52) rather than to its periphery. And, in view of the fact that the
recorded history of the Arabs goes back to between c. 800 BC (in Southern
Arabia) and 328 BC (in Northern Arabia), it follows that, in comparison with
the ancient Egyptians, the Arabs are a recent nation in the area. The combina-
tion of these two observations raises the question as to the origin of the Arabs.
To answer this question, Lewis Awad rejects the traditional view which suggests
Arabia as their original home, simply because it fails to account properly for the
similarities he posits between Arabic and the Indo-European languages. Instead
of asserting that the similarities concerned are genealogical in nature, this

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 201 —
theory considers them as the outcome of linguistic contact. A more plausible
interpretation of the above two observations therefore demands that the
original home of the Arabs be placed elsewhere, outside Arabia itself. Lewis
Awad specifies this home as the Caucasus, to which the Arabs arrived from
Central Asia on their way to Arabia via the Caspian Sea area. This would help
explain the linguistic similarities mentioned above as the outcome of a
linguistic archaeology in which the deepest substratum is neither Semitic nor
Indo-European, but a mixture of both. The spread of Arabic under this view can
no longer be regarded as a matter of out-migration from the Arabian Peninsula,
but as a matter of in-migration into it by people who preferred the nomadic
existence – which they inherited from their ancient fathers – to settled life.
This is a highly speculative view, but it does serve the purpose of claiming
that the Arabs lack the historical pedigree which other nations in the Middle
East can claim for themselves. In comparison with these nations, the Arabs are
said to be outsiders and not insiders in geographical terms. They are in this
respect unlike the ancient Egyptians, or the Hebrews and the Phoenicians who
receive mention in ancient Egyptian documents. However, coming into contact
with these and other peoples, the Arabs absorbed aspects of their linguistic
repertoire, thus adding further strata to the linguistic archaeology of their
language which, Lewis Awad suggests, consists of seven layers. Under this inter-
pretation, Arabic must be viewed as a mixture of core and acquired features.
This hybrid structural compositionality must be taken to deny the claim of
uniqueness attributed to the language in the Arabic intellectual tradition. It
also suggests that Arabic did not emerge on the scene of human history fully
formed and perfect, as is sometimes claimed to be the case in this tradition. Under
this set of interpretations, Arabic is a language like all other languages. It is to
this aspect of Lewis Awad’s thinking that I will turn next.
The claims of uniqueness and superiority attributed to the language in the
Arabic intellectual tradition derive primarily from the fact that Arabic was the
medium of the Islamic revelation (cf. Chapter 3). And, since this revelation
says of itself that it is inimitable, and since it also asserts that this inimitability
lies in the linguistic domain, Arabic acquires connotations of doctrinally impreg-
nated uniqueness. It is therefore claimed by some scholars that Arabic is the
language of Heaven, that it was fully formed before its manifestation on earth
came about or that the revelation did not contain any foreign terms – in spite of
the fact that some of the words in the Qur’an patently belong to this category.
Claims of this kind are said to be responsible for the almost complete lack of
interest in the Arabic linguistic tradition in the history of Arabic or in its
genealogical relationships to other languages. Moreover, if taken seriously, the
above claims and their linguistic consequences would deny the conclusion,
outlined above, that Arabic is a human phenomenon which is subject to the

the arabic language and national identity
— 202 —
same forces of formation and change, and to the same methods of scholarly
scrutiny, that apply to other languages.
Although the above views are not espoused by all Islamic scholars or schools
of thought in Islam, as Lewis Awad himself avers, he nevertheless goes on to say
that they serve a political agenda whose aim was to legitimize Arab hegemony
over other races. The uniqueness of Arabic therefore was an instrument of
power which allocated the authority of interpreting the revelation and that of
conducting the affairs of state to the Arabs, or grudgingly to those among the
non-Arab Muslims who mastered Arabic and therefore became Arabized.
Under this scheme of things, Arabic became an instrument of inclusion and
exclusion, in which the Arabs – whose language Arabic is – had the upper hand.
The association of language, people and power in this context is said to have
given the Arabs advantages that far outweighed their status among the other
older and more distinguished nations in the area. The feeling of superiority this
generated among the Arabs is therefore not only unjustified, but is also the
“Semitic equivalent of Aryan racism in Europe” (al-muqÅbil al-sÅmÈ li-l-Åriyya al-
ËrËbiyya, ibid.: 95). Under this view, Arabic must be branded an instrument of
race and racial purity (ibid.).
Although not explicitly cast in shuÆËbiyya-orientated terms (see Chapter 3,
section 5) or in an Egyptian nationalist framework (section 4), the arguments
set out in the preceding paragraph build on these two ideological articulations.
What matters for us here is the connection with the latter. As Gershoni and
Jankowski (1986: 96–129) convincingly argue, constructions of Egyptian national
identity in the 1920s and 1930s did invoke an anti-Arab feeling which sought
to depict the Arabs as different and separate in personality and mentality from
the Egyptians.16 For some, the Arabs were depicted as aliens whose language and
literature must be resisted in favour of an explicitly and uniquely Egyptian
language and literature, as Lewis Awad himself did in the introduction to
Plutoland which has been discussed above.
Although Lewis Awad declares that language cannot serve as the basis of
racial identity, a view which most scholars would find unproblematic, he never-
theless undermines his case when he claims that the differences between
Egyptian colloquial Arabic and standard Arabic are caused by the racially
bound physical constitution of the Egyptian vocal tract. Without producing any
evidence for it, he states that the use of the glottal stop in Egyptian Arabic
instead of [q] in the standard – ’Ål = qÅl (he said), or [g] instead of [j]: gamal =
jamal (camel), or [t] instead of [th]: tÅnÈ = thÅnÈ (second), or [z] instead of [dh]: izÅ
= idhÅ (if), and so on – reflects the peculiarities of the Egyptian vocal tract,
including the shape of the tongue, the jaws, the hard and soft palates and the
pharynx. Coupled with this physiologically induced racial difference in the
production of speech sounds within the spectrum of Arabic phonetics, the

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 203 —
theory of linguistic archaeology is implicitly employed to state that both ancient
Egyptian and Coptic are important strata in the make-up of Arabic in Egypt.
These two factors are said to give Egyptian Arabic a special character which
distinguishes it from standard Arabic and other Arabic colloquials, although it
may be pointed out in response that all the phonetic correspondences given
above are attested elsewhere within the totality of the Arabic language. Lewis
Awad expresses this special character of Egyptian Arabic by saying that its
“skeleton is Arabic and its flesh is ancient Egyptian” (1993: 42). This view of
Egyptian Arabic as a unique entity in the realm of Arabic varieties is consistent
with the call in Egyptian nationalism to Egyptianize Arabic. It is, however,
different from it in intent. Its aim is not to advocate a path of linguistic
Egyptianization, a project whose realization Lewis Awad allocates to the future,
but to assert that the Egyptian character of the colloquial in Egypt is a fact given
by physiology and linguistic archaeology. Overt and interventionist Egyptian-
ization would under this interpretation be no more than a reflection of the
latent forces which have always conspired to make Egyptian Arabic truly
Egyptian. If so, and since it is this variety of Arabic which is the mother-tongue
of the Egyptians, Arabic cannot serve as a bond of identity with other Arabic-
speaking peoples.
The above reading of Lewis Awad’s views on language and national identity
combines aspects of what he himself states explicitly and an element of
construction in which what is implicit and inferred is made overt. There is,
however, no doubt that these views, as I have tried to show above, are
consistent with some of the major themes of Egyptian nationalism in the 1920s
and 1930s. In some respects, these views are intended to push further the
boundaries of these themes, or to excavate deeper into the foundations upon
which they may be based. The problem with this project, however, is its lack of
consistency and its highly speculative nature. Thus, while race and its identi-
fication with language are condemned in the Introduction, Lewis Awad does not
hesitate to refer to the Egyptian race (ibid.: 41) and, as I have shown above, to
the role played by the physiological features of this race in modifying Arabic
phonology and phonetics among the Egyptians.
The highly speculative nature of Lewis Awad’s ideas may be exemplified by
his identification of Remnen in ancient Egyptian with Lebanon (ibid.: 23) via
the intermediate derivative form Lebnen. This he does by applying a set of
conversion rules which relate r and m in ancient Egyptian to l and b in Lebanon
respectively. While this may be intuitively appealing, it cannot stand rigorous
linguistic scrutiny. Thus we are not told under what conditions the above
phonological conversions apply or what triggers them should such a trigger be
involved. We are also not told whether these conversions between the two
languages are obligatory or optional. We are also left in the dark as to the

the arabic language and national identity
— 204 —
domain of the above conversion rules. Without this information, we cannot
have any confidence in these conversions. They must therefore remain in the
realm of speculation rather than that of assessable descriptive rules. There is
indication, however, that Lewis Awad is aware of this serious shortcoming in his
approach, although he fails to act on it. This is evidenced by the use of terms
which signal the highly tentative nature of his findings: rubbamÅ (perhaps, ibid.:
26, 44, 46), yajËz an (it is possible, ibid.: 27), naΩunn (we believe, ibid.: 28),
yabdË anna (it seems that, ibid.: 32), ÆalÅ al-arja˙ (probably, ibid.: 36), laÆalla
(perhaps, ibid.: 36, 51), qad (it is possible that …, ibid.: 54), and so on. These
and other examples are used in connection with conclusions Lewis Awad draws
from his investigation. Their utilization in this context lends further support to
what has been said above concerning the speculative nature of his conclusions.
5. the arabic language and lebanese nationalism:
a general introduction
There have been very few studies (at least in English) of the language situation
in Lebanon, in spite of the enormous promise this subject holds for socio-
linguists and the light it can shed on questions of colonialism and national
identity in this country during the last half-century. The complexity and
sensitivity of this issue in its political context is the main reason for this lacuna.
It is not my intention in this research to rectify this deficiency or to consider the
sociolinguistic reflexes of political conflict in Lebanon, a subject I hope to
return to in a future project on language and sociopolitical conflict in the
Middle East. Rather, my aim here will be to investigate how standard Arabic is
used as a marker of Lebanese national identity by considering two contributions
in this area, one based on historical and pragmatic advocacy and the other on
philosophical grounds. However, before launching into this discussion, I will
present a general sketch of the language situation in Lebanon in the context of
the conceptualisation of national identity.
Broadly speaking, four languages share the linguistic space that makes up the
Lebanese cultural scene. Two of these languages, English and Armenian, will
not concern us here owing to the fact that they do not impact significantly on
the conceptualizations of national identity for Lebanon. The spread of English
in Lebanon is attributed to its role as the global language of business and
international relations, although its presence in the country goes back to the
nineteenth century. Armenian is restricted to the small Armenian community
in Lebanon, who promote it as an instrument of keeping alive their cultural
identity and their links with their country of origin. The other two languages,
Arabic and French, are intimately interwoven with issues of national identity in
Lebanon. Advocacy in favour of standard Arabic tends to be associated with

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 205 —
pan-Arab nationalism, but not exclusively so, as I shall show below. It is
generally believed that Muslims in particular are the main supporters of this
variety and the nationalist ideology it underpins (cf. section 2). In contrast,
promotion of colloquial Arabic as a marker of national identity tends to be
associated with inward-looking Lebanese nationalism which sees in standard
Arabic an instrument of pan-Arab cultural and, indirectly, political hegemony.
A general perception exists that the supporters of this variety tend to be drawn
from among the ranks of the Christian, particularly Maronite, segments of the
population (cf. section 2). One of the strongest supporters of this variety is the
poet SaÆid ÆAql who, after a long literary career in standard Arabic, published a
collection of poems (Yara) in colloquial Lebanese using the Roman alphabet
(see al-Naqqash 1988: 101). However, the use of the Roman alphabet is not
universally advocated by the Lebanese nationalist colloquialists. Witness the
fact that SaÆid ÆAql himself used the Arabic alphabet to render this dialect in his
introduction to Michel Tarrad’s collection of poems GulinnÅr (see al-Hajj 1978:
242).
Support for French on the Lebanese cultural scene is generally linked to
conceptualizations of Lebanese national identity which propel it outside the Arab
orbit and lodge it in the sphere of a Western or non-Islamic Mediterranean
culture. Under this interpretation, Lebanon is in the Middle East but is not
exclusively of it. Lebanese national identity is therefore not purely Arab or
purely Western, but must partake of both to remain genuinely authentic and
true to its roots. The presence of French is seen now as part of a long-established
multilingual tradition in Lebanon which takes the country back to the times of
the Phoenicians, for whom multilingualism was a fact of life (see Skaf 1960).
Educational and other contacts with France and the presence of French in
Lebanon are said to predate the French Mandate (1918–43), although the
language received a boost when the mandatory authorities declared it to be an
official language alongside Arabic, and then proceeded to provide the resources
to give effect to this policy through the educational system and the institutions
of the state. The presence of French in Lebanon was also justified on what
appeared to be pragmatic grounds. It was argued that, by arming itself with
French, Lebanon can fulfil its civilizing mission in and to the East – read the
Arab world – by interpreting the West to the Arabs and by advocating Arab
causes in the West on behalf of the Arabs. Under this vision of Lebanon, the
point is made that it is in the interest of those Lebanese who value Lebanon’s
connections to the Arabs to support the presence and spread of French in the
country. Some proponents of French stressed its function as a medium of cultural,
even spiritual, expression which enables the Christians, mainly the Maronites,
to keep their contacts with the Christian West, mainly France.
It is clear from the above set of arguments that the presence of French in

the arabic language and national identity
— 206 —
Lebanon is endowed with political, religious and cultural connotations that
bear directly on questions of the conceptualization of national identity, in spite
of the fact that the official status of the language was dropped after indepen-
dence in 1943. Politically, French underpins a concept of Lebanese national
identity which sees it as irrevocably separate from Arab nationalism and Syrian
Nationalism (see section 3 above). Religiously, French gives prominence to a
specifically Maronite confessional identity within the Lebanese body politic, in
spite of the fact that the language is used by Muslims and members of other
Christian denominations for cultural and social interchange. Culturally, French
signifies Lebanese linguistic and literary hybridity as a way of supplanting any
monolinguistic or monoliterary articulations of the national self. Hence the use
of this language as a medium of literary expression in Lebanon, and the pride
shown by the Francophiles in literary works of this kind. These arguments,
which are part of the cultural politics of Lebanon, have been given strong
advocacy in a book on the subject by Selim Abou (1962). In an excellent review
of this book and the wider issues it raises, Rosemary Sayigh summarizes its main
conclusions – which at the same time serve as its implicit premises17 – as follows
(1965: 126–7):
1. French embodies the highest expression of Western civilisation, which is now to
all intents and purposes world civilisation;
2. the renaissance of Arab civilisation depends on its openness to Western civilisa-
tion, and it is Lebanon’s role to provide the channel through which Western ideas
and techniques can pass to the Arab world;
3. Lebanon, geographically and traditionally, has two further functions: to interpret
the Arabs to the West and the West to the Arabs, and to provide the site for the
dialogue between Islam and Christianity;
4. [Arabic-French] bilingualism is essential to the fulfilling of these missions;
5. Lebanon has always been polyglot; French, historically speaking, has merely
replaced Syriac as the “national” language of the Maronites;
6. Lebanese bilingualism must be studied anthropologically as an “existential” fact,
not subject to scientific criteria, whether linguistic or sociological;
7. French is a “fundamental part of Lebanese reality”, essential to the spiritual needs
of the population; it is implicit in the National Pact, and to attack it implies an
attack on the National Pact;18 [and] far from creating problems, it is “the principle
of solution to the problem of an already divided society”;
8. Lebanon’s possession of French has been the means of putting the country on the
map culturally – or “inserting it in the historical present”, as Abou puts it; if
French is lost the country’s relatively high educational and cultural level will
decline, to the detriment not only of Lebanon but also of her Arab neighbours.
Although it is not the aim of this study to examine the above arguments in
favour of the role of French, or those in favour of the Lebanese colloquial in
constructing Lebanese national identity, it will be seen below that this role is

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 207 —
questioned and rejected by other Lebanese nationalists. The fact that some of
these nationalists are staunch supporters of standard Arabic, and that they are
Maronites and French-educated, is very significant. First, the combination of
these facts undermines the impression that the supporters of standard Arabic on
the Lebanese cultural scene are from the Muslim segment of the population.
Second, the association of standard Arabic with Lebanese nationalism provides
an interesting case against the almost exclusive linkage of the language with
Arab nationalism. This     association shows that territorial or state nationalism
does not have to distance itself from standard Arabic to be authentic or
completely independent. Subscription to the one does not have to imply the
negation of the other. The starting point for this argument, as will be seen
below, is the acceptance of the state as the legal entity which gives legitimacy to
Lebanese nationalism. Without it, the above linkage between language and
national identity cannot proceed. To show how this is done, I will consider the
contribution of two Lebanese nationalists, ÆAbdalla Lahhud (1899–?) and
Kamal Yusuf al-Hajj (1917–76).
5.1 The Arabic Language and Lebanese Nationalism: ÆAbdalla Lahhud
Asserting his identity as a Christian and as a Maronite, Lahhud addresses
himself to the colloquialists and Francophiles in Lebanon by declaring that
support for Arabism in no way constitutes a denial of Lebanese nationalism or
threatens the status of Lebanon as a fully independent state, for which – he says
– he is prepared to die if necessary (1993). He points out that, being a cultural
phenomenon and a loose association between the Arabic-speaking countries,
Arabism poses no political threat to Lebanon or to the Lebanese national
identity. The fear of Arabism among Christian Lebanese nationalists out of the
belief that it is irrevocably and organically linked to Islam is therefore
unjustified. To support this, he reminds his colleagues that the first stirrings of
Arabism emerged and were promoted, culturally and otherwise, by the Christians
of Lebanon in the nineteenth century. Also, the proponents of Arabism as a
cultural idea among the Muslims were at pains to distance it, even dissociate it,
from Islam. Arabism is not a licence to promote Islam, for had this been the case
the proponents of this idea would have sought to forge links and bonds of
identity with non-Arabic-speaking countries. The fact that this has not been
done indicates the secular roots of Arabism, a secularism which Lahhud wishes
to promote in Lebanon to counter the confessional basis of Lebanese politics
and conceptualizations of national identity. Support for the Arabist idea would
also enable Lebanon to fulfil its leading cultural role in the area, as well as to
facilitate the discharge of its civilizing mission to the Arabs. This is important
for Lebanon’s own identity if it is to continue to be true to its distant and near
past. Lebanon is a small country with little potential or ability to fashion for

the arabic language and national identity
— 208 —
itself a similar mission to the West. Lahhud stresses that the Arabs have a role
for Lebanon which the Lebanese would be ill-advised to forgo. Without the
Arabs, Lebanon would be culturally and politically far smaller than it geograph-
ically is. It therefore behoves the colloquialists and Francophiles among the
Lebanese nationalists to give up their ideological opposition to standard Arabic,
because that would lead to a massive diminution in the stature of Lebanon
among other nations. Enmity to standard Arabic in Lebanon, declares Lahhud,
must therefore be regarded as a crime (lawn min alwÅn al-ijrÅm, ibid.: 52).
The above arguments in support of standard Arabic are mainly based on
pragmatic grounds of national self-interest. But this is not the only basis for this
support in Lahhud’s thinking. He believes that a non-blinkered and fear-free
reading of Lebanese history would unearth evidence which shows that Arabic
and the Arabs are not recent newcomers to Lebanon. He points out that Arabic
is a sister language to Phoenician and Aramaic, which dominated Lebanon
before the final triumph of the language in the Levant. This linguistic triumph
after Islam built on earlier contacts between the people of Lebanon and the
Arabs through trade and emigration, and it was accomplished willingly and
without subjecting the Lebanese to any coercion. This explains the fact that
many of the leading families of Lebanon trace their origins to pre-Islamic Arab
tribes which embraced Christianity before the rise of Islam. Lahhud concludes
that the idea that Arabic was a foreign language to Lebanon is therefore
ludicrous.
Furthermore, the idea that Arabic did not manage to supplant Syriac as the
language of the Maronites in Lebanon until the end of the eighteenth century
cannot withstand scrutiny. To begin with, Lahhud points out that history in
Lebanon has not bequeathed any written documents in Syriac – apart from the
liturgy – for over 1,000 years. Also, the fact that the main book of Maronite law,
KitÅb al-hudÅ, was produced in Arabic in 1058/9, and that no other copies of this
book exist in any other language, surely indicates that Arabic was the main
language among the Maronites. This is acknowledged by the author of this book
in the introduction he wrote to it, in which he states that he used Arabic in
rendering the book because the language was widespread among the Maronites.
Also, the existence of a set of major Maronite figures from the fourteenth century
with Arabic names (for example, Khalid, Sinan, Qamar, Badr) shows that
Arabic was deeply embedded in Maronite culture. The existence of popular
poetry in dialect form supports this conclusion. In the sixteenth century, the
Maronite cleric Jibrayil al-QilaÆi from Lahfad in the Maronite hinterland
composed a set of such poems in which he extols the virtues of the major
families in the area, pointing out that they took pride in tracing their genealogy
to the Arab tribe of Ghassan. Towards the end of the seventeenth century, an
Italian cleric visited the Maronite areas and wrote in his account of his journey

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 209 —
that Arabic was the language of literacy among them, and that the use of Syriac
was restricted to the liturgy, as in the case of Latin in Europe.
Lahhud further points out that the relationship between the Maronite Church
and Rome, which officially goes back to the sixteenth century, provides further
evidence in support of the embeddedness of Arabic in Maronite society and
culture. It is reported that, on the occasion of a visit by a Maronite envoy to
Rome in 1515, the Pope ordered that the Maronite Patriarch’s letters brought
by the said envoy be read in public in their Arabic and Latin versions. Also,
starting in the fifteenth century, the minutes of the council meetings between
Rome and the Maronite Patriarchate were recorded in both Arabic and Latin.
When disagreements occurred between the two parties, the Maronites used to
invoke the Arabic version of the minutes in support of their position. This
shows, Lahhud tells us, that Arabic was deeply rooted in Maronite culture and
society. The same is true for other churches, for example the Greek Melchites,
whose move to Arabic dates back to the beginning of the eighth century.
History therefore shows that Arabic is not foreign to Lebanon, and that “he who
serves Arabic serves Lebanon” (man khadam al-Æarabiyya fa-qad khadam lubnÅn,
ibid.: 41). Lahhud counts in this category of the servants of Arabic a galaxy of
Maronite scholars, including Bishop Jermanus Farhat (1670–1732), who was
instrumental in promoting grammatical literacy among the Maronites. He also
points to the contribution of Islamic scholars from Lebanon in the development
of Islamic law, in particular the jurist ÆAbd al-Rahman al-AwzaÆi (AD 707–74),
whose reputation travelled far beyond his native town of Beirut.
Lahhud concludes that the above arguments show that the status of standard
Arabic as the “national language of Lebanon” (ibid.: 42) is supported by history
and justified by considerations of enlightened self-interest. Standard Arabic
must therefore be protected against the colloquial. This will, however, require
simplifying its pedagogic grammars and promoting it vigorously throughout the
school and higher-education systems. Arabic must also be protected against
French, which competes with it in this system. However, a protective policy of
this kind should not discourage the learning of foreign languages. Any such
policy would cripple Lebanon’s ability to perform its civilizing mission to the
East.
It is clear from the above discussion that Lahhud is not an ideologue of
Lebanese nationalism. His comments on the subject tend to be journalistic and
popularizing, rather than analytic or part of a fully worked-out ideology. He
begins with the Lebanese state as the basis of this nationalism, and then seeks to
construct a view of standard Arabic which treats it as an attribute of the
Lebanese national self in the past, and promotes it as one in the present and the
future. What makes Arabic serve in this capacity is therefore the existence of
the state. There is no talk about the Lebanization of this language along the

the arabic language and national identity
— 210 —
lines advocated for Arabic in the context of Egyptian nationalism (see section 3
above). The fact that the standard Arabic Lahhud is interested in is more or less
the same as the Arabic of al-ÆAlayli, al-Husri and al-Arsuzi does not seem to
bother him. What makes this language different in politico-linguistic terms is
the existence of the Lebanese state. This takes precedent over everything else.
A more systematic outlook on this issue of language and national identity from
this angle is provided by Kamal Yusuf al-Hajj, to whom I shall turn next.
5.2 The Arabic Language and Lebanese Nationalism: Kamal Yusuf al-Hajj
Although the views of Kamal Yusuf     al-Hajj (1917–76) on the link between
standard Arabic and Lebanese nationalism are not devoid of a strong element of
advocacy and intellectual justification of the status quo of the Lebanese
political system, there is no doubt that he is the foremost proponent of this link
in Lebanon, particularly among the Maronites. What makes him different from
others who advocated the same position, for example Lahhud, is the systematic
way in which he deals with this link and the attempt to premise his discussion of
it on philosophical or semi-philosophical grounds. Al-Hajj is also different from
these scholars in his total support for confessionalism in Lebanon,19 treating it as
the country’s raison d’être in civilizational terms. If we add to this that he was
thoroughly educated in French, then we have before us a character profile
which – common wisdom about Lebanon would suggest – should show little
sympathy for standard Arabic in national-identity terms. The fact that he is one
of the staunchest defendants of this language in Lebanon, and that he treats it as
one of the four ingredients – in conjunction with political geography, political
economy and history – which mould the Lebanese national identity, makes his
contribution to the debate about this identity a particularly significant inter-
vention. From the perspective of the present work, al-Hajj is also important
because his views about Lebanese nationalism emerged from his interest in the
philosophy of language rather than the other way round. In the annals of the
history of language and nationalism in the Arab Middle East, al-Hajj is there-
fore on par with al-Husri and al-Arsuzi, although the latter two are pan-Arab
nationalists and he is a stalwart Lebanese nationalist who ignores the contri-
bution of these two thinkers – in spite of the fact that he shares with al-Arsuzi a
common fascination with the work of the French philosopher Henri Bergson
(1859–1941). He is, however, different from al-Husri and al-Arsuzi in that he
writes in a style which draws on the creative and evocative capacities of the
language. The fact that he writes in such a style, emulating in this regard Bergson,
on whom he wrote his doctorate at the Sorbonne, led some of his critics to deny
him the title of philosopher of which he was very proud (see Nassar 1981, 1994).
The fundamental building block upon which al-Hajj erects his philosophy is
the duality of essence (al-jawhar) and existence (al-wujËd), in which the latter is

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 211 —
a manifestation or realization of the former, albeit not always in a completely
perfect manner. Applying this duality to Lebanon, religion is a matter of the
essence, whereas confessionalism is a matter of existence. Al-Hajj argues that
the fact that confessionalism through blind fanaticism distorts religion is an
argument not against religion per se, but against the faulty practice of confes-
sionalism. And, since religion is a matter of doctrine, it follows that no society
or nation can exist without doctrine, for the very denial of doctrinal belief is in
itself doctrinal. Under this logic, atheism itself is doctrinal. There is therefore
no escaping the fact in Lebanon that religion must be a core element of society
and the state. This core element he calls naßlÅmiyya, a relative adjective that
concatenates the first part of naßrÅniyya (Christianity) and islÅm (Islam). The
challenge facing Lebanon therefore is not just how to defend itself against
secularism, but how to construct a positive confessionalism (tÅ’ifiyya bannÅ’a)
which can reflect the essence of religion that is common to both Christianity
and Islam (al-Hajj 1966).
Linking the above dualism to another between the state and the government,
whereby the former is declared to be a matter of essence and the latter one of
existence, al-Hajj now associates religion with the state, and confessionalism
(in its negative manifestations) with the government. This enables him to
sanction the National Pact of 1943 in Lebanon as a matter of the state and
therefore of the essence, and to condemn the excesses of confessionalism in
Lebanon as a matter of government and therefore of existence. What is wrong
in Lebanon therefore is not the formal structure of the state as envisaged in the
National Pact, but the defective realization of this state in the negative
confessional practices of the government in the administrative and political
sphere. To put this right, the Lebanese must be motivated to practise positive
confessionalism. But this requires an involvement in politics which can activate
religion. Al-Hajj states that the Muslims have no problems with this, since
Islam does not call for separating religion from the state. The Christians,
however, have a problem because they have been exposed to the Western idea
of the separation of the church and the state, which, he says, they tend to treat
as a political doctrine. To counter this, al-Hajj sets up an elaborate argument to
prove that Christianity cannot be separated from politics, drawing from this the
conclusion that the Christians in Lebanon must always be politically involved if
they are to resist secularism or Muslim dominance. Positive confessionalism
now emerges as the moral equivalent of the philosophy of the National Pact,
which is the main title of his book on the subject: al-ÊÅ’ifiyya al-bannÅ’a aw
falsafat al-mÈthÅq al-wa†anÈ (1961). The sub-title spells this connection out,
declaring the book to be a “philosophical, theological and political study of
confessionalism in Lebanon in the context of the National Pact”: mab˙ath falsafÈ
lÅhËtÈ siyÅsÈ ˙awl al-†Å’ifiyya fÈ lubnÅn ÆalÅ ∂aw’ al-mÈthÅq al-wa†anÈ.

the arabic language and national identity
— 212 —
The duality of greatest interest to us in the present work, however, is that
between human language as a universal phenomenon that is inseparable from
thought, and the mother-tongue (al-lugha al-umm) as an instantiation of that
language. The former belongs to the world of the “essence” and the latter to that
of “existence”. Although the comparison is not directly made in al-Hajj’s main
book on the subject, FÈ falsafat al-lugha (On the Philosophy of Language, first
published in 1956), it is not unwarranted to equate “human language” with
Saussure’s langage, and the “mother-tongue” with his langue. Under this frame-
work, standard Arabic is a realization of the phenomenon of human language.
Both are abstract, but the former is a step more removed from the world of
speech than the latter.
The second step in developing al-Hajj’s thinking on the philosophy of
language invokes the duality of maÆnÅ (meaning) and mabnÅ (linguistic
structure). Although meaning is a matter of essence and, therefore, is universal,
linguistic structure is a matter of existence through which meanings are realized
or made manifest in a particular language. However, such is the duality of
meaning and linguistic structure that the only way of getting at the former is
through the latter. Meaning or thought, whenever we encounter them, are
willy-nilly always localized in a particular language. Translators, more than
others, are aware of this. And it is al-Hajj’s struggle with translating Bergson
from French into Arabic that led him to this set of conceptualizations and,
ultimately, to his philosophy of the relationship between standard Arabic and
the Lebanese national identity. Underlying this relationship, however, is the
total belief in the givenness of the Lebanese state as envisaged in the National
Pact. It is this state which legitimizes Lebanese national identity, for without it
this identity cannot come into existence as a political or legal construct.
The mother-tongue for al-Hajj is more than just a means of communication.
It is an end in itself by virtue of the fact that it is inseparable from thought and
meaning, from humanity and from the construction of human society. The
problem in Lebanon, points out al-Hajj, is that language is treated as a means of
communication in the utilitarian sense of the term, thus depriving it of its true
status as one of the forces that shape the Lebanese character and national
identity (cf. section 4.1). Citing a number of psycholinguistic studies from the
1940s and early 1950s in France, and relying very heavily on his own experience
and struggle to translate Bergson into Arabic, al-Hajj concludes that no-one can
be truly bilingual across the full range of language functions served by the two
languages he masters. Of the two or more languages that a person knows, one
will dominate, and it is this language that qualifies for the status of mother-
tongue. This applies to Arabic as it does to all other languages, particularly in
the literary domain, where creativity of the highest order is the sought-after
ideal. Evidence of this thesis can be derived from the fact that no creative writer

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 213 —
who writes in a language other than his mother-tongue has ever been able to hit
the highest notes of creativity achieved by indigenous writers writing in their
mother tongues. Those who write in a language other than their mother-tongue
rarely, if ever, enter the literary canon of the literature to which they seek to
belong. Writers, says al-Hajj, have always understood this, and this is why they
regard their mother-tongue as the most highly prized possession they have. It is
true that meaning belongs to all humanity and that all languages are technically
able to express it; but, when cast in a particular mother-tongue, at least in the
literary domain, it so enters into an organic unity with the mother-tongue
concerned that it is often impossible to separate the one from the other. Herein
lies the genius of every language. And herein lies the enigma of the untrans-
latability of great works of verbal art. Shakespeare may be translated into Arabic,
but his mother-tongue-based genius can never be. He will always remain an
English writer, in both the linguistic and the national-identity sense.
There is no doubt as to who the target of this analysis in Lebanon is: it is the
Francophiles who, in their advocacy of Arabic–French bilingualism, seem to
behave as though language were the outer garment of meaning, its fez (†arbËsh),
rather than of its very essence. Al-Hajj argues that, since complete bilingualism
is an impossibility, the Lebanese have a choice: they either opt for French or
they choose Arabic. Rational consideration of this matter makes it clear that
French cannot function as the mother-tongue of the Lebanese. First, it is a
foreign language in Lebanon, which the French mandatory authorities imposed
on the Lebanese to weaken Arabic and to create a situation of unidirectional
dependence between them and the French. The imposition of the French on
the Lebanese is a case of “linguistic colonization” (istiÆmÅr lughawÈ, 1978: 156).
In this context, al-Hajj lists the coercive measures which the French authorities
adopted to impose French on Lebanese children in the schools. A system of
naming and shaming was put in place to punish and ostracize those who dared
to use Arabic, or who used it by mistake. Being unable to express themselves
with complete facility in French, Lebanese children studied in a linguistically
deprived environment. Second, being unable to achieve native fluency in French,
Lebanese children, and adults for that matter, developed an inferiority complex
towards the French, who could speak their language naturally. Third, the
Arabic–French bilingualism advocated by the Francophiles is more of a dream
than a reality. Very few Lebanese had near-native mastery of French, and some
of those who did achieved this at the expense of a reduction in fluency in
Arabic.
Later studies confirmed this observation by al-Hajj. They showed the
defective use of French by the Lebanese, in newspapers and in news broadcasts,
in shop signs and in other printed materials. Instead of developing a full facility
in French, the Lebanese injected Arabic elements into it, creating what had

the arabic language and national identity
— 214 —
come to be known in Lebanon as franbanais, although this term is not used by
al-Hajj. The call to espouse Arabic–French bilingualism has led not to achiev-
ing it, but to promoting a state of linguistic hybridity which dilutes the creative
impulses of the Lebanese, who, al-Hajj argues, have no choice but to stick to
Arabic as their mother-tongue. Being known by almost all the Lebanese, Arabic
alone qualifies for this role. Thus, where French can divide the Lebanese, Arabic
can unite them. And, where French can stunt the creative impulses of the
Lebanese, Arabic can release these impulses and give full rein to them. This
way, Lebanon and the Lebanese can fulfil their civilizing mission to the Arab
world. Granted, knowledge of French and other foreign languages can help in
this, but not in the way the Francophiles stipulate. They can help as foreign
languages, but not as mother-tongues.
Being aware of the emotive and motivating power of language in task-
orientation and rational persuasion, al-Hajj sets out his main thesis of the unique
linkage between a particular nation and its mother-tongue by using aphoristic
expressions that tap into aspects of Lebanese and Arab culture. The following
are a few examples: “For each heart there is a single language” (lÅ majÅl fÈ-l-qalb
illÅ li-lisÅn wÅ˙id, 1978: 122); “A genius takes care of his language as a virgin does
of her chastity” (ya˙riß al-ÆabÅqira ÆalÅ lughÅtihim kamÅ ta˙riß al-ÆadhrÅ’ ÆalÅ ÆafÅfihÅ,
ibid.: 128); “When the tongue commits adultery, thought does so too” (matÅ
zanÅ al-lisÅn zanÅ al-fikr, ibid.: 131); “It is not possible for more than one tongue
to live under the same roof without fighting each other” (inna alsina ÆadÈda lÅ
yumkin an taskun ta˙t saqf wÅ˙id bi-dËn an tatanÅ˙ar, ibid.: 132); “The mother-
tongue does not accept a co-wife under its roof” (inna al-lugha al-umm lÅ taqbal
lahÅ ∂arra ta˙t saqf baytihÅ, ibid.: 139); and “A mature, alert, honourable and
moral people extol the standing of their national language” (inna al-shaÆb al-wÅÆÈ
al-sharÈf al-ÆafÈf yukbir sha’n lughatih al-qawmiyya, ibid.: 151). Al-Hajj also points
out that great leaders understand the emotional basis of the link between
language and nation, which, in the last three statements above, is signalled by
the use of the emphatic inna in Arabic. Witness also the utilization of the purity
metaphor in setting out the relationship between language and nation.20 Hence,
we are told, the refusal by Antun SaÆada, the leader of the Syrian National Party,
to speak to the court in French when he was tried by the French authorities in
Lebanon in 1936. Al-Hajj tells us that although SaÆada did not treat language as
a defining feature in his nationalist ideology, he understood that Arabic was his
mother-tongue and that French was not. This is also the reason why he refused
to respond to the French judge when he called him Antoine rather than by the
Arabic form of his name, Antun (cf. Chapter 4, section 2).
However, the idea that “the nation and its national language are inseparable”
(al-lugha al-qawmiyya wa-l-umma shar†Ån mutalÅzimÅn, ibid.: 154) may be
thought to be negated by the Swiss example, where three major languages are

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 215 —
believed to live under the same state roof. Al-Hajj considers the Swiss example
a red herring. First, Switzerland is a loose confederation of self-governing
entities, each with its own language. Second, the creative writers in each of
these entities use their mother-tongue as the medium of literary expression.
Third, the speakers of each language feel the bonds of unity which link them to
the speakers of the same language outside the Swiss borders: the French-
speaking with France, the German-speaking with Germany and the Italian-
speaking with Italy. But this raises the question as to why Switzerland continues
to enjoy political unity. Al-Hajj answers this by saying that although the three
languages mentioned above are related to the languages of the surrounding
countries, nevertheless they have their own special flavour which gives them
their own nuanced identities (cf. section 2 above). Differences of this kind also
apply to British English and American English. Furthermore, Swiss political
unity would have crumbled had it not been for the fact that it is more or less
guaranteed by the enlightened self-interests of the surrounding countries whose
languages are represented inside Switzerland. For all these reasons, the Swiss
case cannot be taken as a refutation of the thesis that to every state nationalism
there is one language.
As I have said earlier, the above arguments are directed at the Francophiles
in Lebanon. There is, however, another constituency, the colloquialists, who
need to be addressed. The arguments used by the colloquialists in support of
their favoured variety are well rehearsed in the Lebanese linguistic scene. They
include the difficulty of standard Arabic, the absence of good learner-orientated
pedagogic grammars to teach it and the claim that standard Arabic instils in the
learners a conservative and old-fashioned value system, which is out of step with
the values of modernity Lebanon wishes to absorb and promote. However, the
main argument against the standard springs from the diglossic nature of the
Arabic language situation. Standard Arabic is no-one’s mother-tongue. The
colloquial is. It therefore makes more sense to promote the latter in Lebanon.
The argument goes that the adoption of this variety of Arabic as Lebanon’s
national language would give the Lebanese a language that is unquestionably
theirs, and theirs alone.
Supporters of the standard would respond by saying that the difference
between their favoured variety and the colloquial in Lebanon is not as big as the
colloquialists claim (see Abu SaÆd 1994). The difficulty of standard Arabic is not
linguistically but pedagogically induced. Pedagogic problems require pedagogic
solutions, not linguistic or sociolinguistic ones. These solutions can be provided
by simplifying Arabic grammars for language-teaching and learning purposes,
and by modernizing the language lexically. Enhanced literacy levels and the
increasing contacts between Arabic-speakers will help solve the problem of
inter-dialect communication in due course. It is also not in the interests of the

the arabic language and national identity
— 216 —
speakers of Arabic to dismantle the linguistic unity that exists between them on
the standard-language front. The loss of this unity will lead to a diminution in
the cultural exchange between these speakers. Furthermore, if it is true that
Lebanon has a civilizing mission to the Arabs, which is a recurrent theme in
Lebanese cultural politics, it will be well-nigh impossible for it to deliver this
mission under this scenario.
Important as these arguments are, they fail in al-Hajj’s view to provide the
ultimate, philosophically grounded argument in favour of standard Arabic. He
points out that these arguments are born out of a concern with utility, and the
attendant limited understanding of language as a means to something else. If
language is a tool, an instrument or a means to something else, it should in
principle be possible to introduce changes in it without affecting the system of
symbolic values it carries and signifies. But, since this is not possible, language
must be treated as more than just a system of communication. What is needed,
therefore, is a philosophical engagement with the problem of diglossia. To
achieve this, al-Hajj devotes the last chapter of FÈ falsafat al-lugha (1978: 210–
93) to this task. Rather than arguing in favour of standard Arabic against the
colloquial or vice versa, al-Hajj states that each of these two forms of the
language requires the existence of the other. By failing to grasp this idea, the
supporters both of the standard and of the colloquial fail to appreciate the
ontology which binds the two forms of the language together.
Al-Hajj believes that those who think of diglossia in Arabic as a problem fail
to understand that it is the result of a more fundamental duality which is of the
very essence of man. Man’s inner psyche (wijdÅn) consists of sense (˙iss) and
mind (Æaql), without which man cannot be complete. Each of these two com-
ponents has its own domain. Feelings in the widest sense of the term constitute
the domain of sense. The intellect in its widest sense constitutes the domain of
the mind. Sense is related to sensibility, while the mind is related to rationality.
Each has its own mode of operation. Sense is raw and spontaneous. The mind is
reflective, deliberate and calculating. Each therefore requires its own medium of
expression. The colloquial acts as that medium to sense. The standard acts as
the medium of the mind, which deploys it in the service of rationality. The
colloquial partakes of the properties of sense: it is “spontaneous and impulsive”
(lugha tilqÅ’iyya [wa] infiÆÅliyya, ibid.: 226). It is also ungrammatical and full of
loose ends. The standard reflects the measured and methodical workings of the
mind: it is controlled and regulated. It is structured and systematic. Diglossia
therefore is nothing but a reflection of the sense–mind duality in man. And,
since this duality is universal, diglossia itself must be universal. All human
languages are therefore diglossic to one extent or another. A language which
does not exhibit diglossia cannot be a human language, and if such a language
existed it must be a primitive or impoverished language. Arabic is no exception

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 217 —
to this rule. This is why it makes no sense to argue against the standard in favour
of the colloquial, or against the colloquial in favour of the standard. The one is
the ontological counterpart of the other. It is therefore natural that they should
exist next to each other, and that each would have its own functional domain
into which the other does not and should not stray. Unsanctioned boundary-
crossings between the two would result in dissonance and the disintegration of
meaning, as happened, we are told, in SaÆid ÆAql’s musings on aesthetic
sensibility in literature which he penned in the colloquial in his introduction to
Michel Tarrad’s collection of poems GullinÅr (al-Hajj 1978: 242).
Under this analysis, diglossia is not and should not be seen as a problem in
Lebanon. It is a fact of life from which there is no escape. The colloquialists
should therefore cease to undermine the standard. Even if the Lebanese collo-
quial is adopted as a national language for Lebanon, there will soon emerge
another colloquial to fill its place. This will lead to replacing one form of
diglossia with another. Supporters of the standard should also stop their attacks
on the colloquial. Even if they succeed in eliminating the colloquial by bringing
it closer to the standard, there will inevitably develop another colloquial to fill
its place. Diglossia responds to a basic human need, emerging out of the sense–
mind duality. Failure to understand this fact has led to sterile and needlessly
antagonistic debates between the supporters of the colloquial and those of the
standard in Lebanon. Rather than working against each other, they must work
together to fill the lexical gaps that exist in the standard by taking on board
some of the terminological innovations existing in the colloquial. What,
however, should not happen is to camouflage the modification of grammar in
the descriptive sense (taghyir, ibid.: 250) as a simplification of grammar in the
pedagogic sense (taysir, ibid.) in the calls to simplify standard Arabic. The call
to eliminate the desinential inflections made by some reformers of Arabic is one
such example of ill-conceived simplification, whereby what is definitional of
the standard is presented as an attribute which can be dispensed with. This is
not possible, says al-Hajj, without interfering with the ontological structure of
diglossia and the sense–mind duality that underlies it.
It is not my aim to evaluate the validity or otherwise of the philosophical
basis upon which the diglossic nature of Arabic is valorized in On the Philosophy
of Language. Such an evaluation would belong more to philosophy than to an
investigation of the relationship between language and national identity. What
matters from the perspective of this study is the fact that al-Hajj uses philosophy
to produce a rationalization and justification for the linguistic status quo in
Lebanon in the same manner he did for confessionalism. In the process, he
produced a novel argument that transcends the polarization between the
supporters of the colloquial and those of the standard. Each party can have its
cake and eat it. But there is no doubt as to where al-Hajj’s real sympathies lie.

the arabic language and national identity
— 218 —
As an intellectual and, as he constantly reminds us, a philosopher, he is more
concerned with rationality and the mind than with sense and sensibility. His
enthusiasm on the linguistic scene is therefore mainly reserved for the standard.
But this enthusiasm is motivated by something far greater than the impera-
tives of the subjectivity of al-Hajj as an individual. It is motivated by a deep
concern for Lebanon as a beacon of civilization in the East. In the past, Lebanon
acted as a “teacher” (ustÅdh, ibid.: 284) in the Arab world. Lebanon had a
mission to the East where it is geographically located, and it can have none in
the West which has no need for the genius of the Lebanese. Al-Hajj therefore
believes that Lebanon must be linguistically Arab in order to deliver its mission.
And, since the language which can help it do so is standard Arabic, Lebanon
has no choice but to adopt it as its national language. This is also incumbent
upon it because it is a fact of life that no one nation or individual can master the
genius of two languages. The Lebanese must therefore stop taking pride in the
fact that they do not know Arabic as well as they do French or English. They
must realize that Lebanese culture is inseparable from Arabic. They should not
fear Arabic, since the meanings of Lebanese culture remain intrinsically
Lebanese in spite of the Arabic linguistic structure which envelops them
([thaqÅfat lubnÅn] lubnÅniyyat al-maÆnÅ Æarabiyyat al-mabnÅ, ibid.: 258). Although
al-Hajj does not believe that meaning and linguistic structure can be separated
from each other, as I have explained above, the kind of separation he envisages
here is justified by him on the flimsy grounds that the same words in the Arabic-
speaking world do not necessarily mean the same things across the whole
language community. Geography and history take care of that by adding their
own localized connotations to these words. In response to this, it may be argued
that while it is true that variations of this kind do exist, it is even more true that
far more constancies of meaning exist among Arabic-speakers. But, in a philo-
sophy of advocacy, it is what proves one’s point that matters. The exception,
which may be the rule, gets sidelined. Al-Hajj is certainly guilty of this contri-
vance in the present context.
So, in what sense is standard Arabic a component of Lebanese nationalism
for al-Hajj? The idea that standard Arabic in Lebanon has its flavour and
unique meanings is part of the answer, since it makes of standard Arabic in
Lebanon a construct that is in one way or another uniquely related to it
(Lebanon). But the association of standard Arabic and Lebanese national
identity goes deeper, taking the form of a series of spiralling moves which inter-
lace argument with argument. The first move starts with the view that language
is inseparable from thought, and that language is a factor that shapes the
national character. Arabic is declared to be the operative language in these
domains. The second move builds on this by invoking the psycholinguistic fact
that no one individual or nation can be truly bilingual. Wherever two languages

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 219 —
exist, one of them tends to be dominant in one functional domain or another.
In Lebanon, this language is Arabic and not French, which is actually foreign to
the country and is a relic of French colonialism. The third move consists of
legitimizing diglossia and sanctioning the Arabic language situation in
Lebanon. The fourth move invokes an argument from internal colonialism
concerning Lebanon’s civilizing mission to the Arabs, the purpose of which is to
instil in the Lebanese a moral imperative which turns the adoption and
promotion of standard Arabic in Lebanon as one of the highest forms of virtue.
Finally, all of these moves are rooted in a political philosophy which treats
nationality as the correlate of the state. The fact that there is a Lebanese state
must therefore mean that there is a Lebanese nationalism and a Lebanese
national identity. And, since language is traditionally thought of as an
ingredient, marker or attribute of national identity, Arabic is the only candidate
– for philosophical, linguistic, moral and pragmatic reasons – which can fulfil
this function. It is this web of ideas that al-Hajj reworks in his other
publications on Lebanese nationalism (1959a, 1959b, 1959c, 1966, 1978).
These publications contain further elaborations, but they add little that is new
or not implied in what he says in On the Philosophy of Language about the
relationship between the Arabic language and the Lebanese national identity.
6. conclusion
In this chapter, I have discussed two types of territorial nationalism: regional
nationalism, represented by Antun SaÆada’s Syrian Nationalism, and state-
orientated nationalism, represented by Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism. In
dealing with these two types of territorial nationalism, I was interested in the
way they construct the relationship between Arabic and their own brand of
national identity. Different strategies are adopted for this purpose. The first
consists of denying the thesis that language is a criterion of national identity.
This is explicitly stated by SaÆada, who prefers to give primacy in his nationalist
ideology to the role the environment plays in shaping the national character of
the nation. The fact that language is not a definitional marker of the nation
does not, however, mean that it can be dispensed with in nation-formation. The
existence of one language in the nation helps communication between
members of the nation concerned, and this in turn can enhance the
cohesiveness with which the nation acts and imagines itself. When two or more
languages exist in the same nation – as in Switzerland, for example – the unity
of that nation may come under pressure and could, with time, lead to political
fragmentation. Language for SaÆada, therefore, is first and foremost a means to
something else: it is relevant insofar as it can aid or hinder achieving the ends it
is intended to serve in the national domain.

the arabic language and national identity
— 220 —
This unashamedly instrumentalist view of language is the antithesis of the
Arab nationalist idea wherein language, in both its functional and symbolic
dimensions, is projected as a definitional criterion of the national self. It is this
idea which SaÆada wishes to oppose, and whose validity he sets out to deny, on
the analytical and historical level. He accepts that language is functionally
important in nation-formation; and, judging by his insistence on using Arabic
and the Arab version of his name when he was tried by the French in Lebanon
on 23 December 1936 (section 5.2 above), we may even say that he fully
understood the symbolic significance of language in signalling both his Syrian
National identity and his resistance to the French occupation. However, he had
no choice but to deny that language is a criterion of Syrian Nationalism,
because without such a denial it would have been hard to distinguish between
this Nationalism and Arab nationalism which was the dominant ideology at the
time. Furthermore, since without this denial SaÆada would have brought himself
perilously close to Arab nationalism, thus ringing the alarm bells among the
Maronites of Lebanon, he had little choice but to reject the idea that Arabic is
a criterion of the Syrian National identity. However, this rejection had to be
watered down somewhat to avoid antagonizing the Muslims of Greater Syria, for
whom any diminution in the status of Arabic would have rung alarm bells of a
different kind. SaÆada knew he had to walk a tightrope, and he did so with
consummate ideological agility.
SaÆada could, however, have followed the second strategy in territorial
nationalism – for dealing with the connection between language and national
identity – to get out of his dilemma. This consists of claiming that Arabic is a
criterion of national self-definition, coupling it with the statement that although
standard Arabic shares a common set of features across the Arabic-speaking
lands, it is nevertheless the case that the Arabic of each nation is characterized
by a unique flavour which brands it as that nation’s mother-tongue alone. This
view is advocated by Kamal al-Hajj (section 5.2) and other Lebanese
nationalists who were dealt with indirectly above (section 5 and sub-sections).
It is also adopted by some Egyptian nationalists who called for Egyptianizing
Arabic, thus creating an Egyptian language that is not the same as the Arabic of
the other parts of the Arabic-speaking world. One of the earliest advocates of
this strategy in Egypt was Lutfi al-Sayyid (section 3). However, the difficulty of
creating a standard Arabic that is specifically Egyptian must have convinced
some Egyptian nationalists that the real solution lies in discarding standard
Arabic in favour of the Egyptian colloquial (section 4.1). This solution was also
advocated in Lebanon. The ultimate aim behind it was the break-up of Arabic
linguistic unity, thus depriving the Arab nationalists of the very foundations
upon which their nationalism is built. This aim was sometimes admitted openly.
At other times, it was camouflaged as a measure aimed at promoting literacy,

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 221 —
enhancing realism in literature or unleashing the scientific creativity of the sons
and daughters of the nation.
A third strategy for dealing with language and national identity in territorial
nationalism consists of obfuscation, whether deliberate or not. Here, language is
dealt with at some length, explaining how important it is in the national
literature and in keeping the links between the past and the present. This may
be coupled with informal statements to the effect that the language of a nation
is one of its emblems, but without raising this informal statement to the status of
a nationalist principle. This is the strategy adopted by most Egyptian nationalists
(section 4 and sub-sections). It is also the practice in ÆAbdalla Lahhud’s state-
ments on the topic. Being a compromise between competing positions, this
strategy tends to be associated with journalistic articulations of territorial
nationalism. In this context, the focus is not on theoretical coherence but on
persuasion as dictated by the needs of the moment and the kind of arguments
the opposition brings into play. What principally matters here is not ideology
per se, but deploying ideological positions for task-orientation purposes. This
explains the recourse to reiteration and the reliance on emotive language as
spurs to action under this strategy. Ideological shifts are tolerated as long as the
ultimate aims of a particular nationalism are preserved. These shifts and changes
of focus are also inevitable owing to the fact that this strategy is applied by
individuals working on their own or as a part of a loose association of intel-
lectuals who share a broad vision that is not fully worked out in its details. This
is particularly true of the group of Egyptian journalists and intellectuals who
worked around al-SiyÅsa al-usbËÆiyya (section 4).
The fourth strategy for dealing with language and national identity in terri-
torial nationalism consists of stressing the needs of linguistic or extralinguistic
modernization in a particular nationalism. Although linguistic modernization,
in one form or another, was called for by almost all Lebanese nationalists,
extralinguistic modernization receives little or no attention in this nationalism.
Admitting that extralinguistic modernization is a primary concern for Lebanon
was not seriously entertained because such an admission would have meant that
Lebanon was not qualified to discharge its civilizing, and hence modernizing,
mission to the Arab world. The situation in Egyptian nationalism was different
in that linguistic and extralinguistic modernization were thought to be two sides
of the same coin. In some cases, this modernization was read emblematically
into the modernization of Arabic in its capacity as an ingredient that defines
the Egyptian nation. This is the position adopted by Taha Husayn (section 4.2).
Salama Musa does not see modernization in these terms. His instrumental view
of language means that he does not establish it as a criterion of national self-
definition. But it also means that he can be more daring and radical in the kind
of modernization he proposes.

the arabic language and national identity
— 222 —
The discussion in this chapter shows that territorial nationalism is broader
than state nationalism in scope and orientation. Thus, while Syrian National-
ism is regional in scope, Lebanese nationalism is state-orientated in character.
Egyptian nationalism acknowledges the existence of the state but without giving
it the ideological visibility it has in Lebanese nationalism. This difference
between Lebanese and Egyptian nationalism – insofar as it is constructed from
the perspective of language and national identity – makes Lebanese nationalism
more political than Egyptian nationalism. However, both culture and politics
interact in both nationalisms, as they also do in Syrian Nationalism which,
nevertheless, labours under the strong disadvantage of not having its own state
with its own legally recognized territory.
Although both Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism make reference to the
past in constructing their vision of the nation, there is no doubt that this appeal
to the past has greater importance in the former than it does in the latter. Much
of Egyptian nationalism is built around constructing a “golden age” which shifts
the centre of cultural definition and popular influence from the Arabo-Islamic
heritage to that of the Pharaohs.21 This attempt to reroot the nation in a different
space and time puts strain on the claims of continuity which are necessary to
make the “golden age” usable and capable of interpretation in a way that serves
the present goals of Egypt and its future aspirations. Egypt’s Pharaonic “golden
age” is punctured by another, the Arabo-Islamic “golden age”, which resonates
with a large segment of the country’s Muslim population. To overcome this,
environmental determinism is injected into the nationalist ideology to make
the discontinuous look continuous. By locking the Egyptian character into a
capsule moulded by geography, the claim is made in Egyptian nationalism that
the transition from the Pharaonic “golden age” – when the Egyptian national
character exhibited its genius to the full and achieved its highest point of
grandeur – to the present was almost seamless. Instead of being assimilated into
the culture of its foreign rulers, Egypt assimilated them into its own culture. A
similar position is taken by Antun SaÆada in his exposition of Syrian Nationalism.
Lebanese nationalism envisages Lebanon as Janus-like. In one direction, it
looks to France and the West. In the other direction, it looks to the Arab world.
Its relationship to the West is characterized by a feeling of inferiority (dËniyya),
as al-Hajj points out when he says that Europe has no need for the cultural wares
of Lebanon (1978: 283). In contrast, the relationship of Lebanon to the Arab
world is characterized by a feeling of superiority, expressed in terms of the
civilizational mission which the former has to the latter. This feature of
Lebanese nationalism is based on a “myth of election” which endows Lebanon
with a sense of moral virtue not available to other Arabic-speaking countries.
As a case of intra-Arab cultural imperialism, this “myth of election” in Lebanese
nationalism is but a reflection of the cultural imperialism exercised by France in

the arabic language and territorial nationalism
— 223 —
Lebanon itself.22 In this context of cultural dependence and double dependence,
Lebanese nationalism envisages the role of Lebanon to the Arabs as one of
interpretation and translation. This is exactly what Pierre Gemayel says when
he articulates the Phalangist viewpoint of Lebanese nationalism (1968: 109):
“Lebanon is necessary to the West. It is the interpreter of its ideas, of its spiritual
values to the Arabs.” This is why the maintenance of Arabic and the promotion
of French and other European languages, particularly English, is thought by him
to be so important for Lebanon.

—224 —
Conclusion:
Looking Back, Looking Forward
7
1. the arabic language and national identity: looking back
The major aim of this book has been to show the dominance of language in
ideological formulations of national identity in the Arab Middle East. Formu-
lations of Arab nationalism, whether embryonic or fully fledged in character,
are invariably built around the potential and capacity of Arabic in its standard
form to act as the linchpin of the identity of all those who share it as their
common language. A positive and indissoluble link is therefore established
between language and national identity in discourse of this type. This was the
case in the Arab Middle East in the last few decades of the Ottoman Empire,
and in post-First World War discussions of the topic. The names of al-Husri, al-
Arsuzi and, to a lesser extent, al-Yaziji, al-ÆUraysi, al-ÆAlayli and al-Bitar are all
connected with identitarian formulations in this mode. The nation in this mode
is cultural in character, although in practice culture cannot be separated from
politics, particularly in the high sense.
So dominant was this mode of defining the Arab national self that (alter-
native) territorial modes of imagining the nation in the Arab Middle East could
not but respond to it. Antun SaÆada’s answer was to argue that language cannot
play a defining role in conceptualizing the Syrian nation. Instead, he proposed
environmental determinism as the principle which acts in this capacity, with
language playing no more than an assisting role in this regard. Similar formula-
tions existed in Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism. Other territorial strategies
of responding to the emphasis on standard Arabic in Arab nationalism did exist.
One such strategy consisted of accepting the definitional role of the language in
the formation of national identity, but locking it into an understanding of the
nation which conceives of it as a construct that is inseparable from the state as
the focus of loyalty and solidarity. Under this strategy, the fact of sharing a
common language by people living under the jurisdiction of different states or in
different countries cannot function as the basis for a common national identity
between them. Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism provide examples of this
kind. In these examples, Arabic is given a role in defining the nation, but it is
presented as a factor among other definitional factors which operate within the

conclusion: looking back, looking forward
— 225 —
orbit of the state as the focus of the nation in question. Taha Husayn and Kamal
al-Hajj conceive of the role of Arabic in the formation of national identity in
these terms. A second strategy consists of accepting the view that language is a
factor in nation-formation, but assigning this role to the colloquial as the true
mother-tongue of the people who speak Arabic. This vernacularizing strategy is
designed to create for the state and the putative nation associated with it a
language that is uniquely its own. Examples of this kind exist in Egyptian and
Lebanese nationalism. A variation on this strategy consists of calling for the
creation of a middle language between the standard and the colloquial, with
strong input from the latter to deliver the same territorially particularizing
function for the envisaged language. The call to Egyptianize Arabic by some
Egyptian nationalists – notably Lutfi al-Sayyid – is an example of this kind. A
third strategy consists of promoting a linguistic duality in a particular national-
ism in which the bilingual partners are Arabic in its generic form and a foreign
language, typically French. This is the situation in some articulations of Christian
Lebanese national identity, the best-known example being Abou’s views on the
subject. A variation on this theme consists of anchoring the linguistic duality in
question to the standard and the colloquial in their diglossic setting. This
strategy is embedded, but not fully exploited, in Kamal al-Hajj’s analysis of the
language situation in Lebanon. A fourth strategy consists of highlighting the
role of language in the formation of national identity, but without specifying
whether this role is definitional or not. Typically in this strategy, a fudge is
provided whereby language is at times conceived of as no more than an instru-
ment of communication, and at others as that medium which is inseparable
from thought and which, additionally, is directly responsible for undesirable
behavioural patterns in society. Salama Musa’s views on Arabic in Egypt
provide a good example of this strategy. This and the other strategies listed
above are all associated with a political vision of the nation and nationalism in
the Arab Middle East. However, this vision is embedded in a keen appreciation
of the role culture plays in this enterprise.
Whether directly or indirectly, the past – a resonant past – is always present
in constructions of national identity. This is true of articulations of cultural and
political nationalism in the Arab Middle East. The role of the past in these
articulations is one of valorization of a particular ideological position, or of
conferring authenticity on what a particular nationalism claims for itself. Thus,
Arab nationalism invokes in a variety of ways the traditional esteem with which
Arabic is held in Arab societies, the aim being to promote the thesis that the
language is the marker par excellence of Arab national identity. What makes an
Arab Arab in this nationalism is his or her membership in an Arabic-speaking
community that is as much defined by its attitude of reverence towards the
language as it is by actual linguistic behaviour. This attitude towards Arabic is

the arabic language and national identity
— 226 —
also found in some articulations of territorial national identity, as exhibited by
Lahhud’s statements on the topic. However, being tied to the state as an existing
or imagined entity, the past here is read in a territorial fashion which invokes
factors of political history, economy and geography as forces that imbue the
language with a local flavour. This is more or less the position taken by Taha
Husayn and Kamal al-Hajj in Egyptian and Lebanese nationalism respectively.
In some articulations of territorial nationalism, the past is excavated to
derive ideas which may be used to characterize Arabic as a construct that is
symptomatic of cultural backwardness. This is the case in those examples of
Egyptian nationalist discourse where shuÆËbiyya-type ideas are deployed to
characterize Arabic as a Bedouin language that is unfit for application in the
sciences or for use in other domains of modern life. Other ideas from the same
source are resurrected to argue that a language-based Arab national identity is a
form of linguism which echoes and recreates in modern times the “chauvinistic”
or “racist” feelings the Arabs held towards the non-Arabs in the first few centuries
of Islam. The past may also be deployed or manipulated to argue against deeply
held attitudes towards Arabic, for example the doctrinally sanctioned thesis of
the uniqueness of the language as a factor in the esteem in which it is held by its
speakers. This is particularly present in some of the arguments offered by Lewis
Awad in his book Muqaddima fÈ fiqh al-lugha al-Æarabiyya. In other cases, one past
is pitted against another to press the claim that Arabic cannot be treated as a
marker of a particular national identity. Examples of this strategy abound in
Egyptian nationalism. Here, the Pharaonic past is declared as the genuine and
authentic past of Egypt, using this as a prelude to launching the argument that
all the pasts that had succeeded this original past were more or less marginal in
their influence on the already formed Egyptian character. The intended effect of
this argument was to deny that the Arabs and Arabic had any formative effect
on the Egyptian national character in the modern period. This is often accom-
panied by references to the presumed ability of Egypt throughout its history to
assimilate into its character those who came to settle on its land. On the lingu-
istic front, this assimilative power means that Egypt was able to stamp Arabic
with the indelible imprint of its imperishable soul, thus fashioning out of it a
language that is structurally and stylistically Egyptian in character. Being so
shaped and defined, the Arabic of Egypt cannot serve as the basis of a national
bond involving other Arabic-speakers.
Nationalism is Janus-like. It looks towards the past, a usable past, for valoriza-
tion and authentication. And it looks towards the future for modernization on
all fronts: social, economic, political, cultural and linguistic. Modernization is
part and parcel of the mission of all nationalisms in the Arab Middle East, be
they cultural or territorial in nature, although some nationalist discourses tend
to place more emphasis on modernization than others. An example of this kind

conclusion: looking back, looking forward
— 227 —
of discourse is provided by Salama Musa, who treats the modernization of Egypt
as the most pressing task facing the Egyptians. Broadly speaking, the modern-
izing mission of nationalism in the Arab Middle East may therefore be outlined
as one of bringing about a significant change in the structure of society and in
the way in which the individual relates to it and to other individuals. In this
respect, nationalism aims to transcend the present by moving towards a differ-
ent kind of future. In so doing, it invokes aspects of the past to respond to the
deeply felt needs of the community it addresses. Following Smith, these needs
may be characterized as follows (Smith 1991: 163):
Transcending oblivion through posterity, the restoration of collective dignity
through an appeal to a golden age; the realisation of fraternity through symbols, rites
and ceremonies, which bind the living to the dead and fallen of the community:
these are the underlying functions of national identity and nationalism in the
modern world, and the basic reasons why the latter have proved so durable, protean
and resilient through all vicissitudes.
It is not my intention here to discuss the domains in which modernization as
an objective of nationalism is to take place in the Arab Middle East. Rather, my
aim is to comment on one aspect of modernization that is directly relevant to
the theme of this book: linguistic modernization. There is a commonly held
belief in the nationalist discourses I have examined in this work that Arabic is
in need of modernization grammatically, lexically, stylistically and pedagogic-
ally to make it better able to participate in the nationalist project in an effective
manner. Grammatical modernization should have as its aim the use of a syntax
that is unencumbered by the outmoded and dead rules of the past. Lexical
modernization should aim at increasing the stock of new terminologies available
to the language-users. It should also aim at culling the excesses of synonymy in
the language, thus freeing some lexical slots for use in designating new meanings.
Stylistic modernization should encourage the development of a new rhetoric in
which meaning is not neglected in favour of linguistic virtuosity, but in which
the latter is made to serve the functions of the former. Pedagogic modernization
should aim at developing new ways of setting out the facts of grammar for the
effective nurturing of grammatical competence in the learners. Some demanded
that a daring approach be adopted in this area, consisting, among other things,
of dropping the desinential inflections. Others considered any such so-called
pedagogic simplification of grammar to be an unwarranted intrusion into the
very structure – even the soul – of the language. Some nationalist thinkers
additionally argued for reforming the Arabic script. Others called for its whole-
sale abandonment as the Turks had done.
Behind the above calls for linguistic modernization, there existed an
immediate aim and an ulterior motive. On the one hand, the modernization of
Arabic was thought to make the language more able to deliver the fruits of the

the arabic language and national identity
— 228 —
extralinguistic modernization which nationalism wishes to promote as part of its
programme. This dimension of modernization, its immediate aim, targets the
functional capacities of the language as a medium of communication. On the
other hand, the modernization of Arabic is intended to signal through the
language-as-medium the extralinguistic dimensions of modernization. In this
respect, the modernization of Arabic becomes symbolic of modernization as a
whole – this symbolism being the ulterior motive referred to above. By tapping
into these two roles of Arabic, the functional and the symbolic, nationalism in
the Arab Middle East uses the power of language in society to the full. The fact
that the functional sometimes dominates the symbolic or vice versa does not
invalidate this conclusion.
2. the arabic language and national identity:
looking forward
Having established in this work the broad outlines of the role of language in
nationalism as ideology in the Arab Middle East, a basis now exists for
launching studies of an empirical nature to investigate how linguistic behaviour
and nationalism as movement or action interact with each other in the Arabic-
speaking world. I will suggest below some areas in which this kind of research
may be pursued. However, before doing this, I would like to highlight two issues
of language and national ideology which this study has not dealt with, and to
which I hope to return in the future. The first concerns the attempts by some
state nationalists to construct fully fledged ideologies which treat language,
history and culture in a manner that is definitionally inseparable from the state.
A good example of this, which comes from outside the Middle East proper, is
provided by al-Bashir bin Salama in his book al-Shakhßiyya al-tËnisiyya:
khaßÅ’ißuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (The Tunisian Character: Its Properties and Forma-
tive Elements, 1974). The main thrust of this book is to argue that the Tunisians
form a nation proper (umma), not a people (shaÆb) as would be envisaged under
Arab nationalism. This state ideology is inscribed in discursive practices which
ascribe the term “nation” and its derivatives to all aspects of life in Tunisia,
including language but excepting religion. On the empirical level, this ideology
responds to practices in whose creation the state in the Arab world is wittingly
or unwittingly an active participant; hence the symbolic significance to the state
of the national flag, the national flag-carrier, the national anthem, national
festivals, national holidays, national museums and galleries, passports, stamps
and so on. So pervasive has been the influence of the state in creating its own
self-perpetuating dynamic that, even in the field of high culture, Arab intellec-
tuals now speak about the Syrian novel, the Iraqi short story, the Egyptian theatre
and cinema, Palestinian poetry, the Jordanian or Kuwaiti song, Lebanese

conclusion: looking back, looking forward
— 229 —
cuisine and so on. In Jordan and Kuwait, the Parliament is called majlis al-umma
(lit. the Nation’s Council), but in Syria and Egypt it is called majlis al-shaÆb (lit.
the People’s Council). In the constitutions of some Arab countries, Arabic is
declared as the national language (al-lugha al-wa†aniyya); in the constitutions of
other countries, it is described as the official language (al-lugha al-rasmiyya) of
the state (see Suleiman 1999d). The term Æarab or its derivative (al-)Æarabiyya is
included in the names of some Arab states, for example Syria and Egypt, but it is
absent from the names of others, for example Lebanon and Jordan. Other
manifestations of the state in the nationalist field are present, but these will not
concern us here. The point to be made here, however, is that the all-pervasive
nature of the state in the Arab world can no longer be regarded – as was assumed
by al-Husri and other Arab nationalists in the middle of the twentieth century –
as a temporary phenomenon that is doomed to extinction on the way to estab-
lishing political unity between the Arabic-speaking countries. The state in the
Arab world is here to stay, and this is bound to have a significant effect on how
Arabic will be ideologized in various state nationalist projects. While building
on nationalist ideologies of the territorial kind we have examined above,
modern state nationalisms are better equipped to pursue their self-centred aims
in what seem to be more propitious circumstances internally and externally (cf.
Tarabishi 1982). This is why state nationalism in its modern manifestations in
the Arabic-speaking world must be regarded as a more advanced realization of
the territorial idea examined earlier. As such, it deserves further study and
analysis to establish how Arabic may be cast as an ingredient, marker or emblem
in state-orientated national-identity formulations.
Let us now consider the second issue of language and ideology which has not
been dealt with in this study. This is the connection between (what may be
called) Islamic nationalism and Arabic insofar as the language relates to Arab
and territorial nationalism (cf. Vatikiotis 1987). Most expressions of the latter
nationalisms tend to be secular in nature, thus giving little visibility to the
Islamic and doctrinal significance of the language. Islamic nationalism opposes
this secularizing attitude towards Arabic. It also opposes the attempt by Arab
and territorial nationalists to appropriate the language in their ideological
enterprises, arguing in response that the high status of Arabic in sociolinguistic
terms is part and parcel of its association with Islam. The argument continues
that, without this association, Arabic would never have attained the prestige it
enjoys in the modern world, and could even lose it in the future (cf. al-Bishri
1998, al-Ghazali 1998, Husayn 1979, al-Jundi 1982, Khalafalla 1990). It follows
from this that the use of Arabic as a marker of secular national identities, or of
ones that are not infused with the spirit and mission of Islam, is considered by
Islamic nationalists to be an aberration and an unwarranted distortion of
history. According to these nationalists, it is therefore not possible to equate

the arabic language and national identity
— 230 —
Arabic with any national identity in which Islam is not an operative ingredient.
This is an absolutist position. In practice, however, some Islamic nationalists are
prepared to tolerate expressions of Arab and territorial nationalism as long as
these view themselves as transitory stages on the way to achieving Islamic unity.
This would make it possible to create a rapprochement between Islamic and
other nationalists, as long as the latter are prepared to disavow secularism and to
incorporate Islam as a constitutive element in their nationalist thinking. How
this relates to Arabic is a matter worthy of study in the future.
Let us now highlight other areas of the connection between language and
national identity that are worthy of future study. One such area is the descrip-
tion and analysis of the sociolinguistic reflexes of interethnic conflict in the
Arabic-speaking world. These reflexes may be realized dialectally, as I have tried
to show for Jordan (Suleiman 1993, 1999b; El-Wer 1999). They may also be
realized through the interplay between Arabic and another language within the
state, for example Berber in Algeria or Kurdish in Iraq. Another area is the
description and analysis of the sociolinguistic reflexes of inter-nation conflict in
the Middle East. Typically, conflicts of this kind involve another language in
relation to Arabic in the context of existing or emerging states, for example
Hebrew as in Palestine and Israel (cf. Amara and Spolsky 1996, Ben-Rafael
1994, Ibrahim 1980, Spolsky and Cooper 1991, Spolsky and Shohamy 1999,
Suleiman 1999f), or Turkish as in south-western Turkey. Sociolinguistic reflexes
of conflicts of the latter kind may also be played out through the media of
international languages, typically via translations of place and other types of
name in English (cf. Suleiman 1999b). Future studies of language as a marker of
national identity in the Arabic-speaking world may also involve the attempts to
exploit the colloquial for this purpose; they may also involve the tug-of-war
between this variety and the standard language. Studies of the manner in which
the standard is defended against the colloquial would provide an excellent
example of the principle in some nationalist discourses that “language is worthier
than territory”, the implication being that a nation must defend its language at
least as vehemently as it does its territory. As the site of stereotypical repre-
sentations of national identity, Arabic may be studied from the perspective of
social psychology. At times, it would be necessary to refute the unwarranted
conclusions offered by studies conducted from this perspectives (cf. Patai 1973,
Shouby 1951, Suleiman 1999e). Studies of code-switching between dialects or
languages may yield valuable insights into issues of language and national
identity, as would the eliciting of language attitudes among Arabic-speakers. We
may also add to this list studies of (1) the grammatical and lexical reform
proposals; (2) the use of foreign languages as the media of teaching in schools
and universities; (3) the use of these languages in shop signs and advertising
generally; (4) the position of Arabic in such Arab countries as Somalia,

conclusion: looking back, looking forward
— 231 —
Djibouti and Mauritania that have recently joined the Arab League and in
which Arabic is not very well rooted (cf. Abuhamdia 1995); and (5) the
Arabicization/Arabization efforts in these countries as well as in the countries of
North Africa and Sudan. The above are but some of the themes which future
research on Arabic and national identity may tackle. That they represent a rich
field for cross-disciplinary research from the perspective of identity is not in
doubt. What is required, therefore, is collaboration between scholars from
different disciplinary backgrounds to deliver the rich yield this research does
promise the students of nationalism.

— 232 —
Notes
chapter 1
1. This statement by Anthony Smith is clearly aimed at Benedict Anderson (1991),
Hobsbawm (1990) and Gellner (1983).
2. The term “attribute” (ßifa in Arabic) is used in a specific sense by Antun SaÆada (see
Chapter 6, section 2) to distinguish it from “ingredient”. To the best of my know-
ledge, this is the only context where the term “attribute” is used in this sense.
chapter 2
1. Max Weber (1968: 395) expresses a similar view in connection with the two related
terms “ethnic group” and “nation”: “The concept of ‘ethnic group’, which dissolves
if we define our terms exactly, corresponds in this regard to one of the most vexing,
since emotionally charged, concepts: the nation, as soon as we attempt a
sociological definition”.
2. The differences between languages in conceptualizing the nation are dealt with by
ÆAmr Ibrahim (1981/2), although the main emphasis is placed on Arabic and French.
3. The term “ethnicity” is used in the literature to cover communities exhibiting four
levels of ethnic incorporation (Handelman, in Hutchinson and Smith 1996: 6):
(1) “ethnic category … where there is simply a perceived cultural difference between
the group and outsiders”; (2) “ethnic network [where] there is interaction between
ethnic members such that the network can distribute resources among its members”;
(3) “ethnic association [where] the members develop common interests and political
organizations to express these at a collective, corporate level”; and (4) “ethnic
communities, which possesses a permanent, physically bounded territory, over and
above its political organization”.
4. This mode of defining the nation is prevalent in the literature on Arab nationalism.
See al-ÆAlayli (1996), al-Jundi (1968), al-Kharbutli (n.d.), Khalafalla (1990) and
Nuseibeh (1956).
5. Smith (1991: 12) points out that “every nationalism contains civic and ethnic
elements in varying degrees and different forms”, and that “sometimes civic and terri-
torial elements predominate, [while] at other times it is the ethnic and vernacular
components that are emphasized”. However, ethnic nationalism has not always
been respected in the West (see Fishman 1972: 25).
6. A good example of this tendency may be illustrated by the arguments which
surrounded the design and building of the new Museum of Scotland, opened on 30

notes
— 233 —
November 1998, St Andrew’s (Scotland’s patron saint) Day. In an article in Scot-
land on Sunday (29 November 1998, p. 9), Alan Taylor explains how at “one stage it
was seriously suggested that the [new] museum should not have its own entrance
and that visitors should approach it through the old museum [Royal Museum of
Scotland]”, commenting: “such was the fear of turning it into a nationalist shrine”.
7. Kedourie’s attack on this aspect of nationalism reveals a serious lack of appreciation
of its sociohistorical context in which literature plays a role in developing group
identity. In the context of Arab nationalism, this role was crucial, as Tibi (1997:
104) observes: “Arab nationalism in its early phase took the form of a literary
renaissance not based on political theories, which was generated exclusively by
linguists and men of letters. This was because neither the subjective nor the objective
conditions for a political movement existed in the Middle East in the nineteenth
century. Thus the early Arab nationalists confined themselves to emphasising the
existence of an independent Arab cultural nation without demanding a national
state.”
8. Kedourie expresses this as follows (1966: 101): “Nationalist movements are child-
ren’s crusades; their names are manifestos against old age: Young Italy, Young
Egypt, the Young Turks, the Young Arab Party”. This generational dimension of
nationalism is characteristic of Africa and Asia. Singhal (in Fishman 1972: 33)
writes: “An outstanding common feature of Asian nationalism has been the
remarkable role of its student communities. Both in Burma and in Indonesia the
major strength of the nationalist forces was provided by their student populations.
In Burma even the principal leadership came straight from the University.” The
same is to some extent true of the early stages of Arab nationalism: “On the eve of
World War I the Arab [nationalist] movement was already, by and large, a
movement of the young” (Tauber 1993: 294).
9. The defence of the national or ethnic language is a feature of all nationalist
movements in which language is a defining feature (see Chapter 7 for Arabic). The
following example may illustrate this point: “In Assam, when Bengalis and hill
people opposed making Assamese the official language of the state, a placard in
their procession read ‘Assamese is a donkey’s language’. An Assamese counter-
procession declared Bengali to be ‘a goat’s language’” (Horowitz 1985: 219).
chapter 3
1. The term “manifesto” is used by Sylvia Haim in translating the title of the declar-
ation/statement of the conference. This may give the wrong impression, particularly
of a political programme adopted by a cohesive movement, which the Conference
of the Arab Students in Europe could hardly be said to represent. Haim gives the
title of the declaration/statement as al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya: ˙aqÈqatuhÅ, ahdÅfuhÅ,
wasÅ’iluhÅ (Arab Nationalism: its tenets, objectives and methods).
2. The term “inventing traditions” is borrowed from Hobsbawm (1983). It is used by
him to mean “a set of practices, normally governed by overtly or tacitly accepted
rules of a ritual or symbolic nature, which seek to inculcate certain values and
norms of behaviour by repetition, which automatically implies continuity with the
past” (ibid.: 1). Invented traditions are not, strictly speaking, subject to evaluation

the arabic language and national identity
— 234 —
on grounds of empirical truth or falsity, that is, on whether they relate to a mythic
or real past, but on the efficacy of the role they play in achieving the aims they are
intended to realize. Failure to appreciate this qualification of the term “invented” in
the above phrase can lead to fruitless debate in the literature on nationalism.
3. See ÆAmara (1984), Fajr al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya (The Dawn of Arab Nationalism),
al-Duri (1960), al-JudhËr al-tÅrÈkhiyya li-l-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya (The Historical Roots
of Arab Nationalism) and al-Kharbutli (n.d.), al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya min al-fajr ilÅ
al-Ωuhr (Arab Nationalism from its Dawn to its Zenith), who place the origins of Arab
nationalism in pre-Islamic times. A similar attempt is made by Sharara (1988), who
traces the unity of the Arabs to pre-Islamic times through poetry. The attempt to
trace the origins of Arab nationalism to formative impulses in premodern times is a
central thesis in Nuseibeh’s The Ideas of Arab Nationalism (1956). Referring to the
role of language in forming group identity in pre-Islamic Arabia, Nuseibeh says
(ibid.: 12): “Pre-Islamic Arabia was not a political entity, and yet it developed a
high degree of social and cultural consciousness, akin to nationality, largely on
account of its community of language”. Nuseibeh adds (ibid.: 13): “The poems, the
proverbs, the traditions, the legends and mythologies, expressed in spoken
literature and transmitted by oral tradition, greatly influenced the development of
an Arab national consciousness; they moulded the minds of the Arabs, fixed their
character, and made them morally and spiritually a nation long before Muhammad
welded the various conflicting groups into a single organism animated by one
purpose”. Nuseibeh (ibid.: 13) sums up the “Islamic contribution to modern Arab
nationalism” as follows (ibid.: 13–14): “To Islam is due the birth of a nation, the
birth of a state, the birth of a national history, and the birth of a civilization. These
events moulded the structure of Islamic Arabism in new and unique ways …
Whereas the pre-Islamic period had witnessed the emergence of an Arab nation-
ality, the Islamic … carried the Arabs far toward the development of a full fledged
national consciousness.” Although the above factors are important to any under-
standing of the construction of Arab nationalist discourse in the modern period,
they are in themselves not sufficient to put forward the view that nationalism or
even nationality in the modern sense was a feature of pre-Islamic and Islamic
societies.
4. Evidence for this retrospective Arab nationalism is found in Qunstantin Zurayq’s
work, in spite of the fact that he is fully aware of the rootedness of this notion in
modernity (1962: 170): “We do know that nationalism, in its true sense, is the
offspring of the modern age, and of the political, economic and social factors which
it has brought to birth. However, even in spite of this we still find a strong Arab
feeling in the first age [of Islam], when the Islamic religious emotion was still in full
effervescence. The Muslims treated the Banu Taghlib and other Arab Christians
quite differently from the way they treated non-Arab Christians; some Christian
tribes took part in the early conquests and fought side by side with the Muslims.
This Arab feeling grew in strength with the introduction of the foreigners and the
growth of shuÆËbiyya; the Arabs became more united in order to fend off the attacks
of the Persians, the Turks and others.” See section 5.
5. The following quotations cited in Fishman (1972) illustrate the general tendency to
eulogize the group’s language; they are given here to contextualize the claims made

notes
— 235 —
about Arabic in this chapter. Bonald (cited in Fishman 1972: 63) describes French
as “a language which is simple without baseness, noble without bombast, harmon-
ious without fatigue, precise without obscurity, elegant without affection, meta-
phorical without conscious effort; a language which is the veritable expression of a
perfected nature”. Fichte declares that the Germans were “honest, serious, sober
and speak a language which is shaped to express the truth” (ibid.: 65). Writing in
Latin in 1751, Ribinyi extols the virtues of his native Hungarian as follows: “Italian
is pleasant, French beautiful, German earnest; but all these qualities are so united in
Magyar that it is difficult to say wherein its superiority consists” (ibid.). The Greek
scholar Korai has the following to say about his language: “It is a rare thing for one
to submit to … slavery if one has once managed to drink to the full the charm of the
Hellenic language” (ibid.).
6. This is reflected in the ˙adÈth literature. ShuÆba (a ˙adÈth transmitter, d. 160/776)
relates that the Prophet likened a ˙adÈth specialist who does not devote himself to
the study of Arabic grammar to a hooded cloak (burnus) without a hood, or to a
donkey with a nosebag but without fodder (al-Tufi 1997: 248–9). It is also related in
the ˙adÈth literature that some of the Prophet’s companions said that they would not
hesitate to travel forty days and nights to learn the correct vowelling of a verse of
the Qur’an (ibid.: 243).
7. See ÆArafa (1985) and al-RafiÆi (1974) for a general discussion of the inimitability of
the Qur’an.
8. Ibn al-Qayyim (n.d.: 3) expresses this point as follows: “anzalahu bi-lisÅn al-Æarab li-
yakËn ˙ujja Æalayhim”.
9. Hourani (1983: 260) expresses this linkage as follows: “In the history of Islam, and
indeed in its essential structure, the Arabs had a special part. The Qur’an is in
Arabic, the Prophet was an Arab, he preached first to Arabs, who formed the
‘matter of Islam’, the human instrument through which the religion and its
authority spread; Arabic became and has remained the language of devotion,
theology and law.”
10. For a general discussion of al-Khafaji’s views on this and related topics, the reader
may refer to Suleiman (1996a).
11. This view of the superiority of Arabic is opposed by al-Khafaji’s contemporary and
compatriot, the Andalusian scholar Ibn Hazm (456/1064), in the first volume of his
book al-I˙kÅm fÈ ußËl al-ahkÅm (1984: 32–7). As a Zahirite (literalist), Ibn Hazm
believes that the superiority-of-Arabic thesis cannot be supported by a careful inter-
pretation of the surface – and therefore legitimate – meaning of the text of the
Qur’an. He goes even further, claiming that a literalist interpretation of the text of
the Qur’an with respect to the superiority thesis of Arabic can lead to conclusions
which contradict this thesis. Ibn Hazm also refuses to assign any superiority to any
language over another. It is this linguistic egalitarianism which causes Ibn Hazm to
reject deprecating references to other languages by the Greek philosopher Galen.
He also decries the practice among some Jews of swearing falsely in languages other
than Hebrew because of the belief that the angels speak Hebrew only.
12. For a general treatment of the principle of lightness, the reader may refer to
Suleiman (1999c).
13. See al-Tufi (1997: 243).

the arabic language and national identity
— 236 —
14. Ibid.: 250.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid.: 251.
17. See Suleiman (1999c: 75–80) for an extensive discussion of these arguments.
18. The term la˙n has a multiplicity of meanings. It is used to refer to (1) singing and
chanting, (2) allusion, (3) solecism, incorrect or corrupt speech, (4) dialect or
sociolect, (5) gist of an utterance or a text, and (6) acumen or intelligence (cf.
Matar 1967: 19–28). The reader may also refer to al-Qali (1978, vol. 1: 6–9) and
Matlub (1987, vol. 3: 166–9).
19. For a general survey of the major works on la˙n and the general aims which these
works set out to serve, the reader may refer to Matar (1967: 29–70).
20. See Ibn ÆAbd Rabbih (1928, vol. 1: 18) for further reports of this kind.
21. See Blau (1963) for the role of the Bedouins as arbiters in linguistic disputes.
22. The term “status-planning” refers to the allocation of languages to functional domains
which, on a more practical level, involves the setting up of “laws and norms for
when to use a language” (Spolsky 1998: 125). See also Cooper (1989) and Suleiman
(1999d).
23. See Ibn ÆAbd Rabbih (1928, vol. 2: 18).
24. See Naqd al-nathr – which is wrongly, but famously, attributed to Qudama Ibn JaÆfar
(1982: 143) – for this and other stories.
25. See Anis (1960: 17).
26. See Fück (1980: 38) for this and other reports on solecism.
27. See Lewis (1970) for a discussion of the meaning of the term “Arab” in history.
28. See al-I˙kÅm fÈ ußËl al-a˙kÅm (1984, vol. 1: 36) for Ibn Hazm’s views.
29. See Gabrieli (1979: 206) for a similar treatment; see also the entry on Æajam in Lane
(1980, Part 5) for the meaning of this term in Arabic.
30. An example of this attitude in pre-Islamic discourse is the reference to the Persian
and Christian monks as “stuttering barbarians” because of their language (Goldziher
1966, vol. 1: 99). In the Islamic period, a Bedouin is reported to have referred to
Persian as “kalÅm al-khurs, the language of the dumb” (ibid.). The bodyguards of the
Umayyad rulers of al-Andalus (known usually as the ÍaqÅliba) were also called khurs
because of their inability to speak Arabic properly (I am grateful to Carole Hillen-
brand for pointing this out to me).
31. Not all instances of this phenomenon are framed in the context of contrastive self-
identification at group level (cf. Ibn Hazm 1984, vol. 1: 34).
32. Anis (1970: 198–201) argues that the ˙adÈth upon which this view is based – anÅ
afßa˙ man na†aq bi-l-∂Åd (I am the most eloquent speaker of ∂Åd) – is apocryphal.
However, what matters in this connection is not the factual truth of this ˙adÈth but
the fact that it is consistent with a trend which considers eloquence in pure Arabic
(∂Åd) as a mark of distinction. Anis further argues that the term lughat al-∂Åd is a
fourth/tenth-century invention, and that it came to signal group difference between
the Arabs on the one hand and the Persians and Turks on the other.
33. See Shar˙ dÈwÅn al-MutanabbÈ (1938, vol. 2: 56). See also vol. 4: 230, in which al-
Mutanabbi declares that the Arabs can never succeed if they are ruled by Æajam.
Other references to Arabs and Æajam exist in al-Mutanabbi’s DÈwÅn, but these will
not detain us here.

notes
— 237 —
34. One of the anonymous readers of the book suggested that “Another explanation of
why [Arabic] is called lughat al-∂Åd is that this consonant originally had a lateral
release (which still survives in some Yemeni dialects), and this really is pretty
unusual”. I am grateful to this reader for this suggestion and for other useful comments
on the text.
35. For our purposes here, the term mawÅlÈ is taken to designate “people descended from
foreign families whose ancestors, or even they themselves, on accepting Islam, have
been adopted into an Arab tribe, either as freed slaves or free-born aliens”
(Goldziher 1966, vol. 1: 101).
36. The fact that ∂ is often mixed with Ω by putative Arabic-speakers (cf. al-Hariri,
Maqama 46, in al-Suyuti 1986, vol. 2: 288; and ÆAbd al-Tawwab 1971) is not
considered falsifying evidence of the role of ∂ as a group-identity symbol. This
shows the extent to which the linguistic criterion as a signifier of identity is rooted
in the Arabic intellectual tradition.
37. The term Æarab was used to cover both people of Arab lineage and Bedouin (aÆrÅb)
in Bukhari’s Sa˙È˙. Although the veracity of the tradition, ascribed to the caliph
ÆUmar, in which the term Æarab is used in this sense may be in doubt, the lexical
meaning of the term concerned is not in question. This must reflect a much earlier
usage. See al-Sayyid (1990) for a discussion of this tradition.
38. See Anis (1970), Gibb (1962), Goldziher (1966, vol. 1), Norris (1990) and
Qaddura (1972) for more information on this movement.
39. Cited in Anis (1970: 198).
40. The reader may also refer to the following works by al-Jahiz: al-ÓayawÅn (1938–45),
al-BayÅn wa-l-tabyÈn (1932), RasÅ’il (1964) and al-Ma˙Åsin wa-l-a∂dÅd (1969),
although there is some doubt as to whether the latter was written by al-Jahiz. The
reader may also refer to Ibn Qutayba’s two works Adab al-kÅtib (n.d.) and KitÅb al-
Æarab (1913).
41. Goldziher (1966, vol. 1: 193) points out that the interest in names during the fourth
century was strong in the shuÆËbiyya camp. He mentions a Persian contemporary of
Ibn Durayd, Hamza Ibn al-Hasan al-Isfahani (350/961), whose philological work
included investigating “the original forms of the Muslim-Persian nomenclature …
to establish its etymological and historical relations; to reconstruct and explain
etymologically the original Persian forms of geographical names which Arab
national philology had explained from Arab etymologies; and in general to recover
the original Persian forms from the shape they had acquired in the mouths of the
conquering Arabs”.
42. These may be called homo-antonyms on account of their combining homonyms
with antonyms.
43. It is quite interesting that, in spite of his anti-shuÆËbiyya position, al-Zamakhshari
is claimed by Turkists (advocates of Turkish nationalism) as a Turkish Arabic
grammarian.
44. See al-Bazzaz (1962), al-Duri (1968, 1982), al-Husri (1962), al-Kawakibi (1962),
al-Kharbutli (1968), Nuseibeh (1956), Rida (1962), Zabadiya (1982) and Zurayq
(1962).
45. The term shuÆËbiyya appears in the title of Bayhum’s book al-ÆUrËba wa-l-
shuÆËbiyyÅt al-˙adÈtha, published in Beirut in 1957. In her Arab Nationalism: An

the arabic language and national identity
— 238 —
Anthology (1962), Sylvia Haim includes a translation of a portion of this book (pp.
145–71) under the title “Arabism and Jewry in Syria” (pp. 128–46). The choice of
the word “Jewry” in the title of this selection is unfortunate because of the loss of the
historical reference to the concept of shuÆËbiyya, not to mention the fact that
Haim’s title deviates from the original in an ideologically motivated manner. Al-
Bazzaz’s piece in Haim’s anthology was first published in Baghdad in 1952. Al-
Fikayki’s reference to shuÆËbiyya occurs in the title of his book al-ShuÆËbiyya
wa-l-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, first published in Beirut in 1961. It is clear from the
translated extract from this book in Karpat (1968: 80–6) that al-Fikayki uses
shuÆËbiyya in a wide sense to refer to all the movements which, in his view, are anti-
Arab, including the Turkification movement in the Ottoman empire and in Turkey
(see Chapter 4), Arab communism, Antun SaÆada’s Syrian Social Nationalist Party
(see Chapter 5), Egyptian nationalism (see Chapter 6) and Lebanese nationalism
(see Chapter 6). He sums up his views on this topic as follows (1968: 86): “If we
were to summarize the objectives of anti-Arabism (shuÆËbiyya) we find that it
concentrates [on] attacking Arab nationalism, perverting history, emphasising
Arab regression, denying Arab culture, being hostile to everything Arab, and being
in league with all the enemies of Arab nationalism. In all its various roles, anti-
Arabism has adopted a policy of intellectual conquest as a means of penetrating
Arab society and combating Arab nationalism.”
46. Cited in al-Sayyid (1990: 19).
47. The term umma in Arabic discourse ranges over a wide terrain of meaning. Broadly
speaking, this term signifies the following meanings: (1) a group of people, (2)
religion, (3) an individual who follows the right path (in religious terms), (4) a period
of time and (5) body part. See Farhat (1983) for discussion of these meanings.
48. The contingency of nations (as post-eighteenth-century creations) is a funda-
mental principle of the modernist approach to the study of nationalism. As
Halliday points out in his study of the formation of Yemeni nationalism (1997: 27–
8), this approach “carries with it the implication of the modernity of nations, i.e.
that they cannot be identified prior to the existence of the ideological and social
conditions that give them meaning, namely in the early nineteenth century.
Identifiable linguistics and cultural groups, peoples, or, in a clear pre-nationalist
sense, “nations” can be accepted, but these are not nations in the contemporary
sense, nor, it is emphasized, was it inevitable that they should become so.” One
term which may therefore be suggested as an equivalent of the term umam (plural of
umma) used by al-MasÆudi is “communities”, although this term would fall short of
the much wider collective groupings that al-MasÆudi seems to have in mind when
he talks about umam.
49. See Nassar (1992: 41).
50. The term “myth” is used by Ferguson (1972: 375) to cover three types of attitude:
(1) those that are true by virtue of corresponding well to “objective reality”, (2) those
that are “involved with aesthetic or religious notions the validity of which cannot
be investigated empirically”, and (3) those which are “partly or wholly false”. It
should be clear from this that Ferguson does not use the term “myth” entirely in its
dictionary meaning.

notes
— 239 —
chapter 4
1. This is the first hemistich of a well-known ode by the poet Fakhri al-Barudi which
runs as follows: (Line 1) bilÅdu al-Æurbi aw†ÅnÈ, mina al-shÅmi li-baghdÅni (The lands of
the Arabs are my homeland, from Greater Syria to Baghdad/Iraq). (Line 2) wa-min
najdin ilÅ yamanin, ilÅ mißra fa-ta†wÅni (And from Najd to Yemen, to Egypt and
Tetuan/North Africa). (Line 3) fa-lÅ ˙addun yubÅÆidunÅ wa-lÅ khulfun yufarriqunÅ
(Borders do not separate us, and differences do not divide us). (Line 4) lisÅnu al-∂Ådi
yajmaÆunÅ, bi-qa˙†Ånin wa-ÆadnÅni (The Arabic language unites us with the ancient
Arabs of Qahtan and ÆAdnan).
2. Periodization of political and cultural movements is a hazardous procedure in history.
It is therefore not surprising that objections are made to the anchoring of modernity
in the Arabic-speaking countries to Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798. The
following quotation from Tibawi (1969: 39) illustrates the general thrust of this
kind of objection: “There is really no decisive point at which we can say that the
old world changed itself into the new world in the near East and elsewhere. Long
before 1798 the movement that is variously called modernisation or reform was
under way in different parts of the Muslim world. Long after 1798 ‘medieval’ ideas
held undisputed sway and their supremacy was not fundamentally in question. The
change, modernisation, reform or renaissance was first inspired by native and
internal forces; only its more obvious and later development was in response to
foreign and external challenge.”
3. See Feroz Ahmad (1969) for a detailed study of the politics of the Young Turks.
4. Turkism or Pan-Turkism must be distinguished from Turanism. Landau (1981: 1)
identifies as the guiding objective of the former the attempt to “strive for some sort
of union – cultural or physical, or both – among all peoples of proven or alleged
Turkic origins, whether living both within and without the frontiers of the
Ottoman Empire (subsequently of the Republic of Turkey)”. “Turanism”, he
explains, “is … a far broader concept than Pan-Turkism, embracing such peoples as
the Hungarians, the Finns and Estonians” (ibid.).
5. The list consists of the following sources (Kushner 1977: 75): “(1) The Turkish
vocabulary prevalent among all classes of population in Istanbul, including even old
women. (2) The vocabulary of the inhabitants of Anatolia and Rumelia. (3) The
creation of several new words through the use of existing roots. (4) Old Ottoman
words. (5) The old and new vocabularies of Eastern Turkish which [is called]
Chagatay. (6) The vocabulary of Azerbayjan. (7) The dialects of the Crimea and
Kazan. (8) The vocabulary of Uigur. (9) The vocabulary of Uzbek. (10) The
vocabulary of Kalmuk. (11) Dialects of other Turkish peoples. (12) Creation of new
words through the use of roots, from the dialects … mentioned in items … 4–11.
(13) Arabic. (14) Persian. (15) European languages.”
6. The attitude of the Turkists of the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) and
the Young Turks towards the Arabs is dealt with, albeit briefly, by Haniog¨lu
(1991: 31): “In their publications, the Young Turks claimed that all ethnic groups
of the Ottoman Empire were equal, that there was no difference between Arabs and
Turks, and that it was normal for all groups to desire to develop their ethnic
cultures. But in the confidential correspondence of some of the important members

the arabic language and national identity
— 240 —
of the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) the opposite attitude can be seen
through the use of such derogatory phrases for Arabs as ‘the dogs of the Turkish
nation’ in private letters of two key members of the Central Committee of the
CUP, Dr Nazım Bey, one of the reorganisers of the CUP in 1906, and Ishak Süküti,
one of its five founding members.” And (ibid.: 32): “although Arabs were of the same
religion as the Turks, the Young Turks viewed them as the most inferior ethnic
group of the empire”.
7. See Landau (1993b) for the euphoria with which the Young Turk Revolution was
met in Egypt. See also Jurji Zaydan’s novel al-InqilÅb al-ÆuthmÅnÈ (The Ottoman coup
d’état, n.d.) for an expression of this euphoria in literature. For a more historical
account of the impact of the Young Turk Revolution on the Arabic-speaking
provinces, see Kedourie (1974b).
8. See Antonius (1938: 31–4) and Zeine (1966: 40–1) for a general discussion of this issue.
9. In dealing with this issue, Tibawi (1969: 88) writes: “In the literary field the Egyptian
impact [in Syria] was more profound [than in the field of formal education].
Preserved in the Egyptian archives are cumulative lists of books printed in Cairo
and supplied to various centres in Syria … The lists include books on science,
mathematics, medicine, theology, mysticism, language, history, geography and
travel. They were ordered not by civil servants, physicians, chemists and army
officers, but also by religious functionaries, members of consultative councils,
notables, teachers and private individuals of all communities, Muslim, Christian
and others.” See also Antonius (1938: 38) on this point.
10. Antonius (1938: 39) assesses Ibrahim Pasha’s contribution in this area in more
positive and upbeat terms: “The scholastic system introduced by Ibrahim, although
short-lived, gave a powerful stimulus to national education, particularly among the
Muslim community; and the start he gave it was all the more far-reaching as his
system aimed deliberately at awakening Arab national consciousness among pupils”.
Tibawi (1969: 87–8) offers a different and more reliable assessment of Ibrahim Pasha’s
input in the field of education, which gives no hint of any deliberate nationalist
objectives behind it.
11. In assessing the role of missionary education, attention must be paid to aspects of its
negative impact. A representative view of this impact is given by Antonius (1938:
92): “In a country [Lebanon] which was … a prey to internal division, [the] very
diversity [of the missionary schools] was an added mischief, as some of the missions
had become the tools of political ambitions and brought in their trains the evils of
international rivalry as well as the benefits of education”. Tibi (1997: 100) shares
this view in the context of the French missionary schools: “In the French mission
schools, Arab Christians, mainly Maronites, were taught that they could only
emancipate themselves under the protection of France, which meant French
colonial rule. In the beginning, instruction in the French schools was in French
alone, and it was only in the face of competition from the Protestants that they
began to use more Arabic, although even then only occasionally.” See also Hawi
(1982) on this point.
12. Butrus al-Bustani (1819–83) was a pioneer in this field. His contribution to the
development of Arabic culture, journalism and the Arabic language in the nine-
teenth century was widely acknowledged, as was his call for unity between Christians

notes
— 241 —
and Muslims, whom he urged to love their fatherland. For his contribution to the
formation of Syrian nationalism in the second half of the twentieth century, see
Abu-Manneh (1980). See Tibawi (1963) for the relationship between Butrus al-
Bustani and the American missionaries in Beirut.
13. See Tibawi (1966) for a detailed study of the American interests in Syria in the
nineteenth century.
14. It is interesting to note here that the establishment of the college was championed
by locally based American missionaries who wanted to avoid the universal prescrip-
tion of the use of the “vernacular” as a medium of instruction in missionary schools.
At the time (early 1880s), the American schools were facing tough competition
from other missionary schools which taught foreign languages or used them as the
medium of instruction. Tibawi (1969: 143) refers to this obliquely in the following
quotation: “By the order of their superiors in Boston, the Americans were debarred
from teaching foreign languages, even English. This was one of the common con-
siderations which led the American mission in Beirut to seek the establishment of a
Protestant high school independent of Boston’s control. The result was the estab-
lishment in 1866 of the Syrian Protestant College.”
15. Kedourie (1974a) suggests that the decision to use the “vernacular” in the work of
the American mission was based on the experience of missionaries in India and
Ceylon. Reflecting on their work among the Mahrattas in India, the missionaries
concluded that “experience has seemed to show that such schools are not the most
efficient instruments in forwarding the great work of the missions – that of making
known the gospel to the heathen, and saving souls. The vernacular of any people …
is believed to be the most suitable language in which to communicate truth, and
through which to affect the heart” (quoted in Kedourie, ibid.: 70). The missionaries
in Ceylon encouraged the use of the “vernacular” for the same reason, but they
additionally pointed out that by depriving their graduates of English-language
proficiency they made them less able to pursue careers in government adminis-
tration, commerce and business and, therefore, more available for use in propagating
the work of the mission itself among the indigenous population: “too often the
graduate [with English-language proficiency] went into the more lucrative service of
the government, or of some merchant planter, and thus his labours and influence
were lost to the mission and to his native village. Were our object merely to educate
and civilise the people … this might do; but the churches cannot afford to pro-
secute their work in this manner” (ibid.: 71). By contrast, the situation in the
Levant developed in the opposite direction, in spite of the early preference for
Arabic in the American mission schools. Increased contact with Europe created a
demand for foreign languages (mainly English and French), as did emigration to
North America by native Lebanese. This demand was met by other missions, leading
to a reduction in the number of students enrolled in the American mission schools.
To reverse this trend, English was later (1882) adopted as the medium of
instruction in the Syrian Protestant College to challenge the Jesuits’ promotion of
French. In this connection, Henry Harris Jessup, a member of the mission,
remarked: “Was [the teaching of foreign languages] to be left to the Jesuits, those
enemies of a pure Gospel, those masters of intrigue and duplicity and perverters of
the human conscience? This must not be” (quoted in Kedourie, ibid.).

the arabic language and national identity
— 242 —
16. Considering this policy on the part of the American missions, Tibi (1997: 100)
argues that it is “significant that the early Arab nationalists emerged not from the
French but from the American Protestant mission schools, whose activities were
less directly tied to colonial aims”. The same assessment is offered of the work of the
Russian Orthodox schools, especially the Nazareth School in Palestine. Tibawi
(1969: 172) states that in the Russian Orthodox schools “instruction was through
the medium of Arabic, and this language was taught very thoroughly throughout
the system. Russian was taught only as a foreign language.” See Hopwood (1969:
137–58) for further information on the role of the Russian Orthodox Church
schools in the Levant (particularly in Palestine) towards the end of the nineteenth
century and the beginning of the twentieth century. The reader may also consult al-
Husri’s Mu˙Å∂arÅt fÈ nushË’ al-fikra al-qawmiyya (1985: 126–9) for some interesting
remarks on this topic.
17. Eli Smith (1801–57) was a pioneer in this respect. He came to Beirut in 1827, but
started to learn Arabic in Malta before actually moving to Beirut. Another member
of the mission, the famous physician Cornelius van Dyck (1818–95), followed in
Smith’s footsteps. He came to Beirut in 1840, learned Arabic to a very high
standard and “wrote text-books in it on various scientific subjects, some of which
remained in use for two or three generations” (Antonius 1938: 48). The titles of
some of these books (twenty-five in total), which he wrote in Arabic, are listed in
al-Zarakli’s biographical dictionary al-AÆlÅm (1995, vol. 5).
18. George Post came to Lebanon as a member of the American mission in 1863. He
learned Arabic to a very high standard, worked as a staff member at the Protestant
College for forty-one years (since its inception) and published many books in Arabic
on medicine, biology and botany. He also published the magazine Majallat al-†abÈb
(The Doctor/Physician) before relinquishing its editorship to Ibrahim al-Yaziji (see
section 3). His missionary zeal landed him in trouble with Muslim students at the
College, who refused to attend his lectures (see al-Zarakli 1995, vol. 2).
19. A fourth placard or handbill, dated 17 RabiÆ al-Thani 1298/19 March 1881, was
distributed in Algeria, Egypt, Greater Syria, Iraq and Sudan in the name of the
little-known Society for Watching over the Rights of the Arab Millet (JamÆiyyat ˙ifΩ
huqËq al-milla al-Æarabiyya). The placard attacks the Turks as a corrupt nation and
addresses Muslims and Christians as members of the Arab nation, calling on them
to unite against the Turks in the struggle for liberty and independence. This bill
makes no reference to the Arabic language, restricting itself mainly to Turkish
misrule in the levying of war taxes and the conscription of Arab soldiers. See
Landau (1993a: 141–53) for the text, a translation and a discussion of this handbill.
20. Dozy, vol. 2, 159: includes in the cluster of meanings he lists for this word the
following item: “a coarse and unbridled man who yields to his brutal passions”, and
adds that it is applied to apostates, whether they renege to Christianity from Islam or
the other way round. I am grateful to Carole Hillenbrand for pointing this out to me.
21. Faris Nimr graduated from the American Protestant College in 1874. He worked
with Cornelius van Dyck at the University’s observatory and later became its
director. He established with YaÆqub Sarruf (see n. 40 below) al-Muqta†af magazine
in 1876. In 1884, he emigrated to Egypt and resumed the publication of al-Muqta†af
a year later. He established al-Muqa††am magazine in Cairo in 1889. He co-

notes
— 243 —
translated with YaÆqub Sarruf a number of books into Arabic. He served as a
member of the Egyptian Senate and as a member of the Arabic Language Academy
in Cairo.
22. Shaykh Tahir al-Jaza’iri was one of the prominent men of letters in Syria in his
time. He had more than twenty publications to his name on various aspects of
Arabic and Islamic culture. He was instrumental in establishing the famous Zahiriyya
library in Damascus and the Khalidiyya library in Jerusalem.
23. It is also reported that a Christian Armenian was appointed to teach Islamic
religion in a Beirut school against his will (see al-Afghani 1971: 24).
24. These and other terms were cited by ÆAbd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi in his book Umm
al-qurÅ (see al-Afghani 1971: 33).
25. See Tauber (1993: 197–8) for information on this congress.
26. For a translation of this proclamation, see Sylvia Haim (1962: 83–8).
27. Sylvia Haim (1962: 88) translates the word ÆulËj as “contemptible creatures”. Like
Tibawi (1969), Haim misses the relevant connotations of this term in this context,
mainly those of being unbelievers and non-Arabs by virtue of their not knowing
Arabic or their speaking it with a foreign accent. See the discussion of this issue
earlier in this section.
28. In extreme cases, the use of Turkish was frowned upon. Tauber (1993: 337) tells us
that a French diplomat writing in 1880 noted how, at a public meeting in
Damascus, a speaker warned against the use of Turkish – “Anyone who will use a
Turkish word to indicate ‘bread’ will be beaten to death” – and how he did not
encounter the “slightest protest”.
29. Rida expresses his views on this topic in the following manner (see Hourani 1983:
300): “One of the religious and social reforms of Islam was to bring about linguistic
unity, by making its common language that of all the peoples who adhered to it.
The religion preserved the language and the language preserved the religion. But
for Islam, the Arabic language would have changed like others, as it had itself
changed previously. But for Arabic, the different interpretations of Islam would
have grown apart from each other, and it would have split into a number of faiths,
with the adherents of each accusing the others of infidelity; when they wished to
give up following their passions and return to the truth, they would have found no
general principles to invoke. Thus the Arabic language is not the private property
of the descendants of Qahtan [original Arabic-speakers], it is the language of all
Muslims.”
30. Khalidi sums up the contribution of al-MufÈd as follows (1981: 46–7): “Without
question the most important theme in al-MufÈd, indeed in a sense the paper’s very
raison d’être, is Arab nationalism, whose basic ideas: political, cultural and lingu-
istic, are forcefully hammered home either directly or indirectly in virtually every
leading article. This overriding preoccupation with Arab nationalism is also
frequently evident in the choice of articles reprinted from other papers, in the items
carried from all over the Arab world, and in the political developments in the
capital [Istanbul] which are reported.”
31. In this connection, al-ÆUraysi once said (1981: 48) that “all affiliative bonds may
disintegrate except that of religion”.
32. This article is attributed to al-ÆUraysi by Naji ÆAllush on the basis, it seems, of

the arabic language and national identity
— 244 —
similarity of content with another article (1981: 3–5) written by the author, whose
authorship is not in dispute and for which he was taken to court and punished.
33. Amin Abu Khatir was born in Zahla, Lebanon. He studied medicine at the American
Protestant College in Beirut before moving to Egypt, where he died. He published
many articles on a variety of topics in al-Muqta†af and other Egyptian newspapers.
34. Ibrahim al-Yaziji was born in Beirut in 1847. He worked in journalism and on a new
translation of the Bible into Arabic before leaving for Egypt in the 1880s to take
advantage of the atmosphere of freedom available there at the time. Al-Yaziji pub-
lished three journals – al-ÊabÈb, al-Îiya’ and al-BayÅn – in which he set out his ideas
on a host of issues, including the revitalization of the Arabic language, which occu-
pied him most. In addition, he published two Arabic lexica and a volume of poetry.
He died in Egypt in 1906. His remains were brought back to Beirut in 1913.
35. Antonius describes the content of this poem and its diffusion in the Levant as
follows (1938: 54–5): “In substance, the poem was an incitement to Arab insurgence.
It sang of the achievements of the Arab race, of the glories of Arabic literature, and
of the future that the Arabs might fashion for themselves by going to their own past
for inspiration. It denounced the evils of sectarian dissensions, heaped abuse on the
misgovernment to which the country was a prey, and called upon the Syrians to
band together and shake off the Turkish yoke. It was all the more seditious as it was
couched in stirring terms, and it was recited in a hushed voice to eight members of
the [Syrian Scientific Society in 1868] who had assembled in a private house one
night and were known to one another to be of the same way of thinking. The poem
had a wide circulation. It was too treasonable to be safely committed to anything
but memory … It made a particular appeal to the students and stamped their minds
in their receptive years with the impress of racial pride. The poem did much to
foster the national movement in its infancy. It owed its vogue to its easy cadence
and the neatness of its rhymes, and above all to the fact that, echoing sentiments
unconsciously felt, it could awaken true emotion in the people for whom it was
intended. With its utterance the movement for political emancipation sang its
song.” The place of this poem in the history of the Arab nationalist idea meant that
it was taught in schools in parts of the Arab world as late as the 1960s. The present
writer remembers being taught it at school in Jerusalem in the mid-1960s.
36. Whether the Druze identify themselves as Muslims or not, or whether they are
identified by other Muslims as Muslim or not, is not something that concerns us
here. The labels Christian, Druze and Muslim are used here in conformity with the
relevant literature on the subject.
37. In carrying out this task, I base my argument on the two collections of magazine
articles by al-Yaziji edited by Yusuf Qazma Khuri (1993a, 1993b). I also refer to one
of the articles in Jeha’s (1992) introduction to al-Yaziji’s life and works.
38. Cooper (1989: 31) characterizes corpus-planning as a sub-field of language planning
which refers to “activities such as coining new terms, reforming spelling, and adopting
a new script. It refers, in short, to the creation of new forms, the modification of old
ones, or the selection from alternative forms in a spoken or written code.”
39. Status-planning refers to the “allocation of languages or language varieties to given
functions, e.g. medium of instruction, official language, vehicle of mass communi-
cation, etc.” (ibid.: 32).

notes
— 245 —
40. YaÆqub Sarruf was born in Lebanon. He studied at the American Protestant
College. He was an accomplished translator and writer of both poetry and fiction.
41. It may actually be argued that exaggerations in this sphere are functionally relevant
because they serve to highlight the strength of the posited connection between
language and nation.
42. See Antonius (1938: 92–5) for an assessment of the effect of the foreign schools on
the progress of the Arab national movement. In the course of this assessment,
Antonius makes the following point, as if to give credence to al-Yaziji’s views: “The
French Government, anxious to strengthen their influence, subsidised the French
ecclesiastical missions; and these, entering into an alliance with the Maronite and
Melchite clergy, strove to give the rising generation an education which, although
well-enough in itself, aimed also at shaping their minds in a French mould and
turning their outlook and their mental allegiance towards France. The Russians,
through the agency of an ecclesiastical mission and a richly-endowed pedagogic
society, cultivated the Orthodox Arab population and the Orthodox Patriarchates
of Antioch and Jerusalem with similar ulterior aims.” Evidence for this penetration
may be derived from a debate run by the weekly al-Nashra al-usbËÆiyya in 1881 on
the use of Arabic or foreign languages for instruction in schools in the Levant. One
of the claims made by Antonius about the influence of Western education on the
Arab national movement deals with the transfer of the leadership of this movement
from the hands of the Christians to the Muslims (1938: 92): “It [Western
education] did this mainly by its indirect attack on the position of the Arabic
language as the instrument of the national culture”. This is an extremely interesting
point whose substantiation requires further research. To illustrate the extent to
which foreign languages had penetrated Levantine society, the editors of this
weekly mention that a man had insisted that one of the essential requirements in
his wife-to-be was that she should know English or French (in Khuri 1991: 7).
43. Tibawi believes that educational Westernization in Greater Syria in the latter part
of the nineteenth century had a negative impact on its sociopolitical environment
(1969: 178): “The westernisation in material life may be dismissed as superficial, but
that in speech indicates mental attitudes built up through a long process of educa-
tion in foreign schools … All these foreign influences tended to retard movements
towards a Syrian Arab entity; they militated even more against any form of Ottoman
unity. Within the Syrian Arab house, foreign cultural influences heightened and
aggravated religious divisions by giving them a cultural stamp. An observer who
might have seen the country around the year 1890 thus tossed from one ideology to
another could hardly have resisted asking the question: whither Syria?”
chapter 5
1. This is the second hemistich of a well-known poem by the Lebanese poet Anis al-
Khuri al-Maqdisi (1885–1977), in which he says that language in national-identity
terms overrides the divisions which differences in faith may produce: (1) in farraqa
al-ÈmÅnu bayna jumËÆinÅ, fa-lisÅnunÅ al-Æarabiyyu khayru muwa˙˙idi (Should differ-
ences in faith divide us, our Arabic language is the thing which first and foremost
unites us); (2) qarubat bihi al-aq†Åru wa-hiya baÆÈdatun, wa-tawa˙˙adat min baÆdi fattin

the arabic language and national identity
— 246 —
fÈ al-yadi (Arabic shortens the distances between the Arabic-speaking lands, and it
unites the Arabs when division threatens to fragment them).
2. ÆUmar ÆAbd al-Rahman al-Fakhuri was born in Beirut. He studied law in Paris and
served as a member of the Damascus Academy (al-MajmaÆ al-ÆIlmi al-ÆArabi). He
worked in broadcasting and published many books, essays and translations (from
French into Arabic).
3. Salah al-Din al-Qasimi graduated in medicine from Damascus in 1914, a profession
he practised in Hijaz until his death in al-Ta’if in 1916. He championed the cause of
the Arabic language against the Turkification policies of the Young Turks and was
a founder member of the Arab Renaissance Society (1906) in Damascus.
4. The question as to whether or not Arab nationalism is need of definition was hotly
contested in the 1960s (see Nazik al-Mala’ika 1993a, 1993b, al-Naqqash 1993, al-
Basir 1993a, Budur 1993, al-Dahhan 1993, ÆAbd al-Da’im 1993).
5. For a recent appreciation of SatiÆ al-Husri, see SÅ†iÆ al-ÓußrÈ: thalÅthËn ÆÅm ÆalÅ al-
ra˙Èl (1999). See also Choueiri (2000).
6. Cleveland’s comments (1971: 90–1) on the issue of style in al-Husri’s writings
highlight its interactive qualities with the intended audience: “al-Husri possessed a
spare but forceful literary style, one which was quite direct in its approach to the
issues which he raised, but which was also capable of occasional imagery. He most
often presented his arguments in self-contained essays which employed the following
organisation: he stated a premise which he favoured, buttressed it with ‘historical
scientific facts,’ and then said that these facts proved the irrefutable validity of the
initial premise which was forcefully repeated as a conclusion. Another device which
al-Husri often used was to recognise and predict the doubts his audience might have
concerning a statement which he had just made, and then to demolish those
rhetorical doubts with even more facts. It was an effective and convincing method
when combined with his wide reading and his ability to grasp and manipulate what
he had read.”
7. In his book MulËk al-Æarab, Amin al-Rihani (1929, vol. 2: 402) refers to this fact:
“[al-Husri] is an Arab; his Arabic is beyond reproach, except for his accent”. The
original text, which reads “huwa Æarabiyy lÅ ghubÅr ÆalÅ Æarabiyyatih ghayr lahjatihÅ”,
was mistranslated by Cleveland into (1971: 66): “He [al-Husri] is an Arab,
irreproachable in his Arabism except for his accent”. Cleveland misread Æarabiyyatih
for æurËbatih, the latter meaning Arabism, but not the former.
8. See SaÆd (1979) for a study of al-Husri’s educational thought.
9. See Cleveland (1971: 32–3) for this debate.
10. The urgency of modernization is summed up in al-Husri’s exhortation to the Arabs
to adopt as their slogan “modernization at all times, in all places and in everything”
(årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-tÅrÈkh wa-l-ijtimÅÆ, 1985e: 19: al-tajdÈd fÈ kull zamÅn, wa-fÈ kull
shay’ wa-fÈ kull makÅn yajib an yakËn shiÆÅranÅ al-ÆÅmm).
11. See the following publications by al-Husri for these views: årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-
wa†aniyya wa-l-qawmiyya, 1984a: 21; al-ÆUrËba bayn duÆÅtihÅ wa-muÆÅri∂ÈhÅ, 1985a:
73; and Mu˙Å∂arÅt fÈ nushË’ al-fikra al-qawmiyya, 1985b: 21.
12. Had al-Husri been aware of the fact, he would undoubtedly have pointed out how
“language was part of the national heritage strenuously appealed to by the dictionary-
maker Noah Webster” (Honey 1997: 68) who, “in the immediate aftermath of

notes
— 247 —
American Independence … was at pains to emphasize the distinctiveness of standard
American English” (ibid.: 81) against standard British English.
13. See Faysal (1971) for al-Husri’s views on language education in Syria.
chapter 6
1. The Syrian and secular nature of SaÆada’s nationalist thinking is embedded in the
Constitution of the Syrian National Party (see Makdisi 1960: 173–4).
2. See Thomas (1991) for a discussion of the notion of purity in language.
3. See Muhammad (1996) and Zalat (1988) for a general discussion of Haykal’s work.
4. The potential of this discovery in linking the present with the past was exploited to
the full by Egyptian nationalists. Pilgrimages to the tomb site were organized by
these nationalists, with Muhammad Husayn Haykal taking the lead. Pharaonic
motifs were used on stamps, banknotes, the coat of arms of the Egyptian University
and the coats of arms of each of its faculties. In 1928, a statue (Nah∂at Mißr/The
Revival of Egypt), containing a Sphinx-like figure by the sculptor Mahmud Mukhtar
(1891–1934), was unveiled in a grand ceremony (see Baron 1997). Also in 1928,
the Egyptian government authorized the building of a Pharaonic-style mausoleum
to inter the remains of the Egyptian leader SaÆd Zaghloul (1857–1927), although
the reburial did not take place until 1936. Name-giving practices reflected the
national mood of the period. This mood was also reflected in literature: Ahmad
Shawqi alone composed four poems on the topic (see Khouri 1971 for the role of
poetry in the making of modern Egypt). This pride in the Pharaonic past of Egypt
has led some nationalist poets to adopt shuÆËbiyya-style themes, pointing out that
the greatness of the Arab past pales into insignificance when compared with that of
the Egyptians (see Gershoni and Jankowski 1986: 185).
5. See Abu Sayf (1987) for the history of the Arabic language in Egypt.
6. See Abu Sayf (1987), al-Bishri (1982), Carter (1986), al-Fiqqi (1985), Hanna
(1994), Kilani (n.d.) and al-MiÆdawi (1978) for discussions of the role of the Copts
in the national life of Egypt.
7. See Cachia 1990 (59–73) for a discussion of the use of the colloquial in modern
Arabic literature.
8. See Anis (1969) for a discussion of the issue of the Bedouin nature of Arabic.
9. The idea of establishing a language academy was mooted as early as 1892. Several
attempts were made to establish it, but it was finally established in 1932 and took as
its name MajmaÆ al-Lugha al-ÆArabiyya al-MalakÈ (The Royal Arabic Language
Academy). Its name was changed to MajmaÆ Fu’Åd al-’Awwal li-l-Lugha al-ÆArabiyya
(King Fu’ad’s Arabic Language Academy). Its name was finally changed to MajmaÆ
al-Lugha al-ÆArabiyya (The Arabic Language Academy) in 1954. See al-JamiÆi (1983).
10. For the history of the Arabist idea in Egypt, see ÆAbdalla (1975), ÆAmara (1997), al-
Barri (1992), Burj (1992), Coury (1998), Gershoni and Jankowski (1995), Jalal and
al-Mutawalli (1997), Khatir (1985), Muhammad (1978), Nassar (1980), Qarqut
(1972) and Zaki (1983).
11. See ÆAmara (1995) for an attack on this dimension of Salama Musa’s thinking. For
a more balanced assessment of Salama Musa’s thinking, the reader may refer to Shukri
(1983).

the arabic language and national identity
— 248 —
12. Taha Husayn states that the same must apply to the teaching of the geography and
history of Egypt as the two other components which make up the Egyptian national
identity on the cultural level. The teaching of Islam and Christianity must also be
provided to their followers in all schools, whether state or non-state schools.
13. For criticism from this angle, see al-Jundi (1977, 1984) and al-Muhtasib (1980).
See Rukaybi (1992) for a more balanced assessment of Taha Husayn’s thinking.
14. For views on this matter, see al-Alfi (1990), ÆAyyad (1992), Faraj (1992), Hashim
(1992), Khalafalla (1992), Mijli (1995), Qandil (1992), Salim (1992), al-Tawil
(1992) and Zahran (1985). For some of the court documents, see the appendix to
ÆAwad (1993).
15. Lewis Awad’s bold pronouncements on this and other matters in the introduction
to Plutoland have made him the subject of vitriolic attacks by a band of critics.
Shakir (1972) describes him as “wicked charlatan, impostor, transgressor, puppet,
trash, insane, odious, rotten, depraved, useless thing, missionary errand boy” (cited
in Suleiman 1997: 130). ÆAttar (1965) refers to him as “a communist and Christian
zealot, an enemy of Islam, the Qur’an, Islamic culture and heritage, and the Arabic
language and literature” (ibid.). ÆAttar also refers to him as an “atheist Marxist
Leninist Stalinist radical communist lefty” (ibid.). For a more balanced evaluation
of Luwis ÆAwad’s ideas, see al-Naqqash (1988) and Raghib (1989).
16. Views to this effect were voiced during the Sadat regime (1970–81), when
Muqaddima fÈ fiqh al-lugha al-Æarabiyya was first published.
17. For a criticism of the conceptual framework of this book, see Shahin (n.d.: 175–84).
18. The National Pact (1943) was an unwritten understanding between Bishara al-
Khury, a Maronite Christian, and Riyad al-Sulh, a Sunni Muslim, to regulate the
division of political power among the various confessional communities in Lebanon.
Under this understanding, the presidency was allocated to the Maronites and the
office of prime minister to the Sunnis.
19. For a discussion of confessionalism in Lebanon, see ÆAmil (1989), Dahir (1986),
Ghalyun (1979), Hallaq (1988), Khalifa (1985), Nassar (1981), Phares (1995),
Rondot (1984) and Shahin (n.d.).
20. See Douglas (1966) and Thomas (1991) for an analysis of the concept of purity in
social practices. The latter is devoted to this concept in discussions of language
reform.
21. See Smith (1997) for an excellent discussion of the notion of the “golden age” in
national renewal.
22. See Schöpflin (1997) for other contexts in which what he calls the “myth of
election” obtains.

—249 —
Bibliography
works in arabic cited in the text
ÆAbd al-DÅ’im, ÆAbdalla (1993), “al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya bayn al-shuÆËr wa-l-
Æaql”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-
muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 455–63.
(First published in al-ådÅb, 9 (1960): 4–6, 76–8.)
ÆAbd al-Malik, Anwar (1983), Nah∂at mißr (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma
li-l-KitÅb).
ÆAbd al-Mu’min, Mu˙ammad al-SaÆÈd (1990), “al-ShuÆËbiyya al-˙adÈtha”, in
WaqÅ’iÆ al-nadwa al-qawmiyya li-muwÅjahat al-dass al-shuÆËbÈ (Baghdad: DÅr al-
Óurriyya li-l-ÊibÅÆa), vol. 3, pp. 31–50.
ÆAbd al-TawwÅb, Rama∂Ån (1971), “Mushkilat al-∂Åd wa-turÅth al-∂Åd wa-l-ΩÅ’”,
Majallat al-majmaÆ al-ÆilmÈ al-ÆirÅqÈ, 21: 214–40.
—— (1990), “al-ShuÆËbiyyËn al-judud wa-mawqifuhum min al-Æarabiyya al-fuß˙Å”,
in WaqÅ’iÆ al-nadwa al-qawmiyya li-muwÅjahat al-dass al-shuÆËbÈ (Baghdad: DÅr al-
Óurriyya li-l-ÊibÅÆa), vol. 1, pp. 353–73.
æAbdalla, NabÈh BayyËmÈ (1975), Ta†awwur fikrat al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya fÈ mißr
(Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
AbË-KhÅ†ir, AmÈn (1913), “al-Jinsiyya wa-l-lugha”, in YËsuf QazmÅ KhËrÈ (ed.),
NajÅ˙ al-umma al-Æarabiyya fÈ lughatihÅ al-aßliyya (Beirut: DÅr al-ÓamrÅ’, 1991),
pp. 136–43.
AbË SaÆd, A˙mad (1994), “al-Lahja al-lubnÅniyya fÈ ußËlihÅ al-Æarabiyya”, al-Fikr al-
ÆArabÈ, 277: 7–19.
AbË Sayf, YËsuf (1987), al-AqbÅ† wa-l-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya: dirÅsa isti†lÅÆiyya
(Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
al-AfghÅnÈ, SaÆÈd (1971), Min ˙Å∂ir al-lugha al-Æarabiyya (Damascus: DÅr al-Fikr).
(Second printing.)
ÆAflaq, Michel (1993a), “FÈ al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ,
vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz
DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 78–80. (First published in 1940.)
—— (1993b), “al-Qawmiyya ˙ubb qabl kull shay’”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol.
1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt
al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 74–5. (First published in 1940.)
—— (1993c), “al-Qawmiyya qadar mu˙abbab”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1:
al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt

the arabic language and national identity
—250 —
al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 76–7. (First published in 1940.)
A˙mad, KhalÈl (1981), Dawr al-lisÅn fÈ binÅ’ al-insÅn Æind ZakÈ al-ArsËzÈ (Damascus:
DÅr al-Su’Ål).
ÆAlÅ’ al-DÈn, BakrÈ (1971), “Tajrubat al-lugha ladÅ al-ArsËzÈ”, al-MaÆrifa, 13: 127–
45.
al-ÆAlÅylÈ, ÆAbdalla (1938), Muqaddima li-dars lughat al-Æarab (Cairo: al-Ma†baÆa al-
ÆAßriyya).
—— (1954), al-MuÆjam (Beirut: DÅr al-MuÆjam al-ÆArabÈ).
—— (1963), al-MarjiÆ (Beirut: DÅr al-MuÆjam al-ÆArabÈ).
—— (1996), DustËr al-Æarab al-qawmÈ (Beirut: DÅr al-JadÈd). (First published in
1938.)
al-AlfÈ, ÆAlÈ (1990), “LuwÈs ÆAwa∂ widÅÆan”, Adab wa-naqd, 65–75.
ÆAlÈ, SaÆÈd IsmÅÆÈl (1995), Dawr al-taÆlÈm al-mißrÈ fÈ al-ni∂Ål al-wa†anÈ zaman al-i˙tilÅl
al-barÈ†ÅnÈ (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
al-ÆAlÈ, ÍÅli˙ A˙mad (1986), “al-ShuÆËr al-qawmÈ al-ÆarabÈ Æabr al-tÅrÈkh: muqawwimÅt
al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-maΩÅhiruhÅ Æabr al-tÅrÈkh”, in Ta†awwur al-fikr al-
qawmÈ al-ÆarabÈ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 19–51.
ÆAmÅra, Mu˙ammad (1976), al-JÅmiÆa al-islÅmiyya wa-l-fikra al-qawmiyya Æind
Muß†afÅ KÅmil (Beirut: al-Mu’assasa al-ÆArabiyya li-l-DirÅsÅt wa-l-Nashr).
—— (1984), Fajr al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya (Beirut: DÅr al-Wa˙da).
—— (1995), SalÅma MËsÅ: ijtihÅd khÅ†i’ am ÆamÅla ˙a∂Åriyya? (Cairo: DÅr al-Ía˙wa).
—— (1997), ÆIndamÅ aßba˙at mißr Æarabiyya islÅmiyya (Cairo: DÅr al-ShurËq).
Æåmil, MahdÈ (1989), FÈ al-dawla al-†Å’ifiyya (Beirut: DÅr al-FÅrÅbÈ). (First published
in 1988.)
al-AnbÅrÈ, AbË al-BarakÅt KamÅl al-DÈn ÆAbd al-Ra˙mÅn Ibn Mu˙ammad (n.d.),
LumaÆ al-’adilla fÈ ÆußËl al-na˙w, ed. ÆA†iyya Æåmir (Stockholm: Almqvist and
Wiksell).
al-AnbÅrÈ, Mu˙ammad Ibn al-QÅsim (1987), KitÅb al-A∂dÅd, ed. Mu˙ammad AbË
al-Fa∂l IbrÅhÈm (Sidon and Beirut: al-Maktaba al-ÆAßriyya).
AnÈs, IbrÅhÈm (1960), Mustaqbal al-lugha al-Æarabiyya al-mushtaraka (Cairo: The
Arab League).
—— (1969), “Hal al-lugha al-Æarabiyya lugha badawiyya?”, Majallat majmaÆ al-lugha
al-Æarabiyya, 24: 172–80.
—— (1970), al-Lugha bayn al-qawmiyya wa-l-ÆÅlamiyya (Cairo: DÅr al-MaÆÅrif).
ÆArafa, ÆAbd al-ÆAzÈz ÆAbd al-MuÆ†È (1985), Qa∂iyyat al-iÆjÅz al-qur’ÅnÈ wa-atharuhÅ fÈ
tadwÈn al-balÅgha al-Æarabiyya (Beirut: Æålam al-Kutub).
ArslÅn, ShakÈb (1994), “Al-ÆUrËba jÅmiÆa kulliya”, in Mu˙ammad KÅmil al-Kha†Èb
(ed.), Al-Qawmiyya wa-l-wa˙da (Damascus: WazÅrat al-ThaqÅfa), vol. 1, pp.
287–311. (First published in 1940.)
al-ArsËzÈ, ZakÈ (1972–6), al-Mu’allafÅt al-kÅmila, 6 vols (Damascus: Ma†ÅbiÆ al-IdÅra
al-SiyÅsiyya li-l-Jaysh wa-l-QuwwÅt al-Musalla˙a).
ÆA††År, A˙mad ÆAbd al-GhafËr (1965), al-Za˙f ÆalÅ lughat al-Qur’an (Beirut: no
publisher).
ÆAwa∂, LuwÈs (1947), Plutoland (Cairo: Ma†baÆat al-Karnak).

bibliography
—251 —
—— (1965), MudhakkarÅt †Ålib baÆtha (Cairo: al-KitÅb al-DhahabÈ).
—— (1993), Muqaddima fÈ fiqh al-lugha al-Æarabiyya (Cairo: DÅr SÈnÅ). (First
published in 1980.)
ÆAwn, MÈkhÅ’Èl (1983), “IbrÅhÈm al-YÅzijÈ wa-l-ÆurËba”, al-BÅ˙ith, 26: 137–45.
al-ÆAysamÈ, ShiblÈ (1994), “al-TÅrÈkh fÈ khidmat al-umma”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-
qawmÈ, vol. 3: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-islÅm wa-l-tÅrÈkh wa-l-insÅniyya
(Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 130–3. (First published in al-
ådÅb, 4 (1956): 17–19.)
ÆAyyÅd, ShukrÈ (1992), “MunÅqashat al-afkÅr lÅ iÆdÅmuhÅ”, al-QÅhira, 119: 29.
ÆåzËry, NajÈb (n.d.), YaqΩat al-umma al-Æarabiyya, trans. from the French Le Réveil de
la nation arabe dans l’asie turque by A˙mad AbË Mil˙im (Beirut: al-Mu’assasa al-
ÆArabiyya li-l-DirÅsÅt wa-l-Nashr).
BaÆalbakÈ, RamzÈ (1984), “al-NaΩariyya al-lughawiyya Æind al-ÆAlÅylÈ”, in al-Shaykh
ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ mufakkiran wa-lughawiyyan wa-faqÈhan: dirÅsÅt wa-shahÅdÅt
(Beirut: Itti˙Åd al-KuttÅb al-LubnÅniyyÈn wa-DÅr Ibn KhaldËn), pp. 9–26.
BarakÅt, SalÈm (1977/8), al-Fikr al-qawmÈ wa-ususuh al-falsafiyya Æind ZakÈ al-ArsËzÈ
(Damascus: University of Damascus).
al-BarrÈ, ÆAbdalla KhËrshÈd (1992), al-QabÅ’il al-Æarabiyya fÈ mißr fÈ al-qurËn al-
thalÅtha al-ËlÅ li-l-hijra (Cairo: Al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
al-BaßÈr, ÆAbd al-RazzÅq (1993a), “Óawl ‘al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-˙ayÅ’”, in
QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-
muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 439–41.
(First published in al-ådÅb, 7 (1960): 64–5.)
—— (1993b), “Tasmiyat al-khalÈj bi-l-khalÈj al-ÆarabÈ”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ,
vol. 3: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-islÅm wa-l-tÅrÈkh wa-l-insÅniyya (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 351–4. (First published in Majallat al-
aqlÅm, 1/8 (1965): 64–7.)
Bayhum, Mu˙ammad JamÈl (1957), al-ÆUrËba wa-l-shuÆËbiyyÅt al-˙adÈtha (Beirut:
DÅr al-KashshÅf).
al-BazzÅz, ÆAbd al-Ra˙mÅn (1956), al-Tarbiya al-qawmiyya (BaghdÅd: Ma†baÆat al-
ÆånÈ). (Pages 9–47 are reproduced in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-
Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt
al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 259–79.
—— (1993), “Ta˙rÈr al-qawmiyya wa-taÆrÈfuhÅ”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1:
al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt
al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 524–55. (First published in 1964.)
bin SalÅma, al-BashÈr (1974), al-Shakhßiyya al-tËnisiyya: khaßÅ’ißuhÅ wa-
muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Tunis: Mu’assasat ÆAbd al-ÆAzÈz bin ÆAbdalla).
al-BishrÈ, ÊÅriq (1982), al-MuslimËn wa-l-aqbÅ† fÈ i†År al-jamÅÆa al-wa†aniyya (Beirut:
DÅr al-Wa˙da).
—— (1998), Bayn al-islÅm wa-l-ÆurËba (Cairo: DÅr al-ShurËq).
al-BÈ†År, NadÈm (1979), Min al-tajzi’a ilÅ al-wa˙da (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da
al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1981), ÓudËd al-iqlÈmiyya al-jadÈda (Beirut: MaÆhad al-InmÅ’ al-ÆArabÈ).

the arabic language and national identity
—252 —
—— (1982), ÓudËd al-huwiyya al-qawmiyya (Beirut: DÅr al-Wa˙da).
—— (1993), FÈ al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya (Baghdad: Maktabat al-ShabÅb al-QawmÈ),
first published in 1948. (Pages 7–68 are reproduced in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ,
vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz
DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 182–208.)
BudËr, ÆAlÈ (1993), “Min ΩalÅm al-tajzi’a ilÅ fajr al-wa˙da”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-
qawmÈ, vol. 2: al-Wa˙da al-Æarabiyya (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-
ÆArabiyya), pp. 219–33. (First published in al-ådÅb, 1 (1963): 3–4, 74–8.)
BËluß, JawÅd (1973), LubnÅn wa-l-buldÅn al-mujÅwira (Beirut: Mu’assasat BadrÅn wa-
ShurakÅh li-l-ÊibÅÆa wa-l-Nashr).
al-BundÅq, Mu˙ammad ÍÅli˙ (1980), al-MustashriqËn wa-tarjamat al-qur’Ån al-karÈm
(Beirut: DÅr al-åfÅq al-JadÈda).
Burj, Mu˙ammad ÆAbd al-Ra˙mÅn (1992), Mißr wa-l-˙araka al-Æarabiyya (al-Hay’a
al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
al-DahhÅn, ÍÅli˙ ÆAbdu (1993), “Óawl ‘al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-
mutashakkikËn’”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya,
fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya),
pp. 442–5. (First published in al-ådÅb, 7 (1960): 64–5.)
ÎÅhir, MasÆËd (1986), al-JudhËr al-tÅrÈkhiyya li-l-mas’ala al-†Å’ifiyya al-lubnÅniyya:
1697–1861 (Beirut: MaÆhad al-InmÅ’ al-ÆArabÈ). (First published in 1981.)
DhihnÈ, Ma˙mËd al-ÓanafÈ (1990), “al-Dass al-shuÆËbÈ ÆalÅ al-lugha al-Æarabiyya wa-
ÅdÅbihÅ”, in WaqÅ’iÆ al-nadwa al-qawmiyya li-muwÅjahat al-dass al-shuÆËbÈ (Baghdad:
DÅr al-Óurriyya li-l-ÊibÅÆa), vol. 3, pp. 189–214.
Dimashqiyya, ÆAfÈf (1984), “al-Shaykh ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ lughawiyyan”, in al-
Shaykh ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ mufakkiran wa-lughawiyyan wa-faqÈhan: dirÅsÅt wa-
shahÅdÅt (Beirut: Itti˙Åd al-KuttÅb al-LubnÅniyyÈn wa-DÅr Ibn KhaldËn), pp.
45–53.
ÎËma†, Jabr (1991), “al-ÆArabiyya wa-l-madrasa al-kuliyya”, in YËsuf QazmÅ KhËrÈ
(ed.), NajÅ˙ al-umma al-Æarabiyya fÈ lughatihÅ al-aßliyya (Beirut: DÅr al-ÓamrÅ’),
pp. 97–103.
al-DËrÈ, ÆAbd al-ÆAzÈz (1960), al-JudhËr al-tÅrÈkhiyya li-l-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya
(Beirut: DÅr al-ÆIlm li-l-malÅyÈn).
—— (1981), al-JudhËr al-tÅrÈkhiyya li-l-shuÆËbiyya (Beirut: DÅr al-ÊalÈÆa). (Third
printing.)
—— (1982), “al-IslÅm wa-intishÅr al-lugha al-Æarabiyya wa-l-taÆrÈb”, in al-Qawmiyya
al-Æarabiyya wa-l-islÅm (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 61–90.
FÅkhËrÈ, ÆUmar (1981), Kayfa yanha∂ al-Æarab? (Beirut: DÅr al-åfÅq al-JadÈda).
Fara˙, IlyÅs (1994), “al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-tÅrÈkh”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-
qawmÈ, vol. 3: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-islÅm wa-l-tÅrÈkh wa-l-insÅniyya
(Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 118–27. (First delivered as a
lecture in Aleppo in 1955 and published in Baghdad in 1973.)
Faraj, NabÈl (1992), “LuwÈs ÆAwa∂ amÅm ma˙Åkim al-taftÈsh”, al-QÅhira, 119: 21–3.
Far˙Åt, A˙mad Óasan (1983), al-Umma fÈ dalÅlatihÅ al-Æarabiyya wa-l-qur’Åniyya
(Amman: DÅr ÆAmmÅr li-l-Nashr wa-l-TawzÈÆ).

bibliography
—253 —
Fayßal, ShukrÈ (1971), “Tajrubat al-lugha ladÅ al-ÓußrÈ”, al-MaÆrifa, 13: 109–26.
al-FiqqÈ, Muß†afÅ (1985), al-AqbÅ† fÈ al-siyÅsa al-mißriyya (Cairo: DÅr al-ShurËq).
Fück, Johan (1980), al-ÆArabiyya: dirÅsÅt fÈ al-lugha wa-l-lahajÅt wa-l-asÅlÈb, trans.
from the German by Rama∂Ån ÆAbd al-TawwÅb (Cairo: Maktabat al-KhÅnjÈ).
GhalyËn, BurhÅn (1979), al-Mas’ala al-†Å’ifiyya wa-mushkilat al-aqaliyyÅt (Beirut:
DÅr al-ÊalÈÆa).
al-GhazÅlÈ, Mu˙ammad (1998), ÓaqÈqat al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-us†Ërat al-baÆth
al-ÆarabÈ (Cairo: Nah∂at Mißr).
al-ÓÅjj, KamÅl YËsuf (1959a), DifÅÆan Æan al-Æarabiyya (Beirut: ManshËrÅt ÆUwaydÅt).
—— (1959b), FÈ al-qawmiyya wa-l-insÅniyya (Beirut: ManshËrÅt ÆUwaydÅt).
—— (1959c), al-Qawmiyya laysat mar˙ala (Beirut: ManshËrÅt ÆUwaydÅt).
—— (1966), FÈ ghurrat al-˙aqÈqa (Beirut: ManshËrÅt al-Nadwa al-LubnÅniyya).
—— (1978), FÈ falsafat al-lugha (Beirut: DÅr al-NahÅr li-l-Nashr). (Second printing;
first published in 1956.)
ÓallÅq, ÓassÅn (1988), al-TayyÅrÅt al-siyÅsiyya fÈ lubnÅn: 1943–52 (Beirut: al-DÅr al-
JÅmiÆiyya).
HÅshim, ÓÅzim (1992), “AsrÅr jadÈda ˙awl muqaddima fÈ fiqh al-lugha al-Æarabiyya”,
al-QÅhira, 119: 194–7.
ÓÅwÈ, KhalÈl (1982), “al-Nah∂a wa-l-ba˙th Æan al-huwiyya”, al-Fikr al-ÆarabÈ al-
muÆÅßir, 17: 30–45.
Haykal, Mu˙ammad Óusayn (1986), Thawrat al-adab (Cairo: DÅr al-MaÆÅrif). (First
published in 1933.)
Óusayn, Mu˙ammad Mu˙ammad (1979), al-IslÅm wa-l-˙a∂Åra al-gharbiyya (Beirut:
al-Maktab al-IslÅmÈ).
—— (1983), al-IttijÅhÅt al-wa†aniyya fÈ al-adab al-muÆÅßir, 2 vols (Beirut: Mu’assasat
al-RisÅla). (Sixth printing.)
Óusayn, ÊÅha (1944), Mustaqbal al-thaqÅfa fÈ mißr (Cairo: Ma†baÆat al-MaÆÅrif).
(First published in 1938).
—— (1957), “al-Lugha al-fuß˙Å wa-taÆlÈm al-shaÆb”, Majallat al-majmaÆ al-ÆilmÈ al-
ÆarabÈ, 32: 44–56.
—— (1982), KhißÅm wa-naqd (Beirut: DÅr al-ÆIlm li-l-MalÅyÈn). (Eleventh printing.)
—— (1985), KalimÅt (Beirut: DÅr al-ÆIlm li-l-MalÅyÈn). (Fifth printing.)
al-ÓußrÈ, SÅ†iÆ (1984a), årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-wa†aniyya wa-l-qawmiyya, vol. 1 (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1984b), A˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-tarbiya wa-l-ijtimÅÆ, vol. 2 (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-
Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985a), al-ÆUrËba bayn duÆÅtihÅ wa-muÆÅri∂ÈhÅ, vol. 4 (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt
al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985b), Mu˙Å∂arÅt fÈ nushË’ al-fikra al-qawmiyya, vol. 5 (Beirut: Markiz
DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985c), årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-Æilm wa-l-akhlÅq wa-l-thaqÅfa, vol. 6 (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985d), årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, vol. 7 (Beirut: Markiz
DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).

the arabic language and national identity
—254 —
—— (1985e), årÅ’ wa-a˙ÅdÈth fÈ al-tÅrÈkh wa-l-ijtimÅÆ, vol. 8 (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt
al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985f), al-ÆUrËba awwalan, vol. 9 (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-
ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985g), DifÅÆ Æan al-ÆurËba, vol. 10 (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-
ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985h), FÈ al-lugha wa-l-adab wa-ÆalÅqatihimÅ bi-l-qawmiyya, vol. 11 (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985i), Óawl al-wa˙da al-thaqÅfiyya al-Æarabiyya, vol. 12 (Beirut: Markiz
DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1985j), Óawl al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, vol. 14 (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-
Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
Ibn ÆAbd Rabbih, ShihÅb al-DÈn A˙mad (1928), al-ÆIqd al-farÈd, 4 vols (Cairo: al-
Ma†baÆa al-Azhariyya).
Ibn al-Qayyim, Shams al-DÈn AbË ÆAbdalla Mu˙ammad Ibn AbË Bakr Ibn AyyËb
al-ZarÆÈ (n.d.), al-FawÅ’id al-mushawwiq ilÅ ÆulËm al-qur’Ån wa-Æilm al-bayÅn
(Beirut: DÅr al-Kutub al-ÆIlmiyya).
Ibn al-SarrÅj, AbË Bakr Mu˙ammad Ibn Sahl (1985), al-UßËl fÈ al-na˙w, 2 vols, ed.
ÆAbd al-Óusayn al-FatlÈ (Beirut: Mu’assasat al-RisÅla).
Ibn Durayd, AbË Bakr Mu˙ammad Ibn al-Óasan (1958), al-IshtiqÅq, ed. ÆAbd al-
SalÅm Mu˙ammad HÅrËn (Cairo: Maktabat al-KhÅnjÈ).
Ibn FÅris, AbË al-Óusayn A˙mad (1993), al-ÍÅ˙ibÈ fÈ fiqh al-lugha wa-masÅ’ilihÅ wa-
sunan al-Æarab fÈ kalÅmihÅ, ed. ÆUmar FÅrËq al-ÊabbÅÆ (Beirut: Maktabat al-
MaÆÅrif).
Ibn Óazm, AbË Mu˙ammad ÆAlÈ Ibn A˙mad (1984), al-I˙kÅm fÈ ußËl al-a˙kÅm, 6
vols (Cairo: DÅr al-ÓadÈth).
Ibn JaÆfar, QudÅma (1982), Naqd al-nathr (Beirut: DÅr al-Kutub al-ÆIlmiyya).
Ibn JinnÈ, AbË al-Fat˙ ÆUthmÅn (n.d.), al-KhaßÅ’iß, 3 vols, ed. Mu˙ammad ÆAlÈ al-
NajjÅr (Beirut: DÅr al-KitÅb al-LubnÅnÈ).
—— (1993), Sirr ßinÅÆat al-iÆrÅb, 2 vols, ed. Óasan HindÅwÈ (Damascus: DÅr al-
Qalam).
Ibn Qutayba, AbË Mu˙ammad ÆAbdalla Ibn Muslim (n.d.), Adab al-kÅtib, ed.
Mu˙ammad Mu˙yÈ al-DÈn ÆAbd al-ÓalÈm (Beirut: DÅr al-Ma†bËÆÅt al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1913), KitÅb al-Æarab, in RasÅ’il al-BulaghÅ’, ed. Mu˙ammad Kurd ÆAlÈ (Cairo:
DÅr al-Kutub al-ÆArabiyya al-KubrÅ).
IbrÅhÈm, ÆAmr (1981/2), “MafhËm al-umma bayn lugha wa-ukhrÅ”, trans. from the
French by AdËnÈs al-ÆAkr, al-Fikr al-ÆarabÈ al-muÆÅßir, 17: 64–77.
JabbËr, ÆAbdalla (1991), “Mu˙ibbË al-taqaddum li-l-Æarab hum yufa∂∂ilËn taÆlÈmahum
bi-l-lugha al-Æarabiyya Æalayh fÈ mÅ siwÅhÅ”, in YËsuf QazmÅ KhËrÈ (ed.), NajÅ˙ al-
umma al-Æarabiyya fÈ lughatihÅ al-aßliyya (Beirut: DÅr al-ÓamrÅ’), pp. 17–19.
al-JÅbirÈ, Mu˙ammad Æåbid (1995), Mas’alat al-huwiyya: al-ÆurËba wa-l-islÅm wa-l-
gharb (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
al-JÅ˙iΩ, AbË ÆUthmÅn Ibn Ba˙r (1932), al-BayÅn wa-l-tabyÈn, 3 vols, ed. Óasan al-
SandËsÈ (Cairo: al-Ma†baÆa al-Ra˙mÅniyya).

bibliography
—255 —
—— (1938–45), al-ÓayawÅn, 6 vols, ed. ÆAbd al-SalÅm Mu˙ammad HÅrËn (Cairo:
Maktabat Muß†afÅ al-BÅbÈ al-ÓalabÈ wa-AwlÅdih).
—— (1964), RasÅ’il al-JÅ˙iΩ, ed. ÆAbd al-SalÅm Mu˙ammad HÅrËn (Cairo:
Maktabat al-KhÅnjÈ).
—— (1969), al-Ma˙Åsin wa-l-a∂dÅd, ed. FawzÈ ÆA†awÈ (Beirut: al-Sharika al-
LubnÅniyya li-l-KitÅb).
JalÅl, Mu˙ammad NuÆmÅn and MajdÈ al-MutawallÈ (1997), Huwiyyat mißr (Cairo:
al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
al-JamÈÆÈ, ÆAbd al-MunÆim al-DasËqÈ (1983), MajmaÆ al-lugha al-Æarabiyya: dirÅsa
tÅrÈkhiyya (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
Jeha, Michel (1992), IbrÅhÈm al-YÅzijÈ (London: Riyad El-Rayyes Books Ltd).
al-JundÈ, Anwar (1977), ÊÅha Óusayn: ˙ayÅtuh wa-fikruh fÈ mÈzÅn al-islÅm (Cairo:
DÅr al-IÆtißÅm).
—— (1982), al-Fuß˙Å lughat al-Qur’Ån (Beirut: DÅr al-KitÅb al-LubnÅnÈ).
—— (1984), Mu˙Åkamat fikr ÊÅha Óusayn (Cairo: DÅr al-IÆtißÅm).
al-KhafÅjÈ, Ibn SinÅn AbË Mu˙ammad ÆAbdalla Ibn Mu˙ammad Ibn SaÆÈd (1982),
Sirr al-faßÅ˙a (Beirut: DÅr al-Kutub al-ÆIlmiyya).
Khalafalla, Mu˙ammad A˙mad (1981), “al-TakwÈn al-tÅrÈkhÈ li-mahÅfÈm al-umma,
al-qawmiyya, al-wa†aniyya, al-dawla wa-l-ÆalÅqa fÈmÅ baynahÅ”, in al-Qawmiyya
al-Æarabiyya wa-l-islÅm (Beirut: Markaz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 17–29.
—— (1990), ÆUrËbat al-islÅm (Rabat: al-Majlis al-QawmÈ li-l-ThaqÅfa al-ÆArabiyya).
—— (1992) “al-TurÅth al-islÅmÈ shahid al-ikhtilÅf al-fikrÈ”, al-QÅhira, 119: 30–1.
KhalÈfa, ÆIßÅm KamÅl (1985), FÈ muÆtarak al-qa∂iyya al-lubnÅniyya (no place of
publication or publisher).
al-KharbË†lÈ, ÆAlÈ ÓusnÈ (n.d.), al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya min al-fajr ilÅ al-Ωuhr
(Cairo: ÆsÅ al-BÅbÈ al-ÓalabÈ wa-ShurakÅh).
al-Kha†Èb, Mu˙ammad ÆAlÈ (1983), al-ÍirÅÆ al-adabÈ maÆ al-shuÆËbiyya: al-JÅ˙iΩ [wa-]
al-shÅÆir al-QarawÈ (Beirut: DÅr al-ÓadÅtha).
KhÅ†ir, Fu’Åd al-MursÈ (1985), Óawl al-fikra al-Æarabiyya fÈ mißr: dirÅsa fÈ tÅrÈkh al-fikr
al-mißrÈ al-muÆÅßir (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
KhËrÈ, Ra’Èf (1984), “MarjiÆ al-ÆAlÅylÈ wa-l-muÆÅnÅ al-ÈjÅbiyya li-mashÅkil al-
Æarabiyya”, in al-Shaykh ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ mufakkiran wa-lughawiyyan wa-faqÈhan:
dirÅsÅt wa-shahÅdÅt (Beirut: Itti˙Åd al-KuttÅb al-LubnÅniyyÈn wa-DÅr Ibn
KhaldËn), pp. 171–83.
KhËrÈ, YËsuf QazmÅ (ed.) (1991), NajÅ˙ al-umma al-Æarabiyya fÈ lughatihÅ al-aßliyya
(Beirut: DÅr al-ÓamrÅ’).
—— (ed.) (1993a), al-Shaykh IbrÅhÈm al-YÅzijÈ: Ab˙Åth lughawiyya (Beirut: DÅr al-
ÓamrÅ’).
—— (ed.) (1993b), As’ila ilÅ majallat al-bayÅn wa-l-∂iyÅ’ wa-ajwibat al-Shaykh
IbrÅhÈm al-YÅzijÈ ÆalayhÅ (1897–1906) (Beirut: DÅr al-ÓamrÅ’).
KÈlÅnÈ, Mu˙ammad Sayyid (n.d.), al-Adab al-qib†È qadÈman wa-˙adÈthan (Cairo: DÅr
al-FarajÅnÈ).
La˙˙Ëd, ÆAbdalla (1993), LubnÅn: ÆarabÈ al-wajh, ÆarabÈ al-lisÅn (Beirut: DÅr al-ÆIlm
li-l-MalÅyÈn).

the arabic language and national identity
—256 —
Lu†fÈ al-Sayyid, A˙mad (1945), al-MuntakhabÅt, 2 vols (Cairo: Maktabat al-AnglË
al-Mißriyya).
Ma˙ÅfΩa, ÆAlÈ (1980), al-IttijÅhÅt al-fikriyya Æind al-Æarab fÈ Æaßr al-nah∂a, 1789–1914:
al-ittijÅhÅt al-dÈniyya wa-l-siyÅsiyya wa-l-ijtimÅÆiyya wa-l-Æilmiyya (Beirut: al-Ahliyya
li-l-Nashr wa-l-TawzÈ’). (Third printing.)
al-MalÅ’ika, NÅzik (1993a), “al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-˙Åya”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-
fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ
(Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 414–22. (First published in
al-ådÅb, 5 (1960): 1–4, 67–8.)
—— (1993b), “al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-mutashakkikËn”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr
al-qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 423–31. (First published in al-ådÅb,
7 (1960): 1–5.)
al-MarrÅkishÈ, Mu˙ammad ÍÅli˙ (1985), Mu˙ammad RashÈd Ri∂Å min khilÅl majallat
al-manÅr (1898–1935) (Tunis: al-DÅr al-TËnisiyya li-l-Nashr).
al-MarßafÈ, Óasan (1982), RisÅlat al-kalim al-thamÅn, ed. KhÅlid ZiyÅda (Beirut: DÅr
al-ÊalÈÆa).
—— (1984), RisÅlat al-kalim al-thamÅn, ed. A˙mad ZakariyyÅ al-Shilq (Cairo: al-
Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
Ma†ar, ÆAbd al-ÆAzÈz (1967), La˙n al-ÆÅmma fÈ ∂aw’ al-dirÅsÅt al-lughawiyya al-˙adÈtha
(Cairo: DÅr al-KÅtib al-ÆArabÈ li-l-ÊibÅÆa wa-l-Nashr).
Ma†lËb, A˙mad (1987), MuÆjam al-muß†ala˙Åt al-balÅghiyya wa-ta†awwurihÅ, 3 vols
(Baghdad: al-MajmaÆ al-ÆIlmÈ al-ÆIrÅqÈ).
al-MiÆdÅwÈ, HÅnÈ (1978), “al-AqbÅ† wa-qa∂iyyat al-ÆurËba”, al-Fikr al-ÆarabÈ, 54–5: 352–65.
MijlÈ, NasÈm (1995), LuwÈs ÆAwa∂ wa-maÆÅrikuh al-adabiyya (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-
Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
Mruwwa, Óusayn (1984), “al-Shaykh ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ faqÈhan”, in al-Shaykh
ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ mufakkiran wa-lughawiyyan wa-faqÈhan: dirÅsÅt wa-shahÅdÅt
(Beirut: Itti˙Åd al-KuttÅb al-LubnÅniyyÈn wa-DÅr Ibn KhaldËn), pp. 115–54.
Mu˙ammad, ÆAbd al-Æå†È (1978), “Ta†awwur al-fikra al-Æarabiyya fÈ mißr”, al-Fikr al-
ÆarabÈ, 54–5: 295–318.
Mu˙ammad, La†Èf KarÈm (1990), “al-ShuÆËbiyya al-˙adÈtha: al-wasÅ’il wa-l-ahdÅf”,
in WaqÅ’iÆ al-nadwa al-qawmiyya li-muwÅjahat al-dass al-shuÆËbÈ (Baghdad: DÅr al-
Óurriyya li-l-ÊibÅÆa), vol. 3, pp. 9–30.
Mu˙ammad, Sayyid Mu˙ammad (1996), Haykal wa-l-siyÅsa al-usbËÆiyya (Cairo: al-
Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
al-Mu˙tasib, ÆAbd al-MajÈd (1980), ÊÅha Óusayn mufakkiran (Amman: Maktabat
al-Nah∂a al-IslÅmiyya).
MËsÅ, SalÅma (1947), al-BalÅgha al-Æaßriyya wa-l-lugha al-Æarabiyya (SalÅma MËsÅ li-
l-Nashr wa-l-TawzÈÆ). (First published in 1945.)
—— (1964), Mißr aßl al-˙a∂Åra (SalÅma MËsÅ li-l-Nashr wa-l-TawzÈÆ). (First pub-
lished in 1935.)
—— (1998), al-Yawm wa-l-ghad (SalÅma MËsÅ li-l-Nashr wa-l-TawzÈÆ). (First
published in 1928.)

bibliography
—257 —
Muß†afÅ, IbrÅhÈm (1959), I˙yÅ’ al-na˙w (Cairo: Lajnat al-Ta’lÈf wa-l-Tarjama wa-l-
Nashr). (First published in 1937.)
al-MutanabbÈ, AbË al-Êayyib (1938), Shar˙ dÈwÅn al-MutanabbÈ, 4 vols, ed. ÆAbd al-
Ra˙mÅn al-BarqËqÈ (Cairo: Ma†baÆat al-IstiqÅma).
al-NaqqÅsh, RajÅ’ (1988), al-InÆizÅliyyËn fÈ mißr (Riyadh: DÅr al-MarrÈkh).
—— (1993), “al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-khayÅliyyËn”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-fikr al-
qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 446–54. (First published in al-ådÅb,
8 (1960): 1–4.)
Naßr, Naßr al-DÈn ÆAbd-l-ÓamÈd (1984), Mißr wa-˙arakat al-jÅmiÆa al-islÅmiyya:
1882–1914 (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
NaßßÅr, Óusayn (1980), Mißr al-Æarabiyya (Beirut: Iqra’).
NaßßÅr, NÅßÈf (1981), Na˙w mujtamaÆ jadÈd: muqaddimÅt asÅsiyya fÈ naqd al-mujtamÆ
al-†Å’ifÈ (Beirut: DÅr al-ÊalÈÆa). (First published in 1970.)
—— (1992), MafhËm al-umma bayn al-dÈn wa-l-tÅrÈkh: dirÅsa fÈ madlËl al-umma fÈ al-
turÅth al-ÆarabÈ wa-l-islÅmÈ (Beirut: DÅr AmwÅj). (First published in 1978.)
—— (1994), TaßawwurÅt al-umma al-muÆÅßira: dirÅsa ta˙lÈliyya li-mafÅhÈm al-umma fÈ
al-fikr al-˙adÈth wa-l-muÆÅßir (Beirut: DÅr AmwÅj). (First published in 1986.)
NË˙, ÆAlÈ (1994), “IshkÅliyyat al-lugha al-falsafiyya Æind ZakÈ al-ArsËzÈ”, al-Fikr al-
ÆarabÈ, 76: 67–84.
al-Nußß, ÆIzzat (1994), “al-TÅrÈkh bayna al-qawmiyya wa-l-insÅniyya”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ
al-fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 3: al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-islÅm wa-l-tÅrÈkh wa-l-
insÅniyya (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 193–211. (First
published in al-ådÅb, 6 (1961): 69–72.)
QaddËra, ZÅhiya (1972), al-ShuÆËbiyya wa-atharuhÅ al-ijtimÅÆÈ wa-l-siyÅsÈ fÈ al-˙ayÅt al-
islÅmiyya fÈ al-Æaßr al-ÆabbÅsÈ al-awwal (Beirut: DÅr al-KitÅb al-LubnÅnÈ).
al-QÅlÈ, AbË ÆAlÈ IsmÅÆÈl Ibn al-QÅsim (1978), al-AmÅlÈ fÈ lughat al-Æarab, 2 vols
(Beirut: DÅr al-Kutub al-ÆIlmiyya).
QandÈl, BayyËmÈ (1992), “Nanquduh lÅ nußÅdiruh”, al-QÅhira, 119: 32–8.
QarqË†, DhËqÅn (1972), Ta†awwur al-fikra al-Æarabiyya fÈ mißr (Beirut: al-Mu’assasa
al-ÆArabiyya li-l-DirÅsÅt wa-l-Nashr).
al-QÅsimÈ, ÍalÅ˙ al-DÈn (1959), åthÅruh: ßafa˙Åt min tÅrÈkh al-nah∂a al-Æarabiyya fÈ
awÅ’il al-qarn al-ÆishrÈn, ed. Mu˙ibb al-DÈn al-Kha†Èb (Cairo: al-Ma†baÆa al-
Salafiyya).
al-QaysÈ, NËrÈ ÓamËdÈ (1986), “al-Fikr al-qawmÈ wa-i˙yÅ’ al-turÅth”, in Ta†awwur
al-fikr al-qawmÈ al-ÆarabÈ (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 73–87.
al-QirnÈ, ÆIzzat (1995), FÈ al-fikr al-mißrÈ al-˙adÈth (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-
Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
al-RÅfiÆÈ, Muß†afÅ ÍÅdiq (1974), Ta˙t rÅyat al-Qur’Ån (Beirut: DÅr al-KitÅb al-
ÆArabÈ). (Seventh printing.)
RÅghib, NabÈl (1989), AÆlÅm al-tanwÈr al-muÆÅßir (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-
Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
Ra’Ëf, ÆImÅd ÆAbd al-SalÅm (1986), “al-JamÆiyyÅt al-Æarabiyya wa-fikruhÅ al-qawmÈ:
malÅmi˙ al-fikr al-qawmÈ Æind al-Æarab mundh ma†laÆ al-qarn al-tÅsiÆ Æashar ˙attÅ

the arabic language and national identity
—258 —
qiyÅm al-˙arb al-ÆÅlamiyya al-ËlÅ”, in Ta†awwur al-fikr al-qawmÈ al-ÆarabÈ (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 103–34.
al-RÈ˙ÅnÈ, AmÈn (1929), MulËk al-Æarab (Beirut: al-Ma†baÆa al-ÆIlmiyya).
Rondot, Pierre (1984), al-ÊawÅ’if fÈ al-dawla al-lubnÅniyya (Beirut: Mu’assasat DÅr
al-KitÅb al-ÓadÈth). (Translated from the French Les Communautés dans l’Etat
libanais.)
RukaybÈ, ÆAbdalla (1992), al-FrankËfËniyya mashriqan wa-maghriban (Beirut: DÅr al-
RuwwÅd).
SaÆÅda, An†Ën (1976), al-InÆizÅliyya aflasat (ManshËrÅt ÆUmdat al-ThaqÅfa fÈ al-Óizb
al-SËrÈ al-QawmÈ al-IjtimÅÆÈ).
—— (1993), MukhtÅrat fÈ al-qawmiyya al-ijtimÅÆiyya (Beirut: DÅr Fikr li-l-Ab˙Åth
wa-l-Nashr).
—— (1994), NushË’ al-umam (no place of publication or publisher).
SaÆd, ÆAlÈ (1984), “al-BuÆd al-siyÅsÈ wa-l-ijtimÅÆÈ fÈ kitÅbÅt al-Shaykh ÆAbdalla al-
ÆAlÅylÈ”, in al-Shaykh ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ mufakkiran wa-lughawiyyan wa-faqÈhan:
dirÅsÅt wa-shahÅdÅt (Beirut: Itti˙Åd al-KuttÅb al-LubnÅniyyÈn wa-DÅr Ibn KhaldËn),
pp. 55–114.
SaÆd, NihÅd ÍabÈ˙ (1979), al-Fikr al-tarbawÈ Æind SÅ†iÆ al-ÓußrÈ: ta˙lÈluh wa-taqwÈmuh
(Basra: Ma†baÆat DÅr al-Kutub, University of Basra).
SaÆÈd, NaffËsa ZakariyyÅ (1964), TÅrÈkh al-DaÆwa ilÅ al-ÆÅmiyya wa-ÅthÅruhÅ fÈ mißr
(Cairo: Ma†baÆat DÅr Nashr al-ThaqÅfa).
ÍalÈbÅ, JamÈl (1993), “al-ÊÅbiÆ al-insÅnÈ li-l-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya”, in QirÅ’Åt fÈ al-
fikr al-qawmÈ, vol. 1: al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya, fikratuhÅ wa-muqawwimÅtuhÅ (Beirut:
Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 499–514. (First published in 1962.)
SÅlim, ÓilmÈ (1992), “Lughat al-samÅ’ wa-lughat al-ar∂”, al-QÅhira, 119: 10–20.
SÅ†iÆ al-ÓußrÈ: thalÅthËn ÆÅm ÆalÅ al-ra˙Èl (symposium) (1999) (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt
al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
al-Sayyid, Ra∂wÅn (1990), “al-ÆArab wa-l-ÆurËba wa-lÆarabiyya: min mafÅhÈm al-
huwiyya wa-l-umma wa-l-dawla fÈ al-fikr al-ÆarabÈ al-islÅmÈ”, in WaqÅ’iÆ al-nadwa
al-qawmiyya li-muwÅjahat al-dass al-shuÆËbÈ (Baghdad: DÅr al-Óurriyya li-l-
ÊibÅÆa), vol. 1, pp. 5–26.
al-Sha˙˙Ådh, A˙mad Mu˙ammad (1990), “Kha†ar al-shuÆËbiyya ÆalÅ huwiyyat al-
lugha al-Æarabiyya”, in WaqÅ’iÆ al-nadwa al-qawmiyya li-muwÅjahat al-dass al-
shuÆËbÈ (Baghdad: DÅr al-Óurriyya li-l-ÊibÅÆa), vol. 1, pp. 337–51.
ShÅhÈn, Fu’Åd (n.d.), al-ÊÅ’ifiyya fÈ lubnÅn: ˙Å∂iruhÅ wa-judhËruhÅ al-tÅrÈkhiyya wa-l-
ijtimÅÆiyya (Beirut: DÅr al-ÓadÅtha).
ShÅkir, Ma˙mËd Mu˙ammad (1972), AbÅ†Èl wa-asmÅr (Cairo: Ma†baÆat al-MadanÈ).
(First published in 1965.)
SharÅra, ÆAbd al-La†Èf (1988), Wa˙dat al-Æarab fÈ al-shiÆr al-ÆarabÈ: dirÅsa wa-nußËß
shiÆriyya (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da al-ÆArabiyya).
al-ShayyÅl, JamÅl al-DÈn (1951), TÅrÈkh al-tarjama wa-l-˙araka al-thaqÅfiyya fÈ Æaßr
Mu˙ammad ÆAlÈ (DÅr al-Fikr al-ÆArabÈ).
ShukrÈ, GhÅlÈ (1983), SalÅma MËsÅ wa-azamat al-∂amÈr al-ÆarabÈ (Beirut: DÅr al-åfÅq
al-JadÈda).

bibliography
—259 —
ShËmalÈ, Qus†andÈ (1996), Madkhal ilÅ Æilm al-tarjama (Jerusalem: JamÆiyyat al-
DirÅsÅt al-ÆArabiyya).
SkÅf, George (1960), ÓaqÅ’iq lubnÅniyya (Beirut: DÅr Maktabat al-ÓayÅt).
al-SuyË†È, ÆAbd al-Ra˙mÅn JalÅl al-ÎÈn (1986), al-Muzhir fÈ ÆulËm al-lugha wa-
anwÅÆihÅ, 2 vols, ed. Mu˙ammad A˙mad JÅd al-MawlÅ, ÆAlÈ Mu˙ammad al-
BajÅwÈ and Mu˙ammad AbË al-Fa∂l IbrÅhÈm (Sidon and Beirut: al-Maktaba
al-ÆAßriyya).
al-Êah†ÅwÈ, RifÅÆa RÅfiÆ (1981), al-AÆmÅl al-kÅmila, vol. 5: FÈ al-dÈn wa-l-lugha wa-l-
adab, ed. Mu˙ammad ÆAmÅra (Beirut: al-Mu’assasa al-ÆArabiyya li-l-DirÅsÅt wa-l-
Nashr).
ÊarÅbÈshÈ, George (1982), al-Dawla al-qu†riyya wa-l-naΩariyya al-qawmiyya (Beirut:
DÅr al-ÊalÈÆa).
—— (1993), Madhba˙at al-turÅth fÈ al-thaqÅfa al-Æarabiyya al-muÆÅßira (London and
Beirut: DÅr al-SÅqÈ).
Tar˙ÈnÈ, FÅyiz (1985), al-Shaykh ÆAbdalla al-ÆAlÅylÈ wa-l-tajdÈd fÈ al-fikr al-muÆÅßir
(Beirut and Paris: ManshËrÅt ÆUwaydÅt).
al-ÊawÈl, Rizq (1992), “al-Mu˙Åwara aqwÅ min al-mußÅdara”, al-QÅhira, 119: 24–8.
al-ThaÆÅlibÈ, AbË ManßËr (1938), Fiqh al-lugha wa-sirr al-Æarabiyya, ed. Muß†afÅ al-
SaqqÅ, IbrÅhÈm al-AbyÅrÈ and ÆAbd al-ÓafÈΩ ShalabÈ (Cairo: Sharikat Maktabat
wa-Ma†baÆat Muß†afÅ al-BÅbÈ al-ÓalabÈ wa-AwlÅdih bi-Mißr).
al-ÊËfÈ, AbË al-RabÈÆ Najm al-DÈn SulaymÅn Ibn ÆAbd al-Qawiyy Ibn ÆAbd al-
KarÈm (1997), al-ÍaÆqa al-gha∂abiyya fÈ al-radd ÆalÅ munkirÈ al-Æarabiyya, ed.
Mu˙ammad Ibn KhÅlid al-FÅ∂il (Riyadh: Maktabat al-ÆUbaykÅt).
ÆUmar, A˙mad MukhtÅr (1970), TÅrÈkh al-lugha al-Æarabiyya fÈ mißr (Cairo: al-Hay’a
al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-Ta’lÈf wa-l-Nashr).
al-ÆUraysÈ, ÆAbd al-GhanÈ (1981), MukhtÅrÅt al-mufÈd, ed. NÅjÈ ÆAllËsh (Beirut: DÅr
al-ÊalÈÆa).
ÆUways, Mu˙ammad (1977), al-MujtamaÆ al-ÆabbÅsÈ min khilÅl kitÅbÅt al-JÅhiΩ (Cairo:
DÅr al-ThaqÅfa li-l-ÊibÅÆa wa-l-Nashr).
ZabÅdiya, ÆAbd al-QÅdir (1982), “Dawr al-islÅm wa-l-Æarabiyya (lugha wa-thaqÅfa) fÈ
takwÈn muqawwimÅt al-qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa fÈ baÆth al-waÆy al-qawmÈ al-
ÆarabÈ”, in al-Qawmiyya al-Æarabiyya wa-l-islÅm (Beirut: Markiz DirÅsÅt al-Wa˙da
al-ÆArabiyya), pp. 111–18.
ZahrÅn, al-BadrÅwÈ ÆAbd al-WahhÅb (1985), Da˙∂ muftarayÅt ∂idd iÆjÅz al-Qur’an
wa-lughatih wa-abÅ†Èl ukhrÅ ikhtalaqahÅ al-ßalÈbÈ al-mustaghrib al-duktËr LuwÈs ÆAwa∂
(Mecca: RÅbi†at al-Æålam al-IslÅmÈ).
al-ZajjÅjÈ, AbË al-QÅsim (1959), al-∂Å˙ fÈ Æilal al-na˙w, ed. MÅzin al-MubÅrak
(Cairo: DÅr al-ÆUrËba).
ZakÈ, ÍalÅ˙ (1983), Mißr wa-l-mas’ala al-qawmiyya: ba˙th fÈ ÆurËbat mißr (Cairo: DÅr
al-Mustaqbal al-ÆArabÈ).
Zala†, A˙mad (1988), al-DuktËr Mu˙ammad Óusayn Haykal bayn al-˙a∂Åratayn al-
islÅmiyya wa-l-gharbiyya (Cairo: al-Hay’a al-Mißriyya al-Æåmma li-l-KitÅb).
al-ZamakhsharÈ, AbË al-QÅsim Ma˙mËd Ibn ÆUmar (1840), al-Mufaßßal fÈ al-na˙w,
ed. J. P. Broch (Christianiae: Libraria P. T. Mallingii).

the arabic language and national identity
—260 —
al-ZaraklÈ, Khayr al-DÈn (1995), al-AÆlÅm (Beirut: DÅr al-ÆIlm li-l-MalÅyÈn). (Fifth
printing.)
ZaydÅn, JurjÈ (n.d.), al-InqilÅb al-ÆuthmÅnÈ (Cairo: DÅr al-HilÅl).
ZiyÅda, NiqËlÅ (1950), al-ÆUrËba fÈ mÈzÅn al-qawmiyya (Beirut: DÅr al-ÆIlm li-l-
MalÅyÈn).
Zurayq, Quns†an†Èn (1959), Na˙nu wa-l-tÅrÈkh (Beirut: DÅr al-ÆIlm li-l-MalÅyÈn).
works in other languages cited in the text
Abou, S. (1962), Le Bilinguisme arabe-français au Liban: essai d’anthropologie culturelle
(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France).
Abuhamdia, Zakaria (1995), “Orthography Policy-making by Fiat: The Policy to
Romanise Somali”, Journal of King Saud University, 7: 49–69.
Abu-Manneh, Butrus (1980), “The Christians between Ottomanism and Syrian
Nationalism: The Ideas of Butrus al-Bustani”, International Journal of Middle
Eastern Studies, 2: 287–304.
Ahmad, Feroz (1969), The Young Turks: The Committee of Union and Progress in
Turkish Politics, 1908–1914 (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Ahmed, Jamal Mohammed (1960), The Intellectual Origins of Egyptian Nationalism
(London: Oxford University Press).
Allen, Irving Lewis (1983), The Language of Ethnic Conflict: Social Organisation and
Lexical Culture (New York: Columbia University Press).
Amara, Muhammad and Bernard Spolsky (1996), “The Construction of Identity in
a Divided Palestinian Village: Sociolinguistic Evidence”, in Yasir Suleiman
(ed.), Language and Identity in the Middle East and North Africa (Richmond,
Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 81–99.
Anderson, Benedict (1991), Imagined Communities (London and New York: Verso).
Antonius, George (1938), The Arab Awakening: The Story of the Arab National
Movement (London: Hamish Hamilton).
Arab BaÆth Party (1962), “Constitution”, in Sylvia G. Haim (ed.), Arab
Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press), pp.
233–41.
Armbrust, Walter (1996), Mass Culture and Modernism in Egypt (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).
Armstrong, John A. (1982), Nations before Nationalism (Chapel Hill, NC: Univer-
sity of North Carolina Press).
Badawi, M. M. (1985), Modern Arabic Literature and the West (London: Ithaca Press).
Balibar, Étienne (1991), “The Nation Form”, in Étienne Balibar and Immanuel
Wallerstein (eds), Race, Nation, Class (London and New York: Verso).
Balibar, Étienne and Immanuel Wallerstein (eds) (1991), Race, Nation, Class
(London and New York: Verso).
Baron, Beth (1997), “Nationalist Iconography: Egypt as a Woman”, in James
Jankowski and Israel Gershoni (eds), Rethinking Nationalism in the Arab Middle
East (New York: Columbia University Press), pp. 105–24.

bibliography
—261 —
Barth, Fredrik (ed.) (1969), Ethnic Groups and Boundaries (Boston, MA: Little,
Brown).
Bartlett, Robert (1994), The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonisation and Cultural
Change (950–1350) (Harmondsworth: Penguin).
Bayhum, Mu˙ammad JamÈl (1962), “Arabism and Jewry in Syria”, in Sylvia G.
Haim (ed.), Arab Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press), pp. 128–46.
al-BazzÅz, ÆAbd al-Ra˙mÅn (1962), “Islam and Arab Nationalism”, in Sylvia G.
Haim (ed.), Arab Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press), pp. 172–88.
Bengio, Ofra (1998), Saddam’s Word: Political Discourse in Iraq (Oxford: Oxford
University Press).
Ben-Rafael, Eliezer (1994), Language, Identity and Division: The Case of Israel
(Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Blau, Joshua (1963), “The Role of the Bedouins as Arbiters in Linguistic
Questions”, Journal of Semitic Studies, 8: 42–51.
Blau, Joyce and Yasir Suleiman (1996), “Language and Ethnic Identity in Kurd-
istan: An Historic Overview”, in Yasir Suleiman (ed.), Language and Identity in
the Middle East and North Africa (Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 153–64.
Bohas, Georges, J.-P. Guillaume and D. E. Kouloughli (1990), The Arabic Linguistic
Tradition (London and New York: Routledge).
Boon, J. A. (1982), Other Tribes, Other Scribes: Symbolic Anthropology in the Compara-
tive Study of Cultures, Religions and Texts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Bourdieu, Pierre (1992), Language and Symbolic Power (Oxford: Polity Press).
Brass, Paul (1991), Ethnicity and Nationalism: Theory and Comparison (New Delhi/
Newbury Park/London: Sage Publications).
Breuilly, John (1993), Nationalism and the State, 2nd edn (Manchester: Manchester
University Press).
Brubaker, Rogers (1992), Citizenship and Nationhood (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press).
Cachia, Pierre (1990), An Overview of Modern Arabic Literature (Edinburgh: Edin-
burgh University Press).
Cameron, Deborah (1997), “Demythologizing Sociolinguistics”, in Nikolas Coupland
and Adam Jaworski (eds), Sociolinguistics: A Reader and a Coursebook (New York:
St Martin’s Press, Inc.), pp. 55–67. (First published in 1990.)
Carter, Barbara Lynn (1986), The Copts in Egyptian Politics (London: Croom Helm).
Chejne, Anwar G. (1969), The Arabic Language: Its Role in History (Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press).
Choueiri, Youssef M. (2000), Arab Nationalism: A History (Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers).
Cleveland, William L. (1971), The Making of an Arab Nationalist: Ottomanism and
Arabism in the Life and Thought of SatiÆ al-Husri (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press).
—— (1997), “The Arab Nationalism of George Antonius Reconsidered”, in James

the arabic language and national identity
—262 —
Jankowski and Israel Gershoni (eds), Rethinking Nationalism in the Arab Middle
East (New York: Columbia University Press), pp. 65–86.
Cohen, Anthony P. (1994), Self Consciousness: An Alternative Anthropology of
Identity (London and New York: Routledge).
Connor, Walker (1978), “A Nation is a Nation, is a State, is an Ethnic Group, is
a …”, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 1: 377–400.
—— (1990), “When is a Nation?”, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 13: 92–103.
—— (1994), Ethnonationalism: The Quest for Understanding (Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press).
Cooper, Robert L. (1989), Language Planning and Social Change (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).
Coury, Ralph M. (1998), The Making of an Egyptian Arab Nationalist: The Early Years
of Azzam Pasha (Reading: Ithaca Press).
Davison, Roderic H. (1963), Reform in the Ottoman Empire, 1856–1876 (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press).
Dawn, Ernest C. (1991), “The Origins of Arab Nationalism”, in Rashid Khalidi,
Lisa Anderson, Muhammad Muslih and Reeva S. Simon (eds), The Origins of
Arab Nationalism (New York: Columbia University Press), pp. 3–30.
Deutsch, Karl (1966), Nationalism and Social Communication: An Inquiry into the
Foundations of Nationality, 2nd edn (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Douglas, Mary (1966), Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and
Taboo (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).
al-DËrÈ, ÆAbd al-ÆAzÈz (1968), “The Historical Roots of Arab Nationalism”, in
Kemal H. Karpat (ed.), Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle
East (New York: Frederick A. Praeger), pp. 33–7.
Eastman, Carol and Thomas C. Reese (1981), “Associated Language: How Language
and Ethnic Identity are Related”, General Linguistics, 21: 109–16.
Edwards, John (1988), Language, Society and Identity (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
Eliraz, Giora (1986), “Tradition and Change: Egyptian Intellectuals and Linguistic
Reform, 1919–1939”, Asian and African Studies, 20: 233–62.
Enderwitz, S. (1996), “ShuÆËbiyya”, Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edn, vol. 9, pp. 513–16.
Ferguson, Charles A. (1972), “Myths about Arabic”, in Joshua A. Fishman (ed.),
Readings in the Sociology of Language (The Hague: Mouton), pp. 375–81.
al-FikÅykÈ, ÆAbd al-HÅdÈ (1968), “The ShuÆubiyya and Arab Nationalism”, in Kemal
H. Karpat (ed.), Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East (New
York: Frederick A. Praeger), pp. 80–6.
First Arab Students’ Congress (1962), “Arab Pledge, Definitions, Manifesto”, in
Sylvia G. Haim (ed.), Arab Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: Berkeley
University Press), pp. 100–2.
Fishman, Joshua A. (1972), Language and Nationalism: Two Integrative Essays (Rowley,
MA: Newbury House Publishers).
—— (1980), “Social Theory and Ethnography: Language and Ethnicity in Eastern
Europe”, in P. Sugar (ed.), Ethnic Diversity and Conflict in Eastern Europe (Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio), pp. 69–99.

bibliography
—263 —
Freitag, Ulrike (1994), “Writing Arab History: The Search for the Nation”, British
Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, 21: 19–37.
Gabrieli, F. (1979), “ÆAjam”, Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edn, vol. 1, p. 206.
Gellner, Ernest (1964), Thought and Change (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson).
—— (1983), Nations and Nationalism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
Gemayel, Pierre (1968), “Lebanese Nationalism and its Foundations: The Phalangist
Viewpoint”, in Kemal H. Karpat (ed.), Political and Social Thought in the Contem-
porary Middle East (New York: Frederick A. Praeger), pp. 107–10.
Gershoni, Israel and James Jankowski (1986), Egypt, Islam and the Arabs: The Search for
Egyptian Nationalism 1900–1930 (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press).
—— (1995), Redefining the Egyptian Nation: 1930–1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
—— (1997), “Introduction”, in James Jankowski and Israel Gershoni (eds), Rethink-
ing Nationalism in the Arab Middle East (New York: Columbia University Press),
pp. ix–xxvi.
Gibb, H. A. R. (1962), Studies on the Civilization of Islam, ed. Stanford J. Shaw and
William R. Polk (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).
Goldziher, Ignaz (1966), Muslim Studies, 2 vols, ed. Samuel M. Stern and trans. from
the German by G. R. Barber and Samuel M. Stern (London: George Allen &
Unwin).
Greenfeld, Liah (1992), Nationalism: Five Roads to Modernity (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press).
Grew, Raymond (1986), “The Construction of National Identity”, in Peter Boerner
(ed.), Concepts of National Identity: An Interdisciplinary Dialogue (Baden-Baden:
Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft), pp. 31–43.
Haim, Sylvia G. (1953), “The Arab Awakening: A Source for the Historian?”, Welt
des Islam, 2: 237–50.
—— (ed.) (1962), Arab Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press).
Halliday, Fred (1997), “The Formation of Yemeni Nationalism: Initial Reflections”,
in James Jankowski and Israel Gershoni (eds), Rethinking Nationalism in the Arab
Middle East (New York: Columbia University Press), pp. 26–41.
Haniog¨lu, M. Sükrü (1991), “The Young Turks and the Arabs before the
Revolution of 1908”, in Rashid Khalidi, Lisa Anderson, Muhammad Muslih and
Reeva S. Simon (eds), The Origins of Arab Nationalism (New York: Columbia
University Press), pp. 31–49.
Hanna, Milad (1994), The Seven Pillars of the Egyptian Identity (Cairo: General
Egyptian Book Organisation).
Hayes, Carlton J. H. (1960), Nationalism: A Religion (New York: Macmillan Press).
Hechter, Michael (1986), “Rational Choice Theory and the Study of Race and
Ethnic Relations”, in John Rex and David Mason (eds), Theories of Race and
Ethnic Relations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 264–––––79.
Heyd, Uriel (1950), Foundations of Turkish Nationalism: The Life and Teachings of
Ziya Gökalp (London: Luzac/Harvill Press).

the arabic language and national identity
—264 —
Hobsbawm, Eric (1983), “Inventing Traditions”, in Eric Hobsbawm and Terence
Ranger (eds), The Invention of Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), pp. 1–14.
—— (1990), Nations and Nationalism since 1780 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press).
Holes, Clive (1993), “The Uses of Variation: A Study of the Political Speeches of
Gamal Abdul-Nasir”, in Mushira Eid and Clive Holes (eds), Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics V (Amsterdam: John Benjamins), pp. 13–45.
Holt, Mike (1996), “Divided Loyalties: Language and Ethnic Identity in the Arab
World”, in Yasir Suleiman (ed.), Language and Identity in the Middle East and
North Africa (Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 11–24.
Honey, John (1977), Language is Power: The Story of Standard English and its Enemies
(London: Faber and Faber).
Hopwood, Derek (1969), The Russian Presence in Syria and Palestine 1843–1914:
Church and Politics in the Near East (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Horowitz, Donald (1985), Ethnic Groups and Conflict (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press).
Hourani, Albert (1981), The Emergence of the Modern Middle East (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press).
—— (1983), Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age: 1789–1939 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
Hudson, Michael C. (1977), Arab Politics: The Search for Legitimacy (New Haven,
CT and London: Yale University Press).
al-ÓußrÈ, SÅtiÆ (1962), “Muslim Unity and Arab Unity”, in Sylvia G. Haim (ed.), Arab
Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press), pp.
147–53.
—— (1968), “The Historical Factor in the Formation of Arab Nationalism”, in
Kemal H. Karpat (ed.), Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle
East (New York: Frederick A. Praeger), pp. 55–9.
Hutchinson, John (1987), The Dynamics of Cultural Nationalism (London: Allen
and Unwin).
Hutchinson, John and David Aberbach (1999), “The Artist as Nation-Builder:
William Butler Yeats and Chaim Nachman Bialik”, Nations and Nationalism, 5:
501–21.
Hutchinson, John and Anthony D. Smith (eds) (1996), Ethnicity (Oxford: Oxford
University Press).
Ibrahim, Muhammad H. (1980), “Language and Politics in Modern Palestine”, Arab
Journal for the Humanities, 1: 323–41.
al-JundÈ, Darwish (1968), “The Foundations and Objectives of Arab Nationalism”,
in Kemal H. Karpat (ed.), Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle
East (New York: Frederick A. Praeger), pp. 42–8.
Karpat, Kemal H. (ed.) (1968), Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary
Middle East (New York: Frederick A. Praeger).
al-Kawakibi, Abd al-Rahman (1962), “The Excellences of the Arabs”, in Sylvia G.

bibliography
—265 —
Haim (ed.), Arab Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press), pp. 78–80.
Kedourie, Elie (1966), Nationalism (London: Hutchinson University Library).
—— (1974a), “The American University of Beirut”, in Arab Political Memoirs and
Other Studies (London: Frank Cass), pp. 59–72.
—— (1974b), “The Impact of the Young Turk Revolution in the Arabic-Speaking
Provinces of the Ottoman Empire”, in Arab Political Memoirs and Other Studies
(London: Frank Cass), pp. 124–61.
Khadduri, Majid (1970), Political Trends in the Arab World: The Role of Ideas and
Ideals in Politics (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins Press).
Khalidi, Rashid (1981), “ÆAbd al-Ghani al-ÆUraisi and al-MufÈd: The Press and Arab
Nationalism before 1914”, in Marwan R. Buheiry (ed.), Intellectual Life in the
Arab East, 1890–1939 (Beirut: American University of Beirut), pp. 38–61.
—— (1991), “Ottomanism and Arabism in Syria before 1914: A Reassessment”, in
Rashid Khalidi, Lisa Anderson, Muhammad Muslih and Reeva S. Simon (eds),
The Origins of Arab Nationalism (New York: Columbia University Press), pp. 50–69.
Khalidi, Tarif (1975), Islamic Historiography: The Histories of MasÆËdÈ (Albany: State
University of New York Press).
al-KharbË†lÈ, ÆAlÈ ÓusnÈ (1968), “The Qur’an and Arab Nationalism”, in Kemal H.
Karpat (ed.), Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East (New
York: Frederick A. Praeger), pp. 38–41.
Khouri, Munah (1971), Poetry and the Making of Modern Egypt (1882–1922) (Leiden:
E. J. Brill).
Kirk, George (1962), “The Arab Awakening Reconsidered”, Middle Eastern Affairs,
13: 162–73.
Kohn, Hans (1945), The Idea of Nationalism (New York: Macmillan).
Krejcí, Jaroslav and Vítezslav Velímsky (1981), Ethnic and Political Nations (London:
Croom Helm).
Kushner, David (1977), The Rise of Turkish Nationalism: 1876–1908 (London: Frank
Cass).
Labov, William (1966), The Social Stratification of English in New York City
(Washington, DC: Centre for Applied Linguistics).
—— (1972), Sociolinguistic Patterns (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press).
Landau, Jacob (1981), Pan-Turkism in Turkey: A Study of Irredentism (London:
C. Hurst & Co.).
—— (1993a), “An Arab Anti-Turk Handbill, 1881”, in Jews, Arabs, Turks: Selected
Essays (Jerusalem: The Magness Press), pp. 141–53.
—— (1993b), “A Note on the Egyptian Response to the Young Turk Revolution”,
in Jews, Arabs, Turks: Selected Essays (Jerusalem: The Magness Press), pp. 164–8.
Lane, Edward (1980), An Arabic English Lexicon (Beirut: Librairie du Liban).
Lefevere, André (1992), Translation, History, Culture: A Sourcebook (London and
New York: Routledge).
Lewis, Bernard (1968), The Emergence of Modern Turkey, 2nd edn (Oxford: Oxford
University Press).

the arabic language and national identity
—266 —
—— (1970), The Arabs in History, 5th edn (London: Hutchinson University Library).
Lukitz, Liora (1984), “The Antonius Papers and The Arab Awakening, Over Fifty
Years On”, Middle Eastern Studies, 30: 883–95.
Maalouf, Amin (2000), On Identity, trans. from the French by Barbara Bray (London:
Harvill Press).
Makdisi, Nadim K. (1960), The Syrian National Party: A Case Study of the First
Inroads of National Socialism in the Arab World (unpublished doctoral thesis: The
American University).
Mazraani, Nathalie (1997), Aspects of Language Variation in Arabic Political Speech-
Making (Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press).
Miller, David (1995), On Nationality (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Muhawi, Ibrahim (1996), “Language, Ethnicity and National Identity in the
Tunisian Ethnic Joke”, in Yasir Suleiman (ed.), Language and Identity in the
Middle East and North Africa (Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 39–59.
MËsÅ, SalÅma (1955), “Arabic Language Problems”, Middle Eastern Affairs, 6: 41–4.
Nash, Manning (1989), The Cauldron of Ethnicity in the Modern World (Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press).
Norris, H. T. (1990), “ShuÆËbiyya in Arabic Literature”, in Julia Ashtiany, T. M.
Johnstone, J. D. Letham, R. B. Serjeant and G. Rex Smith (eds), The Cambridge
History of Arabic Literature: ÆAbbasid Belles-Lettres (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press), pp. 31–47.
Nuseibeh, Hazem Zaki (1956), The Ideas of Arab Nationalism (Ithaca, New York:
Cornell University Press).
Overing, Joanna (1997), “The Role of Myth: An Anthropological Perspective, or:
‘The Reality of the Really Made-up’”, in Geoffrey Hosking and George Schöpflin
(eds), Myths and Nationhood (London: Hurst), pp. 1–18.
Patai, R. (1973), The Arab Mind (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons).
Phares, Walid (1995), Lebanese Christian Nationalism: The Rise and Fall of an Ethnic
Resistance (London: Lynne Reinner Publishers).
Reynolds, Susan (1984), Kingdoms and Communities in Western Europe (900–1300)
(Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Ri∂Å, RashÈd (1962), “Islam and the National Idea”, in Sylvia G. Haim (ed.), Arab
Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press), pp.
75–7.
Sayigh, Rosemary (1965), “The Bilingualism Controversy in Lebanon”, The World
Today, 21: 120–30.
Schöpflin, George (1997), “The Functions of Myth and a Taxonomy of Myths”, in
Geoffrey Hosking and George Schöpflin (eds), Myths and Nationhood (London:
Hurst), pp. 19–35.
Seton-Watson, Hugh (1981), Language and National Consciousness. Proceedings of the
British Academy, lxvii (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
SharÅra, ÆAbd al-La†Èf (1962), “The Idea of Nationalism”, in Sylvia G. Haim (ed.),
Arab Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press),
pp. 225–8.

bibliography
—267 —
Shivtiel, Shraybom Shlomit (1999), “Language and Political Change in Modern
Egypt”, International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 137: 131–40.
Shouby, E. (1951), “The Influence of the Arabic Language on the Psychology of the
Arabs”, The Middle East Journal, 5: 284–302.
Smith, Anthony D. (1991), National Identity (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books).
—— (1997), “The ‘Golden Age’ and National Renewal”, in Geoffrey Hosking and
George Schöpflin (eds), Myths and Nationhood (London: Hurst), pp. 36–59.
Snyder, L. Louis (1954), The Meaning of Nationalism (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press).
Spolsky, Bernard (1998), Sociolinguistics (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Spolsky, Bernard and Robert Cooper (1991), The Languages of Jerusalem (Oxford:
Clarendon Press).
Spolsky, Bernard and Elena Shohamy (1999), The Languages of Israel: Policy,
Ideology and Practice (Clevedon: Multilingual Matters Ltd).
Stalin, Joseph (1994), “The Nation”, in John Hutchinson and Anthony D. Smith
(eds), Nationalism (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 18–21.
Suleiman, Yasir (1990), “SÈbawayhi’s ‘Parts of Speech’ According to al-ZajjÅjÈ”,
Journal of Semitic Studies, 35: 245–63.
—— (1991), “The Methodological Rules of Arabic Grammar”, in Kinga Dévényi
and Támas Iványi (eds), Proceedings of the Colloquium on Arabic Grammar: The
Arabist: Budapest Studies in Arabic 3–4, pp. 351–64.
—— (1993), “The Language Situation in Jordan and Code-Switching: A New
Interpretation”, New Arabian Studies, 1: 1–20.
—— (1994), “Nationalism and the Arabic Language: An Historical Overview”, in
Yasir Suleiman (ed.), Arabic Sociolinguistics: Issues and Perspectives (Richmond,
Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 3–24.
—— (1996a), “The Concept of FaßÅ˙Å in Ibn SinÅn al-KhafÅjÈ”, New Arabian
Studies, 3: 219–37.
—— (1996b), “Language and Identity in Egyptian Nationalism”, in Yasir Suleiman
(ed.), Language and Identity in the Middle East and North Africa (Richmond,
Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 25–37.
—— (1997), “The Arabic Language in the Fray: A Sphere of Contested Identities”,
in Alan Jones (ed.), University Lectures in Islamic Studies I (London: Altajir
World of Islam Trust), pp. 127–48.
—— (1999a), “Autonomy versus Non-Autonomy in the Arabic Grammatical
Tradition”, in Yasir Suleiman (ed.), Arabic Grammar and Linguistics (Richmond,
Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 30–49.
—— (1999b), “Language and Political Conflict in the Middle East: A Study in
Symbolic Sociolinguistics”, in Yasir Suleiman (ed.), Language and Society in the
Middle East and North Africa: Studies in Identity and Variation (Richmond, Surrey:
Curzon Press), pp. 10–37.
—— (1999c), The Arabic Grammatical Tradition: A Study in TaÆlÈl (Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press).
—— (1999d), “Language Education Policies: Arabic-speaking countries”, in Bernard

the arabic language and national identity
—268 —
Spolsky (ed.), Concise Encyclopedia of Educational Linguistics (Oxford: Elsevier/
Pergamon), pp. 106–16.
—— (1999e), “Under the Spell of Language: Arabic between Linguistic Deter-
minism and Linguistic Relativity”, in Ian Netton (ed.), Hunter of the East I,
Studies in Honour of C. E. Bosworth (Leiden: Brill).
—— (1999f), “Sociolinguistic Reflexes of Political Conflict: The Case of Jerusalem”,
in Beyond the Border: A New Framework for Understanding the Dynamism of
Muslim Society, international symposium (Tokyo: Islamic Area Studies), pp. 399–
415.
Tauber, Eliezer (1993), The Emergence of the Arab Movements (London: Frank Cass).
Thomas, George (1991), Linguistic Purism (London and New York: Longman).
Thompson, John Alexander (1956), The Major Arabic Bibles: Their Origin and
Nature (New York: American Bible Society).
Tibawi, A. L. (1963), “The American Missionaries in Beirut and Bu†rus al-BustÅnÈ”,
in Albert Hourani (ed.), Middle Eastern Affairs, 3 (London: Chatto & Windus),
pp. 137–82. (St Antony’s Papers, Number 16.)
—— (1966), American Interests in Syria, 1800–1901: A Study of Educational, Literary
and Religious Work (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
—— (1969), A Modern History of Syria including Lebanon and Palestine (London:
Macmillan).
Tibi, Bassam (1997), Arab Nationalism between Islam and the National State, 3rd edn
(London: Macmillan).
Tilmatin, Mohamed and Yasir Suleiman (1996), “Language and Identity: The Case
of the Berber”, in Yasir Suleiman (ed.), Language and Identity in the Middle East
and North Africa (Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 165–79.
Tonkin, Elisabeth, Maryon McDonald and Malcolm Chapman (eds) (1989),
“Introduction”, in History and Ethnicity (London: Routledge), pp. 1–21.
Tütsch, Hans E. (1965), Facets of Arab Nationalism (Detroit, MI: Wayne State
University Press).
ÆUmar, A˙mad MukhtÅr (1998), “The Establishment of Arabic in Egypt”, The
Arabist (19–20), Proceedings of the Arabic and Islamic Sections of the 35th
International Congress of Asian and North African Studies, Part 1, ed. K. Dévényi
and T. Iványi (Budapest), pp. 37–50. (Author’s name rendered as Ahamad
Mokhtar Omer.)
Vatikiotis, P. J. (1987), Islam and the State (London and New York: Routledge).
Versteegh, Kees (1995), The Explanation of Linguistic Causes: al-ZajjÅjÈ’s Theory of
Grammar (Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins).
Walters, Keith (2002), “Review of Niloofar Haeri, The Sociolinguistic Market of
Cairo: Gender, Class and Education (London and New York: Kegan Paul
International, 1997)”, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 6: 152–5.
Weber, Max (1948), From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans. and ed. H. H.
Gerth and C. Wright Mills (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).
—— (1968), Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretative Sociology, ed. Guenther
Roth and Claus Wittich (New York: Bedminster Press).

bibliography
—269 —
Wendell, Charles (1972), The Evolution of the Egyptian National Image: From its
Origins to A˙mad Lu†fÈ al-Sayyid (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press).
El-Wer, Enam (1999), “Why Do Different Variables Behave Differently?”, in Yasir
Suleiman (ed.), Language and Society in the Middle East and North Africa: Studies in
Identity and Variation (Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press), pp. 38–57.
Wild, Stefan (1981), “Negib Azoury and his Book Le Réveil de la nation arabe”, in
Marwan R. Buheiry (ed.), Intellectual Life in the Arab East, 1890–1939 (Beirut:
American University of Beirut), pp. 92–104.
Zeine, N. (1966), The Emergence of Arab Nationalism: With a Background Study of
Arab–Turkish Relations in the Near East (Beirut: Khayats).
Zurayq, Quns†an†Èn (1962), “Arab Nationalism and Religion”, in Sylvia G. Haim
(ed.), Arab Nationalism: An Anthology (Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press), pp. 167–71.

—270 —
Index
æAbd al-ÓamÈd al-RÅfiæÈ, 89
æAbd al-Malik Ibn MarwÅn, caliph, 40, 53–4
Abdul Hamid, sultan, 89, 90
Abou, Selim, 206, 225
AbË al-Aswad al-Du’alÈ, 51, 107
AbË-KhÅ†ir, AmÈn, 92, 94–6
a∂dÅd (homo-antonyms), 61–2
al-AfghÅnÈ, JamÅl al-DÈn, 89–90
al-AfghÅnÈ, SaæÈd, 89
æAflaq, Michel, 119
Ahmed, Jamal Mohammed, 171, 172
Æajam (non-Arab), 56–63, 69, 106, 110, 125, 156,
157
and solecisms, 51
and ÆulËj, 83
al-Akh†al, 40–1
al-æAlÅylÈ, al-Shaykh æAbdalla
and definition of nationalism, 36–7, 118–19
and language and nationalism, 117–24, 126,
128, 159, 162, 224
and territorial nationalism, 122, 161
æAlÈ, caliph, 43, 51
æAllËba, Mu˙ammad, 179–80
æAllËsh, NajÈ, 243–4n
æAmÅra, Mu˙ammad, 234n
American Protestant College (Beirut), 81–2, 108,
244n, 245n
ÆÅmiyya (vernacular), 63
æAmr Ibn DÈnÅr, 46
æAnÅn, Mu˙ammad æAbdalla, 176
al-AnbÅrÈ, AbË al-BarakÅt KamÅl al-DÈn æAbd al-
Ra˙mÅn Ibn Mu˙ammad, 60
al-AnbÅrÈ, Mu˙ammad Ibn al-QÅsim, 61
Anderson, Benedict
and definition of nationalism, 16, 17, 24
and language, 28, 30, 32, 35–6, 40
and myths and symbols, 27
and the past, 39, 40
and print culture, 10, 80
AnÈs, IbrÅhÈm, 40–1, 59, 60, 236n
AnÈs al-KhËrÈ al-MaqdisÈ, 245–6n
Antonius, George, 68, 79, 80, 240n
and al-YÅzijÈ, 96–7, 100, 108, 109
æAql, SaæÈd, 205, 217
al-AqqÅd, æAbbÅs Ma˙mËd, 149
Arab nation (umma), 64–6, 68, 87–8, 92–3, 104,
111, 124–6, 128
in al-ArsËzÈ, 148, 154–7
in æåzËry, 116–17, 126, 159
Christians in, 92, 97, 106, 110, 125, 141
and Egypt, 101–2, 114–17, 126, 175–6, 179–
80, 182, 189–90
in al-ÓußrÈ, 30, 34, 131–4, 140–2, 159
in al-MarßafÈ, 115–16
and wa†an, 18, 113, 114
in al-YÅzijÈ, 99–102
Arab nationalism
and al-æAlÅylÈ, 117–22, 126
and al-ArsËzÈ, 146–58, 160–1, 162
and al-BÈtÅr, 122–4
definition, 118–19
and al-ÓußrÈ, 126–46, 147, 159–60
and ideology, 126–8
and Islam, 12, 62, 68, 89–91, 110, 141, 165,
234n
and language, 3, 62, 84–5, 90, 100, 110–11,
116–19, 134, 142, 156, 162, 167, 204–5,
225; as symbol, 66–8
and names, 61, 125
and nation-formation, 93, 100, 116–17
origins, 68, 69–70, 79–80, 96–7, 111
and Ottoman empire, 8, 11, 37, 70, 83–7, 92–
3, 111, 162–3
and the past, 39–42, 66–7, 160
and pre-Islamic Arabia, 40, 148, 234n
secular, 140–2, 146, 157–8, 159, 165, 181, 228
and standard Arabic, 9–10, 88–9, 98, 117–18,
125–6
and supra-nationalism, 18
and al-YÅzijÈ, 96–109, 123
see also cultural nationalism; political
nationalism; territorial nationalism
Arab renaissance, 79, 102, 110, 113, 159
Arab Renaissance Society, 246n
Arab Revival Society, 88
Arab Revolutionary Society, 87
Arab Student Congress, First (1938), 39
Arabia, pre-Islamic, 68, 234n
Arabic
and Arab renaissance, 79, 102, 110, 113, 159

index
—271 —
as boundary marker, 35, 79–80, 100, 123,
141, 192; in al-æAlÅylÈ, 121; and Arabs
and non-Arabs, 57–9, 66, 69, 110; and
script, 33; and solecism, 51–2, 55
colloquial, 4, 15, 123, 156, 230; and Egyptian
nationalism, 9, 172–4, 177–9, 193–4,
198–9, 201–3, 220, 225; and Lebanese
nationalism, 9, 126, 205, 208–9, 215–17,
220, 225; and modernization, 10; and
MËsÅ, 182, 185, 189, 194, 198; and al-
YÅzijÈ, 104–5, 108–9
communicative function see communication
and competing languages, 11–12
and contiguity of sound and meaning, 149–
52, 192
as “homeland”, 113
and Óusayn, 193–4
and language academies, 90–1
and language of heaven, 154, 201
as language of Qur’an see Qur’an
and linguistic borrowing, 69, 88, 102–3, 125,
170, 172–3, 179, 181, 187–8, 200
and linguistic interference, 58–9, 148, 152,
177
as lughat al-∂Åd, 59–60, 106, 110
and middle language, 143, 145, 172–3, 179,
225
as official language, 10, 82–4, 86–7, 90, 93,
95, 170, 229
as original language, 158
and other Semitic languages, 153–4, 196
and the past, 40–1, 102–3, 156
and political unity, 8, 115, 123–5, 128, 138,
140, 142–4, 191, 194
pre-Islamic, 148, 153–4, 157, 158
and reforms see modernization
revival, 97–9, 101, 102, 105, 107, 148, 154–7
and science, 103–6, 108, 141, 145, 172, 184,
187–8, 226
and shuÆËbiyya, 37, 60–3, 64, 91, 123, 201,
226, 247n
standard, 9–10, 15, 46, 91, 117–18, 172–3;
and al-ArsËzÈ, 108–9, 224; and
authenticity, 10, 59, 99, 178–9, 207; and
cultural nationalism, 34–6; and Egyptian
nationalism, 9, 193–4, 196–7, 220; and
al-ÓußrÈ, 142–6, 224; and Lebanese
nationalism, 9, 204, 207–10, 212, 215–
20; and al-MarßafÈ, 115; and
modernization, 35; and national identity,
224; and Syrian nationalism, 88–9; and
al-YÅzijÈ, –98, 100, 105, 108
as superior, 42–6, 47–9, 60, 66–7, 121, 155,
200–1
symbolic role see symbol
in Syria, 83–9, 142, 168
systematicity, 104
and territorial nationalism, 10, 79–80, 162–
223, 224–6
and Turkish, 60, 71, 73–8, 83, 88, 91, 127,
143, 157, 170
as unique, 199–202, 226
varieties in, 4, 15, 35–6
see also grammar; ˙ikmat al-Æarab; Islam;
language; lexicon, Arabic; modernization;
names; resonance; solecism
Arabists
Christian, 78, 207–10
and Ottoman Empire, 78–9, 89, 91–2, 128–9
Arabs
and Arabic, 44–9, 64, 66, 78–80, 89–90, 93–
4, 131, 200
“awakening”, 68
Christian, 56–7, 76, 83, 84, 92, 97, 106–7,
110, 125, 141, 205
and Egypt, 200–1
and lineage, 64, 200–1
as nation see Arab nation
and non-Arabs, 56–63, 69, 83
in Ottoman Empire, 73–4, 75, 77–9, 82–6,
91–3, 143
as superior, 45–6, 78, 148, 202
and Turkification, 77, 84, 85–9, 90–6, 101,
110
Armbrust, Walter, 111
Armenian, in Lebanon, 204
Armstrong, John A., 22, 56
Arndt, Ernst Moritz, 131
al-ArsËzÈ, ZakÈ, 37, 120, 146–58, 162, 168, 210
and Arab nation, 146, 148, 154–7, 159–61
and colloquial Arabic, 156, 224
and contiguity of sound and meaning, 149–
52
and al-ÓußrÈ, 147–8, 156
and linguistic interference, 148, 152
and race and language, 147–9, 158, 161
and standard Arabic, 108–9, 224
and word-formation, 152–3
Atatürk see Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
al-æA††År, A˙mad ÆAbd al-GhafËr, 248n
al-æAttar, Shaykh Hasan, 170
attribute, and identity, 232n
authenticity
and cultural nationalism, 25, 73, 75, 79, 157–8
and the past, 7, 38, 40, 102–4, 146, 225
and standard Arabic, 10, 59, 99, 178–9, 207
and territorial nationalism, 169, 190
æAwa∂, LuwÈs (Lewis), 197–204, 226
æAwn, MÈkhÅæÈl, 109
æAwwÅn, TawfÈq, 176, 178
al-AwzÅæi, æAbd al-Ra˙mÅn, 209
al-Azhar, 181, 183, 195–6, 197
æåzËry, NajÈb, 116–17, 126, 159
Badawi, M. M., 35
Balibar, Étienne, 30
Balkans, language and nationality in, 71, 135–6,
140, 146

index
—272 —
Banu Taghlib tribe, 56, 83
Baron, Beth, 111
Barth, Fredrik, 22
Bartlett, Robert, 28
al-BaßÈr, æAbd al-RazzÅq, 125
Ba’th party, 64, 119, 124–5
al-BayÅn, 99–100, 103, 106
bayÅn (clarity, purity), 156
Bayhum, Mu˙ammad JamÈl, 237n
al-BazzÅz, æAbd al-Ra˙mÅn, 102, 125, 237–8n
Bedouin tribes, and Arabic, 48, 52, 53, 69, 178,
226
beggars, and standard Arabic, 54, 88
Belgium, as multilingual state, 137, 139
Bergson, Henri, 210, 212
Bible, translations into Arabic, 69, 81, 141, 185,
196–7, 244n
Bin SalÅma, al-BashÈr, 228
al-BÈ†År, NadÈm
and language and identity, 122–4, 224
and language and nationalism, 122–3, 126,
159, 162
and the state, 124, 128
and subjective definition of nationalism, 36–7
and territorial nationalism, 123–4, 161
Bohas, Georges et al., 48
Bonald, 234–5n
Boon, J. A., 8
borrowing, linguistic, 29
and Arabic, 69, 88, 102–3, 125, 170, 172–3,
179, 181, 187–8, 200
and Turkish, 73–5
boundaries, linguistic, 35, 79–80, 100, 121, 123
and ingroup and outgroup, 56–9, 66, 69, 192
and national identity, 22–3, 32, 37, 66, 110,
141
and solecisms, 51–2, 55
and symbolic function of language, 32–3, 57,
58–9, 66
and Turkish, 74
Bourdieu, Pierre, 58
Brass, Paul, 31
Breuilly, John, 18, 29, 40
Brubaker, Rogers, 25
Bulgaria, and language and religion, 136
BËluß, JawÅd, 163
al-BustÅnÈ, Butrus, 164, 240–1n
Catalonia, language and nationalism, 31
causation (ta’lil), and grammar, 47–9, 62
Christians
and Arab nationalism, 12, 97, 110, 125, 141,
165, 196–7, 205–6
and the state, 211
citizenship
and language, 95
and nationality, 93, 106
Cleveland, William, 97, 129, 246n
code-switching, 114, 230
cohesion, 23, 35, 38, 42
and territorial nationalism, 164, 219
colonialism
and education, 130, 213
and language, 11–12, 152, 204, 213
and territorial nationalism, 123, 165, 204
Committee of Union and Progress (CUP; Turkey),
239–40n
communication as language function, 3, 27, 32,
37, 62–3, 66, 156, 212, 225, 228
and Arabic, 4, 82, 103, 125, 134, 146, 147,
159, 170–1
and spread of nationalism, 79, 98–9, 103,
115, 119–21, 123, 133, 134–40
and Turkish, 71, 75, 76–7
confessionalism, Lebanon, 163, 165, 206, 207,
210–11
conflict, interethnic, 12, 204, 230
Connor, Walker, 18, 21, 27
consciousness, national, 6–7, 18, 20–1, 23, 72,
81, 131, 171
construction, social, and national identity, 7, 18,
22–3, 26, 72–3, 134
contact, linguistic, 77, 201
and solecisms, 51–2, 55, 64, 106
contiguity principle, 149–52
continuity, and the past, 38, 72–3
Cooper, Robert L., 98, 244n
Coptic language, 177, 183, 203
cultural nationalism, 10, 24–6, 34, 41, 224
Arab, 34, 70, 96–109, 110–12, 113, 127, 161,
225
and authenticity, 25, 73, 79, 157–8
and elites, 25, 72
and modernization, 25–6, 35, 226
and political unity, 8
and tradition, 25–6, 35, 39–40, 67, 104
Turkish, 70–8, 79, 129, 135, 161
culture
Arabic, 88, 102, 105, 125, 143, 199
Egyptian, 175, 181, 199
European, 180–1, 183, 188–90, 191–2
folk, 34–5, 73
and language, 31, 97, 100, 134, 139–40, 167,
189
Lebanese, 218
and nationalism, 2–3, 8, 10, 20, 22, 23–7, 34,
41
Davids, Arthur Lumley, 72
Dawn, Ernest, 97
Decentralization Party, 86–7
descent, common, 24, 31, 120, 182
determinism, environmental
in Egyptian nationalism, 163, 164, 175–9,
190, 191–2, 222, 224
and history, 166
in Lebanese nationalism, 163, 164, 165–6,
169, 219, 224

index
—273 —
Deutsch, Karl, 21, 24, 31, 79
Dickson, John, 84
diglossia, Arabic see Arabic, colloquial; Arabic,
standard
al-ÎiyÅ’, 99–100, 105–6
Dozy, 105, 242n
Druze, 19, 97
al-DËrÈ, æAbd al-æAzÈz, 234n
Eastman, Carol and Reese, Thomas C., 33
education
and Arabic, 10, 11, 86–7, 93, 143, 170, 174,
209, 227
and the civic nation, 24
and foreign languages, 81–2, 108–9, 129–30,
192–3, 207
in Óusayn, 192–3, 195
in al-ÓußrÈ, 128–30
and language, 29, 86, 100, 105, 108, 110, 174,
213
missionary, 80–2, 97, 110, 141
and nationalism, 79–80, 97, 128–30, 136,
171–2, 192
and scientific approach, 105
in Turkish, 73, 76, 85
Edwards, John, 4, 16–17, 22, 31, 32–3
Egypt
and Arab nation, 101–2, 114–17, 126, 139–
40, 175–6, 182, 189–90
and Arabic, 79–80, 101–2, 104–5, 170, 172–
3, 197–204
and Arabism, 78, 179–80, 197
and European culture, 180–1, 183, 188–90,
191–2
and foreign languages, 130, 192
and identity, 180–1, 189–90, 191–2, 197–204
and Islam, 164, 174–5, 179, 190, 199–200
and modernization, 69, 104–5, 109, 115, 130,
169–74, 183–90, 195–6, 221, 227
Napoleonic invasion, 69, 131–2, 169
and Ottoman empire, 164, 175
and religion, 181–2
School of Languages, 169–70, 179
Egyptian nationalism
and Arab nationalism, 8, 37, 163, 174, 188,
194, 197, 226
and Arabic, 104–5, 169–204, 224; colloquial,
9, 104–5, 172–4, 177–9, 182, 185, 189,
193–4, 198–9, 201–3, 220, 225; standard,
193–4, 196–7, 220
and Christians, 196–7
and history, 170–1, 174, 175
and language, 3, 11–12, 37, 169–204
and al-MarßafÈ, 114–16
origins, 11, 69, 79–80, 169–70
and the Other, 8, 37
and the past, 170–1, 222
and territorial nationalism, 78, 114–15, 169–
204, 219, 220–2, 226
see also determinism, environmental;
Pharaonism
elites
and construction of identity, 7, 11, 18, 24,
72–3, 77–8, 109, 132
and cultural nationalism, 25, 72
and language, 58, 82, 87, 89–96, 98, 101,
103, 106, 143
and political nationalism, 89–96, 97
Enderwitz, S., 60
English, in Lebanon, 81, 82, 108, 157, 204, 223
essence, and existence, 210–12
ethnicity
and labelling, 55–7
and language, 71
and levels of incorporation, 232n
and national identity, 6–7, 55, 64
and nationality, 17–18
and the past, 46, 123
and religion, 19
existence, and essence, 210–12
FakhrÈ al-BÅrËdÈ, 239n
al-FÅkhËrÈ, æUmar æAbd al-Ra˙mÅn, 116
al-FÅrÅbÈ, AbË Naßr, 51, 65–6, 148
Farhat, Jermanus, 209
FÅris Nimr, 84, 99
al-FÅrisÈ, AbË æAlÈ al-Óasan, 49
faßÅ˙a (eloquence; purity of speech), 51, 52
fatherland, and nation, 18, 114, 164, 171
Ferguson, Charles A., 67
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 9, 28, 131, 147, 234–5n
al-FikÅykÈ, æAbd al-HÅdÈ, 237–8n
Finland, language and nationalism, 31
Fishman, Joshua, 2, 14, 29, 38, 39–40, 53, 234–
5n
France
as civic/political nation, 23, 25, 30, 93, 128,
157
and language, 11, 59, 130, 234–5n
and Lebanese nationalism, 121–2, 126, 152,
157, 222–3
French, in Lebanon, 11, 94, 121, 152, 204–7,
208, 209, 210, 213–15, 219, 223, 225
Freud, Sigmund, 21
Fu’Åd al-Kha†Èb, 89
fundamentalism, linguistic, 50, 51, 158
Galen, 56, 235n
Gellner, Ernest
and cultural nationalism, 25, 34, 41
and definitions of nationalism, 18, 19, 22
and folk culture, 34
functionalist approach to nationalism, 1
and myths, 41
and nationalism as ideology, 26–7
and symbolic function of language, 33
Gemayel, Pierre, 223
geography see determinism, environmental

index
—274 —
Germany
as cultural/ethnic nation, 23, 25, 71, 161
and language and nationhood, 29, 92, 127–8,
131–2, 146, 152, 157, 162, 167–8, 234–5n
see also Romantic movement
Gershoni, Israel and Jankowski, James, 11, 42,
171, 176, 201
al-Ghazali, Abu ÓÅmid Mu˙ammad al-ÊËsÈ, 148
Gökalp, Ziya, 30, 71, 76, 103–4, 129
Goldziher, Ignaz, 45, 58, 59, 60, 62, 237n
grammar, Arabic, 44, 46, 56
and al-ArsËzÈ, 62, 148–55, 158, 160
and causation, 47–9, 62
in education, 10, 170, 187, 192, 209, 227
and ˙ikmat al-Æarab, 47–9, 50, 52, 61–3, 148
and al-ÓußrÈ, 144, 145
and law, 44, 63
and modernization, 159, 227
and shuÆËbiyya, 64
and simplification, 10, 36, 81, 94, 115, 121,
178, 187, 193–5, 209, 215, 217, 227
and solecism, 51–5, 64, 148, 174
and Turkification, 85
and al-YÅzijÈ, 98, 99
Greeks, and language and Orthodoxy, 135–6
Greenfeld, Liah, 17, 21
Grew, Raymond, 7, 8
Guignes, Joseph de, 72
˙adÈth literature
and Arabic, 43–4, 50, 51, 60, 141, 235n
and the Arabs, 92
Hafni Mahmud Pasha, 139
Haim, Sylvia, 39, 89–90, 233n, 237–8n, 243n.
al-ÓÅjj, KamÅl YËsuf
and diglossic nature of Arabic, 210, 212,
215–19
and language and identity, 210–19, 220, 222,
225–6
and religion and nationalism, 120, 163, 210–11
al-ÓajjÅj Ibn YËsuf al-T˙aqafÈ, 54
Halliday, Fred, 238n
ÓamdÅn, JamÅl, 163
Handelman, 232n
Haniog¨lu, M. Sükrü, 239–40n
al-Óasan al-BaßrÈ, 50
ÓassËna, Mu˙ammad AmÈn, 176
Hayes, Carlton J. H., 25
Haykal, Mu˙ammad Óusayn, 175, 177, 178–9,
247n
Hebrew, revival, 32–3
Hebrew nationalism, 3
Hechter, Michael, 55
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 28, 131
Heyd, Uriel, 71, 103–4
˙ikmat al-Æarab (wisdom of the Arabs), 47–9, 50,
52, 61–3, 64, 148
history
and environmental determinism, 166
in al-ÓußrÈ, 36, 120, 128, 131, 134, 137, 148,
162, 168
and language, 121, 148
and modernity, 69, 190
and myth, 41
and nationhood, 20, 67–8, 72, 95, 160, 170–1
and territorial nationalism, 170–1, 174, 175
see also past
Hobsbawm, Eric
and definition of the nation, 17, 21
and definition of nationalism, 16, 17, 18, 27
and invented tradition, 233n
and language, 29, 30–3
and retrospective nationalism, 40
Honey, John, 246–7n
Horowitz, Donald, 23, 233n
Hourani, Albert, 57–8, 67, 90, 171, 190, 196,
235n
Hudson, Michael C., 19
Óusayn, ÊÅha
and Arabic Bible translation, 81, 196–7
and colloquial and standard Arabic, 193–4,
196–7
and education, 130, 192–3, 195
and environmental determinism, 191–2
and European culture, 190, 191–2
and grammar, 194–6
and language and nationalism, 139, 140, 190–
1, 194, 221, 225–6
and national literature, 177, 194, 197
al-ÓußrÈ, SÅ†iæ, 126–46, 210
and the Arab nation, 30, 34, 131–4, 140–2,
159
and al-ArsËzÈ, 147–8, 156
and education, 128–30
and history, 36, 120, 128, 131, 134, 137, 148,
162, 168
and ideologization of language, 134–40
and ideology of Arab nationalism, 126, 160
and language and religion, 140–2, 160, 162
and objective definition of nationalism, 36–7
and populist nationalism, 126–8, 159–60, 161
and standard Arabic, 142–6, 224
and state and nation, 128, 131, 229
Hutchinson, John, 25
Hutchinson, John and Smith, Anthony D., 23
Ibn Durayd, AbË Bakr Mu˙ammad Ibn al-Óasan,
60–1
Ibn FÅris, AbË al-Óusayn A˙mad, 60, 62
Ibn Hazm, AbË Mu˙ammad æAlÈ Ibn A˙mad, 56,
235n
Ibn JinnÈ, AbËal-Fa† æUthmÅn, 48–9, 59, 149–51,
155
Ibn KhaldËn, æAbd al-Ra˙mÅn, 102–3, 115
Ibn al-SarrÅj, AbË Bakr Mu˙ammad Ibn Sahl,
47, 48
IbrÅhÈm, æAmr, 21, 30, 232n
Ibrahim Pasha, 79–80

index
—275 —
identity, national
Arab, 6, 64–6, 80, 90, 162
as construct, 7, 18, 22–3, 36, 72–3, 134
contrastive, 55–63, 65, 113, 123
definition, 4–9, 18–19
ethno-symbolic approach, 23
and ideology, 7–8
and language see Arabic; Germany; language
and identity
and lineage, 64
and modernization, 108–9, 110
and the Other, 8, 22, 55–8, 123, 131, 148
political, 7, 71
Turkish, 37, 71–4, 76–8
see also Arabic; determinism, environmental;
ethnicity; language and identity;
nationalism
identity, religious, 93, 135–6, 140–2, 159–60, 191
and Arab and non-Arab, 55–63
and Egyptian nationalism, 170–1, 181–2,
195–6
and Lebanese nationalism, 164, 165, 206
and multiple identities, 18–19
and standard Arabic, 10, 55
and Turkish nationalism, 71, 78
as unifying factor, 12
identity, social, 18–19
ideology
and Arab nationalism, 97, 126–8, 160, 228–31
as discourse, 8
and Egyptian nationalism, 175
and language, 134–40
and movement, 18
and nationalism, 7–8, 10, 18, 23, 26–7
Æilj, 110
inflection, desinential, 187, 194, 217, 227
intellectuals see elites
interference, linguistic, 58–9, 148, 152, 177
Iraq 129,142
Ireland, language and nationalism, 31, 33, 168
Islam
and Arabic, 10, 43–6, 52–3, 78, 88–9, 92,
143, 195–6, 199–200, 228–9
and Arabism, 62, 91, 207
and Arabs, 89, 91–2, 115
and Christianity, 181
and Egypt, 164, 174–5, 179, 190
and nationalism, 12, 62, 64, 68, 110, 135,
140–1, 146, 234n
and Turkish nationalism, 76–8
Italy, and language and nationalism, 29, 92
JabbËr, æAbdalla, 81–2
al-JÅ˙iΩ, AbËæUthmÅn Ibn Ba˙r, 156, 237n
al-JarÈda, 172
al-JazÅ’irÈ, Shaykh ÊÅhir, 85
Jeha, Michel, 244n
journalism
Arab, 69, 99, 103, 110, 113, 121, 172, 180, 221
and Lebanese nationalism, 81, 92–5
and Turkish nationalism, 79
Jumæa, IbrÅhÈm, 178
Karpat, Kemal H., 237–8n
al-KawÅkibÈ, æAbd al-Ra˙mÅn, 89–90, 91, 243n
Kedourie, Elie, 26–7, 28, 131, 148, 233n, 241n
al-KhafÅjÈ, Ibn SinÅn AbË Mu˙ammad æAbdalla
Ibn Mu˙ammad Ibn SaæÈd, 44–6, 62
Khalidi, Tarif, 65, 77–8, 243n
al-KhalÈl, Ibn A˙mad, 48, 61, 149
al-Kharbu†lÈ, æAlÈ ÓusnÈ, 234n
al-KhËri, RashÈd SalÈm, 149
KhËrÈ, YËsuf QazmÅ, 244n
Kohn, Hans, 25
Korai, 234–5n
Krejcí, Jaroslav and Velímsky, Vítezslav, 20
Kurd æAlÈ, Mu˙ammad, 100
Kurdish, and Arabic, 12
Kushner, David, 72, 77
Labov, William, 4
La˙˙Ëd, æAbdalla, 207–10, 221, 226
La˙n see solecism
Landau, Jacob, 239n, 240n
language
as boundary-marker see boundaries
colonial, 11–12, 152, 204, 213
and culture, 97, 100, 134, 139–40, 167, 189
dead languages, 63, 122, 133, 182, 187
and diglossia, 15, 216–17
functional role see communication
ideologization, 134–40
instrumental role, 87, 219–20, 221
and linguistic norms, 49–55
modernization, 73, 98, 110, 227
and the past, 29, 40–6, 64–6, 102–3, 106,
109, 123, 146, 156, 170–1, 192
and race, 28, 100, 120, 131, 147–9, 158, 161,
201–3
and science, 106, 172
and social change, 98–9
and style, 126–8
symbolic role see symbol
and territory, 71, 72–3, 78, 79–80, 109, 115,
119, 140
and thought, 28, 192, 212, 218, 225
see also communication as language function
language and identity, 9, 11–12, 27–33, 36–7,
41–2, 50, 64–5, 224–31, 234n
in AbË-KhÅ†ir, 92, 94–6
Arab and non-Arab, 55–63
in al-ArsËzÈ, 156–7, 224
in æAwa∂, 198–204
in al-BÈ†År, 122–4, 224
and dialects, 142–6, 176–7
and Egyptian nationalism, 176, 188–9, 197–
204, 221–2
and German Romanticism, 28–9, 162

index
—276 —
in al-ÓÅjj, 210–19, 225–6
in Óusayn, 139, 140, 190–1, 225–6
in al-ÓußrÈ, 132–6, 141, 142–6, 162, 224
and Lebanese nationalism, 204–19, 221–2
and race, 26, 95, 117, 226
and religion see identity, religious; language
and religion
and sociolinguistics, 4
and Syrian nationalism, 114, 152, 157, 167–
8, 220
and Turkish, 37, 71–4, 76–8, 96, 160–1
in al-æUraysÈ, 92–4
in al-YÅzijÈ, 106–7, 224
language and nationalism, 2–4, 8–9, 11–12, 22–3,
26–7, 31–2, 66–8, 110–11
in al-æAlÅylÈ, 117–24, 128, 159, 162
in al-ArsËzÈ, 146–58, 159–60, 162
in æAzËry, 116–17
in al-BÈ†År, 122–3, 128, 159, 162
in al-ÓußrÈ, 126–8, 132–3, 134–40, 159, 162
and Ireland, 31, 33, 168
and Italy, 29, 92
and territorial nationalism, 162–3, 167–9
see also Germany
language and religion, 35, 120, 144
in Egyptian nationalism, 115, 170–1, 181–2,
191, 195–6
in al-ÓußrÈ, 140–2, 160, 162
and Islam, 78, 88–9, 90–2, 143, 195–6, 199–
200, 228–9
and people, 20, 44–9, 53–4, 55–63, 64, 76,
88, 89–90, 170–1
in Turkish nationalism, 75–6
in al-YÅzijÈ, 100, 106
see also identity, religious
language-planning, 79
corpus, 32, 98–9, 107, 110
status, 32, 53, 95–6, 98, 108–9, 110, 236n
underlying motives, 99–100, 104–6, 110
law, and language, 63, 91
Lebanese nationalism
and Arab nationalism, 8, 163, 206
and Arabic, 3, 9, 204–19, 224, 225
and Arabism, 207–10
and Christians, 97, 141, 165, 205–6, 207–11,
225
nd foreign languages, 121–2, 126, 207–9,
213–14, 223
and language, 11–12, 81–2, 84, 117–23, 204–5
and La˙˙Ëd, 207–10
and religious diversity, 120, 206
and Syrian nationalism, 165, 206
and territorial nationalism, 122, 163, 204–19,
220–1, 224, 226
see also determinism, environmental; Syrian
nationalism
Lebanon
civilising mission, 205–6, 207–9, 216, 218,
219, 221, 222–3
National Pact, 206, 211–12
legitimacy, and the past, 38–9, 40, 182
Levant, and contact with Europe, 69–70
lexicon, Arabic
and contiguity principle, 150–1, 152, 154,
158, 160
deficiency, 98, 145–6, 184, 187
elaboration, 82, 98–9, 101, 170, 172–3, 227
richness, 45, 61, 62, 67
and Turkish, 73, 75–6
lightness (khiffa), in Arabic, 45
lineage, and identity, 64
linguism, 26, 120, 131, 148, 165–6, 168, 226
linguistics
and glottochronology, 200
and national identity, 4
literacy
and the civic nation, 24
spread, 36, 69, 178, 187, 193, 215
literature, 2–3, 27, 79, 96–7, 233n
and Egyptian nationalism, 177–9, 182, 184,
194, 198, 221
and Lebanese nationalism, 206
and literary revival, 82, 102, 110, 113, 141
and mother tongue, 212–13
oral, 35, 73
and Turkish nationalism, 76
lughat al-∂Åd, 59–60, 106, 110
Lu†fÈ al-Sayyid, A˙mad, 139, 171–4, 179, 220,
225
al-ManÅr, 90, 91
Maronites
and Arabic, 81, 207–9, 210, 220
and Lebanese nationalism, 165, 205–10
and Syriac, 208–9
Marr, Andrew, 22
al-MarrÅkishÈ, Mu˙ammad Íali˙, 90–1
al-MarrÅsh, Francis, 114, 126
al-MarßafÈ, Óasan, 114–15, 126, 158
al-MasæËdÈ, AbË ’l-Óasan æAlÈ Ibn al-Óusayn, 64
al-MÅzinÈ, IbrahÈm æAbd al-QÅdir, 198
meaning
and sound, 149–52, 154–6, 192
and structure, 212, 213, 218, 227
Middle East
and Arabic language, 3, 8–12
and national identity, 6–8
and studies of nationalism, 1–3
missionaries, and education, 80–2, 97, 110, 141
modernization
of Arabic, 98–9, 109, 117, 142–7, 156, 159,
170, 172, 174, 179, 184–7, 189, 196–7,
215, 221, 227–8
and cultural nationalism, 25–6, 35, 226
and education, 128, 130
and Egyptian nationalism, 69, 104–5, 109,
115, 130, 169–74, 183–90, 221, 227
and Lebanese nationalism, 81–2, 221

index
—277 —
and national identity, 108–9
and nationalism, 73, 79, 110, 146, 159, 226–7
and the past, 10, 25, 39–40, 67, 102–3, 227
and role of Arabic, 35, 93, 99, 102–4, 108–9,
141, 147, 156–7, 159, 170, 174, 228
and science, 103–6, 108, 172, 184
and Syrian nationalism, 81–2, 84, 89
and territorial nationalism, 10, 226–7
and Turkification, 70, 89
of Turkish, 73–7
al-Mubarrad, AbË ’l-æAbbÅs Ibn YazÈd al-AzdÈ, 49
al-MufÈd, 92–4, 113
Mu˙ammad æAbdu, 171
Muhammad Ali (governor of Egypt), 79–80,
169–70
Mu˙ammad RashÅd, sultan, 89
MukhtÅr, Ma˙mËd, 247n
Müller, Max, 28
multilingualism, 31, 130, 137, 138, 139, 144, 205
al-Muqta†af, 95–6, 99
MËsÅ, SalÅma, 180–90, 225, 227
and colloquial Arabic, 182, 185, 189, 194,
198
and European culture, 180–1, 183, 188–90,
191
and modernization of Arabic, 184–9, 193,
197, 221
and religion and national identity, 181–2
Muslims
and Arabic, 91
non-Arab, 51, 69
as one nation, 89–90
Turkish, 75
MustafÅ, IbrÅhÈm, 194
Mustafa Kamil, 116, 174–5
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, 135, 140, 175, 183
al-Muætamid æAlÅ AllÅh, caliph, 58
Al-MutanabbÈ, AbË al-Êayyib A˙mad, 59
myths
and language, 67
and nationalism, 7, 23, 24, 27, 41, 46
Murras, Charles, 59
al-NadÈm, æAbdalla, 174
names
Arabic, 60–1, 125, 247n
foreign, 102, 125
Nash, Manning, 23, 29, 39
al-Nashra al-usbËÆiyya, 81, 108
NÅßir al-DÈn, AmÈn, 89
NaßßÅr, NÅßÈf, 65
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 124–5, 194, 197
nation
Arabs as, 64–6, 68, 87–8, 89–90, 92–3, 97,
99–101, 104, 106, 111, 115
civic/political, 23–4, 30, 34, 65, 70, 84, 86,
128, 165–6, 168
cultural/ethnic, 23–7, 34, 71, 106, 108, 128,
129, 131–4, 224
and fatherland, 18, 114, 164, 171
as imagined community, 30
and language, 30, 65, 76, 93, 99–100, 115,
116, 131, 134–5, 158, 162, 167–8, 214
objective definitions, 17, 20–1, 36–7, 65,
131–4, 147, 159
problems of definition, 17–18, 65–6, 114–15
subjective definitions, 20, 22–3, 36, 118,
134–5, 159, 165, 166, 168
unity and diversity in, 38, 138
voluntarist view, 22, 93, 128, 129, 134–5,
159, 165, 166, 168
see also state, and nation
nationalism
as construct, 18, 22–3, 26
critiques of, 26–7
and culture, 2–3, 8, 10, 22, 23–7, 41
as ideology, 7–8, 10, 18, 23, 26–7, 97, 126–8,
160, 175, 228–31
intuitive, 118–19
Islamic, 12, 165, 175, 228–9
“philological”, 29, 73
populist, 126–8, 159
and problems of definition, 16–19
regional see Syrian nationalism
and religion, 12, 32, 93, 120, 135–6, 140–2,
159–60, 165, 181–2, 197, 206
retrospective, 40–2, 234n
theoretical approaches to, 1–4, 26–7
and youth, 233n
see also Arab nationalism; cultural
nationalism; Egyptian nationalism;
identity, national; language and
nationalism; Lebanese nationalism;
political nationalism; Syrian nationalism;
territorial nationalism
nationality
and ethnicity, 17–18
and language, 29, 71, 76, 90, 93, 115
Norris, H. T., 62–3
North Africa
and nationalism and language, 11–12, 101,
116–17
and nationalism and religion, 12
see also Egypt
Nuseibeh, Hazem Zaki, 39, 67, 234n
Orientalism, 72
Other, and national identity, 8, 22, 27, 37, 55–8,
73, 123, 131, 148
Ottoman empire, 70–9
and Arab identity, 68, 77–8, 92–3, 95, 113–
14, 162
and Arab nationalism, 8, 11, 37, 70, 83–7,
92–3, 111, 162–3
and Arabic, 82–7, 90–1, 93, 96, 101, 113,
143
and Arabists, 73–4, 89, 91–2
break-up, 113–14, 127–8, 129, 140

index
—278 —
and citizenship, 93, 95
as composite state, 95–6, 128
and Egypt, 164, 175
and elites, 89–96
Tanzimat reforms, 70, 73
and Turkification, 70, 72, 79–96, 109–10, 113,
135
see also Lebanese nationalism; Syrian
nationalism; Turkish language; Turkish
nationalism; Young Turks
Ottomanism, 70–1, 75–6, 78–9, 91–2
Overing, Joanna, 41
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount,
80
pan-Arab nationalism see Arab nationalism
Paris Congress (1913), 87, 92–3, 95
past, 38–68, 225–6
and civic/political nation, 24
continuity with, 38, 72–3, 222
and ˙ikmat al-Æarab, 47–9
and language, 29, 40–6, 64–6, 102–3, 106,
109, 123, 146, 156, 170–1
and linguistic norms, 49–63
and myths and symbols, 41, 63, 66–7, 172
and nationalist discourse, 53, 64–5, 66–8,
102, 139, 160
and territorial nationalism, 162, 188, 192,
199, 226
see also history; Pharaonism; tradition
Patriarchate School, Beirut, 99, 105
patriotism, territorial, 171
peasants, language of, 53, 178
people, and language and religion, 20, 44–9, 53–4,
55–63, 64, 76, 88, 89–90, 170–1
Pharaonism
and Egyptian nationalism, 122, 175–6, 180,
199, 222, 226
in Haykal, 179, 247n
in Óusayn, 194, 197
in al-ÓußrÈ, 139
in MËsÅ, 182–3, 190
in al-Êah†ÅwÈ, 170
philology, nationalist, 29, 73
placards, 82–5, 97, 110
poetry, 35
Egyptian, 198–9
Lebanese, 208
role, 40–1, 44, 89, 108, 110, 159, 234n
political nationalism, 113–15
Arab, 25, 70, 84, 86–9, 90–2, 97, 110–12,
113, 124–6, 127–8, 225
Syrian, 34, 84, 86, 165, 168
Turkish, 70, 79–96, 135
see also territorial nationalism
politics, and religion, 211
populism, 126–8, 159
Post, George, 82, 103
power, and language, 32, 202
present
and linguistic solecisms, 50
and past, 24, 38, 66–8, 106, 156, 192
print technology
impact on languages, 36, 69, 73, 110
and spread of nationalism, 10, 79–81, 123
al-QÅsimÈ, Íala˙ al-DÈn, 116
Qur’an
and Arabic, 76, 88, 89, 91, 115, 125, 141,
143, 179
and Arabs and non-Arabs, 57–8, 84, 109
and cohesive role of Arabic, 35–6
and grammar, 193
inimitability, 44, 198, 200
and linguistic borrowing, 172, 200
and literalism, 235n
and prestige of Arabic, 15, 42–4, 58, 120
and solecism, 50–1, 54
as untranslatable, 123
and al-YÅzijÈ, 107–8, 109, 123
race
and language, 28, 100, 120, 131, 147–9, 158,
161, 201–3
and national identity, 26, 95, 117, 226
rationalism, in al-YÅzijÈ, 104–5, 108
Reform Society (Basra), 86–7
Reform Society (Beirut), 86
religion
and confessionalism, 163, 165, 206, 207, 210–
11
and ethnicity, 19
and language and people, 20, 44–9, 53–4, 55–
63, 64, 76, 88, 89–90, 170–1
and nation, 93, 170–1
and nationalism, 12, 32, 93, 120, 135–6,
140–2, 159–60, 165, 181–2, 195–6, 197
and politics, 211
and solecism, 50
see also language and religion
Renan, Ernest, 22, 27, 67, 93, 134
resonance
of Arabic, 66, 69, 132
of the past, 7, 42, 63, 106, 225
revelation, and Arabic, 42–4, 123, 200–1
Reynolds, Susan, 21
rhetoric, and Arabic, 45, 62, 182, 184, 187, 192,
227
Ri∂Å, Mu˙ammad RashÈd, 90–2
al-RÈ˙ÅnÈ, AmÈn, 246n
Romantic movement, 131–2, 146, 152, 157,
162
and cultural/ethnic nation, 28–9, 131
and high and low culture, 35, 73
and religion, 76
Saæd Zaghloul, 247n
SaæÅda, An†Ën, 119, 214, 232n

index
—279 —
and environmental determinism, 166, 169,
219, 224
and territorial nationalism, 34, 142, 163,
164–9, 219–20, 222
Sami, Shemseddin, 71–2, 74
SamÈka, Murquß, 177
ÍarrËf, YaæqËb, 99, 242–3n
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 151, 212
Sayigh, Rosemary, 206
Schöpflin, George, 7
science, and Arabic, 103–6, 108, 141, 145, 172,
184, 187–8, 226
script, Arabic, 33, 73, 102–3, 117, 179, 188–9, 227
and Roman, 104, 143–4, 188–9, 194, 205
secularism
and Arab nationalism, 140–2, 146, 157–8,
159, 165, 181, 228–9
and Arabism, 207
Seton-Watson, Hugh, 23, 41
ShaÆb (people), 34, 93, 228–9
al-ShÅfiæÈ, al-ImÅm AbË æAbd AllÅh Mu˙ammad
Ibn Idris, 64, 91
ShÅkir, Ma˙mËd Mu˙ammad, 248n
SharÅra, æAbd al-La†Èf, 18, 234n
shariÆa, and Arabic, 91
al-ShÅ†ibÈ, AbË Is˙aq, 64
ShawqÈ, A˙mad, 113, 198, 247n
Shivtiel, Shraybom Shlomit, 63
Shuæba b. al-HajjÅj, 235n
ShuÆËbiyya, 37, 64, 91, 123, 201, 226, 247n
and rebuttals, 60–3
Sibawayhi, AbË Bishr æAmr Ibn æUthman, 149
al-SijistÅnÈ, AbË ÓÅtim, 49
al-SiyÅsa al-usbË’iyya, 175, 176, 178, 180, 221
Smith, Anthony D., 5–7, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23–4,
227, 232n
Smith, Eli, 242n
Snyder, L. Louis, 16, 17
socialization, and language, 28, 29, 115, 121, 134,
192
Society of Eloquence (Jam’iyyat al-IfßÅ˙), 88–9
sociolinguistics
and corpus-planning, 32, 98–9, 107, 110
and identity, 4
and interethnic conflict, 204, 230
and status-planning, 32, 53, 95–6, 98, 108–9,
110, 236n
solecism (lahn), 49–55, 64, 106–7, 115, 148, 174,
236n
Stalin, Joseph, 20
state
and Arab nationalism, 25
composite, 95–6
and government, 211
and language, 74–5, 79–80, 207–10, 211–12,
228–9
multilingual, 31, 130, 137, 138, 139, 144, 205
and nation, 18, 114–15, 119, 123–5, 161,
164, 169
civic/political, 23, 25, 34, 128, 166, 168
ethnic/cultural, 24–5, 34, 128, 131
and national identity, 6–7, 94, 228
and territorial nationalism, 163, 211–12, 219,
222, 224–5, 228
style, linguistic, 126–8
SulaymÅn al-TÅjÈ al-FÅrËqÈ, 89
Suleiman, Yasir, 5, 52, 111, 154
Switzerland, as multilingual state, 137, 139, 214–
15, 219
symbol, 3, 27, 56, 63, 123, 159
Arabic as, 4, 37, 50, 64, 108, 111, 133, 174,
228
and boundary markers, 32–3, 58–9
and nationalism, 23, 24, 27, 66–8, 119–20,
147, 183, 228
and the past, 38, 39, 41, 46, 66–7, 172
Turkish as, 71, 74, 103–4
see also Arabic; myths; Turkish language
synonyms, in Arabic, 45, 61, 62, 185, 227
Syria
and Arab nationalism, 80
and Syrian Arabic, 83–9, 142, 168, 178
Syriac, in Lebanon, 208–9
Syrian National Party, 25, 119, 142, 169, 214,
247n
Syrian nationalism
and Arab nationalism, 163, 165, 167, 169,
220
and Arabic, 83–9, 93–4, 96–100, 129, 168
and civic-political nation, 34, 84, 86, 165,
168
and education, 129
and language and identity, 114, 152, 157,
167–8, 220
and Lebanese nationalism, 165, 206
origins, 70, 79–80
and other languages, 122
and placards, 82–5, 97, 110
and territorial nationalism, 163, 164–9, 219,
222, 224
and Turkification, 85–9, 101
Syrian Revival Society, 88
Syrian Scientific Society, 97
al-ÊabÈb, 103–5
al-Êah†ÅwÈ, RifÅæa RÅfiæ, and territorial
nationalism, 164, 170–1
taÆlÈl (causation), and grammar, 47–9, 62
tamßÈr al-lugha, 173
taÆrÈb (Arabization/Arabicization), 11, 102
ÊarrÅd, Michel, 205, 217
Tauber, Eliezer, 233n, 243n
Taylor, Alan, 232–3n
teacher training, 187, 192, 195–6
territorial nationalism, 34, 111, 162–223, 224
and Arab nationalism, 10, 122, 123–4, 162–
223, 226
and Arabic, 10, 79–80, 162–223, 224–6

index
—280 —
and colonialism, 123, 165, 204
and Egyptian nationalism, 78, 114–15, 169–
204, 219, 220–2, 224, 226
and language, 71, 72–3, 78, 109, 115, 119,
140, 167–9
and Lebanese nationalism, 122, 163, 204–19,
220–1, 224, 226
and modernization, 10, 226–7
and the state, 163, 211–12, 219, 222, 228
and Syrian nationalism, 164–9, 219, 222, 224
and Turkish nationalism, 70, 72, 79–96, 135,
175
see also determinism, environmental
territory, and nation, 20–1, 24, 31, 65
al-Tha’ÅlibÈ, AbË ManßËr, 44
Tibawi, A. L., 83, 239n, 240n, 241n, 242n, 243n,
245n
Tibi, Bassam, 82, 233n, 240n, 242n
Tonkin, Elisabeth et al., 19, 55
tradition
and cultural nationalism, 25–6, 35, 39–40,
67, 104
invented, 7, 39, 41, 233–4n
and territorial nationalism, 164, 189
Tunisia
as nation, 228
and religion and identity, 12
Turanism, 239n
Turkification, 109–10, 113, 135
of Arabs, 77–8, 84, 85–9, 90–6, 101, 110
of Ottoman Turks, 70–7, 79–96
resistance to, 87–9, 92–3, 95–6, 116
Turkish language
and Arabic, 60, 71, 73–8, 88, 91, 127, 143,
170
communicative role, 71, 75, 76–7
modernization, 73–6
and national identity, 37, 71–4, 76–8, 96,
160–1
as official language, 76–7, 85–6
and “Sun Theory”, 157, 162
symbolic role, 71, 74, 103–4
Turkish nationalism, 3, 70–9, 109, 162–3
cultural, 70–8, 79, 129, 135, 161
and identity, 71–3
and language, 37, 71–6, 82–3, 103–4, 157,
160–1
and names, 61
and the Other, 8, 73
and religion, 140, 181
territorial, 70, 72, 79–96, 135, 175
Turkism, 70–9, 83, 86, 88–9, 91, 94, 239n
Tütsch, Hans E., 25
Æujma (foreignness), 106
ÆulËj (unbeliever), 83, 87
ÆUmar, caliph, 46, 50–1, 56–7
æUmar Ibn ÆAbd al-æAzÈz, caliph, 54, 88
umma, 18, 34, 228–9
Arabs as, 64–6, 92–3, 99–101, 104, 115–17,
124–6, 128
Muslims as, 89–90
as superior, 45–6
and wa†an, 18, 113, 114
see also Arab nation; nation
United States of America, language and
nationhood, 137, 138
unity, political, and Arabic, 8, 115, 123–5, 128,
138, 140, 142–4, 191, 194
al-æUraysÈ, æAbd al-GhanÈ, 113, 122, 224
and language and identity, 92–4
and Turkification, 92
van Dyck, Cornelius, 82, 242n
vernaculars
in education, 81, 86–7
European, 34, 35–6
al-WalÈd Ibn æAbd al-Malik, caliph, 52, 54
wa†an (fatherland), 18, 114, 164, 171
Weber, Max, 30, 232n
will see nation, voluntarist view
Willcocks, Sir William, 185, 199
al-YÅzijÈ, IbrÅhÈm, 84, 96–109, 122, 242n
and Arab nation, 100–1
and language and identity, 106–7, 224
and language-planning, 95–6, 98–100
and linguistic borrowing, 102–3, 106–7
and modernization, 98–9, 102–4, 106, 108–9
and the Qur’an, 107–8, 109, 123
and rationalism, 104–5, 108
and revival of Arabic, 97–9, 101, 102, 105,
107, 159, 224
and science, 103–6, 108
and solecism, 106–7
Young Turks, 77, 239–40n
resistance to, 87–9, 92–3, 95–6, 110–11
and Turkification, 70, 79, 82, 84, 85–9, 91–2,
95, 116
youth, and nationalism, 233n
Yugoslavia, language and nationhood in, 136–7
YËsuf, NiqËlÅ, 178
al-ZajjÅjÈ, AbË al-QÅsim, 47–8
al-ZamakhsharÈ, AbË al-QÅsim Ma˙mËd Ibn
æUmar, 60, 62–3
ZaydÅn, JurjÈ, 240n
Zeine, N., 68, 78, 90, 97
ZiyÅd Ibn AbÈh, 51
ZiyÅd al-Aæjam, 83
ZiyÅda, NiqËlÅ, 125
Zurayq, Qunstan†Èn, 66, 234n

