

Cover images 0 
Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-642-9 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004 
All rights reserved 
Apart-from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
reviews as permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, this publication may not be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in Ivriting of The Royal Society of Chemistry, or 
in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the licences 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the terms of 
the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization outside the UK. 
Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be sent to 
The Royal Society of Chemistry at the address printed on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Alden Bookset, Northampton 
Printed and bound by Italy by Rotolito Lombarda 

Preface 
The wonderful complexity of organic chemistry involves thousands of 
different reactions which allow the synthesis and interconversions of mil- 
lions of compounds, some of great complexity. The key to understanding 
this vital branch of chemistry is the concept of the reaction mechanism. 
This book starts with a discussion of how covalent bonds break and 
form, and how these bond-breaking and bond-forming processes pro- 
vide the basis of reaction mechanisms. The principles governing how to 
make sensible suggestions about possible mechanisms are set out, and the 
distinction is made between elementary reactions, which involve just one 
step, and stepwise reactions which have more than one step and involve 
the production of intermediates that react further. 
Chapter 2 covers kinetics, which provides useful information about react- 
ion mechanisms, and allows us to distinguish between possible mecha- 
nisms in many cases. Elementary reactions do not involve intermediates, 
but go through a transition state. Although this transition state cannot be 
isolated, it can be studied in various ways which provide insights into the 
reaction mechanism, and this forms the subject matter of Chapter 3. This is 
followed by three chapters on the most important intermediates in organic 
chemistry: anions, radicals and cations. A final chapter on molecular 
reactions concerns thermal and photochemical processes. The concepts of 
frontier orbitals and the aromatic transition state allow us to predict which 
reactions are “allowed” and which are “forbidden”, and provide insights 
into why most reactions of practical interest involve multi-step processes. 
Where common names are used for organic compounds, the systematic 
name is given as well at the first mention. Common names are widely used 
in the chemical literature, in industry and commerce, and there is a great 
divergence in the use of systematic as opposed to non-systematic nomen- 
clature in the English-speaking world. 
I thank many colleagues for helpful comments and advice, particularly 
Mr Martyn Berry and Professor Alwyn Davies FRS who have read the 
entire manuscript and whose suggestions for changes have improved the 
text in numerous places. I would also like to thank my wife Pat for her 
support and forbearance over the past three years. Enjoy the book! 
Richard A. Jackson 
University of Sussex 
iii 

E D  I T 0  R - 1  N - C  H I E F  
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANT 
Projessor E W Abel 
Professor A G Duvies 
Professor D Phillips 
Prqfessor J D Woollins 
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of' short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the 
fundamental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Burrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hanson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Sainsbury 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Organic Synthetic Methods J R Hanson 
Aromatic Chemistry J D Hepworth, 
D R Waving and M J Waring 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
D 0 Hayward 
Peptides and Proteins S Doonan 
Biophysical Chemistry A Cooper 
Natural Products: The Secondary 
Metabolites J R Hanson 
Maths for Chemists, Volume I, Numbers, 
Functions and Calculus M Cockett and 
G Doggett 
Maths for Chemists, Volume TI, Power Series, 
Complex Numbers and Linear Algebra 
A4 Cockett and G Doggett 
Inorganic Chemistry in Aqueous Solution 
Organic Spectroscopic Analysis 
J Barrett 
R J Anderson, D J Bendell and 
P W Groundwater 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
R A Jackson 
S E Dann 
J M Seddon and J D Gale 
J M Hollas 
Nucleic Acids S Doonan 
Further information about this series is available at ivww.rsc.org/tct 
Order and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 426017; Email: sales(alrsc.org 

Contents 
1.1 Elementary and Stepwise Reactions 
1.2 Bond Making and Bond Breaking 
1.3 Molecularity 
1.4 Formulating Mechanisms 
1.5 Why Study Mechanisms? 
2.1 Rates and Rate Constants 
2.2 Conclusions about Mechanism that can be Drawn 
from Kinetic Order 
2.3 The Dependence of Rate of Reaction on Temperature: 
Arrhenius Parameters 
2.4 Primary Kinetic Isotope Effects 
3.1 Early and Late Transition States 
3.2 Solvent Effects 
3.3 Electronic Effects of Substituents in Polar Reactions 
3.4 Steric Effects 
3.5 Stereochemistry 
4.1 Acids and Bases 
4.2 Bases and Nucleophiles 
4.3 Carbanions 
2 
4 
11 
13 
16 
20 
25 
34 
37 
45 
47 
48 
58 
60 
73 
77 
77 

vi 
Contents 
5.1 Formation of Carbocations 
95 
5.2 Evidence for Cations 
96 
5.3 Reactions of Carbocations 
99 
5.4 Electrophilic Rearrangements involving Migration 
108 
of C to 0 or N 
5.5 Acid-catalysed Reactions 
110 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6.7 
6.8 
Formation of Free Radicals 
Destruction of Radicals (Termination) 
Detection of Radicals as Reaction Intermediates 
Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) 
Structure and Stability of Free Radicals 
Radical Chain Reactions 
Atmospheric Reactions 
Non-chain Radical Reactions 
118 
121 
122 
124 
128 
135 
143 
144 
7.1 Frontier Orbitals 
151 
7.2 The Aromatic Transition State 
159 
7.3 Application of the Idea of the Aromatic Transition 
State to Pericyclic Reactions 
163 
7.4 Photochemical Reactions 
170 
7.5 Molecular Reactions with Non-cyclic Transition States 
172 


What Is a Mechanism? 
The chemical structure of most organic compounds is well established. 
Spectroscopic methods and X-ray crystallography show that individual 
atoms in a molecule are connected, usually by covalent bonds. Bond 
lengths are often known to within about +1 pm (0.01 A) and bond 
angles to within k 1". Molecular models and graphics programs give a 
good picture of the overall shape of the molecule, including possible 
interactions between atoms that are not covalently bonded to each other. 
These structures correspond to energy minima. 
Molecules can acquire extra energy by collisions, and this energy may 
cause distortions of bond lengths or angles by small amounts. However, 
the bond lengths and angles will tend to return to the equilibrium values. 
However, if the distortions become too great, one or more covalent 
bonds may break, and new bonds may be formed, either within the 
molecule or with a new molecule with which the first has collided. A 
chemical reaction has occurred, and when equilibrium is reached, one or 
more new molecules will be produced, which may be stable or may 
undergo further reactions. 
The energy required to break covalent bonds may be provided 
thermally by molecular collisions, which give a range of molecular 
energies, providing some molecules with enough energy to react. At 
higher temperatures, more molecules will have sufficient energy to react, 
so the reaction will be faster. Alternatively, the energy can be provided in 
other ways, especially by visible or UV light. Absorption of a photon by a 
molecule causes electronic excitation, and the excited state of the 
molecule may then undergo reactions which cannot be carried out 
thermally. 
1 

2 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
I =I Elementary and Stepwise Reactions 
Reactions are of two types. In 
the reacting 
molecule or molecules are transformed into products directly, without 
the formation of intermediates. In a 
, one or more inter- 
mediate species are produced, which react further to give the products. 
A stepwise reaction can be split up into two or more elementary 
reactions. 
As an elementary reaction proceeds, the Gibbs free energy increases up 
to a maximum value and then goes down to a value corresponding to that 
of the products. The position of highest energy is called the 
, and is a key feature of the reaction; most of the experimental 
information about chemical reactions relates to the transition state and 
will be discussed in the next two chapters. 
In a stepwise reaction, at least one of the products of the first 
elementary reaction reacts further in a second elementary reaction. This 
may be followed by further elementary reactions until the reaction is 
complete. Any molecules produced in the course of a stepwise reaction 
which react further and are not present at the end of the reaction are 
known as 
. Intermediates are discussed in more detail in 
Chapters 4, 5 and 6. 
Figure 1.1 shows free energy diagrams for an elementary reaction 
(1.1 a) and for a stepwise reaction with two steps (1.1 b). 

What Is a Mechanism? 
3 
Transition state 
i 
Transition states 
Reaction coordinate 
(1.la) Elementary reaction 
e.g. HO- + CH3-Br _.* HO-CH3 + Br- 
Reaction coordinate 
(1. lb) Stepwise reaction 
e.g. Me$-Br 
__+Me$+ + Bi 
Me$+ + -OH - 
Meg-OH 
Figure 1.1 Free energy 
diagrams for elementary and 
stepwise reactions 
An example of an elementary reaction (1.1 a) is the SN2 displacement of 
a bromide ion from bromomethane by the hydroxide anion. The reaction 
is thermodynamically favourable (negative AGO) and takes place when a 
hydroxide ion collides with a bromomethane molecule. A bond starts to 
form between the oxygen atom and the carbon atom at the same time as 
the carbon-bromine bond breaks. Because of electron repulsion, in the 
early stages of the reaction the energy released by the formation of the 
new bond is not quite as much as the energy required to break the C-Br 
bond, so the free energy increases and eventually reaches a maximum at 
the transition state, before decreasing to the value appropriate to the 
products. No intermediate is involved; the reaction proceeds smoothly 
from reagents through the transition state directly to products. 
In contrast, the hydrolysis of tert-butyl bromide (2-bromo-2- 
methylpropane) occurs in a stepwise manner (reaction 1.lb). In the 
first slow step, the C-Br bond breaks, with the bromine atom taking 
both electrons from the bond and leaving as a negatively charged 
bromide ion. The remainder of the molecule is the positively charged 
tert-butyl cation (2-methylprop-2-yl cation). This is a highly reactive 
intermediate, which reacts rapidly with the hydroxide ion to form the 
corresponding alcohol. 

4 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
These two examples raise an important point about mechanisms. The 
two reactions are similar from the point of view of reagents and products, 
yet are known to have different mechanisms. Thus we cannot determine 
mechanisms merely by knowing the starting materials and products; 
we need further information. The remainder of this chapter is devoted 
to writing sensible possible mechanisms for a new reaction, and the 
remainder of the book concerns the methods that we can use to 
distinguish between the various mechanistic possibilities. 
1.2 
Bond Making and Bond Breaking 
Inspection of the structure of the reagents and products tells us which 
covalent bonds have been broken and formed during the reaction. 
1.2.1 Bond Breaking 
Covalent bonds, which involve two electrons, can be broken in two 
ways, 
(homo = same), when one electron is retained by 
each fragment, or 
(hetero = different), when both 
electrons go to one of the fragments. Heterolysis is more likely if the 
two atoms in the bond have different electronegativities, and in polar 
solvents which stabilize charges. Electronegativity is a measure of the 
power of an atom or a group of atoms to attract electrons from other 
parts of the same molecule: fluorine is the most electronegative element; 
cesium is the most electropositive. A covalent bond between two 
different elements is polarized in the direction '+X-Y"-, where Y is the 
more electronegative element. In a heterolysis, the bond will almost 
always break in the direction which will leave both bonding electrons on 
the more electronegative atom. If the original molecule has no net 
charge, this will give an anion centred on the more electronegative 
element and the cation centred on the less electronegative element. The 
electronegativities of elements commonly found in organic compounds 
are listed in Table 1.1. 

What Is a Mechanism? 
5 
H 
2.1 
Li 
Be 
B 
C 
N 
0 
F 
1 .o 
1.5 
2.0 
2.6 
3.0 
3.4 
4.0 
0.9 
1.3 
1.6 
1.9 
2.2 
.2.6 
3.2 
K 
Br 
0.8 
3.0 
I 
2.7 
I 
Na 
Mg 
Al 
Si 
P 
S 
CI 
Table 1 .l Electronegativities of elements commonly found in organic compoundsa 
a
L
~
~
 
numbers = electropositive; high numbers = electronegative 
The first stage of the SN1 reaction in reaction (l.lb) is a heterolysis 
involving a neutral molecule dissociating into a cation and an anion. 
Heterolysis will take place exclusively in the direction indicated in 
reaction (1.2a), with no contribution from (1.2b). For the heterolysis 
shown in (1.2a), the electrons originate in the covalent bond; both move 
to the bromine atom during the reaction. 
Homolysis is more likely for weak covalent bonds and for bonds 
containing atoms with similar electronegativities. Heating di-tert-butyl 

6 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
~ 
~~ 
peroxide affords an example of homolysis (equation 1.2~). The central 
0-0 bond breaks homolytically to give two tert-butoxyl radicals. Since 
one electron from the two shared electrons in the covalent bond goes to 
each atom, no charge is created during an homolysis. 
1.2.2 Bond Formation 
This is the reverse of bond breaking. The electrons involved in the new 
bond may both come from one of the reagents; this is the reverse of 
heterolysis. An example is the second step of reaction (1.1 b), redrawn in 
(1.2d) to show the movement of an electron pair from an unshared pair 
on the oxygen atom (arrow-tail) to a position between the oxygen and the 
carbon atom where the covalent bond will form (arrow-head). Since an 
unshared electron pair becomes shared during bond formation, the 
oxygen effectively loses one electron and the formal negative charge on 
the oxygen atom is reduced from -1 to zero. Likewise, the positively 
charged carbon atom acquires a half-share of two electrons and its formal 
charge changes from+ 1 to zero. 
If one electron comes from each of the atoms forming the new bond 
(the reverse of homolysis), there will be no change in formal charge (half 
of two shared electrons is equivalent to one attached to an individual 
atom). The combination of two chlorine atoms to form a chlorine 
molecule is shown in reaction (1.2e); the curved half-arrows show the 
movement of the electron from the chlorine atom (tail) to the position 
where the bond will be (head). 

What Is a Mechanism? 
7 
I .2.3 Timing of Electron Movements 
The hydrolysis of halogenoalkanes involves the breaking of a carbon- 
halogen bond and the formation of a carbon-oxygen bond. If the 
reaction is heterolytic, there are three mechanistic possibilities. The first is 
that bond breakage takes place first, followed by bond formation, as in 
reaction (1.1 b). The difficulty with processes of this type is that they often 
have a high activation energy. 
Alternatively, both bond-breaking and -making take place at the same 
time. For example, in reaction (1. la), as the carbon-halogen bond breaks, 
the new carbon-oxygen bond is forming. The energy required for bond 
breakage is partially provided by the energy given out as the new bond 
forms. Processes of this type, with simultaneous bond-breaking and 
-making, are termed 
. We show the movement of electrons as 
two (or more) curved arrows, as in reaction (1.20. Since electrons are 
flowing both towards and away from the central carbon atom, little or no 
charge is built up there during the reaction. Concerted reactions may also 
involve attack by a reagent at an unsaturated centre. Here the bond 

a 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
broken is the double bond, leaving a charge or a radical centre at the 
other end of the bond. An example is shown in reaction (1.2g). Note the 
movement of an electron pair from the n: bond to the oxygen atom. 
The third possibility, that bond formation precedes bond breakage, is 
not feasible at saturated carbon centres. Atoms of first-period elements 
cannot expand their octet, and carbon atoms cannot form more than four 
covalent bonds, so that mechanisms such as that shown in reaction (1.2h) 
can be ruled out. 
Free radical reactions show the same timing possibilities as heterolytic 
processes. Reactions (1.3as) illustrate a non-concerted and two types of 
concerted reaction. More detailed consideration of homolytic processes 
will be given in Chapter 6. 
When postulating mechanisms, concerted possibilities should be 
considered first, then processes that require one bond to be broken at 
the start of the reaction process. Steps in which more than one bond is 
broken before any new bonds are formed can normally be ruled out as 
requiring too much energy. Thus the homolysis of tetramethyllead to give 
lead and four methyl radicals is more likely to proceed by the sequential 
homolysis of the four carbon-lead bonds (reaction 1.4b) rather than by 
simultaneous rupture of all four bonds (reaction 1.4a). 
For heterolytic reactions, consideration of polarity is important in 
predicting possible reaction paths: positive reagents tend to react with the 
negatively polarized atom of a covalent bond and vice versa. Thus 
bromomethane, with "+C, reacts with -OH to give methanol, but not 
with a proton to give methane (reaction 1.5). If the bromomethane is 
allowed to react with magnesium to form methylmagnesium bromide, the 
polarity is reversed, giving "-C, which reacts with acids to give methane 

What Is a Mechanism? 
9 
and not with bases to give methanol. Polar reactions are considered in 
more detail in Chapters 4 and 5. 
1.2.4 Labelling 
It may often be obvious which bonds are broken and formed in a 
reaction. However, in some cases it is not so obvious. In the acid- 
catalysed hydrolysis of esters (reaction 1 . Q  it is not obvious whether 
the alkyl-oxygen bond is broken (1.6a) or the acyl-oxygen bond (1.6b). 
This question can be resolved by use of an "0 isotopic label in the ester. 

10 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
~ 
~~ 
Route (1.6a) predicts that the "0 label will end up in the carboxylic acid, 
whereas route (1.6b) predicts labelling of the alcohol. By mass 
spectrometry, it is established that the "0 label ends up in the alcohol, 
thus showing that acyl-oxygen fission takes place (reaction 1.6b). Note 
that neither (1.6a) nor (I .6b) represents complete mechanisms: the timing 
of the bond breaking and bond formation is not established, nor is the 
role of the acid catalyst. However, all the possibilities represented by 
(1.6a) are eliminated, simplifying the mechanistic search. 
Sometimes a reaction is more complicated than appears at first sight. 
The halide hydrolysis reactions in Figure 1.1 result in formation of the 
new C-0 bond at the same carbon atom from which the bromide ion 
is detached. However, in the apparently analogous reaction in which 
iodobenzene reacts with the amide ion to give aniline (phenylamine), the 
reaction does not go by route (1.7a). Carbon labelling of the atom to which 
the iodine atom is attached shows that in the aniline product about half the 
label is on the carbon attached to the NH2 group, whereas the other half is 
located on the adjacent carbon atoms. Significantly, none of the label is 
located further away. This shows that an intermediate must be formed in 
which two carbon atoms have become equivalent, leading to the proposal 
of the extraordinary benzyne intermediate in route (1.7b), an intermediate 
whose existence was later demonstrated by trapping experiments. 

What Is a Mechanism? 
11 
Labelling can sometimes be carried out by introduction of an inert 
substituent group in the molecule, rather than by isotopic substitution. 
For example, 4-iodotoluene (4-iodomethylbenzene) can be used to detect 
the change of position of the substituent group in reaction (I .7). The 
products are a mixture of 3- and 4-aminotoluenes, but not the 2-isomer, 
again pointing to the benzyne intermediate, rather than to complete 
freedom of attack for the incoming amide ion. 
1.3 
Molecularity 
We conclude this chapter by considering the 
of elementary 
reactions, that is the number of molecules that are involved in the 
transition state. This number is almost always one or two. Such reactions 
are termed 
and 
I .3. I Unimolecular Reactions 
Unimolecular reactions may be concerted, involving simultaneous bond 
formation and cleavage, as in reaction (1.8), or may involve the breakage 
of one bond, either heterolytically, as in the first stage of (l.lb), or 
homolytically, as in (1.4b). The energy required for reaction may be 
acquired by random collisions, which occasionally give a molecule the 
energy required for reaction. Photolysis, in which a photon of visible or 
UV light is absorbed by a molecule, may also cause reaction, often by 
homolysis of a covalent bond, for example the photolysis of a chlorine 
molecule to give two chlorine atoms (equation 1.9). 
hv 
c1-c1 - 
2 c1' 
1.3.2 Bimolecular Reactions 
Bimolecular reactions involve a collision between two molecules, with 
enough energy to overcome the activation barrier. These processes are 
usually concerted, with bond formation and breaking taking place 
simultaneously. The relative orientation is important, so that the new 
bonds can be formed between atoms that are near enough to each other. 
Reactions (I. 1 a) and the first step of (1.7b) are examples of bimolecular 
reactions. Reaction (1.10) is an example of a bimolecular reaction that 
does not involve ions. Three covalent bonds are broken and formed 
synchronously, and 
of this type are very useful 

12 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
synthetically, particularly in forming compounds with new six- 
membered rings. 
I .a13 Termolecular Reactions 
Termolecular reactions, involving three molecules in the transition state, 
are very rarely encountered. Bimolecular reactions have to take place in 
the very brief time that two molecules collide, before they bounce apart 
again. The chance that a third molecule will collide at exactly the same 
time, in a suitable orientation for reaction, is extremely improbable. 
Termolecular reactions only occur under very unusual conditions, where 
special circumstances apply. For example, the reaction of two hydrogen 
atoms in the gas phase to form a hydrogen molecule (reaction 1.11) 
cannot take place as a bimolecular reaction because the energy liberated 
by the formation of the H-H covalent bond can only go into vibrational 
and rotational energy of the new molecule, and this energy is sufficient to 
cause the almost immediate reversal of the reaction to give back the two 
hydrogen atoms. However, if a third molecule is available to absorb the 
energy, reaction (1.1 1) can take place. 
H'+H'+M - 
H-H 
+ M  
(1.11) 
Reactions involving more than three molecules are virtually 
impossible. 
I .3.4 Microscopic Reversibility 
In principle, all elementary reactions are reversible, although if they are 
very exothermic the reverse reaction may be immeasurably slow. The 
reverse reaction must follow the same route (in reverse) as the forward 
reaction and go via the same transition state. This is known as the 
. The main practical application of 
this principle is in ruling out, as elementary processes, reactions which 
would give more than three molecules. The reverse of any such reaction 
would have a molecularity greater than three, which we have established 
above would be virtually impossible. Mechanism (I .4a) can be ruled out 
on these grounds, and another example will be found in the problems at 
the end of the chapter. 

What Is a Mechanism? 
13 
~ 
I .4 
Formulating Mechanisms 
We have seen above in reaction (1- 1) that there are at least two possible 
mechanisms for the hydrolysis of halogenoalkanes. How do we formulate 
possible mechanisms? 
First, inspect the bonding in the reagents and products, to find what 
bonds have been broken and formed. Then, use this information to create 
possible mechanistic paths based on the different ways in which these 
bond-breaking and -making processes can be achieved, trying different 
possibilities involving bond breakage first, bond formation first, or 
simultaneous breakage and formation of two or more bonds. Remember 
that bonds can break homolytically or heterolytically. 
Rule out steps involving more than one net bond-breaking process 
taking place at the same time, and bond-forming reactions that would 
expand the octets of first-row elements on energetic grounds. Rule out 
steps that involve more than two reactant or three product molecules on 
“probability of collision grounds” (see Section 1.3). Look for concerted 
reactions where possible; reactions where bond breakage and formation 
take place at the same time will usually have lower activation energies 
than reaction steps involving bond breakage. 
If a catalyst is required for the reaction, ensure that it figures in your 
mechanistic scheme. A bond will need to be established between the 
catalyst and one of the reacting molecules, usually in the first step of 
the reaction. In a later step, this bond will be broken again to regenerate 
the catalyst. 
Heterolytic processes are favoured in polar solvents where the ions 
formed are stabilized, but are uncommon in non-polar solvents and 
virtually unknown in the gas phase. Homolytic and molecular processes 
are much less affected by solvents, and are therefore the favoured possi- 
bilities for reactions taking place in the gas phase or in non-polar solvents. 

i 4  
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

What Is a Mechanism? 
15 

76 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
I .5 
Why Study Mechanisms? 
There are a number of reasons, not mutually exclusive, which may be 
listed by the type of person most affected: 
Students. Mechanisms form a framework on which the factual detail of 
organic chemistry, necessary for a good understanding, can be hung. It 
would be possible to learn all the individual reagents which add to 
carbonyl groups, but the classification of many of these as nucleophiles, 
together with an understanding of why these reagents add to the carbon 
centre, makes the information more memorable. 
Chemists Involved in Synthesis. Mechanistic knowledge allows intelli- 
gent variation of reaction conditions, temperatures and proportions of 
reagents to maximize yields of pure products. 
Industrial Chemists. Mechanistic knowledge allows the prediction of 
new reagents and reaction conditions which may affect desired 
transformations. It also allows optimization of yields, cutting down on 
raw materials costs and waste material which may be expensive to dispose 
of. For example, Augmentin is a broad-spectrum antibiotic, marketed by 
GlaxoSmithKline, with sales of over $2 billion in 2001. If, say, 5% of the 
costs are in raw materials, a 1 % improvement in reaction yield would save 
GSK at least a million dollars per annum. 
Biochemists, and Those Involved in Medical Research. The reactions 
involved in metabolism in living organisms are organic, and many are 
understood in some detail. The establishment of mechanism is of vital 
importance in understanding how diseases affect metabolism, how drug 
molecules can assist or prevent particular biochemical reactions, and in 
the development of new drugs. 
Chemists Giving Advice on Environmental Issues. Organic molecules in 
the environment can have beneficial or harmful effects (or both). An 
understanding of the mechanistic chemistry involved in the degradation 
of chemicals in the environment can lead to improvements in the 
environment. For example, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), used as refri- 
gerants, escape into the atmosphere and diffuse to the stratosphere where 
they damage the ozone layer. Knowledge of the reaction mechanisms 
involved has led to replacement of these chemicals for some purposes by 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). These degrade before they reach 
the stratosphere and do much less harm to the ozone layer. 

What Is a Mechanism? 
17 

18 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

What Is a Mechanism? 
19 

Kinetics 
In Chapter 1, we established some ground rules for writing plausible 
mechanisms (normally several) for particular reactions, based on the 
identification of bonds formed and broken in the reaction. In this chapter, 
we show how 
the study of how concentrations of reagents or 
products vary with time, enable us to rule out some potential mechanisms 
and provide insight into elementary and stepwise reactions. 
2 1  Rates and Rate Constants 
2. I I First-order Reactions 
When we study the rate of a reaction, we normally actually measure 
concentrations of reagents or products at different times as the reaction 
proceeds. To see how this is connected to mechanism, let us look first at 
elementary unimolecular and bimolecular reactions. 
20 

Kinetics 
21 
Kinetic theory tells us that reactions take place because random 
collisions between molecules produce a small number of molecules with 
an energy greater than the minimum (the activation energy) for reaction 
to occur. For unimolecular reactions at a particular temperature, this 
number (and thus the rate of reaction) will be proportional to the number 
of molecules present in a particular space (volume), i.e. the concentration. 
Thus for a reaction 
Rate of reaction = d[B]/dt = -d[A]/dt = kl[A] 
(2.2) 
The constant kl is known as the first-order rate constant and has the units 
of 1 /time, normally expressed as s- '. 
For a reaction of this type, the reaction will slow down as the reaction 
proceeds, so that when half the starting compound has been used up, the 
rate will have fallen to half of the original value. After three-quarters has 
been used up (and only a quarter remains), the rate will have fallen to a 
quarter of the original rate, and so on. The time taken for the 
concentration to drop to a half of the original value in a first-order 
reaction is a constant, the half-life; this does not depend on the original 
concentration. 
It is easier to measure concentration than rate; a plot of concentration 
against time is shown in Figure 2.l(a). This type of process is known as 
exponential decay. In principle, reactions of this type are never complete. 
However, 99.9% completion corresponds to about 10 half-lives, and 
99.9999% to 20 half-lives, at which point for all practical purposes the 
reaction is complete. 
Figure 2.1 First-order reactions 

22 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
To find out if the reaction is first order, you can make a plot of the type 
shown in Figure 2.1 (a) and check that the half-life is constant, i.e. that the 
time taken for the concentration to fall from 100% to 50% is the same as 
that for 50% to 25% and 25% to 12.5%. In practice, it is often difficult to 
be sure of half-lives, particularly if there is significant scatter, and it may 
be impractical to measure the rate over several half-lives. 
An alternative is to use calculus to transform equation (2.2) by 
integration. This gives equations (2.3) and (2.4): 
Thus a plot of loglo[A] against time should give a straight line of slope 
-2.303k1. The straightness of the plot is evidence for first-order 
behaviour, and the slope allows the first-order rate constant kl to be 
determined (Figure 2.1 b). 
From a practical point of view, it is often easier to monitor the 
concentration of product rather than reagent. Provided that the reaction 
is quantitative, the final concentration of B, [B],, will equal [Ale, so a plot 
of [B],-[B], 
against t will be equivalent to a plot of [A], against t. 
2.1.2 Second-order Reactions 
For an elementary bimolecular reaction, the two molecules involved may 
be the same or different. The number of product molecules is almost 
always one or two. We have already come across reactions of this type: 
the SN2 hydrolysis of halogenoalkanes involves reaction between two 
different molecules; reaction (2.5) involves two molecules of the same 
compound, buta-1,3-diene (1): 
1 
Since two molecules are involved in the reaction, and the rate of 
reaction depends on the frequency of collisions, the rate of reaction will 
depend on both [A] and [B] (different reagents), or on [AI2 if there is only 
one reagent: 

Kinetics 
23 
Rate ofreaction = d[C]/dt = d[D]/dt = -d[A]/dt 
(2.7) 
= -d[B]/dt = k2[A][B] 
A + A - - + C  
(2.8) 
(2.9) 
Rate ofreaction = -d[A]/dt = k2[AI2 
For reactions involving a single component A, a plot of [A] against time 
will give a curve of the type shown in Figure 2.2(a). Because the rate of 
reaction depends on the square of the concentration of the reagents, the 
rate will fall off more rapidly with time than for a first-order reaction, and 
the half-life will increase as the reaction proceeds. As with first-order 
reactions, it is useful to integrate the rate equation to give an expression 
involving concentration directly; the result of integrating equation (2.9) is 
equation (2. lo), from which it can be seen that a plot of 1 /[A] against time 
should be a straight line, with a slope of k2. This is shown in Figure 2.2(b). 
(2.10) 
Figure 2.2 Second-order reactions 
Similar expressions can be derived for reactions of different orders. 
For reactions with two components, it is better to determine the order 
with respect to each component separately, as described in the next 
section. 
2.1.3 Order of Reaction and Connection between 
Reaction Order and Reaction Mechanism 
In more complicated reactions with several reagents, the reaction rate 
depends on the concentrations of some or all of the components, and for 

24 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
a reaction of type (2.1 I), an expression of the type (2.12) can often be 
writ ten: 
A + B + C  ... +Products 
(2.11) 
Rate = -d[A]/dt = -d[B]/dt = -d[C]/dt = k[A]'[B]"[C]" . . . (2.12) 
The reaction is then said to be of I-th order with respect to A, m-th order 
with respect to B, n-th order with respect to C, and so on, with a total 
order of I+ un + n. The orders with respect to each component are usually 
but not always integers. Experimentally, orders with respect to individual 
reagents are usually obtained by carrying out the reaction with all other 
components except the one being investigated (say A) being in a large 
(10- to 20-fold) excess. Under these conditions, the concentrations of 
B, C, etc., will not change appreciably during the reaction, and the rate 
will effectively depend only on [A] as the only reagent being depleted. 
We talk of pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order, etc., behaviour in 
these cases. 

Kinetics 
25 
2.2 
Conclusions about Mechanism that can be 
Drawn from Kinetic Order 
2.2.1 First- and Second-order Reactions 
Elementary uni- and bimolecular reactions will necessarily show first- and 
second-order kinetic behaviour, but the reverse is not necessarily true: 
a first-order reaction may not be unimolecular and a second-order reac- 
tion may not be bimolecular. For example, we considered the decompo- 
sition of dibenzylmercury in Chapter 1, in which the mechanism could 
either be elementary, giving a mercury atom and a 1,2-diphenylethane 
molecule directly (reaction 2.13a), or the reaction could be complex, with 
a slow initial homolysis of a carbon-mercury bond, followed by rapid 
further reactions to give the products (reaction 2.13b). Similarly for the 
Cope rearrangement of diene 2 to diene 4, the reaction could be elemen- 
tary, with a concerted cyclic movement of electrons (reaction 2.14a), or 
might involve a di-radical intermediate 3 which rapidly reacted further to 
give the observed product 4 (reaction 2.14b). Both these mechanisms 
would lead to first-order kinetics, so the establishment of first-order 
kinetic behaviour for both these reaction schemes does not establish the 

26 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
_
_
_
_
_
~
~
~
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
 
_____~______________ 
mechanism. In fact, based on other evidence, reaction (2.13) is believed to 
involve the complex mechanism (2.13b) whereas the Cope rearrangement 
is believed to be an elementary unimolecular reaction (2.14a). The same is 
true for reactions between two different species to give products: second- 
order rate dependence (first order with respect to both components) is 
consistent with a bimolecular reaction but does not prove it. 
2.2.2 Rate-determining Step 
Why does the mechanism shown in reaction (2.13b) lead to simple first- 
order kinetics, not involving rate constants for the reactions subsequent 
to the first step? The answer is that the first step is slow; subsequent 
reactions are much faster. The only reaction by which dibenzylmercury is 
destroyed is the first step, which is a unimolecular reaction that is first 
order. The overall rate of loss of dibenzylmercury will therefore show 
first-order kinetics, with the measured rate constant corresponding to k d .  
Reactions of this type with a “bottleneck” are said to have a 
Reactions subsequent to the rate- 
determining step, which need not be the first step, can have no effect on 
the kinetics. We have already come across another reaction involving a 
rate-determining step, the S N 1  hydrolysis of a halogenoalkane by a base. 
Although reaction (2.15) involves both a t-butyl bromide (2-bromo- 
2-methylpropane) molecule 5 and a hydroxide ion, experimentally the 
(or 

Kinetics 
27 
rate shows a first-order dependence on 5 and zero-order (i.e. no) 
dependence on the hydroxide ion, in accordance with equation (2.15). 
Reactions which show a zero-order dependence on one of the components 
cannot be elementary reactions. 
slow 
-OH 
Me3C-Br - 
Br- + Me3C' - 
Me3C-OH 
fast 
(2.15) 
5 

28 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
2.2.3 Rate of Formation of Products 
Incidentally, if we tried to measure the rates of reactions (2.13) or (2.15) 
by measuring the rate of appearance of the products, we would find that 
the rates would almost exactly match those of the disappearance of the 
starting materials. Even though intermediates are involved, they are so 
unstable as not to build up any measurable concentration during the 
reaction. However, in the acid-catalysed hydrolysis of the diester 6 
(reaction 2.16), the initial rate of disappearance of 6 will be greater than 
the rate of formation of 8 because the intermediate 7 will have a similar 
reactivity to the initial diester 6, so it will build up in concentration 
initially, and until an appreciable amount of the intermediate is formed, 
the rate of production of the diacid product will be negligible. Reactions 
where the rate of formation ofthe products is initially slower than the rate of 
disappearance of starting materials cannot be elementary. 

Kinetics 
29 
C02Et 
C02Et 
CO2H 
I 
I 
I 
C02Et 
C02H 
COzH 
6 
7 
8 
(2.16) 
2.2.4 Reactions of Order Higher than Second 
These cannot be elementary, since termolecular organic reactions are 
virtually non-existent. The most common reason for third-order kinetics 
is for two reagents to react with each other rapidly and reversibly to give 
an intermediate, which then undergoes a slow rate-determining reaction 
to give a product. An example is the base-catalysed dimerization of two 
acetaldehyde (ethanal) molecules to give 3-hydroxypropanal (aldol, 11). 
The rate is proportional to [CH3CHO]2[OH-]. Proton abstraction by the 
hydroxide ion from the acetaldehyde molecule gives rise to a small 
concentration of the intermediate anion 9. The reverse reaction is rapid, 
an equilibrium is set up and the concentration of this intermediate, [9], 
will be k2. 17a[CH3CHO][OH-]/k-2. 17a[H20]. The rate-determining step 
is equation (2.17b), a second-order reaction involving addition of 
9 to a CH3CH0 molecule to give the anion 10. The rate of formation 
of product will therefore be the rate of this reaction, k2.17b[CH3CHO] X 
[-CH2CHO] = k2.17ak2.17b[CH3CHO]2[OH-]/~-~.17a[H20], accounting 
for the third-order behaviour. 

30 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
2.2.5 Reactions with Fractional Order: Radical 
Chain Reactions 
These cannot be elementary. The fractions are usually 1/2 or 3/2 and 
indicate a 
An example is the bromination of 
trichloromethane (chloroform; reaction 2.18); the kinetic expression is 
given by equation (2.19). 
Br2 + CHC13 - 
BrCC13 + HBr 
(2.18) 
-d[Br21 = kobs[CHC13] 
[Br2]'.' 
dt 
(2.19) 
Radical reactions will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. Radicals 
are molecules or atoms with an unpaired electron, usually formed by 
thermolysis (e.g. reaction 2.20) or by photolysis of compounds containing 
a weak covalent linkage. In reaction (2.1 8), the Br-Br bond is the weakest 
bond present in the two molecules, and the homolysis (2.20) takes place at 
an appreciable rate at temperatures above 150" C. Processes that produce 
radicals in this way are termed 
Since the radicals 
are formed in very small quantities, and since they are very reactive 
species, the bromine atom will react predominantly with trichloro- 
methane (reaction 2.21) to give hydrogen bromide and the trichloro- 
methyl radical. This in turn reacts with a bromine molecule (usually not 
a bromine atom - there are very few of these around) to give the 
bromotrichloromethane product and regenerating a bromine atom 
(reaction 2.22). The pair of reactions (2.21) and (2.22) are called 
These are the reactions that turn reagents into 
products: up to several thousand molecules for each bromine atom 
produced. The bromine atom used up in (2.21) is regenerated in (2.22). 
Finally, the combination reactions (2.23), (2.24) and (2.25) destroy the 
radicals 
These bimolecular reactions have very large rate 
constants, so the radical concentrations can only reach a very low level. 

Kinetics 
31 
For this reaction, it turns out that the propagation step (2.21) is much 
slower than (2.22), so that when a bromine atom is lost in reaction (2.21), 
it is quickly regenerated by (2.22); therefore most of the radicals present in 
the system at any one time are bromine atoms. Since the instantaneous 
concentration (-lo-' 
M) of bromine atoms is much smaller than the 
throughput of the atoms and its absolute value falls only very slowly as 
the reaction proceeds, the rates of formation (= 2k20[Br2]) and destruc- 
tion (= 2k23[Br']) of these reactive atoms are approximately equal, so we 
can equate these rates in equation (2.26) and derive an expression for the 
concentration of the bromine atoms in equation (2.27). This is the 
Because [Br'] >> ['CC13], termination steps (2.24) 
and (2.25) can be ignored. Throughput to products depends on the 
propagation steps, and since (2.21) is rate determining, the overall rate of 
reaction is given by equation (2.28), and the reaction has an overall order 
of 1.5: first order with respect to the trichloromethane and 0.5 order with 
respect to the bromine. 
d[Br'l = 2k2,20[Br2] 
- 2k2.23[Br*]2 
== 0 
dt 
(2.26) 
(2.27) 
(2.28) 
2.2.6 Reactions with Mixed Order: Competing Reactions 
In many reactions, two or more processes may contribute to the dis- 
appearance of a reactant. These processes may have different kinetic 
dependence on the reagent concentrations. For example, when 2-bromo- 
propane is hydrolysed to propan-2-01 by sodium hydroxide in aqueous 
ethanol, both sN1 and SN2 processes take place at the same time, and 
each contributes to the loss of the 2-bromopropane, as shown in reactions 
(2.29) and (2.30). Both processes involve [Me2CH-Br], but the sN2 
process also depends on [OH-] whereas the SN1 process does not. The 
overall rate of loss of 2-bromopropane is given by expression (2.31), 
showing a mixed kinetic dependence of zero and first order with respect 
to the hydroxide ion. 
slow 
-OH 
MeZCH-Br - 
Br- + Me*CH+ 
MeZCH-OH 
(2.29) 
MezCH-Br 
+ -OH - 
MeZCH-OH 
+ Br- 
(2.30) 

32 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
-d[Me2CHBr] 
dt 
Rate = 
= k2.29 [Me2CHBr] + k2.30 [Me2CHBr] [OH-] 
(2.31) 
This kinetic behaviour is difficult to distinguish from the fractional 
order dependence discussed in the previous section. However, if several 
experiments are carried out with different [OH-] concentrations, and 
a plot of {initial rate of reaction/[Me2CH-Br]} against [OH-] is made, 
the result will be a straight line of slope k2 and an intercept of kl, as shown 
in Figure 2.3. For this reaction, kl = k2.29 and k2 = k2.30. 
Figure 2.3 Mixed first- and 
second-order kinetics. A plot of 
rate/[A] against [B] for a reaction 
which follows the rate 
expression: rate = k,[A]+k,[A][B] 
Many acid- and base-catalysed reactions show mixed-order kinetics. 
For example, 1, 1 , 1-triethoxyethane (ethyl orthoacetate, 12) is hydrolysed 
to ethanol and acetic acid (ethanoic acid) in aqueous buffers of m- 
nitrophenol (a weak acid) and its sodium salt (reaction 2.32). The kinetic 
dependence is shown in equation (2.33). It appears that three separate 
processes contribute to the loss of 12 from the reaction mixture. The 
second term in rate expression (2.33) suggests a reaction with a rate- 
determining step involving transfer of a proton from H30+ with a rate 
constant kh. This would correspond to the first step of (2.32), with 
HA=H30+. The third term suggests a similar process, but with the 
transfer of the proton from the undissociated m-nitrophenol (first step in 
2.32, but with HA=HOC6H4N02, rate constant k J .  The first term 
probably relates to the transfer of a proton to 12 from a water molecule 
(first step in 2.32, but with HA=H20). The k, term should involve the 
water concentration, but this cannot be varied significantly in aqueous 
solution. The mixed order kinetic expression for reaction (2.32) provides 
strong evidence that the reaction can be catalysed by any acid present 
(H30+, HOC6H4NO2 or H20). Any acid can provide the proton in 
the rate-determining step, though with different rate constants, and the 
reaction is therefore subject to general acid catalysis. 

Kinetics 
33 
EtO 
EtO 
H 
I 
HA 
I
/
 
fast 
1 
\ 
slow 
I 
\ 
several steps 
(2.32) 
CH3-C-0 
CH3-C-0' - - 
CH3C02H + 3 EtOH 
EtO 
Et 
EtO 
Et 
12 
(2.33) 
2.2.7 More Complex Kinetic Behaviour 
Not all reactions show a kinetic behaviour based on a simple order 
dependence. The most common reason for this is that the reaction is 
reversible, so the rate will fall as product accumulates, and its 
concentration will enter the kinetic rate expression. The simplest solution 
if this happens is to measure initial rates and confine the kinetic study to 
the first few percent of the reaction. 
2.2.8 Summary 
A flow chart showing how information about kinetic order gives useful 
information about mechanisms is shown in Figure 2.4. It must be 
emphasized that kinetic information can rule out possible mechanisms 
Figure 2.4 
Information about 
reaction mechanisms from 
kinetics studies 

34 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
but can never prove a particular mechanism. If more than one mechanistic 
possibility remains that is consistent with the observed kinetics, then other 
methods need to be employed, as discussed in the next four chapters. 
2.3 The Dependence of Rate of Reaction on 
Temperature: Arrhenius Parameters 
Most reactions go faster at higher temperatures, and for the majority of 
reactions the variation with temperature can be expressed in the form of 
equation (2.34). If we take logarithms of both sides of this equation, we 
obtain equation (2.35), from which we see that a plot of logl& against l/T 
(in Kelvin) should be a straight line of slope E/2.303R and intercept 
logloA. Equation (2.34) is known as the 
A is known as 
the 
or 
and E is the 
which can be identified for elementary reactions as the energy required for 
the molecules to reach the transition state and therefore be able to react. 
These parameters provide useful information, particularly for radical or 
molecular reactions; for ionic reactions, solvent effects make it difficult to 
extract useful information. 
k = Ae- EIRT 
(2.34) 
2.3.1 Information from Activation Energies 
(2.35) 
Although it is difficult to predict activation energies, it is easier to measure 
or predict heats (enthalpies) of formation and hence heats of reaction. 
For an endothermic reaction, the activation energy must be at least as 
great as the endothermicity AH (Figure 2.5), so if the measured activation 
energy of reaction is less than the endothermicity of a proposed 
elementary reaction or an initial rate-determining step, that proposal 
can be ruled out. 
r--- 
AH 
Figure 2.5 Endothermic 
react ions 
I 
Reaction coordinate 

Kinetics 
35 
For example, tetraethyllead decomposes on heating to give lead, 
ethane, ethene and butane. Two possible mechanisms are equations 
(2.36) and (2.37). Mechanism (2.36) involves simultaneous rupture of all 
four Pb-C bonds to give a lead atom and four ethyl radicals. From the 
known heats of formation of tetraethyllead, lead and the ethyl radical, 
the heat of reaction of (2.36) can be estimated as +515 kJ mol-'. This is 
massively greater than the observed activation energy of 155 kJ mol- *, 
so it must be concluded that (2.36) cannot be correct, which suggests 
that the stepwise breakage of successive Pb-C bonds as shown in (2.37) 
is favoured. Since the simple homolysis of one bond in an organic 
molecule normally takes place without an extra activation energy over 
and above that required by its endothermicity, the figure of 155 kJ 
mol-' can be equated with AH for the first step of (2.37), allowing the 
heat of formation of the triethyllead radical to be determined. A large 
number of heats of formation of organic radicals have been determined 
in this way. 
Pb(C2H5)4 - 
Pb + 4 C2H; 
AH = +515 kJ mol-' 
(2.36) 
(2.37) 
Cyclohexene decomposes on heating to give butadiene and ethene. Two 
mechanistic possibilities are equations (2.38) and (2.39). Mechanism 
(2.38) involves breakage of a single C-C bond, a process which should 
require an energy input of about 343 kJ mol-', 
lessened by say 
38 kJ mol-' to about 305 kJ mol-' to take account of the allylic 
stabilization expected in the intermediate diradical 13. The observed 
activation energy is 279 kJ mol-', significantly less than this value, 
which suggests that the alternative concerted reaction (2.39), where 
three bonds are made concurrently with three bonds being broken, is 
more likely. 

36 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
28382 Arrhenius A factors 
Simple kinetic theory for bimolecular reactions equates the activation 
energy of the reaction to the minimum energy for the reaction to take 
place, which is brought to the reacting system by the energy of collision of 
the two reagent molecules. The A factor is seen as the product PZ of the 
rate of collisions Z multiplied by a probability factor P, which depends on 
the likelihood of a particular collision having the correct geometry for the 
reaction to take place. Transition state theory relates the A factor to 
the difference in entropy AS’ between the reagent molecule(s) and 
the transition state. The more entropy that is lost (e.g. by molecules 
associating, forming new bonds that restrict rotation), the lower the A 
factor. This is known as a “tight” transition state. Conversely, if the 
molecule is dissociating into fragments with a gain in entropy, this 
corresponds to a “loose” transition state and a high A factor. For 
unimolecular reactions, homolyses of molecules into radicals form 
excellent examples of a loose transition state, which is close to the two 
incipient free radicals. These have logloA in the region of 15-1 7 s-’. On 
the other hand, molecular eliminations such as the elimination of HBr 
from CH3CH2Br, which involves a four-membered transition state with 
some bonding between the H and Br atoms and a restriction of rotation 
round the C-C bond, have logloA in the region of 12.5-14 s-’. 
For bimolecular reactions, the loosest transition states are found in 
combination reactions of radicals, where (as for the reverse homolysis) 
the transition state corresponds to very loose association between the 
two radicals, with most of the rotational entropy conserved. These give 
logloA values in the range of 9-10.5 M-’ s-’. Radical addition to 
double bonds and transfer reactions show some loss in entropy in the 
transition state, and have logloA values in the region of 7-9 M-’ s-’. 
Cycloadditions such as the Diels-Alder reaction, in which bonds are 
formed simultaneously between both ends of the reagent molecules, lose 
even more entropy, with logloA values in the region of 5-7 M-’ s-’. 
These results are summarized in Table 2.1. It should be emphasized 
that these generalizations apply only to molecular and radical reactions. 
For polar reactions, solvation effects are often very large, making 
generalization difficult. 

Kinetics 
37 
Table 2.1 Ranges of Arrhenius pre-exponential factors for different reaction types 
Molecularity 
Type of reaction 
Example 
Homolysis 
C2H6 - 
2CH3' 
Four-centre process 
C&Br - 
CH2=CH2 + HBr 
Pericyclic reactions 
2Q-+) 
Radical combination 
2 CH; - 
C2H6 
CH; + CH2=CH2 - 
CH3-C€-L-C€ 
CH; +C2H6 - 
CH4 + C2H; 
Radical transfer or 
addition to a double 
bond (reagent an 
organic radical) 
a univalent atom 
as reagent 
As above, but with 
Cl*+CH4 - 
HCl + CH; 
15-1 7 
12.5-1 4 
5-7 
9-10.5 
7-9 
10-1 1 
2.4 
Primary Kinetic Isotope Effects 
Isotopes (particularly deuterium) are often used as labels to show where 
a reaction has occurred in a particular molecule. A specialized use of 
kinetics applied to isotopically substituted molecules provides infor- 
mation about the mechanism that is often not available from other 
sources. 
The energy of a C-H bond in an organic molecule as a function of 
bond length is shown in Figure 2.6a. If we compress the bond below its 
equilibrium value, the energy rises steeply because of electron-electron 
and nuclear-nuclear repulsion. If we stretch the bond, the energy rises 
more gradually due to decreased orbital overlap and bonding. At an 
infinite separation we have the free organic radical R' and a hydrogen 
atom. The forces involved are electrostatic, and will not be affected if we 
replace the hydrogen by deuterium, since this merely involves adding an 
uncharged neutron to the proton in the hydrogen nucleus. However, the 
deuteron is approximately twice as heavy as the proton, so even though 
the force constant of the bond is unchanged, the vibration frequency will 

38 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
be dramatically reduced because the same force is having to move a 
particle with twice the mass. At room temperature, most molecules are in 
their lowest vibrational state, but because of the zero-point energy, this is 
just above the minimum on the energy curve. This zero-point energy will 
be slightly smaller for the C-D than the C--H bond, so the deuteriated 
compound will have a slightly greater bond dissociation energy than the 
protiated compound, as shown in Figure 2.6a. 
I 
Distanw between R and H 
Reaction codinate 
Figure 2.6 The primary deuterium isotope effect. (a) The homolytic dissociation of an alkane, showing the differences between 
the bond dissociation energies D(R-H) and D(R-D) due to zero-point energy differences (exaggerated). (b) A reaction in which 
some zero-point energy is retained in the transition state. ED - EH is less than D(R-D) - D(R-H) 
If the rate-determining step of the reaction involves breakage of the 
isotopically substituted bond, in the transition state the zero-point energy 
of that bond will have been lost. Accordingly, there will be a slightly 
higher activation energy for breakage of the stronger C-D bond than the 
weaker C-H bond. This is known as the 
kD has a maximum value of about 7 at 25°C and kH/kT cannot be greater 
than about 17 for reactions in which a hydrogen atom is transferred from 
one species to another. For heavier atoms, the isotope effects are much 
smaller. The smaller relative difference in isotopic mass (C13/C12 = 1.08, 
D/H=2) will give a much smaller difference in zero-point energies, and 
the maximum value of a CI3/C12 isotope effect at room temperature will 
be in the region of 1.04. The nearer the observed isotope effect is to the 
theoretical maximum, the more completely the bond in question must be 
broken in the transition state. 
The greater availability and cheapness of deuterium compounds, 
coupled with the large isotope effects, has until recently made this isotope 
the most widely used in mechanistic studies. However, recent work 
using nuclear magnetic resonance or mass spectrometry has allowed the 
determination of heavy atom isotope effects in natural abundance, by 
k H /  

Kinetics 
39 
carrying out reactions to a high level of completion and comparing the 
isotopic composition of the initial reagent with recovered reagent. This 
technique magnifies small differences in isotope effects into larger 
differences in ratios of species left after reaction. As an illustration, let 
us consider two isotopically substituted species A and B present initially 
in the same concentrations, showing a kinetic isotope effect kA/kB of 2. 
After three half-lives of reaction of the slower species B, its concentration 
would have fallen to 12.5% of its original value, but the faster species 
A would have fallen to 1.56%, and the ratio of the two concentrations 
[BJ/[AJ in the recovered starting material would be 12.511.56 = 8. 
An example of a reaction showing a primary deuterium isotope effect is 
reaction (2.40), in which acetone (propanone) reacts with bromine in the 
presencz of base to give bromoacetone (bromopropanone). Under similar 
conditions, the fully deuteriated compound CD3COCD3 reacts about 
seven times more slowly. This is consistent with the mechanism shown; 
the rate-determining step is the production of the anion 14 in the first 
step. The C-H bond is partially broken in the transition state, so the 
deuteriated compound will react more slowly. 

40 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The absence of a primary kinetic isotope effect throws important light 
on the mechanism of electrophilic aromatic substitution. Nitration of 
benzene labelled with very small amounts of the radioactive hydrogen 
isotope tritium was carried out to a partial extent. The radioactivity in 
the unreacted benzene recovered was virtually identical to that of the 
initial benzene, showing that there was no significant isotope effect. This 
suggests that there is no significant breakage of the C-H (or C-T) bond in 
the transition state, and that equation (2.41b) can be ruled out in favour 
of (2.41a) where the rate-determining step involves addition of the 
nitronium ion to give the stabilized intermediate 15, followed by a rapid 
loss of a proton (or Tf). 
The presence of a significant 13C isotope effect at both ends of the diene 
system (but not for the central carbon atoms) in 16 in the Diels-Alder 

Kinetics 
41 
reaction (2.42) provides strong evidence that both the terminal carbon 
atoms are changing their bonding in the transition state, supporting the 
concerted mechanism shown. Likewise, there is a significant 13C isotope 
effect at both ends of the C=C double bond in the epoxidation reaction 
(2.43), indicating that both atoms are involved in the transition state, 
favouring the concerted mechanism shown. 

42 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Kinetics 
43 

44 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

The Transition State 
We cannot isolate the transition state of a chemical reaction, nor can 
we study it by spectroscopic methods which rely on the presence of 
appreciable concentrations of species with particular energy and geo- 
metry. However, the transition state does have a geometry and energy; 
what we can do is to investigate how changes in the reagents and solvents 
can influence the difference in energy between reagents and the transition 
state. If these influences make the transition state more stable compared 
with the reagents, the reaction will be faster; if the transition state is made 
less stable relative to the reagents, the reaction will be slower. We shall 
consider the effects of substituents, solvents, steric crowding and stereo- 
chemistry. We focus on elementary reactions or rate-determining steps 
of stepwise reactions. 
3.1 
Early and Late Transition States 
Figure 3.1 (a) represents a reaction coordinate reaction for a thermo- 
neutral reaction, for example the abstraction of a hydrogen atom by 
a methyl radical from a methane molecule (reaction 3.1). Since 
the products are identical with the reactants, the reaction is exactly 
45 

46 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
thermoneutral, with a transition state involving the transferred hydrogen 
being equidistant from both methyl carbon atoms. The activation energy 
of 61 kJ mol-' reflects the fact that because of electron repulsion, each 
of the partial C-H bonds has less than half the strength of the C-H bond 
in methane. If we now consider the very similar reaction (3.2), this reaction 
is exothermic by 25 kJ mol-', attributed to the stabilization of the ethyl 
radical compared with the methyl radical. Since the reaction is approxi- 
mately symmetrical, we may expect the transition state to have approxi- 
mately half the bonding of the breaking H-CH2CH3 bond and half that 
of the forming CH3-H bond. Thus we can expect the activation energy 
to be lowered by about half the change in exothermicity. The observed 
activation energy of 49 kJ mol-' is in accord with this, and in general we 
should expect that, for similar approximately thermoneutral reactions, if 
we change the exothermicity by 2 kJ mol-' we will expect an activation 
energy change of about 1 kJ mol-'. This is illustrated in Figure 3.l(a). 
Figure 3.1 The Hammett 
postulate. (a) Approximately 
thermoneutral reaction. (b) Very 
endothermic reaction. (c) Very 
exothermic reaction 
Figure 3.l(b) and (c) show reaction coordinates for very endothermic 
and exothermic reactions, respectively. The 
states 
that for very endothermic reactions the transition state resembles the 
products almost completely, with a late transition state (Figure 3.1 b), 

The Transition State 
47 
whereas for very exothermic reactions the transition state is very like 
the reagents, i.e. an early transition state (Figure 3.1~). There is much 
experimental evidence to support this view. 
For endothermic reactions, since the transition state resembles the 
products, if a small change is made in the endothermicity of the reaction, 
almost the whole of the difference will have been developed in the 
transition state. This will make the rates of reactions of this type very 
much affected by small changes in endothermicity, often giving rise to 
strong selectivity between different sites in a molecule for a particular 
reagent. The reaction that determines the position of bromination of 
alkanes under free radical conditions is the abstraction of hydrogen by a 
bromine atom from a C-H bond. This is 44 kJ niol-' endothermic for the 
reaction with propane to give the prop- 1 -yl radical (reaction 3.3a), 
reduced to 29 kJ mol-' for attack at the 2-position (reaction 3.3b). Since 
these reactions are significantly endothermic, with a late transition state, 
this will result in a large difference in activation energies for attack at the 
1- and 2-positions, giving an increased rate at the 2-position, and hence 
selectivity in attack there. 
Br. + C3H8 - 
Br-H 
+ *CH2CH2CH3 M = +44 kT mol-l 
(3.3a) 
- 
Br-H 
+ CH,d&CH3 
= +29 kT mol-' 
(3.3b) 
Conversely, for very exothermic reactions, changes in enthalpy of reac- 
tion will have little effect on the activation energy, giving unselective 
reactions. The corresponding fluorination of propane (reaction 3.4) is 
highly exothermic: AH = -1 59 kJ mol- ' at the 1-position and -1 73 kJ 
mol- at the 2-position. However, with an early transition state and a very 
small activation energy for both reactions, there is little difference in rate 
for attack at the two positions and the reaction is very unselective. 
F + C3Hs - 
F-H 
+ 'CHZCH~CH~ AH= -159 kl m01-l 
(3.4a) 
- 
F-H 
+ CH3dH2CH3 
&= -173 kT mol-' 
(3.4b) 
3.2 Solvent Effects 
Ions are stabilized by polar solvents. Hydrogen chloride dissolves in 
benzene as covalent molecules, but in water it is completely dissociated 
to give solvated H30+ and C1- ions. The high dielectric constant of 
water decreases the energy of the ions. This principle can be applied to 
reactions: if charge is being built up in the transition state of a reaction, 
the transition state will be more stabilized compared with the reagents if 
the reaction is carried out in a more polar solvent, resulting in an increase 
in rate. This is shown in Figure 3.2(a). Conversely, if charge is being 
dispersed or destroyed, the reagents will be more stabilized in more polar 

48 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
solvents, compared with the transition state, resulting in a decrease in 
reaction rate (Figure 3.2b). 
(a) 
EM <.EL 
Reachon faster in more polar solvents 
Reaction coordinate 
(b) 
EM >.EL 
Reaction slower in more polar solvents 
Reaction coordinate 
Figure 3.2 Effect of solvent polarity on reaction rate. (a) Charge built up in the transition state. (b) Charge destroyed or dispersed 
in the transition state 
Table 3.1 shows the effect of solvent polarity on four different nucleo- 
philic substitution reactions. Creation or destruction of charge gives the 
biggest effects; spreading or dispersal of charge as in the second and third 
examples in the table gives smaller effects. Molecular and radical reactions 
do not involve charge build-up in the transition state, and are little affected 
by solvents; thus a check for the presence or absence of a solvent effect 
often allows a distinction to be made between radical or molecular mecha- 
nisms, on the one hand, and polar reaction mechanisms, on the other. Care 
should be taken in applying a solvent effect test. The change in solvent 
should be small, such as a 10% increase in water in aqueous ethanol; more 
dramatic changes in solvent polarity risk changing the mechanism. 
Table 3.1 
Examples of solvent effects on reaction rates 
~ 
~ 
Reagents 
Transition state 
Products 
Type 
Effect on rate of increasing 
solvent polarity 
Me3C - Br 
+ 
Me3Cf Brr(+H20) 
-+ 
Me3C-OH2+ + Br- 
Charge created 
Large increase 
HO- + CH3-Br 
-+ 
HOsr.. CH3. * 43r'- 
+ 
HO-CH3 + Br- 
Charge spread 
Small decrease 
H20 + +SEt3 
+ 
H208++. .Et. . ."SEt2 
+ 
H20+-Et + SEt2 
Charge spread 
Small decrease 
HO- + +SEt3 
+ 
HO"-.+Et..."SEt2 
+ 
HO-Et + SEt2 
Charge 
Large decrease 
destroyed 
3.3 
Electronic Effects of Substituents 
in Polar Reactions 
Solvent effects are useful in differentiating polar from non-polar 
reactions, but give no direct information about the location or polarity 

The Transition State 
49 
of the charges being produced or destroyed. The effect of substituent 
groups near to a reaction site provides more detailed insight. 
A convenient system for studying substituent effects is the equilibrium 
between meta- and para-substituted benzoic acids and their correspond- 
ing anions (reaction 3.5). The acids are straightforward to synthesize, and 
the acidities in water at 25 O C are readily determined: the pH of a solution 
containing equal molar quantities of the acid and its fully ionized sodium 
salt will be equal to -log&, where KA is the dissociation constant of the 
acid. Ortho substituents are not considered because of complications 
caused by steric effects. 
O V o H  
O v O -  
We define a 
(Greek sigma = s for substituent) for 
any particular meta or para substituent as log (KAIKH), where KA is 
the dissociation constant for the substituted benzoic acid and KH is the 
dissociation constant for benzoic acid itself (equation 3.7). (J values 
for some common substituents are given in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2 Some values of Hammett substituent constantsa 
Substituent 
meta 
para 
U 
U 
U+ 
0- 
NMe2 
Me 
OMe 
F 
CI 
Br 
I 
CO2R 
CF3 
CN 
NO2 
-0.10 
-0.06 
0.10 
0.34 
0.37 
0.37 
0.34 
0.35 
0.46 
0.62 
0.71 
-0.32 
-0.14 
-0.28 
0.15 
0.24 
0.26 
0.28 
0.44 
0.53 
0.70 
0.81 
- 1.70 
-0.31 
-0.78 
-0.07 
0.11 
0.15 
0.13 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.74 
0.88 
1.26 
- 
- 
- 
- 
aFor further values, see for example N. B. Chapman and J. Shorter, Correlation 
Analysis in Chernistr)/; Plenum, New York, 1978 

50 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Looking at reaction (3.9, the undissociated acid is uncharged, whereas 
the anion has a negative charge. We might therefore expect that 
electronegative substituents would withdraw electrons from the anion, 
therefore spreading the negative charge, stabilizing the anion, and thus 
making the compound more acidic. In accordance with this, the halogens 
all have positive (T values at the meta positions. However, there are 
anomalies: for example, apara 
for the very electronegative fluorine is 
only just positive, and the methoxy substituent appears to be electron 
withdrawing at the meta position but electron releasing if it is at the para 
position. 
3.3.1 Inductive and Resonance Effects 
To make sense of the (T values in Table 3.2, we need to look in more 
detail at how substituents can stabilize a developing positive or 
negative charge. Two factors are involved. The more obvious is the 
effect of the electronegativity of the substituent. Carbon and hydrogen 
have similar electronegativities, so C-H and C-C bonds in neutral 
saturated organic molecules are non-polar. Carbon becomes more 
electronegative in CH3+ as it changes its hybridization and acquires a 
positive charge. If one hydrogen is replaced by a fluorine atom, the 
electronegative fluorine atom will polarize the sigma bond so that, 
relative to the C-H bond, the electron density will be centred closer to 
the fluorine, and away from the C + .  This will build up the positive 
charge on the carbon and destabilize the ion. Conversely, groups such 
as alkyl groups can (relative to hydrogen) release electrons and 
stabilize a carbocation. This effect is called the 
Most 
of the common groups found in organic compounds are centred on 
elements which are more electronegative than carbon, and therefore 
tend to withdraw electrons inductively. The effect falls off sharply with 
distance. 
or 
For any molecule for which more than one electron- 
pair bond “structure” can be written, the true structure will be 
intermediate between these “structures” and the molecule will be more 
stable than expected. Well-known examples include benzene (Figure 3.3a) 
and charged structures such as the ally1 cation (Figure 3.3b). A 
carbocation can be stabilized either by an adjacent lone pair, which can 
be donated to form a double bond (Figure 3.3~) or by donation of 
electrons from an adjacent multiple bond (Figure 3.3b). Anions can be 
stabilized by donation of the lone pair to an adjacent multiply bonded 
atom (Figure 3.3d). 
The second and often more powerful influence is the 

The Transition State 
51 
H 
H 
I 
1
-
 
I 
I 
v CH? 
Resonance effects are frequently opposed to the inductive effect. The 
methoxy group is a striking example. The oxygen atom will withdraw 
electrons inductively but release them from its lone pair by resonance. 
The inductive effect predominates at the meta position, but the reso- 
nance effect predominates at the para position. Why is this? 
The inductive effect falls off with distance, so we should expect that the 
inductive withdrawal of electrons by the methoxy group should be 
somewhat less at the para position (though still in the same direction). 
The resonance effect, on the other hand, will release electrons and 
produce negative charges at three locations on the benzene ring, as 
shown in Figure 3.4. For the meta substituents, none of these positions is 
adjacent to the carboxylate anion group, but for thepara substituent, one 
of the negative charge positions is adjacent to the carboxylate anion as 
shown: this will destabilize the anion and outweigh the inductive 
withdrawal of electrons, giving a net negative (7 value. 
Figure 3.4 
Resonance effects 
of meta and para substituents 

52 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The halogens also show inductive withdrawal of electrons and con- 
jugative release. The release is greatest for fluorine in spite of its electro- 
negativity. Being a first-row element, its size is similar to that of carbon, 
and overlap between its lone pair orbital and the neighbouring carbon p 
orbital is therefore greater than for chlorine. However, unlike the methoxy 
group, the resonance effect at the para position does not quite out- 
weigh the inductive effect. The dimethylamino group shows the greatest 
difference between apara 
and urneta. 
Nitrogen, being more electropositive 
than oxygen, more readily accommodates a positive charge, so resonance 
from structures analogous to those shown in Figure 3.3(c) will be more 
effective. The C02Et, CN and NO2 groups all have resonance effects 
in the same direction as the inductive effect; accordingly, the positive 
u values at the meta positions are enhanced at the para position by the 
extra resonance contribution. 
Finally, we consider the methyl substituent. The very slightly negative 
(T value at the meta position indicates that, relative to hydrogen, the 
methyl group releases electrons inductively to a neighbouring carbon 
atom. The more negative value at the para position indicates a 
conjugative release as well; this is surprising because the group is 
saturated and there is no lone pair to donate electrons. The effect is 
explained in terms of 
The alternative structure shown 
in Figure 3.3(e) is thought to contribute to the overall structure of a 
methyl group attached to a sp2 hybridized carbon atom. 
Thus from the experimentally obtained acidities of benzoic acids 
with a particular substituent at the meta and para positions, we obtain 
insight into the inductive and resonance effects for that substituent. 

The Transition State 
53 
3.3.2 Hammett Reaction Constants: p (rho) Values 
The Hammett CT substituent constants would be of little value if they only 
applied to the dissociation of substituted benzoic acids. Fortunately, this 
is not the case. For a very wide variety of reactions or equilibria involving 
a substituted phenyl group, if a plot is made of log k or log K against the 
Hammett (T substituent constant, a straight line is obtained, showing that 
a relationship of type (3.8) holds: 
This is the 
The slope of the plot is denoted by p (Greek 
rho=r for reaction), and is characteristic of the reaction being studied. 
If negative charge is being built up in the transition state (or positive 
charge is being destroyed), p will be positive, If the reaction centre is 
further away from the benzene ring, as in the ionization of phenylacetic 
(phenylethanoic) acids (Table 3.3c), the p value will be smaller. If the 
reaction takes place even nearer the substituent on the benzene ring 
itself, as in electrophilic aromatic substitution, the value can be substan- 
tially higher than unity (Table 3.39. Substituents have a greater effect in 
non-polar solvents or in the gas phase, where there is no solvent to 
stabilize developing charges (Table 3.31). 
Table 3.3 Harnmett p values 
Reaction 
Medium 
P 
(a) ArC02H + Arc02 + H+ 
(b) ArC02H + ArCO; + H+ 
(c) ArCH2C02H + ArCH2C0F + H+ 
(d) ArNH; e 
ArNH, + Hf 
(e) Ar3CCI + Ar3C+ + Hf 
(f) ArCMe2CI + H 2 0  -+ ArCMe20H + HCI 
(9) ArH + HN03 + ArN02 + H20 
(h) ArH + HOBr + ArBr + H20 
(i) ArH + Br2 -+ ArBr + HBr 
(j) ArCla+MeO- -+ ArOMe + HCI 
(k) ArO- + H,C ~
C
H
,
 
A r 0- C H 2-C H 2- 0- 
(I) 
ArCH; 
-+ ArCH: + e- 
(m) 
ArCH(CI)CH3 -+ ArCHCH, + HCI 
(n) ArCH, + CI' + ArCH; + HCI 
(0) ArCOCl + BusSn' --+ ArCO' + Bu,SnCI 
Water 
Ethanol 
Water 
Water 
Liquid SO2 
Acetone/water 
Acetic anhydride 
H C I 04/d ioxane/w at e r 
Acetic acid/water 
Methanol 
Ethanol 
Gas 
Gas 
cc14 
m-Xy I ene 
1 .oo 
1.96 
0.49 
2.77 
-3.97 
-4.54 
-7.29 
-6.2 
-12.1 
3.9 
-1.12 
- 20 
- 1.36 
-0.66 
+2.6 
"ArCI = 1-CI-2-N02-4-X-C6H3 

54 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
For reactions in which positive charge is being built up (or negative 
charge destroyed), the effect of substituents will be reversed, and 
substituents that release electrons will favour reaction. Thus in reactions 
of this sort, the slope of the Hammett plot will be negative, and negative 
values of p will result. 
The defining reaction for Hammett u constants is the ionization of 
substituted benzoic acids. Although a full negative charge is produced in 
the anion, which is delocalized between the two oxygen atoms of the 
carboxylate anion group, the charge cannot be spread by delocalization 
onto the benzene ring or further onto substituents (reaction 3.9a). 
Substituents such as CH3C0 stabilize the anion by an electron- 
withdrawing resonance contribution which builds up a partial positive 
charge on the carbon atom adjacent to the C02-, but there is no through 
conjugation of the type that is possible for the substituted phenoxide 
ion. For this ion, structure 1, in which the negative charge is moved to 
the carbonyl group with no net loss of covalent bonds or charge creation, 
will contribute more than structure 2 does to the stabilization of the 
para-acetylbenzoate ion, which would involve charge creation and net 
breakage of a covalent bond. 
Me 
0 
Me y,- 
1 
OH 
I 
O V 0 -  
c-----) 
Me 
O Y 0 -  
Me 2- 
2 
0- 
I 
This means that substituents that can withdraw electrons conjugatively 
will have a greater effect on the acidity of phenols (reaction 3.9) than on 
the acidity of benzoic acids. The difference will only be appreciable at the 
para position; for the meta position, no through resonance is possible. If 
we make a plot of logKA for the acidities of meta-substituted phenols 
against Hammett u constants, we find that the points lie on a straight 
line, the slope of which gives the p value for the reaction as +2.23 

The Transition State 
55 
(see Figure 3.5a). For para substituents such asp-N02, which stabilize the 
anion significantly by through conjugation, the acidities are much greater 
than expected on the basis of their (T values. For each substituent, a new 
(T- value can be defined, to ensure that the point will fall on the graph. 
These (T- values will apply for reactions in which a product anion can be 
stabilized by through-bond conjugation. 
In an analogous manner, through conjugation from para substituents 
can stabilize a positive ion. The para-methoxy substituent shows this type 
of stabilization for the cumyl (2-phenylprop-2-yl) cation 3. Rates of 
hydrolysis of substituted cumyl chlorides (reaction 3.10) in aqueous 
acetone were plotted against (T. The meta-substituted points fell on the 
line; substituents such as methoxy and methyl were faster than expected, 
and these values were used to derive a+ values for para substituents of this 
type (Figure 3.5b). 
(3.10) 
X 
X 
X 
Figure 3.5 (a) Hamrnett plot for acidity of phenols. (b) Hammett plot for reaction (3.10) 

56 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
3.3.3 Deductions about Mechanism from 
Substituent Studies 
Ideally, we determine the Hammett p factor for a reaction by studying 
the rates of reaction with a number of meta substituents, plotting log k 
against Hammett a substituent constants. A positive p factor means that 
negative charge is being built up (or positive charge is being destroyed). 
The magnitude of p often provides information about how close to the 
benzene ring is the position where charge is being built up. 
We now look at the rates for a number of para substituents, choosing 
ones which have different a, a+ and a- values. We check how well the 
experimental log k values for these para-substituted compounds lie on 
the line defined by the meta substituents when we use (a) a, (b) a+ or 
(c) a- values for the para substituents. If u- is followed, this provides 
strong evidence that a negative charge is being built up at a position in 
the molecule which is conjugated with the para substituent, if p is positive. 
If p is negative, a negatively charged site of this type must be being 
destroyed during the reaction. If a+, 
is followed, with a negative p value, 
a positive charge is being built up during the reaction at a position 
conjugated with the para substituent; if p is positive, this positive charge, 
present in the reactant, must be destroyed in the reaction. If cr is followed, 
the positive or negative charge being built up or destroyed during the 
reaction is not conjugated with the reaction centre. The various possi- 
bilities are listed in Table 3.4, with examples. 
Table 3.4 Deductions made from the sign of p, and which of cr, cr+ or (T- gives 
the best fit in the Hammett equationa 
p positive 
p negative 
Reaction centreb conjugated with 
Ar group; negative charge builds 
up in the transition state. 
Example: reaction (3.9) 
Reaction centre not conjugated 
with Ar group; transition state 
has less demand for electrons 
than reactant. Example: 
hydrolysis of aromatic esters 
by bases 
Reaction centre conjugated with 
Ar group and stabilized by 
electron-releasing substituents; 
conjugation less important in 
transition state. Examples: rare 
Reagent stabilized by conjugative 
electron release of electrons to Ar 
group; this conjugation is less 
important in the transition state. 
Example: reaction (k) in Table 3.3 
Reaction centre not conjugated with 
Ar group; transition state has a 
greater demand than reactant for 
electrons. Example: hydrolysis of 
arylmethyl acetates, ArCH20COMe, 
by acids 
Reaction centre conjugated with Ar 
group; transition state has greater 
demand than reactant for electrons. 
Example: reaction (i) in Table 3.3 
acrvalues are used where a special a" or cr- value has not been derived 
bThe reaction centre for the purpose of this table is the position at which charge IS built 
up or destroyed during the reaction 

The Transition State 
57 
The following worked problems show how useful information about 
reaction mechanisms is derived from the sign and magnitude of the 
Hammett p factor, and whether CT, 
CT+ or (7- is followed for para 
substituents. 

58 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
3.4 
Steric Effects 
The previous section has focused on the electronic effects of substituents. 
The size of substituents can also affect reaction rates. Bulky substituents 
destabilize molecules or ions, and the greater the number of groups 
attached to a reaction centre, the greater the destabilization. 
Many reactions involve a change in coordination round the reaction 
centre. If the coordination number increases on going from the starting 
molecule to the transition state, replacement of an atom or group at the 
reaction centre by a bulkier group will cause a reduction in rate. If there is 
a reduction in coordination number, introduction of a bulkier group will 
cause an increase in rate. These two effects are termed 
and 
respectively. 
A good example of steric retardation is shown by SN2 reactions, in 
which an incoming nucleophile displaces a leaving group (reactions 1.1 a 
and 3.11). In the transition state, the new bond is partially formed 
whilst the breaking bond is still partially bonded. Thus the original 
four coordination round the carbon reaction centre is increased in the 
transition state to five coordination. Hence if we increase the bulk of 
the substituents, the crowding will be worse in the transition state, so the 
reaction will be slower. For the reaction of sodium ethoxide with primary 
bromoalkanes (R1R2R3C)CH2Br in ethanol at 55 O C (reaction 3.1 l), 
the effects on the relative rates of reaction for increasing numbers of 
substituent methyl groups are given in Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5 Relative effects of successive substitutions 
Reaction (3. I I )  
Reaction (3.12) Acid strength of 
(SN2) 
(SN 1) 
substituted acetic 
acids 
Substituent change 
H + Me 
Me + t-Bu 
H + CI 
Effect of first substitution 
~ 3 . 6  
X I  .2 
x80 
Effect of second substitution 
~ 9 . 4  
x15.2 
x24 
Effect of third substitution 
+7022 
- 
x6 
Increasing or decreasing? 
Increasing 
Increasing 
Decreasing 
Steric or electronic? 
Steric 
Steric 
Electronic 

The Transition State 
59 
The effect of introducing a methyl group at the P-position is to decrease 
the rate by a factor of 4. The second methyl produces a more pronounced 
reduction by a factor of 9 as the transition state becomes more crowded. 
The third methyl group produces a massive rate decrease by a factor of 
7000; this last methyl effectively blocks access to the ethoxide ion as it 
approaches the reaction centre. 
In a SNl reaction (l.lb or 3.12), the reaction centre in the halo- 
genoalkane is four coordinated. The transition state is close to the 
intermediate carbocation in structure, which is three coordinated (and 
planar). Crowding is therefore less severe in the transition state than 
in the initial molecule, so substitution of bulky groups at the reaction 
centre gives rise to steric acceleration. In reaction (3.12), the solvolysis 
of R1R2MeCCl in 50% ethanol at 25 'C, relative rates for Me3CCl, 
t-BuMe2CC1 and t-Bu2MeCCl are 1:1.21:18.4. There is a very small 
increase in rate as the first t-butyl group is introduced, but a much larger 
effect is caused by the second t-butyl group. This is seriously crowded by 
the first t-butyl group in the original molecule, but the crowding is 
relieved as the bond angles at the central carbon atom spread out from 
about 109%' to 120". 
This increase in effect on rates as further similar substituents are 
introduced is typical of steric effects, where each further substituent 
causes an increase in the amount of crowding. This is to be contrasted 
with polar effects, where a second substituent usually causes a smaller 
relative increase or decrease than the first. For example, if the substituent 
stabilizes a positive charge by releasing electrons, the charge is diminished 
and a further substituent will be releasing electrons to a centre where there 
is less demand, so the stabilizing effect will be less. In the series acetic 
(ethanoic) acid, chloroacetic acid, dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic 
acid, the acid dissociation constant values (KA) in water are 1.76 x lo-', 
1.40 x 
3.32 x lop2 and 2 x lo-', respectively. The first chlorine 
strengthens the acid by a factor of 80, the second only produces 
an increase of a factor of 24, and the third produces less than a factor 
of 10. This suggests that the effect of the chlorine substitution is electronic 
rather than steric. These steric and electronic substituent effects are 
summarized in Table 3.5. 

60 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
3.5 
Stereochemistry 
The stereochemistry of products relative to starting materials can give 
important clues to the structure of the transition state. The stereo- 
chemistry of molecules gives rise to two types of isomerism: 
and 
3.5. I Enantiomerism (Optical Isomerism) 
If four different groups surround a central carbon atom, two (and only 
two) different stereoisomers are possible, as illustrated in Figure 3.6. 
These are known as enantiomers (or optical isomers). These two isomers 
are different because rotation about any of the bond axes of the molecule 
cannot bring all four groups of the R-isomer into coincidence with the 
S-isomer. There are not more than two: any other arrangement of groups 
round the central carbon atom can always be rotated around a bond axis 

The Transition State 
61 
to bring the ethyl group to the top, and if the hydrogen atom is not at the 
back, rotation round the C-ethyl bond to bring the hydrogen to the back 
will lead to one or the other of the two isomers shown in Figure 3.6. 
Figure 3.6 Enantiomers 
To enable the enantiomers to be identified without the need for a 
drawing, the following convention has been established. The four groups 
are assigned a priority from 1 (highest) to 4 (lowest) on the basis of the 
atomic numbers of the atom directly connected to the central carbon 
atom. This establishes the chlorine atom as the group with highest 
priority (1) and hydrogen as the lowest (4), but both methyl and ethyl 
both have a carbon atom attached to the central carbon atom, with the 
same atomic number. Ties are broken by considering the atoms attached 
to the first (carbon) atom in the group. Ethyl has a carbon and two 
hydrogens (C,H,H); methyl has three hydrogens (H,H,H). Since carbon 
has a higher atomic number than hydrogen, the ethyl group has the 
higher priority (2) and methyl the lower (3). A single atom of higher 
priority takes precedence over any number of atoms of lower priority, e.g. 
(N,H,H) beats (C,C,C). If the tie is not broken at the atoms two removed 
from the central atom, we go one further out and so on until the tie is 
resolved. A double bond is counted as having a normal bond to the atom 
at the other end, plus a further bond to a fictitious atom of the same 
type which does not have any further connections. Thus isopropyl 
[-CH(CH3)2] (C,C,H) and vinyl [-CH=CH2] (C,(C),H) both beat ethyl 
[-CH2CH3] (C,H,H). Isopropyl [-CH(CH3)2] beats vinyl [-CH=CH*] by 
having six hydrogens at the next position out, whereas vinyl has only two. 
These slightly arcane rules are to ensure compatibility with the older 
D,L stereochemical convention used for sugars and a-amino-acids. 
Once priorities have been assigned, the molecule is viewed from a 
position where the group of lowest priority (4) is at the back. The 
remaining groups are viewed in decreasing order of priority: (1) to (2) 
to (3). If this is clockwise, the configuration is (R) (rectus, right-handed). 
If anticlockwise, the configuration is (S) (sinister, left-handed). 
Enantiomers have very similar properties. Since each has the same 
groups attached to the same atoms, with identical bond lengths and 
angles, properties such as melting point, solubility, reaction rate with 
particular reagents, etc., will be identical. The two enantiomers are related 

62 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Figure 3.7 Configuration of 
naturally occurring cr-amino 
acids 
as an object and its mirror image as shown in Figure 3.6, and can 
only be distinguished under circumstances in which this “handedness” 
or 
is important. For present purposes, the most important 
difference is that solutions of the enantiomers will rotate the plane of 
polarized light in opposite directions by an exactly equal amount. The 
rotation of a 1 g mL-’ solution in a 10 cm cell, measured for yellow 
sodium D-line light, is called the specific rotation and is denoted as [.ID2’. 
The superscript number refers to the temperature used in O C. Positive 
values for [a]D2’ correspond to a clockwise rotation, negative values to 
anti-clockwise rotation. 
For mechanistic studies, we are mostly interested in relative con- 
figuration. We would like to know, for example in an SN2 reaction, 
whether the incoming group replaces the outgoing group without than- 
ging stereochemistry at the reaction centre 
, or if the reaction 
involves 
at the reaction centre to give the opposite confi- 
guration. Unfortunately, the sign of rotation is not a reliable guide 
to absolute or relative configuration. Of 19 common optically active 
a-amino acids, RCH(NH2)C02H, involved in proteins which all have the 
same configuration (Figure 3.7), 11 have negative specific rotations but 8 
have positive rotations. 
I 
Absolute configurations can now be obtained by X-ray crystal- 
lography. Determination of the absolute stereochemistry of both reagent 
and product molecules will in principle allow us to determine if a parti- 
cular reaction involves retention or inversion. Historically, an alternative, 
which does not require knowledge of absolute stereochemistry, involves 
carrying out a set of reactions in which an optically active reagent 
molecule is converted in several steps via a number of intermediates back 
into the same molecule, but with the opposite configuration. All but one 
of the reaction steps do not take place at the optically active centre, and in 
these steps it is assumed that no change in configuration can take place. 
This leaves one step only where reaction takes place at the optically active 
centre. If the final molecule has the same rotation as the initial molecule, 
the reaction must take place with retention of configuration; if the sign of 
rotation is reversed, the reaction must involve inversion of configuration 
to the other enantiomer. 
This type of logic is illustrated by reaction sequence (3.14), in which the 
positively rotating form of the alcohol 4 is converted in two stages 
through 5 and 6 into its negatively rotating enantiomer 7. At the time 

The Transition State 
63 
these experiments were carried out, no absolute stereochemistries were 
known, but since the overall process gave inversion of configuration, 
either one or all three of the individual steps must involve inversion of 
configuration. Step (a) involves attack of the hydroxyl oxygen on the 
p-toluenesulfonyl chloride, and should not affect the C-0 bond, and step 
(c) involves ester hydrolysis, which again is thought to leave the C-0 
bond intact. This leaves step (b), in which an acetate ion attacks the 
chiral carbon atom, displacing the p-toluenesulfonate anion, and so this 
reaction is where the inversion of stereochemistry must occur. 
Me 
Me 
Me 
I 
a 
I 
b 
I 
PhCH2-CH-OH - 
PhCH2-CH-OTs 
PhCH2-CH-OAc 
4 a = 33.0" 
5 a=31.1" 
6 a=-7.1" 
TsCl 
-0Ac 
c 1 - 0 ~  
(3.14) 
Me 
I 
7 a=-32.2" 
PhCH2-CH-OH 
A simple way of determining the stereochemical course of SN2 
reactions is to study reactions of disubstituted cyclopentane and 
cyclohexane rings, where retention or inversion can be established by 
finding out if the product has the same geometric form (cis or trans, 
see next section) as the starting molecule, which proves retention of 
configuration at the reaction centre, or has the opposite geometrical 
form, which proves inversion. Reaction (3.15) shows that inversion of 
configuration takes place for this SN2 reaction. 
Transition State for SN2 Reactions 
The simplest way to account for the inversion of configuration which 
always accompanies SN2 reactions is that the incoming nucleophile 
approaches the molecule from the side opposite to the leaving group 
(Figure 3.8). As the nucleophile approaches, the bond to the leaving 
group lengthens and the hybridization of the central carbon atom 
moves towards sp2, so that the unchanged groups take up a trigonal 
configuration with 120" bond angles. In the transition state 9, the 
remaining p orbital allows a partial bond to both the incoming and the 
leaving group, at a 180" angle to each other. As the reaction goes beyond 
the transition state, the hybridization reverts to sp3, but the bond to the 
incoming nucleophile is on the opposite side of the molecule to where 

64 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
the leaving group was situated. The movement of the three unchanged 
groups round the central carbon atom is like an umbrella blowing 
inside out in the wind, and is called inversion. The product 10 has the 
opposite configuration to that of the starting molecule 8. This mechanistic 
insight into the SN2 reaction can only be obtained from stereochemical 
studies. 
Figure 3.8 Inversion in SN2 
reactions 
Stereochemistry of SNl Reactions 
In contrast to SN2 reactions, SN1 reactions of molecules with a chiral 
centre proceed with racemization, that is the product comprises a mixture 
of equal numbers of molecules with the same and opposite configurations 
compared with the starting molecule. Each individual reaction must of 
course involve either retention or inversion of configuration, but the 
processes which lead to these two products must proceed at the same rate. 
This accords with the mechanism proposed in Chapter 1. The rate- 
determining step involves the heterolytic breakage of the bond to the 
leaving group, leaving a carbocation which from this and other 
evidence has a planar trigonal structure with sp2 hybridization. Since 
the carbocation is planar, the incoming nucleophile can approach from 
either face equally readily, as shown in Figure 3.9, giving rise to an equal 
mixture of (R) and (S) molecules, whose rotations will cancel out. 
A mixture of this type is known as a 
, and racemization 
is the characteristic stereochemical feature of SN 1 reactions. 
Figure 3.9 Stereochemistry of 
SN1 reactions 
In contrast to SN2 reactions, where the stereochemical outcome is 
always complete inversion, the racemization of SNI reactions is 

The Transition State 
65 
~~ 
sometimes only partial. This can arise because the leaving group, though 
free from the carbocation intermediate, still blocks that side of the 
molecule, so that attack from the opposite face is easier, giving a product 
in which the inverted molecules predominate over those with retention 
of stereochemistry. 
Neigh bouri ng Group Assistance 
A vast number of SN2 reactions at carbon centres has been studied. In 
every case, it is found that inversion of configuration occurs. This 
certainty now allows us to use inversion of configuration as a diagnostic 
test: if inversion does not take place, the reaction cannot have a simple 
SN2 mechanism. SNl reactions show partial or complete racemization, 
depending on how “free” the intermediate carbocation becomes. 
A small number of nucleophilic substitutions show retention of 
configuration, i.e. the new group comes in on the same side as the leaving 
group departs, in spite of the unfavourable steric interactions that would 
occur between the two groups. Reactions of this type tend to be faster 
than expected by comparison with similar compounds. The reactions are 
kinetically of first order, depending only on concentration of the halogen 
compound, and not on that of the attacking nucleophile. These reactions 
are characterized by the presence of a neighbouring substituent group 
(e.g. Br, OH) which has a lone pair that makes the group nucleophilic. 
This group can carry out an intramolecular substitution, as shown in 
reaction (3.16), forming a cyclic intermediate 11, with the expulsion of 
the leaving group and inversion of configuration at the reacting centre. 
The incoming nucleophile attacks the intermediate by an SN2 reaction, 
opening the ring, restoring the internal substituent group and inverting 
the configuration again at the reaction centre. The overall reaction 
involves two inversions of configuration, thereby giving overall retention 
of Configuration. 

66 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
3.5.2 Geometrical Isomerism 
A second form of stereoisomerism is associated with restriction of 
rotation round a bond joining two atoms in a molecule. The restriction 
can be caused by a double bond, or by a ring structure, and gives rise to 
two 
. For a 1,2-disubstituted ethene, the substituents 
can be on the same side of the double bond (cis) or on opposite sides 
(trans). The two geometrical isomers will have different reactivity and 
physical properties. For example, the two geometrical isomers of 1,2- 
dichloroethene (Figure 3.10a and b) differ by 11 "C in boiling points, 
attributable to the presence of a dipole moment in the cis isomer, whereas 
the trans isomer has no overall dipole. The cisltrans nomenclature can be 
extended to tri- or tetrasubstituted ethenes, provided that there is a pair of 
identical substituents on each end of the double bond, for example 13 in 
equation (3.18) below. For more complex situations, where the double 
bond has three or four different substituents, the isomers are distinguished 
by assigning priorities as for the R,S convention to the substituents at 
each end of the double bond. If the substituents of higher priority at each 
end of the double bond are on the same side, the molecule is 2 (zusarnmen, 
German, together); if they are on opposite sides, the isomer is E (entgegen, 
German, opposite) (Figure 3.10~ and d). For double bonds with identical 
substituents on each end, 2 = cis and E = trans. 
Figure 3.10 Geometrical 
isomerism 
Geometrical isomerism is a useful tool in investigating the stereo- 
chemical course of addition and elimination reactions. 
Stereochemistry of E2 Elimination Reactions 
For SN2 reactions, there is almost always a competing reaction in which 
the nucleophile removes a proton from the P-carbon atom. This is 
accompanied by loss of the leaving group and formation of a C=C 
double bond, as shown in reaction (3.17). The reaction is usually 
elementary, and is termed 
or 
. In an E2 
reaction, there is no intermediate. Can we determine anything about the 

The Transition State 
67 
transition state, in particular, the direction of approach of the incoming 
nucleophile (base) from the stereochemical course of the reaction? 
Compounds such as PhCHBr-CHBrPh have two asymmetric centres, 
each of which can have the R or the S configuration. There will be three 
stereoisomers (reactions 3.18 and 3.19), which can be designated 
S,S (14), R,R (15), and R,S (12) (S,R will be the same as R,S because 
of the symmetry of the molecule). The R,R and S,S forms will be 
optically active and rotate polarized light in opposite directions by an 
equal amount. Synthesis will normally give a 50/50 mixture of the two 
isomers, the 
or (+) mixture. The R,S or 
isomer will be 
optically inactive since it is identical with its mirror image (the mirror 
plane in 12 can be seen in the eclipsed conformation obtained by 
rotation of the front of the molecule clockwise by 60" round the central 
C-C bond). 
Experimentally, it is found that PhCHBr-CHBrPh reacts with sodium 
ethoxide by elimination of hydrogen bromide to give l-bronio-l,2- 
diphenylethene. The meso compound 12 gives the cis-alkene 13 (reaction 
3.18), whereas the (S,S and R,R) 
racemic mixture 14 and 15 gives the 
trans-alkene 16 (reaction 3.19). The disposition of the substituent groups 
in the alkene product suggests that the molecule reacts in the 
conformation shown in Figure 3.1 1 and the incoming base attacks anti 
to the departing halide anion (180" dihedral angle). In this conformation 
the carbon atoms which are rehybridizing from sp3 to sp' can begin to 
form the n: bond as the reaction proceeds, as shown in Figure 3.11. 3' ince 
two new bonds are being formed at the same time as two are being 
broken, the reaction is concerted and can take place with a relatively low 
activation energy. 

68 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Figure 3.1 1 Anti elimination in 
E2 reactions 
For rigid strained molecules such as the norbornane derivative 17, it 
is impossible for the leaving proton and toluenesulfonate anion to 
adopt the anti conformation, since the molecule is locked in an eclipsed 
conformation where the only possible dihedral angles are 0" (syn) or 
120". Under these circumstances, syn elimination in reaction (3.20) allows 
the reaction to take place in a concerted manner, and is the preferred 
route. It must be emphasized that for compounds in which free rotation 
is possible, anti elimination takes place almost exclusively, even though 
both syn and anti orientations would allow concerted reaction. The anti 
orientation has the advantage of having the attacking base on the 
opposite side of the molecule to the leaving halide, and the staggered 
conformation involved would be an energy minimum, compared with 
the energy maximum for the eclipsed conformation required for syn 
elimination. 

The Transition State 
69 

70 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

The Transition State 
71 

Anions and Nucleophilic 
Reactions 
Chapter 3 considered elementary reactions and the information about 
their transition states that can be obtained by a variety of techniques. The 
next three chapters deal with complex reactions, in which intermediates 
are produced. These may be short lived, but they have an independent 
existence, show spectroscopic properties and can sometimes be trapped 
out of the reaction mixture. 
This chapter considers reactions in which anionic intermediates are 
involved. 
are species that carry a negative charge. Also important 
here are: 
: species (often anions) that can remove a proton from another 
molecule. 
: species with a lone pair of electrons that can be donated 
to an electron-deficient centre, normally a carbon atom, to form a 
covalent bond. 
72 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
73 
4.1 
Acids and Bases 
are molecules or ions that abstract protons. 
can donate 
protons to a base. The base formed when an acid loses a proton is called 
the 
of the acid and vice versa (reaction 4.1). The strength 
of an acid corresponds to its ability to donate protons; that of a base 
depends on its ability to accept protons. It follows that if an acid is 
strong (readily donates protons to a different base), its conjugate base is 
weak (cannot readily abstract protons from the conjugate acid of the 
different base). A strong acid will react with a strong base to give a weak 
acid and a weak base, as shown in reaction (4.2), with an example shown 
in reaction (4.3) where hydrogen chloride, which is a stronger acid than 
phenol, donates a proton to the sodium salt of phenol to give phenol 
and the chloride ion. In practical terms, this reaction goes entirely to 
completion. 
Table 4.1 shows the acidities of a number of acids, arranged in order 
from strongest to weakest. A number of factors contribute to acid 
strength. These include the electronegativity of the atom which bears the 
negative charge in the anion formed on loss of the proton, the strength of 
the bond to the proton, and delocalization. Other things being equal, 
electronegative atoms, in particular the halogens and oxygen, will be 
more stable carrying a negative charge, and these elements comprise the 
central atom of the conjugate bases of the strongest acids. Electro- 
negativity will not account for the strengths of the hydrogen halides: 
hydrogen fluoride is the weakest of these acids, even though fluorine is 
the most electronegative element. However, the hydrogen-fluorine bond 
is one of the strongest known, whereas the hydrogen-iodine bond is 
extremely weak, and this factor counterbalances the electronegativity 
effect. 

74 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Table 4.1 Acidity, basicity and nucleophilicity 
Acid 
Conjugate base 
pKA of acida 
Nucleop hilicity, 
(strongest at 
(weakest at top, 
(most negative = 
n, of baseb 
top, weakest 
strongest at 
most acidic) 
(high = most 
at bottom) 
bottom) 
nucleop hilic) 
(bold = oxygen- 
centred nucleophile) 
HC104 
HI 
HBr 
HCI 
H30+ 
HF 
MeC02H 
H2S 
PhOH 
MeCOCH2COMe 
HCN 
MeCOCH2C02R 
H2S04 
RNH3' 
EtOCOCH2C02Et 
HCC13 
H20 
EtOH 
C~C~O-CSH~ 
RCOCHZR 
ROCOCHZR 
H-CSC-H 
PhNH2 
NH3 
PhCH3 
CH~ZCH-CH~ 
C6H6 
CH2=CH2 
CH4 
c104- 
I ~- 
HS04 
Br- 
CI- 
H20 
F- 
MeC02- 
HS- 
PhO- 
MeCOCH-COMe 
CN- 
MeCOCH-C02R 
RNH2 
EtOCOCH-CO2Et 
cc13- 
OH- 
EtO- 
RCOCHR- 
ROCOCHR- 
PhNH- 
CYCIO-C~H~ 
~ 
H-C-C 
~ 
NH2- 
PhCH2- 
CH2=CH-CH2- 
C6H5- 
CH2=CH- 
CH3- 
-11 
-10 
-10 
-9 
-7 
-1.7 
3.2 
7.0 
9.9 
9 
9.2 
10-1 1 
11 
13 
13.6 
15.7 
16 
16 
19-20 
24.5 
25 
30.6 
38 
40 
43 
43 
44 
48 
4.8 
5 
3.5 
2.7 
0 
2.0 
2.7 
5.1 
3.5 
5.1 
4.5 
4.2 
a p K ~  
= -logl0KA = -IO~,~([H'][A-]/[HA]}. For strong, highly dissociated, acids, the 
equilibrium value of [H'] is high, giving high KA values, and thus low or negative pKA 
values 
bNucleophilicity, n, is defined by the expression log,o(kn/ko) = sn, where (kn/ko) 
is the 
relative rate of attack by the nucleophile on a substrate compared with attack by water 
on the same substrate, s is the sensitivity of the substrate to nucleophilic attack, and 
nHZO 
is defined as zero 
For acids where a hydrogen-oxygen bond is to be broken, we might 
expect similar acidities, and indeed this is true for compounds such as 
water and ethanol where there are no structural stabilizing features in 
either the acid or the corresponding conjugate base. However, for acetic 
(ethanoic) acid, the acetate ion has two equally contributing resonance 
structures (see Chapter 3). The negative charge will therefore be spread 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
75 
equally over the two oxygen atoms, so the ion will be more stable than 
expected. Thus the equilibrium shown in Box 4.1 (b) will lie (relative to the 
ethanol equilibrium shown in Box 4.1 a) more to the right, and acetic acid 
will be more acidic than ethanol. This is confirmed by the data in 
Table 4.1. Phenol (Box 4.1~) is intermediate in acidity. The phenolate 
(phenoxide) anion is stabilized by delocalization of the charge onto three 
ring carbon atoms. However, since these contributing structures have the 
negative charge on carbon rather than oxygen, they would have a higher 
energy and contribute less; so the stabilization, though significant, is not 
so great as in the acetate ion. 
Carbon-hydrogen bonds are much less acidic than oxygen-hydrogen 
bonds. For simple alkanes, there is effectively no dissociation and the 
values given in Table 4.1 have been estimated by indirect methods. 
A carbonyl group adjacent to a C-H bond increases the acidity of that 
bond significantly. Although there will be no measurable dissociation in 
water, a very small equilibrium concentration of the anion will be formed, 
and this anion, being reactive, may react with other reagents. As it does 
so, more of the carbonyl compound will dissociate, so that complete 

76 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
reaction may occur. This dissociation occurs because of delocalization of 
the charge onto the carbonyl group. It should be noted that this effect 
only applies to C-H bonds adjacent to a carbonyl group. If the carbonyl 
group is further away, the anion will not be stabilized and there will be no 
appreciable acidity of these bonds. This is illustrated in reaction (4.4) for 
cyclopen t anone. 
By the definition given above, the strongest bases will be those at 
the bottom of the second column of Table 4.1 and the weakest will 
be those at the top. Thus the metal salts of hydrocarbons will be 
the strongest bases, bases such as hydroxide and ethoxide will be 
intermediate in strength and molecules such as water are relatively 
weak bases. Bases lower in Table 4.1 will be able to abstract protons 
from acids higher in the table. For example, the ethoxide ion will 
abstract a proton from pentane-2,4-dione almost quantitatively 
(reaction 4.5). 
MeCOCHZCOMe + -0Et 
MeCOCHCOMe + HOEt 
(4.5) 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
77 
4.2 
Bases and Nucleophiles 
Bases always contain a lone pair of electrons which can form a bond to a 
proton. Most, but not all, bases have a negative charge. We have seen an 
example of a reaction of bases with halogenoalkanes to give alkenes in the 
last chapter, and others will follow in this chapter. 
Bases can also react to form bonds to other elements, especially 
carbon, and when reacting in this way they are termed nucleophiles. We 
have already come across nucleophilic reactions in the SNl and SN2 
reactions of nucleophiles with halogenoalkanes. The scale of nucleophi- 
licity used in Table 4.1 is based on SN2 reactions, but it is not possible to 
define a single scale of nucleophilicity that will apply to all nucleophilic 
processes. In general, strong bases tend to be strong nucleophiles, and this 
trend is followed most closely when the central element is the same. The 
values for oxygen-centred nucleophiles in Table 4.1 (bold type) fall from 
4.2 for OH- to zero for H20, in line with base strengths, but nucleophiles 
such as I- and Br- are strongly nucleophilic even though they are very 
weak bases. A likely explanation is that small ions such as OH- and F- 
are highly solvated in water, whereas bigger ions such as I- and Br- are 
less solvated. The solvation energy is partially lost as the covalent bond 
forms in the transition state for the SN2 reaction, which retards the rate 
more for the small nucleophiles. 
4.3 
Carbanions 
Carbanions have a formal negative charge on a carbon atom. They are 
important nucleophiles and bases. 

78 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
4.3.1 Formation of Carbanions 
There are four important methods. 
(a) Abstraction of a proton by a base from a C-H bond. 
This can only be done by strong bases, and is made easier if the carbanion 
to be formed is stabilized, for example by conjugation with an 
adjacent C=O group. In such cases (e.g. reaction 4.4a), the equilibrium 
concentration of the carbanion produced is often very small, but since 
carbanions of this type are very reactive, as the carbanion is removed it 
will be replaced by further hydrogen abstraction by the base, and nearly 
100% reaction can often be achieved. 
(b) Reaction of a metal with an organic halide. 
Reaction of organic halides with metals gives organometallic compounds. 
The carbon-metal bond can vary in character from being essentially 
covalent, as in organomercury compounds, to mainly ionic, as in the 
alkali metal compounds, especially where the potential carbanion is 
resonance stabilized, as in the cyclopentadienyl anion, C5H5-, or the 
triphenylmethyl anion, Ph3C- (reaction 4.6). Organomagnesium com- 
pounds or 
are particularly useful in synthesis. They are 
made by the reaction of the halide with magnesium in the presence of a 
coordinating solvent such as diethyl ether (reaction 4.7). Grignard 
reagents have a complex structure, but the magnesium-carbon bonds are 
covalent and the compounds react as though they had the structure 
R-Mg-X, with polarization of the carbon-magnesium bond '-C-MgS +. 
As a consequence, Grignard reagents are strongly nucleophilic, and can 
bring the organic group with the electrons from the covalent bond to a 
reaction site as a carbanion equivalent. 
2 N d  
Ph3C-Cl - 
Ph3C- Na' + NaCl 
Mg 
R-Br - 
R-Mg-Br 
ether 
(c) Addition of a nucleophile to a C=C double 
(4.7) 
bond. 
The n: bond in alkenes gives a region of high electron density in the region 
that a nucleophile would need to approach to form a bond to one of the 
sp2 carbon atoms, and electron repulsion therefore prevents such attack. 
However, if the C=C bond is conjugated with a C=O group, the electron- 
withdrawing nature of the carbonyl group polarizes the C=C bond so 
that nucleophilic attack can take place at the C=C carbon atom remote 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
79 
from the carbonyl group. This is the basis of the Michael addition 
reaction (4.8). The ethoxide ion abstracts a proton from diethyl malonate 
(propane-1,3-dioate) to give the malonate anion 1 which can attack the 
butenone molecule to give the stabilized anion 2, which in turn abstracts a 
proton from an ethanol molecule to give the adduct molecule 3. 
(d) Fragmentation of anions. 
Elimination of a stable molecule, often C02 or a carbonyl compound, can 
give an anion which usually reacts further. Examples include elimination 
of carbon dioxide from acetates (reaction 4.9). The reaction of iodine with 
acetone (propanone) in the presence of base also involves a step of this 
type (reaction 4.17), as does the reverse of the Claisen condensation 
(reaction 4.34). 
4.3.2 Structure of Carbanions 
The methide anion (CH3-) has been shown to be pyramidal in the gas 
phase, and other saturated carbanions are also pyramidal. Hybridization 
is essentially sp3, with the lone pair electrons occupying one of the 
tetrahedral positions. 
Conjugated carbanions, for example those with an adjacent carbonyl 
group, are essentially planar. Hybridization is sp2 with n: overlap to the 
carbonyl group, and the majority of the negative charge resides on the 
oxygen atom. I3C NMR spectra of anions show upfield shifts compared 
with the corresponding hydrocarbons, consistent with the increased 
shielding caused by the electron pair on the carbon atom which bears 
the charge. The 13C NMR spectrum of conjugated anions such as penta- 
2,4-dienide (Figure 4.1) shows that the charge is mainly spread on the 
odd-numbered carbon atoms, in accordance with resonance or molecular 
orbital theory, with the even-numbered atoms having shifts in the range 

80 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
shown by alkenes, showing that little of the negative charge is associated 
with these atoms. 
Figure 4.1 Chemical shifts in 
the I3C NMR spectrum of the 
penta-2,4-dienide anion 
4.3.3 Reactions of Carbanions (and Nucleophiles) 
Carbanions, being strong bases and nucleophiles, react readily with acids 
and undergo the SN2 reactions considered in Chapter 1 and the 
bimolecular E2 eliminations considered in Chapter 3. Other important 
reactions of carbanions (and nucleophiles) include addition to unsatu- 
rated compounds, especially those containing carbonyl groups, fragmen- 
tation (the reverse of addition) and elimination to give carbenes. 
Reaction with Acids 
This has been discussed earlier in the chapter. Carbanions will abstract a 
proton from acids (including carbon acids) provided that the acid is 
stronger than the conjugate acid of the carbanion (see Table 4.1). Since 
water is acidic, most organometallic compounds will react with water to 
give the hydrocarbon and the hydroxide ion, so water must be rigorously 
excluded from most organometallic preparations and reactions. The 
reaction of water with organometallic compounds does however provide 
a route to organic compounds deuteriated (or tritiated) in particular 
positions, for example reaction (4. lo). 
Although the reaction of hydroxide or alkoxide ions with carbonyl 
compounds to abstract a proton from a carbon atom adjacent to the 
carbonyl group is thermodynamically unfavourable, and the equilibria in 
reactions such as (4.11) and (4.12) lie well over to the left, the high 
reactivity of the carbanion intermediates formed makes reactions of this 
type of vital importance in a number of cases, especially in halogenation 
(reaction 4.14) and in some carbonyl addition reactions, e.g. reactions 
(4.20) and (4.30). 
H-0- 
+ H-CHzCHO A H-0-H 
+%H2CHO 
(4.1 1) 
Et-O-+ 
H-CH2C02Et A Et-O--H 
+ TH2C02Et 
(4.12) 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
a1 
~ 
Nucleophi tic Substitution 
Carbanions are strong nucleophiles. The SN2 reaction with halogeno- 
alkanes gives a new carbon-carbon bond, allowing long or complex 
hydrocarbon groups to be introduced into organic molecules (reaction 
4.13). Carbanions will react with halogens to give the halogenoalkane and 
halide ion (4.14). 

a2 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
E2 Eliminations 
Alkyl sodium and potassium compounds, R-Na+ and R-Kt, are strong 
enough bases to react with ethers, such as diethyl ether (ethoxyethane), to 
give ethene and the ethoxide ion (reaction 4.18). This means that ethers 
are unsuitable solvents for the preparation of these reactive compounds. 
Addition to the Carbonyl Group 
The carbonyl group is strongly polarized in the direction "C=O", 
so it 
is not surprising that a carbanion (or any other nucleophile) will bring its 
electron pair to the "C 
atom to form a bond, displacing the n: bond 
electron pair onto the oxygen atom which can readily accommodate 
them, as shown in reaction (4.19). This type of reaction is important 
synthetically and biologically. An important example is the aldol 
condensation, the simplest example of which is shown in reaction 
(4.20). The hydroxide ion reversibly removes the weakly acidic proton 
from an acetaldehyde (ethanal) molecule to give the stabilized carbanion 
5. Although present only in a tiny concentration at equilibrium, this 
carbanion is highly nucleophilic and adds to the carbonyl carbon atom of 
a second acetaldehyde molecule to give an adduct that reversibly reacts 
with water to give aldol(3-hydroxybutanal, 6). The mechanism shown in 
reaction (4.20) is supported by the observed kinetics: first order with 
respect to [OH-], second order with respect to [CH&HO]. A rapid 
equilibrium is set up between the acetaldehye and its anion 5 (equation 
4.20a), giving a small concentration of -CH2CH0, which is proportional 
to [CH3CHO][OH-]. The product is formed by a second-order reaction 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
03 
of the anion 5 with a further acetaldehyde molecule (equation 4.20b), 
thereby accounting for the overall kinetics. 
Neutral nucleophiles, such as Grignard reagents (R-Mg-Br), also react 
readily with carbonyl compounds, as shown in reaction (4.21). The 
hydroxide ion will also react as a nucleophile (reaction 4.22), but here 
the overall equilibrium lies well to the left so that only a few percent of 
the diol7 is present in an aqueous solution of acetone. 
Reaction with Esters 
Nucleophiles react with esters by substitution rather than addition, as 
shown in ester hydrolysis (4.23) or conversion to an amide by ammonia 
(4.24). Why the difference from aldehydes and ketones, and what is the 
mechanism? 
MeCOzEt + -OH 
---+ MeC02- + EtOH 
(4.23) 
MeCOzEt + NH3 --- 
MeCONH2 + EtOH 
(4.24) 
The key difference is thermodynamic. By placing a carbonyl group and 
a hydroxyl group on the same carbon atom, we have created a new 
functional group, the carboxylic acid group. This has different chemical 
properties and, in particular, is more thermodynamically stable than 
would be expected from a compound containing separate C=O and 

84 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
OH groups. The magnitude of this stabilization can be estimated by 
considering the hypothetical reaction (4.25) in which the hydroxyl group 
in ethanol and the aldehyde hydrogen in ethanal are notionally 
exchanged to give acetic acid and ethane. If there were no interaction 
between the C=O and the OH group in acetic acid, the reaction would be 
expected to be thermoneutral. In fact, based on experimental heats of 
formation, the reaction is 115.5 kJ mol-' exothermic. This shows that 
there is a strong stabilizing interaction between the C=O and the OH 
groups. A lone pair on the oxygen atom of the OH group can interact 
with the n; bond of the C=O group, or, to use resonance language, there 
are two possible resonance contributions to the structure. Structure 9, 
which has the same number of covalent bonds as 8, but has charge 
separation, will not contribute as much as 8 to the overall structure, but 
the infrared carbonyl stretching frequency ranges of aldehydes and 
ketones, on the one hand, and carboxylic acids and derivatives, on the 
other, demonstrate less double-bond character in carboxylic acids and 
derivatives, showing a significant contribution of 9 to the structure. 
Stabilization of this type is also important for other related functional 
groups, in particular esters (- C02R) and amides (- CONH2). 
Aldehydes and ketones tend to react with nucleophiles by addition of 
the nucleophile at the carbonyl carbon, and this is often followed by 
addition of an electrophile at the carbonyl oxygen, giving a stable adduct. 
Reaction (4.26), involving an aldehyde and the cyanide ion, is a good 
example. The first step of reaction of the hydroxide ion with ethyl acetate 
(reaction 4.27a) likewise involves addition of the hydroxide ion to the 
ester carbonyl group to give the tetrahedral intermediate 10. This destroys 
the carboxylic stabilization energy which would not be recovered if this 
intermediate were to add a proton. Instead, the lone pair electrons on the 
negatively charged oxygen come in to re-form the carbonyl double bond, 
and the ethoxide ion is expelled. This restores the carboxylic stabilization 
energy. In subsequent steps, the ethoxide ion reacts with a water molecule 
to give ethanol and the hydroxide ion (reaction 4.27b), which in turn 
removes a proton from the acetic acid to give the even more stabilized 
acetate anion, where the negative charge is delocalized equally onto its 
two oxygen atoms (reaction 4.27~). 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
85 
Me-C=O 
I 
OEt 
Why not postulate the direct substitution reaction analogous to the 
SN2 reaction, with a transition state 11 as shown in reaction (4.28), with 
no intermediate? The best evidence for the formation of a tetrahedral 
intermediate comes from studies of hydrolysis, in ordinary water (H21 60), 
of benzoate esters which have been labelled at the carbonyl oxygen with 
"0. If the reaction was not carried out to completion, and the unchanged 
ester was isolated, it was found that some of the "0 had been lost from 
the carbonyl group. Quantitative analysis for ethyl benzoate showed that 
the ratio of the rate constant for exchange of oxygen to that for 
hydrolysis, kex/khyd, was 4.8, implying that an adduct is formed initially, 
but after a movement of a proton, the addition is reversed with loss of 
"OH-, as in reaction (4.29). 
- 
Me-d 
+-OEt 
(4.28) 
'b 
1 
OH 

86 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The Claisen Condensation 
An important reaction of esters is the 
, illustrated in 
reaction (4.30), in which two molecules of an ester react, in the presence of 
base, to give a P-keto ester. The initial steps of the reaction are similar to 
the aldol condensation already considered, but because of the lesser 
acidity of the ester compared with an aldehyde or ketone, a strong base 
has to be used, and the reaction cannot be carried out in water. 
The first step involves the abstraction of a proton by the base from 
the a-carbon atom of the ester. The equilibrium for this reaction lies 
overwhelmingly in favour of starting materials, but the carbanion 12 
produced is very reactive, and adds to the carbonyl group of an ester 
molecule. The tetrahedral intermediate loses an ethoxide ion to give the 
P-keto ester product 13. This molecule is much more acidic than the 
original ester, and readily loses a proton to form the highly stabilized 
anion 14. In practical terms, the reaction is carried out by adding sodium 
to the neat ester. A trace of alcohol is always present in the ester, which 
reacts with sodium to form the base sodium ethoxide. The ethanol 
produced in the reaction reacts with sodium as it is formed to provide 
further ethoxide ions, driving the reaction to the right, giving as the final 
product the sodium salt of the P-keto ester 14, from which the P-keto ester 
is recovered at the end of the reaction by acidification. 
Although this reaction cannot be carried out in aqueous solution in the 
laboratory, an enzymic version of the Claisen condensation is responsible 
in living cells for the conversion of acetic acid derivatives to fatty acids. 
Base-catalysed Reactions 
A number of reactions of carbonyl compounds require the presence of a 
base, but the base is not used up in the reaction and is therefore acting as a 
catalyst. The aldol condensation considered earlier (reaction 4.20) is an 
example, and another is the base-catalysed exchange of l 8 0  between 
water and esters (reaction 4.29) which accompanies hydrolysis. The base 
reacts with the carbonyl compound in the first stage of the reaction, either 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
87 
by abstraction of a proton (4.20) or by addition at the carbonyl carbon 
atom (4.29). In both cases, the base is regenerated in the final step of the 
reaction. Other reactions which similarly involve a base include ester 
hydrolysis (reaction 4.27) and the Claisen condensation (reaction 4.30). 
However, in these reactions, a mole of base is used up in the final step to 
convert the carboxylic acid to its anion in ester hydrolysis and the P-keto 
ester to its anion in the Claisen condensation. Since base is used up, these 
reactions are better described as 
Reaction with Alkenes 
Although carbanions and nucleophiles add readily to the highly polarized 
C=O group, addition to the C=C bond is difficult because of the high 
electron density in the n; bond, which makes approach of nucleophiles 
difficult. We have already seen in reaction (4.8) that attack is possible if 
electron density is pulled away from one end of the C=C double bond by 
a carbonyl group. Organometallic compounds with a high degree of ionic 
character in the carbon-metal bond, such as butyllithium, will react with 
conjugated alkenes such as buta- 1,3-diene or styrene (phenylethene) to 
give adducts which in the absence of moisture or oxygen can add further 
alkene molecules to give polymers; these continue to grow until all the 
alkene is used up. At this point, the 
is still reactive: if a 
further supply of the same or a different conjugated alkene is added, 
polymerization continues, giving in the latter case a 
where blocks of different monomer units can be assembled (reaction 
4.31). The process is finished by adding water or air, which quenches the 
organometallic compound by donation of a proton to give the alkane 
(reaction 4.32), or addition to a dioxygen molecule to give in turn the 
peroxide anion and then the alkoxide anion (reaction 4.33). 

88 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
H2O 
R-Li - 
R-H 
+ I,i+ + -OH 
o=o 
R-I 
i 
R-Li - 
R-0-0- 
Li+ -- 2 R-0- + 2 Li' 
(4.32) 
(4.33) 
Fragmentation 
Carbanions (and other anions) can undergo fragmentation reactions to 
produce a carbanion and a smaller molecule, usually carbon dioxide or a 
molecule containing a carbonyl group. Examples include the loss of 
carbon dioxide from the acetate anion (reaction 4.9), considered above. 
Other important examples include reactions of type (4.34), which are the 
reverse of addition reactions such as (4.20) and (4.30). 
Elimination to give Carbenes 
Carbanions with a good leaving group, such as a halogen atom, attached 
to the carbanion centre may react in a unimolecular elimination process 
to give a 
, a different type of reactive intermediate with only six 
electrons in the valence shell. Dichlorocarbene may be conveniently made 
by the reaction of potassium t-butoxide with trichloromethane (chloro- 
form; reaction 4.35). Abstraction of the proton is made easier by the 
presence of the three chlorine atoms which stabilize the charge on 
the intermediate carbanion 15, and the subsequent elimination of the 
chloride ion transfers the negative charge from carbon to the much more 
electronegative chlorine. 
Carbenes are very reactive: since they contain divalent carbon, they 
have the capacity to react to form two new bonds. Two important ways 
in which this happens are by addition to both ends of a double bond 
synchronously to give a cyclopropane ring (reaction 4.36) or by insertion 
into a single bond (reaction 4.37). The former reaction has synthetic utility, 
since few reactions exist to produce cyclopropane rings in good yields. 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
89 
(4.36) 
+ CClZ - 
CHC12 
(4.37) 
4.3.4 Detection of Carbanions and Indications for 
Anionic Intermediates 
In some cases, carbanion intermediates can be detected, for example by 
NMR spectroscopy. More frequently, they are inferred as being the most 
likely intermediate, or characterized by trapping with reagents known to 
react with anions. Reactions taking place in basic solutions are likely to 
involve anionic intermediates, formed either by abstraction of a proton or 
by addition to a multiple bond (usually containing a heteroatom). 
Reactions in acidic media virtually never involve reactive anionic 
intermediates; any anions present merely balance the positive charges. 
Stepwise reactions in basic media usually involve alternating sequences of 
neutral and negatively charged species. Do not suggest steps involving 
positively charged species including protons: any protons needed to 
complete a reaction will come from solvent molecules. 
For example, both cyclohexa-l,3-diene and its isomer cyclohexa- 
1,4-diene, when heated separately with t-C5H110K and t-C5H1 10D at 
95 "C [t-C5H11= (C2H5)(CH3),C-] give the same mixture of monodeu- 
teriated compounds 16 and 17 (reaction 4.38). This is not the equilibrium 
mixture, which suggests that the mixture of products arises from an 
intermediate which is the same for both reactions. The only likely 
intermediate is the stabilized anion 18, arising from proton abstraction 
from the cyclohexadiene molecules by the base, followed by abstraction 
of a deuteron from the solvent by the common intermediate anion. 
H
D
 
I I  
- II 
(4.38) 
H 
17 20% 

90 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Trapping of anions can be achieved by adding methyl methacrylate 
(methyl 2-methylpropenoate, 19) to a reaction mixture. The formation of 
a polymer, precipitated out of the reaction mixture by adding methanol, 
indicates an anion intermediate (reaction 4.39). Addition of a mixture of 
methyl methacrylate and styrene is even more specific for reactive anions. 
If an anion initiates the polymerization, the polymer contains only methyl 
methacrylate units. If a radical is involved, a copolymer of styrene and 
methyl methacrylate will be formed, whereas cations will give a styrene 
polymer. The three possible polymer outcomes, and thus the nature of the 
initiator, can readily be distinguished by combustion analysis: the weight 
percentages of carbon and hydrogen in the three types of polymers are 
markedly different (see Table 4.2). 
Table 4.2 Copolymerization of methyl methacrylate in the presence of various 
initiators 
Polymer composition 
Carbon (%) 
Hydrogen (%) 
lnitia tor 
Polystyrene 
92.3 
7.7 
Cation 
Poly(methy1 methacrylate) 
60.0 
8.1 
Anion 
Copolymer of styrene and 
76.4 
7.9 
Radical 
methyl methacrylate (1 : 1 ) 
I 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
91 

92 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Anions and Nucleophilic Reactions 
93 

Cations and Electrophiles 
Many reactions in polar solvents involve the production of cations as 
intermediates. This chapter focuses on 
. These are electron- 
deficient species that form a covalent bond with a reaction partner 
(the nucleophile) by accepting both electrons for the bond from the 
nucleophile (reaction 5.1). The terms 
and 
are also 
used to describe electrophiles and nucleophiles, especially in the context 
of inorganic chemistry. Electrophiles can be positively charged or neutral. 
If positively charged, they are 
. Cations centred on carbon are 
. All proton acids are electrophiles; other electrophiles 
include the nitronium ion NO2+ and the bromine molecule. Some 
examples of reactions of electrophiles with nucleophiles (which can be 
negatively charged or neutral) are shown in reactions (5.2)-(5.5). 
Reactions (5.2) and (5.3) involve positively charged electrophiles, whereas 
the electrophiles in (5.4) and (5.5) are neutral. 
94 

Cations and Electrophiles 
95 
The tert-butyl (2-methylprop-2-yl) cation, which is the electrophile in 
reaction (5.2), has a vacant orbital which can accept the electron pair 
from the nucleophile without the need for any further movement of 
electrons. However, in many reactions a further electron pair movement 
is needed. The electrophilic proton in H30+, HBr or H20 (reactions 
5.3-5.5) can only support one covalent bond, so as the nucleophile 
attacks with its electron pair, the bond from the proton to the oxygen or 
bromine atom has to break, with the electrons from that bond forming a 
lone pair on the oxygen or bromine atom. 
5.1 
Formation of Carbocations 
Carbocations can be formed in a number of ways, including heterolysis of 
a covalent bond and addition of an electrophile to a multiple bond. 
5.1.1 Heterolysis of a Covalent Bond 
Organic compounds with covalent bonds to electronegative elements may 
dissociate to form carbocations, especially if the cation is stabilized by the 
inductive effect, as in the t-butyl cation, or by resonance, as in the cumyl 
(2-phenylprop-2-yl) cation. This can happen slowly in polar solvents such 
as water. The SN1 reaction of t-butyl halides is an example (reaction 5.6). 
The slow and rate-determining heterolysis of the halide is followed by a 
rapid reaction of the t-butyl cation with water to give the alcohol product. 
Loss of halide can be assisted by the presence of a Lewis acid such as 
antimony(V) fluoride (reaction 5.7). In this or other polar aprotic solvents 
the carbocation formed has no nucleophile to react with except for the 

96 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
~~ 
~~ 
SbF5Cl- anion, which regenerates the original halide. In these solutions, 
concentrations of cations can be achieved which are high enough to allow 
study by NMR spectroscopy. 
5.1.2 Addition of an Electrophile to a Multiple Bond 
The proton and other electrophiles can readily add to one end,of a C=C 
or C-C double or triple bond, and to the more electronegative atom in 
C=N, C=N or C=O bonds. In addition to a C=C or C-C bond, the 
direction of addition is to give the most stabilized cation. Alkyl groups 
stabilize a cation by their inductive and hyperconjugative effects (see 
Chapter 3); unsaturated and aromatic groups stabilize a cation by 
delocalization of the positive charge onto remote atoms. Propene reacts 
with HBr in the first step to give the secondary prop-2-yl cation (reaction 
5 . Q  rather than the less stable primary prop- 1-yl cation (reaction 5.9). 
Protonation of a carbonyl group (reaction 5.10) gives a delocalized 
cation 1, with the charge spread between the carbon and the oxygen 
atoms. This reaction is reversible and forms the first step of many acid- 
catalysed reactions. 
Addition of a proton or other electrophile is often rapidly followed by 
addition of a nucleophile at the other terminus of the multiple bond. 
5.2 
Evidence for Cations 
5.2.1 NMR Spectroscopy 
Reactions such as SN1 reactions in water are believed to involve cationic 
intermediates, but do not give sufficient concentrations of the cations for 

Cations and Electrophiles 
97 
them to be identified spectroscopically. However, cations can be observed 
conveniently in solutions in aprotic polar solvents such as SbF5. The 
strong deshielding, resulting in high values of chemical shift for both 13C 
and 'H NMR spectra, is good evidence for cationic character. For 
example, the 'H NMR spectrum of the prop-2-yl cation (CH3)2CH+ 
shows a one-proton resonance at 6. = 13.5 ppm, split into septets by the 
six methyl protons. The methyl protons appear at 5.1 ppm. The very high 
value for the CH proton is consistent with its attachment to a carbon 
bearing a positive charge; the high value for the methyl protons suggests 
that the charge on the neighbouring carbon is causing deshielding by 
inductively and hyperconjugatively withdrawing electrons. The diphenyl- 
methyl cation 2 (Figure 5.1) shows a high-field proton at 9.8 ppm; 
the ring protons are more deshielded at the ortho and para positions, 
corresponding to greater positive charge density at these positions 
compared with the meta protons, in accord with resonance and molecular 
orbital theory. 
Figure 5.1 
chemical shifts (6) 
' t i  and I3C NMR 
The nitronium ion N02+ attacks hexamethylbenzene to give an adduct 
3 of the type thought to be involved in electrophilic aromatic substitution; 
the 13C chemical shifts for the ring carbon atoms are shown in Figure 5.1. 
The 6 value of 98.7 ppm is very high for a sp3 carbon atom and is 
attributed to the positive charge build-up on the adjacent carbon atoms. 
Again the ortho and para carbon chemical shifts are higher than those of 
the meta carbon atoms, in line with resonance and molecular orbital 
theory. 

98 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
5.2.2 Trapping 
Cations react rapidly and indiscriminately with nucleophiles. Thus if a 
reaction which is suspected to go via a cationic intermediate is carried out 
in the presence of an added nucleophile, and an adduct containing the new 
nucleophile is obtained, this provides evidence for a cationic intermediate 
which is trapped by the added nucleophile. For example, the addition of 
bromine to alkenes is thought to go via a cationic intermediate 4 (reaction 
5.1 1). If chloride or nitrite ions are added to the reaction mixture, the 
chloride or nitrite adducts 5 and 6 are obtained, even though the chloride 
and nitrite ions do not react with ethene (or 1,2-dibromoethane) directly 
at a rate that would account for the amount of these products in the 
reaction mixture. This provides strong evidence for the intermediate 
bromoethyl cation 4, which will be trapped by the added chloride or 
nitrite ions (reactions 5.12 and 5.13). The structure of bromoalkyl cations 
is discussed further in the section on electrophilic addition. 

Cations and Electrophiles 
99 
If a carbocation will react with two nucleophiles to give the corres- 
ponding adducts, we would expect the adducts to be formed in the same 
ratios however the carbocation is formed. Although the decomposition 
of benzhydryl bromide (bromodiphenylmethane, 7) in 90% aqueous 
acetone at 50 "C in the presence of 0.1 M sodium azide is 335 times faster 
than the decomposition of the corresponding chloride 8, the proportion 
of alcohol 9 to azide 10 remains constant, pointing to a common 
intermediate, the carbocation 11, in both solvolyses (reactions 5.14). 
Ph,CH-Br 
7
\
 
Ph,CH -OH 
H
2
y
 9 66% 
(5.14) 
Ph,CH-CI 
Ph,CH-N, 
8 
10 34% 
5.283 Rearrangements 
Rearrangement of the carbon skeleton in a chemical reaction is a strong 
indication that carbocations are involved. Examples and the mechanism 
are discussed in the next section. Carbanions and carbon-centred free 
radicals rarely rearrange. 
583 
Reactions of Carbocations 
There are three important reactions of carbocations: rearrangements, 
addition of a nucleophile, and elimination, usually of a proton. Since 
rearrangements involve conversion of one carbocation into another, these 
reactions will need to be completed to give an uncharged product by 
addition of a nucleophile or by elimination. 
5.3.1 Rearrangements 
Intramolecular rearrangements are the most characteristic reaction of 
carbocations; whenever a free carbocation can undergo rearrangement to 
give a more stable cation, it will do so provided there is a possible reaction 
pathway. Thus both 1- and 2-fluoropropane in SbF5 give the prop- 
2-yl cation, and all four isomers of C4H9F give the t-butyl cation. This 
also provides strong evidence that the stability order is tertiary > secon- 
dary > primary. The mechanism is thought to involve a succession of 
1,2-hydrogen or alkyl shifts, shown for the rearrangement of the 
n-butyl cation 12 to the t-butyl cation 15 in reaction (5.15). The second 
step involving the rearrangement of the but-2-yl cation 13 to the 
isobutyl cation 14 (i.e. secondary to primary) is endothermic, but overall, 

I00 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
reaction (5.1 5) is strongly exothermic and the equilibrium overwhel- 
mingly favours the t-butyl cation 15. 
The primary alcohol 16 reacts with HBr to give the rearranged bromide 
19 (reaction 5.16). Protonation will give the oxonium ion 17; as the water 
molecule leaves in the second step, the methyl group migrates so that the 
tertiary carbocation 18 is formed, which adds a bromide ion to give the 
final product. 
The diol 20 (pinacol) rearranges to pinacolone 22 in the presence of 
acid; in the second step the methyl group migrates with its bonding 
electrons to give the stabilized cation 21, which loses a proton to give the 
final ketone 22 (reaction 5.17). 

Cations and Electrophiles 
I01 
5.3.2 Addition of a Nucleophile 
Carbocations, however formed, are very electrophilic. They react readily 
with nucleophiles, as shown in reaction (5.18). These reactions are 
important as steps in electrophilic addition to double bonds and 
unimolecular nucleophilic substitution (SNl) reactions. 
E I ect rop h i I ic Add it io n to Mu It i p I e Bonds 
Molecules such as hydrogen bromide add to alkenes to form bromo- 
alkanes. Trapping experiments (see above) support the intermediate 
formation of a carbocation; the direction of addition is determined by the 
stability of the intermediate cation. Thus propene gives 2-bromopropane 
via the prop-2-yl cation (reaction 5.19); this direction of addition is 
termed 
addition, to distinguish it from the radical- 
catalysed addition considered in the next chapter which gives the 
product I -bromopropane. However, 3,3,3-trifluoro- 
propene (23) adds HCl in the opposite direction to give 25, in which the 
proton has added to the central rather than the terminal carbon atom 
(reaction 5.20). The secondary ion 26 is destabilized by the electron- 
withdrawing fluorine atoms; as a result, the reaction goes through the 
primary cation 24. 

102 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The electrophile does not need to be a proton. Bromine adds to double 
bonds to give the 1,2-dibromo compound (reaction 5.21). The inter- 
mediate bromonium cation here is believed to have the cyclic structure 
27 rather than the open structure 28 because of the stereochemistry 
of the products. trans-But-2-ene (29) reacts with bromine to give 
the optically inactive meso dibromide 31 as a single compound 
(reaction 5.22) [cis-but-2-ene gives an equimolar mixture of the two 
enantiomers (R,R)- 
and (S,S)-2,3-dibromobutane, which is also optically 
inactive]. 
This shows that the two bromine atoms add to the opposite sides 
of the double bond, which rules out a molecular mechanism for 
this reaction in which both new bonds are formed simultaneously. 
This suggests that the bridged bromonium ion 30 is formed as an 
intermediate; the bridging will prevent free rotation round the C-C 
bond which would allow a mixture of diastereoisomers to be formed. 
The second step is effectively an SN2 reaction, in which we expect 
attack by the incoming nucleophile on the opposite side to the leaving 
group. 

Cations and Electrophiles 
103 
Epoxidation by Peroxy Acids 
The 0-0 bond in peroxycarboxylic acids 32 can be regarded as polarized 
in the direction Ar-CO-O'--O'+ 
H, so 32 reacts by electrophilic addition 
of the O'+H group to a double bond (reaction 5.23). However, a lone 
pair of electrons on the oxygen atom immediately coordinates with the 
other carbon which would otherwise have developed the positive charge, 
to give the bridged intermediate hydroxonium ion 33. The benzoate anion 
escapes and takes no further part in the reaction; the stabilization of the 
benzoate anion provides a driving force for the reaction. The oxonium 
ion 33 is attacked from the opposite side by a water molecule in an SN2 
reaction to form the cation 34. This loses a proton to give the diol35, in 
which the two hydroxyl groups have been added to the original C=C 
bond in the anti (opposite sides) orientation. 
SN1 Reactions 
SNl reactions (5.24), discussed in Chapter 1, involve a slow rate- 
determining step in which a leaving group departs, taking the electrons 
from the covalent bond, and leaving a reactive carbocafion intermediate. 

104 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
This reacts rapidly by addition to any nucleophile present, especially with 
the solvent, to form a stable product. A final proton loss may be 
necessary. Since carbocations are planar, it might be expected that 
optically active starting materials should give racemic products: if a 
completely free carbocation is formed, the incoming nucleophile would 
be expected to be able to attack equally readily from both sides of the 
cation (Figure 5.2a). In practice, a mixture of racemization and inversion 
is observed, suggesting that the leaving group is still in the vicinity, either 
free or as an ion pair, which inhibits attack from the same side as the 
departing group and therefore favours attack from the opposite side, 
giving rise to a greater amount of inversion than retention (Figure 5.2b). 
R-Hal 
slow 
H2O 
+ 
H20 
- 
Hal- + R+ - 
R-OH2 -- 
R-OH 
+ H30' 
(5.24) 
Figure 5.2 Stereochemistry of 
SN1 reactions 
5.3.3 Elimination 
The alternative way in which a carbocation can be converted into a 
neutral product is by elimination of a cation, almost always a proton. 
Two important reactions involve elimination as the final step. 
Unimolecular Elimination (El) Reactions 
When a carbocation is formed by loss of a nucleophile, as in the SN1 
reaction, elimination of a proton will always compete with substitution, 
provided that there is a P-C-H bond in the cation. These eliminations 
are described as 
because, as with the 
competing SN 1 reaction, the rate-determining step is the unimolecular 
reaction of the original halide to give the carbocation. For example, 
t-butyl chloride in ethanol gives the t-butyl cation, which can either react 
with a solvent molecule to give the ethyl ether 36 (SN1, 
reaction 5.25) or a proton can be removed by a solvent molecule to give 
2-methylpropene 37 (El, reaction 5.26). If more than one type of P-C-H 

Cations and Electrophiles 
105 
bond is available, a mixture of products will be formed. The proportion of 
products is mainly determined by the stability of the alkene produced. 
For unhindered monoalkenes, this will favour the alkene product 
which has most substituents on the C=C, since this alkene will be the 
most stable. For example, Me2C=CHMe (AHf= -42.1 kJ mol-', three 
substituents) is more stable than Me(Et)C=CH2 (AHf = -35.6 kJ mol-', 
two substituents), which in turn is more stable than Me2CH-CH=CH2 
(AHf = -27.4 kJ mol-', one substituent). This stabilization is probably 
due to the greater strength of the Csp2-Csp3 bond than the Csp3-Csps 
single bond, due to better overlap. There are more of these bonds in more 
substituted alkenes. However, bulky groups such as the t-butyl group 
cause steric destabilization, especially when cis to another group at 
the other end of the double bond. Examples of these effects are shown in 
reactions (5.27) and (5.28). In (5.27), the trisubstituted alkene 38 
predominates over the disubstituted alkene 39; in (5.28), the predominant 
product is the disubstituted isomer 40 where the t-butyl and methyl 
groups are trans to each other, followed by the monosubstituted 41, with 
a very small amount of the cis product 42, which, although disubstituted, 
has significant steric hindrance between the two groups cis to each 
other. The proportions follow the measured heats of formation of the 
three isomers. 

106 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Elimination from halides almost always gives a mixture of elimination 
and solvolysis products. The acid-catalysed elimination of water from 
alcohols provides a preparative alternative (reaction 5.29). The proto- 
nated alcohol 43 loses a water molecule to give the carbocation, which can 
eliminate a proton to form the alkene. Even if some of the carbocation is 
trapped as the sulfate ester 44, this reaction is reversible, and the alkene 
can be distilled out of the reaction mixture to bring the reaction to 
completion. 
H+ 
+ 
4 3 2 0  
Me&-OH - 
Me,C-OH, 
Me$+ 
---+ 
H2S04 
43 
II 
I I H2S04 
H 
-H+ 
/ 
(5.29) 
Me,C-OS0,H 
Me$-0' 
/ 
44 
SO,H 
Electrophilic Aromatic Substitution 
In these important reactions, one electrophile replaces another (usually 
a proton) on an aromatic ring. In a classical example, benzene is 
converted into nitrobenzene by a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids 
(reaction 5.30). The reagent that attacks the benzene ring is believed 
to be the nitronium ion, NOz+, for which there is spectroscopic and 
other evidence. Two possible mechanisms are shown in reactions 
(5.31, E+ = N02+). The first (route a) would involve simultaneous 
bond making and bond breaking, going through a transition state 45 
to the substituted product 47. Evidence against this route is the 
absence of a hydrogen isotope effect, which shows that the C-H bond 
is not significantly broken in the transition state, and the effect of 
substituents on the benzene ring. The rate of reaction is speeded 
up by electron-releasing substituents such as methyl, supporting the 
presence of a positively charged intermediate or transition state. 
Additionally, the effect of substituents at the para position on the 
rate shows that the effect correlates with u+ rather than (T (see 
Chapter 3), which shows that the charge is conjugated with the para 
substituent, allowing extra stabilization as indicated in structures 
49 and 50. The involvement of an intermediate 46 (a 
and thus route (b) is supported by NMR evidence 
(see the section on structure of carbocations above), which shows 
that structures of this type can be identified for highly substituted 
benzenes. Salts of cations of type 46 have recently been isolated 
as crystals whose structures have been determined by X-ray crystal- 
lography. 

Cations and Electrophiles 
107 
- 6+ 
6+ 
E, ,H 0 
- 
45 
* 
6 
+ H +  
47 
(5.3 1) 
E
H
 
E
H
 
49 
50 
Why do the adduct carbocations 46 not react with a nucleophile to 
give an adduct of type 48, as happens in electrophilic addition to 
double bonds? The main reason is probably thermodynamic. The 
hypothetical reaction (5.32) is very exothermic, based on experimental 
heats of formation. If we attribute this exothermicity to the 
stabilization of the benzene nucleus, we obtain a value of 150 kJ mol-' 
for this stabilization. This stabilization would be lost in reaction (5.31) 
if the adduct 48 were formed, but is regained if the substituted 
product 47 is produced. This stabilization does not apply to reaction 
with alkenes, so addition can take place if the reaction is favourable 
energetically. 
3 0 
- 8 
+ 2 0 
AH=-150kJm01-~ 
(5.32) 

108 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
5.4 
Electrophilic Rearrangements involving 
Migration of C to 0 or N 
Rearrangements of carbocations by migration of a carbon-centred 
group from an adjacent atom as in reaction (5.33) are common, and 
this is indeed a characteristic reaction, as discussed in Section 5.3.1. 
We might expect that similar reactions might be observed for positively 
charged nitrogen and oxygen species with six electrons in their valence 
shell, as in reactions (5.34) and (5.35). However, the greater electro- 
negativity of nitrogen and oxygen makes species such as 51 and 53 so 
unstable that it is almost impossible to create them in solution. Thus in 
reaction (5.36) the first stage involves the protonation of the oxygen 
atom in the oxime 55 to give 56 in which the OH2 fragment would be a 
good leaving group, but its loss with a pair of electrons to leave the 
positively charged nitrogen-centred intermediate 57 is too endothermic 
to take place. Instead, the production of 57 can be forestalled by the 
simultaneous migration of the group R' to the nitrogen atom to give 
the carbocation 58, which in turn is attacked by a water molecule to 
give 59, and after three subsequent protonation and deprotonation 
steps gives the amide 60 in good yield. Evidence that the reaction is 
concerted and does not involve 57 as an intermediate is provided by 
the observation that the isomeric oxime 61 reacts to give the amide 62 
in which R2, the other group, has migrated. If the symmetrical 
intermediate 57 were involved, a mixture of amides 60 and 62 would be 
expected from the rearrangement of either of the oximes 55 or 61. This 
rearrangement is useful synthetically and is known as the 

Cations and Electrophiles 
109 
Ketones such as 63 are oxidized by peroxy acids 65 in the 
(5.37), which involves migration of a carbon-centred 
group from carbon to oxygen. The protonated ketone 64 reacts with 
the peroxy acid 65 to give the ester 66. Migration of R2 to oxygen 
takes place as the stabilized carboxylate anion 68 leaves, to give the 
protonated ester 67. This loses a proton to give the ester product 70. 
The alternative route via the unstable oxygen-centred cation 69 does not 
take place. 

110 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
5.5 
Acid-catalysed Reactions 
Many reactions are catalysed by acids. Hydrolysis of esters and the 
reverse reaction, esterification, are important examples both in the labo- 
ratory and in living systems (reaction 5.38). In the forward direction, the 
initial rate is proportional to [H30+][71]; in the reverse direction the 
kinetic dependence is on [H30+][74][EtOH]. By the principle of micro- 
scopic reversibility (Chapter l), the reaction must have the same 
mechapism in both directions. The third-order kinetic dependence of 

Cations and Electrophiles 
I11 
the reverse reaction suggests that the reaction is complex and involves 
intermediates, because termolecular reactions are rare. The formation of 
tetrahedral intermediates of type 72 or 73, involving reversible addition of 
a water molecule, is supported by the observation that if partial 
hydrolysis of an ester labelled with '*O in the carbonyl group is carried 
out and unchanged ester is recovered, oxygen exchange with the solvent 
water occurs. In both reaction directions, if substituted benzoate esters 
are used, negative Hammett p factors are observed, showing that positive 
charge is built up during the reaction, and the dependence on (T+ shows 
that the charge is conjugated with the ring (see Section 3.3 for an 
explanation of substituent effects). 
The scheme shown in (5.38) is consistent with these observations. Why 
are so many steps involved? The scheme has been drawn out in detail, 
including the representation of the solvated proton as H30+ to 
emphasize that in each step a bond is formed and a bond is broken. Thus 
all the steps are approximately thermoneutral, and can take place with low 
activation energies. The number of steps is immaterial, so long as there is a 
negative Gibbs free-energy change in the reaction. Most biological 
reactions involve sequences of this type. 

112 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
In general, the fact that a reaction is acid catalysed implies that a 
substrate molecule is protonated in the first step, and that the protonated 
molecule reacts further, perhaps with other molecules, to give product 
molecule(s), regenerating the proton during the process. This route must 
be faster than alternative schemes which do not involve the catalyst, 
otherwise no catalysis would have taken place. Two possibilities are 
shown in reactions (5.39) and (5.40). 
rapid 
pre-equilibrium 
slow 
S + H + -  
- SH' - 
Products 
(5.39) 
fast 
S + H +  - 
- SH' - 
Products 
reverse deprotonation 
(5.40) 
does not compete with 
product formation 
In (5.39), a rapid pre-equilibrium is set up between the substrate S and 
its protonated form SH+, followed by a slow reaction of SH+ to give 
products. Alternatively, the protonation may be rate determining, with a 
rapid reaction of SH' to give products being faster than the reverse 
deprotonation back to S, as in reaction (5.40). There are kinetic 
consequences of this difference. For reactions of type (5.39), the set-up 
of an equilibrium between S and SHf means that the concentration of 
SH+ and thus the rate depends only on the (solvated) hydrogen ion 
concentration. Reactions of this type are said to undergo 
the rate will depend only on the concentration of solvated 
protons and not on the concentration of any other acid species present, 
including water. However, for reactions of type (5.40), where protonation 
is rate determining, the protonation can be carried out either by the 
solvated proton (reaction 5.41) or by any other acid present, including 
water (reaction 5.42). Each route will independently produce SH+ ions 
that contribute to product formation. The rate equation will have terms 
involving all acids present, and the reaction is said to be subject to 
S + H30' - 
SH' + H20 
(5.41) 
S + HA ---+ 
SHf + A- 
(5.42) 

Cations and Electrophiles 
113 
An example of specific acid catalysis is the hydrolysis of 
acetaldehyde diethyl acetal (1,l -diethoxyethane, 75). Reaction (5.43) 
was carried out in a formic (methanoic) acid/formate buffer. The 
formic acid concentration was varied over a factor of 10, whereas 
the ratio [HC02H]/[HCO,-] was maintained at a value of 3.0, to give 
a constant pH and hydrogen ion concentration. The rate of hydrolysis 
in all the experiments was the same, within experimental error, showing 
that the rate depended only on the hydrogen ion concentration and 
not on the formic acid or water concentrations. Thus this reaction 
is subject to specific acid catalysis. A rapid pre-equilibrium is set up 
between 75 and its protonated form 76 in the first step. The second and 
rate-determining step involving loss of an ethanol molecule to give the 
carbocation 77 is slow, so specific acid catalysis by the solvated proton 
is observed. The subsequent steps lead to an acetaldehyde (ethanal) 
molecule 78 in good yield. 
By contrast, the hydrolysis of 1, 1 ,1-triethoxyethane (ethyl ortho- 
acetate, 79) to acetic acid (82) is subject to general acid catalysis 
(reaction 5.44), as discussed in Chapter 2 (reaction 2.32). When the 
reaction is carried out in a m-nitrophenollm-nitrophenolate buffer, 
terms in [H30]+, [m-02NC6H40H] and [H20] are found in the 
rate equation. In reaction (5.44), the first step to give the 
protonated compound 80 is rate determining, followed by a rapid 
second step. 

114 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Why the difference between (5.43) and (5.44)? In reaction (5.43), the 
carbocation 77 formed in the second step is stabilized by only one oxygen 
substituent. However, the analogous cation 81 in reaction (5.44) is 
stabilized by two oxygen substituents, making the fragmentation step 
more exothermic and therefore faster, so in this case the rate-determining 
step shifts from the second to the first. 

Cations and Electrophiles 
115 

116 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Cations and Electrophiles 
117 

Radicals 
Free radicals are species that have an unpaired electron in their valence 
shell. They tend to be very reactive and are normally only present in 
tiny concentrations. In solution in non-polar solvents, free radical and 
molecular reactions play a dominant role to the virtual exclusion of 
cations and anions. Almost all the reactions that take place in the 
atmosphere are free radical processes. 
6.1 
Formation of Free Radicals 
Since most organic molecules have all their electrons paired, conversion 
into radicals involves homolysis of a covalent bond, or a single electron 
transfer to or from a molecule. 
6.1.1 Thermolysis 
For molecules with a weak covalent bond, heating provides enough 
thermal energy to break the covalent bond 
(one electron 

Radicals 
119 
from the covalent bond to each of the two radicals formed); the weaker 
the bond, the lower the temperature for decomposition. In practice, per- 
oxides and azo compounds are the most practical and cleanest sources, 
as exemplified by reactions (6.1) and (6.2). Di-t-butyl peroxide (1) 
decomposes at temperatures above 100 "C to give two t-butoxyl radicals 
(2). The oxygen-oxygen bond is by far the weakest in the molecule, so 
this bond is the exclusive bond broken in the homolysis, giving a 
clean reaction. In azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN, 3) the C-N bond is the 
weakest, partly because the product 2-cyanoprop-2-yl radical (4) is 
stabilized by delocalization. The intermediate azo radical 5 quickly loses a 
nitrogen molecule to give a second 2-cyanoprop-2-yl radical, so reaction 
(6.2) provides a clean source of these radicals at temperatures above 
about 80 O C. Hydrocarbons such as 1,2-diphenylethane (6), which 
homolyse to give two stabilized benzyl radicals 7 (reaction 6.3), decom- 
pose at temperatures of about 400 "C, too hot to be of practical value 
for reactions in solution, whereas simple alkanes such as ethane only 
undergo homolysis at temperatures above 800 ' C, making these reactions 
significant only in high-temperature pyrolyses and combustion reactions 
(e.g. reaction 6.4). 
Me 
Me 
Me 
Me 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Me-C-N=N-C-Me - 
Me-C' 
+ 'N=N-C-Me 
I 
I 
I 
CN 
CN 
I 
CN 
4 
5 
CN 
3 
I 
I ' Me 
b-i] 
N=N + '?-Me 
I 
CN 
4 
Y 
Ph-CHz-CH2-Ph - 
Ph-CH; + 'CHz-Ph 
6 
7 
7 
6.1.2 Photolysis 
The energy required to break a covalent bond can also be provided 
by electromagnetic radiation, normally ultraviolet or visible light. 

120 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The molecule needs to have a chromophore to absorb the radiation. 
Chlorine, bromine and iodine molecules absorb visible radiation and are 
decomposed by a photon of light into two halogen atoms (reaction 6.5). 
Alkanes do not absorb visible or UV light down to 200nm, and thus do 
not undergo photolysis to free radicals. Ketones such as benzophenone 
(diphenylmethanone, 8) absorb near-UV light to give an excited molecule 9 
in which an electron has been promoted from a non-bonding orbital on 
oxygen to the n* antibonding orbital of the carbonyl group. This n+x* 
transition gives an excited ketone molecule 9, which has enough energy 
to abstract a hydrogen aiom from a solvent (usually alcohol) molecule to 
give the stabilized,Phz COH radical 10 and a more reactive alcohol- 
derived radical R2 COH 11, both of which can undergo further reactions 
(reaction 6.6 and Figure 6.1). 
hv 
x-x - 
X'+X' 
X = C1. Br or I 
hv 
. 
HCR20H 
Ph2C=O - 
Ph2C-0 
Ph26-OH + dR20H 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Figure 6.1 n-m* excitation of 
ketones 
6.1.3 Electron Transfer 
Many metal atoms can give up a single electron to give a cation with a 
single positive charge, and many ions can give up or take an electron from 
an organic molecule to convert it into a radical. Practical examples are 
shown in reactions (6.7)-(6.9). In (6.7) the silver atom gives up an electron 
to the chlorotriphenylmethane molecule 12, which promptly loses a 
chloride ion to give the triphenylmethyl radical 13, whereas in (6.8) the 
electron is transferred from the sodium atom to the lowest antibonding 
orbital of anthracene (14) giving a radical anion 15 which behaves both as 
a radical and as an anion. Fe(I1) salts are readily oxidized to Fe(II1) salts 
by hydrogen peroxide, giving a hydroxide ion and a hydroxyl radical, a 
convenient source of the latter at room temperature (reaction 6.9). 

Radicals 
121 
(6.7) 
Ph3C-Cl 
+ Ag A Ph$* + Ag'C1- 
12 
13 
Fe2+ + H-0-0-H 
A Fe3+ + HO + -OH 
(6.9) 
6. I .4 Molecule-induced Homolysis 
Some reactions occur thermally at temperatures too low for homolysis of 
any of the covalent bonds present to provide enough radicals to start the 
reaction. For example, mixtures of fluorine and methane explode at room 
temperature, and many hydrocarbons are oxidized slowly by molecular 
oxygen (see below). It has been postulated that the bimolecular reactions 
(6.10) and (6.11) are responsible. In (6.10), the formation of the very 
strong H-F bond makes this reaction much less endothermic than the 
simple homolysis of the fluorine molecule. In (6.1 l), a strong 0-H bond is 
formed in the hydroperoxyl radical 18, whereas two relatively weak bonds 
are broken, the 0=0 n bond and the C-H bond in 16 which is weakened 
by the stabilization of the product benzylic radical 17. The occurrence of 
these molecule-induced homolysis reactions is difficult to prove because 
the compounds formed tend to be swamped by those from the subsequent 
radical reactions. 
CH4 + F-F - 
CH; + H-F 
PhCMezH + 0=0 
PhCMe2 + 
16 
17 
+ F '  
(6.10) 
H-0-0 
18 
(6.11) 
6.2 
Destruction of Radicals (Termination) 
Radicals show a very important difference from anionic and cationic 
intermediates. Because radicals are uncharged and possess an unpaired 
electron in an orbital which is capable of forming a covalent bond, 
they normally react with each other on every collision with little or no 
activation energy. The bimolecular rate constants are large, in the region 
of 10" M-' s-'. 
results in a new covalent bond, as in 
reaction (6.12). If more than one type of radical is present in the system, 

122 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
occurs, for example reaction (6.13), and the final 
product contains all possible dimers in proportions that depend on the 
relative concentrations of the radicals. For alkyl radicals such as the 
t-butyl radical 19 with one or more g-hydrogen atoms, an alternative 
reaction is 
in which one radical abstracts a hydrogen 
atom from the P-position of the other, leading to an alkane and an alkene 
product (reaction 6.14). The more P-hydrogen atoms present, the more 
does disproportionation compete with combination. 
The rapid rate of radical termination reactions for simple organic radi- 
cals means that only very small steady-state concentrations can be main- 
tained, typically 1 OWs M or lower. However, some larger stabilized radicals 
do not dimerize readily and therefore larger concentrations can be built up. 
These stabilized radicals will be considered later in the chapter. 
6.3 Detection of Radicals as Reaction Intermediates 
Because of the low steady-state concentrations involved, this is not always 
easy. Evidence for free radical intermediates can be obtained from: 
Kinetics. As outlined in Chapter 2, since radicals tend to be formed by 
first-order processes and destroyed in second-order reactions, steady- 
state radical concentrations are usually proportional to the square root of 
the precursor concentration [A]. This often leads to kinetic dependence 
on 
or [A]'.5, so kinetic dependence of this form is strong evidence 
for a free radical mechanism. 
Influence of light. If a reaction is speeded up by visible or UV light, a 
free radical mechanism should be considered, though we shall see in the 
next chapter a variety of molecular photo-induced reactions are also 
possible. The quantum yield @ (phi) is a useful parameter, defined as the 
number of molecules converted from starting materials into products per 
photon absorbed. A few radical reactions have iD in the region of 1 or 2, 
but most radical chain reactions have higher @ values, often 1000 or 
more, so a high quantum yields for any reaction taking place in the gas 
phase or in solution in non-polar solvents is a strong indication of a 
radical reaction. 

Radicals 
123 
Initiation and inhibition. If a reaction is speeded up by the addition 
of compounds such as peroxides which are known to produce free 
radicals, this is evidence for a free radical mechanism. Inhibition 
(slowing down) of a reaction by compounds such as phenols is also 
evidence for free radical behaviour. 2,4,6-Tri-t-butylphenol (20) acts as 
an inhibitor by hydrogen transfer (reaction 6.15) to one of the chain- 
carrying radicals involved, giving the phenoxyl radical 21, which is 
stabilized by delocalization and may be unable to carry on the chain 
reaction. 
H-R 
6 
I 
CMe3 
21 
Initiation of polymerization. If styrene (phenylethene, PhCH=CH2) 
or methyl methacrylate (methyl 2-methylpropenoate, CH2=C(Me)- 
C02Me),or preferably an equimolar mixture of the two, is added to the 
reaction mixture, the production of polymer, which can be precipitated 
from the mixture by methanol, indicates the presence of radicals. If a 
mixture of the alkene monomers is used, the product will be a copolymer 
containing equal quantities of the two alkene monomers. This allows the 
distinction to be made between the presence of radicals, anions or cations 
as the reactive species responsible for initiating the polymerization. 
Cations would give a polymer comprising styrene residues only; anions 
would give a polymer containing methyl methacrylate residues only. The 
three possibilities can be readily be distinguished by elemental analysis by 
combustion, which typically gives the carbon and hydrogen content to 
about 0.4%. Expected compositions of the polymers formed by these 
three methods of initiation are shown in Table 4.2 (Section 4.3.4). 
By-products. The presence in the products of small quantities of 
compounds which would arise from combination of free radical inter- 
mediates can provide evidence for a free radical process. For example, 
the explosive reaction of methane with fluorine gives mainly hydrogen 
fluoride and a mixture of mono-, di-, tri- and tetrafluoromethanes, 
but small quantities of fluorinated ethanes, including C2F6, are also 
produced. These two-carbon products cannot be readily explained on the 
basis of possible molecular reactions (see reaction 6.16), but would arise 
naturally as combination products of the fluorinated methyl radicals 
produced in a radical chain reaction sequence (reaction 6.17). 

124 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
(6.16) 
(6.17) 
CH4 + F' 
CHj + F-F - 
CH3-F + F' 
- 
C H j +  H-F 
eF3 
CH3F + 
dH2F - 
CH2F2 -+ dHF2 - 
CHF3 -+ eF3 - 
6.4 
Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) 
With specialized equipment, it is possible to investigate the presence of 
particular radical species by UV or visible spectroscopy, but the most 
useful spectroscopic method for free radicals is 
or 
This technique depends on the fact that a free electron has a 
magnetic moment. In a magnetic field, this will line up either with the field 
or against it. These two orientations have slightly different energies, so if 
radiation of an appropriate frequency is applied, there will be absorption 
of energy at a frequency corresponding to the energy difference. The 
energy gap between the two spin states will be proportional to the 
magnitude of the applied field (see Figure 6.2a), and equation (6.18) 
shows the relationship between the frequency of radiation v and the 
applied magnetic field H. p is the Bohr magneton, a parameter derived 
from the properties of the electron, h is Planck's constant, and g, the 
dimensionless g value, has a value of 2.0023 for the free electron. 
Magnetic fields in the region of 300mT are used, corresponding to 
radiation in the microwave region of about 3 cm. At this wavelength, 
which depends on the size of the cavity of the spectrometer, it is easier to 
keep the wavelength constant and sweep the magnetic field to achieve the 
resonance condition at which absorption of radiation can take place. 
Because of the method of detection, the display is in the form of the 
derivative of the absorption, giving a spectrum shown in Figure 6.2(b). 
The g value corresponds to the field at which the derivative curve crosses 
the baseline. Values of g vary over a small range and are larger for organic 
radicals with, for example, oxygen substituents. The g value corresponds 
to the chemical shift in the analogous NMR technique, but is nothing like 
as useful, since it is difficult to predict the effect of a particular substituent. 
The g value, is, however, characteristic of a particular radical even if 
prepared in different ways, provided the solvent and temperature remain 
the same. 
E = hl) = gPH 
(6.18) 

Radicals 
125 
Figure 6.2 Electron spin 
resonance. (a) Dependence of 
electron energy on magnetic 
field. (b) ERS spectrum of a 
simple free radical. (c) Idealized 
ESR spectrum of the methyl 
radical 
The presence of an ESR signal is conclusive evidence for the presence of a 
free radical in the system. The presence of an ESR signal in a reacting 
system is, however, not by itself conclusive evidence that the main body of 
the reaction is taking place by a free radical process, since a small amount 
of a side reaction could lead to a signal. Because of the small magnitude of 
the radical concentration often present, it is also possible to have a free 
radical reaction without producing a visible ESR signal. 
If g values were the only information available from ESR, the technique 
would have limited use in showing the presence or absence of free radicals 
in a system. Fortunately, there is another feature. Many atomic nuclei 
have a nuclear magnetic moment, much smaller than that of the electron. 

126 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The most useful is the proton, which has a nuclear spin of %, as do 19F, 
31P and also 13C (which is present in about 1 % in natural abundance). 14N 
has a spin of 1, and both 35Cl and 37Cl have spins of 3/2. l 6 0  has no nuclear 
spin. A list of common nuclei with nuclear spins is given in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1 Some common nuclei with nuclear spins 
Atom 
Nuclear spin 
Natural abundance (%) 
IH 
’/2 
99.98 
I4N 
1 
99.6 
’/2 
1.1 
”F 
2 9 ~ i  
31P 
35c I 
3 7 ~ 1  
100 
100 
4.7 
75.5 
24.5 
If an atom with a nuclear spin of ‘/z is present close to the radical site, 
it will align with (t) or against (1) the magnetic field, augmenting or 
decreasing the magnetic field “seen” by the electron, so there will be two 
resonance positions and the spectrum will show a doublet of lines of equal 
intensity. Two identical atoms in the same environment will behave 
identically, giving three possible orientations and will therefore produce 
three lines. However, since the possible orientations are tt,tJ, Jt or 11, with 
equal probabilities, the central line, corresponding to the two situations 11 
and J.1 where there is no net effect of the two nuclei, will have twice the 
intensity of the outside lines, leading to a triplet with relative intensities of 
the lines of 1 :2: 1, analogously to NMR. Likewise, three hydrogen atoms, 
for example in a methyl group, will give rise to a quartet with intensities 
1 :3:3: 1, and in general n hydrogen atoms will give n + 1 lines. An idealized 
spectrum of the methyl radical is shown in Figure 6.2(c). 
If more than one environment for the hydrogen is present, each type 
can be considered separately, so that in the ethyl radical CH3CH2’, each 
line of the triplet due to the methylene group is split into quartets by the 
three hydrogens of the methyl group, giving a spectrum of 12 lines in all. 
Atoms such as 14N and deuterium with a nuclear spin of 1 have three 
possible orientations of the nuclear magnetic moment, either with the 
field, at right angles to it, or opposed to the field. This gives rise to a 1 : 1 : 1 
triplet, in contrast to the 1:2:1 triplet caused by two identical protons. 
These splitting patterns often allow identification of a radical and to 
determine the position of attack on a molecule. For example, t-butoxyl 
radicals react with diethyl ether to give a product radical whose spectrum 
shows a quartet of doublets of triplets, corresponding to three different 
kinds of hydrogen atoms containing one, two and three atoms, 

Radicals 
127 
respectively. This accords wit4 attack at the position a to the oxygen 
atom to give the radical CH3CH-O-CH2CH3, rather than the radical 
'CH2CH2-O-CH2CH3 
which would have been formed by P-attack. 
Figure 6.3 shows the spectrum and how it is analysed. 
Figure 6.3 ESR spectrum of 
the CH36 H-O-CH2CH3 radical 
The use of ESR to support a radical mechanism is exemplified in the 
autoxidation of isopropylbenzene (cumene, 16) by molecular oxygen. The 
proposed initiation reaction is shown in reaction (6.1 l), and a mechanism 
to account for the production of the hydroperoxide 24 as the first stable 
product is shown in reactions (6.19) and (6.20). The development of a 
singlet ESR signal in this reaction system is evidence for a free radical 
reaction, and also suggests that the dominant radical present is the 
peroxyl radical 23 rather than the cumyl radical 22. The peroxyl radical 
has no hydrogen atoms a, P or y to the radical site, whereas the cumyl 
radical has six P hydrogen atoms and also hydrogen atoms on the benzene 
ring which should split the ESR signal into a complex pattern. This 
suggests that reaction (6.19) is much faster than (6.20): the cumyl radical 
is rapidly converted into the peroxyl radical, which is only slowly 

128 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
reconverted back to the cumyl radical, giving a much higher steady-state 
concentration of the cumylperoxyl radical 23. 
fast 
PhdMe2 + O=O - 
PhCMe2-0-0' 
(6.19) 
(6.20) 
22 
23 
slow 
PhCMe2-0-0' 
+ PhCMe2H - 
PhCMe2-O-O-€I + P h b q  
16 
24 
6.5 
Structure and Stability of Free Radicals 
Methyl and simple alkyl radicals are essentially planar with sp2 hybridiz- 
ation and the single electron in a p orbital, in contrast to the analogous 
silyl radicals which are pyramidal with approximately sp3 hybridization 
for all the valence orbitals: three bonding and one singly occupied. The 
evidence is for this comes from ESR and stereochemistry studies. 
6.5.1 Coupling Constants for Radicals Centred on 
an Atom with a Nuclear Spin 
In organic and organosilicon free radicals, the predominant carbon and 
silicon isotopic species, I2C and 28Si, have no nuclear magnetic moment 
and do not give rise to splitting, but the 13C and 29Si isotopes are present 
in natural abundances of 1 YO and 5%, respectively. These isotopes have 
a nuclear spin of % and can couple with the free electron. Thus lower 
intensity 13C and 29Si satellite spectra are seen for carbon and silicon free 
radicals, and the relevant coupling constants can be measured. 
The interaction between the nuclear spin and the electron spin is 
expected to be proportional to the spin density of the unpaired electron at 
the nucleus of the central atom. Only s electrons have spin density at the 
nucleus (in fact this is the position of the highest value of the wave function 
$), whereas p electrons have a node at the nucleus corresponding to zero 
spin density. Thus the interaction between the nucleus and the electron, 
and thus the coupling constant, will be proportional to the s character of 
the orbital. The maximum coupling constants a for an electron in a 2s 
orbital in 13C and the 3s orbital in 29Si can be calculated to be 11 1 and 
121 mT, respectively. For an electron in an sp3 orbital, the expected 
values will be 25% of these figures, i.e. 28 and 30 mT, respectively. For an 
electron in a p orbital, corresponding to sp2 hybridization of the central 
atom, the expected values of a will be zero in both cases. 
Table 6.2 shows the 13C and 29Si coupling constants for a number of 
carbon- and silicon-centred radicals. 'SiH3 has a 29Si coupling constant 
close to the region expected for sp3 hybridization. '%Me3 also has a 
substantial 29Si coupling and is therefore pyramidal in shape. The value of 

Rad i ca I s 
129 
the 13C coupling constant in 'CH3 is much lower and is consistent with a 
more planar structure. In fact, 'CH3 is considered to be planar with sp2 
hybridization. The non-zero I3C coupling constant is thought to be due to 
the molecular vibration in and out of the plane (like an umbrella), which 
means that although the lowest energy of the system is planar, on average 
there is a small divergence from planarity. Other alkyl radicals are nearly 
planar. If the central carbon is substituted with electronegative elements 
such as fluorine, the radical becomes more pyramidal and the I3C 
coupling constant rises. The 13C coupling constant for 'CF3 is close to the 
predicted value for sp3 hybridization. 
Table 6.2 2gSi and I3C coupling constants a 
Radical 
a/mT 
Radical 
a/mT 
'SiH3 
'SiMe3 
'SiCI3 
27 
18 
42 
'CH3 
'CMe3 
'C F3 
3.8 
4.5 
27 
The near planarity of alkyl radicals and the non-planarity of silicon- 
centred radicals is supported by experiments on optically active 
compounds. In reaction (6.21) the chiral carbon centre in 25 is converted 
into a carbon-centred radical 26 with three different substituents, which in 
turn gives a chlorinated product 27 that has lost its optical activity. This 
implies that the radical 26 is either planar or, if pyramidal, it undergoes 
rapid inversion prior to capture to give the product. On the other hand, if 
the organosilane 28 is converted into 30 via the silicon-centred radical 29 
(reaction 6.22), the product is optically active and can be shown to have 
retained its configuration, proving that, in this case, the intermediate 
radical has maintained its non-planar structure. 

130 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
6.5.2 a-Hydrogen Coupling Constants 
Conjugated radicals have a conjugated 71: system of multiple bonds or 
aromatic rings adjacent to the radical centre. The n: overlap allows the 
unpaired electron to be delocalized over the whole of the conjugated 
system and leads to greater thermodynamic stability for the radical. The 
coupling constants of hydrogen atoms attached to sp2 carbon atoms in a 71: 
radical are approximately proportional to the spin density on the carbon 
atom to which they are attached, and thus provide a measure of the spin 
density on individual carbon atoms. Figure 6.4 shows the hydrogen 
coupling constants for methyl (31), allyl (32) and benzyl (33). It can be 
seen that the coupling constants for the hydrogen atoms attached to the 
terminal positions of the allyl radical have values of just over half of those 
of the methyl radical, reflecting the fact that the electron is delocalized 
equally on the terminal atoms. The ortho and para hydrogen atoms on the 
benzene ring of the benzyl radical have coupling constants greater than 
those at the meta positions and those attached to the 2-position of the allyl 
radical. This reflects the spin density at the various carbon atoms and 
accords with the predictions of resonance and molecular orbital theory. 
The resonance structures for the allyl and benzyl radicals are shown in 
Figure 6.4. No resonance structures can be drawn showing the unpaired 
electron at the 2-position of allyl or the meta positions of benzyl, 
according with the much lower spin density found at these positions. 
Figure 6.4 
Hydrogen coupling constants (a, in mT) for n: radicals 

Radicals 
131 
6.5.3 P-Hydrogen Coupling Constants 
These have the same order of magnitude as the a-coupling constants. 
For rigid radicals, the value depends critically on the orientation of 
the C-H bond with the orbital containing the unpaired electron (see 
Figure 6.5). If the a-orbital of the C-H bond is exactly aligned with the 
axis of the p orbital containing the unpaired electron (34, dihedral 
angle 8 = O"), there will be maximum interaction, spin density will be 
transferred to the hydrogen and a large coupling, in the region of 5mT, 
will be observed. If the dihedral angle is 90", conformation 35, there will 
be no interaction and no coupling. For intermediate angles, the coupling 
constant will depend on c0s20. If there is free rotation round the C-C 
bond, for example in the ethyl radical, there will be an average over all 
possible dihedral angles. Since the average value of c0s20 over all angles 
from 0" to 360" is 0.5, the expected value of the coupling constant would 
be half the maximum value. The P-C-H coupling constant for ethyl is 
2.7 mT, in approximate agreement with the expected value of 
0.5 X 5 = 2.5 mT. 

132 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Figure 6.5 
Dependence of 
P-hydrogen coupling constants 
in organic radicals on the 
dihedral angle 8 
On a resonance picture, we can consider structures such as 36a and 36b 
as contributing to the total structure. Stabilization of this type is referred 
to as hyperconjugation. It must be stressed that structures such as 36b 
only contribute to the structure to a minor extent, so there is no question 
of the hydrogen atom becoming free and leaving the radical. 
H 
H' 
Hydrogen atoms more remote than the P-position have coupling 
constants which are typically at least an order of magnitude less than a 
and p coupling constants, and are usually unimportant. 

Radicals 
133 
6.5.4 Stability and Persistence 
Stability is a thermodynamic concept, and is defined for organic radicals 
as the difference between the bond dissociation energies of R-H and 
CH3-H. Values of D(R-H) for a number of radicals are given in Table 6.3. 
The stability increases in the order CH; < CH3CH2' < (CH3)2CH' < 
(CH3)3C*. This increase in stability is normally ascribed to hyperconjuga- 
tion as described above, but the increasing number of alkyl carbon atoms 
round the free radical centre will also mean that these sp3-sp3 C-C bonds 
will be converted into the stronger sp3-sp2 bonds as the branched alkane 
is converted into the radical, which will decrease the bond dissociation 
energy and therefore increase the stability of the radical. 
Table 6.3 Bond dissociation energies for hydrocarbons, D(R-H)a 
Me' 
MeCH2' 
Me2CH' 
Me&' 
CH2=CHCHZ' 
PhCH; 
PhZCH' 
Ph3C' 
HzC=CH' 
Ph' 
HC-C' 
439 
423 
41 2 
404 
362 
370 
34 1 
298 
465 
465 
556 
aSecondary and tertiary C-H. bonds in alkanes have strengths very similar to those of 
MeCHi, Me2CH* and Me$ , respectively 

i34 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The bond from H to sp2 carbon is stronger than that to sp3 carbon so 
the vinyl (ethenyl), ethynyl and phenyl radicals are all less stable than the 
methyl radical. On the other hand, delocalized radicals such as ally1 and 
benzyl are significantly more stable than methyl. The delocalization is 
demonstrated by ESR, so that delocalization and stabilization go hand- 
in-hand. Delocalization is increased if the radical can be spread over more 
than one ring, as in diphenylmethyl and triphenylmethyl. 
Stability as defined in this way is a good guide to reactivity, since the 
trend in bond strengths to other elements broadly follows the strengths to 
carbon. Thus the more stabilized the radical, the less reactive it will be 
towards a particular reagent. 
Most radicals react with each other very rapidly by combination and 
disproportionation to give non-radical products, and if radicals are not 
continuously introduced into the system, the concentration quickly drops 
to zero. A minority of radicals do not react with each other rapidly by 
combination or disproportionation, usually for steric reasons or because 
no bond of sufficient strength can be formed. Radicals of this type which 
can maintain their concentration at least for a few hours in solution in inert 
solvents in the absence of oxygen are said to be 
Examples of 
persistent radicals include triphenylmethyl(37). Here, the central carbon 
atom is so crowded that dimerization to hexaphenylethane is impossible. 
Attack by the central carbon radical centre of one radical on the para 
position of another can take place, giving rise to an alternative dimer 38 
that exists in equilibrium with the triphenylmethyl radical (reaction 6.23). 
Nitr oxides such as 2,2,6,6- tetrame t h ylpiperidinoxyl (TEMPO, 39) are 
persistent. The lone pair orbital on the nitrogen and the singly occupied 
orbital on the oxygen interact to form a n bond; since three electrons are 
involved, one has to go into the n* orbital (Figure 6.6,39a). As a result, the 
N-0 bond has a bond order of 1 %, and this strength would be reduced to 1 
in any addition or abstraction reaction of the oxygen atom. 
(6.23) 
38 
Figure 6.6 The TEMPO radical 
Radicals can be stable without being persistent; the benzyl radical 33 is 
stabilized by delocalization of the electron onto the ortho and para 

Radicals 
135 
positions of the benzene ring, but it is not persistent since dimerization 
can readily take place at the unhindered CH2 group. 
6.6 
Radical Chain Reactions 
The high reactivity and fast recombination rate of most radicals ensures 
that however rapidly radicals are introduced into a system, the steady- 
state concentration of radicals remains low. Under these conditions, a 
radical will meet thousands of molecules before it is destroyed on meeting 
another radical, offering excellent opportunities for reaction. Because of 
the single electron involved, reaction of a radical with an electron paired 
molecule must produce another radical, which in turn can react with 
another molecule to produce another radical, and so on, until eventually 
the radical is destroyed on encounter with another radical. If the radical is 
reactive and the radical concentration is very low, many thousands of 
molecules may be converted for each radical introduced into the system. 
Reactions of this type are called 
almost all free radical 
reactions of synthetic or environmental importance are chain reactions. 
Because of their importance, a terminology for chain reactions has been 
developed. 
reactions are those in which a radical or radicals 
are introduced into the system (see Section 6.1). 
reactions 
are those in which radicals are destroyed, usually combination and 
disproportionation (Section 6.2). 
reactions are the radical- 
molecule reactions in which all the useful chemistry takes place, in 
favourable cases at least 99%, leaving less than 1 YO of by-products from 
termination reactions. There are two important classes of propagation 
reactions: radical transfer and addition to a multiple bond (and its 
reverse, fragmentation). 
6.6.1 Chain Reactions involving Radical Transfer 
involve abstraction of an atom or group B by a 
radical A from a molecule B-C (reaction 6.24). B is nearly always an 
atom; transfer of a group, which would correspond to substitution at a 
polyvalent atom, though important in nucleophilic and electrophilic 
reactions, is very uncommon in radical reactions. The atom transferred is 
almost always a hydrogen or a halogen atom. 
A' + B-C 
A-B + C' 
(6.24) 
Reactions such as (6.25) which involve transfer of an oxygen atom are 
important in atmospheric chemistry. They are thought to involve 
addition of the hydroxyl radical to form an intermediate 40, which then 
loses a hydrogen atom. 

136 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
(6.25) 
Reactions such as (6.26) involve transfer of a hydrogen atom from a 
radical to a multiply bonded atom, and can be seen as hopping of a 
hydrogen atom between a C=O and an 0=0 double bond. 
'0-CH2-H 
+ O=O - 
O=CH2 + H-O-0' 
(6.26) 
Radical transfer reactions involved in chain reactions are almost always 
exothermic. Endothermic reactions would be faster in the reverse direction. 
This principle can sometimes be used to generate a more stable radical from 
a less stable radical. Thus the non-stabilized t-butoxyl radical 41 reacts with 
toluene to give t-butanol and the benzyl radical 42 (reaction 6.27). 
Me$-0' 
+ H-CH2-Ph - 
Me3C-0-H 
+'CHz-Ph 
41 
42 
(6.27) 
Halogenation 
Halogenations of alkanes provide good examples of chain reactions 
where all the chain steps involve radical transfer. Initiation is by 
photolysis of the halogen (reaction 6.28; X = CI or Br) or, for fluorine, by 
molecule-induced homolysis (reaction 6.10). There are two propagation 
steps. The first (6.29) involves abstraction of a hydrogen atom from the 
alkane (illustrated here by methane). The alternative reaction to give the 
halomethane and a hydrogen atom does not take place: this would involve 
attack at a multivalent centre which is very uncommon for organic 
compounds without electropositive substituents, and the reaction would 
be 90 kJmol-' endothermic for Cl', which would lead to an activation 
energy of at least that amount. The second propagation step (6.30) 
involves abstraction of a halogen atom from a halogen molecule by the 
methyl radical. Termination involves combination reactions of X' and 
CH3' to give X-X, CH3X and CH3CH3. The feasibility of the chain 
reaction depends on both propagation steps being fast. This is partly 
controlled by the thermochemistry; heats of reaction for both steps of the 
chain reaction are shown in Table 6.4 for all four halogens. 
hv 
x-x - 
x' + X' 
X = C1 or Br 
(6.28) 
CH3-H + X' - 
CH; + H-X 
(6.29) 
CH; + X-X - 
CH3-X + X' 
(6.30) 

Radicals 
137 
~. 
Table 6.4 
Heats of reaction for halogenation of methane (kJ mol-') 
I 
Halogen 
F 
CI 
Br 
I 
AH for reaction (6.29); 
-133 
+3 
+ 69 
+I36 
hydrogen abstraction by X* 
AH for reaction (6.30); reaction 
- 298 
-103 
- 99 
- 82 
of CH3' with X-X 
AH overall 
-431 
-100 
- 30 
+54 
For fluorine, both steps are highly exothermic. Each step is fast; the 
reaction is explosive. For chlorine, the first reaction is approximately 
thermoneutral, but the extra activation energy barrier is not high, and the 
first step is fast. The second step is substantially exothermic and fast; the 
overall exothermicity ensures that there is no tendency for the reaction 
to reverse. For bromine, the first step is substantially endothermic, and 
the activation energy must be greater than this. The reaction is therefore 
much slower than chlorination, even though the second step is highly 
exothermic, and will be expected to be fast. The overall exothermicity of 
the whole process will ensure that the reaction goes to completion. For 
iodine, the endothermicity of the first step makes it too slow for reaction to 
proceed. Additionally, the exothermicity of the second step is not sufficient 
to balance the endothermicity of the first step, so the reaction is endo- 
thermic overall. In fact, the reaction can be operated in reverse: hydrogen 
iodide will reduce iodoalkanes to alkanes with iodine as the other product. 
For hydrocarbons with more than one type of C-H bond, halogenation 
will give mixtures of products. The position of attack is determined by the 
abstraction step, and the heat of reaction (and also the activation energy) 
will reflect the strength of the bond broken. Table 6.3 shows that bond 
strengths fall from primary > secondary > tertiary > allylic or benzylic 
carbon atoms, and we may therefore expect reactivity to rise in the same 
order, as the bond becomes easier to break. The situation was discussed in 
Chapter 3. For the very exothermic reactions of fluorine, there will be an 
early transition state (Figure 3. lc), which will be very close to the starting 
materials. There will be little development of radical character on the 
alkyl group, so there will be little differentiation because of the different 
stabilities of the incipient alkyl radicals. Thus attack will be essentially 
random (see Table 6.5). On the other hand, attack by bromine atoms will 
have a late transition state with a structure near that of the products, so 
that any radical stabilization will be almost fully developed. Bromination 
will therefore be highly selective, and the different reactivities of different 
positions enable useful preparative chemistry to be carried out. 

138 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
-______ 
Table 6.5 
Relative selectivity in hydrogen abstraction from alkanes by halogen 
atoms at 300 Ka 
\ 
-- CH 
\ 
/CH2 
\ 
Halogen 
-CH3 
F 
CI 
Br 
I 
1.2 
1.4 
4.4 
6.7 
80 
1600 
1850 
210,000 
aRelative selectivities are for a single hydrogen of the type indicated. 
Allylic positions are even more reactive, so that, for example, 
although cyclohexene has three types of hydrogen atom, bromination 
takes place almost exclusively at the 3-position via the allylic radical 43 
(reaction 6.3 1). 
43 
Br 
Organotin Hydride Reductions 
Tin forms strong covalent bonds to halogens but only a weak bond to 
hydrogen. This feature can be exploited in a radical chain reaction that 
results in reduction of haloalkanes to alkanes by organotin hydrides; the 
chain steps are shown in reactions (6.32) and (6.33). In the initiation step, 
a radical from homolysis of an azo compound (e.g. reaction 6.2) abstracts 
the weakly bound hydrogen atom from the tin centre of 44. The organotin 
radical 45 preferentially abstracts a halogen atom from the haloalkane to 
give the alkyl radical, and does not react with the C-H bonds because the 
Sn-H bond is so weak. In the second step, the alkyl radical preferentially 
abstracts a hydrogen atom from the Sn-H bond, the weakest bond in the 
two molecules. Thus haloalkanes can be reduced to alkanes 46 in good 
yields, and the reaction can be carried out in the presence of groups such 
as the carbonyl group, which is readily reduced by polar reagents such as 
lithium aluminium hydride, Li+ [A1H4]-. 
Bu3Sn' + Br-R - 
Bu3Sn-Br + R' 
45 
(6.32) 
(6.33) 
R' + H-SnBu3 - 
R-H + 'SnBu3 
44 
46 
45 

Radicals 
139 
6.6.2 Chain Reactions involving Addition to Multiple 
Bonds (and Fragmentation) 
The second important type of propagation reaction is addition to 
multiple bonds; addition to C=C is particularly important. In reaction 
(6.34), R can be an atom or a group centred on carbon or any element 
which forms a bond stronger than the n: bond which is broken in the 
reaction (about 250 kJ mol-'). If the alkene is unsymmetrical, addition 
can in principle take place at either end of the double bond. Addition 
normally takes place at the end of the double bond which will generate the 
more stable free radical. Thus for addition of a halogen atom to propene, 
attack at the CH2 position will give the secondary radical 47 (reaction 
6.35) rather than attack at the central carbon atom which would give the 
less stable primary radical 48 (reaction 6.36). 
The most favourable approach for attack by a radical appears to be 
along the line on which the new bond is being formed (Figure 6.7). For 
the intramolecular addition of the hex-5-enyl radical 49, this results in the 
formation of the less stable primary cyclopentylmethyl radical 50 by 
reaction (6.37) rather than the more stable secondary cyclohexyl radical 
51 by reaction (6.38). 
Figure 6.7 
Direction of 
approach of a radical to a double 
bond 

140 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Fragmentation 
Addition reactions differ from radical transfer reactions in one very 
important respect: two reactants react to give one product radical. This 
decrease in number of particles means that entropy is decreased during 
addition. The reverse reaction, fragmentation, involves an increase in the 
number of particles and therefore in the entropy. Since the free energy of 
reaction, AG, and therefore the position of equilibrium is governed by 
equation (6.39), however exothermic the addition reaction is, at a 
sufficiently high temperature the TAS term will outweigh AH and 
fragmentation will take place. t-Butoxyl radicals 52 fragment to methyl 
radicals and acetone at 140 "C (reaction 6.40), and fragmentation of alkyl 
radicals will be considered in the next section on polymerization. 
AG = AH - TAS = -RTlnK 
(6.39) 
Me 
Me \ 
/ 
Me'jC-O' 
Me 
Me - 
C=O +'Me 
(6.40) 
\ 
52 
Polymerization 
The radical product of addition to a double bond may itself be able to add 
to a new alkene molecule to give a longer-chain radical, and this process 
may be repeated in a chain reaction consisting only of radical additions 
to give a long-chain polymer radical. The process to give the 
is 
completed by termination steps involving combination or dispropor- 
tionation of two polymer radicals. This chain-reaction free radical 
polymerization process is exemplified in reactions (6.4 1)-(6.47) for the 
polymerization of styrene initiated by azobisisobutyronitrile (53). The 
2-cyanoprop-2-yl radical 54 adds to the CH2 group of a styrene molecule 
to give the stabilized radical 55 (reaction 6.42). The adduct radical 55 in 
turn adds to the CH2 group of another styrene molecule to give the 
radical 56 (reaction 6.43), and by successive additions (6.44 and 6.45) a 

Radicals 
141 
long-chain polymer radical 57 is produced, as a straight chain with phenyl 
substituents on alternate backbone carbon atoms. Termination takes 
place by combination (reaction 6.46) to give a dimeric polymer 58, or by 
disproportionation where one polymer radical 57 abstracts a hydrogen 
atom from a second radical to give an alkane 59 and an alkene 60 polymer 
molecule (reaction 6.47), both with shorter chain lengths than polymer 
molecules produced by combination. Useful polymers tend to have chain 
lengths of at least 1000. Most alkenes that can be readily polymerized 
have a terminal CH2 or CF2 group. 
The average chain length of polymers can be reduced by adding small 
quantities of 
such as thiols. These react with the 
growing polymer chain by hydrogen transfer (reaction 6.48), to form a 

142 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
~ 
~~ 
polymer molecule 59 and a thiyl radical, which can re-initiate further 
polymerization. Thus each original initiator radical results in several 
shorter chain polymer molecules rather than one long one. This enables 
the chain lengths of polymers to be controlled. 
Polymerizations are carried out at relatively low temperatures. Since 
the propagation steps (6.44) and (6.45) involve two starting molecules 
giving one product molecule, entropy is lost when the reaction goes in the 
forward direction. Equation (6.39) shows that as the temperature rises, so 
does the TAS contribution to the free energy of reaction, so that at a 
sufficiently high temperature the reverse of steps (6.44) and (6.45) will be 
faster than the forward reactions. Above this 
polymer 
molecules will degrade to monomer molecules by fragmentation. Ceiling 
temperatures are different for different polymers; for polystyrene 
[poly(phenylethene)] the temperature is 3 10 O C. 
Addition of HBr to Alkenes 
In the presence of a radical initiator, alkenes react with reactive molecules 
such as hydrogen bromide to give simple 1:l adducts rather than a 
polymer. The initiator radical reacts rapidly with an HBr molecule to give 
a bromine atom (6.49), which starts the chain reaction. In the first 
propagation step, the bromine atom adds to the alkene 61 to give the 
adduct radical 62 (reaction 6.50). Since 62 abstracts a hydrogen atom 
from HBr by reaction (6.51) more rapidly than it would add to the alkene 
to form a polymer radical as in (6.43), the chain continues with reactions 
(6.50) and (6.51) as the propagating steps, and the product is the primary 
bromo compound 63. This 
addition is in the reverse 
direction to the polar addition discussed in Chapter 5. Since the radical 
chain reaction is faster than the polar reaction, the anti-Markovnikov 
product dominates if radicals are present. If the Markovnikov product is 
required, the reaction must be carried out in the dark, in the absence of 
free radical initiators, and preferably with a radical inhibitor present. 

Radicals 
143 
6.7 
Atmospheric Reactions 
Almost all the chemistry that takes place in the atmosphere is free radical 
in nature. An important area is the oxidative degradation of organic 
matter, ultimately to carbon dioxide, with formaldehyde (methanal) and 
carbon monoxide as key intermediates. The hydroxyl radical is the main 
daytime initiating radical, formed principally by the photolysis of NO2 to 
give an oxygen atom which reacts with water to give two hydroxyl 
radicals (reaction 6.52). A simplified scheme for oxidation of methane 
to formaldehyde in an unpolluted atmosphere is shown in reactions 
(6.53)-(6.57). This sequence of five elementary steps involves two hydro- 
gen transfer reactions, an addition to a double bond, a disproportiona- 
tion reaction and a photolysis, all of which are analogous to reactions 

144 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
already considered in this chapter. The overall result (equation 6.58) is the 
oxidation of one molecule of methane by a molecule of oxygen to 
formaldehyde and a water molecule. One photon is required, and the 
.OH, CH30' and CH300' radicals which are formed during the reaction 
sequence are destroyed in other steps. The disproportionation reaction 
(6.55) is thought to be the way peroxyl radicals are destroyed: simple 
combination would lead to a molecule containing a chain of four oxygen 
atoms which would be unstable and immediately break in the centre to 
re-form the peroxyl radicals. 
hv 
H2O 
- NO + 0 - 
2'OH 
k 400 nm 
NO2 
(6.52) 
CH4 + 'OH - 
CH; + H20 
(6.53) 
CH3-O-O' + 'O+H - 
CH3-O-0-H 
+ O=O 
(6.55) 
hv 
CH3--O-O-H 
A CH3-0' + '0-H 
(6.56) 
H-CH2-0' 
+ O=O 
CH2=O + '0-0-H 
(6.57) 
hv 
CH4 + 0 2  - 
H2CO + H2O 
(6.58) 
Formaldehyde and other aldehydes and ketones formed during the 
atmospheric oxidation of more complex organic compounds are 
photolysed with a loss of a hydrogen atom or an alkyl radical. Photolysis 
of ketones (6.59) provides one way in which C-C bonds break; another is 
the fragmentation of alkoxyl radicals mentioned earlier (reaction 6.40). 
Eventually, all organic compounds end up as carbon dioxide and water. 
(6.59) 
hv 
CH3-CO-CH3 - 
CH; +'CO-CH3 - 
CO + 'CH3 
6.8 
Non-chain Radical Reactions 
Most useful free radical reactions are chain reactions and for 
photochemical reactions a large number of starting molecules are 
converted into products for every photon absorbed. A few photochemical 
processes are non-chain reactions, in which only one or two initial 
molecules are converted into products for each photon absorbed. 

Radicals 
145 
6.8.1 Nitrosation of Cyclohexane 
The reaction of cyclohexane with nitrosyl chloride (NOCl) is a 
commercially important photochemical reaction, used in the first stage 
of nylon-6 manufacture. The UV light is absorbed by the NOCl 
(cyclohexane does not absorb UV light with ;1>200nm) to give NO 
and C1' (reaction 6.60). The NO, though a radical, is unreactive, but the 
chlorine readily abstracts a hydrogen atom from cyclohexane (64) to give 
the cyclohexyl radical 65 (reaction 6.61). The cyclohexyl radical under- 
goes a combination reaction (6.62) with the NO, to give nitrosocyclohex- 
ane (66). One photon is required to produce one molecule of product; 
thus it is not a chain reaction. The remaining steps in the process to give 
the oxime 67, the lactam 68 and eventually nylon-6 (69) are ionic. They 
are shown as reaction (6.63), but are not considered here. 
(6.60) 
64 
65 
0 
II ON 
o*+ 
N=* - 
66 
6.8.2 Intramolecular Hydrogen Abstraction: 
the Barton Reaction 
(6.61) 
(6.62) 
Most organic compounds have more than one type of C-H bond, and 
hydrogen abstraction by radicals usually proceeds in an unselective 
manner, giving complex mixtures of products. An exception is when the 
abstraction is intramolecular, when for example a long-chain alkoxyl 

146 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
radical 70, produced in reaction (6.64), abstracts a hydrogen from its own 
chain to give 71, as in reaction (6.65). Here the reaction takes place almost 
exclusively at the &position. The radical 71 combines with N=O to give 
the nitroso compound 72. This is readily isomerized by acid to the oxime 73, 
which can be hydrolysed to the ketone 74 (reaction 6.66). This allows 
the remote functionalization of a C-H group, and has been particularly 
useful in steroid chemistry. Yields are -30%. 
O
h
 
@ - c: - 
*N=O 
H,N=O 
Bu 
CH Bu 
“Bu 
c, 
(6.65) 
70 
71 
72 
72 
73 
74 
This reaction is not a chain reaction. One photon is required for each 
molecule of nitrite converted. The nitric oxide produced in the photolytic 
step is too unreactive to start a chain reaction, and simply combines with 
the rearranged radical. 
The preferential abstraction of a &hydrogen atom corresponds to a 
six-membered transition state, which can adopt the unstrained cyclohex- 
ane chair-type conformation 75. The alternative y-hydrogen abstraction, 
which would require a five-membered transition state 76, is not usually 
observed. By analogy with cyclopentane, this would be approximately 
planar, involving significant angle strain and eclipsing interactions which 
would raise the energy. 

Radicals 
147 

148 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Radicals 
149 

Molecular Reactions: 
Cyclic Transition States 
The great majority of reactions involve intermediates, as illustrated in 
the previous three chapters. A smaller number of uni- or bimolecular 
reactions appear to proceed from reagents to products without detectable 
intermediates. These reactions take place in the gas phase or in solution in 
non-polar solvents. The absence of substantial solvent effects (Chapter 3) 
indicates little build up of charge in the transition state. 
Butadiene dimerizes to 4-vinylcyclohexene (4-ethenylcyclohexene, 1) 
(reaction 7.1). The absence of intermediates suggests a cyclic movement 
of three electron pairs, (which could equally well have been written in the 
opposite direction, or as single electron movements). The transition state 
would involve partial bond-making and breaking in the six-membered 
transition state as shown. Reactions involving such cyclic transition states 
are known as 
However, ethene does not dimerize to 
cyclobutane (reaction 7.2) under thermal conditions, even though a cyclic 
movement of two pairs of electrons could have been invoked. 
This chapter explores the reasons why some molecular reactions take 
place whereas others do not, and introduces the concepts of frontier 
orbitals and transition state aromaticity. 
150 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
151 
7.1 
Frontier Orbitals 
When two atoms approach, the atomic orbitals from the individual atoms 
begin to overlap, giving rise to molecular orbitals. The overlap is either 
in phase, giving rise to a lowering of energy resulting in bonding if the 
orbital is occupied by electrons, or out of phase, giving rise to an increase 
of energy and antibonding. This is illustrated in Figure 7.1 for two 
hydrogen atoms, each of which brings one 1s electron, both of which can 
be accommodated in the resulting bonding sigma (a) orbital. 
Figure 7.1 Overlap of the 
atomic orbitals of hydrogen. 
Positive phase for wave functions 
(orbitals) shown red, negative 
as white 
Overlap of orbitals applies to molecules as well as atoms. In Figure 7.2 
we see the approach of two hydrogen molecules end on. As the molecules 

152 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
approach, the u orbitals interact to give two molecular orbitals, one with 
lower and one with higher energy. Since both original orbitals are 
occupied, with a total of four electrons, both the new molecular orbitals 
will be occupied. To a first approximation, the extra bonding and 
antibonding will cancel out, although because of electron repulsion the 
antibonding effect will be somewhat larger than the bonding effect. 
Figure 7.2 Overlap of the mol- 
ecular orbitals of two 
hydrogen molecules 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
153 
In most molecules, all the electrons are paired: orbitals are either filled 
with two electrons or empty. If two molecules approach each other, all 
the orbitals in one molecule will interact with all those in the other. For 
complex molecules with a large number of orbitals, this gives rise to a very 
large number of interactions. Fortunately, it turns out that only one or 
two are important. 
The interactions are of three types: occupied-occupied, occupied- 
unoccupied and unoccupied-unoccupied (Figure 7.3). For occupied- 
occupied interactions, because four electrons are involved, both the 
resulting orbitals are filled. One goes down in energy, the other goes up, 
so there is no significant change in energy (Figure 7.3a). For unoccupied- 
unoccupied interactions there will be no energy consequences since 
neither of the new orbitals is occupied (Figure 7.3b). Only for occupied- 
unoccupied interactions is there a significant energy difference. Because 
only the more bonding new orbital is occupied, there will be a significant 
reduction in energy (Figure 7.3~). 
Figure 7.3 Energy conse- 
quences of the interaction 
between orbitals 
Thus we should focus on occupied-unoccupied interactions. Interac- 
tions between orbitals are greater if the individual energies are similar, 
and less if they are significantly different (Figure 7.3d and 7.3e). Thus the 
largest (favourable) energy interactions occur when there is the least energy 
diference between the interacting orbitals. These correspond to interac- 
tions between the 
of one 

154 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
molecule and the 
of the 
other (Figure 7.4). If the two reacting molecules have similar energy 
levels, the HOMO-LUMO interactions in each direction will both 
contribute significantly (Figure 7.4a), whereas if the levels are different 
in energy, the dominant interaction will be the one where there is the 
lesser difference in energies (Figure 7.4b). 
Figure 7.4 Frontier orbitals 
It turns out that we can usually neglect all other orbital interactions 
between molecules and focus our attention only on these 
(HOMOS and LUMOs) when considering interactions between 
molecules, and in particular pericyclic reactions. This insight gained the 
relatively unknown Japanese chemist Kenichi Fukui a share in the Nobel 
Prize for Chemistry in 198 1. 
How do we determine the frontier orbitals? We only need to consider 
the bonds that are actually reacting. For example, in reactions involving 
addition to ethene, we only need to consider the C-C n: bond. The n: 
orbital is the HOMO and the 7c* orbital is the LUMO. For buta-1,3-diene 
with four orbitals in the n: system, the HOMO and LUMO are shown in 
Figure 7.5b; note that there is a smaller HOMO-LUMO gap than for 
ethene (Figure 7.5a). In general, the antibonding level is approximately 
as far above the non-interacting level (separate atomic orbitals) as the 
bonding orbital is below this level. 
In reaction (7.1), one of the butadiene molecules is reacting across 
its ends, so the HOMO and LUMO are for the whole conjugated system, 
but the other molecule is only reacting across one of the double bonds. 
The second double bond is unchanged in the reaction, so plays no part in 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
155 
the primary electronic interactions and can be regarded as a substituent 
of a reacting ethene molecule. 
Figure 7.5 Molecular orbitals of ethene and buta-l,3-diene 
In the next section we will see how the ideas of frontier orbitals can be 
applied to cycloaddition reactions. 
7.1 .I Cycloadditions 
A simple (though not very efficient or convenient) cycloaddition reaction 
is the reaction of buta-l,3-diene with ethene to give cyclohexene (reaction 
7.3). The reaction does not appear to involve significant charge build-up 
in the transition state, and it appears that both new bonds are being 
formed at the same time, since the reaction is stereospecific with 
cis addition across both unsaturated systems. 
It can be seen in Figure 7.6 that there is favourable (same phase) overlap 
between both ends of the HOMO of the butadiene molecule with the 
LUMO of the ethene molecule, and vice versa. Accordingly, as the 
molecules approach, there is a favourable energy change and the reaction 
takes place readily. 

156 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Figure 7.6 HOMO-LUMO 
interactions for (a) ethene with 
buta-l,3-diene and (b) ethene 
with ethene 
However, for reaction (7.2), the dimerization of ethene to cyclobutane, 
the HOMO-LUMO interactions are unfavourable; if there is in-phase 
(favourable) interaction at one end, it will be unfavourable at the other. 
Thus the interactions cancel out, there is no overall favourable frontier 
orbital interaction, and the reaction does not take place thermally. 
Other Cyc I oadd it i ons 
Provided that there is a favourable interaction at both ends between 
the HOMO of one component and the LUMO of the other component, 
reactions with a cyclic transition state should be possible for many other 
systems. Figure 7.7 shows the basic structures available for n: systems 
containing between two and four overlapping p orbitals. 
Figure 7.7 Molecular orbitals 
derived from two, three and four 
porbitals. Nodesareshownin red 
Orbital phases are shown as 
shaded and white 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
157 
Inspection of Figure 7.7 shows that whatever the size of the system, 
the lowest, most bonding orbital has all the constituent orbitals in phase. 
Thus the components at the two ends necessarily have the same phase. 
For the next orbital up, there is a reversal of phase in the middle of the 
molecule, giving rise to antibonding at this point for systems with even 
numbers of orbitals, or non-bonding if there is an odd number of con- 
stituents. This change of phase or node results in the two end component 
orbitals being out of phase. For ethene (two atomic orbitals in 3 two 
molecular orbitals out) there are no further orbitals, but for systems with 
three or more constituent orbitals the next orbital up in energy will have 
two nodes, and the end orbital components will be back in phase again. 
This alternation of sign will continue as we go to higher and higher 
energies. Since electrons go into the lowest orbital available, a system 
with two electrons will have its HOMO with the end component orbitals 
in phase irrespective of the number of atomic orbitals involved. For 
four electrons, the HOMO will have the end components out of phase, 
for six, they will be back in phase, and so on. Thus for systems with 
4n+2 electrons the end components will be in phase, and for 4n 
electrons the ends will be out of phase. Since the LUMO is the next 
orbital above the HOMO, the phases will be opposite, with 4n+2 
electrons resulting in out-of-phase end components, and 4n in-phase. 
The position is summarized in Table 7.1, which enables the phases at the 
ends of molecular orbitals to be easily determined without having to con- 
struct all the molecular orbitals. 
Table 7.1 Phases at ends of frontier orbitals 
Frontier orbital 
4n+2 electrons 
4n electrons 
HOMO 
LUMO 
Same phase 
Opposite phase 
Opposite phase 
Same phase 
The atoms need not be carbon: it is the orbitals that matter. Charged 
species can be involved, for example the allyl cation CH2=CH-CH2+ 
has two n electrons (formally two from the double bond and none 
from the carbocation centre), the allyl anion CH2=CH-CH2- has four 
71: electrons (two from the double bond and two from the lone pair on 
the negatively charged carbon). Ozone, O=O+-O-, is isoelectronic with 
the allyl anion, and will also bring four 71: electrons to the reaction (two 
from the double bond and two from the lone pair on the negatively 
charged oxygen). 
For conjugation to be effective in n: systems, approximate planarity 
needs to be maintained so that each p-type orbital can overlap with the 

158 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
next. The two points of attack on the n system can be on the same surface 
(top or bottom), in which case the attack is said to be 
(supra = above) for that n system (Figure 7.8). Less commonly, attack can 
take place on opposite surfaces, in which case it is said to be 
(possibly from antae, antarum = columns on either side of a door). 
Figure 7.8 Suprafacial and 
antarafacial attack 
Almost all cycloadditions are suprafacial for both components. For 
these fully suprafacial reactions, inspection of Table 7.1 shows that for 
the ends of the HOMO and LUMO to both be in phase (or both to be 
out of phase) and therefore to give favourable interactions at both ends, 
one component needs 4x electrons and the other needs 4y + 2, i.e. a total 
of 
(n = x +y). 
In a very small number of reactions, the twisted geometry of one of the 
components makes it possible for antarafacial attack to take place on one 
of the components. In these rare cases, since the opposite lobe of the 
antarafacial component is being used, the 4n + 2 rule is broken, and 4n 
electrons becomes the favoured total, Heptafulvalene (2) has a twisted 
structure (Figure 7.9) and reacts antarafacially with tetracyanoethene to 
give the adduct 3 (reaction 7.4). 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
159 
Figure 7.9 Antarafacial attack 
of tetracyanoethene on 
heptaf ulvalene 
7.2 
The Aromatic Transition State 
The frontier orbital arguments outlined above strictly apply only to the 
initial stages of the reaction when the molecules come into contact and 
the orbitals start interacting. We have shown that there will be favourable 
HOMO-LUMO interactions if 4n+2 electrons are involved in a fully 
suprafacial reaction or 4n electrons if one antarafacial component is 
involved. It does not necessarily follow from this that there will be a 
lowering of energy in the transition state. However, in the transition 
state of all fully suprafacial pericyclic reactions, there is a cyclic overlap of 
the atomic orbitals involved in the bonds being formed and broken in the 
reaction, and we may expect, by analogy with cyclic conjugated structures, 
that delocalization and hence stabilization will he involved if there are the 
correct number of electrons. 
7.2.1 Huckel Systems 
For all common aromatic systems, the overlap of the constituent p-type 
atomic orbitals is continuous around the cyclic system (no phase change). 
This leads in every case to a uniquely stable orbital with in-phase overlap 
between each of the adjacent orbitals in the cyclic system, as shown for 
three-, four-, five- and six-membered ring systems in Figure 7.10. This 
orbital can accommodate two electrons. The next most-stable orbitals 
will have a node where the phase changes, causing antibonding across this 
plane. Because the molecule is cyclic, there are two ways of introducing 
this nodal plane, at right angles to each other. This results in two orbitals 
of equal energy, which can between them accommodate four electrons. 
For the larger ring sizes, the higher orbitals will have two, three or more 
nodes, still occurring in pairs which can accommodate four electrons. 
Thus aromatic systems will have 4n + 2 electrons, the 
Figure 7.10(b) and (d) shows that, for even numbered ring sizes, there is 
a unique most antibonding orbital with out-of-phase overlap between all 

160 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
next-neighbouring orbitals, but an orbital of this type is impossible for 
rings with odd numbers of atoms as in (a) and (c). For a three-membered 
ring, the aromatic number of two electrons can be achieved by loss of 
an electron from the neutral cyclopropenyl radical C3H3* to give the 
cyclopropenyl cation C3H3 + (4). For a five-membered ring, six electrons 
can be achieved by the neutral cyclopentadienyl radical C5H5* gaining 
an electron to give the cyclopentadienyl anion C5H5- (6), or in the case of 
pyrrole (7) by the contribution of two electrons from the lone pair on the 
nitrogen atom. Cyclobutadiene (5) should be a triplet with an electron 
in each of the equivalent orbitals if the molecule is delocalized. In fact, 
molecules of this type distort to give alternate single and double bonds. 
Benzene (8) is the archetypal aromatic molecule, with an unstrained ring 
system with sp2 hybridization, 120" bond angles and six n: electrons that 
can be accommodated in the three bonding molecular orbitals. 
Figure 7.10 Orbitals and energy levels for cyclic conjugated systems 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
161 
7.2.2 Mobius Systems: Rings with a Twist 
In a large cyclic conjugated system, we could envisage a small angular 
deviation between the p orbitals of adjacent atoms, which if continued 
in the same direction round the ring could eventually reach a 180" 
total as we get back to the original atom, giving an out-of-phase 
antibonding interaction at this point. Systems of this type are rare, 
but it has been suggested that the cyclononatetraenyl cation C9H9+ 
(9) may be a system of this type (Figure 7.11). They are named 
after the topological structure known as the Mobius 
strip, which can be constructed by joining the ends of a long thin strip 
of paper into a loop, but turning one end through 180" before 
joining. 
Figure 7.1 I 
a Mobius system 
Orbital overlap in 
Since there is a "twist" in the system, there is no uniquely 
favourable orbital with positive overlap all the way round the ring, 
a crucial difference from Huckel molecules. The change of phase at a 
position on the opposite side of the molecule to that of the first mole- 
cular orbital (Figure 7.12a) will result in another orbital (Figure 7.12b) 
with positive overlap between all but one pairs of adjacent atoms, 
and with the same energy. These two orbitals will accommodate four 
electrons. We can put further nodes in the system, always in pairs, 
giving a succession of pairs of orbitals which can accommodate four 
electrons. Finally, if there is an odd number of atoms in the ring, 
there will be an unique high-energy orbital, with out-of-phase overlap 
between all pairs of adjacent orbitals. Since the orbital levels occur in 
pairs which can accommodate four electrons, Mobius systems will be 
stabilized if they have 
and destabilized with 4n + 2, the 
opposite to Huckel systems. The molecular orbitals for a hypothetical 
Mobius cyclobutadiene are shown in Figure 7.12; the generalized 
progression of orbital levels is shown for both Huckel and Mobius 
systems in Figure 7.13. 

162 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Figure 7.12 Molecular orbitals 
for the (hypothetical) Mobius 
cyclobutadiene 
Figure 7.13 Progression of 
molecular orbitals in conjugated 
cyclic systems 
7.2.3 The Link between the “Frontier Orbital” and the 
‘‘Aromatic Transition State” Approaches 
We have established earlier in the chapter that there will be favourable 
Frontier Orbital HOMO-LUMO interactions when two molecules 
approach for a cycloaddition reaction if there are 4n+2 electrons 
involved in a fully suprafacial reaction, or 4n electrons if there is an 
antarafacial component. For delocalization of electrons in the transition 
state, the fully suprafacial cycloaddition reaction will result in a con- 
tinuous cyclic overlap of atomic orbitals in the transition state without 
a phase change, for which 4n + 2 electrons will give aromatic stabilization. 
For a cycloaddition with one antarafacial component, the cyclic over- 
lap of orbitals will give a Mobius system for which 4n electrons will 
provide stabilization. Thus the two approaches, Frontier Orbitals and 
the Aromatic Transition State will always be in agreement: favourable 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
163 
HOMO-LUMO interactions as the molecules approach will always be 
accompanied by a lowering of the energy of the transition state, 
corresponding to a much faster reaction, as shown in Figure 7.14. 
Figure 7.14 
Reaction paths for 
pericyclic reactions involving 
aromatic and non-aromatic 
numbers of electrons. Number of 
aromatic electrons is 4n + 2 for 
Huckel systems with no antara- 
facial components, or 4n 
electrons for Mobius systems 
with one antarafacial component 
7.3 
Application of the Idea of the Aromatic Transition 
State to Pericyclic Reactions 
In the remainder of this chapter we will consider further cycloaddition 
reactions and other examples of pericyclic reactions. We will use the 
aromatic transition state approach for simplicity, although in all cases 
an approach based on HOMO-LUMO interactions would give the same 
result. 
7.3.1 Cycloadditions 
Entirely Suprafacial Reactions with 4n + 2 Electrons 
Diels-Alder reactions (for example 7.1 and 7.3) are important six-electron 
systems which can be used synthetically. The six-membered transition 
state is unstrained, and the probability of both molecules colliding with 
the correct orientation is reasonably favourable. 
Reactions involving a five-membered transition state arc even more 
favoured on entropy grounds, although there is some angle strain in 
the transition state and the products. The first step in the reaction of 
ozone with alkenes is a reaction of this type (7.5), as is the reaction of 
diazomethane with alkenes such as methyl acrylate (methyl propenoate) 
(reaction 7.6). In each case, six p-type electrons are involved, a Huckel 
number, so the reactions will be favoured as long as the reactions 
arc entirely suprafacial. The movement of three pairs of electrons (six in 
total) is shown by the curved arrows, and corresponds to the bonds 
broken and formed during these two reactions. 

164 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Reaction (7.7) involves the reversible removal of a proton from an allylic 
position by a base to give the stabilized anion 10, which then 
reacts suprafacially with trans- 1,2-diphenylethene to give the cyclopen- 
tane product in which the relative stereochemistry of the two phenyl 
groups has been preserved. 
Suprafacial cycloadditions involving 10, 14, etc., electrons are possible, 
but for open chain systems the probability of getting conformations of the 
two molecules in which interaction at both ends of both 7c systems takes 
place at once is very small. making the reactions impractical. However, if 
the molecules are constrained to give a favourable transition state 
geometry, for example by being part of a ring system, such reactions are 
feasible. In reaction (7.8), both components are constrained by being part 
of ring systems. The cyclic ketone 11 only brings six electrons to the 
reaction; the C=O group, though conjugated, does not react and is 
present in the product. The involvement of 10 electrons, a Huckel 
number, is shown by the five curved arrows. 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
165 
Cyc I oad d it i o ns with an An ta raf ac i al Co m pone n t 
These are rare. We have already met a 16-electron system in reaction 
(7.41, where the bicyclic geometry of the 14-electron system holds the 
ends of its n: system close together and at an angle which Facilitates 
antarafacial attack by the substituted ethene molecule. 
Two ethene molecules do not react thermally to give cyclobutane 
(reaction 7.2). This 4n: system has the wrong number of electrons for 
suprafacial attack to take place, and geometric reasons make it impossible 
for overlap to take place from a p-orbital lobe away from the direction of 
approach to give an antarafacial component (Figure 7.15). 
Figure 7.15 Impossibility of 
antarafacial attack in ethene 
dimerization 
In principle, two buta- 1,3-diene molecules could react to give 
cycloocta-l,5-diene (reaction 7.91, but this would involve an eight- 
membered transition state, with a low probability of the correct 
orientation for reaction. Instead, reaction can take place more readily 
via a six-membered Huckel transition state to give 4-vinylcyclohexene 
(reaction 7.1). 
7.3.2 Electrocyclic Reactions 
Pericyclic reactions can involve 0 as well as n: bonds. Electrocyclic 
ring opening (or closure) reactions are exemplified by reactions (7.10) 
and (7.11). 

166 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
These reactions involve breakage of a u bond. As the bond breaks, the sp3 
orbitals gradually rehybridize to p orbitals, and rotation takes place so 
that the incipient p orbitals can overlap with the p orbitals of the n: system 
in the ring, resulting in one more double bond in the open-chain product. 
The reactions are stereospecific: trans-3,4-dimethylcyclobutene (12) gives 
trans,trans-hexa-2,4-diene 
(13), whereas the cis isomer (14) gives cis,trans- 
hexa-2,4-diene (15). 
In reactions (7.10a) and (7.1Ob), the rotations are both in the same 
direction and are shown as anti-clockwise. For (7.1 Ob), the rotations 
could have equally well been both clockwise, but for (7.10a), clockwise 
rotation would have given rise to the less stable &,cis isomer which 
would be energetically less favourable. Where the rotations are in the 
same direction, the reaction is said to be 
By contrast, the cyclohexadiene isomers in reaction (7.1 1) undergo ring 
opening with rotations in opposite directions as shown. These reactions 
are termed 
These electrocyclic reactions and their conrotatory or disrotatory 
nature can be readily understood on the basis of aromaticity in the 
transition state (Figure 7.16). For the conrotatory mode, the rotations of 
the breaking u orbitals bring about a phase change in the cyclic transition 
state: continuous red-to-red overlap cannot be maintained. Thus the 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
167 
transition state is Mobius, and is favoured for 4 (or any multiple of 4) 
electrons in the reacting system, as in Figure 7.16a. The distrotatory mode 
(Figure 7.16b) would have continuous in-phase overlap, giving a Hiickel 
system, for which 4n electrons is unfavourable. 
Figure 7.16 
Conrotatory and 
disrotatory ring opening of 
cyclobutenes and 
cyclohexadienes 

168 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Figure 7.16 (Continued) 
In contrast, ring opening of the cyclohexadiene isomers 16 and 18 to 
give 17 and 19 are both disrotatory. For this reaction, with a Huckel 
transition state involved, 4n + 2 electrons is the favoured number, and 
for this number of electrons the conrotatory mode which would give a 
Mobius transition state is not favoured. 
A worked problem follows and several examples of electrocyclic 
reactions occur in the problems at the end of the chapter. The important 
principle is that for 4n electrons, conrotation will give the favoured 
Mobius transition state, whereas for 4n + 2 electrons, disrotation will 
give the favoured Huckel transition state. 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
169 
78383 Sigmatropic Rearrangements 
In these reactions, a (T bond moves across a 7c system to a new site. An 
example is reaction (7.13), where the stereochemistry of the product 22 
shows that the reaction is suprafacial. The reaction is designated [1,5] 
because a u bond to a single atom moves from one end to the other of a 
5-atom system. Another interesting example of this is the rearrangement 
and interconversion of the methylcyclopentadiene isomers 23,24 and 25, 
which is rapid at room temperature (reaction 7.14). 
Figure 7.17 shows the cyclic overlap of the orbitals for a [1,5] 
suprafacial shift. This will be favourable for Huckel systems with 4n + 2 
electrons, as in reactions (7.13) and (7.14). Antarafacial migration will be 
possible for systems with 4n electrons; these are relatively uncommon. 
Hydrogen atoms do not migrate across an ally1 system (reaction 7.15). 
The suprafacial migration is forbidden; the allowed antarafacial process 
cannot take place for geometric reasons which prevent the hydrogen 
orbital from overlapping simultaneously with the orbitals on carbon atoms 
1 and 3 in an antarafacial manner. 
Figure 7.17 Cyclic overlap of 
orbitals in a [1,5] sigmatropic 
shift 

7 70 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
(7.15) 
A number of [3,3] rearrangements are interesting, including the rear- 
rangement of ally1 phenyl ethers 26 to dienones such as 27 (reaction 7.16). 
The designation [3,3] indicates that there are two 3-atom components 
of the system, shown in red in (7.16) and (7.17), which are joined at 
one end in the starting molecule, and at the other end in the products. 
The Cope rearrangement of 28 to 29 (reaction 7.17) is another example 
of a [3,3] rearrangement. 
(7.16) 
(7.17) 
7.4 
Photochemical Reactions 
All the examples so far in this chapter have been thermal reactions. Many 
reactions which do not go thermally, such as (7.2), can be made to take 
place photochemically. If the alkenes are disubstituted, the stereochem- 
istry of the products is consistent with entirely suprafacial attack, as 
shown in reaction (7.18). 
Frontier orbital treatment provides a good explanation. For the 
thermal reaction of two ethene molecules, HOMO-HOMO 
and 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
171 
LUMO-LUMO are unable to contribute stabilizing influences as the 
reagents collide, as shown in Figure 7.18(a). For this four-electron 
system, HOMO-LUMO interactions are also unfavourable because the 
orbitals at the ends of the two 71: systems are out of phase. In the photo- 
chemical reaction, one of the ethene molecules has an electron promoted 
to a higher orbital, usually from the HOMO to the LUMO. This 
dramatically alters the possible interactions, as shown in Figure 7.18(b). 
We designate as “HOMO” and “LUMO” the orbitals that were the 
HOMO and LUMO before excitation. The orbitals themselves will be 
virtually unchanged by the change in occupancy. The “HOMO’’ with one 
electron will be able to interact with the HOMO of another molecule (two 
electrons) to give bonding and antibonding combinations of molecular 
orbitals. Two electrons will go into the bonding orbital, one in the 
antibonding, giving a net bonding interaction. Likewise the “LUMO” 
with one electron interacts with the LUMO of the second molecule (no 
electrons) to give bonding and antibonding combinations. The single 
electron available goes into the bonding combination with a reduction 
in energy. Thus for this system, which is thermally forbidden, both 
“HOMO”-HOMO and “LUM0”-LUMO reactions are favourable and 
the reaction is photochemically allowed. 
Figure 7.18 Molecular orbitals 
involved in thermal and photo- 
chemical reactions (a) Thermal: 
overall interaction slightly 
unfavourable. (b) Photochemical: 
one electron in molecule B 
promoted to “LUMO”; overall 
interact ions f avou rab le 

172 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
The conclusion is general: reactions which are forbidden thermally 
are allowed photochemically and vice versa. For a particular number of 
electrons, cycloadditions that go entirely suprafacially under thermal 
conditions will require an antarafacial component photochemically and 
vice versa. For electrocyclic reactions that are conrotatory under thermal 
conditions, the corresponding photochemical reactions will be disrota- 
tory and vice versa. 
are a general expression of this. 
A pericyclic reaction which is entirely suprafacial is allowed thermally if 
4n + 2 electrons are involved (Hiickel transition state), but forbidden for 
4n electrons. If there is one antarafacial component, the reaction will be 
allowed thermally if4n electrons are involved (Mobius transition state), but 
forbidden for 4n -k 2 electrons. For photochemical reactions, these rules are 
reversed. Roald Hoffmann shared the Nobel prize for Chemistry with 
Kenichi Fukui in 1981 for his contribution to this concept; Robert Burns 
Woodward had already won the prize in 1965. 
The different stereochemistry of thermal and photochemical reactions 
can sometimes be exploited, where reactions are reversible, to cause 
isomerization between stereoisomers. The thermal conrotatory ring 
opening of trans-3,4-dimethylcyclobutene (30) to trans,trans-hexa-2,4- 
diene (31) goes effectively to completion, since the product 31 is more stable 
because of the relief of the ring strain (reaction 7.19). The photochemical 
ring closure is also very effective: the diene 31 because of its conjugation 
absorbs light at longer wavelengths than the mono-ene product trans-3,4- 
dimethylcyclobutene (32) which is photochemically inert to normal UV 
radiation, and the photon of light provides plenty of energy to make 
the endothermic reaction proceed. By this sequence of reactions, 30 can 
be transformed into its geometric isomer 32 in good yield. 
The 
(7.19) 
30 
32 
31 
I 
7.5 
Molecular Reactions with Non-cyclic 
Transition States 
The reaction of diborane, B2H6 (which reacts as BH3), with alkenes gives 
adducts that can be used further in synthetic schemes, for example to give 
alcohols; this is important synthetically. Reaction (7.20) shows that the 
overall effect is to give addition in the opposite sense to that given by 
direct hydration of alkenes. 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
173 
CH3-CH2-CH2-OH 
The B-H bond has a polarity which is reversed compared with most 
H-X bonds, with the 6+ on boron and 6- on the hydrogen atom. 
However, the reaction does not seem to be a normal electrophilic addition 
to the C=C double bond. Addition is suprafacial, suggesting a molecular 
reaction, which at first sight might appear to be a forbidden four-electron 
process. The movement of electrons shown in Figure 7.19(a) would 
indeed be forbidden, but there is an alternative involving the empty p 
orbital on boron. The movement of electrons shown in Figure 7.19(b) 
shows overlap between the sp2 hybrid orbital on boron with the 
hydrogen, thence to the p orbitals on the two carbon atoms and back 
to the vacant p orbital on boron. However, there is no overlap between 
the p orbital on boron with the original sp3 hybrid orbital; these are 
strictly orthogonal (no overlap), and hence there is no cyclic conjugation 
in the transition state. Thus the reaction is a non-cyclic concerted reaction 
involving the flow of two electron pairs. 
Figure 7.1 9 Non-cyclic 
transition states 
A similar situation occurs in the addition of carbenes to alkenes to give 
cyclopropanes, another synthetically useful reaction shown in its simplest 
form in reaction (7.21). Figure 7.19(c) shows the movement of electrons 
for this reaction, which is similarly concerted but does not involve a cyclic 
transition state. 
11 
+ CH2 - 
D 
(7.21) 
As a footnote, the stability and integrity of ordinary organic compounds 
containing nitrogen, oxygen and halogen atoms towards direct exchange of 
groups depends on the absence of empty accessible orbitals. Thus reactions 
of types (7.22) and (7.23), for example, which would have to involve a 
cyclic Hiickel transition state with four electrons, do not take place. 
Peptides do not exchange side chain groups directly, and esterijication of 
carboxylic acids has to take place by lengthier processes involving 
intermediates, as discussed in previous chapters. 

174 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
(7.22) 
(7.23) 

Molecular Reactions: Cyclic Transition States 
175 

176 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
177 

178 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
179 

180 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
181 

#82 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
183 

184 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
185 

186 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
I87 

188 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
189 

190 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
I91 

i92 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
193 

194 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Answers to Problems 
195 

196 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 

Subject Index 
Abstraction, a-H, 
Acidity 
by base 76, 80 
benzoic acids 49 
carbox ylic 
acids 59, 71, 75 
phenols 54, 75 
Acids, strength 73, 74, 
Activation energy 34 
Acyl-oxygen fission 10 
Acylation, hydroxy 
Addition to C=C bonds 
carbene 88, 173 
diborane 172 
electrophilic 
96, 101 
nucleophilic 
78, 87 
radical 
139-143 
Addition to C=O bonds 
nucleophilic 
13, 
70, 82, 85, 86, 93 
radical 
136 
93 
groups 63 
Addition to 0=0 
bonds, radical 
144 
Aldol reaction 
15, 29, 
82,93 
Alkyl-oxygen fission 
10 
Amidation, esters 83 
Anions 72 
Ant arafacial 
attack 158, 165 
Anti elimination 68 
Anti-Markovnikov 
addition 142 
Aromatic stabilization 
107, 159-162 
Arrhenius A factor 34, 
Arrhenius equation 34 
Arrows, curved 
5 
Arrows, half- headed, 
curved 
5 
Atmospheric 
reactions 
143 
Atom transfer 
reactions 
135 
Autoxidation 43, 128 
36,43 
Baey er-Villiger 
Barton reaction 
145 
Bases, strength 73, 74 
Beckmann 
rearrangement 
109, 
116, 145, 188 
Benzidine rearrangement 
Benzoin 
condensation 93 
Benzyne 
intermediate 
10 
Bromination - see 
Halogenation 
By-products, radical 
reactions 
123 
reaction 
109 
43, 181 
Carbanions 77-9 1 
detection 89 
Carbene reactions 88, 
Carbocations 94, 
93 
95-101 
bridged 
102 
acid 32, 110-114 
base 86 
Catalysis 
Cations 94 
Ceiling 
Chain reactions, 
Chain transfer 
141 
Chlorination - see 
Halogenation 
Claisen 
condensation 86 
Claisen 
rearrangement 
170 
Combination 
reactions 
121, 141, 
149, 190, 191, 192 
base 73 
opening/ 
closure 166, 172 
Cope rearrangement 
26, 170 
Coupling constants, 
Cycloaddition 
temperature 142 
radical 30, 135-144 
Conjugate acid and 
Conrotatory ring 
ESR 
125-132, 148 
reactions 
155-1 59, 
163-165, 175, 195 
photochemical 
170, 195 
Delocalization 50, 75, 
84, 107, 148, 159, 
161 
Diels-Alder reaction 
11, 22, 41, 44, 
150, 155 
Dimerization, alkenes, 
photochemical 
170 
Disproportionation 
122, 141, 144 
197 

198 
Subject Index 
Disrotatory ring 
opening/closure 
166, 172 
Electrocyclic 
reactions 165-1 69, 
172, 175, 195, 196 
Electron spin resonance 
- see ESR 
Electron transfer 
120 
Electronega tivi ty 4 
Electronic effects 
Electrophiles 94 
Electrophilic aromatic 
48, 71 
substitution 40, 60, 
106, 177 
Elimination reactions 
El 104 
E2 44, 66, 71,82 
from carbanions 
Enantiomerism 
60 
Epoxidation, by peroxy 
acids 41, 103 
ESR 
124-128, 148 
Ester hydrolysis 
88 
acid-catalysed 
base-promoted 
9,111 
63, 85 
Formal charge 6, 19 
Fragmentation 
anions 79, 88 
radicals 140, 142, 
144, 190 
Frontier orbitals 
Fukui, Kenichi 
154, 172 
151-1 59, 162 
g value, ESR 124 
General acid catalysis 
Geometrical 
113 
isomerism 66 
Half-life 21, 23 
Halogenation 
carbonyl 
compounds 
39, 81 
radical 
30, 136-138 
Hammet t 
equation 53-57 
Hammond postulate 
46 
Heterolysis 4, 95 
Hoffmann, Roald 
172 
HOMO (see also 
Frontier 
orbitals) 
153, 171 
Thermolysis) 4, 8, 
26, 35, 118 
molecule- 
Homolysis (see also 
induced 
121 
Hiickel systems 159, 
160, 167 
Hydrogen transfer - see 
Radical transfer 
intramolecular 
145, 192 
acetals 
113 
esters 10, 83 
orthoacetates 114 
Hyperconjugation 
Hydrolysis 
51, 52 
Inductive effect 50 
Inhibition, 
reactions 
123 
Initiation, 
reactions 
30, 123, 135, 141 
Integrity, organic 
compounds 173 
Intermediates (see also 
Trapping) 2 
Inversion, configuration 
Isotopes - see Labelling, 
63, 64 
isotopic; Kinetic 
isotope effect 
Labelling, isotopic 
Lewis acids - see 
Lewis bases - (see also 
LUMO (see also 
9, 85 
Electrophiles 
Nucleophiles) 94 
Frontier 
orbitals) 
154, 171 
Markovnikov 
Mechanisms, 
addition 101 
alternative 8, 15, 
26, 35, 43, 85, 177 
Meso isomers 67 
Microscopic 
reversibility 
12, 18 
Mobius systems 161, 
162, 165, 167, 168 
Molecular reactions - 
see C ycloaddi tion 
reactions; 
Electr oc y clic 
reactions; 
Sigma t r o pic 
rearrangements 
with non-cyclic 
transition 
states 172 
Molecularity (see also 
Reactions, 
unimolecular, 
bimolecular , 
termolecular) 
11 
Neighbouring group 
assistance 65 
Nitrosation 145 
NMR 80, 96, 116 
Nucleophiles 
72, 77 
Nucleophilicity 
74 
Nylon-6 
145 
Kinetic isotope effect, 
primary 
37-41 
Kinetics (see also 
Reaction order; 
Arrhenius 
equation) 20 
Organometallic 
compounds (see 
also Thermolysis) 
9, 80, 83 
Organotin hydride 
reductions 
138 

Subject Index 
199 
Oxidation (see also 
Autoxidation; 
Epoxidation) 
alcohols 39 
alkanes 143 
see Beckmann 
rearrangement 
Oxime rearrangement - 
Pericyclic reactions 
Persistence, radicals 
134 
Photochemical 
reactions 
150, 155-172 
170-172, 176 
Photolysis 
119, 144, 
149, 192 
Pinacol rearrangement 
I00 
Polymerization 
anionic 90 
cationic 123 
radical 90, 123, 
140 
Product formation, rate 
of 28 
Propagation reactions 
30, 135, 141 
Pyrolysis (see also 
Thermolysis) 
carboxylic acid 
salts 79 
esters 43, 70 
R,S convention 61, 71 
Racemic mixtures 67 
Racemization 
104 
Radical intermediates, 
detection 
122-128 
Radical reactions 
chain 
135-144 
non-chain 
144-1 46 
Radical structure 
Radical transfer 46, 
128-132 
135-139, 144, 146, 
191 
intramolecular 
145, 149 
first-order 21 
second-order 23 
Rate constant 
Rate-determining 
step 26 
Reaction constant, 
Hammett 53, 70 
Reaction order 23 
and mechanism 
first 20, 25 
fractional 30 
mixed 31 
second 22 
third 29, 110 
zero 27 
bimolecular 
1 1 
concerted 7 
elementary 2 
stepwise 2 
termolecular 
12 
unimolecular 
1 1 
Rearrangements (see 
also Baeyer-Villiger; 
Beckrnann; Claisen; 
Pinacol) 
carbocation 99, 
electrophilic, C to 0 
25 
Reactions 
116 
or N 
108 
Resonance effect 50 
Retention, 
configuration 64 
S - see R,S convention 
Sawhorse 
representations 65 
Selectivity, in 
halogenation 
138 
Sigmatropic rearrange- 
ments 
169, 170, 
175 
Solvent effect 47, 70 
Specific acid catalysis 
I13 
Stability - see 
Delocalization 
Stabilization, by 
substituents 
50, 105, 133 
Steady-state 
approximation 
31, 180 
S tereochemistry 
Steric effects 58, 60, 71 
Substituent constant, 
Hammett 49, 52, 
54, 55, 70 
Substitution, nucleophilic 
60-68, 129, 139 
SNI 
2,26, 31,48, 
55, 58, 95, 116 
stereochemistry 104 
sN2 2, 31, 48, 58, 
70, 81, 93 
stereochemistry 
63, 117, 189 
Suprafacial 
attack 158, 169 
Syn elimination 68 
TEMPO 134 
Termination (see also 
Combination; 
Disproportionation) 
30, 121, 135, 141 
Thermolysis (see also 
Homolysis) 
8, 18, 
26, 35, 118, 148, 177, 
190, 191 
Transition state 45 
Trapping 
aromatic 159-1 70 
carbanions 90, 91 
cations 98 
intermediates 
195 
Trip hen ylme t h yl 
radical 
134 
Woodward, Robert 
Burns 
172 
Woodward-Hoffmann 
rules 
172, 175 




