Main = Post Resume and What to Expect 
Lets talk about what will happen when you post your resume online e.g. indeed, career builder, 
zip recruiter, monster or whichever website you prefer.   
 
• 
Recruiters or Companies’ Human Resources 
ENTER  Your resume will be searched by the HR or the recruiters based on the resume title or 
the keywords inside of your resume.   
Now who are recruiters and HR?  Good question.  Recruiters are also referred as headhunters 
and they work independently to find the right candidate for the right job.  Sometimes they have 
exclusive relationship and contracts with the hiring companies to find them a person for an 
open position.  Companies prefer to work with the recruiters because they specialize in this 
field.  Recruiters search for all the candidates online, shortlist them based on their skills, 
academic background or experience.  They perform initial interview, set the expectation on job 
duties and salary, present the candidates to the hiring manager by setting up the interviews.  
Present the offer to the candidate if selected and then sometimes run the background check.   
Please remember one thing that recruiters are your best friend in this process.  They would try 
their best to get you the interview.  Think of them as your agent who is working on your behalf 
but at the same time if you do not qualify their initial criteria then they will drop you because 
they don’t want to tarnish their reputation with the hiring manager.   
Now who are the HR people?  The HR is the human resources department in a companies who 
deals directly with the candidates.  They usually do not search for you online.  They will only 
contact if you have applied for a job on the company website or through one of the job search 
websites.  If you do not qualify for the job requirement then simply an automated email will be 
sent out to you indicating that they are moving on with other candidates.  If they like your 
resume then they will contact you directly through the phone or email you have specified on 
your resume. 
 
• 
Job description 

ENTER  What will be the second step when a recruiter calls you? 
The recruiter will send you the job description and calls you to go over your experience and 
qualification.  He or she will try to match job requirement with your skills.  This will be your 
first and initial round of selection.  At this time if the recruiter feels confident that you can be 
the right candidate then the conversation continues to the next step 
• 
Full time or Consultant 
ENTER  The recruiter lets call him Mr. Litman.  Mr Litman will tell you if this job is a full 
time or as a consultant.  Full time is when you are working directly with the hiring company.  A 
consultant is someone who works either independently on 1099 or on W2 which will be an 
employee of the recruiting agency.  By the way the 1099 or W2 are the tax terms used in the 
United States.  It could be different according to tax department of your country.  Anyway, Mr. 
Litman will specify all these details up front.  He will also tell you the duration of the 
consultancy.  It can be either 6 months to a year or unspecified number of years.   
• 
Rate negotiation 
ENTER  Now the money part.  Mr. Litman at this point asks you about your salary expectation 
or per hour rate.  Tell him that you are flexible and willing to negotiate or if you are already in 
IT then you should have a better idea of what you ask for.  
• 
Updated resume with rate confirmation 
ENTER   When agreed to a rate then Mr. Litman will send you an email and he would ask 
you to acknowledge the rate confirmation.  He will also ask you to send him your updated 
resume if there is some updates required.  Often times this email will also have some questions 
for you to fill out. E.g. your full legal name, your address, telephone number, if you are 
authorized to work in the country, your last 4 digits of social security, or birth month and day.  
Now please don’t be scared to provide that information.  They are not here to steal your 
identification, this is how they keep track of candidates in their database.   
 Quick interview with the recruiter’s manager over the phone 
ENTER   The next step is that Mr. Litman might ask you to talk to his manager who is also in 
the recruiter agency.  There will be a quick 10 minutes interview with Mr. Litman’s manager 
who will also go through you resume, your background and if you are ready to be presented.   

• 
Meet the recruiter in person 
 ENTER  Sometimes Mr. Litman or his manager will ask you to come and meet them in 
person if they are in the same city as yours.  This will be the perfect opportunity for you to go 
and meet them and start practicing your in-person interview skills.  You can deny the meeting 
request but perhaps it might effect your chances to be presented.  I would recommend that you 
make some time and go see them. 
• 
Resume submission 
ENTER  After all the conversation and formalities with Mr. Litman, your resume will be 
submitted to the hiring manager.  It can take anywhere from 2 days to a couple of weeks for 
the hiring manager to get back to Mr. Litman.   
• 
Interview schedule 
ENTER   Once your resume is reviewed by the hiring manager and shortlisted then Mr. 
Litman will be notified and a request for interview will be placed.  Mr. Litman will reach out to 
you with a few interview time slots.  Pick your desired time slot and start the preparation.  If the 
hiring manager does not like your resume then he will notify Mr. Litman.  If you don’t hear 
back from Mr. Litman for 3-4 weeks then you should assume that it’s a NO.  You can always 
call Mr. Litman for a follow up. 
• 
First phone interview 
 ENTER  So lets be optimistic.  You are scheduled for an interview.  The first interview will be 
most likely a phone interview and it can last up to an hour.  This can include technical 
questions as well. 
 Second in-person interview 
ENTER  A couple of days later you will get a call from Mr. Litman you will provide feedback 
based on your interview.  If you have cleared the first interview then he will schedule the 
second round of interview.  This will be most likely on-site in-person interview and can 
include additional technical interview questions.  You will meet with the team so make sure 
you are dressed with a suit and tie and present yourself professionally.   
 Offer Letter 

NEXT  A few days go by and your phone will ring. Mr. Litman will give you the great news 
that you have been selected and the hiring manager is ready to offer you the job.  You of course 
jump off the bed and ask for more details about the start date.   
• 
Acceptance and start date. 
NEXT  Mr. Litman will send you all the required paper work to fill out and sign the offer 
letter.  Also at this point you might have to go through the background check which might 
include, education history, experience, criminal record and sometimes a drug test depending 
on the hiring company requirements. 
 
When you start the first day then you will feel that your hard work has finally paid off.  
Congratulate yourself. 
 
 

