TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

2500 Keywords
to Get You Hired
JAY A. BLOCK, CPRW
MICHAEL BETRUS, CPRW
McGraw-Hill
New York
Chicago
San Francisco
Lisbon
London
Madrid
Mexico City
Milan
New Delhi
San Juan
Seoul
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

Copyright © 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. Except as permitted under the United
States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system,
without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-141571-8
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-140637-5. 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names
in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in
this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more
information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work
is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decom-
pile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the
work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work
is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURA-
CY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT
CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be
uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of
cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that
result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall
apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071415718

Contents
Contributors
vii
Introduction
xi
PART 1
1
What Is a Keyword?
3
2
Skills Lead to Keywords
7
3
Tips and Techniques
11
PART 1
4
Keywords by Profession
25
Account Executive
26
Accounting Manager
27
Accounts Receivable Supervisor
28
Actuary
29
Administrative Assistant
30
Airline Pilot (Commercial/Private)
31
Application Developer
32
Architect
33
Art Director
34
Artist
35
Association Manager
36
Auditor
37
Automobile Parts Manager
38
Bank Branch Managers
39
Bank Teller
40
Benefits Coordinator
41
Bookkeeper
42
iii
For more information about this title, click here.
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

Brand Manager
43
Building Inspector
44
Call Center Director
45
Career Counselor/Coach
46
Certified Public Accountant
47
CFO
48
Change/Reengineering Consultant
49
Chemist
50
City Manager
51
Civil Engineer
52
Civil Service (Police Officer)
53
College Graduate (Accounting)
54
College Graduate (Communications)
55
College Graduate (Construction)
56
College Graduate (M.B.A.)
57
College Graduate (Mechanical Engineer)
58
College Graduate (Sales)
59
Commercial or Corporate Pilot
60
Construction Foreman
61
Contracts Specialist
62
Controller
63
Corporate Attorney
64
Corporate Recruiter
65
Cosmetologist
66
Creative Designer
67
Cruise Director
68
Customer Service Representative
69
Data Warehouse Developer
70
Dental Assistant
71
Design Engineer
72
Director of Manufacturing
73
Director of Marketing
74
Director of Operations
75
Director of Purchasing
76
Editor
77
Electrical Engineer
78
Elementary Teacher
79
Environmental Engineer
80
Estimator
81
Executive Chef
82
Executive Recruiter, Engineering
83
Finance Manager, Banking
84
Financial Analyst
85
Financial Planner
86
Flight Attendant
87
Food/Beverage Manager
88
Fundraiser
89
Funeral Director
90
General Manager—Hospitality
91
Government Liaison
92
iv
Contents

Graphic Designer
93
Guidance Counselor
94
Hair Stylist
95
Help Desk Administrator
96
High School Teacher
97
Human Resources Manager
98
Image Consultant
99
Insurance/Claims Adjuster
100
Insurance Sales
101
Interior Designer
102
Inventory Control Manager
103
Journalist
104
Lab Technician
105
Librarian
106
Limousine Driver
107
Loan Officer
108
Loss Prevention Manager
109
Management
110
Manufacturer’s Representative
111
Marketing Manager
112
Media Buyer
113
Medical Billing Supervisor
114
National Account Sales
115
Network Architect
116
Network Engineer
117
Nonprofit Program Director
118
Nurse
119
Nutritionist 
120
Paralegal/Legal Assistant
121
PeopleSoft Consultant
122
Personal Trainer
123
Pharmaceutical Sales Representative
124
Pharmaceutical Technician
125
Pharmacist
126
Photographer
127
Physical Therapist
128
Physician’s Assistant
129
Police Officer (Military Conversion)
130
Production Manager
131
Project Manager
132
Property Manager
133
Public Relations Director
134
Quality Engineer
135
Radio Disc Jockey
136
Radiologist
137
Real Estate Broker
138
Receptionist
139
Regulatory Affairs Counsel
140
Restaurant Manager
141
Retail Sales Manager
142
Contents
v

Risk Management
143
Sales/Corporate Trainer
144
Sales—Entry Level
145
Sales Support (Coordinator)
146
Sales Support Engineer
147
SAP Analyst
148
School Principal
149
Senior Business Consultant
150
Senior VP Sales
151
Social Services
152
Social Worker
153
Software Engineer
154
Speech Therapist
155
Sports Agent Attorney
156
Sports Coach
157
Surveyor
158
Switch Engineer
159
Systems Administrator
160
Tax Specialist
161
Telecommunications/E-Solutions
162
Telemarketing Manager
163
Transportation/Logistics Specialist
164
Travel Agent
165
TV Production Manager
166
Underwriter
167
UNIX Manager
168
Veterinary Assistant 
169
Volunteer Coordinator
170
Warehouse Manager
171
Web Designer
172
Writer/Editor
173
Index
175
vi
Contents

Contributors
Pages That Resumes Appear on
Deborah Wile Dib, CCM, CCMC, CEIP, JCTC, NCRW, CPRW
39, 43, 48, 57, 
Advantage Resumes of New York & Executive Power Coach
150, 151, 168
77 Buffalo Avenue
Medford, NY 11763
631-475-8513 
100Kplus@advantageresumes.com
www.advantageresumes.com  &  www.executivepowercoach.com
Vivian VanLier
27, 35, 38, 42, 47, 59, 69, 166
Advantage Career Services
6701 Murietta Avenue
Los Angeles (Valley Glen), CA 91405
818-994-6655
Vvanlier@aol.com
www.CuttingEdgeResumes.com
Sue Montgomery
49, 55, 73, 84, 115, 130
Resume Plus
4130 Linden Ave., Ste. 135
Dayton, OH 45432
937-254-5627
resumeplus@siscom.net
www.resumeplus.com
Janice Worthington
26, 74, 88, 91, 110, 141, 163
Worthington Career Services 
6636 Belleshire Street
Columbus, Ohio 43229
614-890-1645
Janice@worthingtonresumes.com
www.worthingtonresumes.com
Mike Fernandes
31, 101, 104, 114, 129, 132, 137
Resumes and More
13101 Preston Road, Suite 300
Dallas, Texas 75240-5229
(972) 239-1991
mikefernan@aol.com
vii
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

Rolande L. LaPointe, CPC, CIPC, CPRW,  IJCTC, CCM 
30, 136, 139, 146, 152
RO-LAN Associates, Inc.
725 Sabattus Street
Lewiston, Maine  04240
207) 784-010
Rlapointe@aol.com
Anne Follis
79, 89, 94, 97, 106, 149, 153
CareerPro Resume Service
6738 N. Frostwood Parkway
Peoria, Illinois 61615
(309) 691-2445
AAAProfessionalResumes@yahoo.com or AAAProResumes@aol.com 
www.AAAProfessionalResumes.com
Jean Cummings
54, 58, 123, 138, 145, 173
A Resume For Today
123 Minot Road
Concord, MA 01742
Phone: 978-371-9266   Email: jc@AResumeForToday.com
Web site  www.AResumeForToday.com
Barb Poole
33, 37, 56, 103, 126, 160, 172
Hire Imaging
1812 Red Fox Road
St. Cloud, MN 56301
(320) 253-0975
eink@astound.net
Peter Hill, CPRW
64, 87, 99, 107, 133, 157, 165
Distinctive Resumes 
Honolulu, Hawaii
(808) 306-3920
distinctiveresumes@yahoo.com
www.peterhill.biz
Camille Carboneau, CPRW, CEIP
32, 50, 53, 72, 125, 154, 158
CC Computer Services & Training
PO Box 50655
Idaho Falls, Idaho  83405
208.522.4455
Camille@ccComputer.com
http://www.SuperiorResumes.com
Roleta Fowler
100, 119, 127, 134, 140, 144, 162, 164
Wordbusters Resume and Writing Services
433 Quail Court
Fillmore, California 93015-1137
(805) 524-3493
resumes@wbresumes.com
http://www.wbresumes.com
Debbie Ellis 
34, 40, 67, 81, 93, 108, 121, 161
Phoenix Career Group 
Danville, KY 40422  
(800) 876-5506 
info@phoenixcareergroup.com
www.phoenixcareergroup.com
viii
Contributors

Kathy Renzulli 
29, 51, 78, 85, 117, 159
Connecticut Department of Labor 
555 Main Street 
Ansonia, Connecticut 06401
(203) 736-1059
Kathy.Renzulli@po.state.ct.us
www.ctdol.state.ct.us
Susan Guarneri
36, 44, 46, 96, 124, 167, 171
Guarneri Associates / Resumagic
1101 Lawrence Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
(609) 771-1669 
Resumagic@aol.com
www.resume-magic.com
Freddie Cheek
63, 65, 71, 86, 128, 143, 169, 170
Cheek & Cristantello Career Connections
4511 Harlem Road, Suite 3
Amherst, New York 14226
(716) 839-3635
fscheek@adelphia.net
CheekandCristantello.com
M. J. FELD, MS, CPRW
62, 66, 68, 75, 98, 102, 109
Careers by Choice, Inc.
205 East Main Street, Suite 2-4 
Huntington, NY 11743
(631) 673-5432 
mjfeld@bestweb.net 
Wendy J. Terwelp
41, 61, 70, 112, 116, 156
Opportunity Knocks of Wisconsin, LLC
11431 N. Port Washington Road, Ste. 101-C
Mequon, WI 53092
262.241.4655  
consultant@knocks.com
www.knocks.com
Ann Baehr
80, 82, 92, 105, 118, 122, 148, 155
Best Resumes
122 Sheridan Street
Brentwood, NY 11717
(631) 435-1879
resumesbest@earthlink.net
www.e-bestresumes.com
Tracy M. Parish, CPRW
28, 45, 76, 77, 95, 113, 120, 142
CareerPlan, Inc.
PO Box 325
Kewanee, IL 61443
(888) 449-2200
Resume@CareerPlan.org
www.CareerPlan.org
Contributors
ix

This page intentionally left blank.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

Introduction
Welcome to the seventh installment in our series of reference guides 
designed to help you in your career. Our previous guides have been 
focused on the structure and development of resumes and cover letters.
They include:
I 101 Best Resumes
I 101 More Best Resumes
I 101 Best Cover Letters
I 101 Best .Com Resumes
I 101 Best Resumes for Grads
I 101 Best Tech Resumes
Keywords represent a subset of this matter. Keywords are nouns
and adjectives that serve to describe you professionally.
This guide offers a variety of tools for you. For the top professions
we identified, you will find a list of at least 20 keywords, an example of
their use in a sample resume, and their use in a sample interview ques-
tion. Not every keyword is illustrated in every respective resume or
sample interview. Inserting every keyword would have made them too
wordy and in many cases unrealistic. These samples will give you some
ideas, but your use really depends on your own experiences and objec-
tives. Each profession showcases the work of both the authors and the
members of the Professional Association of Resume Writers.
Really look over “Tips to Get You Hired” starting on Chapter 3.
They will provide you with savvy tips you won’t find anywhere else.
The tips are divided into six categories and are very tactical in nature.
We always try to stay away from theory and instead emphasize hands-
on tactics.
xi
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

Part I
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

1
What Is a Keyword?
Keywords are those descriptive words, usually nouns, that are associ-
ated with specific disciplines or industries. Keywords are important 
because they are considered standardized for specific industries. For
example, if you were an accountant, keywords would include: cost 
accounting, budget analysis, auditing, tax, etc. Keywords can be critical
in the world of software management and job searching. Employers and
recruiters may take your resume and cover letter (especially if sent
electronically) and do a computerized search for keywords or descrip-
tors that match the profile they are seeking. Think of it as a prescreen-
ing process. For example, a finance director for Microsoft hiring a staff
accountant might have a scan or search of resumes and cover letters
completed for the words listed above, and if they aren’t on your mate-
rials, you could miss the first cut.
Keywords play an integral role in two areas of the resume screen-
ing process. One is the human element, when hiring and nonhiring
managers are screening resumes for words and phrases that match the
criteria they are seeking. The second is the computer search, where
computers search the data on many different resumes to select those
that match the words and phrases. That is how posted resumes on Web
sites like Monster.com work.
Prescreening by Personnel
Keywords can be very important outside the computer search arena. In
many cases, the initial scan of resumes is completed by either a human
3
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

resources person or an assistant to the hiring manager. Even the most
competent people doing this function can only do a high-level job of 
resume scanning if they are not intimately aware of the position or are
not hiring for themselves. That is why it is important to keep a certain
amount of “boilerplate” in your resume.
A client of ours named David Robinson comes to mind. He worked
for Verizon Wireless and was curious about an advertisement he saw
for a position with Ericcson. We updated his resume in the style that
looks like that on pages 56–57 from our first book, 101 Best Resumes.
The key to that resume style was the use of the left column for a list-
ing of accounts—that really becomes the core of the resume if you work
in an account-driven environment like sales. The hiring manager called
David for an interview and told him: “We’ve had so many resumes that
I told my assistant not to bring me any more unless they look like a per-
fect fit. The way that you listed your accounts on the first page of the
resume was a great way to show us who your contacts are.” So, the 
initial screening was conducted by his assistant, who was only scan-
ning resumes for key items (words, even things like industry-specific
terms, product names, etc.), and his resume effectively illustrated his
sales accounts.
Don’t make the readers work to learn what you’re all about. Even
in a four percent unemployment environment, the competition for good
jobs is too stiff.
The Online Environment
Today, the Internet environment brings a new way of distributing your
resume. As part of the “boilerplate” activities that people do when be-
ginning to market themselves to potential employers, using the Inter-
net is now a standard resource tool. One of the first things many peo-
ple do is post their resumes on Web sites like Monster.com or
Headhunter.net. Corporate recruiters and independent recruiters do
review resumes posted on these sites. It works best when the search
field is very narrow. If you were to do a keyword search of all the re-
sumes posted on Monster.com for telecommunications, for example, the
return would be in the thousands. However, if you narrowed the search
to MMDS narrowband spectrum management, the return would be sig-
nificantly lower. So, you need to whittle your skills down as much as
possible to help the right people find you through these keyword
searches. Keywords make your traditional resume electronically 
retrievable in resume databases like Monster.com or Headhunter.net.
After your resume is entered electronically into a resume database
like that on Monster.com, it is ready to be searched and ranked. A hir-
ing manager or recruiter then decides which keywords best identify the
skills needed in a candidate, and based upon those keywords, has the
system search the resume database. Typically, the reviewer will have
several keywords that are required and others that are optional.
When the search engine recognizes a keyword in your resume, it is
called a “hit.” Your resume is ranked according to the number of key-
word hits. Only resumes that have the required keywords are found. Of
4
What Is a Keyword?

those, resumes that have more of the desired keywords rank higher,
and will be selected first to be read by a human reviewer. Other factors
that can affect search rankings include proximity to other keywords
and how close to the top of the page keyword hits occur. Therefore, in
addition to placing keywords relevant to your field throughout your re-
sume and cover letter, an extra “keyword summary” should be created
near the top of your resume specifically for a resume search engine. Our
resume guides provide many examples of how to do this in constructing
the opening part of your resume.
A good “Summary of Qualifications” provides an opportunity to in-
clude listings of keywords that may not fit in the rest of the written
part of the resume. The more keywords you have, the greater the like-
lihood of ranking high in the search.
Keywords
Below is a plain-formatted resume that is representative of something
that might be pasted in the application area on Monster.com. High-
lighted in gray are the keywords. Granted, this resume is an exagger-
ated version of the use of keywords. Still, it will give you a good per-
spective. Also, it’s no secret that the more specialized a position is, the
greater the role that keywords will play. However, even if you’re in sales
or general management, key industry terms can be very helpful.
What Is a Keyword?
5

Dan Schmitz
1234 Hereford Highway
Kansas City, MO 12345
H: (913) 555-1111 W: (913) 555-1111; E-mail: danschmitz@technology.net
Keyword Summary
Systems Engineer. Client Server System Architect. Systems Analysis. Systems Integration. Net-
work Administration. Database Administration. Systems Administration. Software Engineering.
Troubleshooting Computing Systems. C++. Visual Basic. SQL. UNIX Shell Script. Windows. MS
DOS. Windows NT. TCP/IP. OSI. Microsoft LAN Manager. Novell Netware. Project Management.
Trade Studies. Consulting. BETA Tester. Technical Presentations. Sales Presentations. Instruc-
tor. BS Degree. Mathematics and Computer Science. UCLA. Air Force Institute of Technology.
Computer Engineering.
Summary of Qualifications 
Seven years of experience in designing, installing, and troubleshooting computing systems.
Programming: C, C++, Visual BASIC, FORTRAN, Pascal, SQL, OSF/Motif, UNIX Shell Script
(sh, ksh, csh), BASIC, Clipper, Algol 68, and 80X86 Assembler.
Operating Systems: UNIX (bsd & SVr3/r4), MS Windows, MS DOS, MS Windows NT, Solaris,
HP-UX, Ultrix, AIX, VAX/VMS, and Macintosh System 7.
Networking: TCP/IP, OSI, Microsoft LAN Manager, Novell Netware, DDN, Internet, Ethernet,
Token Ring, SNA, X.25, LAN-WAN interconnection.
Applications: Microsoft Office, Microsoft Access, Microsoft Visual C++, Microsoft Project, 
Microsoft Publisher, Lotus 123, Lotus Freelance, System Architect, and others.
Professional Experience
Network Engineer
Netcom, Dallas, Texas 1996–Present 
* Provide systems engineering, software engineering, technical consulting, and marketing 
services as a member of the Systems Integration Division of a software engineering consult-
ing company.
* Designed and managed the development of an enterprise-level client/server automated 
auditing application for a major financial management company migrating from mainframe
computers, db2, and FOCUS to a workgroup-oriented, client/server architecture involving 
Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT Advanced Server, Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle7, and
UNIX.
* Designed an enterprise-level, high-performance, mission-critical, client/server database sys-
tem incorporating symmetric multiprocessing computers (SMP), Oracle7’s Parallel Server,
Tuxedo’s on-line transaction processing (OLTP) monitor, and redundant array of inexpensive
disks (RAID) technology.
* Conducted extensive trade studies of a large number of vendors that offer leading-edge tech-
nologies; these studies identified proven (low-risk) implementations of SMP and RDBMS sys-
tems that met stringent performance and availability criteria.
Education
University of Kansas, B.S. Software Engineering and Computer Communications 
GPA: 3.43 
Specialized Training
Database Administration, Performance Tuning, and Benchmarking with Oracle7; Oracle Corpo-
ration.
Interactive UNIX System V r4 (POSIX) System Administration; ETC, Inc.
Effective Briefing Techniques and Technical Presentations; William French and Associates, Inc.
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP); Technology Systems Institute.
LAN Interconnection Using Bridges, Routers, and Gateways; Information Systems Institute.
OSI X.400/X.500 Messaging and Directory Service Protocols; Communication Technologies,
Inc.
6
What Is a Keyword?

2
Skills Lead to Keywords
Have you ever known a highly successful sales professional who didn’t
have a firm grasp and knowledge of his or her product? An award-
winning professor that did not know his or her material? Ask experi-
enced salespeople what the secret to success is, and they’ll say that it’s
knowing the product, knowing the customer, and matching the benefits
of the product to the needs of the customer. This is a powerful success
formula.
The job search is a sales and marketing endeavor. There is simply
no way around this: You are the product, you are the salesperson, and
you must define your customers and promote yourself to them. So, like
the highly successful salesperson, the key to your success is to know
your product (you) inside and out, and match the benefits of the prod-
uct to the needs of your potential customers (prospective employers). In
sales, we call this selling features and benefits. You must know the fea-
tures of the product, known as “marketable skills,” and determine what
specific benefits result from those features that would interest a
prospective employer. In other words, the only reason for someone to
hire you is for the benefit that you offer that person or company. If 
interviewers were to ask you what your strengths are, what skills you
bring to the table, or what contributions you feel you could make to the
company, they are actually asking you to identify your features and the
benefit that the company would realize by hiring you.
7
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

In order to communicate effectively the features and benefits of
the product, namely you, you must first take an inventory of your skills.
In the simplest of terms, there are three categories of skills:
I Job-related (or academic) skills
I Transferable skills
I Self-management skills
JOB-RELATED/TECHNICAL SKILLS
There are four categories of job-related skills: 1) working with people,
2) working with data and information, 3) working with things, and 4)
working with ideas. Though most of us work with all four categories at
one time or another, we tend to be attracted to one or two areas in par-
ticular. Successful teachers, customer service representatives, and
salespeople must be particularly skilled at working with people. Fi-
nancial controllers, weathermen, and statistical forecasters possess
outstanding skills in working with data and information. Engineers,
mechanics, and computer technicians enjoy using their skills to work
with things, and inventors, writers, and advertising professionals must
have solid creativity and idea skills.
For the keyword exercise, place most emphasis on working with
data and information; uncover skills that are objective and as specific
as possible.
TRANSFERABLE SKILLS
Transferable skills are just that—transferable from one environment
to another. If you enjoy working with people, your specific transferable
skills might include leadership, training, entertainment, mentoring,
mediation, persuasion, public speaking, conflict resolution, or problem-
solving skills. If you enjoy working with data and information, your
specific transferable skills might include research, analysis, proofread-
ing, editing, arranging, budgeting, assessing, measuring, evaluating,
surveying, or pricing. If you enjoy working with things, your specific
transferable skills might include knowledge of equipment, repair, main-
tenance, installation, setup, troubleshooting, or building. And finally, if
you enjoy working with ideas, your specific transferable skills might 
include creating, developing, reengineering, restructuring, painting,
writing, problem solving, planning, or brainstorming.
So take 15 minutes, sit down with a pen, and paper and write
down all the skills and abilities you possess that have value to a com-
pany. Transferable skills are marketable and tangible qualifications
that will have value to many organizations. An accountant, human 
resources manager, or logistics manager at General Motors has tangi-
ble transferable skills that are of value to many companies both in and
out of the automotive industry.
8
Skills Lead to Keywords
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

SELF-MANAGEMENT SKILLS
Self-management skills are skills that are personality and value ori-
ented. Self-management skills are those that describe your attitude
and work ethic. They include creativity, energy, enthusiasm, logic,
resourcefulness, productive competence, persistence, adaptability, and
self-confidence. One cautionary note, however: Try not to be too general
in describing your self-management skills. When you identify a specific
skill, always be prepared to explain how that skill will benefit a
prospective employer. For example, if you’re analytical, how does that
make you better prepared for a position you have designed for yourself?
When you identify and recognize your skills, you begin to know
your product. If you know your product inside and out, you will never
be caught off guard in an interview. In fact, you will be able to reinforce
your value by emphasizing specific accomplishments you’ve achieved in
the past, using those specific skills.
In summary, writing a resume with good keyword descriptors 
requires that you identify your marketable skills because they repre-
sent the heart of the resume. Your ability to sell yourself confidently in
an interview despite stiff competition depends on knowing your skills
and communicating the benefits of those skills to the interviewer.
Strategic resume preparation begins with identifying what you have to
offer based on where you plan to market yourself. It is the foundation
for developing a powerful resume, and will be the foundation of suc-
cessful interviewing as well.
Skills Lead to Keywords
9

This page intentionally left blank.

3
Tips and Techniques
11
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

25 TIPS FOR USING THE INTERNET 
IN YOUR JOB SEARCH
1. When typing your resume out with the intent of emailing, make sure it is in an ASCII
format.
2. Use keywords heavily in the introduction of the resume, not at the end.
3. Keywords are almost always nouns, related to skills, such as financial analysis, market-
ing, accounting, or Web design.
4. When sending your resume via email in an ASCII format, attach (if you can) a nicely for-
matted one in case it does go through and the reader would like to see your creativity
and preferred layout. If you do attach it, use a common program like MS Word.
5. Don’t focus on an objective in the introduction of the resume, but rather accomplish-
ments, using keywords to describe them.
6. Don’t post your resume to your own Web site unless it is a very slick page. A poorly 
executed Web page is more damaging than none at all.
7. Before you email your resume, experiment sending it to yourself and to a friend as a test
drive.
8. Look up the Web site of the company you are targeting to get recent news information
about new products, etc., and look for their job posting for new information.
9. Before your interview or verbal contact, research the company’s Web site.
10. Use a font size between 10 and 14 point, make it all the same for an ASCII format re-
sume, and don’t create your resume for emailing with lines exceeding 65 characters.
11. In case your resume may be scanned, use white paper with no borders and no creative
fonts.
12. Include your email address on your resume and cover letter.
13. Don’t email from your current employer’s IP network.
14. Don’t circulate your work email address for job search purposes.
15. In the “subject” of your email (just below the “address to” part), put something more 
creative than “Resume Enclosed.” Try “Resume showing 8 years in telecommunications
industry” (if that is your chosen industry), for example.
16. For additional sources of online job searching, do a “search” on the Web for job searching,
your company, and your specific discipline for additional information.
17. Be careful of your spelling on the Internet. You will notice more spelling errors on email
exchanges than you will ever see in mailed letter exchanges.
18. Try to make sure your resume is scannable. This means it has a simple font, no borders,
no creative lining, no bold face, no underlining, no italics, and limited if any columning.
Though the practice of scanning is overestimated, it should still be a consideration.
19. Purchase or check out of a library an Internet directory listing the many links to job op-
portunities out there. There are thousands.
20. If you are using the email as your cover letter, keep it brief. If the reader is reading on
screen, their tolerance for reading long information is reduced dramatically.
21. Always back up what you can on a disk.
22. If you post your resume to a newsgroup, first make sure that this is acceptable to avoid
any problems with other participants.
23. Remember that tabs and spaces are the only formatting you can do in ASCII.
24. Make sure you check your email every day. If you are communicating via the Internet,
people may expect a prompt return.
25. Don’t send multiple emails to ensure that one gets through.
Try to send it with a 
confirmation of receipt, or keep a look out for a notice from you ISP that the message 
didn’t go through.
12
Tips and Techniques

25 NETWORKING TIPS
1. Two-thirds of all jobs are secured via the networking process. Networking is a system-
atic approach to cultivating formal and informal contacts for the purpose of gaining 
information, enhancing visibility in the market, and obtaining referrals.
2. Effective networking requires self-confidence, poise, and personal conviction.
3. You must first know the companies and organizations you wish to work for. That will 
determine the type of network you will develop and nurture.
4. Focus on meeting the “right people.” This takes planning and preparation.
5. Target close friends, family members, neighbors, social acquaintances, social and reli-
gious group members, business contacts, teachers, and community leaders.
6. Include employment professionals as an important part of your network. This includes
headhunters and personnel agency executives. They have a wealth of knowledge about
job and market conditions.
7. Remember, networking is a numbers game. Once you have a network of people in place,
prioritize the listing so you have separated top-priority contacts from lower-priority ones.
8. Sometimes you may have to pay for advice and information. Paying consultants or pro-
fessionals or investing in Internet services is part of the job search process today, as long
as it’s legal and ethical.
9. Know what you want from your contacts. If you don’t know what you want, neither will
your network of people. Specific questions will get specific answers.
10. Ask for advice, not for a job. You should not contact someone asking if they know of any
job openings. The answer will invariably be no, especially at higher levels. You need to
ask for things like industry advice, advice on geographic areas, etc. The job insights will
follow but will be almost incidental. This positioning will build value for you and make
the contact person more comfortable about helping you.
11. Watch your attitude and demeanor at all times. Everyone you come in contact with is a
potential member of your network. Demonstrate enthusiasm and professionalism at all
times.
12. Keep a file on each member of your network and maintain good records at all times. A
well-organized network filing system or database will yield superior results.
13. Get comfortable on the telephone. Good telephone communication skills are critical.
14. Travel the “information highway.” Networking is more effective if you have email, fax,
and computer capabilities.
15. Be well prepared for your conversation, whether in person or over the phone. You should
have a script in your mind of how to answer questions, what to ask, and what you’re try-
ing to accomplish.
16. Do not fear rejection. If a contact cannot help you, move on to the next contact. Do not
take rejection personally—it’s just part of the process.
17. Flatter the people in your network. It’s been said that the only two types of people who
can be flattered are men and women. Use tact, courtesy, and flattery.
18. If a person in your network cannot personally help, advise, or direct you, ask for refer-
rals.
19. Keep in touch with the major contacts in your network on a monthly basis. Remember,
out of sight, out of mind.
20. Don’t abuse the process. Networking is a two-way street. Be honest and brief and offer
your contacts something in return for their time, advice, and information. This can be as
simple as a lunch, or offering your professional services in return for their cooperation.
Tips and Techniques
13

21. Show an interest in your contacts. Cavette Robert, one of the founders of the National
Speakers Association, said, “People don’t care how much you know, until they know how
much you care.” Show how much you care. It will get you anywhere.
22. Send thank-you notes following each networking contact.
23. Seek out key networking contacts in professional and trade associations.
24. Carry calling cards with you at all times to hand out to anyone and everyone you come
in contact with. Include your name, address, phone number, areas of expertise, and/or
specific skill areas.
25. Socialize and get out more than ever before. Networking requires dedication and mas-
sive amounts of energy. Consistently work on expanding your network.
14
Tips and Techniques

25 “WHAT DO I DO NOW THAT I HAVE 
MY RESUME?” TIPS
1. Develop a team of people who will be your board of directors, advisors, and mentors. The
quality of the people you surround yourself with will determine the quality of your re-
sults.
2. Plan a marketing strategy. Determine how many hours a week you will work, how you’ll
divide your time, and how you’ll measure your progress. Job searching is a business in
itself—and a marketing strategy is your business plan.
3. Identify 25 (50 would be better) companies or organizations that you would like to work
for.
4. Contact the companies, or do some research, to identify hiring authorities.
5. Define your network (see “Networking Tips”). Make a list of everyone you know includ-
ing relatives, friends, acquaintances, family doctors, attorneys, and CPAs, the cleaning
person, and the mail carrier. Virtually everyone is a possible networking contact.
6. Prioritize your list of contacts into three categories: 1) Strong, approachable contacts, 2)
good contacts or those who must be approached more formally, and 3) those who you’d
like to contact but can’t without an introduction by another party.
7. Set up a filing system or database to organize and manage your contacts.
8. Develop a script or letter for the purpose of contacting the key people in your network,
asking for advice, information, and assistance. Then start contacting them.
9. Attempt to find a person, or persons, in your network who can make an introduction into
one of the 25 or 50 companies you’ve noted in number 3.
10. Spend 65 to 70 percent of your time, energy, and resources networking because 65 to 70
percent of all jobs are secured by this method.
11. Consider contacting executive recruiters or employment agencies to assist in your job
search.
12. If you are a recent college graduate, seek out assistance from the campus career center.
13. Scout the classified advertisements every Sunday. Respond to ads that interest you, and
look at other ads as well. A company may be advertising for a position that does not fit
your background, but say in the ad they are “expanding in the area,” etc. You have just
identified a growing company.
14. Seek out advertisements and job opportunities in specific trade journals and magazines.
15. Attend as many social and professional functions as you can. The more people you meet,
the better your chances are of securing a position quickly.
16. Send out resumes with customized cover letters to targeted companies or organizations.
Address the cover letter to a specific person. Then follow up.
17. Target small to medium-sized companies. Most of the opportunities are coming from
these organizations, not large corporations.
18. Consider contacting temporary agencies. Almost 40 percent of all temporary personnel
are offered permanent positions. Today, a greater percentage of middle and upper man-
agement, as well as professionals, are working in temporary positions.
19. Use online services. America Online, Prodigy, and CompuServe have career services, em-
ployment databases, bulletin boards, and online discussion and support groups, as well
as access to the Internet. This is the wave of the future.
20. If you are working from home, be sure the room you are working from is inspiring, or-
ganized, and private. This is your space and it must motivate you!
21. If your plan is not working, meet with members of your support team and change the
plan. You must remain flexible and adaptable to change.
22. Read and observe. Read magazines and newspapers and listen to CNBC, CNN, and so
on. Notice which companies and organizations are on the move and contact them.
Tips and Techniques
15

23. Set small, attainable, weekly goals. Keep a weekly progress report on all your activities.
Try to do a little more each week than the week before.
24. Stay active. Exercise and practice good nutrition. A job search requires energy. You must
remain in superior physical and mental condition.
25. Volunteer. Help those less fortunate than you. What goes around comes around.
16
Tips and Techniques

25 INTERVIEWING TIPS
1. Relax. The employment interview is just a meeting. And although you should not treat
this meeting lightly, don’t forget that the organization interviewing you is in need of your
services as much as, or perhaps more than, you are of theirs.
2. The key to successful interviewing is rapport building. Most people spend their time
preparing for interviews by memorizing canned responses to anticipated questions. Suc-
cessful interviewers spend most of their time practicing the art of rapport building
through the use of powerfully effective communicating techniques.
3. Prepare a manila folder that you will bring to the interview. Include in the folder:
* company information (annual reports, sales material, etc.)
* extra resumes (6–12) and your letters of reference
* 15 questions you’ve prepared based on your research and analysis of the company
* a blank legal pad, pen, and anything else you consider helpful (e.g., college transcripts)
4. Dress appropriately. Determine the dress code and meet it. If their dress is business ca-
sual, you still need to be dressed in business professional. Practice proper grooming and
hygiene.
5. Shoes, of course, must be polished.
6. Wear limited jewelry.
7. Call the day before and confirm the appointment—it will set you apart.
8. Be certain that you know exactly where you’re going. Arrive in plenty of time. You should
be at the receptionist’s desk 10–12 minutes before the scheduled interview.
9. Prior to meeting the receptionist, check your appearance. Check your hair, clothing, and
general image. Test your smile.
10. Secretaries, administrative assistants, and receptionists often have a say in the hiring
process. Make a strong first impression with them.
11. Look around the office and search for artifacts that disclose the personality and culture
of the company—and possibly the interviewer. This information will be helpful in ini-
tially breaking the ice, when you first begin discussions.
12. Be aware of your body language. Sit erect, with confidence. When standing and walking,
move with confidence!
13. Your handshake should be firm, made with a wide-open hand, fingers stretched wide
apart. Women should feel comfortable offering their hands and firm and friendly hand-
shakes. A power handshake and great smile will get you off to a great start.
14. Eye contact is one of the most powerful forms of communicating. It demonstrates confi-
dence, trust, and power.
15. During the interview, lean forward toward the interviewer. Show enthusiasm and sincere
interest.
16. Take notes during the interview. You may want to refer to them later in the interview. If
you are uncomfortable with this, ask permission first.
17. Be prepared for all questions, especially uncomfortable ones. Before the interview, script
out a one-page response for each question that poses a problem for you, and practice 
repeating it until you’re comfortable with it.
18. Communicate your skills, qualifications, and credentials to the hiring manager. Describe
your market value and the benefits you offer. Demonstrate how you will contribute to the
bottom line. Show how you can 1) improve sales, 2) reduce costs, 3) improve productivi-
ty, or 4) solve organizational problems.
19. Key in on specific accomplishments. Accomplishments determine hireability. They sepa-
rate the winners from the runners-up.
Tips and Techniques
17

20. Listening skills are priceless! Job offers are made to those who listen well, find hidden
meanings, and answer questions in a brief but effective manner.
21. Let the interviewer bring up salary first. The purpose of an interview is to determine
whether there is a match. Once that is determined, salary should then be negotiated.
22. There is no substitute for planning and preparation, practice and rehearsing—absolute-
ly none.
23. Practice interviewing techniques using video technology. A minimum of five hours of
video practice, preferably more, guarantees a stellar performance.
24. Close the sale. If you find that you want the position, ask for it. Ask directly, “Is there
anything that would prevent you from offering me this position now?” or “Do you have
any reservations or concerns?” (if you sense that). At the very least, this should flush out
any objections and give you the opportunity to turn them into positives.
25. Always send a thank-you note within 24 hours of every employment meeting.
18
Tips and Techniques
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

25 SALARY NEGOTIATING TIPS
1. From the moment you make initial contact with any company or organization you wish
to work with, you are in negotiation. You may not be discussing money openly, but you
are making a permanent imprint on the minds of the hiring authorities.
2. Delay all discussions of salary until there is an offer on the table.
3. You are in the strongest negotiating position as soon as the offer is made.
4. Know your value. You must know how you can contribute to the organization. Establish
this in the mind of the hiring manager.
5. Get employers enthusiastic about your candidacy, and they will become more generous.
6. There is no substitute for preparation. If you are well prepared, you’ll be confident, self-
assured, and poised for success.
7. Prior to going into employment negotiations, you must know the average salary paid for
similar positions with other organizations in your geographical area.
8. Prior to going into employment negotiations you must know, as best you can, the salary
range that the company you’re interviewing with will pay, or what former employees
were earning.
9. Prior to going into employment negotiations, you must know your personal needs and re-
quirements, and how they relate to numbers 7 and 8 above.
10. Remember, fringes and perks, such as vacation time, flex time, health benefits, pension
plans, and so on, have value. Consider the “total” salary package.
11. Salary negotiations must be win-win negotiations. If they’re not, everybody loses in the
end.
12. Be flexible; don’t get hung up on trivial issues, and always seek compromise when pos-
sible.
13. Listen carefully and pay close attention. Your goals will most likely be different from the
goals of the employer. For instance, the firm’s main focus might be “base salary.” Yours
might be “total earning potential.” So a win-win solution might be to negotiate a lower
base salary but a higher commission or bonus structure.
14. Anticipate objections and prepare effective answers to these objections.
15. Try to understand the employer’s point of view. Then plan a strategy to meet both the
employer’s concerns and your needs.
16. Don’t be afraid to negotiate out of fear of losing the offer. Most employers expect you to
negotiate as long as you negotiate in a fair and reasonable manner.
17. Always negotiate in a way that reflects your personality, character, and work ethic.
Remain within your comfort zone.
18. Never lose control. Remain enthusiastic and upbeat even if the negotiations get a little
hot. This might be your first test under fire.
19. Play hardball only if you’re willing to walk away from, or lose, the deal.
20. What you lose in the negotiations will most likely never be recouped. Don’t be careless
in preparing for or conducting the negotiation.
21. Be sure to get the offer and final agreement in writing.
22. You should feel comfortable asking the employer for 24 to 48 hours to think about the
deal if you need time to think it over.
23. Never link salary to personal needs or problems. Compensation should always be linked
to your value.
24. Understand your leverage. Know if you are in a position of strength or weakness and 
negotiate intelligently based on your personal situation.
25. End salary negotiations on a friendly and cheerful note.
Tips and Techniques
19

25 UNCONVENTIONAL TECHNIQUES FOR UNCOVERING
AND SECURING NEW OPPORTUNITIES
1. If you see a classified ad that sounds really good for you but only lists a fax number and
no company name, try to figure out the company by trying similar numbers. For exam-
ple, if the fax number is 555-4589, try 555-4500 or 555-4000, and get the company name
and contact person so you can send a more personalized letter and resume.
2. Send your resume in a Priority Mail envelope for the serious prospects. It only costs $3,
but will stand out and get you noticed.
3. Check the targeted company’s Web site; they may have postings there that others with-
out computer access haven’t seen.
4. If you see a classified ad for a good prospective company but for a different position, con-
tact them anyway. If they are new in town (or even if they’re not), they may have other
nonadvertised openings.
5. Always have a personalized card with you in the event that you meet a good networking
or employment prospect.
6. Always have a quick personal briefing rehearsed to speak to someone.
7. Network in nonwork environments, such as a happy-hour bar (a great opportunity to
network) or an airport.
8. Network with your college alumni office. Many college graduates list their current 
employers with that office, and they may be a good source of leads, even out of state.
9. Most newspapers list all the new companies that have applied for business licenses.
Check that section and contact the ones that appear appealing to you.
10. Call your attorney or accountant and ask them if they can refer you to any companies or
business contacts; perhaps they have a good business relationship that may be good for
you to leverage.
11. Contact the Chamber of Commerce for information on new companies moving into the
local area.
12. Don’t give up if you’ve had just one rejection from a company you are targeting. You
shouldn’t feel that you have truly contacted that company until you have contacted at
least three different people there.
13. Join networking clubs and associations that will expose you to new business contacts.
14. Ask stockbrokers for tips on which companies they identify as fast growing and good
companies to grow with.
15. Make a list of everyone you know and use them as a network source.
16. Put an endorsement portfolio together and mail out with targeted resumes.
17. Employ the hiring proposal strategy. (See 101 Best Cover Letters.)
18. Post your resume on the Internet, selecting news groups and bulletin boards that will
readily accept it and match your industry and discipline.
19. Don’t forget to demonstrate passion and enthusiasm when you are meeting with people,
interviewing with them, and networking through them.
20. Look in your industry’s trade journals. Nearly all industries and disciplines have sever-
al, and most have advertising sections in the back that list potential openings with 
companies and recruiters. This is a great resource in today’s low-unemployment envi-
ronment.
21. Visit a job fair. For most professionals, there won’t be managerial positions recruited for,
but there will be many companies present, and you may discover a hot lead. If they are
recruiting in general, you should contact them directly for a possible fit.
22. Don’t overlook employment agencies. They may seem like a weak possibility, but that
may uncover a hidden opportunity or serve as a source to network through.
20
Tips and Techniques

23. Look for companies that are promoting their products using a lot of advertising. Sales
are probably going well, and they may be good hiring targets for you.
24. Call a prospective company and simply ask them who their recruiting firm is. If they
have one, they’ll tell you, and then you can contact that firm to get in the door.
25. Contact every recruiter in town. Befriend them, and use them as networking sources if
possible. Always thank them, to the point of sending them a small gift for helping you
out. This will pay off in dividends in the future. Recruiters are always good contacts.
What Is a Keyword?
21

This page intentionally left blank.

Part II
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

25
4
Keywords by Profession
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

ACCOUNT EXECUTIVE (ADVERTISING/MARKETING/PR)
26
Keywords
Market Penetration/
Expansion
Negotiations
Presentations
Relationship
Building
Incentive
Development
Territory
Penetration
Competitive Market
Analysis
Prospecting
Solution-Based
Selling
Consultative Selling
Client Needs
Analysis
Trade Show
Management
Lead Generation
Sales & Marketing
Sales Promotions
Product Introduction
Market Research &
Analysis
Staff Training &
Development
New-Business
Planning/
Development
Goal
Setting/Personal
Development
Resume
Anita Cooley
234 Shoshue Blvd.
Cincinnati, Ohio 45237
(513) 555-1122 / anita666@hotmail.com
Account Executive
Growing and sustaining revenues in highly competitive markets.
New-Business Planning/Development • Market Research & Analysis
Competitive Market Analysis • Market Penetration/Expansion
Core Strengths
Presentations / Negotiations 
Problem Resolution
Relationship Building 
Consultative / Solution-Based Selling
Incentive Development 
Client Needs Analysis
Territory Penetration 
Lead Generation
Professional Experience
ROCCO MARKETING AGENCY, Detroit, Michigan
1999 to Current
Account Executive
Exercise full sales and marketing accountability for major local account list with territory ex-
tending from Detroit to Philadelphia and reaching to Toms River, NJ. Coordinate annual trade
shows, develop and execute sales promotions, and create power methods to introduce new
products. Challenged with ensuring peak performance of team through effective staff training
and development as well as ambitious goal setting while emphasizing personal development.
I
Received Stellar Seller Award (2000) for generating first-quarter new business.
I
Increased local sales by 16% in 2000 over 1999 by employing consultative sales approach.
I
Aggressively negotiated contract with major client, netting over $1 million 2000.
I
Lead team in turning around distress territory of underperforming executive.
Education
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
Bachelor of Arts: Business & Communications, 1990
I
Interned with One2all Communications, New York
I
GPA 3.75
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Consistently, I have demonstrated my ability to meet or exceed sales goals. Planning and developing
ways to attract new business have always distinguished me from my colleagues. Based on my ability
to conduct thorough market research and analysis, I have repeatedly been successful in implementing
creative sales, marketing and promotional strategies that have produced desired results. Your company
has a product/service that will assist clients in getting ahead of their competition; I offer expertise in
market expansion and solution selling to attract new clients and thus maximize your revenue.

ACCOUNTING MANAGER
27
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have more than five years’ experience in all aspects of general accounting and financial reporting. I
am strong with all required software programs, including Word, Excel, and accounting software such
as QuickBooks Pro, Great Plains, and Peachtree. From a management perspective, I practice team
building and leadership skills and have experience in hiring, training, and coaching. My financial
strengths include budgeting, reporting, auditing, and GL work.
Resume
Heather Shuster
1234 North Colorado Boulevard
Burbank, California 91304
(818) 555-1234 / email@email.com
ACCOUNTING MANAGER
Experienced in All Aspects of General Accounting and Financial Reporting
Team Building and Leadership / Hiring, Training, & Supervision
Strong Analytical, Mathematical, and Problem Solving Skills
Experienced in Integrated Accounting Software
Accounting manager with bachelor’s degree in Finance and five years’ related supervision and
accounting systems experience. Proven ability to plan and supervise work of others to achieve
department and organizational goals. Expertise in QuickBooks Pro, Great Plains, Peachtree,
Word, Excel, and Access.
Core Strengths
General Accounting
Budget Management
Financial Systems & Reporting
Hiring, Training & Supervising
Oral & Written Communications
Payroll/Employment Taxes
Accounts Receivable/Payable
Expense Tracking & Analysis
Professional Experience
WC SPECIALTY PRODUCTS, INC., Los Angeles, CA
1997−Present
Accounting Manager
Direct activities of accounting department for manufacturer of specialty gift items. Supervise,
train, and evaluate team of twelve involved with general accounting, accounts
receivable/payable, payroll processing, data collection and analysis, banking activities, and em-
ployment tax reporting. Ensure month-end closings and timely financial statement prepara-
tion. Prepare and manage annual budget process. Report to VP Finance.
I
Consolidated benefits accounting system for divisions located in four states throughout
United States.
I
Directed implementation of state-of-the art accounting software; trained staff on use.
I
Improved accuracy of financial reporting systems and asset accounting procedures.
I
Coordinated audit process with outside CPA. Collaborated in due diligence process on antic-
ipated acquisition.
Education
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, Los Angeles, CA
B.A. in Accounting; 1996
Keywords
Account
Reconciliations
Accounting Software
Accounts
Receivable/Payable
Banking
Budgets
Computer Skills
Data Collection &
Analysis
Data Processing
Expense Tracking
Financial Reporting
Mergers and
Acquisitions
General Accounting
Information Systems
Month-End Closing
Payroll
Revenue Accounting
Employment Tax
Reporting
Problem Solving
Project Management
Uniform
Capitalization

ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE SUPERVISOR
28
Keywords
Accounts Receivable
Cash Management
Cost Reduction
Key Accounts
Financial Audits
Internal Controls
Credit & Collections
Strategic Planning
Financial Reporting
Negotiate
Collections
Profit/Loss (P&L)
Corporate Mergers
Profit Gains
Regulatory
Compliance
Auditing
Audit Controls
Risk Management
Revenue Gain
Work Paper
Financial Controls
Resume
Mark Williams
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Accounts Receivable Supervisor
Proven Background in Cost Reduction, Credit, and Collections
Financial Reporting / Strategic Planning Skills
Full Range of P&L / Key Account Financial Management Experience
Results-oriented, dedicated, and highly accomplished Accounts Receivable Supervisor with a
proven track record of reducing costs and improving collection results. Experienced in working
with corporate mergers.
Core Strengths
Accounts Receivable 
Strategic Planning
Collections 
Key Accounts
Profit/Loss (P&L)
Credit & Collections
Financial Reporting
Audit Controls
Financial Controls
Risk Management
Professional Experience
JT ENTERPRISES—Lawson, IL
1989 to Current
Accounts Receivable Manager
Direct, train, and mentor a staff of four full-time accounting clerks in managing domestic and
international accounts receivable operations, financial reporting, strategic planning, and cred-
it/collection activities. Implement policies, procedures, and programs to streamline operations,
reduce costs, and increase efficiency. Negotiate payment terms and serve as the main point of
contact in resolving issues at all levels.
I
Negotiated key account terms, resulting in $7,000 in annual savings.
I
Spearheaded collection methods, clearing $45,000 in past-due accounts.
I
Trained staff members on new collection techniques to improve profit gains.
I
Oversaw accounts receivables during two corporate mergers.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS STATE—Knox, Illinois
Bachelor of Science: Accounting 1988
Certifications: Certified Public Accountant (CPA) 1989
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why Should Our Company Hire You?
I have extensive experience as an Accounts Receivable Manager and have been involved in many cor-
porate-level teams in implementing audit controls, ensuring regulatory compliance, managing corpo-
rate mergers, and ensuring profit gains. I have also worked with many high-level and international
clients in effectively directing collections activities.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

ACTUARY
29
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I bring an understanding of contemporary political, social, and health issues. My expertise includes ex-
tensive research and training in current mortality and disability trends in light of those issues as well
as cutting-edge interest rate theory and valuation constructs. Having consulted with both HHS and
state legislatures, I have knowledge of upcoming legislation and regulatory changes. I have excellent
presentation skills and can translate complex formulas into the vernacular.
Resume
Laura Longevity
999 Concourse Boulevard
Meriden, Connecticut 06456
(860) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Actuary
Society of Actuaries Fellow
Life and Health Insurance/Employee Benefits/Pensions
American Society of Pension Actuaries
Pensions specialist with a background in insurance plans. Proficient in mortality and disability
table construction. Skilled in statistical analysis software. Trained in latest valuation tech-
niques.
Core Strengths
Pension valuations 
Calculating employee contributions
Earnings distribution
Risk management
Annuity and Pension design
Computer programs and applications
Solid communication skills
Data analysis
Professional Experience
Milk M Enterprises, Chicago, Illinois
1987−2000
Actuary
Managed rate and product development functions of benefits department. Calculated rates for
insurance plans. Projected and reported on yields. Recommended equitable earnings distribu-
tions. Designed pension and annuity products. Reviewed legislation for product compliance and
design. Researched demographic and social issues for impact on group and individual plans.
Certified pension plans for federal and state agencies.
I
Acted as Consultant to Health and Human Services Administration
I
Introduced a complex lattice model for higher accuracy in valuations
I
Provided technical assistance to a legislative team working on health-care reforms
I
Created a multitiered pension plan for a company with 8,000 employees
Education
University of Pennsylvania
Bachelor of Science, Mathematics
1982
I
Pi Mu Epsilon, Math Honors Society
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School of Business
Asset Liability Management
2002
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Statistical Data
Probability Tables
Mortality
Yield
Insurance Plans
Pensions
Annuities
Premiums
Demographics
Social Issues
Legislative Review
Data Analysis
Earnings
Distribution
Rate Calculation
Disability
Liability
Benefits
Group Contracts
Risk
Valuation

ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT
30
Keywords
Assistant to
Administrator
Computer Skills
Word Processing
Dictation
Transcription
Spreadsheets
Appointment
Management
Travel
Arrangements
Letter Composition
Newsletter Creation
Itinerary
Management
Message Taking
Call Screening
Office Management
Petty Cash
Presentation
Preparation
Professional
Appearance
Commissioned
Notary Public
Staff Supervision
Project Management
Resume
Linda B. Boisvert
123 James Street
Auburn, Maine 04210
(207) 555-1111 / email@email.com
Credentialed Administrative Assistant
Certified Professional Secretary
Commissioned Notary Public
Office Management Capabilities
Unique paraprofessional with outstanding skills resulting in becoming recently certified in ad-
vanced secretarial skills. Ability to totally run and manage a small office or work as a team
member in a larger environment.
Core Strengths
Executive Assistant
Accurate Message Taking
Varied Computer Skills
Dictation/Transcription
Letter Composition
Newsletter Creation
Appointment Management
Petty Cash Account
Professional Experience
Bates Manufacturing Co., Lewiston, Maine
1995 to Present
Administrative Assistant
Provide secretarial and administrative support to the vice president of manufacturing. Nota-
rize documents when needed for entire organization. Coordinate all incoming business news
and create monthly newsletter distributed to all employees and clients. Utilize the Internet ex-
tensively to research products, competitive businesses, and current trends. Compile informa-
tion for weekly presentations for department heads.
I
Serve as corporate librarian for all Internet research compiled.
I
Completely prepare newsletter from scratch to “camera-ready.”
I
Saved the company $10,000 in printing costs in one year.
I
Introduced software and applications to upgrade and network office.
Education
Mid-State College, Auburn, Maine
Completed 2 Years
Associate Degree Computer Science
Associate Degree Secretarial Science
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Having recently earned my CPS (Certified Professional Secretary) status, I feel confident that my ad-
ditional five (5) years of experience as an executive secretary would qualify me for your position. The
strengths I would bring to your position would be in all areas of secretarial support with an emphasis
on administrative-level assisting. In particular, I have worked successfully in the areas of special proj-
ect management, presentation preparation, itinerary management, and all levels of travel scheduling
and tracking. I am also very proficient with all Microsoft programs and using a Palm Pilot.

ANESTHESIOLOGIST
31
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have 20 years of experience as a Board Certified Anesthesiologist providing perioperative, preopera-
tive, Intraoperative, and postoperative medicare care. After performing medical assessments on each
patient, I diagnose their situation, monitor and control anesthetics, and prescribe pain-relieving inter-
ventions. I have practical experience in anesthesia, moderate sedation, respiratory and cardiovascular
disease, infection control, and emergency situations. I believe my research and clinical studies will help
the practice greatly.
Resume
Roberto Sanchez, M.D.
123 Alvarado Lane
Dallas, Texas 75243
(972) 555-5432 / email@email.com
BOARD CERTIFIED ANESTHESIOLOGIST
with 20 years of experience
Cardiovascular and Emergency/
Research and Clinical Studies
Perioperative, preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative practical experience in adminis-
tering anesthetics, pain control, and moderate sedation, and an active participant in ongoing
research.
Core Strengths
Provide excellent medical care
Focused consultations with patients
Prescribe pain-relieving medication
Monitor and control all situations
Cardiovascular and respiratory
Infection control techniques
Board certified—ASAHQ
Licensed by the State of Texas
Professional Experience
NORTH TEXAS MEDICAL ASSOCIATES, Dallas, Texas
1982 to present
Senior Anesthesiologist
Provide Perioperative, Preoperative, Intraoperative, and Postoperative Medicare Care for anes-
thesia care, pain management, respiratory and cardiovascular disease, and emergency situa-
tions. Perform medical assessments, diagnose situations, monitor and control anesthetics, and
prescribe pain-relieving medication. Actively participate in research and clinical studies.
I
Treated over 20,000 patients in hospitals and clinics since 1982.
I
Patient satisfaction rated very high in interpersonal interactions.
I
Conducted more than 25 clinical studies since 1995.
I
Recognized by the ASAHQ as a “Top 25” Anesthesiologist in 2001.
I
Selected as a member of the ASAHQ Board of Directors in 2002.
Education
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
Doctor of Medicine in Anesthesiology; 1981
University of Houston, Texas
Bachelor of Science Degree; Major: Medicine
Keywords
Anesthesiology
Pain
Board Certified
Moderate Sedation
Medical Care
Consultations
Perioperative
Preoperative
Intraoperative
Postoperative
Anesthetics
Medical Assessment
Monitor and Control
Pain-Relieving
Interventions
Diagnosis
Respiratory
Cardiovascular
Infection Control
Emergency
Situations
Research and
Clinical Studies

APPLICATION DEVELOPER
32
Keywords
Visual Basic/
VBScript
Java
Active Server Pages
JavaScript
XTML
XML
DHTML
ActiveX
Com/COM+
.Net
IIS
SQL Server
MTS
ADO
Windows 2000
Linux
Design Development
Infrastructure
Code Testing
Programming
Resume
Jonas Gorauskas
11027 Southeast 21 Boulevard
Anywhere, Idaho 00000
(208) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Application Developer
Expert Web Application Developer
Proven ability to transform concepts into working, stable applications.
Outstanding analytical, problem-solving and decision-making skills. Able to solve complex
problems with efficient solutions. Proficient in managing multiple projects. Multilingual—flu-
ent in Portuguese and English.
Core Strengths
Programming Ability
Deliver Solutions
Business Management Skills
Read German and Spanish
Infrastructure Planning
Customer Service Oriented
Code Testing
Integrate Web sites
Professional Experience
AKTIVTEK.com, Sierra, Nevada
2001 to Present
Web Application Developer/Owner
Develop applications, analyze data, plan infrastructure and deployment for Web sites. Define
and analyze requirements, design, code, and implement core elements in the company’s prod-
uct line. Perform object-oriented Web application development, integrate Web sites with data-
base servers, and code new programs and new server components. Address and resolve numer-
ous technical issues.
I
Reader’s Choice Award, WebOnline, 2000.
I
Published “Using the FileSystemObject,” Pinnacle Publishing, Inc. 2001.
I
Published “User Authentication and Management Without a Database,” ActiveWeb Devel-
oper, 1999.
Education
Lewis-Clark State College, Lewiston, Idaho
Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Science
1999
I
Selected to lead the development of the WinBridge game client product.
I
Key player selected to implement compiled server-side components to improve robustness
and efficiency of client solutions.
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My hands-on technical expertise makes me a great candidate for the job. I meet all qualifications out-
lined in the advertisement. I earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science. I have designed,
developed, and programmed a number of successful Web projects, always being cost-conscious. Com-
pleting the Pet.com e-commerce site required dedication to the project from conception to completion. I
have excellent communications skills and understand that providing superior customer service is the
key to success.

ARCHITECT
33
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am able to handle all phases of design: from program definition through design, models, and draw-
ings. My works have received design finalist and exhibit recognition in academic and professional en-
vironments, including the Design of the Year award in Minneapolis in 1999. Because of multilingual
fluency, as well as historic and public architecture expertise, my range of influence is broad. Multistate
licensure and broad experience encompass commercial and residential, codes, zoning, and ADA com-
pliance. I have led manpower allocation, feasibility studies, site and cost analysis, estimating and man-
agement of projects. Trade/Crossover skills in plumbing, electrical, build-out, and renovation projects
have been valuable assets to my work.
Resume
Christopher Aron
8705 Cleveland Avenue
St. Paul, Minnesota 55104
(651) 555-2599 / email@email.com
Licensed Architect
Registered in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Michigan
Fluent in English, Spanish, and French
Proficient with AutoCAD, FormZ, 3D Studio, MS Office, Pagemaker
Demonstrated success in exploring the relationship between architecture and the environ-
ment, preservation, and accessibility through the discourse of design. Able to enhance the un-
derstanding, knowledge, and philosophy brought forth in quality architecture.
Core Strengths
Public architecture
Preservation consultant
Program definition
Drawings and models
Presentation graphics
Historic log structures
Americans with Disabilities Act
Trade/crossover skills
Professional Experience
STATE OF MINNESOTA, St. Paul, Minnesota 1995 to Current
Architect: Bureau of Engineering
Midwest region’s recognized authority in the analysis, documentation, and restoration of his-
toric log structures, completing 54 projects to date. Scope of project management encompasses
manpower allocation, feasibility studies, site and cost analysis, estimating, and management
budgets. Served on the Technology Planning Committee, reviewing and implementing tools
and systems for the Architectural Unit. Design, develop, and manage public park, rural, and
city projects, from proposal development through new and restorative construction phases.
I
“The Bremerton Estate” featured in The Log Home Tradition magazine
I
“Volunteer of the Year” award recognition, The St. Paul Area Historical Society
I
Design Finalist, Elderly Housing (Exhibited at National Institute of Health)
I
“Architecture Responds to Americans with Disabilities,” featured in the St. Paul Chronicle
Education
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Master of Architecture, 1999
Bachelor of Architecture, 1989
I
Design Finalist, Contemporary Healthcare Facility (Exhibited in New York, New York)
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Multistate Architect
Licensure
Program Definition
Americans with
Disabilities Act
Compliance
Documents
Construction
Estimating and
Management
Site and Cost
Analysis
Presentation
Graphics
Feasibility Studies
Program Definition
Drawings and
Models
Public Architecture
Design Finalist
Zoning and Codes
Historic Log
Structures
Commercial and
Residential
Architecture
Manpower
Allocation
Preservation
Consultant
Exhibits
Multilingual
Fluency
Trade/Crossover
Skills

ART DIRECTOR
34
Keywords
Layout & Design
UI/Site Architecture
Typography
Pre-Press/Print
Production
Visual Media
Concept
Development
Paste-Up
Point-of-Sale
Materials
Trade Promotions
Dealer Sell Sheets
Event Graphics
Branding &
Advertising
Print, Logo, &
Identity
Bounce-Back
Trade Show Exhibits
Branding Identity
Brand Building
Interface Design
Product Design
Global Brand
Strategy
Resume
Chris Smith
178 Green Street
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87104
(505) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Art Direction / Design
Specializing in branding, identity development, and team leadership
Resource Allocation / Load Balancing
Extensive knowledge of interface design and Internet technologies
Dynamic, experienced professional with an eye on the bottom line. Special ability to motivate
teams and develop creative brand identity and advertising campaigns that consistently im-
prove market position.
Core Strengths
Strong Visual Skills
Creative Problem Solving
Resource Management
Budget Development / Management
UI/Site Architecture
New Product Launch
On-Site Promos
Formal Graphic Design Training
Professional Experience
SICOLA MARTIN, Austin, TX
1995 to Present
Art Director
Art Direct ad campaigns in all divisions including Web site design, catalogs, dealer sell sheets,
product graphics, packaging, point-of-sale materials, trade show promotions, and event graph-
ics. Oversee all licensee groups as International Creative Director. Manage art department. As-
sisted in the development and presentation of global brand strategies for key client accounts.
I
Designed and rendered accompanying point-of-sale materials.
I
Utilizing illustrative talents, selected to complete product illustrations for bounce-back
coupons and ad slicks.
I
Directed paste-up and type-setting activities for direct mail pieces.
Education
Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York
Bachelor of Fine Arts / Advertising Design, 1986
I
Design of gallery graphics
I
Gallery scheduling
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I understand that you are looking for a professional with a minimum of 5 years of senior art direction
experience. I have more than 10 years of hands-on direction experience. What makes me unique is that
I have frequently done lettering as part of the product design projects on which I’m working. I special-
ize in typography, brand building, and identity design, which add collateral value to my candidacy. With
a long track record of success in advertising and multimedia design, I will immediately add value to
your team!

ARTIST
35
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a creative designer with talent and experience across diverse mediums. I possess a strong sense
of color and have an innate sense of design. I have worked with several design software programs and
graphic designers, and like to interpret client needs and preferences and produce a magical end result
that seems always to impress them. I have conceived innovative designs that generated industry recog-
nition and increased sales.
Resume
Maria Lane
5555 Ridgeway Lane
Sherman Oaks, California 91340
(818) 555-2222 / email@email.com
ILLUSTRATOR / ARTIST / DESIGNER
Creative Artist/Designer Experienced in Diverse Mediums.
Strong Sense of Color, Detail, Balance, and Proportion.
Talented in Interpreting Needs of Clients.
Creative artist/designer who consistently exceeds client expectations. Developed business im-
ages and design graphics, logos, illustration, murals, and textiles for wide range of corporate
and private clients. B.A. in art with strong computer skills including CAD, Adobe Illustrator,
PageMaker, Photoshop, Quark, etc. Works well independently as well as collaboratively in a
team environment. Skilled in monitoring trends and styles.
Core Strengths
Illustrations
Textile Design
Sketch Artist
Packaging
Logos
Murals
Business Images
Graphic Design
Creative Direction
Design Elements
Professional Experience
HEARTFELT GRAPHICS, Encino, CA
1995−Present
Textile Artist / Designer
Design product line for multimillion manufacturer of textiles. Monitor fashion trends and
styles to conceive new designs that “win” accounts and meet consumer demand. Created sea-
sonal and proprietary branded designs for retail mass market. Create business images includ-
ing logos, packaging, illustrations, and murals for office decor.
I
Conceived innovative designs that generated widespread industry recognition for company
and increased sales fourfold.
I
Created designs that have become classics and broke all sales records.
I
Consistently met critical deadlines in a fast-paced environment.
I
Developed specialty packaging for soft-drink product launch.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, Los Angeles, CA
B.A. in Art and Art History
Excellent Recommendations Available upon Request
Keywords
Artistic
Balance
Branding
Business Images
Color
Creative Direction
Designer
Graphic Design
Illustrator
Logos
Murals
Packaging
Painting
Product
Development
Promotional
Material
Proportion
Sketch Artist
Talent
Textile Design
Trends

ASSOCIATION MANAGER
36
Keywords
Advocacy
Chapter
Development
Program
Administration
Development
Member-Driven
Organization
Certified Association
Executive (CAE)
Not-for-Profit
Leadership
Member
Recruitment
Member Retention
Member Services
Budget Allocation
Revenue Generation
Member
Development
Educational
Programming
Fund-Raising
Grant-Writing
Special Events
Management
Public Relations
Member
Communications
Resume
Robert S. Dawson, CAE
977 Marlboro Court
Lawrenceville, New Jersey 08648
(609) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Association Manager / Executive Director
Proven track record of advocacy and chapter development
Program Administration / Development Coordination
Member-driven organization management
Certified Association Executive (CAE) and Executive Director of not-for-profit association.
Noted for leadership in member recruitment and retention, budget allocation, revenue genera-
tion, and program expansion.
Core Strengths
Financial/Budget Management
Member Development
Legislative Advocacy
Educational Programming
Public/Media Relations
Fund-Raising/Grant Writing
Staff Development/Training
Special Events Management
Professional Experience
HUNTERDON TEACHERS ASSOCIATION, Ewing, New Jersey
1998 to Current
Executive Director
Recruited to revitalize 2500-member professional association of teachers in Hunterdon County.
Guide policy for Board of Directors, provide educational programming, legislative advocacy,
and member communications. Manage $800,000 annual budget along with $500,000 in strate-
gic funds and investments. Lead conference planning, community outreach, and fund-raising.
Represent HTA at local, state, regional, and national events.
I
Spearheaded goal-based strategic visioning and planning committee, which has implement-
ed benchmarked objectives for member services.
I
Increased membership by over 50% within two years, with record-breaking recruitment and
renewal rates and targeted program expansion.
I
Controlled costs and saved $55,000 through in-depth insurance review.
Education
Rider University, Lawrenceville, New Jersey
Bachelor of Arts, Sociology and Business Administration—1992
I
Certified Association Executive, Society of Association Executives
I
Management Certificate, Zenger-Miller Leadership Program
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an experienced Association Executive, my proactive organization leadership has included key ele-
ments in the long-term success of a member-driven organization: viable organization mission and pol-
icy development coupled with tangible, high-benefit member services and revenue development activi-
ties. This combination drives member recruitment and retention, promotes positive public relations,
and stimulates productive board relations. I would like to do the same for you.

AUDITOR
37
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I offer exemplary performance within Internal Revenue Service, “Big 8” accounting firms, and corpo-
rate settings. I have a track record of directing financial and operational audit management programs
of businesses worldwide. In doing so, I have established a structured process to expedite regulatory
compliance auditing, reporting, and defense. One of my strengths is in implementing stringent audit
controls to accommodate internal and external audit reviews. I can create sound financial status
through internal and external controls focused on due diligence. Strong computer systems expertise
also ensures my ability to distinguish between problems caused by systems errors or flawed input.
Resume
Hunt Wesley, CPA
3459 Summit Avenue
St. Paul, Minnesota 55102
(651) 555-9713 / email@email.com
Auditing Specialist
15-Year Career Ensuring Tight Financial Controls
Internal Revenue Service / Public Accounting / Corporate Accounting
Operational Audit and Corporate Development Expertise
Broad career path has enhanced auditing expertise from the perspectives of government regu-
latory and compliance auditor, public accounting auditor, and corporate controller. Stay proac-
tive with audit techniques, accounting methods, and codes and regulations.
Core Strengths
Cost avoidance & reduction
Financial audits
Tax audits
Audit controls
Asset & liability management
Financial models
Profit/loss (P&L) analysis
Audit management
Professional Experience
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, St. Paul, Minnesota
1995 to Current
Auditor
Planned and managed tax and financial audits for businesses throughout Minnesota, design-
ing and implementing a comprehensive program of financial controls and accountability. En-
forced internal controls governing finance, accounting, capital assets, and technology acquisi-
tions. Introduced proactive management techniques to strengthen focus on cost avoidance and
reduction. Led a team of 10 responsible for corporate tax filings in more than 600 local, state,
and federal jurisdictions.
I
Integrated audit controls that reversed the previous external audit review findings.
I
Helped client reduce debt by 28% through improved credit and collection processes.
I
Implemented financial controls reversing several companies’ previous year’s losses.
I
Led operational audits of Salvation Army, ensuring federal/organization compliance.
Education
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Bachelor of Business Administration: Accounting, 1985
I
C.P.A., State of Minnesota, since 1986
I
Accounting Club Treasurer, 2 years
Keywords
Audit Management
Audit Controls
Asset & Liability
Management
Tax Audits
Corporate
Development
Public & Corporate
Accounting
Cost Avoidance
Cost Reduction
Cost/Benefit
Analysis
Due Diligence
Financial Audits
Financial Controls
Financial Models
Internal/External
Controls
Internal/External
Audit Reviews
Operational Audits
Internal Revenue
Service
Profit/Loss (P&L)
Analysis
Regulatory
Compliance
Auditing
Computer Savvy

AUTOMOBILE PARTS MANAGER
38
Keywords
After-Market
Products
Auto Parts
Knowledge
Automotive
Knowledge
Client Relations
Communications
Customer Service
Entrepreneurial
Drive
Expense Control
Inventory
Management
Leadership
Motivated
OEM Parts
Organizational
Skills
P&L Responsibility
Retail Management
Sales Growth
Shipping/Receiving
Staff Development
Team Building
Warehouse
Operations
Resume
Greg Fantin
66220 Magnolia Boulevard
Encino, California 91316
(818) 555-1111/ email@email.com
AUTOMOBILE PARTS MANAGER
Five Years’ Automotive Industry Experience; Three Years as Manager
Strong Customer Service Orientation
Track Record of Sales Growth and Increased Staff Productivity
In-depth automotive and auto parts knowledge. Strong entrepreneurial drive with excellent
communication, organizational, and problem-solving abilities. Proven ability to increase sales,
reduce costs, and motivate teams to achieve high levels of productivity.
Core Strengths
OEM & After-Market Parts
Inventory Management
Client Relations
P&L Responsibility
Expense Control
Warehouse Operations
Shipping/Receiving
Staff Development
Team Building & Leadership
Organizational Skills
Professional Experience
AUTO UNIVERSE, Los Angeles, CA
Encino, CA
1997−Present
Auto Parts Manager
Direct day-to-day operations of leading auto parts retailer with full P&L responsibility. Ensure
high level of customer service/support.
I
Increased sales by average of 15% annually through combination of excellent staff training
and mentoring, improved merchandising efforts, and continued focus on customer service.
I
Implemented inventory controls that streamlined product delivery while concurrently re-
ducing theft and loss.
I
Recruited, trained, and developed #1 team out of 25 stores in Western Region.
I
Initiated mentoring program with local schools, culminating in recognition by local govern-
ment officials for community support, and generating positive publicity for company.
Education
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, Los Angeles, CA
B.A. in Business Administration
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am familiar with all aspects of automotive parts operations, with five years direct experience includ-
ing three years management level experience. You need strong customer service skills since this posi-
tion deals with customers constantly, and I am very comfortable working with the public. I am also ex-
perienced at managing tight inventory controls that ensured timely delivery of products while reducing
losses and theft. Finally, at Auto Universe, sales increase by about 15% annually through combination
of excellent staff training and improved merchandising.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

BANK BRANCH MANAGER
39
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an experienced branch manager who has fast-tracked from teller, to assistant manager, to branch
manager within a few short years, I have a hands-on understanding of all facets of banking at the
branch level. I’ve used that knowledge to develop innovative customer-driven programs that have de-
livered a 22% revenue increase this year, despite a lagging economy. Customer retention rates have
grown by over 20% as well. Our customers and staff are happy, our operations are lean, and our mar-
gins reflect that.
Resume
Jeff Kilpatrick
192-35 32nd Avenue
Flushing, NY 11358
(718) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Banking Branch Manager
Five Years’ Profitable Branch Operations Experience
Deep Knowledge of Bank Products, Practices, and Procedures
Committed to Customer Service and Community Relations
High-energy professional with fast-track hands-on banking experience. Skilled in the strategic
planning, sales building, and local brand building needed for a branch’s visibility and viability
in this competitive industry.
Core Strengths
Business Development
Cash Management
Action Plans/Sales Goals
Budgets/Staffing
Consumer Banking Programs
Relationship Management
Bank Compliance
Staff Coaching/Monitoring
Professional Experience
Astoria Federal Savings, Bayside, NY 
1997 to Current
Branch Manager, Bayside and Flushing
Manage all banking activities and 20-member staff for two neighborhood branches of this lead-
ing New York Metro retail banking institution. Direct and train staff in deposit and loan pro-
duction, merchant services, consumer credit and mortgage administration, Internet and ATM
banking, and customer service strategies. Actively develop relationships with local businesses
and community leaders.
I
Generated 22% revenue increase by increasing customer retention.
I
Managed turnkey opening and staffing of new Flushing branch.
I
Initiated profitable “Neighborhood Days” branch promotions.
I
Partnered with merchants to raise visibility through community events.
Education
Queens College, The City University of New York, Flushing, NY
Bachelor of Arts: Business Administration, 1997
I
GPA 3.75
I
Graduated with Honors
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Branch Operations
Bank Compliance
Cash Management
Business
Development
Relationship
Management
Customer Relations/
Service
Branch Sales Action
Plans
Sales Goals
Staff Coaching/
Monitoring
Deposit/Loan
Production
Alternative Systems
Internet Banking
ATM Banking
Merchant Services
Community
Relations
Budgets
Staff Scheduling/
Management
Consumer
Credit/Mortgage
Administration
Customer Service
Strategies
Consumer Banking
Programs

BANK TELLER
40
Keywords
Banking
Safe Deposit
ATM Processing
Vault Operations
Bank Teller
Foreign Currency
Exchange
Audit Examination
Transaction
Approval
Processed Data
Retrieval
Accountability of
Transactions
Daily Settlement
Sheet
Lockbox Processing
Funds Transfer
Operations
Transaction
Banking
Reconciliation
Projects
Ancillary Sales
Referrals
Reconnet Software
Loan Documentation
Back Operations
Accounting
Branch Automation
Banking
Resume
Patricia A. Evans
1234 Olde Post Road
Lovington, New Mexico 88260
(506) 555-1122 / email@email.com
BANK TELLER
Accuracy / Dependability / Efficiency
Bonded to handle large sums
Reconciliation Project Specialist / Back Operations Accounting
Highly qualified Bank Teller with extensive experience as a cash handler and customer ser-
vice representative. Customer focused, goal oriented, with excellent verbal communication and
interpersonal skills.
Core Strengths
Funds Transfer Operations
Reconciliation & Audits
Foreign Exchange Conversions
Reconnet Software Proficiency
Processed Data Retrieval
Ancillary Sales Referrals
Professional Experience
WELLS FARGO, Lovington, New Mexico
1996 to Current
Teller
Process customer transactions within established guidelines. Identify and make ancillary sales
referrals, recommend alternate channels, cross-sell bank services and products for Wells Fargo
partners, and render consistently superior customer service. Provide access to processed data
retrieval for banking customers. Additional responsibilities include safe deposit, merchant, and
vault operations, ATM processing, bond and coupon sale, foreign currency exchange, night shift
lockbox processing, and funds transfer operations.
I
Noticed for maintaining full accountability of transactions.
I
Recognized for computing figures with speed and accuracy.
I
Able to satisfy consistently stringent audit examinations.
I
Awarded “Teller of the Year” for providing continuously superior customer service.
Education
City University of New York, New York, New York
Bachelor of Science / Accounting, 1993
I
NSF Scholarship recipient
I
Past President, City University Alumni Association
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With over five years of experience in transaction and branch automation banking, a degree in ac-
counting, and a superior record for accuracy, I offer immediate value to your team. My biggest strengths
are my mathematical ability, my enthusiasm, and my total dedication to quality and personal and pro-
fessional growth. I will always do my best to provide your customers, my colleagues, and my supervi-
sors with the level of performance they expect and deserve.

BENEFITS COORDINATOR
41
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a Certified Employee Benefits Specialist with more than a decade of experience researching, select-
ing, and administering cost-effective health, dental, life, AD&D, LTD, STD, 401K, and pension plans, I
am confident I can select and administer plans benefiting both employee and company goals. As a suc-
cessful liaison and resource, I educate new and existing personnel in plan benefits, while ensuring sat-
isfaction.
Resume
Wilma F. Sandstone
1972 North 82nd Street
Milwaukee, WI 53223
(414) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Benefits Coordinator
Expertise in health, dental, life, AD&D, LTD, STD, and pension plans
Certified Employee Benefits Specialist/Employee Education
Cost-effective approach to benefits administration
A cost-effective professional with expertise in administering health, dental, life, AD&D, LTD,
STD, and pension plans. Skilled analyzing existing plans and examining new insurance plans
that meet employee and corporate goals.
Core Strengths
Employee education and training
Benefits analysis and administration
Cost-effective plan selection
New plan rollout and integration
Insurance billing reconciliation
Knowledge of employment law
Employee satisfaction survey
Compliance with standards
Professional Experience
FRIENDSHIP VILLAGE, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
1990 to Present
Benefits Coordinator
Research, select, and administer insurance plans and employee benefit packages for approxi-
mately 400 employees, including health, dental, life, AD&D, LTD, STD, and pension plans. Co-
ordinate employee surveys to assess satisfaction levels and needs. Conduct biweekly employee
benefit orientations. Process family and medical leave paperwork. Reconcile insurance billings.
Keep abreast of current employment laws.
I
As a result of an employee survey, adopted new dental plan that improved employee satis-
faction and increased enrollment.
I
Analyzed/coordinated integration of benefits for pending acquisition and its 73 employees.
I
Developed and administered successful on-site education program.
Education
WHARTON SCHOOL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
(International Foundation of Benefits), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Certified Employee Benefits Specialist (CEBS), 1990
I
Benefits Discussion Group, MRA Student Chapter
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Certified Employee
Benefits Specialist
Health, Dental, Life,
AD&D, LTD, STD
Administration
401K and Pension
Plan Administration
Family Medical Leave
Act
Employee Education
and Training
Benefits Integration
Insurance Plan
Research and
Selection
Benefits Assessment/
Analysis
Employee Satisfaction
Survey
Compliance
Employee Relations
Increased Enrollment
On-site Educational
Programs
Resolve Benefit
Issues
Liaison
Insurance Billing
Reconciliation
New Plan Rollout
Knowledge of
Employment Laws
Benefits Orientation
Documentation

BOOKKEEPER
42
Keywords
Accounts Payable
Accounts Receivable
Accuracy
Analyze
Bank Deposits
Client Relations
Collections
Computer Skills
Expense Reports
Expense Tracking
General Ledger
General Office
Invoicing
Journal Entries
Month-End Closing
Multitasking
Payroll
Reconciliations
Research
Trial Balance
Resume
Trisha Thompson
5151 Valjean Avenue
Encino, California 91316
(818) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Full Charge Bookkeeper
15 Years’ Experience in All Aspects of Bookkeeping through Trial Balance
Proactive in Streamlining Procedures / Adept at Multitasking
Excellent Computer Skills Including QuickBooks, ADP, and Peachtree
Detail-oriented professional committed to efficiency and thoroughness. Works well indepen-
dently as well as collaboratively in a team environment. Proven ability to process high volume
of work accurately and meet critical deadlines with attention to detail.
Core Strengths
Accounts Payable/Receivable
Journal Entries & General Ledger
Trial Balance
Account & Bank Reconciliations
Payroll
Expense Tracking & Reports
Collections
Client Relations
Professional Experience
STUDIO CITY BMW, Studio City, CA
1995 to Current
Full Charge Bookkeeper
Handle all bookkeeping functions for busy BMW dealership, including Accounts
Receivable/Payable, Payroll Processing, and Invoicing. Accurately processed high volume of
records in a fast-paced environment. Generate monthly trial balance. Reconcile bank state-
ments and key accounts identifying, researching, and analyzing all variances. Process expense
accounts and generate reimbursements. Tactfully follow up on and resolve overdue receivables
and collections. Consistently meet critical deadlines. Provide additional general office support.
I
Upon hire, organized six-month backlog of bookkeeping and accounting documentation.
I
Collected on accounts that were seriously delinquent.
I
Created standardized forms to process more expense accounts on timely basis.
I
Transitioned bookkeeping and payroll processes to QuickBooks and ADP respectively in re-
sponse to increasing work volume.
Education
Los Angeles Valley College, Valley Glen, CA
A.A. in General Education; 1994
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have a thorough knowledge of all aspects of bookkeeping through trial balance. I am experienced in
accounts receivable, accounts payable, and payroll processing. You mentioned you have a fast-paced en-
vironment, and our current operation processes a high volume of records. I consistently meet critical
deadlines. Technically, I reconcile monthly accounts and bank statements, accounting for all variances,
manage the GL, and oversee all invoicing. I work well independently as well as collaboratively in a
team environment.

BRAND MANAGER
43
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With over 15 years’ participation in the development, growth, or turnaround of leading brands, I offer
you a proven history of innovative marketing initiatives. The skills and passion that I bring to brand
management, business development, and campaign management translate directly to the bottom line.
My leadership of cross-functional product teams has led major divisions in Kraft, Mars, and Campbell
Soup to new highs in productivity, market share, and brand success. Your market domination is my
goal.
Resume
Grace Matherly
927 The Maples
Pennington, NJ, 08534
(609) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Senior Brand Manager
Vice President of Pepperidge Farm Division, Campbell Soup Company
Fifteen Years’ Experience in Product Development, Launch, and Marketing
Cradle-to-Grave Product Line Oversight
Inspire teams to achieve, create, and bring products to market, develop strategies to increase
sales, develop systems to grow productivity, reengineer processes to reduce costs, and lead
business to profitability.
Core Strengths
Cradle-to-Grave Product Life Cycle
Cross-Functional Team Management
Profit & Loss (P&L) Management
Multigeneration Product Plans
Product/Market Positioning
Competitive Intelligence
Product/Market Launch 
Trend Identification/Analysis
Professional Experience
Campbell Soup Company, Camden, NJ
1992 to Current
VP Marketing, Pepperidge Farm / Senior Brand Manager
Spearheaded revitalization and new product development for one of Campbell’s leading divi-
sions, delivering five successful new products, creative pricing and service strategies, and inno-
vative purchasing and cost-reduction initiatives. Manage full product life cycle, C-level rela-
tionship building, strategic distribution partnerships, and continuous market research for
competitive advantage. Initiatives have produced over $50 million in new sales in five years.
Manage a multimillion-dollar P&L and a staff of 10 directs.
I
Led Cookie/Cracker division to $100 million in annual sales (+30%).
I
Delivered top profit contribution of company’s three divisions (+25%).
I
Saved plant from closure by developing successful new snack product.
I
New product has generated $30 million in sales in first two years.
Education
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
M.B.A.: Marketing, 1990
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
Bachelor of Arts: Economics, 1985
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Brand Management
Advertising
Campaign
Management
Multigeneration
Product Plan
Marketing
Communications
Cross-Functional
Product Team
Trend Identification/
Analysis
Competitive
Advantage
Pricing Strategies
Service Strategies
Purchasing/Cost-
Reduction
Initiatives
Market Share
Relationship Building
Product/Market
Launch
Product/Market
Positioning
Competitive
Intelligence
Market Research
Product Lifecycle
Management
Cradle-to-Grave
Product Life Cycle
Profit & Loss (P&L)
Management

BUILDING INSPECTOR
44
Keywords
General Building
Inspector
International
Conference of
Building Officials
(ICBO)
Certified Inspector
Field Inspections
Automated
Permitting
Residential and
Commercial
Construction
Building Trade
Construction
Building Inspections
Materials Standards
Inspection
Ordinances
Code Compliance
Customer Service
Building Code
Requirements
Material Assembly
Practices
Code Enforcement
Team Building
Customer
Relationship
Management
Building Plans
Blueprints
Construction Laws
Resume
Theresa Mascagni
17 Mercer Street
Mt. Laurel, New Jersey 08054
(856) 555-4586 / email@email.com
General Building Inspector
International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) Certified
Skilled Field Inspections / Automated Permitting
Residential and Commercial Construction
Certified Inspector (ICBO) experienced in building trade construction and building inspections,
materials standards, inspection ordinances, and code compliance. Team player with exemplary
customer service commitment.
Core Strengths
Building Code Requirements
Automated Permitting/Inspections
Building Materials Standards
Code and Ordinance Enforcement
Material Assembly Practices
State and Local Construction Laws
Team Building and Motivation
Customer Relationship Management
Professional Experience
TRENTON PUBLIC WORKS, Trenton, New Jersey 1985 to Current
General Building Inspector III
Perform skilled field inspections of residential and commercial buildings under construction or
renovation. Review building plans and blueprints to determine compliance with codes, ordi-
nances, and regulations. Committed to providing quality customer service, and ensuring struc-
turally sound and safe buildings. Train, evaluate, and supervise team of six junior inspectors.
I
Lead inspection team in producing up to 300 field inspections monthly, overseeing project
coordination with other city and county departments.
I
Captured high level of customer satisfaction (88% approval rating) by providing timely in-
spection work and responsive code enforcement.
I
Introduced and maintain automated permitting and inspection software, increasing depart-
ment efficiency by 147% and reducing labor costs.
Education
Burlington Community College, Pemberton, New Jersey
Associate of Science Degree, General Engineering—1984
I
International Conference of Building Officials Certification—1985
I
Member, Construction Technology Association of New Jersey
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With training in general engineering and 17 years’ experience in skilled inspectional work, I have
gained extensive knowledge in building inspections, as well as state and local code compliance issues.
Moreover, I have been able to build cohesive inspection teams (with little employee turnover), generate
cost-saving automated processes, and win the trust and approval of builders, contractors, and home-
owners alike. I am ready for a new challenge—when can I begin?

CALL CENTER DIRECTOR
45
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why Should Our Company Hire You?
I have a successful track record of managing call centers, both from a technology standpoint and per-
sonnel. I have improved failing call centers on two occasions in different industries, while increasing
profits, boosting morale, and reducing employee turnover. The key factors in achieving these results
have been my ability to analyze operations quickly and spearhead numerous programs, policies, and
procedures to reengineer systems and achieve the corporate mission.
Resume
Patti Coury
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Call Center Director
Highly Accomplished and Globally Experienced
Network Administration / Operational Leadership
Expertise in Quality Improvement and Business Development
Goal-oriented, technically adept, and highly motivated call center manager with a proven track
record in building, mentoring, and motivating highly effective teams and exceeding corporate
sales goals.
Core Strengths
Contract Negotiations
Multisite Operation
Strategic Planning
Outsourcing
Cost Reduction 
Vendor Negotiations
Supplier Management
Cost Analysis
Network Administration
Total Quality Management (TQM)
Professional Experience
TELECOM COMPANY
1987 to Current
Call Center Director
Recruited to turn around operations, reduce turnover, drive profits, and boost morale. Devel-
oped and implemented continuous process improvement approaches, integrated technology so-
lutions, reengineered internal systems, and played a key role in business development. Led
benchmarking project to achieve productivity improvement and increase customer retention on
inbound calls; significantly improved customer relations and communications.
I
Played a key role in supporting a key client’s global market expansion.
I
Championed Total Quality Management (TQM) programs.
I
Spearheaded employee recognition programs, reducing turnover by 20%.
I
Oversaw network administration and achieved cost reductions in hardware by assigning a
technical equipment manager to manage accessories.
Education
ILLINOIS STATE COLLEGE, MORGAN, Illinois
Bachelor of Arts: Business Communications 1983
Keywords
Telecommunications
Customer Relations
Multisite Operations
Management
Quality
Improvement
Network
Administration
Call Center
Technology Solutions
Business
Development
Total Quality
Management
(TQM)
Advanced
Technology
Reengineering
Continuous Process
Improvement
Customer Service
Productivity
Improvement
Global Market
Expansion
Cost Reduction
Performance
Improvement
Low Employee
Turnover
Customer Retention
Efficiency
Improvement

CAREER COUNSELOR/COACH
46
Keywords
Career Development
Job Search Coaching
Career Assessments
Career Decision
Making
Group Facilitation
National Certified
Career Counselor
(NCCC)
Career Services
Career Planning
Business
Networking
Job Development
Vocational
Counseling
Multimedia
Presentations
Portfolio Preparation
Career Counseling
Academic
Counseling
Transfer Counseling
Intake Counseling
Needs Assessment
Career Research
Employment
Preparation
Resume
Cathy Quigley
1040 Shaker Drive
Columbia, Maryland 21046
(410) 555-1245 / email@email.com
Career Counselor / Career Coach
Career Development and Job Search Coaching
Career Assessment Instruments / Career Decision Making
Individual and Group Facilitation
Confident, compassionate, licensed professional counselor and National Certified Career Coun-
selor with 18 years of demonstrated career services effectiveness facilitating adult career tran-
sitions and job search skills.
Core Strengths
Career Development and Planning
Program/Workshop Design
Career Assessments and Interpretations
Group Facilitation/Training
Business Networking/Job Development
Multimedia Presentations
Vocational Counseling and Guidance
Portfolio Preparation
Professional Experience
KENT COMMUNITY COLLEGE, Columbia, Maryland, 1995 to Current
Senior Career Counselor
Provide career, job search, academic and transfer counseling to diverse student population.
One of three career counselors for 1800-student campus. Administer career assessments, indi-
vidual and group facilitation sessions, and career information workshops. Deliver intake coun-
seling, needs assessment, career research and planning, employment preparation, resume writ-
ing, and mentoring programs. Supervise two career technicians.
I
Expanded career services program to include Internet-based delivery, including on-line stu-
dent support group and interactive career research.
I
Achieved highest student satisfaction rating (96%) for department (as compared to other
campus departments) for the last four years.
I
Teamed cross-departmentally to deliver highly successful career fairs.
Education
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
Master of Science, Guidance and Counseling—1985
I
National Certified Career Counselor (NCCC)
I
Certified Career Management Coach (CCMC)
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a Myers-Briggs Type ENFJ, I bring a “big picture” perspective to the career development issues of
students, as well as to department constraints. With that perspective, I have developed up-to-date de-
livery of career services utilizing Web-based tools that ensure quality, interactive information at low
cost. As an “NF” I genuinely care about meeting each student’s career counseling needs. Finally, as a
“J,” I get things done! Do you need an innovative, proactive career counselor?

CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT
47
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a senior-level accounting professional with “Big 6” experience. Above all else, I have an impecca-
ble record of managing accounting practices consistent with GAAP and have never been involved with
any improper practices. My references will echo that trait. I have an in-depth knowledge of federal and
state tax codes and regulations and am skilled in all aspects of tax and financial planning and bud-
geting.
Resume
Emma Thompson, CPA
55 Amanda Avenue
Encino, California 91316
(818) 555-9875 / email@email.com
CPA—“Big 5” Experience
Expertise in Taxation / Forensic Accounting / Auditing / Financial Analysis
Cutting-Edge Technology Solutions / Hiring, Training, & Supervising
Senior-Level Accounting Professional with excellent qualifications in accounting, client rela-
tionships management, and financial/tax reporting. In-depth knowledge of generally accepted
accounting principles as well as federal and state tax guidelines. Proven ability to work well
under pressure with attention to detail and meeting critical deadlines. Highly developed skills
in analyzing/interpreting/summarizing data, problem solving, building client rapport, and or-
ganizational management.
Core Strengths
Research & Analysis
Tax Planning
State & Federal Income Taxes
P&L Evaluation
Financial Reporting & Projections
Budget Development/Management
Compilation & Reviews
Business Development
Client Relations
Hiring, Training & Supervision
Professional Experience
JONES, STEIN & WILLIMS, CPAS, Beverly Hills, CA
1995−Present
CPA/Senior Accountant
Provide full range of accounting and tax services including audits, projections, compilations
and review, and tax return preparation for corporations, partnerships, and individuals. Develop
and manage client relationships across diverse industries including entertainment, real estate,
construction, and nonprofits, as well as high net worth individuals. Research complex tax is-
sues. Train and supervise junior staff members.
I
Introduced technology solutions that standardized in-house tasks including audit working
papers, financial reports, and tax returns. Reduced time required to complete audits and
tax returns by 30%.
I
Advised real estate holding company through various complex due diligence and financing
procedures.
I
Directed preacquisition audit of manufacturing operation considered for purchase by major
client. Findings resulting in recommendation that purchase not be completed.
I
Successfully negotiated IRS tax settlements on behalf of clients.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, Los Angeles, CA; B.A. in Economics
Keywords
Auditing
Banking & Lines of
Credit
Budgeting
Client Relationships
Compilation &
Reviews
CPA
Financial Analysis
Financial Reporting
Financial
Projections
Forensic Accounting
Generally Accepted
Accounting
Principles/GAAP
Hiring, Training, &
Supervising
P&L Evaluation
Problem Solving
Research & Analysis
State & Federal
Income Taxes
Tax Guidelines
Tax Planning
GAAP
Training &
Supervision

CFO
48
Keywords
Financial Strategies/
Analysis
Asset/Liability
Management
Strategic Planning
Profitability Modeling/
Forecasting
Profit & Loss (P&L)
Management/
Analysis
Financial Statement
Preparation
Regulatory Compliance
Capital/Operating
Budgets
Cross-Functional Team
Leadership
Financial Restructuring
Margin Improvement
M&A Due Diligence/
Management
Audit Management
Policy Development
Financial
Planning/Controls
Return-on-Assets (ROA)
Return-on-Equity (ROE)
Return-on-Investment
(ROI)
Corporate Tax
Planning/Oversight
Regulatory Affairs
Oversight/Compliance
Resume
Frank Thompson
62 Rancho Rio Boulevard
Northridge, CA 91326
(818) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Diversified Senior-Level Finance Specialist
Special Expertise in MIS
Extensive Mergers and Acquisitions Experience
Skilled in Financial Integration of IT and Business Process
Ten-year, cross-functional corporate and entrepreneurial finance experience. Core contributions
to successful start-ups and established leaders. Expert in M&A due diligence and systems/cul-
ture integration.
Core Strengths
Financial Strategies/Analysis 
Corporate Tax Planning/Oversight
Capital/Operating Budgets
Profitability Modeling and Forecasting
Profit & Loss (P&L) Management
Financial Restructuring
M&A Due Diligence/Management 
Regulatory Affairs Oversight
Professional Experience
R&D Technology Associates, Los Angeles, CA
1999 to Current
Chief Finance Officer
Report directly to the CEO, maintaining full business operations authority and P&L responsi-
bility for all financial strategic planning, asset/liability management, financial statement
preparation, audit management, finance policy development, financial planning/control, and
regulatory compliance. Cross-functional team leadership as member of core management team.
Solid contributions in return-on-assets (ROA), return-on-equity (ROE), and return-on-invest-
ment (ROI). Structured accounting, administration, and MIS areas.
I
Participated in five major corporate acquisitions and related integrations.
I
Received LA Biz Award for creating employee-owned subsidiary.
I
Negotiated joint venture with Malaysian firm to test/correct software.
I
Took $16 million contract to $50 million, five-contract revenue stream.
Education
Boston College, Carroll Graduate School of Management, Chestnut Hill, MA
Master of Science: Finance, Highest Honors, 1997
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sloan School of Management, Cambridge, MA
Bachelor of Science: Management Science, concentration in Finance, 1995
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a skilled and accessible manager, I can run large organizations yet do a spreadsheet when needed,
I can see “the big picture” yet reduce a complex problem to a simpler explanation, and I can manage
the details of multimillion-dollar organization. My financial background is very sound, with an em-
phasis on audit management, policy controls, and when necessary, financial restructuring. Under my
direction my current corporation manages the best ratio of SG&A expenses to revenues in our indus-
try.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

CHANGE/REENGINEERING CONSULTANT
49
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have cross-industry experience and significant achievements working with start-up, turnaround, and
high-growth businesses. I have comprehensive management experience, and have been successful in re-
structuring sales, marketing, strategic and business planning, and information technology. I am a
tough but fair negotiator who can create win/win outcomes. I am a skilled public speaker who is com-
fortable communicating cross-culturally and across management and functional lines.
Resume
Henry L. Crawford
27 Elm Circle
Miamisburg, Ohio 45347
(937) 555-1573 / email@email.com
Change/Reengineering Consultant
Experience Building Start-Up, Turnaround, & High-Growth Companies
Facilitate Corporate Cultural Change & Build Strategic Partnerships Skilled
Relationship Manager / Customer-Driven Management Style
Entrepreneurial spirit and multiindustry experience. Facilitate business development and
profit growth through emphasizing continuous process improvement and cost containment.
Core Strengths
Business Consulting
Contract Negotiations
Corporate Image 
Sales Management
Problem Solving
Teaming & Leadership
Product & Service Pricing
Training & Development
Professional Experience
CRAWFORD & SEALS, INC., Miamisburg, Ohio
1985 to Current
Business Consultant
Successful leading start-up and underperforming organizations to industry leadership posi-
tions and profitability through analyzing operations, identifying problems, and restructuring
processes. Expert in competitive market positioning and key customer relationship manage-
ment. Deliver strong and sustainable financial gains in challenging markets through decisive
leadership.
I
Directed start-up of multimillion-dollar real estate investment firm.
I
Managed chain of 400 health clubs from loss to $5M annual profit.
I
Streamlined manufacturing plant to cut costs $500K per month.
I
Negotiated merger between two major medical facilities.
Education
Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio
M.B.A., 1995
I
B.S., Finance & Accounting, 1984
I
Graduate GPA: 4.0
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Reengineering
Consultant
Strategic
Partnership
Competitive Market
Positioning
Cost Containment
Profit Growth
Relationship
Management
Cross-Cultural
Communication
Business
Development
Multiindustry
Experience
Customer-Driven
Management
Start-Up
Turnaround
Continuous Process
Improvement
Corporate Cultural
Change
Contract
Negotiations
Corporate Image
Sales Management
Business
Reengineering
Efficiency
Improvement
Problem Solving

CHEMIST
50
Keywords
Science
Organic
Research
Development
Composition
Structure
Elements
Synthetics/Polymer
Modeling
Simulation
Measure
Independent
Chemistry
Meticulous
Mathematics
Analytical
Corrosion
Reaction
Kinetics
Spectrographic
Resume
Mary Beth Brissette
2345 Spyglass Circle
Waterford, Michigan 00000
(208) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Chemist
Expertise in Chemical Corrosion Research
Strong science, inorganic, and organic chemistry background. Exceptional knowledge of chem-
istry specializing in research and development of polymer compounds and the effects of chemi-
cal corrosion on super alloy metals.
Core Strengths
Organic Chemistry
Reaction Kinetics
Proficient Computer Skills
Gibbs Energy of Formation
Data Analyzation
Spectrographic Analysis
Quality Control
Chemical Corrosion Research
Professional Experience
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURER, Cascade, Michigan
1997 to Current
Chemist
Prepare instructions for plant workers that specify ingredients, mixing times, and tempera-
tures for each stage in the process. Monitor automated processes to ensure proper product
yield, and test samples of raw materials or finished products to ensure that they meet industry
and government standards. Report and document test results and analyze those results to im-
prove existing theories or develop new test methods.
I
Developed a new process to reduce costs in mixing chemical compounds resulting in a
$250,000 cost savings per year.
I
Chairperson of a Regional Conference of Chemists and Material Scientists on Corrosion Re-
search.
Education
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
Master of Science Degree in Chemistry
1997
I
Contributor to the JANAF Thermochemical Tables
I
Dean’s List, Four Years
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am accurate, pay attention to detail, and have the ability to focus. I am curious and thrive on research
and experiments. I rely on collaboration with other professionals and work well with or without su-
pervision. I enjoy working with my hands building scientific apparatus, performing laboratory experi-
ments, and computer modeling. I value the integrity of my work. I am a meticulous and organized
record keeper. I have a well-established network of professional chemists with whom I collaborate reg-
ularly.

CITY MANAGER
51
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With my background in economic development, I am able to attract businesses appropriate to commu-
nities and consistent with their future plans. Coordinating infrastructure projects by leading a team of
civil engineers and public works specialists has yielded positive results, meeting deadlines and ex-
ceeding expectations. I am able to design and implement program initiatives. I have extensive experi-
ence in regional collaborations that increase services while trimming the cost of delivery and main-
taining quality.
Resume
Dana Urban
5555 72nd street
Omaha, Nebraska 68102
(402) 555-1122 / email@email.com
City Manager
Economic Development/Business Liaison
Member International City/County Management Association
Goal-oriented administrator with vision and skills to bring municipalities into the twenty-first
century. Skilled in cost-saving strategies and planning that bring initiatives to life while main-
taining the integrity of existing communities.
Core Strengths
Economic Development
Project Management
Regional Collaboration
Community Relations
Zoning Regulations
Contract Negotiations
Budget Administration
Strategic Planning
Professional Experience
City of Des Moines, Des Moines, Iowa
1995−present
City Manager
Prepared and administered $120MM annual municipal budget. Attended Council meetings
and implemented policy of elected officials. Managed Human Resources with final decision on
hiring and firing key personnel. Developed positive relationships with local media, businesses
and community. Negotiated contracts and reviewed proposals for development projects. Report-
ed progress of City departments in reaching goals.
I
Leveraged services through regional collaboration saving $6.2MM annually
I
Designed Youth Leadership Project under Iowa state renewable grant
I
Coordinated five-year neighborhood revitalization project
I
Des Moines named in 100 best places to live in America 1999
Education
Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska
Bachelor of Arts/Political Science 1987
Master of Arts/ Urban/Suburban Administration 1992
Keywords
Planning
Zoning Regulations
Local Ordinances
Public Services
Economic
Development
Annual Budget
Community
Relations
Policy
Municipal
Operations
Contracts
City Council
Media Relations
Human Resources
Project Management
Budget
Administration
Infrastructure
Business Liaison
Neighborhood
Revitalization
Statutes and
Legislation
Regional
Collaboration

CIVIL ENGINEER
52
Keywords
Industry Knowledge
Conceptual
Knowledge
Hands-on
Experience
Project Oriented
Scientific
Instrumentation
AutoCad
GenericCad
GPS/GIS
VISIO
Excel
Licensed
Professional Civil
Engineer
Self-Insured
Building
Construction
Results Oriented
Transit
Technical
Mathematics
Eaglepoint
SoftDesk
Design
Logic
Resume
Kendall Koplin
11027 Southeast 21 Boulevard
Anywhere, Idaho 00000
(208) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Civil Engineer
Accomplished Multilingual Engineer
Successful Project Management and Supervisory Experience
Competent in building construction, local transit, pipelines, electric, gas, and sanitary services.
Effective problem-solving and decision-making skills. Proficient in managing multiple projects.
Fluent in English, Spanish, and Portuguese.
Core Strengths
Solid Management Capabilities
Excellent Technology Skills
Team Player
Project Oriented
Schematics
Results Oriented
Design
Quality Conscious
Professional Experience
L&A ENGINEERING, Idaho Falls, Idaho 
1988 to Present
Civil Engineer
Oversee and conduct daily operations of a $3.6M sewer renovation project. Plan and oversee a
variety of field projects, including making recommendations for design of parking and mainte-
nance facilities.
I
Successfully completed a $1.2M City Greenbelt renovation project, on time and within bud-
get.
I
Successfully completed a $5.6M street and landscape redesign project saving the company
$51,000.
I
Improved record-keeping database by redesigning input logic.
Education
Idaho State University, Pocatello, Idaho
Bachelor of Science Degree in Civil Engineering; 1988
I
Dean’s List, 4 Years.
I
Junior and Senior Internship, L&A Engineering; only offered to top two students.
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I meet all qualifications outlined in the job posting including a Bachelor’s degree. I have designed and
managed several multimillion-dollar projects in the Boise area. I have the dedication it takes to visu-
alize the project, start the project, and see it to completion. My proficient use of computer software
makes me most productive, reducing any training time, and I can assist in training other coworkers. I
have successfully coordinated a number of project professionals. I am available immediately and have
directly related experience.

CIVIL SERVICE (POLICE OFFICER)
53
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a police academy graduate with specialized training in fingerprinting and analysis and crime
scene investigations. With five years of experience as a police officer, I have had many opportunities to
put to use much of my training and expertise on the job. Duties have also included walking a beat,
driving a cruiser, and operating a motorcycle. Prior formal education in criminal justice has prepared
me for management and/or supervisory roles, as I become eligible.
Resume
Michael Lendl
113 Bartlett Street
Lewiston, Maine 04240
(207) 555-7777 / email@email.com
Police Officer
Crime Scene Investigator
Crime Scene Lab Fingerprinting Specialist
Certified in the Use of Varied Surveillance Equipment
Law enforcement professional with active involvement in all areas of police work including
numerous court appearances as a witness, volunteer participation in self-defense programs,
and monitoring, reviewing, and making recommendations for lock-up and jail security proce-
dures.
Core Strengths
Fingerprint Analysis
Undercover Operations
Crime Investigations
Surveillance
Interrogations
Witness Questioning
Professional Experience
Lewiston Police Department, Lewiston, Maine 
1997−Present
Police Officer
Monitor a specified geographic area for unlawful or suspicious activities, and in some cases
providing and dispatching assistance to those requiring medical assistance. Perform duties on
a rotation basis while either walking a beat with a fellow officer, driving a cruiser, or operating
a motorcycle. Specialized work involving crime scene investigations and undercover work is
scheduled as needed.
I
Recognized as the department’s fingerprinting expert.
I
Proficient at operating an intoxilyzer; train other officers.
I
Volunteer, labor relations liaison assisting union steward.
I
Member, Jail Security Committee.
Education
University of Maine (L/A Center), Lewiston, Maine
Bachelors Degree: Criminal Justice, 1996
I
Attended, Waterville Police Academy, Waterville, Maine
I
Graduated, Police Training Program, 1997
Keywords
Law Enforcement
Surveillance
Criminal Law
Investigations
Doppler Traffic
Radar
Intoxilyzer
Operation
Dispatching
Self-Defense
Traffic Control
Court System
Labor Relations
Jail Security
Management
Undercover
Witness
Suspect
Victim
Lineup
Finger Printing
Firearms

COLLEGE GRADUATE—ACCOUNTING
54
Keywords
Accounts Payable
Accounts Receivable
General Ledger
Account
Reconciliations
Expense Reports
Collections
Finance
GPA
Accounting
Major/Degree
Auditing
Cost Accounting
GAAP
Oral and Written
Communication
Skills
Payroll
Benefits
Financial functions
Microsoft Excel and
Word
Quicken,
QuickBooks,
Peachtree
Bookkeeping
Bachelor of Science
in Accounting
Resume
Susan Quinn
35 Memorial Boulevard
Newark, NJ 07104
(973) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Entry-Level Accountant
Record of cost reduction and collections improvement
Self-starter / Streamlining accounting processes
Leveraging technology to increase efficiency and accuracy
Motivated college graduate with a Bachelor of Science degree in Accounting. Strong academic
performance. Four years of part-time experience performing basic bookkeeping/accounting
functions.
Core Strengths
Organizational skills
Computer proficient
Multitasking
Talented in basic accounting
Detail oriented
Strong work ethic
Numerically accurate
Integrity
Education
University of Syracuse, Syracuse, NY
Bachelor of Science: Accounting, 2001
Minor: Computer Science
I
3.7 GPA in Major
Professional Experience
REED ANIMAL HOSPITAL, Newark, NJ Part-time 1999−Present
Administrative Assistant, Reception, Bookkeeping
Handle all front-desk duties at a busy small-animal practice. Schedule appointments, take or-
ders for medicines, field questions, and solve problems. Bookkeeping/accounting activities in-
clude maintaining computerized records using Quicken, and reconciling accounts.
I
Created an Excel spreadsheet to track past-due invoices
I
Decreased aging reports and increased monies collected by over 40%
I
Saved $2000 annually by negotiating a bulk-buying agreement
I
Helped automate AP and AR
I
Streamlined staff payroll operations by creating an electronic form
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a new Accounting graduate, I stand out in two ways. First, I offer a record of improving accounting
processes in a small office. Second, I know how to use software applications to improve the speed and
accuracy of accounting operations. My organizational, communication, and problem-solving skills are
equally strong. I am able to benefit a company significantly by accurately performing basic accounting
functions as well as introducing efficiencies that reduce costs.

COLLEGE GRADUATE—COMMUNICATIONS
55
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
While attending college, I held part-time and summer jobs for companies that ranged from Web-based
businesses to the performing arts, advertising communications, and radio. This, together with intern-
ships my junior and senior years, gave me hands-on experience in multimedia, public relations, and cre-
ative services. This combination of broad-based experience and formal education will help me quickly
come up to speed in your company, and enable me to make valuable contributions from day one.
Resume
Glenna Hazen
1167 Frederick Valley Pike
Huber Heights, Ohio 45428
(937) 555-7377 / email@email.com
College Graduate—Communications
Seeking Entry-Level Position in Communications
Multimedia Training: Advertising Communications, Broadcast & Electronic Media,
Trade Show Presentations, & Public Relations
Strong combination of classroom training and hands-on experience. Enthusiastic and energetic
top performer graduating in top five percent of class. Internships completed with major adver-
tising agencies and corporations.
Core Strengths
Planning & Organization
Self-Motivated
Creative Problem Solving
Attention to Detail
Multitasking
Computer Proficiency
Team Leadership
Concept Development
Professional Experience
FLYNN-BRODERICK, INC., Cincinnati, Ohio
1995 to Current
Intern
Assisted with campaign planning and management. Conducted market research, wrote direct
mail letters and press releases, and designed electronic media (home page). Produced corporate
identity through creating letterhead and logo. Contracted for creative services. Helped develop
publications, i.e., newsletters and training manuals. Planned and managed conferences and
special events; coordinated complex logistics.
I
Expanded AIDS Awareness effort to community outreach programs.
I
Secured corporate sponsorship for Communications College scholarship.
I
Spearheaded fund raising campaign that produced $10K for food pantry.
I
Led grassroots campaign that defeated proposed teen center closing.
Education
Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio
Bachelor of Science, Organizational Communication, 2002
I
GPA: 3.65
I
President of Spanish Club; Member of Campus Actors Guild
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Advertising
Communications
Broadcast Media
Campaign
Management
Conference Planning
Event Management
Logistics
Corporate Identity
Direct mail
Campaign
Market Research
Multimedia
Advertising
Press Release
Public Relations
Publications
Grassroots
Campaign
Fund-Raising
Community
Outreach
Corporate
Sponsorship
Trade Shows
Electronic Media
Creative Services

COLLEGE GRADUATE—CONSTRUCTION
56
Keywords
Real-World Experience
B.S., Construction
Management
Time and Cost
Parameters
Building Construction
and Code Compliance
Commercial and
Residential
Construction
Planned Use
Development (PUD)
Project Scheduling
through Completion
Engineering and
Construction
Technology
Construction Quality
Control Management
Specifications and
Contracts
Soils and Foundations
Cost Estimating and
Competitive Bidding
Construction Safety
Mechanics of Engineering
and Materials
Crew and Subcontractor
Supervision
Surveying
Concrete and Steel
Design
Articulate
Communications
Land Development
Labor Productivity
Resume
Jason Pertowski
8215 Harriet Avenue South
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55406
(651) 555-3409 / email@email.com
Construction Manager
B.S., Construction Management / 10 Years’ Experience
Talented Builder of Physical Facilities Beneficial to Society
Eclectic Talents Blend Technology, Techniques, and Communications
Experience in the planning, development, and management of construction operations, with a
record of consistent achievement in improving quality, accountability, and efficiency. Proficient
at managing simultaneous projects to meet costs/deadlines successfully.
Core Strengths
Supervision and labor productivity
Planned Use Development (PUD)
Land development and surveying
Mechanics and materials
Competitive estimating and bidding
Building construction and codes
Specifications and contracts
Safety and quality control
Professional Experience
JP BARTLETT COMPANIES, Minneapolis, Minnesota 
1995 to Current
Construction Manager
Supervise and coordinate construction management contract services for Rivertown, a 450,000-
square-foot facility. Direct monthly safety meetings. Coordinate layout and design, communi-
cate with engineers and key personnel. Perform on-site inspection during all phases of con-
struction projects, including commercial, single and multifamily, water towers, plants and
wastewater treatment facilities, barracks, fire stations, and other facilities. Interpret specifica-
tions, review bids, and prepare concise activity reports. Manage budget process and financial
expenditures.
I
Implemented program for in-house precast concrete that reduced materials costs by 24%
I
Member of senior management team leading Minneapolis’s first PUD projects
I
Directed construction affairs for the mall renovation, a five-year, $2.8 billion project
I
Coordinated $25 million in mixed-use property development project, as part of revitaliza-
tion
Education
North Dakota State University, Fargo, North Dakota
Bachelor of Science: Construction Management, May 2002
I
Peer Assistant, Construction Management Mentoring Program, 2001−2002
I
Home Builders Care Foundation Scholarship Recipient, 2002
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Success in construction management prompted me to enhance my real-world experience with a related
B.S. degree. I have supervised 2 to 100-person crews—staff and subcontractors, with high productivity,
through all phases of projects. Both professors and supervisors have commended my ability to come in or
ahead of time with deadlines, within or below costs. “Ground-up” work with a major contractor and de-
veloper has exposed me to commercial and residential construction. My concentrated studies in land de-
velopment and soils/foundations help me balance environmental and economic issues. I have significant
cost estimating and competitive bidding experience on concrete and steel design structures. My scope of
abilities ranges from technical specifications and contracts, to articulate communications at all levels.

COLLEGE GRAD—M.B.A.
57
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a recent MBA recipient with three years’ background in finance, marketing, and sales support with
Ernst & Young, I offer hands-on experience in an array of business functions in several industries, in-
cluding health care, retail, and hospitality. E&Y is a great training ground and I have learned much in
my time there, fast tracking from entry-level support positions to managing team leader. It has been
my practice to learn everything possible in every department, and I have done so while completing a
rigorous MBA program at Columbia.
Resume
Hanna Thomas
212-37 Corporal Kennedy Street
Bayside, NY 11360
(718) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Experienced Finance and Marketing Professional
Recent M.B.A. Recipient—Columbia University
Three Years’ Background with Ernst & Young
Committed to Achieving and Supporting Corporate Objectives
Contribute to cross-functional success by facilitating communication across individual account
teams; supporting the sales process; interfacing with partners, clients, and support staff; and
crafting value propositions.
Core Strengths
Marketing/Positioning Strategies
Niche Marketing
Marketing Communications
Strategic Analysis
Speed-to-Market Support
Event Planning
Relationship Management
Presentation Abilities
Professional Experience
Ernst & Young, LLP, New York, NY
1997 to Current
MarCom Specialist, Marketing Support
Work closely with sales and marketing executives in support of E&Y partners in the Metro
New York Tax Practice. Using experience and education in finance and marketing, provide a
wide array of marketing communications including pursuit packs, collateral pieces, and
newsletters. Using technology abilities, produce multimedia presentations/communications.
Handle public relations initiatives and seminar creation.
I
Produced unplanned, speed-to-market seminar for managing partner.
I
Created Practice’s first standardized, area-specific collateral pieces.
I
Suggested and supported development of Practice’s first intranet site.
I
Contributed ideas and content for Tax Practice’s yearly marketing plan.
Education
Columbia University, New York, NY
M.B.A.: Finance, 2002
Fordham University, New York, NY
Bachelor of Arts: Business, 1999
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
M.B.A.
High GPA
Presentation
Abilities
Positioning
Strategies
Finance
Strategic Analysis
Marketing
Communications
Public Relations
Event Planning
Sales Support
Partner Support
Marketing Strategy
Technology Abilities
Multimedia
Communications
Sales and Marketing
Speed-to-Market
Support
Seminar Creation
Relationship
Management
Cross-Functional
Teaming
Collateral Material
Production

COLLEGE GRADUATE—MECHANICAL ENGINEER
58
Keywords
BSME
Analytical
Detail-Oriented
AutoCAD
Numerical aptitude
Engineering
Mechanical
Engineering
Design
Mathematics
Internship
Documentation
Team Player
Parts Design/Repair/
Replacement
Project Development
Life Cycle
Spreadsheets—
Excel, Lotus 1-2-3
Project Costing
Project Planning
Quality Assurance
Mechanically Adept
Detailed Drawings
Resume
Louise B. Brown
22 Acton Road
Acton, MA 02478
(978) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Mechanical Engineer—College Graduate
Combining sound academic training with hands-on experience
Mechanically Adept / Making Solid Project Contributions
Team Player / AutoCAD Proficient
Technically-skilled, highly motivated BSME with hands-on mechanical engineering experience.
Intensive co-op experience assisting with the development of an alternative energy project.
Core Strengths
Math and technical skills
Organizational skills
Design and documentation skills
Detail-oriented
Communication skills
Parts repair/replacement
Working knowledge of welding
AutoCAD layouts
Education
Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts
Bachelor of Science: Mechanical Engineering 2001
I
3.4 GPA
I
Proficient in AutoCAD, Excel, and Lotus 1-2-3
Professional Experience
MILLDAM HYDRO, Gardner, MA
Part-time 2001−2002
Co-op Position
Performed duties in support of day-to-day operations at a low-head hydropower generating sta-
tion. Developed Excel spreadsheets and entered line-items to assist with project costing. Eval-
uated engineering problems and made recommendations. Developed AutoCAD layouts. Re-
sponded to FERC (Federal Energy Regulatory Commission) correspondence. Specified
materials. Performed cost estimating and price comparisons.
I
Performed preventative maintenance on parts of hydraulic turbines
I
Helped design an eel-way to maintain the Fish and Wildlife license
I
Saved $2000 by negotiating more advantageous sheet metal contracts
I
Contributed to executing endangered mussels recovery program
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My co-op placement gave me an opportunity to participate in the design, development, and implemen-
tation of several engineering projects. On the job, I supported the Mechanical Engineer at various
stages of the project life cycle. I identified opportunities to reduce costs, recommended engineering so-
lutions, and solved project problems. My AutoCAD skills are excellent. In the role of entry-level me-
chanical engineer, I am ready to “hit the ground running” and make valuable project contributions to a
company.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

COLLEGE GRADUATE—SALES
59
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a recent college graduate with previous part-time and seasonal experience in a retail sales envi-
ronment. My achievements in school represent a strong work ethic and sense of responsibility, having
graduated with a 3.4 GPA while working all four years at UCLA. I achieved top store sales on several
occasions and was promoted to Assistant Manager.
Resume
John Justin
10231 Linden Lane
Los Angeles, California 90049
(310) 555-1111/ email@email.com
RECENT COLLEGE GRADUATE WITH B.A. IN ENGLISH
Track Record of Professional Accomplishments in Retail Sales
Excels in Customer Service
Tenacious / Motivated / High Energy
Hard working and highly motivated with a strong work ethic. Consistently goes beyond the re-
quirements of the job to achieve company goals. Learns quickly, enjoys challenges and works
well independently as well as collaboratively in a team setting. Track record of accomplish-
ments in retail sales positions.
Core Strengths
Organizational Abilities
Team Building & Leadership
Client Relations
Oral & Written Communications
Time Management
Presentations
Problem Solving
Sales Experience
Relationship Building
Presentation Delivery
Computer Skills
Report Preparation
Education
University of California at Los Angeles; 2002
B.A. in English
Professional Experience
FASHION WORLD, Los Angeles, CA
1997−Present
Part-Time and Seasonal Positions
Assistant Manager (2000−Present)
Sales Associate (1997−2000)
Promoted to Assistant Manager of $2.5 million location of national retailer. Oversee smooth
functioning of day-to-day operations, consistently meeting or exceeding sales goals while 
maintaining stable payroll expense. Ensure high level of customer satisfaction. Hire, train,
schedule, and motivate team of 15−20 sales associates.
I
Increased sales in men’s department by more than 50%.
I
Developed reputation for skilled merchandising.
I
Implemented weekly coaching meetings that enhanced staff morale, fostered team building,
and reduced absenteeism.
Keywords
College Graduate
GPA
Computer Skills
Major: Marketing
Prospecting
Account
Relationship
Leadership
Motivation
Organizational
Skills
Presentations
Problem Solving
Professional Image
Relationship
Building
Report Preparation
Sales Experience
Team Building
Time Management
Well Organized
Work Ethic
Work Experience

COMMERCIAL OR CORPORATE PILOT
60
Keywords
Aircrew Training
Pilot
Charter Flight
Aviation
Air Traffic Control
Altitude
Airport
Commercial Flight
Corporate Travel
Close Coordination
with Maintenance
and Operations
Cost Control
Crew Coordination
Customer Focus
Flexible Training
Managing Complex
In-Flight
Emergencies
Mentoring Crew
Members
Safety-First
Orientation
Simulator
Instruction
Upgrading Skills
Resume
Charles R. Miller
1400 West Street
Montgomery, Alabama 36100
(334) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Corporate or Commercial Pilot
7500 PIC, accident- and incident-free flying hours
Crew Coordination & Mission Planning Skills
Expert Ambassador
A team-oriented, safety-driven pilot who can balance operational needs with reliable, quality
flight operations. Regularly tested on my ability to upgrade across types quickly and capably.
Core Strengths
Flexible mission planning
Natural instructor skills
Solid FAR knowledge
Confidence-inspiring appearance
Crew coordination skills
Managing multiple emergencies
Professional Experience and Qualifications
Commercial Pilot, Multi Engine, Land, Instrument
FAA Class I Medical Certification, No restrictions, July 2003
Total time: 10,500 PIC 7500 Instrument 8600 Multi-engine 7500 IP 4000
Blue Sky Airlines
2000 to Current
First Officer promoted to Captain
Responsible for safe flight operations of B727-200 series passenger service. Insure full compli-
ance with corporate and flying safety regulations. Project a positive image to our passengers.
Subject to no-notice, in-flight evaluations.
I
Selected as simulator instructor over three more experienced captains
I
Met or exceeded Federal on-time departure standards every quarter for the last eight quar-
ters
Education
Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama
Bachelor of Business Administration, 1985
References Furnished Immediately Upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I bring a combination of flying skills and business acumen that can serve all your customers—internal
and external—very well. I know that our company will be judged by how smoothly, efficiently, and safe-
ly a flight proceeds under my command. I can bring that same dedication to every crewmember because
I enjoy mentoring aviation professionals. Finally, you might consider the cost savings I can offer you as
a simulator instructor.

CONSTRUCTION FOREMAN
61
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a results-oriented Construction Foreman, I am consistently on time and under budget with my proj-
ects, whether our company is serving as the general contractor or the subcontractor. I have experience
with commercial and residential properties including new construction, remodeling, and renovation.
Projects range from $100,000 to more than $10 million. My team leadership skills also enable me to co-
ordinate the efforts of multiple trades including plumbing, HVAC, electrical, painting, and rough/finish
carpentry.
Resume
Joseph A. Smith
121 Carpenter Way
Mequon, Wisconsin 53092
(262) 555-1186 / email@email.com
Construction Foreman
Proven track record of meeting time, labor, and project goals
Project/Job site management
Estimating time, labor, materials/Cost containment
Results-oriented, quality-focused Construction Foreman with a consistent track record of meet-
ing project timelines and budgetary constraints. Skilled managing general contractor/subcon-
tractor crews and other trades.
Core Strengths
Project management 
Team leadership
Rough/finish carpentry
Plumbing, HVAC, electrical
Vendor sourcing
Time, labor, materials estimating
Code compliance
Quality commitment
Professional Experience
RITZY BUILDERS, Pewaukee, Wisconsin
1995 to Present
Construction Foreman
Interact with general and subcontractors, architects, crews, and other trades to coordinate
projects on site from blueprints to completion, while meeting time, labor, material estimates,
and project specifications. Source and negotiate terms with suppliers, ensuring materials meet
quality specifications and delivery timelines.
I
Built eight 320,000-square-foot, $10 million supermalls.
I
Restored $1.2 million Victorian mansion to its original specifications.
I
Instituted use of proprietary construction management system to produce estimates, take-
offs, and bids.
Education
Milwaukee Area Technical College
Carpentry Diploma, 1992
I
Member of the National Vocational Honor Society
I
Recipient of Scholastic Achievement Award
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Project Management
Job Site
Crew/Skilled Trades
Cost Estimating
Time, Labor,
Materials
Residential/
Commercial
Rough/Finish
Carpentry
Plumbing, HVAC,
Electrical
Interior/Exterior
Painting
Architect
General Contractor
Subcontractors
Takeoffs, Bids
Building Codes
Compliance
Team Leadership
Remodeling/Build-
Outs
Restoration
Renovation
New Construction

CONTRACTS SPECIALIST
62
Keywords
Signature Authority
Documentation
Purchase
Agreements
Letters of Intent
Promissory Notes
Finance Terms
Reimbursements
Inquiries
Negotiation of Terms
Deliverables
Breech of Contract
Milestones
Lease Agreements
Contractual
Deadlines
Export Regulations
Proposal
Submissions
Contract Language
Creditworthiness
Credit
Authorizations
Purchase Orders
Resume
David Robinson
3 Bradford Drive
Bristol, CT 06010
(860) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Contracts Specialist
Four years of progressive responsibilities facilitating contractual sales
Full accountability negotiating and overseeing the contracts process with our customers. Ex-
cellent skills in expediting the entire purchasing process from inquiry to delivery.
Areas of Expertise
Contract Language
Reimbursements
Letters of Intent
Credit Authority
Purchase Agreements
Promissory Notes
Documentation
Export Regulations
Professional Experience
RAYTHEON COMPANY, El Segundo, CA
1997 to Present
Contracts Specialist (1999−Present)
Contracts Associate (1997−1999)
Submit proposals and negotiate sales terms with purchasers of Raytheon goods. Validate the
creditworthiness of international companies by verifying commercial credit authorizations.
Monitor the progress of contracts tracking purchase orders, deliverables, and milestones. Hold
signature authority up to $3M.
I
Successfully negotiated lease agreements with favorable finance terms.
I
Resolved technical and logistical matters in advance of contractual deadlines, avoiding a
potential breech of contract on the company’s largest sale in history.
I
Considered the company expert on export regulations.
Education
University of California, Sacramento
Bachelor of Science, Business Administration, 1997
I
Summa Cum Laude graduate
I
Honors Program
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I believe that what I do has a substantial impact on the bottom line of my organization, and I take that
responsibility very seriously. You mentioned you are looking for a self-starter, and I am pleased to be
able to say that since I became a contracts specialist, my management has commented on my ability to
handle the job more effectively than my predecessors. In particular, my ability to evaluate creditwor-
thiness, knowledge of contract language, and commitment to making sure contractual deadlines are
met, are what sets me apart.

CONTROLLER
63
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
You mentioned how important growth through acquisition was to your future, and I have facilitated the
acquisition and integration of four small companies, consolidating production lines and warehouse
space with significant expense reduction. Recently I negotiated an insurance settlement that realized
$220,000 in incremental loss recovery. We have reduced audited adjustments from 40 to 4 by stan-
dardizing accounting practices. My team also saved over $600,000 in property and sales tax reduction
and discovered $98,000 in double-paid charges on utility taxes.
Resume
Michael A. Schenker
722 Woodbridge Road
Williamsville, New York 14221
(716) 555-1029 / email@email.com
Controller
Private Sector and Public Accounting
Profit Oriented / Cost Conscious with Successful
Record as Change Agent, Introducing New
Technologies and Progressive Business Models
Senior executive with complete financial management of all accounting and finance activities.
Researched and designed comprehensible road map for lucrative acquisitions and mergers.
Core Strengths
Profit Forecasting
Cash Flow Analysis
Contingency Planning
Feasibility Study
Debt Consolidation
Systems Integration
Professional Experience
OPEN ROAD, INC., Lackawanna, New York
1993 to Present
Controller/Director of Finance
Provide fiscal leadership for manufacturer of automotive aftermarket products with $26.7 mil-
lion in annual sales. Protect business and financial assets through internal controls, indepen-
dent audits, and aggressive insurance management. Prepare annual budgets and strategic
plans.
I
Negotiated insurance settlement that realized $220,000 in incremental loss recovery.
I
Facilitated acquisition of four small companies, consolidating production lines and ware-
house space with significant expense reduction.
I
Reduced audited adjustments from 40 to 4 by standardizing accounting practices.
I
Saved over $600,000 in property and sales tax reduction and discovered $98,000 in double-
paid charges on utility taxes.
Education
Canisius College, Buffalo, New York
Master of Business Administration, 1987
Certified Public Accountant—New York
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Financial
Leadership/
Management
Audit Adjustments
and Internal
Controls
Asset Protection
Report Creation
Tax Reduction
Budgeting and
Strategic Planning
Loss Recovery
Cost Containment/
Expense Reduction
Change Agent
Systems Integration
Profit Forecasting
Business Acquisition
Feasibility Study
Cash Flow Analysis
Fiscal Integrity
Public and Private
Sector Accounting
Debt Consolidation
Asset and Liability
Management
Contingency
Planning
Insurance and Risk
Management

CORPORATE ATTORNEY
64
Keywords
Corporate Law
In-House Counsel
Corporate Policy
Manuals
Mergers and
Acquisitions 
(M & A)
Joint Ventures
Venture Capital
Start-Up Operations
Regulatory
Compliance
Employment Law
Employee Benefit
Plans
Business Contracts
Contract
Negotiations
Trade Regulations
Advertising and
Promotional Law
Food and Drug Law
Product Liability
Vendor Agreements
Customer Service
Agreements
Trademark Rights
Juris Doctor (J.D.)
Resume
Alfred Jones
9893 Valleyview Road
San Diego, California 92109
(619) 555-3589 / email@email.com
Corporate Attorney
In-House Counsel for Fortune 500 Companies
Mergers and Acquisitions / Joint Ventures
Regulatory Compliance Specialist
Dedicated legal professional with 15+ years of broad-based experience in multimillion-dollar
corporate environments. Verifiable track record of effectively advising senior management on
trade regulations and implications of their business decisions.
Core Strengths
Advertising Law
Food and Drug Law
Contract Negotiations
Product Liability
Trademark Rights
Employee Benefit Plans
Vendor Agreements
Corporate Policy Manuals
Professional Experience
JUMPSTART, INC., San Diego, California
1995 to Present
Assistant to General Counsel
Primary duties include reviewing, negotiating, and drafting business contracts. Also write all
customer service agreements. Advise company management on matters of trade regulations,
advertising and promotional law, employment law, food and drug law, product liability, and
other areas of legal compliance. Assist with joint venture and M & A initiatives. Regularly con-
sulted on matters of corporate policy planning.
I
Completely rewrote firm’s corporate policy manual.
I
Selected to spearhead multimillion-dollar venture capital negotiations.
I
Oversaw legal aspects of new start-up operations for Eastern Seaboard.
Education
Marquette University Law School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Juris Doctor, 1983
I
Graduated Cum Laude
I
Internship, Wisconsin Supreme Court
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As in-house counsel to several large corporations, I have excelled in the corporate law setting. I have a
demonstrated record of successfully advising senior management of three Fortune 500 companies on
aspects of employment law, food and drug law, and advertising law, and have prevented millions of dol-
lars in unnecessary direct and indirect costs related to product liability. Additionally, I am particularly
skilled at ensuring regulatory compliance when pursuing joint venture and merger opportunities.

CORPORATE RECRUITER
65
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With training and development costs as high as they are, hiring and retaining the best employees is
one of the most critical business practices. Our employee churn is the lowest these two years it has ever
been. We streamlined recruiting process by 28% through standardized client interview forms and de-
signed an Access database of technical and business candidates with keywords matched to company-
wide job descriptions. To cut fixed costs, I also utilized contract and temporary personnel to eliminate
overtime costs.
Resume
Christine Pantoya
173 Sheridan Avenue
Buffalo, New York 14216
(716) 555-1714 / email@email.com
Corporate Recruiter
Seven Years’ Experience Aggressively Solving Staffing Needs
Campus Visits / Job Fair Participation
Internet Recruitment / Internship Program
Dynamic human resource professional with solid track record of finding qualified and talented
technical and business personnel.
Core Strengths
Job Task Analysis
Capability Assessment
Offer Negotiation
Applicant Tracking
Succession Planning
Candidate Screening
Professional Experience
HELFER METALS, INC., Depew, New York
1992 to Present
Technical/Executive Recruiter
Oversee the full range of corporate recruitment, with emphasis on IT and management person-
nel. Anticipate staffing needs and forge strategic alliances with traditional and nontraditional
candidate sources, including employment agencies and professional affiliations. Utilize con-
tract and temporary personnel to eliminate overtime costs. Oversee diversity management pro-
gram to insure affirmative action/EEO compliance.
I
Significantly reduced turnover rate by careful and thorough reference checking.
I
Designed Access database of technical and business candidates with keywords matched to
companywide job descriptions.
Education
Millard Fillmore College, Buffalo, New York
Certificate in Personnel Administration, 1996
Erie Community College, Williamsville, New York
Associate in Applied Science: Business Studies, 1992
I
Concentration in Human Resources
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Candidate Screening
Standardized
Interview Forms
Job Descriptions
Diversity
Management
Turnover Reduction
Campus Visits
Internship Program
Job Fair
Participation
Human Resources
Job Task Analysis
Capability
Assessment
Offer Negotiation
Applicant Tracking
Keyword Matching
Affirmative
Action/EEO
Internet
Recruitment
Corporate Recruiter
Labor Cost
Reduction
Contract and
Temporary
Staffing
Succession Planning

COSMETOLOGIST
66
Keywords
Consultations
Day Spa
Scrubs
Peels
Skin Care
Makeovers
Deep Pore Cleansing
Regimens
Dermatological
Knowledge
Hydration
Cosmetics
Up-Selling
Facials
Color Analysis
Moisturizers
Glycolic Compounds
Client Following
Micronized Zinc
Oxide
Scar Minimization
Reflexology
Resume
Carolyn Celly
45 Smith and Hale Drive
Huntington, New York 11743
(631) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Licensed Cosmetologist
Excellent business and sales skills
Strong client following
Intuitive and creative cosmetologist and skin care therapist skilled in working with women of
all ages. Regional reputation for expertise with facial scar minimization.
Expertise
Consultations
Makeovers
Skin Care Regimens
Color Analysis
Scar Minimization
Moisturizers
Facials
Skin Hydration
Professional Experience
The Day Spa of Long Island, Huntington, New York
1998 to Present
Cosmetologist
Conduct consultations and provide advice on make-up application and skin care regimens in
this upscale day spa. Utilize extensive dermatological knowledge to select and sell the best
products to clients. Provide customized makeovers incorporating color analysis. Cross-sell
other spa services.
I
Increased cosmetology sales by 200% from 1998 to present.
I
Cultivated relationships with local dermatologists who now refer several individuals a
month for scar minimization makeovers.
I
Added new services to the spa including glycolic peels, reflexology, deep pore cleansing, and
scrubs.
I
Developed a micronized zinc oxide sunscreen that was patented and is sold exclusively
through the spa.
Education/Licensure
Rollers Institute Cosmetology School, New York, New York
400 hours of clinical work
The Dermal Institute, New York, New York
Certified Reflexologist
Licensed Cosmetologist; Licensed in Skin Care Therapy
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Besides having excellent cosmetology skills and the ability to make women feel their best, I am also
quite good at selling. After having had a makeover with me, it is not uncommon for a woman to leave
the spa with $100 worth of glycolic compounds, cosmetics, and moisturizers in addition to two future
appointments for facials and reflexology sessions. It is this ability to cross-sell and up-sell that distin-
guishes me from other cosmetologists.

CREATIVE DESIGNER
67
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My personal capabilities cover all areas relating to the development of successful twenty-first century
businesses, and differentiate my value from other advertising, creative, marketing, financial, and busi-
ness consultants. A specialist using emerging media technology, I will bring synergy, harmony, and in-
teractive functionality to projects companywide that will increase productivity, improve communica-
tions, and significantly increase the organization’s profitability.
Resume
Dan Schickman
67 Sacred Woods Lane
Holly Grove, California 94078
(818) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Creative Designer / Project Manager / Consultant
Specializing in Visual Communication and Virtual Reality Design
Advertising / Marketing / Corporate Identity / High-Impact Design
Media Placement / Branding and Positioning
A creative professional with 20 years of experience as a writer, designer, producer, project man-
ager, and creative director in all media. Recognized for improving consumer perception and
global market position.
Core Strengths
Digital Publishing Technology
Creative Direction
Research & Copyrighting
Production Coordination
Marketing Consultant
Multimedia Interactivity
Identity Development
Collateral Design
Professional Experience
TOP INTERNET STRATEGIES CO., Fresno, CA
1998 to Current
Creative Director
Oversee the creative end of all projects. Manage and direct teams to develop solutions using
technology with a user-centered approach to interface design and content, creating meaningful
connections between people, ideas, art, and technology. Provide direction to designers and pro-
duction staff; liaise with sales and clients on presentations that bring technology and art to-
gether.
I
Reorganized in-house advertising agency to achieve 15% savings on ad costs.
I
Upgraded and managed all advertising, promotion, packaging, and cooperative programs.
I
Increased sales by 200%, reduced costs by 40%.
Education
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, NYC
Bachelor of Fine Arts / Design and Marketing, 1983−1987
I
Visual Interface Design, MIT, Boston, MA 1998
I
Specialized Technology, Art Institute of PA, Philadelphia, PA 1991
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Design Methodology
Informatics
Virtual Reality
Design
Graphical User
Interface
Creative Systems
Development
Project Management
Visual
Communication
Collateral Design
Media Placement
Logo Identity
Branding &
Positioning
Identity
Development
Image
Consumer
Perception
Corporate Identity
Multimedia
Interactivity
Interactive
Functionality
High-Impact Design
Emerging Media
Technology
Digital Publishing

CRUISE DIRECTOR
68
Keywords
Themed Activities
Special events
Planning
Excursions
Entertainment
Travel
Event Coordination
Hospitality
Event Planning
Passengers
Budgeting
Big Three Cruise
Lines
Safety
Emergency
Preparedness
Master of
Ceremonies
Ports-of-Call
Itineraries
Cruise
Evening Shows
Public Speaking
Foreign Languages
Resume
Gracie Holmes
2354 Mystic Street, #2
Palo Alto, California 94303
(415) 555-6859 / email@email.com
Cruise Director
Offering a combination of
hospitality, event planning, and staff management experience
Five years in increasingly responsible positions with a “big three” cruise line. Extensive ship
experience spanning 75 different world itineraries and 95 ports-of-call.
Core Strengths
Special events planning
Emergency preparedness
Excursions
Budgeting 
Themed activities
Life enhancement programs
Public speaking
Training and supervision
Professional Experience
P & O PRINCESS CRUISES, London, England
1996 to Present
Cruise Director (2001−Present)
Assistant Cruise Director (1997−2000)
Cruise Associate (1996−1997)
Develop and coordinate daily activities and entertainment planning for all passengers. Orches-
trate safety and emergency preparedness drills for passengers and staff, ensuring procedures
are carried out to exact specifications. Utilize public speaking skills while serving as Master of
Ceremonies at evening shows. Hire, train, and supervise a staff of five associates.
I
In 1999, conceptualized, initiated, and brought to fruition “life enhancement programming.”
Life enhancement programming focuses on activities with a learning component such as
onboard dance and cooking classes. This initiative was so well received it has become a
standard offering on Princess cruises and has also been copied by other cruise lines.
Education
Cal State University, Sacramento, California
Bachelor of Arts, Foreign Languages, 1995
References Available upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a cruise director, I believe my role is to see that each and every passenger onboard our vessel has a
pleasurable and memorable experience. To accomplish that requires a great deal of expertise, since
there is so much happening on any given sailing. To be a great cruise director means, for example, that
you have to know how to put on great entertainment, create themed activities, and above all, be the
quintessential host or hostess. I am that person.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE
69
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have excellent telephone skills with all kinds of customers and like interacting with customers both
in person and in a call-center environment. I have strong general office abilities including filing, orga-
nizing and word processing. You will need a self-starter that works well independently and is able to
understand effectively and resolve customer problems.
Resume
Carol Pappas
10025 Victory Boulevard
Van Nuys, California 91405
(818) 555-4444 / email@email.com
Customer Service Representative
Highly Reliable Self-Starter with Excellent Phone Skills
Computer Literate... Well Organized... Attention to Detail
Five years’ experience in customer service including order entry, client relations, and general
office support. Professional in work habits and appearance. Reliable with a verifiable record of
punctuality and low absenteeism.
Core Strengths
Client Relations
Communication Skills
Detail Oriented
Organizational Abilities
General Office
Computer Literate
Problem Solving
Word Processing
Professional Experience
ORION INSURANCE SERVICE, Hollywood, CA
1999 to Present
Customer Service Representative
Provide customer service to insurance policy holders on phone and in person. Document con-
versations using Microsoft Word; maintain accurate and detailed files. Research and resolve
various problems involving billing, benefits, and reimbursement issues. Assist in general office
procedures as requested.
I
Received numerous awards for Top Customer Service Representative.
I
Reorganized filing system enabling staff to more easily retrieve information.
I
Recognized by management for positive attitude and willingness to go beyond the require-
ments of the job.
TRIAD DISTRIBUTING, Canoga Park, CA
1997 to 1999
Customer Service/Order Entry Representative
Handled busy inbound phone inquiries regarding products sold via infomercials. Processed
high volume of orders.
Education
North Hollywood High School, North Hollywood, CA
Graduated in 1999
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Analyze
Client Relations
Communication
Skills
Computer Literate
Customer Relations
Detail Oriented
Filing
Call Center
Independence
Multitasking
Order Desk
Organizational
Skills
Phone Skills
Problem Solving
Research
Self-Starter
Word Processing

DATA WAREHOUSE DEVELOPER
70
Keywords
E-Commerce
ERP Models
Move from Logical to
Physical Models
Data Warehouse
Processing,
Performance, and
Management
Identify, Document, and
Design Interfaces
OLAP/ETL
MIS, IT
Logical and Physical
Hardware/Software
Topology
Identify Gaps and Risks
“Single Source of Truth”
Architecture Criteria
SAP Business
Warehouse, SQL, and
Oracle Databases
BAPI/DCOM/ABAP/VB
Development and
Implementation
Web Management
B2B
B2C
CRM
Project Management
Internet
Source Systems
Limitations and Batch
Processing Windows
End-User Data Access
Performance
Expectations
Resume
Chip N. Glass
9871 North 81st Street
Wauwatosa, Wisconsin 53213
(414) 555-2447 / email@email.com
Data Warehouse Developer
Big-picture strategist with the ability to analyze business and technical
requirements at any level
SAP Business Warehouse, SQL, and Oracle databases
Big-picture strategist with the ability to analyze business and technical requirements at any
level, to develop B2B and B2C data warehouses via SAP, SQL, and Oracle.
Core Strengths
Project management 
Logical to physical modeling
Gap/risk identification
SAP Business Warehouse
“Single source of truth” architecture 
BAPI/DCOM/ABAP/VB
SQL and Oracle databases 
Hardware/software topology
Professional Experience
DATA STORAGE INC., Milwaukee, Wisconsin 1998 to Present
Data Warehouse Developer
Interact with management teams to analyze business and technical requirements for creating
“single source of truth” architecture used in data warehouse. Develop and implement
BAPI/DCOM/ABAP/VB. Identify, document, and design interfaces with existing systems. De-
sign standard and Web-based management reporting capabilities. Document information man-
agement processes, resources, and tools.
I
Designed and developed data warehouse (SAP Business Warehouse) to identify “single
source of truth” architecture for retailer that specified consumer trends for marketing pur-
poses. Included OLAP strategies and components.
Education
Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Bachelor of Science, Electrical Engineering, 1998
I
GPA: 3.75
I
Member of Tau Beta Pi Engineering Honor Society
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a big picture strategist with the ability to analyze business and technical requirements at any level,
I am confident I can develop a data warehouse that will aid your company in analyzing B2B and B2C
information. My technical skills include: SAP Business Warehouse, SQL, and Oracle databases, and
BAPI/DCOM/ABAP/VB development and implementation, and creating “single source of truth” archi-
tecture for retail environments.

DENTAL ASSISTANT
71
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My experience is in assisting oral surgery, periodontal surgery, advanced clinical surgery, and extrac-
tions. I utilize the Easy-Dental Network for accurate and timely health record management. Of course,
good medical practices are important to you, and I insure safe and sanitary conditions through auto-
clave, ultrasound, and dry heat instrument sterilization. I have also presented wellness lectures to area
schools to promote oral hygiene and plaque control. Technically, I can take, develop, and interpret di-
agnostic x-rays and perform oral examinations.
Resume
Claire James
2 Michelle Avenue
Kenmore, New York 14217
(716) 555-8342 / email@email.com
Dental Assistant
Extensive Background in Oral Surgery and Restorative Care
Chair-Side Assistance for Busy Dental Practice
Orthodontic and Periodontal Experience
Patient-focused dental professional with superior skills in providing pre- and post-operative
care to adults and children. Earned patients’ trust and confidence and contributed to expand-
ing practice.
Core Strengths
Preventive Care
Sealant Application
Emergency Treatment
Patient Education
Insurance Processing
Community Outreach
Teeth Whitening
Infection Control
Professional Experience
AMHERST DENTAL GROUP, Amherst, New York
1989 to Current
Dental Assistant
Provide surgical and general dentistry assistance for 3 dentists in a busy general practice han-
dling over 3000 patients of all ages. Take, develop, and interpret diagnostic x-rays and perform
oral examinations. Take casts and impressions for prosthetics and restorations.
I
Assist in oral surgery, periodontal surgery, advanced clinical surgery, and extractions.
I
Insure safe and sanitary conditions through autoclave, ultrasound, and dry heat instru-
ment sterilization.
I
Utilize Easy-Dental Network for accurate and timely health record management.
I
Present wellness lectures to area schools to promote oral hygiene and plaque control.
Education
Monroe Community College, Rochester, New York
Certificate in Dental Assisting, 1989
I
Seligman Scholarship
I
Dean’s List
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Dental Assistant
Oral Examination
Patient Education
Pre- and Post-
Operative Care
Appointment
Scheduling
Instrument
Sterilization
Diagnostic X-Rays
Emergency
Treatment
Health Record
Management
Insurance
Processing
Casts and
Impressions
Oral Hygiene and
Plaque Control
Teeth Whitening
Easy-Dental
Network
Infection Control
Preventive Care
Sealant Application
Oral Surgery and
Extractions
Prosthetics and
Restorations
Orthodontics/
Periodontics

DESIGN ENGINEER
72
Keywords
Onboard Electrical
Modules
Wireless Interfaces
Analog
Digital
Cellular
802.11
IT Infrastructures
Architecture
Standards
Hardware
Analytical
Computer-Aided
Data Gathering
Team Player
Engineering
Complex Telematics
Service Plans
Organized
Self-Directed
Evaluate
Resolve
Coordinate
Resume
Michael Smith
6234 La Costa Lane
Anywhere, Idaho 00000
(208) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Design Engineer
10 Years of Demanding Engineering Testing and Development Experience
Demonstrated Creativity, Perception, and Independent Judgment
Expert in all aspects of experimental test techniques, including analytical, physical, and sub-
jective evaluation of components under investigation. High level of competence in computer-
aided data gathering systems.
Core Strengths
Methodical
Investigative
Rational 
Creative
Analytical
Onboard Vehicle Electrical Modules
Wireless Air Interfaces
Exceptional IT Knowledge
Professional Experience
GENERAL CAR COMPANY, Clarkston, Michigan
1991 to Present
Senior Design Engineer—OnTwinkle Development
Direct the activities of a medium-sized group of engineers in defining, executing, and analyzing
the highest level of experimental test scenarios and programs. Contribute to the continual im-
provement of product and component designs through extensive understanding of program ob-
jectives.
I
Developed and implemented a GCC enterprisewide telematics strategy that replaced out-
dated systems.
I
Improved component design in the OnTwinkle technology.
I
Participated in national development of technology road maps and business models for
global telematics initiatives.
Education
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
Master of Science Degree in Engineering; 1991
I
Engineering Student of the Year, 1999
I
Contributor, Student Engineering Newsletter
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have a thorough understanding of relationship design, build, and test cycles. I have the ability to man-
age, plan, and evaluate the work of others in team situations. I am highly analytical and have demon-
strated technical and professional skills. I keep abreast of current product development and trends.
While working for General in Detroit, I was the lead corporate representative working with communi-
cations vendors to design our new WAN technology. I have excellent knowledge of onboard vehicle elec-
trical modules, wireless air interfaces, and working knowledge of IT infrastructures.

DIRECTOR OF MANUFACTURING
73
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I can help your company evolve to World-Class Manufacturing status through strengthening key areas
such as automated manufacturing, inventory control, technology integration, facilities consolidation,
and profit & loss performance. I have been successful in union and nonunion companies, am an expert
in facilitating efficiency and productivity improvements, and am top-notch in contract negotiations.
Other professional strengths that can add value to your operations are staff training and relationship
management.
Resume
Darren C. Stevenson
1632 Tuxedo Drive
Springboro, Ohio 45458
(513) 555-0501 / email@email.com
Director of Manufacturing
Recognized Expert in Efficiency & Productivity Improvement
Multisite Operations / Just-in-Time Inventory Control
Lean Manufacturing / Continuous Improvement
Direct staff and operations of union and nonunion World-Class Manufacturing facilities. Astute
management of operating budgets, emphasizing outsourcing, to achieve maximum profit & loss
performance
Core Strengths
Facilities Consolidation
Technology Integration
Cost Reductions
Total Quality Management
Automated Manufacturing
ISO Certification 
Union Negotiations
Training & Leadership
Professional Experience
DELPHI AUTOMOTIVE, Dayton, Ohio
1993 to Current
Director of Manufacturing
Manage multiple sites and shifts for fully automated manufacturing of shoe and brake lines
for General Motors vehicles. Member of executive team guiding development and monitoring of
strategic, financial, and operational plans. Introduced lean manufacturing, value-added
processes, and other cost-reduction measures projected to raise plant’s profitability to $10M in
2002. Increased efficiency through establishing Quality Circles.
I
Increased production output to 5K pieces per line.
I
Led completion of company’s largest capital project.
I
Restructured scheduling processes to cut production lead time 28%.
I
Met $50K added labor cost without exceeding operating budget.
Education
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
Master of Science, Industrial Engineering, 1990
I
Bachelor of Science, General Engineering
I
Graduate GPA: 3.8; Undergraduate GPA: 3.6
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Facilities
Consolidation
Technology
Integration
Cost Reductions
Production Output
Value-Added
Processes
Production Lead
Time
Profit & Loss
Multisite Operations
Capital Project
Automated
Manufacturing
Continuous
Improvement
Operation Budget
Outsourcing
Efficiency
Improvement
Productivity
Improvement
Quality Circles
Just-in-Time
Inventory Control
Union Negotiations
World-Class
Manufacturing

DIRECTOR OF MARKETING (ADVERTISING/MARKETING/PR)
74
Keywords
Brand Management
Product Launch
B2B and B2C
Public Speaking/
Presentations
Product
Development
Special Events
Planning
Strategic Marketing
Campaigns
Market and Product
Research
Collateral Material
Support
Focus Groups
Promotional
Programs
Corporate Identity/
Logo Development
Direct Mail and
Database
Marketing
Co-Op Campaign
Development
Creative Concepts
Signage/Package/
Support Material
Design
Budgeting/ Cost
Reduction
Client & Vendor
Relations
Marketing Strategy
& Communications
Resume
Patrick Dudash
5463 Dovelet Lane
Powell, Ohio 43065
(614) 885-1122 / email@email.com
Director of Marketing
Driving Sales and Developing Markets within Competitive Venues
Marketing Strategy Communications
Market & Product Research • Co-Op Campaign Development
Highly motivated marketing executive with nine years’ experience building market presence
and driving revenue growth within competitive product settings. Recognized as skilled public
speaker and presenter.
Core Strengths
Brand Management
Corporate Logo & Identity
Product Launch
Promotional Programs &Campaigns
B2B and B2C
Budgeting/Cost Reduction
Product Development
Client & Vendor Relations 
Professional Experience
Sol Rise Consultants, Brooksville, Minnesota
1993 to Current
Director of Marketing
Direct all strategic initiatives toward increasing company visibility as top provider of market-
ing services. Charged with planning and implementing special events, conceiving and design-
ing creative marketing concepts, and guiding concept toward actuality. Provide design direc-
tion for signage, packaging and collateral materials. Demonstrate expertise in direct mail and
database marketing; develop strategic marketing plans used on focus groups.
I
Maintained 100% customer retention rate by creating customer focused initiatives.
I
Generated unprecedented $5 million dollars during employment period.
I
Developed innovative Web/printed material marketing plans.
I
Honored with coveted “Sol Rise Ace Performance” award for three consecutive years.
Education
Miami University, Miami, Ohio
Bachelor of Arts: Business/Marketing, 1987
National Honors Society
Sigma Phi Epsilon Fraternity
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
In our industry, competition is fierce! My extensive background in marketing strategy and communi-
cations, market/product research, and my ability to increase corporate identity through creative con-
cepts will bring significant contributions to your company. I am also well-balanced between developing
long-term strategies and shorter-term tactics that are easily tracked for effectiveness. I offer the abili-
ty to work effectively under extremely stressful environments. Whether coordinating special events for
clients or building relationships with vendors, my professionalism and performance remain consistent
and uncompromised.

DIRECTOR OF OPERATIONS
75
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Without wishing to appear immodest, I am proud to be able to say that in my present position as di-
rector of operations, I have turned around a village government that was headed for fiscal disaster. By
implementing a traditional business model to this nonprofit arena, I was able to pull in the reins on
spending, reduce waste, and perhaps most importantly institute a policy of accountability. Our opera-
tion is now a model for other local municipalities.
Resume
Elliot (E. J.) Darrow
3 Windmill Drive
Oyster Bay, New York 11771
(516) 555-4689 / email@email.com
Director of Operations
Ten years’ experience in
Cross-Functional General Management and Administration
Versatile business professional adept at running a nonprofit operation. Proven talent in trim-
ming budgets through better fiscal management. Facility in establishing excellent relation-
ships with community representatives and outside vendors.
Core Strengths
Strategic Business Planning
Information Systems
Treasury Functions
Purchasing
Human Resource Management
Facilities Management
Policies and Procedures
Operational Efficiencies
Professional Experience
VILLAGE OF OYSTER BAY, Oyster Bay, New York
1992 to Present
Director of Operations
Oversee all facets of town government in support of service delivery for the 5000 residents and
100 business owners within this community. Manage a $2M general budget with allocations
for special projects. Cultivate public and private partnerships to maximize village’s ability to
provide services in a cost-effective manner. Work closely with Board of Trustees on matters ef-
fecting capital expenditures and financial management. Supervise a staff of 12 civil service
employees.
I
Instrumental in saving the village $300,000 in waste removal fees through the adoption of
a more stringent bid review process for carting companies.
I
In collaboration with town attorney, successfully handled several legal challenges to the vil-
lage’s policies on zoning regulations.
Education
Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York
Bachelor of Arts, Economics, 1992
Excellent References on Request
Keywords
Information Systems
Financial
Management
Human Resource
Management
Administration
Capital
Expenditures
Bid Reviews
Policies and
Procedures
Board of Trustees
Facilities
Management
Operational
Efficiencies
Service Delivery
Civil Service
Legal Challenges
Treasury Functions
Cross-Functional
General
Management
Purchasing
Strategic Business
Planning
Cost-Effective
Public and Private
Partnerships
Budget

DIRECTOR OF PURCHASING
76
Keywords
Contract
Negotiations
Competitive Bidding
Acquisition
Management
Contract
Administration
Fixed-Price
Contracts
Materials
Replenishment
Ordering
Contract Change
Orders
RFP
Contract
Terms/Conditions
International
Purchasing
JIT Purchasing
Current
Negotiation
Outsourcing
Price Negotiations
Procurement
Proposal Review
Cost Analysis
Purchasing
Proposal Review
Supplier
Management
Resume
John H. McKinley
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Director of Purchasing / Sr. Buyer
12-Year Successful Track Record of International Procurement Services
Price Negotiations / Contract Administration / Procurement
Expertise in High-Level Contract Negotiations
Results-oriented, visionary purchasing/management professional with extensive experience in
MRO Purchasing, international procurement, cost analysis, and contract conditions/terms ne-
gotiations.
Core Strengths
Contract Negotiations 
Multisite Operation
Strategic Planning
Outsourcing
Cost Reduction 
Vendor Negotiations
Cost Analysis 
Supplier Management
JIT Purchasing
Materials Replenishment Ordering (MRO)
Professional Experience
XYZ COMPANY
1995 to Present
Purchasing Manager
Supervise, train, and mentor a staff of eight purchasing analysts in all aspects of international
corporate procurement operations for a multisite company. Direct contract negotiations for all
vendor services and oversee cost analysis functions. Oversee supplier management, ensure the
procurement of quality materials / supplies, and secure extended terms on select items. Train
and direct new purchasing agents. Direct outsourcing activities.
I
Negotiated key vendor contracts, resulting in a $500,000 annual savings.
I
Implemented cost analysis policies, saving $2200 in internal annual costs.
I
Pioneered JIT Purchasing for national and international purchasing.
I
Created and integrated a successful supplier management model.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS, Collinsville, Illinois
Bachelor of Arts: Business Management/Accounting 1987
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why Should Our Company Hire You?
I have a proven track record of streamlining purchasing procedures for both domestic and internation-
al procurement, resulting in a significant annual cost savings. I have managed the RFP process with-
out outside consultant support in most cases, and have implemented a wide range of effective pur-
chasing operational procedures and programs including JIT Purchasing functions, competitive bidding,
and fixed-price contracts.

EDITOR
77
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why Should Our Company Hire You?
I have a wide range of experience in not only editing, but also media relations and marketing commu-
nications. This allows me to communicate valuable input throughout the various stages of media de-
velopment. I have worked on many different kinds of work, including consumer products’ marketing
campaigns, fiction, and nonfiction business writing.
Resume
Madison K. Nelson
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Professional Editor
Extensive Track Record of Successful Editorial Management
Media Relations / Corporate Communications / Public Relations
Multimedia and Electronic Advertising Expertise
Highly accomplished, detail-oriented, and personable editorial professional skilled in market-
ing communication, direct mail campaign, and electronic advertising strategies to support the
corporate vision.
Core Strengths
Advertising Communications
Media Relations
Strategic Planning
Electronic Advertising
Publications Editing
Customer Communications
Creative Services
Strategic Positioning
Multimedia Advertising
Professional Experience
STRATFORD COMPANY
1997 to Current
Editorial Manager
Direct all aspects of corporate editing operations in collaborating with the marketing/public 
relations staff. Oversee a wide range of editing functions for multimedia advertising and 
supervise/train a staff of seven editors and three proofreading assistants. Ensure solid cor-
porate, VIP, client, and management communications to reach corporate goals and deliver
100% customer satisfaction. Serve as the central point of contact in resolving editing issues.
I
Negotiated effective third-party creative services contracts for graphics.
I
Implemented policies to improve marketing/media relations.
I
Spearheaded procedures for accurate editing of multimedia materials.
I
Increased management/department communications.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF IOWA, Statesville, Iowa
Bachelor of Arts: Corporate Communications 1985
Keywords
Advertising
Communications
Corporate
Communications
Electronic Media
Corporate Vision
Creative Services
Customer
Communications
Direct Mail
Campaign
Electronic
Advertising
Management
Communications
Marketing
Communications
Public Relations
Media Relations
Multimedia
Advertising
Publications Editing
Publicity
Strategic
Communications
VIP Relations
Strategic Planning
Tactical Campaign
Strategic Positioning

ELECTRICAL ENGINEER
78
Keywords
Components
Design
Research
Test Procedures
Controls
Protocols
Manufacturing
Production
Equipment
Troubleshooting
Analog Circuits
Microprocessor
Prototypes
AutoCAD 14
Cost Estimates
Installations
ISO 9000
Layout
Power supply
Wire Harness
20. Calibration
Resume
Mark Watt
6542 Main Street
Middlefield, CT 06455
(860) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Electrical Engineer
Manufacturing and Defense Industries
High Security Clearance
Patent Holder
Electrical Engineer with background in design and testing. Experienced in manufacturing in-
cluding military specifications. Able to build prototypes and develop protocols and procedures.
Skilled in software applications.
Core Strengths
Design
Test Procedures
Protocols
AutoCAD 14
Cost Estimates
Installations
Research
Prototypes
Professional Experience
Sikorsky, Stratford, Connecticut
1995 to Present
Electrical Engineer
Designed electrical system for production equipment including controls, layout and compo-
nents using AutoCAD 14. Developed test protocols and procedures for installations. Provided
technical support, troubleshooting, and calibration for maintenance. Performed research on
proposed projects creating prototypes and supplying cost estimates. Evaluated existing power
supply and recommended upgrades as required.
I
Patent holder for design of new wire harness in CNC machine
I
Documented and wrote procedures as part of ISO 9000 team
I
Assisted in design of avionics components using analog circuits
I
Produced technical manual for testing protocols, reducing test time 35% 
Education
University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut
Bachelor of Science/Electrical Engineering 1993
I
Research fellow Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute 1993−1994
I
4.0 Grade Point Average
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have knowledge of the latest technology as well as solid skills in design and applications of electrical
theory. I am able to coordinate machine and equipment installations, providing troubleshooting and
other technical assistance. My strengths are in research and testing, developing protocols and proce-
dures that streamline the process and accelerate product release while cutting production time and
costs.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

ELEMENTARY TEACHER
79
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I’m a great believer in hands-on learning. I’ve developed a number of creative learning centers with
themes ranging from dinosaurs and Native American to music, art, math, reading, and dance. In addi-
tion, I use positive reinforcement to foster self-esteem in children at all academic levels, and my 
approach is student oriented and performance based. Continuing education is also important to me. I’ve
attended a number of seminars to stay up-to-date on various teaching strategies, including cooperative
learning, assertive discipline, and the use of brain-compatible techniques.
Resume
Deborah Davis
Route 117, Avenue B
Princeville, Illinois 61111
(309) 123-4567 / email@email.com
Elementary Teacher
Four years’ experience working with children of various academic & socioeconomic levels
Intensive Phonics / Manipulatives / Literature-Based Reading
Internet & Computer-Learning Games
Resourceful and energetic teacher with a history of developing creative, hands-on activities
and lessons to encourage a love of learning in students. Incorporate singing, dancing, puppets,
learning centers, computer learning games, and cooperative learning groups within an inclu-
sive classroom, and develop multiple themes across the curriculum. Commended for imple-
menting effective discipline and class management techniques. Approach is student oriented
and performance based.
Core Strengths
Student Advocate
After-School Tutoring
Creative Learning Centers
Fostering Student Self-Esteem
Literature Based Reading
Positive Reinforcement
Assertive Discipline
The Use of Brain-Compatible Techniques
Professional Experience
GARDNER SCHOOL, Princeton, Illinois
8/97 to Present
Fourth Grade Teacher
Design and teach units in spelling, cursive, math, social studies, science, and language arts, in-
corporating character and ethics across the curriculum in a cooperative learning environment.
Implement extensive role playing, conflict resolution, Internet research, and hands-on/interac-
tive learning projects. Collaborate with another teacher to develop stations among two rooms
for various units.
I
For a thematic unit on Native Americans: taught students Native American dances, demon-
strated aerodynamics through the flight of an arrow for match and science, and read a
short novel on Native Americans.
I
Had students create a “Bill of Rights” in cooperative learning groups for social studies.
I
Had students select a famous American, conduct research, write and memorize reports, and
give presentations to invited guests, including community representatives, political figures,
school board officials, and parents.
I
Completed training and implemented “Success for All,” a guided reading program to target
students at all learning levels.
Education
NORTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY, DeKalb, Illinois
Bachelor of Science in Education, 5/97
Keywords
Education
Elementary
Teaching
Student Advocate
Team Teaching
Self-Esteem
Manipulatives
Intensive Phonics
Literature-Based
Reading
Internet /Computer
Learning Games
Cooperative
Learning
Hands-on Learning
Developing Themes
across the
Curriculum
Curriculum
Development
Brain-Compatible
Techniques
Performance Based
Positive
Reinforcement
Assertive Discipline
Inclusive Classroom
Self-Contained
Classroom
Tutoring
Learning Centers

ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEER
80
Keywords
Asbestos Abatement
Bids and
Negotiations
Cap & Cell
Construction
Computer-Aided
Drawing
Drilled Shaft
Foundation
Environmental
Solutions
Feasibility Studies
Ground-Up Facade
Inspection
Land Surveys &
Mapping
Local Law 11
Inspection
Specialized
Equipment
Petroleum Cleanup
Project Management
Proposal
Development
Quality Control
Regulatory
Compliance
Risk Assessment
Soil Classification
Vendor Selection
Waste Management
Resume
Brian M. Keith
12 Pine Aire Drive
Deer Park, New York 11729
(631) 555-2099 / email@email.com
Environmental Engineer
25 years of experience in environmental construction management
Geotechnical, Foundation, Cap & Cell Construction
Local Law 11 Inspection
Broadly experienced environmental engineer with a background providing project manage-
ment and compliance support on a permanent/contract basis for major industrial, commercial,
and governmental clients.
Core Strengths
Project Management
Land Surveys & Mapping
Feasibility Studies
Soil Classification
Drilled Shaft Foundation
Ground-Up Facade Inspection
Proposal Development
Bids and Negotiations
Professional Experience
Enviro-Services, Inc., New York, New York
1984 to Current
Environmental Engineer
Provide first and third-party services to ensure the environmental integrity of construction
sites in the areas of earthwork, electrical, concrete, drainage systems, geosynthetic material in-
stallation, petroleum cleanup, asbestos abatement, waste management, inspections, contractor
relations, vendor selection, cost control, crew supervision, proposal review, regulatory compli-
ance, and agency reporting.
I
Perform ALTA, topographical, boundary, and environmental surveys.
I
Supervise the Ground-Up Facade Inspection of New York landmarks.
I
Led negotiations on runway, tunnel, and bridge renovation projects.
I
Direct indoor air quality testing and drainage systems of train stations.
Education
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York
Bachelor of Science: Civil Engineering, 1987
I
Estimating and Blueprint Reading/Development
I
Certified Tester: Soil Pressures and Properties; Foundations
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an environmental engineer, I am qualified to deliver environmental solutions in areas of construc-
tion support and risk assessment. I’m confident that my experience in Quality Control, Local Law 11
inspection, architectural and computer-aided drawing, construction methods, and specialized equip-
ment, combined with my ability to expedite the cost-effective resolve of problems and schedule delays
would guide your firm in achieving its five-year plan to build six new malls across New Jersey and Con-
necticut.

ESTIMATOR
81
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Everything I have accomplished during my 16 years in business demonstrates my ability to add effi-
ciency and profitability along the entire length of the construction industry value chain. I specialize in
budgeting, costing and pricing, change orders, and profit planning. With a nationwide network of over
900 contractors and managers that will commit to my projects, I can ensure quality, value-driven engi-
neering with minimum lead time preparation.
Resume
Donald D. Burnard
402 East Maude Avenue
Arlington Heights, Illinois 60004
(847) 555-7035 / email@email.com
SENIOR ESTIMATOR /
GENERAL MANAGER
Improving Corporate Profits by Unifying Project Management,
Estimating, and Construction
INDUSTRY EXPERT with 16 years of successful project management experience at the se-
nior level for federal, commercial, retail, and multi-unit residential renovation and construc-
tion projects.
Core Strengths
Feasibility Studies
Contract Negotiations
Technology Surveys
Subcontractor Assessment/Selection
Pay Applications
Overview Reporting
RFIs (Request for Information)
SOVs (Schedule of Value)
Professional Experience
COOPER CONSTRUCTION, Phoenix, Arizona
1995 to Present
Senior Project Manager/Estimator
Reporting directly to the CEO, singly responsible for overseeing management of all projects,
building estimates, and developing accurate and realistic schedules for a broad range of con-
struction projects including a four-story Holiday Inn Express, Joy Medical Office Building,
commercial restaurants, and multimillion-dollar renovation projects for hurricane-damaged
luxury condo developments.
I
Sourced and installed the innovative Quest Digital Estimating System; recruited, hired,
and provided comprehensive training for two additional estimators.
I
Selected by M.J. Anderson, Inc. to rescue projects worth $4.3 million in danger of degener-
ating into liquidated damages. Result: Reworked contracts, reversed downward trends, and
completed projects profitably.
Education
University of Texas, Arlington, Texas
Bachelor of Science / Industrial Engineering, 1985
I
National Merit Finalist
I
College of Arts and Sciences Dean’s Award for Engineering
Keywords
Project
Specifications
Site Assessment
Material
Procurement
Troubleshooting &
Turnaround
Competitive Bidding
Value Engineering
Data Acquisition
Proposals
Budgeting
Costing/Pricing
Profit Planning
Change Orders
Feasibility Studies
Technology Surveys
Subcontractor
Assessment &
Selection
SOVs (Schedule of
Value)
Contract
Negotiations
Pay Applications
RFIs (Request for
Information)
Overview Reporting

EXECUTIVE CHEF
82
Keywords
Budget Control
Restaurant
Culinary Designs
Cultivate
Relationships
Customer Relations
Diet and Nutrition
Fat-Free Generation
Food Cost Analysis
Health-Conscious
Hospitality
Kitchen Operations
Multiethnic
Public Awareness
Quality Control
Recipe Development
Signature-Style
Dishes
Teach and Inspire
Team Leadership
Vendor Selection
World-Renowned
Resume
Jeffrey Bernard
Circle 6 Black Bird Road
Huntington Station, New York 11746
(631) 555-8013 / email@email.com
Executive Chef
18 years of award-winning culinary excellence
Five-Star Restaurants, Landmark Hotels / Exclusive Resorts
American, European, and Asian Cuisine
Celebrated, world-traveled chef with a flair for creating visually-stimulating culinary designs
and signature-style dishes. Personable with keen business management skills, and a desire to
teach and inspire new chefs.
Core Strengths
Kitchen Operations 
Recipe Development
Culinary Staff Management
Food Cost Analysis
Customer/Public Relations
Quality Control
Innovative Presentations
Vendor Selection
Professional Experience
La Toro Restaurant, New York, New York
1998 to Current
Executive Chef
Recruited by this 450-seat five-star restaurant, located in New York’s theatre district, to whet
the appetite of high-profile stars and tourists with an eclectic menu inspired by the city’s
multiethnic landscape. Oversee all aspects of kitchen operations in areas of culinary staff 
management, menu planning, purchasing, kitchen safety, customer/public relations, catering,
and special events coordination, realizing annual profits of $2.7 million.
I
Achieved five-star status for La Toro four years consecutively.
I
Developed trademark techniques used in leading culinary institutes.
I
Cultivate relationships with food critics to enhance public awareness.
I
Travel globally to discover cultural-based foods and traditional recipes.
Education
Institute of America, Hyde Park, New York
Bachelor of Professional Studies: Culinary Arts, 1993
I
Member, National Restaurant Association, 1995−current
I
Metro Restaurant Association, Best New Restaurant, 1998
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
In the recent decade, changes in diet and nutrition have inspired a health-conscious, “fat-free” genera-
tion, creating new challenges for the foodservice industry. I understand your organization is planning
a national launch of “healthy eating” restaurants and food products. As a world-renowned chef with 18
years managing award-winning restaurants, I believe my culinary talents and business management
know-how would drive this venture to commercial success.

EXECUTIVE RECRUITER, ENGINEERING
83
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I utilize creative strategies in sales and candidate sourcing. Keenly aware of the need to develop new
business continually, I have established contacts in hundreds of companies. I am knowledgeable in the
needs of industry and can anticipate staffing requirements of companies with emerging technologies. I
have a reputation of professionalism, handling issues with discretion, and maintaining confidentiality.
Resume
Lori Harding
9999 North Road
Bedford, Massachusetts 01730
(781) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Executive Recruiter
Mechanical, Civil, Electrical, and Computer Engineering
Fortune 1000 Companies
Defense, Aerospace, and Telecommunications Industries
High-energy recruiter with proven success in placing Project Managers and Senior Engineers
in Defense, Manufacturing, and Telecommunications Industries. Skilled in Peoplesoft and
other software applications.
Core Strengths
Networking
Sales
Candidate Sourcing
Screening
International Placements
Labor/Unemployment Law
Communication Skills
Recruitment
Professional Experience
Tech Recruiters Plus, Waltham, Massachusetts
1998−2002
Technical Recruiter
Identified and contacted candidates for positions in engineering. Attended job fairs and trade
shows for recruitment and sales. Established contacts with colleges, military, and professional
groups to create talent bank. Determined needs of company and successfully matched candi-
dates to positions. Monitored recruitment/retention statistics for select classifications. Net-
worked in target industries to generate new business.
I
Created Web site for national recruitment, increasing talent bank 15%
I
Increased sales 25% by delivering presentations at trade shows
I
Tracked recruitments and hires demonstrating 92% retention rate
I
Landed accounts in England opening first of many international markets
Education
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts
Bachelor of Arts / Human Resource Management, 1996
I
Graduated Magna Cum Laude
I
Internship in Human Resources at Peabody Engineering Group
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Staffing
Candidate Sourcing
Project Positions
Domestic
International
Confidentiality
Discretion
Telecommunications
Emerging
Technology
Manufacturing
Sales Skills
Defense Industry
Interviewing
Technical Recruiting
Network
Peoplesoft
Screening
Colleges
Job Fairs
Labor Law

FINANCE MANAGER, BANKING
84
Keywords
Commercial Lending
Relationship
Management
Investment
Management
Asset Management
Portfolio
Management
Retail Lending
Commercial
Banking
Consumer Banking
Credit
Administration
Regulatory Affairs
Branch Operations
Securities
Management
Secured Lending
Loan Processing
Return on Assets
(ROA)
Global Banking
Foreign Exchange
Unsecured Lending
Return on
Investment (ROI)
Return on Equity
(ROE)
Resume
Anthony J. Burton
5827 Warminster Avenue
Dayton, Ohio 45472
(937) 555-2012 / email@email.com
Finance Manager—Banking
Proven Success in Expanding Scope & Profitability
Commercial Lending / Relationship Management
Investment Management / Sales & Marketing
Deliver strong and sustainable gains in revenue, fee income, and asset management. Facilitate
change and revitalize organizational performance. Experience with start-up, turnaround,
merger, acquisition, and growth.
Core Strengths
Portfolio Management
Retail Lending
Branch Operations
Commercial Banking
Regulatory Affairs
Credit Administration
Problem Analysis & Resolution
Organizational Reengineering
Professional Experience
NEIGHBOR’S BANK, Springfield, Ohio
1994 to Current
Vice President
Manage 17 branch operations in tristate area with focus on building relationship management
programs with commercial banking customers. Responsible for expanding U.S. market reach
and establishing global banking division. Ensure profitability through creating and managing
strategic, financial, and operational plans. Named fourth in nation for secured lending perfor-
mance and a Top 10 security investment professional.
I
Increased consumer banking sales $4.5M in six months.
I
Restructured operations to improve ROA 12%, ROE 20%, and ROI 24%.
I
Successfully added unsecured lending to loan processing operations.
I
Managed foreign exchange and regulatory affairs/compliance programs.
Education
University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio
Bachelor of Science: Accounting, 1993
I
GPA 3.9
I
Top 2% of graduates
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have comprehensive experience in finance and banking that includes branch operations, global bank-
ing, and investment and portfolio management. Underlying this success are key strengths, primary of
which are the abilities to recognize opportunities, anticipate change, and create and sustain solid cus-
tomer relationships. Drawing upon these and my broad-based experience, I can help your bank expand
its market reach, increase its commercial lending, and drive profitability to new heights.

FINANCIAL ANALYST
85
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have a proven track record of increasing profitability through sound management, financial analysis,
and budget process improvement. I have had substantial results in capital areas including purchase
recommendations, fixed asset management, and asset redeployment resulting in significant cost sav-
ings. I have implemented cost and budget controls resulting in, measurable decreases in expenditures.
My expertise also includes long-term and short-term planning, as well as the ability to streamline op-
erations.
Resume
Ben A. Counter
127 Maple Street
Wethersfield, Connecticut 06102
(860) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Financial Analyst
Planning and Budget Specialist
Budgeting/Forecasting
Operations Strategist
Analytical, organized finance professional recognized for achievement in budget controls, fi-
nancial reporting, and cost savings. Strong in management and operations analysis and in-
creasing profitability.
Core Strengths
Cost Analysis
Strategic Planning
Fixed Assets
Budget Process and Implementation
Investment analysis
Pricing structures
Forecasting
Divestitures
Professional Experience
New England Corporation, Hartford, Connecticut
1989−2001
Financial Analyst
Coordinated all financial reporting and budget functions for all 15 departments of a major cor-
poration. Oversaw month-end closings for sales and operations. Prepared and implemented an-
nual budget with cost controls and process improvement. Recommended capital purchases and
technology to trim costs and streamline operations.
I
Saved $2.3MM annually through cost projections and pricing structures
I
Increased profitability by 12% by streamlining operations
I
Received recognition for creating expense variance reports
I
Designed financial matrix for chargebacks, reducing errors and labor
Education
University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut
Master of Business Administration, Finance
1986
Bachelor of Science, Business Administration
1982
Keywords
Financial Planning
Financial Reporting
Capital Projections
Annual Budget
Forecasting
Accruals
Expense Tracking
Expense Variances
Cost/Pricing
Analysis
Audit Management
Cash Management
Investment Analysis
Technology
Integration
Profitability
Divestitures
Asset Utilization
Strategic Planning
Financial Models
Budget
Implementation
Fiscal Controls

FINANCIAL PLANNER
86
Keywords
Acquisition
Investigation
Contingency
Planning
Asset Management
Joint Venture
Analysis
Return on
Investment
Financial Reporting
Business
Development
Asset Purchase
Securities and
Investment
Banking
Feasibility Study
PowerPoint
Presentation
Cost-Benefit
Analysis
Financial Models
Equity Financing
Sales Forecasting
Risk Analysis
Market/Consumer
Research
Capital Expense
Justification
Cost Controls/Cost
Avoidance
Business
Advisement
Resume
Warren S. Michaels
155 Seventh Street
Clarence, New York 14031
(716) 555-9280 / email@email.com
Financial Planner
Perform Risk Analysis / Secure Equity Financing
Research Launch of Product Lines
Solid track record of implementing creative solutions to enhance market share and increase
profitability. Develop financial models to situate company for aggressive expansion.
Core Strengths
Contingency Planning
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Feasibility Study
Asset Purchase
Joint Venture Analysis
Capital Expense Justification
Financial Reporting
Investment Banking
Professional Experience
HEALTH RESOURCES, INC., Buffalo, New York
1997 to Current
Vice President—Financial Planning
Provide strategic counsel to corporate executives in financial planning, new business develop-
ment, and investments. Research and evaluate consumers, sales history, pricing, emerging
competition, packaging, and market trends to forecast sales and profits accurately.
I
Recommended acquisition of primary competitor, realizing 87% of market share.
I
Initiated cost controls in production, warehouse operations, and purchasing that resulted in
over $230,000 in savings.
I
Provided business advisement on divestiture of poor-performing subsidiary and investment
in start-up company, earning significant increase in revenues.
Education
University of Buffalo School of Management, New York
Master of Business Administration, 1984
I
Phi Beta Kappa
I
Magna Cum Laude
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As standard practice, I perform risk analysis and secured equity financing for the launch of new prod-
uct lines. I also recommended acquisition of primary competitor, realizing 87% of market share. Since
cost control in today’s environment is so critical, I initiated cost controls in production, warehouse op-
erations, and purchasing that resulted in over $230,000 in savings. I also provided business advisement
on divestiture of a poor-performing subsidiary and investment in a start-up company, earning signifi-
cant increase in revenues.

FLIGHT ATTENDANT
87
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have 10 years of experience with a major air carrier flying both international and domestic routes,
and am a bilingual speaker of Japanese. I am a highly skilled cabin leader with particular expertise in
customer service, complaint resolution, and crew resource management. Your airline will soon equip its
fleet with automatic external defibrillators; I have already been trained in the use of the AED, and am
qualified to teach the module during flight attendant recurrent training.
Resume
Phillip B. Hall
4545 Coconut Way
Honolulu, Hawaii 96818
(808) 555-5693 / email@email.com
Professional Flight Attendant
10+ Years of Safe Flying and Superior Customer Service
Cabin Leadership / Passenger Relations
International and Domestic Experience
A friendly, flexible, and reliable cabin safety professional. Reputation for complaint resolution
techniques. As a trainer, appreciate the value of Inflight Policies and Procedures, and SOPs.
Bilingual speaker of Japanese.
Core Strengths
Cabin Safety
FARs
Evacuation Procedures
In-flight Emergencies
Emergency Equipment
Crew Resource Management
Customer Service
Complaint Resolution
Professional Experience
ALL PACIFIC AIRLINES, Honolulu, Hawaii
1990 to Present
Flight Attendant
Maintain clear sense of responsibility for safety of passengers and fellow crewmembers while
providing outstanding customer service aboard international flights throughout the Pacific and
Asia. Jointly charged with recurrent training curriculum planning, including review of land
and water evacuation procedures, water survival, first aid, emergency equipment location and
use, and hijacking procedures.
I
Reorganized Policies and Procedures section of flight attendant manual.
I
Assisted in selecting cabin location of automatic external defibrillator.
I
Achieved record $3500 in duty-free sales on single transpacific flight.
I
Flight Attendant of the Year Award for superior passenger relations.
Education
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii
Bachelor of Arts / Travel and Tourism Management, 1988
I
Editor of campus travel and tourism newsletter
I
Front desk internship—Royal Hawaiian Hotel
Keywords
Cabin Safety
Evacuation
Procedures
Flight Attendant
Emergency
Equipment
Hijacking
Procedures
First Aid
Automatic External
Defibrillator (AED)
Federal Aviation
Regulations (FARs)
Crew Resource
Management
(CRM)
Cabin Leadership
Recurrent Training
In-Flight Policies
and Procedures
Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs)
Air Travel
Passenger Relations
Complaint
Resolution
Bilingual Japanese
Speaker
International Routes
Domestic Routes
Duty Free Sales

FOOD & BEVERAGE MANAGER (HOSPITALITY)
88
Keywords
Revenue
Management
Catering
Bar & Beverage
Operations
Kitchen Operations
Hospitality
Banqueting and
Conferences
Food Production
Technology
Customer Service
Team Building &
Leadership
Planning and
Organization
HACCP Standards
Purchasing Vendor
Relations
Inventory Cost
Control
Menu Development
Food Production
Standards and
Controls
Room Service
Staff Hiring &
Training
Performance
Management
Finance &
Budgeting
Restaurant
Resume
Paul Garvey
8934 Brighton Blvd.
Columbus, Ohio 43229
(614) 716-4233
Food and Beverage Manager
Expertise in Special Events and VIP Galas...
Food Production Standards and Controls • Banquets & Conferences Bar & Beverage
Operations • Food Production Technology • Purchasing Vendor Relations
Qualified Food and Beverage Manager with demonstrated history in empowering individuals
to achieve restaurant goals. Implement cost-saving measures while utilizing resources with
maximum efficiency.
Core Strengths
Revenue Management
Customer Service/Room Service
Contract Negotiations
Team Building & Leadership
Kitchen Operations
Planning and Organization
Product Knowledge
HACCP Standards
Professional Experience
Rumford Hotels, Columbus, Ohio 
1997 to Present
Food and Beverage Manager
Collaborate with manager in maintaining inventory cost control, finance & budgeting, staff
hiring & development, and overall performance management. Accountable for security of as-
sets, supervision of daily operations, and ensuring guest satisfaction through excellent cus-
tomer service, while increasing sales through creative menu development.
I
Achieved 5% companywide food and beverage service improvement to prior year.
I
Trained associates in highly important Alcohol Intervention and Life safety.
I
Assisted in development and execution of highly successful sales strategy.
I
Awarded annual bonus based on service and profitability.
Education
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
Bachelor of Arts, Hospitality & Tourism Management, December 2000
I
GPA 3.8
I
Social Director for Residence Hall, two years
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My qualities as a Food and Beverage Manager have been identified in areas including room service 
operations, banquets/conferences, and special events. The profit-centered projects upon which I’ve 
focused this past year have provided the opportunity to prove my skills in revenue management, bud-
geting, and cash flow, and will prove useful as a part of your management team.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

FUND-RAISER
89
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My background includes the management of fund-raising operations for a nonprofit organization of
1500+ members. In that capacity, I answer directly to the Board of Directors, with broad responsibility
for volunteer recruitment, budgeting, strategic planning, and staff supervision. In addition to serving
as liaison to staff, volunteers, board members, and the community, I am charged with fostering a posi-
tive relationship with the media, identifying revenue sources, and conceiving and coordinating direct
mail and capital giving campaigns. As a result of my efforts in the past five years, the organization’s
revenues have nearly doubled.
Resume
Jesse Elijah
504 49th Avenue West
Edwards, Illinois 61528
(309) 243-1111 / email@email.com
Fund-Raiser
Special Event Management / Public Relations / Capital Campaigns
Skilled in Forging Partnerships with Diverse Revenue Sources
14-Year Track Record of Organizational Development
Accomplished Fund-Raising Executive with experience managing relationships with financial
contributors, boards of directors, staff, and volunteers. Track record of increasing revenues and
fostering positive public and media relations. Broad base of experience in fund raising includ-
ing grant writing, direct mail, annual campaigns, major gifts, telephone solicitations, and spe-
cial events.
Core Strengths
Special Event Management 
Public Relations/Media Relations
Capital Giving Campaigns
Budgeting
Strategic Planning
Grant Writing
Policy Development
Team Leadership
Professional Experience
HEART OF ILLINOIS LEUKEMIA FOUNDATION, Peoria, Illinois
1997 to Present
Director of Fund-Raising and Public Relations
Conceive and direct all fund-raising activities and serve as liaison to staff, volunteers, board
members, the community, and the media. Responsible for strategic planning, budgeting, and
reporting. Write and edit promotional materials and press releases for various events and ser-
vices and give presentations to local service organizations. Recruit, schedule, motivate, train,
and supervise 150+ volunteers.
I
Researched and launched a grant solicitation campaign, resulting in additional revenues of
approximately $100,000.
I
Initiated a direct mail campaign resulting in $10,000 profit within just six months and
1000 new contributors.
I
Pioneered a fashion show at an upscale area hotel, using parents and children affiliated
with the foundation as models. Planned the entire event, including securing approval, re-
cruiting and scheduling volunteers, calling on stores for donations, and selling tables to cor-
porations. By all accounts the event was a huge success, earning a one-night $25,000 profit.
Education
WESTERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY, Macomb, Illinois
Bachelor of Arts in Communications, 1997
Keywords
Special Event
Management
Public Relations
Media Relations
Financial
Contributors
Capital Giving
Campaign
Volunteer
Recruitment
Nonprofit
Institutions
Organizational
Development
Fund-Raising
Revenue Sources
Direct Mail
Campaign
Oral and Written
Communication
Skills
Financial
Contributors
Board of Directors
Policy Development
Campaign
Development
Budgeting
Grant Writing
Team Leadership
Partnerships

FUNERAL DIRECTOR
90
Keywords
Advice and
Counseling
Funeral Director
Death
Life Insurance
Claims
Bereavement
Cemeterian
Family Service Sales
Future Planning
Human Service
Profession
Legal
Documentation
National Board
Certification
Preneed Programs
Psychology of Grief
and Bereavement
Counseling
Viewings
Visitations
Resume
Clinton Worthy
200 Springview Lane
Lawrenceville, Georgia 30040
(770) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Funeral Professional
Building and holding an increasing market share
through customer support second to none.
Preneed planning specialist / Caring, comprehensive advice and counseling
Complete bereavement services / Sales and management expertise
Accomplished funeral professional with an MBA and 12 years’ experience in funeral service. A
results-oriented, success-driven leader and director with strong operational skills in finance,
sales, and marketing. Initiated many strategies and programs that repeatedly added value, in-
creased customer service performance, grew market share, and enhanced public image of the
firm while meeting profit goals.
Core Strengths
Preneed and family service sales
Empathetic grief and needs counseling
Marketing & promotion to enhance our industry
Attention to detail to deliver flawless service
Operational management
Strong ethical standards
Professional Experience
Shady Rest Funeral Home, Lawrenceville, Georgia
1990 to Current
Director
Provide advice and counseling, legal documentation, assistance with administrative tasks, and
the logistical management of human remains. Counsel and advise people prior to death as well
as during and after bereavement. Sensitive to requirements of law, custom, and the accepted
practices of the individuals and communities. Meet sales and revenue goals.
Education
University of Lowell, Lowell, Massachusetts
Bachelor of Science in Business, 1987
I
Summa cum laude
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
While some join the funeral industry because they think it is “recession proof,” I’ve dedicated my entire
career to serving communities and building market share. The two are related, not opposed. My
strength is in providing caring, empathetic, comprehensive service that positions my organizations as
the provider of choice in times of grief and sorrow. While I am an embalmer as well as a director and
cemeterian, my greatest strength is in anticipating and filling final arrangement needs. What pleases
me most is that most of my sales are referrals.

GENERAL MANAGER—HOSPITALITY
91
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I possess talents that will contribute to your property in several key areas, the first of which will be
sales and marketing. Without an increasing customer base, good service is inconsequential. Therefore,
business development, despite competitive markets, must be addressed. To assure that the hotel re-
mains first class, I will concentrate on quality in banquet/catering, convention management, executive
housekeeping, and front desk service by assuring strong internal controls and building a sound associ-
ate team.
Resume
Roberta Alexander
208 Tallowood Blvd.
Westerville, OH 43081
(614) 555-4562 / email@email.com
General Manager: Hospitality
Able to develop strategies and follow through to impressive outcomes.
Operations Management • Human Resources Management
Staff Development, Training, and Leadership
Hotel/Resort Management professional with outstanding reputation for producing impressive
results. Practical problem solver, effective when managing union staffs, and recognized for
tenacity and perseverance.
Core Strengths
Guest Services 
Contract Negotiations
P&L Management
Labor Cost Controls
Hotel Sales & Marketing
Convention Coordination
Labor Relations
Financial & Cost Accounting
Professional Experience
Land Paradise Resort, Honolulu Hawaii
1999 to Current
General Manager
Manage hospitality operations and guest services of 200-room resort with revenues in excess of
$5 million annually. Ensure quality assurance and adherence to hotel service standard while
overseeing banqueting & catering, executive housekeeping, while ensuring that front office and
guest service departments operate at optimum levels. Develop and execute strategies support-
ing facilities planning and restaurant operation agendas.
I
Successfully implemented innovative Hospitality Training System.
I
Improved profit by over 25% during first year as General Manager.
I
Selected as Keynote speaker at three General Managers’ conferences.
I
Pioneered groundbreaking “Hotel Managers Survival Camp.”
Education
Cornell University, School of Hotel Administration, Ithaca, New York
Bachelor of Science: Hotel Administration, 1996
I
Concentration: Food and Beverage Management
I
Activities: Teaching Assistant, Culinary 101
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Hotel Sales &
Marketing
Labor Relations
Hospitality Training
Systems
Business
Development
Executive
Housekeeping
Banqueting &
Catering
Business Start-up
and Turnaround
Front Office
Management
Facilities Planning
Financial & Cost
Accounting
Restaurant
Operations
Management
Catering
Guest Services
Management
Budget Planning and
Administration
Labor Cost Controls
Convention
Coordinating
P&L Management/
Strategic Planning
Quality Assurance/
Service Standards
Staff Development,
Training, and
Leadership
Contract
Negotiations

GOVERNMENT LIAISON
92
Keywords
Bridging Clients
Together
Bureau Compliance
Client Advocate
Corporate Filings
Court-Held Fraud
Cases
Database Search
Management
Domain Names
Domestic/
International
Policies
Federal Laws and
Regulations
Government
Relations
Internet Intellectual
Property
Expert Testimony
Legislative Hearings
National Speaker
Patents,
Trademarks,
Copyrights
Peer Consultation
Portfolio of Services
Tangible/Intangible
Property
Trademark
Infringement
Web Site Content
Resume
William J. Whitfield III
Coral Grove Point—Northgate Way
North Babylon, New York 11703
(631) 555-0088 / email@email.com
Government Liaison
20-Year Career Specializing in Intellectual Property
Traditional & Internet Case Management
Patents / Trademarks / Copyrights
Influential government liaison with a groundbreaking career serving as a vital link between
federal agencies, patent attorneys, Internet companies, inventors, highly regarded marketing
firms, and Fortune 500 companies.
Core Strengths
Government Relations
Domestic/International Policies
Client Advocate
Database Search Management
Corporate Filings
Federal Laws and Regulations
Trademark Infringement
Expert Testimonials
Professional Experience
Intellex Properties, Inc., New York, New York 1993 to Present
Government Liaison
Expedite the granting of domestic/international trademarks, patents, and copyrights specific to
tangible/intangible property, Web site content, and domain names/personal names through ap-
propriate channels. Ensure full compliance with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Copy-
right Office, World Intellectual Property Organization, and a matrix of federal bureaus. Serve
as a leading authority, case representative, and client advocate.
I
Speak nationally on controversial foreign intellectual property issues.
I
Provided expert testimony for clients at fraud examination hearings.
I
Consult peer specialists on case analyses and legal protocols.
I
Attended legislative hearings on music copyright infringements.
Education
Fordham University, Bronx, New York
Master of Arts: Political Science, 1985
I
Chairperson, World Trade Advisory Committee
I
Member, MENSA
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Recently, my work has centered on influencing changes in Washington on issues concerning tradition-
al and Internet intellectual property rights. It is your organization’s recent decision to expand its port-
folio of services to include intellectual property that is of particular interest to me. I am confident that
my expertise in this arena would prove viable in supporting this challenging initiative.

GRAPHIC DESIGNER
93
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With a special knack for organization, system creation, streamlining work-flow, managing projects, and
solving inefficiencies, I bring proficiency in the areas of sheet-fed and web press processes, large format
printing, and desktop publishing. Offering collateral value as an experienced freelance graphic spe-
cialist for design staffing services, I have nine years of experience using QuarkXPress, Adobe Illustra-
tor, Adobe Photoshop, Adobe Pagemaker, and various other support programs and plug-ins.
Resume
Patti Elliott
9911 Davidian Drive
Menlo Park, California 94025
(415) 555-9681 / email@email.com
Graphic Designer
Experienced in Freelance Graphic Design and Production
Business-to-Consumer Project Design & Management
Full-Service Graphic Design Capabilities
Nine years’ experience in graphic design and project management from initial concept to fin-
ished product. Extensive experience creating corporate identity/communication packages for
the technical, medical, entertainment, and retail industries.
Core Strengths
Graphic Image Manipulation
Linotronic Outputs
Multicolor Printing
3-D Packaging
Publication Design
Visual Communications Media
Professional Experience
TARGET CORPORATION, Minneapolis, MN
1993 to Current
Graphic Designer—Advertising
Develop and design creative execution of concepts for assigned projects, including (but not lim-
ited to) magazine ads, newspaper ads, outdoor advertising, collateral, catalog page layout and
design, POS signing, interactive advertising, packaging, style guides, press kits, and other re-
lated projects.
I
Reduced advertising/marketing budget by $80,000 over a single year by streamlining bud-
geting practices.
I
Received awards for print design; published in multiple graphic design “best of” books in-
cluding Rockport Publishers Computer Graphics 2.
I
Designed corporate collateral and organized project archiving system.
Education
Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia
Bachelor of Arts / Fine Arts, 1993
I
Graphic Artist Intern, Century Marketing, Boulder, Colorado—1992
I
Graduated with Cum Laude Distinction
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Art Design
Ad Layout
Desktop Publishing
POS Signing
Electronic Pitchbook
Presentation Library
Visual
Communications
Media
Business-to-
Consumer (B2C)
Projects
Printing and
Prepress Processes
3-D Packaging
Large Format
Printing
Graphic Image
Manipulation
Sheet-Fed Press
Web Press
Typography
Linotronic Outputs
Color Separation
Photo Retouching
Multicolor Printing
Publication Design

GUIDANCE COUNSELOR
94
Keywords
Counseling
Peer Counseling
Education
Vocational/Career
Counseling
Parent and Family
Relationships
Research
Regulatory
Compliance
Intervention
Educational
Programs
Multidisciplinary
Teams
Therapists
Special Education
At-Risk Student
Populations
Student Advocate
Supportive
Colleague
Test Administration
Interactive Learning
On-Line Classrooms
Committee
Leadership
Resume
David McClosky
6738 N. Frostwood Parkway
Peoria, Illinois 61615
(309) 555-2445 / email@email.com
High School Guidance Counselor
20-year track record of helping students develop academically and socially
Career Counseling / Parent & Family Relationships / Public Relations
Expertise in the Development of Effective Student Programs for School, Career, and Family
Creative, resourceful, and dedicated Guidance Counselor with a history of identifying the
needs of various student populations and leading multidisciplinary teams to develop strategies
to meet those needs. Excellent communication skills in relating to administrators, teachers,
therapists, and family members. Reputation as a supportive colleague and a student advocate.
Core Strengths
Intervention
Targeted Educational Programs
Vocational/Career Counseling
Interactive Learning
On-Line Classrooms
Committee Leadership
Test Administration
Peer Counseling
Professional Experience
George Washington High School, Washington, Illinois
1980 to Present
Guidance Counselor
Facilitated both personal and career counseling, and conducted vocational testing. Acted as li-
aison to universities and the military, and developed college financial aid and career seminars
for schools, parents, and students. Conducted parent and student information sessions. Inter-
acted extensively with teachers and administrators regarding student progress, and made col-
lege admissions and scholarship information available as needed.
I
Pioneered a program with a local community college to provide classes at the high school,
giving eligible juniors and seniors dual credit for both high school and college coursework.
I
Developed a vocational counseling program in concert with a part-time jobs program, and
served as liaison to students and employers.
I
Provided leadership for the following committees: Tech Prep, Interactive Learning, and In-
tervention for At-Risk Student Populations
Education
ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY, Normal, Illinois
M.A. in Guidance and Counseling; Administrative Endorsement, 1980
B.S. in Biology and Physical Education (Double Major), 1975
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
In addition to extensive counseling with both individual students and their families, I’ve had the op-
portunity to provide leadership on a number of committees. For example, I led the project to bring in-
teractive learning to our school district, allowing students to take college courses via on-line classrooms
and receive dual credit for both high school and college. I also helped set up the tech-prep program in
our school in collaboration with a local community college. In addition, I’ve worked closely with multi-
disciplinary teams of teachers, administrators, therapists, social workers, and psychologists to identify
intervention strategies for at-risk and special-education students who have special needs.

HAIR STYLIST
95
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should our company hire you?
I have continued to keep my skills current by attending all trade shows and training in the three-state
area. In addition to my expert styling techniques, I have trained many staff members on safety, quali-
ty assurance, marketing, and customer satisfaction issues. My specialties include coloring hair, perms
and multilayered cuts. I have also been selected to provide personal stylist services for high-profile
clients, and once worked the set for Oprah Winfrey’s guests.
Resume
Cindy Lawson
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Professional Hair Stylist
12-Year Background in Professional Hair Styling and Training
Innovative Styling Techniques / Skilled Cosmetologist Trainer
Safety Training, Quality Control, and Marketing Experience
Creative and highly accomplished expert cosmetologist with a full range of styling, manage-
ment, customer relations, marketing, and training skills. Background in working successfully
with high-profile clientele.
Core Strengths
Customer Relations
Customer Loyalty
Creative Styling Techniques
Quality Control
Safety Training
Marketing
Customer Satisfaction
Shaping/Trimming
Perm Techniques
Curling/Tinting
Professional Experience
THE WAVE—Chicago, IL
1995 to Current
Head Stylist
Manage styling services for top-level clients and mentor new stylists in learning various cut-
ting, shaping, tinting, curling, and perm techniques. Implemented weekly safety and styling
meetings to improve quality and reduce incidents involving safety issues. Developed highly ef-
fective marketing techniques and trained staff to up-sell accessories effectively. Selected to pro-
vide services for numerous visiting celebrities.
I
Routinely train stylists on new techniques and safety compliance issues.
I
Spearheaded the purchase and use of the first ergonomically efficient chairs.
I
Increased customer satisfaction by implementing procedures to raise quality.
I
Achieved a 20% increase in accessory sales through aggressive marketing.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, Chicago, Illinois
Bachelor of Arts: Business Management 1986
Illinois State Licensed Cosmetologist 1984
Keywords
Customer Relations
Stylist
Customer Loyalty
Training
Styling Techniques
Quality Control
Safety Training
Marketing
Ergonomically
Efficient
Beautician
Cutting Methods
Tinting
Perm Techniques
Innovative
Shaping
Hair
Trimming
Curling
Customer
Satisfaction
Creative

HELP DESK ADMINISTRATOR
96
Keywords
Inbound Services
Operations
End-User Support
First-Level
Customer Service
Networking
Environment
User Support
Specialist
Troubleshooting
Escalation Skills
Problem Resolution
Data
Communications
Call Center
Environment
Team Player
Help Desk and
Hardware Support
First-Level PC
Support
Product Launch
Support
Customer Service
On-Line CRM
Network
Architecture
Support
Customer
Communications
Front-Line Help
Desk
On-Call Operations
Support
Resume
Grace Matherly
43 Murdock Court
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901
(732) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Help Desk Administrator / Help Desk Coordinator
Productive, high-quality inbound services operations
End-User Support / First-Level Customer Service
Stand-Alone or Networking Environments
User support specialist experienced in troubleshooting, escalation skills and problem resolu-
tion for networking and data communications in a call center environment. Cooperative team
player, able to work under pressure.
Core Strengths
Help Desk and Hardware Support
First-Level PC Support
Product Launch Support
Customer Communications
Customer Service / On-Line CRM
Escalation Resolution
Network Architecture Support
Migrations and Upgrades
Professional Experience
PHARMA BIOTECH, Princeton, New Jersey
1998 to Current
Help Desk Administrator
Front-line help desk support technician experienced in end-user computing systems and net-
work support for 1500 personnel in U.S. headquarters for top-five international manufacturer
and distributor of biotech products. First point of contact for support incidents, as well as end-
user instruction.
I
Ensure effective and efficient on-call operations support for product launches, data commu-
nications migrations and upgrades, and sales. Won annual company award for “Exceptional
Customer Service” in 2000.
I
Investigate and resolve 95% of first-level inquiries utilizing on-line knowledge base, techni-
cal knowledge, and on-line CRM system.
I
Assist application users by providing prompt responses, training one-on-one and in groups,
and in reactive and proactive problem solving.
Education
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey
Bachelor of Science, Computer Science—1998
I
Computer Skills: Microsoft Suite XP and 2000 products, Win NT, Win XP and 2000,
PC/mainframe applications, Unix, Linux, LAN/WAN, TCPIP and Novell networks, Magic
Enterprise Help Desk software.
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With four years’ experience providing complex front-line help desk support in a fast-paced sales sup-
port environment, I have gained in-depth escalation skills and technical knowledge ensuring first-level
customer service of the highest caliber. Utilizing on-line knowledge base tools and analytical trou-
bleshooting abilities, I have attained a problem resolution rate of 95% for first-point-of-contact in-
quiries. I would like to deliver exceptional customer support services to your organization.

HIGH SCHOOL TEACHER
97
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have employed a number of classroom teaching strategies, including process writing, writing on com-
puter, role playing, and the development of thematic units. In addition, I have had the opportunity to
mentor three student teachers and participate in curriculum development for the English department.
I believe in fostering an environment that leads to student success, and that includes adapting my
teaching style to meet the needs of students at multiple socioeconomic and ability levels. In addition, I
am comfortable in an inclusion environment, and I have extensive experience team teaching with spe-
cial education teachers.
Resume
Mary Brown
123 Fourth Avenue
Peoria, Illinois 61615
(309) 123-4567 / email@email.com
Secondary Teacher of English
12 Years’ Classroom Experience Combined with 7 Years as a Speech Team Coach
Teaching Techniques include: Writing on computer, process writing, team teaching,
cooperative learning groups, role playing, and the development of thematic units.
Resourceful and energetic teacher with a commitment to fostering lifetime learning in stu-
dents. Positive, outgoing, and approachable, with a talent for drawing out young people and
putting them at ease. Able to communicate effectively with parents, administrators, and col-
leagues.
Core Strengths
Curriculum Development
Classroom Management
Mentoring Colleagues & Students
Inclusion/Team Teaching with Special Education Teachers
Identifying Learner Needs
Helping Students Develop Critical Thinking Skills
Assertive Discipline
Teaching Writing as a Process
Professional Experience
ABC HIGH SCHOOL, Peoria, Illinois
1991 to Present
English Teacher / Speech Team Coach
Taught creative writing, process writing, writing on computer, and grammar, in addition to
multiple literature units on Shakespeare, Steinbeck, and Hemingway. Coached speech team
members and coordinated the group’s participation in tournaments in various locations
throughout central Illinois.
I
Developed a number of thematic units, incorporating spelling, process writing, and gram-
mar into various literature units.
I
Effectively supervised and mentored three student teachers.
I
Collaborated with special education teachers to design individualized lessons for students
with special needs within an inclusive environment.
Education & Credentials
Illinois State University, Normal, Illinois
Bachelor of Arts in the Secondary Teaching of English, 1990
Minor in Speech Communication
I
GPA: 3.8
I
Summa Cum Laude
Keywords
Higher Education
Teaching
English
Mathematics
Guidance
Counseling
Performance Based
Student Oriented
Student Success
Assertive Discipline
Team Teaching
Power Writing
Process Learning
Process Writing
Writing on
Computer
Thematic Units
Curriculum
Development
Continuing
Education
Role Playing
Mentoring
Classroom
Management
Lifelong Learning

HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER
98
Keywords
ADA Regulations
Compensation
Benefits
Administration
Salary Structures
Employee Assistance
Programs
COBRA
Administration
Performance
Appraisals
Employee Retention
Cost-per-Hire
Manpower Planning
Job Descriptions
Generalist
EEO Regulations
Staffing/Recruitment
Training and
Development
Organizational
Development
HRIS
Career Paths
Exempt and
Nonexempt
Workers
Personnel Policies
New-Hire
Orientations
Resume
Naomi Alexander
234 Cypress Street
Freehold, New Jersey 07728
(201) 555-1234 / email@email.com
HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER
Top-notch experience in Fortune 500 companies
Meeting Business Needs Through Expert Management of Employee Resources
Five years’ experience with accountability for all aspects of personnel administration in a 350-
person department. Key responsibilities include:
Core Strengths
Benefits Administration
Manpower Planning
Organizational Development
Performance Appraisals
Recruitment and Retention
COBRA Administration
Salary Structures and Compensation
EEO and ADA requirements
Professional Experience
JOHNSON & JOHNSON, New Brunswick, NJ
1997 to Present
Human Resource Manager (1998−Present)
Human Resource Associate (1997−1998)
Hired for the associate position and quickly promoted to HR Manager—a transition that typi-
cally takes several years. As HR Manager, direct a multitude of personnel functions for exempt
and nonexempt employees with emphasis on effective staffing, training, and retention of em-
ployees. Strong knowledge of COBRA, EEO, and ADA regulations.
I
Revamped recruitment strategies placing added emphasis on campus initiatives. As a re-
sult, cost-per-hire expenses fell 35% this year.
I
Conducted industrywide salary surveys and subsequently realigned our salary structure to
reflect market trends.
I
Overhauled antiquated job descriptions to reflect current job demands.
I
Spearheaded an HRIS conversion within the department.
Education
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ
Bachelor of Arts, Psychology, 1997
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With five years of progressively responsible positions in Human Resource Management, first in gener-
alist roles and then in various HR specialties, I have broad-based experience with the ability to handle
the multitude of issues that often arise within an organization such as yours. Key needs today include
employee retention and hiring the best people the first time, and our employee satisfaction surveys and
churn has been the best in the company history. In my present job, in addition to the staffing, benefits,
and compensation functions, I have successfully revamped our career paths, which has contributed to
increased employee retention.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

IMAGE CONSULTANT
99
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have a 10-year track record of advising individuals on dress-for-success techniques, significantly
heightening their professional potential. I am an experienced workshop presenter, and will advise and
guide your workforce on basics of image design, including professional dress, wardrobe color analysis,
and long-term image planning. I am also an expert at teaching essential nonverbal communication and
business etiquette skills, enhancing your company’s professionalism in the mind of your customers.
Resume
Jane Smart
45-454 East King Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96815
(808) 555-7873 / email@email.com
Image Consultant
Personalized Fashion Guidance
Wardrobe Analysis and Planning / Fashion Makeovers
Nonverbal Communications and Business Etiquette Authority
Dedicated professional seeking consultative position with mid- to
large-size firm. Background includes 10 years’ image design experience, 50+ corporate work-
shop presentations.
Core Strengths
Corporate Dress
Business Casual Dress
New Image Design
Closet Overhaul
Long-Term Wardrobe Planning
Shopping Skills Development
Color Analysis
Mannerisms
Professional Experience
IMAGINE THIS, Honolulu, Hawaii
1992 to Present
Proprietor/Image Consultant
In-person coaching of over 700 individuals to maximize their personal and professional image
potential. Select clients include sports professionals, corporate senior management, and
lawyers. Key areas of guidance include professional and casual dress, often requiring complete
wardrobe overhaul.
I
Helped rookie salesperson with wardrobe color analysis. New look contributed to 30% hike
in personal sales volume.
I
Designed fashion makeover for laid-off 48-year-old middle manager—business and casual
dress. Boost in confidence helped client land better-paying, more responsible position within
a month.
Education
San Diego State University, San Diego, California
Bachelor of Arts / Marketing, 1986
I
4.0 GPA
I
Who’s Who Among American College Students
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Corporate Dress
Professional Dress
Business Casual
Casual Dress
Dress for Success
New Image Design
Wardrobe Analysis
Long-Term
Wardrobe Planning
Closet Overhaul
Fashion Makeovers
Shopping Skills
Development
Personal Shopping
Color Analysis
Hair
Mannerisms
Nonverbal
Communications
Business Etiquette
In-Person
Consulting
Corporate
Workshops
Wedding Planning

INSURANCE CLAIMS ADJUSTER
100
Keywords
Investigation
Interpersonal
Communications
Insurance
Project Management
Analytical and
Problem-Solving
Ability
Claims
Auto Theft or
Larceny
Insurance Adjuster’s
License
claims Adjusting
Xactimate
(Estimating
Software)
Estimating
Interviewing
Coverage
Liability
Damage
Personal Injury
Uninsured Motorist/
Uninsured
Motorist Property
Damage
(UM/UMPD)
Site Investigation
Repair vs. Replace
Witness Statement
Resume
Sharon Tamiya
72801 Robin Lane
Ojai, California 93023
(805) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Claims Adjustor
Independent Contractor
Automobile
Collision / Theft / Personal Injury
Independent Claims Adjustor—nine years
representing major automobile insurers and underwriters
California insurance adjuster’s license #C5551212
Arizona insurance adjuster’s license #A5558888
Core Strengths
Site Investigations
Communications/Interviews
Estimating
Interviewing
Project Management
Remaining Calm in Emergencies
Professional Experience
Claims Adjuster / Independent Contractor
1991 to Current
Investigating, estimating, and resolving motor vehicle collision claims. Conduct crash site in-
vestigation. Take statements from witnesses. Assess damage (property, theft, or personal bodily
injury). Photograph and document site. Analyze police and witness reports for inconsistencies.
Reinterview if warranted. Determine liability after consideration of uninsured motorist and
third-party involvement. Make repair/replace recommendations. Submit Xactimate estimates
in final report submitted to field office.
I
Mobile Office Capability: 2002 Chevy 4X SUV with laptop computer, GPS, mapping soft-
ware, printer, cell, and digital camera.
Education
Insurance Institute of America, Malvern, Pennsylvania
Associate in Claims (AIC) / 2001
Registered Professional Adjusters, Inc., Napa, California
Registered Professional Adjuster (RPA)
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I offer a combination of critical claims adjusting and project management skills in addition to industry
licenses and certifications. With adjuster’s licenses for both California and Arizona, I can extend my op-
erations over a greater area. With my high-tech, mobile office you get 24/7 accessibility and state-of-
the-art electronic communications. I prepare my reports in the field and submit them electronically,
while on my way to our next job.

INSURANCE SALES
101
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have more than 13 years of outstanding achievements in the sales of life and health insurance gen-
erating as much as $14 million annually. My strengths include the ability to secure new clients, inter-
face with senior executives, and develop strong relationships resulting in long-term repeat and refer-
ral business. I believe my excellent prospecting, presentation, and closing skills will produce
outstanding sales results that will contribute greatly to the continued growth and success of your com-
pany.
Resume
Stephen Gallegos
456 Kelley Road
Dallas, Texas 75240
(214) 555-1122 / email@email.com
SUCCESSFUL INSURANCE SALESMAN
with more than 13 years of outstanding achievements
2001 Company Salesman of the Year
$14 million in annual sales
Proven track record of success in the sales of life and health insurance with recognition for
new market start-ups, increasing annual sales from $6 million to $14 million in six years, and
consistently exceeding quotas.
Core Strengths
Unique prospecting techniques
Interfacing with senior executives
Developing long-term relationships
Securing referrals from clients
Strategic marketing
New product introductions
Strong presentation skills
Excellent customer service
Professional Experience
L & H INSURANCE COMPANY, Dallas, Texas
1995 to present
District Sales Representative
Prospect for new clients, make formal presentations, and close sales
in the North Texas District. Focus on small to medium-size businesses as well as individuals,
analyze their needs and recommend the appropriate products to build their confidence and
trust. Develop and implement strategic marketing and advertising plans. Provide excellent
service to all clients to generate repeat business and referrals.
I
Opened three new markets and generated $1 million in the first year.
I
Increased annual territory sales to $14 million in 2001.
I
Secured a Fortune 100 company with $3 million in annual premiums.
I
Received the Top District Sales Award in all four quarters of 2001.
Education
Baylor University, Waco, Texas
Bachelor of Business Administration Degree; 1995
GPA: 3.8
Dean’s List in every semester
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Insurance Sales
Increased Sales
Exceeded Quotas
Sales Awards
Prospecting
Presentations
Closing Skills
Relationships
Repeat Business
Referrals
Customer Needs
Customer Service
Interface
Licensed
Insurance Products
Product
Introductions
Territory
Strategic Plans
Forecasting
Client Base

INTERIOR DESIGNER
102
Keywords
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Trends
Space Planning
Floor Plans
Drafting
Architectural
Elements
Budgeting
Consultations
Traditional
Old World
Contemporary
Construction
Faux Finishes
Renovations
Furnishings
Showrooms
Accessories
Interior Design
Showcases
Resume
Margaret West-Hafford, ASID
12 Linden Court
Southampton, New York 11968
(516) 555-8787 / email@email.com
INTERIOR DESIGNER
Focused on creating comfortable yet innovative interior spaces
Over 10 years’ experience helping a wide variety of clients surround themselves with beauti-
ful, functional environments. Skilled in all aspects of space planning for residential, commer-
cial, and industrial projects.
Core Strengths
Traditional, Old World, & Contemporary Design
Floor Plans
Construction & Renovation Projects
Space Planning
Budgeting
Architectural Elements 
Design Trends 
Accessories
Professional Experience
INTERIOR DIMENSIONS, Southampton, New York
1990 to Present
Interior Designer
Work collaboratively with clients from initial consultation to completion of interior design proj-
ects. Utilize strong drafting skills to create detailed floor plans to assist in construction and
renovation phases. Provide input on architectural elements and select and purchase furnish-
ings/accessories. Frequently visit New York City showrooms keeping abreast of design trends
to offer maximum options to clientele.
I
Won first place design award for Most Inviting Master Bedroom, Muttontown Interior De-
signers Showcase, November 2001.
I
Designed and commissioned a one-of-a-kind faux finish to replicate an old world plaster ef-
fect for the Oheka Castle renovation.
Education
New York University, New York, New York
Bachelor of Fine Arts, Art History, 1985
Metropolitan Institute of Interior Design, Plainview, New York
Diploma, Interior Design, 1999
Affiliations
Professional Membership, American Society of Interior Designers
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I’d like to think that what sets me apart from other interior designers is the flexibility I bring to each
project. Though like most professionals in this field, I have strong preferences in what I consider truly
beautiful, I remain entirely open and adaptable to the wants and styles of my clients. For example, I’ve
had clients recommend me to friends and in the process called me a contemporary design specialist,
while others just weeks later have referred to me as a traditional designer. I get a real kick out of that.

INVENTORY CONTROL MANAGER
103
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an 18-year veteran in inventory control and planning, I will ensure improved efficiency with con-
trolled costs. I have directed globally located, multisite operations, and managed multiyear supply
agreements as large as $60 million. My CIRM and MRP credentials are backed by significant real-time
inventory and automatic data capture experience. I have a track record of applying innovative, state-
of-the-art concepts in cycle counts, item identification, and tracking. My expertise in developing inven-
tory protection programs, documents, and contracts has resulted in industry networking.
Resume
John E. Davis
925 Grand Avenue South
St. Paul, Minnesota 55104
(651) 555-3498 / email@email.com
Inventory Control Manager
18-Year Career Complemented by MRP and CIRM Credentials
Broad Materials Management Experience ...
Industry Networking / Multisite Global Operations
A keen eye for improving efficiency while controlling costs. Consistently able to identify prob-
lems and implement solutions. Track record of achieving order accuracy, trimming fulfillment
costs, reducing capital asset deployment, and cutting spoilage/loss and shrinkage.
Core Strengths
Contract administration
Acquisition management
Identification and tracking
Automatic data capture
Real-time inventory
Supplier management
Cost control and reduction
Inventory protection
Professional Experience
BENSON INDUSTRIES, St. Paul, Minnesota 1995 to Current
Inventory Control Manager
Manage daily operations of a 54-person inventory control division with both union labor and
support personnel. Manage $68 million inventory. Enhance real-time features: inventory re-
ceipts, withdrawals, availability, commitments, and customer service information. Direct acqui-
sition management function responsibilities for over $1 billion in annual expenditures. Over-
see contract administration, negotiation, and rebid functions for over $200 million in annual
subcontracts. Established inventory protection programs for components and subcontractors.
I
Implemented an automatic data capture network system using bar codes and radio fre-
quency.
I
Reduced raw-material inventory by 38% in first year, without write-outs or stock-outs.
I
Achieved 2000 material cost savings of 39%, and 28% during 2001.
I
Integrated a supplier management model based on partnership strategies and visions.
Education
St. Cloud State University, St. Cloud, Minnesota
Bachelor of Science: Business Management, 1984
I
Inventory & Materials Management Diploma, St. Cloud Technical College, 1981
I
3.78 GPA
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Certified Integrated
Resource Manager
(CIRM)
Material
Requirements
Planning (MRP)
Certification
Industry
Networking
Inventory Planning
and Control
Materials
Management
Contract
Administration
and Negotiation
Real-Time Inventory
Acquisition
Management
Multisite Operations
Cost Control and
Reduction
Improved Efficiency
Supplier
Management
Global Locations
Inventory Document
Development
Item Identification
Inventory Protection
Programs
Leadership
Strengths
Item Tracking
Cycle Counts
Automatic Data
Capture

JOURNALIST
104
Keywords
Writing Skills
Creative
Analytical
Ideas
Research
Interviewing
Investigative
Factual Information
Utilize Resources
Editing
Proofreading
Meets Deadlines
Magazines and
Journals
Multiple Projects
Creative Writing
Fiction
Journalism Degree
Communication
Skills
Nonfiction
Electronic
Publishing
Resume
Susan Stafford
98765 Writers Lane
Dallas, Texas 75252
(469) 555-1122 / email@email.com
HIGHLY PUBLISHED JOURNALIST
with 10 years of outstanding accomplishments
Newspapers, Magazines, and Trade Journals
Dallas “Writer of the Year” in 2001
Creative and analytical journalist who constantly comes up with story ideas, conducts re-
search, utilizes various resources, and is technology savvy, to develop well-written and inter-
esting articles.
Core Strengths
Excellent writing skills
Investigative/factual information
Multiple projects
Always meets specified deadlines
Disciplined/detail-oriented
Editing and proofreading
Journalism degree
Electronic publishing
Professional Experience
STAFFORD & ASSOCIATES, Dallas, Texas
1992 to present
Independent Journalist
Constantly seek out newspapers, magazines, and trade journals that welcome creative and fac-
tual articles. Present story ideas to publishers and editors and determine specific deadlines.
Conduct research, utilize resources, organize materials, and use excellent writing skills to de-
velop wel-written and interesting articles. Edit and proofread all articles before submitting for
publication.
I
Six articles published in the Texas State Newspaper in 2001.
I
Guest columnist in the Wall Street Bulletin in July of 2001.
I
Selected from among 25 Independent Journalist to create a weekly home improvement 
column in the Texas Home and Garden Magazine.
I
2001 “Writer of the Year” Award presented by the Dallas Writers Club.
Education
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas
Bachelor of Arts Degree; Major: Journalism; 1991
GPA: 4.0
Member of Phi Kappa Beta Honor Society
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a creative and analytical journalist who has been published in several major newspapers, maga-
zines, and trade journals since 1992. I continually work on multiple projects, including interviewing, or-
ganizing materials, conducting research to obtain factual information, and using my excellent, detail-
oriented writing skills. I always meet specified deadlines. I can contribute greatly to your company by
always coming up with story ideas and utilizing various resources to develop well-written and inter-
esting articles.

LAB TECHNICIAN
105
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an evening shift laboratory technician of 10 years, I am recognized for my ability to prioritize, coor-
dinate, and perform tasks concurrently during periods of limited staffing and supervision. I offer cross-
trained experience in areas of hematology, phlebotomy, blood bank, urinalysis, coagulation, chemistry,
bone marrow slides, vital signs, venipuncture, and fire and safety. I am confident that my technical,
clinical, and administrative abilities would ensure the integrity of your hospital’s laboratory functions
in areas of quality assurance, clinical data processing, and specialized instrument/equipment care man-
agement.
Resume
Eleanor M. Salerno
2 Pennsylvania Way
East Brentwood, New York 11717
(631) 232-5555
email@email.com
Laboratory Technician
10 years of experience in medical and clinical laboratory settings
Specimen analysis and reporting / Clinical data processing
Instrument calibration and maintenance
Cross-trained in broad areas of medical laboratory procedures including hematology, mi-
croscopy, chemistry, serology, and bacteriologic testing. Organized and analytical with excep-
tional time management, error reduction, and outcome reporting skills.
Core Strengths
Hematology/Phlebotomy
Specimen Handling
Blood Bank
Infection Control
Equipment Care
Medical Waste Removal
Quality Assurance
Northern/Western Blot Analyses
Professional Experience
ALL SAINTS HOSPITAL, West Islip, New York
1996 to Present
Laboratory Technician
Work collaboratively with a medical technologist to maintain a compliant department that
strictly adheres to regulatory guidelines. Interface with all concerned throughout multiple hos-
pital units. Perform laboratory tests, routine preventive maintenance, and quality control pro-
cedures. Analyze, interpret, record, and communicate test results, and ensure the integrity of
computerized systems and high-end equipment functionality.
I
Coordinate in-service training programs for new clinical assistants.
I
Continue to reduce the annual error rate for specimen testing by 20%.
I
Participate in audits to ensure regulatory compliance and state funding.
I
Render off-site phlebotomy services across the medical community.
Education
Suffolk County Community College, Brentwood, New York
Associate in Applied Science: Medical Laboratory Technology, 1992
I
New York State Certified Phlebotomist
I
Member, American Association for Clinical Chemistry
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Analysis and
Reporting
Bone Marrow Slides
Chemistry
Clinical Data
Processing
Coagulation
Cross-Trained
Customer Care
Fire and Safety
Hematology/
Phlebotomy
Infection Control
In-Service Training
Inventory Control
Medical Laboratory
Procedures
Medical Waste
Removal
Northern/Western
Blot Analyses
Quality Assurance
Specialized
Equipment Care
Specimen Handling
Urinalysis
Venipuncture

LIBRARIAN
106
Keywords
Library Science
Librarian
MLS (Master of
Library Science)
ALA Accredited
University
OCLC
OCLC MARC
Format
Cataloguing
Dewey Classification
Multiple Disciplines
Circulation
Online Circulation
Customer Service
Reference Librarian
Children’s Librarian
Business Librarian
Readers’ Advisory
Literacy
Grant Writing
After-School
Programs
Tutoring
Internet Research
Library of Congress
Subject Heading
Resume
Rachel Oster
6738 N. Frostwood Parkway
Peoria, Illinois 61615
(309) 555-2445 / email@email.com
School Librarian
Fostering a love of learning in young people of all ages for 15 years
Children’s Librarian / Reference Librarian
Forging Links with Children, Parents, and Educators to Enhance Learning
Information and resource specialist with a background in the development of numerous after-
school programs. Excellent research and organizational / cataloguing skills combined with the
ability to communicate effectively with people at all levels and provide first-class service.
Core Strengths
Tutoring
Promoting Literacy
Reader’s Advisory
Internet Research
Cataloguing
Multiple Disciplines (languages/social sciences/literature)
On-Line Circulation
Providing Positive Customer Service
Professional Experience
FORBES SCHOOL SYSTEM, Forbes, Illinois
1990 to Present
Librarian
Oversee all operations for a library serving four schools, elementary through high school, with
responsibility for the hiring, scheduling, and supervision of part-time student staff. Serve as
reference librarian to students of all ages. Collaborate with teachers to coordinate library time
and training for various classes, and direct multiple after-school programs.
I
Conducted a thorough assessment of the information systems of other school libraries, both
through personal visits and via telephone with librarians, and updated the Forbes Library
to incorporate many of their features.
I
Implemented specialized catalogues and indexes, making research materials more accessi-
ble.
I
Setup a “Computer Day” one Saturday each month to teach Internet research to interested
students.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS, Urbana, Illinois
Master of Library Science (MLS), 1989
Bachelor of Science in French; Minor in Spanish, 1986
Bachelor of Science in Human Relations; Minor in English Literature, 1983
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Of course, I have an MLS from an ALA Accredited University. In addition, I have extensive coursework
in multiple disciplines including history, psychology, French, and Renaissance literature. But I believe
that all the knowledge in the world isn’t very helpful to a librarian who doesn’t possess good customer
service skills, so I have always tried to be very sensitive to the needs of our patrons. In that regard, I’ve
developed a number of activities and events to reach multiple populations, including an adult literacy
program, and an after-school tutoring and homework-help program.

LIMOUSINE DRIVER
107
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a limousine driver, I will contribute to your profitability through my ability to create loyal cus-
tomers. I am a reliable, courteous, and detail-oriented driver. I skillfully anticipate the needs of my pas-
sengers. I have driven for literally hundreds of special occasions, from birthdays to wedding anniver-
saries, and conscientiously set the appropriate atmosphere for each. In addition, my island-wide tour
itineraries have become somewhat legendary—clients love them and regularly refer friends to me.
Resume
Andrew Bankwell
24-680 Waikiki Boulevard
Honolulu, Hawaii 96818
(808) 555-3265 / email@email.com
Professional Chauffeur
Enhancing the Limousine Experience
Airport Transfers / Special Events / City Tours
Courteous and Professional
Expert driver with detailed knowledge of island roads and sight-seeing points of interest. Ex-
perienced with stretch limos and luxury SUVs. Hold current commercial driver’s license.
Core Strengths
Customer Service
Customer Loyalty
Itinerary Planning
VIP Handling
City Tours
Sight-Seeing Destinations
Entertainment Destinations
Special Occasions
Professional Experience
STRETCH OF THE IMAGINATION LIMOS, Honolulu, Hawaii
1995 to Current
Limousine Driver/Chauffeur
Primary activities include client/VIP airport pick-up for area businesses. Also drive for variety
of exclusive events, including weddings, birthdays, and graduations. Accountable for light
cleaning and minor maintenance of vehicles. Ensure adequate supply of convenience items
(newspapers, magazines, and drinks) and proper functioning of cellular phone, CD player, and
television. Teach quarterly safety training class for new chauffeurs.
I
Regularly receive positive letters of commendation from satisfied local and international
clients.
I
Received Chauffeur of the Year 2001 Award for customer loyalty.
I
Researched and wrote circle-island limousine tour script.
Education
Kapiolani Community College, Honolulu, Hawaii
Associate of Science / Hospitality Management, 1991
I
Internship at Royal Hawaiian Hotel
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Chauffeur
Stretch Limousines
Luxury SUVs
Airport Transfers
Special Occasions
Weddings
Birthdays
Bachelor Parties
Graduations
City Tours
Business Client
Pick-Up
VIPs
Commercial Driver’s
License
Safety Training
Customer Service
Customer Loyalty
Convenience Items
Itinerary Planning
Entertainment
Destinations
Sight-Seeing
Destinations

LOAN OFFICER
108
Keywords
Mortgage Banking
Loan Production
Lending Products
Conventional A thru
D Paper
Commercial Loan
Consumer Loan
Conventional, FHA,
and VA Mortgage
Loans
HUD1
Origination Fees
Broker Fees
Discount Fees
YSP Fees
SRP Fees
Rate Sheets
Desktop
Underwriting
Prime/Subprime
Lending
Banking
Point-of-Sale
Systems
Secondary
Marketing
Preapproval
Programs
Resume
Ryan Smith
309 Main Street
Albany, New York 06548
(518) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Mortgage Loan Officer / Originator
Prime & Subprime Markets
Top-Producing Loan Officer
Expert in Mortgage Banking, Training, Sales, and Finance
Loan officer with extensive experience underwriting multifamily and commercial real estate
loans and providing lending products in branches of a bank having the highest rate of growth
in the state.
Core Strengths
Loan Origination Programs
FHA, VA, and Conventional Products
Desktop Underwriting
Preapproval Programs
Point-of-Sale Systems
Financial Services Reporting Software
MS Business Administration
Conventional A thru D Paper
Professional Experience
Norwest Financial, Albany, New York
1998 to Present
Senior Loan Officer
Reporting directly to the director of the branch, manage eight loan officers with responsibility
for $288 million in production, plus full responsibility for training. In addition to personal 
account management and sales responsibility, recruited to design point-of-sale systems and
preapproval programs to boost market share in a highly competitive market.
I
Closed over $30,000,000 in FHA, VA and conventional products since 1998.
I
Established eight new locations nationwide.
I
Increased loan volume by 50% resulting in $18,000,000 in new revenue.
I
Established equity loan products including primary and secondary trust deeds.
Education
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
Masters in Business Administration/Finance, 1997
I
Member, National Association of Mortgage Brokers
I
MS Word 1997, Excel, Access, and WordPerfect
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a senior loan officer with more than five years of successful service, I offer extensive experience in
both prime and subprime lending markets. You will find that I have a verifiable track record of success
for meeting and exceeding sales objectives, and will consistently deliver strong revenue and profit con-
tributions through aggressive account management and superior customer service initiatives.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

LOSS PREVENTION MANAGER
109
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
There are many similarities between the challenges your company has and the ones present in the com-
pany I am with now. As I see it, the number of stores, the type of items sold, and even the typical cus-
tomers, are strikingly similar. As such, I can offer my ability to hit the ground running. I am confident
that my full knowledge of asset protection including physical inventory monitoring, fraud training, and
security reporting will provide the answers to any difficulties you have in this area.
Resume
Joel S. Lawson
3 Bradford Drive
Bristol, CT 06010
(860) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Loss Prevention Manager
12 years’ experience with nationally recognized retailers
Proven expertise in reducing retail losses through proactive measures
Driven to achieve substantial reductions in profit losses through leadership, vigilance, and
planning and execution of top-notch loss prevention strategies.
Core Strengths
Asset protection
Policies and procedures
Fraud training
Electronic surveillance
Auditing
Undercover operations
Security reports
Internal theft investigations
Professional Experience
COACH, Inc. New York, NY
1990 to Present
Loss Prevention Manager (1994−Present)
Loss Prevention Associate (1990−1994)
Oversee activities pertaining to loss prevention in 300 stores across the United States. Review
audits of store inventory and assess discrepancies. Consult with company executives regarding
inventory inconsistencies. Formulate and administer company policies with regard to antitheft
procedures at the store level. Train store personnel in proper procedures for interacting with
customers engaged in dishonest activity.
I
Achieved a 40% reduction in shrinkage from 1996 to 2001.
I
Researched, evaluated, purchased, and implemented state-of-the-art surveillance equip-
ment for all stores. New equipment, prominently displayed, is credited with a reduction in
store theft.
I
Instituted undercover operations using store detectives posing as sales staff. To date infor-
mants have identified 10 company employees involved in theft of merchandise.
Education
Long Island University, C.W. Post Campus, Brookville, NY
Bachelor of Arts, Criminal Justice, 1990
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Asset Protection
Inventory Shortage
Analysis
Electronic
Surveillance
Security Operations
Industrial Security
Stolen Property
Store Detectives
Undercover
Operations
Auditing
Security Breaches
Employee Integrity
Interviews
Policies and
Procedures
Revenue Loss
Security Reports
Informants
Internal Theft
Investigations
Physical Inventory
Shrinkage
Chargebacks
Fraud Training

MANAGEMENT
110
Keywords
Decision Making/
Analysis
Accounting
Budget Control
Staff Training &
Development
Cost and Quality
Business Taxation
Customer Service
Forecasting and
Analysis
Operations
Management
Process
Management
Business
Development/
Administration
Organizational
Leadership
Team Building &
Leadership
Problem Solving
Budget Development
& Administration
Sales & Marketing
Relationship
Building
Goal Setting/
Incentive
Programs
Organizational
Leadership
Profit and Loss
Resume
Justin Coury
3452 Broman St.
Cincinnati, Ohio, 45327
(513) 555-4567 / email@email.com
Management
Combining organizational leadership with profit & loss experience
Decision Making/Analysis • Staff Training & Development 
Business Development/Administration • Budget Development
Extremely motivated entry-level management professional offering formal education in management
as well as hands-on management experience within fast-paced retail settings.
Core Strengths
Accounting
Customer Service
Budget Control
Forecasting and Analysis
Cost and Quality Theory
Process/Operations Management
Business Taxation
Team Building & Leadership
Professional Experience
FOOTPROOF, Cincinnati, Ohio
2000 to Current
Manager
Ensure performance of daily operations within fast-paced shoe retail store ranked third in 
region. Accountable for proactive sales and marketing of store items as well as developing
problem-solving strategies that address profit and loss issues. Provide excellent customer ser-
vice, and focused on expanding referral base by building relationships with repeat customers.
I
Increased store profits by 35% within only three months of employment.
I
Successfully implemented new goal setting/incentive programs.
I
Recipient of “Golden Foot” for consistently exceeding store goals.
I
Decisively replaced lagging employees with goal-driven individuals.
Education
Klipplinger College of Business, Boulder, Colorado
Bachelor of Science, Management, 2000
I
Young Professionals student chapter, vice president
I
Honors Society, member
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have paid for nearly 90% of my education while serving as a sales associate in a retail setting.
Promoted to a management position, I have been afforded the opportunity to gain hands-on experience
in profit/loss, staff hiring/development, and business development processes. Reinforcing my profes-
sional experience is a formal education in business management, which added to my knowledge in 
budget development and administration, forecasting/analysis, and operations management, will 
produce successful results.

MANUFACTURER’S REPRESENTATIVE
111
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
You should put me on your team if you want to minimize the cost of sales and maximize your return
on investment. I could never have been successful as a manufacturer’s rep. without the polished skills
that come with years of solid performance as a sales professional. Add to that credential a detailed
knowledge of your territory, a permanent presence before your customers, and relationships that let me
exploit industry trends faster than ever-changing sales forces and we have a solid foundation for a mu-
tually profitable arrangement. Remember, because you don’t pay me a base salary, I must sell in order
to live.
Resume
Mark Williams
3443 Sandy Hill Drive
Birmingham, Alabama 35201
(205) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Manufacturer’s Representative (A vested partner in your success)
Building and keeping OEM sales high—at the lowest cost of sales
Compiling, tracking, and using comprehensive customer databases
to great advantage
Maintaining steady territory presence
An experienced, “hungry” sales professional with an in-depth knowledge of a rich and develop-
ing territory. A master at finding and using competitive intelligence to put us inside your com-
petitors’ sales decision cycles.
Core Strengths
Closing
Anticipating specific customer needs
Selling related, but not competitive, products
Making every call a relationship call
Building or recovering distributor networks
Finding emerging markets
Professional Experience
Vulcan General Manufacturing, Birmingham, Alabama
1992 to Current
Manufacturer’s Representative
Manage a large territory effectively and efficiently. Find and cement lasting relationships with
purchasing decision makers. Develop, implement, and continually improve marketing and
sales strategies that match our corporate strengths with our customers’ ever-changing needs.
Increase the number of SKUs sold to each account
I
Reignited a distributor network that had been neglected for years. Sales up 22%.
I
Captured an account that had relied upon a traditional sales rep. for five years. Revenue
from this account exceeds $250K annually.
I
Increased add-on sales last quarter at the highest rate ever recorded for our company.
Education
University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama
Bachelor of Science in Marketing, 1990
Keywords
Manufacturing
Construction
Metals and Raw
Materials
Fabrication
Consulting Services
Customer Database
Decision Cycle
Emerging Markets
Entrepreneur
Increasing the
Number of SKUs
Independent
Marketing
Partners
Market Niche
OEM Business
Product Knowledge
Qualified Dealer
Network
Recover and Build a
Distributor
Network
Related but Not
Competitive
Products
Relationship Calls
Field Sales
Steady Territory
Presence

MARKETING MANAGER
112
Keywords
Project Management
Brand Recognition
Market Share
Collateral Material
Direct Marketing
Communication
Strategies
Media Relations
Press Releases
Intranet
Web Site
Distribution
Channels
Product Offerings
New Product
Launch
Quark XPress,
FrontPage, Flash,
Java, HTML
Vendor Sourcing/
Outsourcing
Talent Management
Competition,
Market, Trend
Analysis
Consumer Relations
Marketing Plan
Development
Strategic Planning
Resume
Robin Claterbaugh
736 Marquette Avenue
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202
(414) 555-1492 / email@email.com
Marketing Manager
Creative, innovative marketing manager with expertise in creating sales collateral, direct mar-
keting, and communication strategies to drive revenue, product offerings, and new marketing
opportunities.
Core Strengths
Project management
Media relations
Web marketing and e-solutions
Trend/market analysis
Talent management
Strategic marketing plans
Brand recognition
New product launch
Professional Experience
MORGAN BANK, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
1998 to Present
Marketing Manager, Insurance Division
Administer a $2 million marketing budget. Create sales collateral, direct marketing, and com-
munication strategies to drive revenue, grow product offerings, and identify new marketing op-
portunities for this $300 million division. Identify methods to market strategically and drive
sale and distribution of insurance products through distribution channels. Keep abreast of
competition and trends. Manage vendor relationships.
I
Strategized and collaborated with SJ Bank to develop communication program, including
page of Morgan Bank’s Intranet, regarding its acquisition. Coordinated media relations for
coverage of acquisition.
I
Created and developed pages for Major Bank Insurance Group’s intranet. Project involved
converting policies/procedures into HTML, creating electronic access to newsletter, site nav-
igation testing, and more.
Education
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Bachelor of Business Administration: Marketing, 1995
I
Member of the American Marketing Association—Student Chapter
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an innovative, results-oriented marketing manager, I am experienced with creating and developing
sales materials/collateral, direct marketing, and communication strategies to drive revenue, grow
product offerings, and identify new marketing opportunities. In one project, I utilized HTML to convert
polices, procedures, and product information for our company Web site, which significantly increased
sales and market share. I have also had a tour in sales, which enables me to understand that both sales
and the end customer are my two customers.

MEDIA BUYER
113
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why Should Our Company Hire You?
Because I have held both buying and marketing positions, I know the business from both sides. I have
a thorough understanding of media marketing, brand management, and strategic positioning from my
previous experience, which better equips me to buy media effectively for my clients. I also have solid
Corporate Communications and Marketing credentials, along with hands-on experience in print ad-
vertising and television.
Resume
Ross Johnson
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Media Buyer
Highly Skilled in Branding Strategies within International Markets
Experienced in Multimedia Technology and Strategic Positioning
Solid Purchasing and Marketing Experience
Talented media buyer and marketing professional with a unique balance of hands-on experi-
ence. Thorough understanding of strategic positioning, buy analysis, multichannel media dis-
tribution, and negotiation techniques.
Core Strengths
Corporate Communications
Print Advertising
International Markets
Imaging Technology
Client Relations
Electronic Media
Branding Strategies
Purchasing
Buy Analysis
Quality Assurance
Professional Experience
MEDIA NOW TECHNOLOGIES—Hamond, IL 
1999 to Current
Assistant Media Buyer
Manage 10 top-level key accounts in directing all aspects of international media buying. Col-
laborate with top-level client management teams to review branding strategies, negotiate pur-
chasing terms, and ensure strategic positioning by selecting quality electronic, print, and tele-
vision media. Oversee client relations, quality assurance, corporate communications, and
contracts for additional creative services.
I
Negotiated major media buys for all 10 clients with $22.5 million to profits.
I
Played a key role in three clients’ breaking into international markets.
I
Reengineered internal buy analysis strategies, increasing accuracy by 30%.
I
Created six national and four international brand management campaigns.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS, Collinsville, Illinois
Bachelor of Arts: Marketing 1998
Bachelor of Arts: Corporate Communications 1987
Keywords
Marketing
Purchasing
Buying
Corporate
Communications
Multimedia
Technology
Strategic Positioning
Buy Analysis
Print Advertising
Television
Imaging Technology
International
Markets
Negotiation
Multichannel Media
Distribution
Client Relations
Quality Assurance
Advertising
Communications
Brand Management
Creative Services
Electronic Media
Branding Strategies

MEDICAL BILLING SUPERVISOR
114
Keywords
Accurate
Transactions
Verify Insurance
Patient Eligibility
Coding
Processing Claims
Patient Benefit
Payments
Billing Problems
Payment Delays
Accounts Receivable
Reports and
Statistics
Patient
Confidentiality
Explanation of
Benefits
Managed Care
Employee Assisted
Programs (EAP)
Billing Software
Policies and
Procedures
Supervising
Employees
Multiple Projects
Medicare
Medical Billing
Resume
Karen Odom
789 White Boulevard
Dallas, Texas 75240
(972) 555-1212 / email@email.com
MEDICAL BILLING SUPERVISOR
with 14 years of diversified experience
Consistently commended for accurate transactions
and a low percentage of delays in payments
A dedicated medical billing supervisor with experience in fast-paced environments with Dal-
las-based healthcare companies focusing on streamlining procedures to maximize productivity
and profitability.
Core Strengths
Managed care experience
Employee-Assisted Programs (EAP)
Rapid processing of claims
Accurate transactions and coding
Low delays in payments
Resolve patient problems quickly
Team environment of employees
Excellent reports and statistics
Professional Experience
DALLAS MEDICAL PRACTICE, Dallas, Texas
1990 to present
Medical Billing Supervisor
Supervise a team of six employees in the daily verification of insurance, patient eligibility, cod-
ing, and processing of claims. Ensure that accurate transactions are entered as fast as possible
and research any billing problems to eliminate “explanation of benefits notices” and delays in
payments from insurance companies. Prepare weekly and monthly reports and statistics for
the Clinical Director and Chief Financial Officer.
I
Managed the successful processing of 20,000 billings/claims in 2001.
I
Maintained a 96% to 98% accuracy rating of all transactions.
I
Increased employee productivity by revising job responsibilities.
I
Implemented new medical billing software and trained all employees.
Education
Richland College, Richardson, Texas
Associate of Arts Degree; 1987
Major: Accounting
GPA: 3.75
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have 14 years of medical billing supervisory experience with Dallas-based healthcare companies. My
supervisors have consistently commended me for accurate transactions, coding, and processing of
claims with a low percentage of delays in payments. I have also built a team of dedicated employees
who concentrate daily on resolving problems and providing excellent service to all patients while main-
taining strict confidentiality. My outstanding accomplishments are proof of how I will contribute great-
ly to your company.

NATIONAL ACCOUNT SALES
115
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I came up through the ranks, so I understand the problems that every sales representative faces, every day,
to keep the company strong in tough markets. My strength lies in consultative selling that provides solu-
tions for customers. Most sales people have a difficult time developing and nurturing relationships with
large accounts, and approaching them strategically. I excel in developing, managing, and retaining highly
profitable accounts by looking at the larger picture from the customer’s perspective. As a member of your
sales management team, I can take a leadership role in advancing your direct, indirect, and global sales 
efforts. I can also handle new product launches, from planning to putting them in the customers’ hands.
Resume
Tonya Stevens
815 Carmack Way
Tipp City, Ohio 45371
(937) 555-3396 / email@email.com
National Account Sales
Dynamic Career in Sales, Management, & Marketing in fiercely competitive,
high-growth businesses. Expert in managing top-producing organizations.
New Product Launch / Profit & Loss Control / Key Account Management
Strategic, Sales, & Business Planning / Marketing & Advertising
Outstanding presentation, negotiation and sales-closing skills. Ability to merge cross-functional
teams. Consistently achieve objectives, even during periods of increased competition & econom-
ic downturns.
Core Strengths
Teaming & Leadership
Consultative Sales
Direct & Indirect Sales
Global Marketing
Revenue & Profit Growth
Multichannel Distribution
Time Management
Attention to Detail
Professional Experience
PITNEY INDUSTRIAL SALES
1987 to Current
National Accounts Manager
Direct nationwide group of sales professionals serving manufacturing industry. Fully responsi-
ble for profit & loss of 12 sites with annual sales of $150M. Direct supervision of 12 managers;
indirect responsibility for 200 people. Recognized for achieving highest sales increase and low-
est attrition rate in corporate network. Consistently received performance-based promotions to
company’s key management team.
I
Increased 2002 sales 22% first quarter; repeat sales grew 12%.
I
Led organization to first place for international sales.
I
Received company’s most prestigious profit award last three years.
I
Named Top Accounts Manager seven years in row.
Education
Miami University, Oxford, Ohio
Bachelor of Science, Organizational Management, 1992
I
GPA: 4.0
I
Class Valedictorian
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Account
Development
Account
Management
Account Retention
Competitive
Analysis
Consultative Sales
Customer Loyalty
Customer
Satisfaction
Direct Sales
Indirect Sales
Global Markets
Key Account
Management
Product Launch
Multichannel
Distribution
Negotiations
Profit & Loss
Sales Closing
Solutions Selling
Team Building/
Leadership
Profit Growth
Revenue Growth

NETWORK ARCHITECT
116
Keywords
LAN/WAN
TCP/IP Networking
Protocols
Cisco VPN Solution
Technical Support/
Documentation
Analytical Problem
Solving
Client/Server
Programming
Routing
Configuring,
Debugging,
Programming at
Network Level
Windows NT/2000
Novell
SQL, Oracle
Communication
Skills
Team Player
Cisco Certified
Network Associate
(CCNA)
Network Security
Multisite Exposure
Budget
Development/
Compliance
Purchasing
Project Management
Disaster Recovery
Plans
Resume
Vernon P. Schultz
1982 Grafton Street
Grafton, Wisconsin 53024
(262) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Cisco Certified Network Associate
Eliminates downtime through LAN/WAN design and administration
Configuring, programming, and debugging at network level
Communicates solutions and provides technical support
Innovative network architect with expertise configuring, programming, and debugging Win-
dows NT/2000 and Novell LAN/WAN, including client/server programming, to eliminate down-
time.
Core Strengths
Project management
Technical Support
Hardware/software purchasing
Budget development/compliance
Multisite environments
TCP/IP networking protocols
Client/server programming
Cisco VPN Solution
Professional Experience
NETWURX UNLIMITED, Waukesha, Wisconsin
1998 to Present
Network Architect, CCNA
Support global Microsoft server infrastructure in a global company with business efforts in 50
countries. Support, administer, and design NT, Novell, and OS/2 systems and networks. Install
hardware for Windows NT and OS/2 workstations. Set up Distinct, Rumba, Cisco Secure, and
Ethernet configurations. Provide technical support to more than 2500 internal users at all lev-
els. Travel nationwide to resolve system issues or set up/install new systems, applications or
upgrades. Source vendors to purchase complete systems.
I
Coordinated installation of 28-site frame relay supporting AS/400 5394 and 5494 con-
trollers, terminals, and printers for key manufacturer. Tied project into AT&T frame and
Internet Security utilizing Cisco’s PIX firewall.
I
Directed Novell-to-NT server migration.
Education
Milwaukee School of Engineering, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Bachelor of Science, Computer Science, 1995
I
GPA: 3.5
I
Member of Tau Beta Pi Engineering Honor Society
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a Cisco Certified Network Associate, I possess broad-based server and network experience includ-
ing hardware, software, and network configuration, programming, troubleshooting, and repair, as well
as user training. Additionally, I possess experience working with third-party vendors and negotiating
favorable terms to purchase complete systems, hardware, software, and services. With this expertise, I
can virtually eliminate downtime and keep your network operating smoothly.

NETWORK ENGINEER
117
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am an experienced Certified Network Engineer with excellent customer service and communication
skills. I utilize the latest technology to customize system solutions that exceed customer expectations.
Coordinating vendors, coupled with tenacious problem solving and troubleshooting, allows me to bring
the project in ahead of schedule. I took the initiative to upgrade my skills in security and designed a
virtual private network. I describe myself as a self-starter, attentive to detail, and cost conscious.
Resume
Connie Connect
888 Current Way
San Jose, California 95112
(408) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Network Engineer
Five years’ experience in Communications Engineering
Certified Network Engineer
Certified network professional adept in latest technology. Strong installation, troubleshooting,
and administration skills. Able to meet and exceed expectations in quality and rollout. Exper-
tise in routing protocols.
Core Strengths
TCP/IP
Cisco
Windows NT
Novell NetWare
Installation
Troubleshooting
Remote access
Extranet
Professional Experience
ConnectNet, San Jose, CA
1995 to 2001
Communications Engineer
Responsibilities:
Planned, built, and managed computer network infrastructures. Integrated new hardware and
software into existing networks. Created new local and wide area networks. Designed wire line
and wireless linkages for simple and complex systems. Provided technical support and trou-
bleshooting for installations and maintenance phases of project.
I
Installed remote access system for global company of 15,000 employees
I
Piloted design of broadband system
I
Designed Virtual Private Network using public network transport
I
Developed security access controls including sign-on, filters, firewalls
Education
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California
Bachelor of Science / Communications Engineering, 1994
I
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California
I
Certified Network Engineer 1995
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
TCP/IP
Unix
Windows NT
Local Area Network,
LAN
Wide Area Network,
WAN
Internet
Routing Protocols
Troubleshooting
Servers
Telecommunications
Cisco
Circuit Design
Installation
Integration
Firewalls
Remote Access
Extranet
Network Design
Infrastructure
Novell NetWare

NONPROFIT PROGRAM DIRECTOR
118
Keywords
After-school
Programs
Agency Relations
Board Elections
Budget Planning
Caseload
Management
Curriculum
Development
Day Care Center
Inspections
Early Childhood
Development
Exit Conferences
Federal Funding
Health and Safety
High-Scope Trainer
Individual
Education Plans
Nonprofit Fund
Raising
Program Evaluation
and Analysis
Regulatory
Compliance
Requests for
Funding Proposals
Research Studies
Student Advocate
Teacher Training
Resume
Carolyn Freeman
90-A Gillespie Avenue
Ozone Park, NY 11418
(718) 555-2222 / email@email.com
Nonprofit Program Director
30-year career in education and program management
Preschool and School-Aged Day Care Centers
Early Childhood Development Programs
Dedicated, accomplished program director with a career ensuring the quality of education with
a focus on the planning, development, and implementation of educational programs for early
childhood development.
Core Strengths
Program Evaluation
Curriculum Development
Agency Relations
Requests for Funding Proposals
Budget Planning
Regulatory Compliance
Facilities Inspection
Board Elections
Professional Experience
High Bridge Learning Center, New York, New York
1989 to Current
Program Director
Guide the evaluation of early childhood development programs, and determine programmatic
and facility ratings based upon curriculum content, staffing, regulatory compliance, facility
conditions, and health and safety guidelines. Plan budgets, prepare requests for funding 
proposals, and confer with Board of Education and agency officials on a range of educational,
budgetary, and regulatory issues.
I
Cochair Board elections; hold Certified Parents Association meetings.
I
Manage a caseload of 150 preschool and school-aged day care centers.
I
Conduct weekly Exit Conferences to present findings of evaluations.
I
Serve as a High-Scope trainer, and advocate for special needs students.
Education
Education, Queens College, Flushing, New York
Master of Science: Education, 1985
I
New York State Certification, Nursery through Sixth Grade
I
Administration Training for Educational Directors
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have a strong interest in your early childhood development program, and believe my experience as a
classroom teacher and program director overseeing similar programs would be of value. I offer
strengths in areas of day care and after-school program evaluation and analysis, proposal development,
curriculum and Individual Education Plan development, educational facilities inspection, federal fund-
ing, health and safety compliance, teacher training, research studies, and Board elections.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

NURSE
119
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
During my entire 14-year nursing career in state-licensed nursing homes, I have been an advocate of
compassionate care and efficient treatment for my patients and their families. While high costs ac-
company quality care, my expertise in the use of rapid and accurate intake and discharge assessment
tools such as the Resident Assessment Instrument and the Minimum Data Set can not only ensure that
the facility meets its regulatory requirements, but also help eliminate unnecessary stays and treat-
ments.
Resume
Louise Lamarr
2858 Fir Street
Ventura, California 93003
(805) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Registered Nurse (RN-BSN)
Nursing Home and Convalescent Care Management
Skilled Diagnostics and Treatment Planning
Quality through Compassionate, Managed Care
Ardent communicator with over 14 years of providing medical services to geriatric patients in
state licensed, long-term care facilities.
Core Strengths
Resident Assessments
Acute Care / Long-Term Care
Treatment Plan Development
Diagnostic Models
Case Management
Patient Education
Professional Experience
SEAVIEW GERIATRIC CARE CENTER
Ventura, California
Charge Nurse—Registered Nurse (RN II)
1995 to Current
Direct the admission, treatment, and discharge of patients in this 120-bed nursing home. Con-
sult with interdisciplinary team members regarding patient treatment and implementation of
patient care plans. Instructed patient and family diagnosis, prognosis, and in-residence care.
I
Resident expert and staff trainer in the Resident Assessment Instrument and the Mini-
mum Data Set.
I
Initiated and conducted a series of practice RAI/MDS audits. Seaview has earned 100%
compliance on all inspections since 1998.
I
RAI/MDS Facilitator certification expected in September 2002.
Education
California State University at Northridge, California
Bachelor of Science, Nursing (BSN) / 1994
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Registered Nurse
(RN)
Long-Term Care
Managed Care
Health Care
Case Management
Prognosis
In-Residence Care
Patient Admissions
and Discharge
Treatment Plans
Rehabilitation Plans
Patient Care Plan
Problem Solving
Clinical Intervention
Diagnostic Models
Minimum Data Set
(MDS)
Resident
Assessment
Instrument (RAI)
Nursing Homes
Communications
Skills
Patient Education
Life Support
Monitoring
Equipment

NUTRITIONIST
120
Keywords
Integrative Care
Meal Plans
Dietetic & Nutrition
Services
Treatment Plans
Metabolic Typing
Chelation Therapy
Intravenous
Vitamins &
Minerals
Immunology
Therapeutic Skin
Care Analysis
Biochemistry
Metabolic Nutrition
Enzyme Nutrition
Rehabilitation
Services
Nutrition
Natural Allergy
Treatment
Client Consultation/
Analysis
Holistic Approach
Diet, Exercise, &
Lifestyle
Vitamin
Supplementation
Nutrient Depletion
Resume
Janice Scott, CN
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Certified Nutritionist
Highly Skilled in Holistic Approaches to Health and Fitness
Natural Allergy Treatment / Therapeutic Skin Care Expertise
Integrate Various Diets, Supplement Protocols, and Enzyme Approaches
Results-oriented, enthusiastic, and highly accomplished certified nutritionist with a solid track
record of assisting patients at all age levels in overcoming various health problems including
diabetes, ADD, allergies, and weight issue.
Core Strengths
Metabolic Typing
Integrative Care
Metabolic Nutrition
Biochemistry
Rehabilitation
Well Family Guidance
Natural Allergy Treatment
Therapeutic Skin Care
Patient Analysis
Treatment Plans/Meal Plans
Professional Experience
NUTRITION PLUS—Janesville, IL
1992 to Current
Director of Nutrition
Spearhead and manage various nutritional outreach programs for this thriving organization
providing services to hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, and other large entities/corporations.
Supervise, train, and mentor a staff of eight in all aspects of performing client consultations/
analysis, introducing vitamin and mineral supplementation, and reinforcing a holistic ap-
proach involving the nutrition, exercise, and lifestyle changes needed to obtain optimum
health.
I
Pioneered a highly successful Family Wellness Guidance program.
I
Increased annual revenues through new programs by 60%.
I
Recruited and hired new staff members to assist in managing new business.
Education
STATE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS—Mercer, Illinois
Bachelor of Science in Nutrition/Biochemistry (1988)
Certifications: Certified Personal Trainer (1990) • Illinois State Certified
Nutritionist (1989) • Certified in Hair Analysis (1989)
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why Should Our Company Hire You?
I believe in a holistic approach to health because health is much more than just the absence of disease.
Optimum health is to thrive in a state of vitality. The way I accomplish this is through proper client
analysis and the implementation of vitamin supplementation, diet, exercise, and lifestyle changes, en-
zyme nutrition, chelation therapy, natural allergy and skin care treatments, and the integrative care
methods. This balanced and whole body approach has proven highly effective because it is a multisided
approach and brings on a more rapid achievement of positive results.

PARALEGAL/LEGAL ASSISTANT
121
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am committed to the highest standards of performance, and am looking for a long-term employment
relationship. My areas of specialty are civil law, domestic relations, research and discovery, client in-
terviews, and document preparation, which, as I understand your requirements, make me a perfect
match for your position. I will be able to provide the support you require immediately without further
training, and am ready to begin when you are!
Resume
Tina Vitou
4230 Dove Drive
Citrus Heights, California 95621
(916) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Certified Paralegal
Dedicated to providing superior, uninterrupted administrative support
to legal and nonlegal staff.
Confident, articulate, and results-oriented legal support professional offering a strong founda-
tion of education and experience. Creative and enthusiastic with a proven record of success in
prioritizing and processing heavy workflow without supervision. Superior organization and
communication skills, committed to personal and professional growth.
Core Strengths
Client/Trial Preparation
Subpoena & Affidavit Preparation
Research & Support
Motion & Order Preparation
Domestic Relations
Discovery/Client Interviewing
Exhibits/Witness Lists
Memoranda of Law
Professional Experience
County Attorney’s Office—Fremont, CA
1995 to Present
Paralegal
Conduct in-depth research and summarize depositions, declarations, and memoranda of law.
Organize documents for trial, and assist with jury instruction. Provide litigation support by as-
sisting with case presentation including independent preparation of motions, affidavits, plead-
ings, and subpoena responses.
I
Promoted above peers to paralegal position after serving as intern.
I
Repeatedly noticed by senior attorneys for accuracy and precision handling of documents in
time-critical and key litigation cases.
I
Formally recognized for superior performance by the state government of California.
Education
Sullivan College, San Francisco, CA
Associates of Science Degree, Paralegal Studies
I
Magna Cum Laude distinction
I
Commissioned Notary Public at Large
Keywords
Litigation Support
Paralegal/Legal
Assistant
Deposition
Pleadings
Declarations
Memoranda of Law
Trial Preparation
Subpoena/ Subpoena
Response
Affidavit
Jury Instructions
Case Investigations
Civil/Criminal
Domestic Relations
Motions
Orders
Research/Discovery
Power of Attorney
Exhibits
Complaints
Witness List
Preparation
Client Interviewing

PEOPLESOFT CONSULTANT
122
Keywords
Business Solutions
Change Analysis
Contract Negotiation
Development Life
Cycle
Fit Gap Analysis
Internet
Architecture
Labor Productivity
Payroll
PeopleSoft
Needs Assessment/
Consultation
Planning and
Development
Project Management
Seamless
Integration
Self-Serve
Technology
Systems
Implementation
Human Resources
Technical Writing
HRMS
Employee Benefits
Vendor Management
Resume
Lin Chin Wong
18-A Kissena Blvd.
Flushing, New York 11355
(718) 555-2220 / email@email.com
PeopleSoft Consultant
20-year career leading HRMS projects into production
PeopleSoft HR/ADP Payroll Interface/Base Benefits
Financials/Distribution/Manufacturing
Functional and Technical PeopleSoft Consultant with a verifiable record of success in guiding
the mass deployment of multimodule PeopleSoft HRMS implementation projects for govern-
ment and Fortune 1000 clients.
Core Strengths
Project Management
Team Leadership
Planning and Development
Needs Assessment/Consultation
Self-Serve Technology
Vendor Management
Technical Writing
Development Life Cycle
Professional Experience
GROELGER-PARAMUS, New York, New York
1992 to Current
PeopleSoft Consultant
Spearhead multiple PeopleSoft HRMS projects in charge of planning, developing, and imple-
menting task-specific, customized modules. Develop self-serve Internet architectures in re-
sponse to requirements for Web-based technology. Conduct fit gap analyses to gauge labor pro-
ductivity and data integrity throughout the development life cycle.
I
Led firm to compete on a global scale for eight consecutive years
I
Successfully lead multimillion-dollar government contract negotiations
I
Cost-effectively strengthen teams through train-the-trainer programs
I
Author technical and user manuals for companywide distribution
Education
Queens College, Flushing, New York, 1988
Bachelor of Arts: Mathematics
I
PeopleSoft V5.10-8.0, Oracle, Unix, ERP, SAP
I
SQL7, Sybase, Informix, COGNOS
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an accomplished PeopleSoft consultant with a notable career, I bring to the table an expertise in
business systems implementation, change analysis, design, and management of PeopleSoft HRMS proj-
ects for government sectors and Fortune 1000 clients. Your organization’s recent acquisition of similar
business models will no doubt require these strengths to ensure the seamless integration of an Inter-
net architecture with customized business solutions and self-serve technology.

PERSONAL TRAINER
123
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have been highly successful in helping clients achieve their fitness goals. My four-year academic train-
ing in exercise science has given me a solid knowledge base from which to design safe, workable, and
successful personalized fitness programs. I am a “people person” who is able to keep clients motivated.
My ability to increase participation in personal training programs can enhance revenues for a fitness
facility.
Resume
Susan Quinn
35 Memorial Boulevard
Newark, NJ 07104
(973) 443-5555 / email@email.com
Personal Trainer
Helping clients achieve fitness and weight-loss goals
Certified Personal Trainer / B.S. in Exercise Science
High client referral rate
Certified Personal Trainer/Fitness Specialist with five years’ experience at an upscale fitness
club. Skilled at motivating clients to achieve goals. Book 30% more clients on average than
other trainers at the facility.
Core Strengths
Fitness evaluations
Communication skills
Goal Setting
Muscle conditioning
Customized program design
Motivating clients
Interpersonal skills
Fitness software
Professional Experience
HIGHTOWER SPORTS CLUB, Cleveland, OH
1997−Present
Personal Trainer
Train a client base of up to 40 members per week. Perform fitness assessments including body-
fat analysis. Set and modify goals in consultation with clients. Use fitness software to main-
tain accurate records. Train clients on use of equipment, including Nautilus and free weights.
Develop professional weight-training and cardiovascular programs. Perform introductory con-
sultations and book new clients.
I
Top trainer as measured by number of referrals booked
I
Developed professional programs based on exercise science
I
Helped clients achieve weight-loss and strength-improvement goals
I
Developed successful incentive programs to keep clients motivated
Education
University of Maine, Orono, ME
Bachelor of Science in Exercise Science 1997
I
First Aid certified
I
CPR for the Professional Rescuer
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Fitness Specialist
Certified Personal
Trainer
Fitness Instructor
First Aid Certified
CPR for the
Professional
Rescuer
Health and Wellness
Programs
Exercise Science
Evaluations
Assessments
Setting Goals
Modify Goals
People Skills
Body Fat
Assessment
Muscle Conditioning
Stretching and
Flexibility
Program Design
Weight Room
Management
Fitness Assessments
Communication
Skills
Organizational
Skills
Interpersonal Skills
Fitness Software

PHARMACEUTICAL SALES REPRESENTATIVE
124
Keywords
Territory Sales
Producer
Clinical Selling
Skills
Hospital Territory
Management
Pharmaceutical
Direct Sales
Key Accounts
Sales Professional
Client Relationship
Management
Managed Care
Accounts
Direct and Indirect
Sales
Hospital Territory
Sales
Key Physician
Accounts
Therapeutic
Knowledge
Medical Terminology
Customer-Focused
Selling Strategies
Revenue Gain
Market Share
Market Leader
Product Positioning
Clinical Sales
Presentations
Customer Needs
Assessment
Resume
Marci J. Leonard
77 Main Street
East Brunswick, New Jersey 08816
(732) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Pharmaceutical Sales Rep
Award-Winning Territory Sales Producer
Clinical Selling Skills / Hospital Territory Management
Pharmaceutical Direct Sales to Key Accounts
Pharmaceutical sales professional and former registered nurse with track record of success in
sales and client relationship management dealing with “hard-to-see” key customers and man-
aged care account directors.
Core Strengths
Direct and Indirect Sales
Medical Terminology/Processes
Hospital Territory Sales
Customer-Focused Selling Strategies
Key Physician Accounts
Revenue/Market Share Gain
Therapeutic Knowledge
Market Leader/Product Positioning
Professional Experience
PHARMA PRODUCTS, INC., Princeton, New Jersey
1997 to Current
Pharmaceutical Sales Representative
Market multiple classes of pharmaceutical products to hospital accounts and key physician
contacts. Closely manage marketing budget (5% under) and monitor competitor products to de-
liver persuasive clinical sales presentations. Use customer needs assessment, as well as phar-
maceutical market and managed care contracting knowledge to achieve medical sales.
I
Consistently overachieved sales quota and increased market share in major product groups.
Won top sales achievement awards in hospital territory sales for four consecutive years
(1999−2002).
I
Teamed with three field representatives to triple dollar volume and boost market share
45% in highly competitive northern New Jersey territory.
I
Delivered strong results for secondary products in hospital territory, doubling sales year
over year. Selected as sales training advisor and medical information resources provider for
sales and marketing team.
Education
State University of New York, Buffalo, New York
Master of Science, Nursing Education
(cum laude)—1988
Bachelor of Science, Nursing (summa cum laude)—1986
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With demonstrated pharmaceutical direct sales success and therapeutic knowledge gained as a regis-
tered nurse, I combine an aggressive, results-oriented approach to hospital territory management with
finely honed clinical sales presentation skills. This proactive approach utilizes customer needs assess-
ment, key account sales strategies, and product positioning to win market share. May I have the op-
portunity to put my pharmaceutical knowledge and clinical selling skills to use for you?

PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNICIAN
125
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a Certified Pharmacy Technician, I have a thorough understanding of dispensing and compounding
techniques, computer procedures, and billing procedures. I am knowledgeable in radiological half-life
concepts and working with radiopharmaceutical products. I work well with or without supervision. My
personal traits include being accurate, meticulous, detailed, and thorough. My experience includes
working as a health physicist in a radioisotope laboratory. I am conscientious, a team player, customer
service oriented, and quality control conscious.
Resume
Camille Roberts, CphT
6234 La Costa Lane
Anywhere, Michigan 00000
(208) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Certified Pharmacy Technician
Seven Years of Pharmaceutical Experience
Experienced in Handling Radioactive Pharmaceuticals
Strong science, chemistry, and health care background. Comprehensive knowledge of medical
terms and medications. Precise handling of radioactive pharmaceutical products. Currently
learning pharmaceutical robotic machine programming.
Core Strengths
Health Physics
Nuclear Chemistry
Organic Chemistry
Pharmacy Law
Organization
Alert/Responsible
Quality Control
Ability to Decipher Difficult Handwriting
Professional Experience
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY, Walled Lake, Michigan
1995 to Present
Certified Pharmacy Technician
Input and track patient data, transcribe pharmacy orders, and accurately fill orders according
to unit dose system. Check in supplies and inventory. Compound IV solutions, fill cassettes,
order entry, billing, and handle narcotics. Establish and maintain patient profiles, prepare in-
surance claim forms, and stock and take inventory of prescription and over-the-counter med-
ications. Assemble 24-hour supplies of medication for in-home patients. Verify accuracy and
completeness of prescriptions.
I
Employee of the Year, 2000.
I
Secured in a $2 million annual contract from a local government agency.
I
Presenter, National Conference of Pharmaceutical Technicians.
Education
Ferris State College, Big Rapids, Michigan
Bachelor of Science Degree in Organic Chemistry, 1990
I
Mentor for Freshmen Chemistry students
I
Volunteer, Big Rapids Hospital, six years
Keywords
Dispensing
IV Compounding
Radio-
pharmaceutical
Cassette Fill
Order Eentry
Billing
Narcotic Handling
Pyxis
Unit Dose
Sterile Techniques
Measure
Independent
Communication
Meticulous
Mathematics
Health Physics
Pharmaceuticals
Health Care
Drugs
Prescription

PHARMACIST
126
Keywords
Client Interface Skills
Licensed Pharmacist
Pharmacy Consultant
Medication Dosages,
Adverse Effects and
Labeling
Regimen Review
Third-Party Systems
OBRA and VBRA 40
Regulations
Chemical
Compounding
High Volume
Prescription
Dispensing
Medication
Counseling
Record-Keeping
Systems
Patient Profile
Systems
In-Service Training
Programs
Protocol
Medication
Interactions
Government
Pharmacy
Administration
Hospital Pharmacy
Administration
Inventory Control
Controlled Substances
Pharmaceutical Law
and Technology
Resume
Angela Woodstone
19 Ashland Avenue
St. Paul, Minnesota 55102
(651) 555-1138 / email@email.com
Highly Qualified Licensed Pharmacist/Consultant
15-Year Background in Government & Hospital Settings
Licensed by the Minnesota and Wisconsin State Boards of Pharmacy
Effectively Balance Protocol Management and Relationship Building
Extensive background in administering government and hospital programs. Skilled in develop-
ing maintenance systems and creating in-service programs. Recognized for consulting, counsel-
ing, and interface expertise with the medical community and its customers.
Core Strengths
Record-keeping & patient profile systems
Consulting and counseling
Regimen review
Third-party systems
OBRA & VBRA 40 regulations
In-service training programs
Chemical compounding
Inventory control
Professional Experience
MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH—St. Paul, Minnesota
1995 to Current
Pharmacist, Industrial Rehabilitation Center: Worker’s Compensation
Order and distribute medications to clients and provide client counseling on medication
dosages, adverse effects, and general usage. Develop and implement wean schedules for clients,
helping them to reduce and eliminate medication use. Maintain well-controlled inventory, in-
cluding legally handling and storing controlled substances. Trained staff regarding laws and
newly marketed medications. Consulted with private physicians and intuitional staff on med-
ications. Develop record-keeping and patient profile systems. Oversee high-volume dispensing.
I
Received Client Interface recognition from the American Pharmaceutical Association, 1999
I
Created protocol for contingency cabinet, eliminating unwarranted use
I
Implemented new unit dose medication system, expediting medication delivery
I
Established physician signature card process, reducing physician approval delays by 35%
Education
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Master of Science: Pharmacy Administration, 1987
I
Benjamin M. Cohen Memorial Scholarship recipient (financial need and academics)
I
Research assistant for Paul Schaef, Pharm.D., Associate Professor, Antibiotic Resistance
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I can bring to the table 15 years’ combined pharmacy administration experience in government and
hospital programs. As a seasoned licensed pharmacist, I have served as consulting pharmacist to vari-
ous medical staffs on medication issues. As an in-service trainer, I have mentored multilevels of health-
care staff in remaining proactive on pharmacy issues. My client interface and counseling skills have
been recognized by the American Pharmaceutical Association. Combined expertise with pharmaceuti-
cal law and technology ensure well-controlled inventory and dispensing. An extensive background with
third-party systems, OBRA, and VBRA 40 foster effective processing and protocol.

PHOTOGRAPHER
127
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As an award-winning industrial photographer and videographer, I can help you develop positive, visu-
al marketing messages for your company through probing executive portraits and work site documen-
taries that reflect your business image and ethics. Awards and formal training in digital photography,
computer graphics, and fine art portraiture round out my success story.
Resume
Robarra Cicchalone
7231 Ventura Boulevard
Ventura, California 93003
(805) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Photographer
Industrial—Documentary—Digital Portraiture
Corporate Image Building & Repair through
Inspired Photojournalism
Core Strengths
I
Proven program management and analytical skills coupled with the photographic eye
I
Excellent communicator with the ability to earn subjects’ trust and cooperation quickly
I
Working experience with an impressive range of camera, lenses, film, formats, sizes, and
computer graphics software...35 millimeter, video, digital, panoramic, SLR, automatic,
Quark, Dreamweaver, Flash, Adobe Photoshop...See Photographic Skills Addendum, at-
tached...
Professional Experience
Freelance Photographer
1997 to Current
Corporate/industrial clients include: The Los Angeles Times, Mobil Oil, AT&T, IBM, American
Express IDS, Turner Broadcasting, Ciba-Geigy Pharmaceuticals, Sunset Magazine, TV Guide
Magazine, Norton Simon Museum, Los Angeles Museum of Modern Art, and numerous oth-
ers...
View my Web portfolio at http://www.dock.net/~myportfolio.
Plan and produce photography, Web, and graphic design projects consistent with corporate 
vision. Assess clients and products for compatibility with corporate intent. Consult with public
relations department on target audience and media selection. Present proposals to board 
members. Coordinate and shoot executive portrait sessions within program budget and 
schedules.
I
International Film Channel Award for Best Documentary about the Los Angeles Museum
of Modern Art—2002
Education
California Institute for the Arts, Valencia, California
Bachelor of Fine Arts in Photography—1997
Associate of Arts in Computer Graphics—1995
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Analytical and
Problem-Solving
Ability
Strong Oral and
Written
Communications
Skills
Program
Management and
Coordination
Creativity (e.g.,
Have the
“Photographic
Eye”)
Public Relations
Computer Graphics
Fine Art
Photographer
Marketing
Advertising
Digital Photography
Documentary
Image Building
Portraiture
Industrial
Photography
Photojournalism
Single Lens Reflex
(SLR)
Videography
35 Millimeter to
Panoramic
Name Specific
Equipment and
Formats in
Photographic
Skills Addendum

PHYSICAL THERAPIST
128
Keywords
Injury Prevention
Workplace Wellness
Education
Progress Charting
Strength Analysis
Functional Capacity
Daily-Living
Activities
Rehabilitation
Services
Hydrotherapy
Respiratory
Efficiency
Injury Management
Treatment Planning
Cross Training
Funding and
Contract
Development
PTA Clinical
Supervision
Assistive Technology
and Supportive
Devices
Therapeutic
Massage
Range of Motion
Uniform Standards
of Patient Care
Human Anatomy
and Physiology
In-Service Training
Resume
Kim Tynan, PT
133 Park Lane, Unit 3
Orchard Park, New York 14127
(716) 555-6932 / email@email.com
Physical Therapist
Seasoned Professional Providing Injury Management /
Rehabilitation Services
Clinical Supervision / Training of PTAs
Licensed physical therapist with six years’ experience working with patients ranging from
school-age children to older adults. Specialize in addressing women’s health issues.
Core Strengths
Strength Analysis
Treatment Planning
Therapeutic Massage
In-Service Training
Daily-Living Activities
Sports Physical Therapy
Professional Experience
HEALTHY WOMEN CENTER, Amherst, New York
1996 to Current
Physical Therapist
Utilize extensive knowledge of human anatomy and physiology to evaluate functional capacity
and develop treatment plans. Assist patients in improving range of motion, agility, strength,
and respiratory efficiency. Chart progress and create follow-up home exercise programs. Break
down tasks into manageable components, ensuring positive outcomes. Utilize hydrotherapy
and assistive technology.
I
Developed workplace wellness education programs to prevent back, neck, shoulder, and
wrist injuries.
I
Established referral contracts with local Employee Assistance Programs.
I
Implemented cross training and initiated uniform standards of patient care, enabling col-
laborative treatment and reduced labor costs.
I
Secured funding for arthritis education and exercise program.
Education
Russell Sage College, Troy, New York
Bachelor of Science: Physical Therapy, 1996
New York State Department of Education
Licensed Physical Therapist, 1996
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My areas of specialty include orthopedic support and spinal correction. My group, under my lead, de-
veloped workplace wellness education programs to prevent back, neck, shoulder, and wrist injuries. I
have established referral contracts with local Employee Assistance Programs (EAP) and secured fund-
ing for a community arthritis education and exercise program.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

PHYSICIAN’S ASSISTANT
129
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have more than 10 years of experience providing health care services to internal medicine, pediatric,
and family practice patients in clinics, hospitals, and nursing homes. I gather medical history as well
as perform and analyze x-rays; diagnostic, therapeutic, and laboratory tests; and assist physicians with
minor injuries, suturing, splinting, and casting. I will be a tremendous asset to your company because
of my extensive experience and dedication to providing the best possible services to all patients.
Resume
Margaret Bradford
789 Wilson Boulevard
Dallas, Texas 75287
(972) 555-2121 / email@email.com
PHYSICIAN’S ASSISTANT
with 10 years of diversified experience
Internal Medicine, Pediatric, Family Practice
Clinics, Hospitals, and Nursing Homes
Extensive experience assisting physicians with minor injuries, suturing, splinting, and casting,
along with performing and analyzing x-rays, and diagnostic, therapeutic, and laboratory tests.
Core Strengths
Diversified health care experience
Excellent service to all patients
Tremendous asset to physicians
Accurate analysis of various tests
Counseling patients
Comprehensive reports/progress notes
Dedicated and reliable
Commendations and staff awards
Professional Experience
PHYSICIANS NETWORK, Dallas, Texas
1996 to present
Physician’s Assistant
Assist internal medicine, pediatric, and family practice physicians in a fast-paced environ-
ment. Gather medical history from patients, and perform and analyze x-rays and a variety of
other tests necessary for treatment. Order supplies and/or equipment for patients, prepare
comprehensive reports and progress notes, and ensure that the best possible service is provid-
ed to all patients.
I
Assisted physicians with over 5000 patient appointments in 2001.
I
Performed and accurately analyzed more than 2500 tests in 2001.
I
Completed 1000 sutures, 500 splints, and 250 casts on patients.
I
Recognized as the “Physician Assistant of the Year” in 2001.
Education
Baylor University, Dallas, Texas
Bachelor of Science Degree; Major: Health Care; 1990
GPA: 3.5
Dean’s List twice in 1989 and once in 1990
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Health Care
Services
Internal Medicine
Pediatrics
Family Practice
Clinics
Hospitals
Nursing Homes
Physician’s Assistant
Diagnostic
Therapeutic
Laboratory Tests
X-Rays
Minor Injuries
Suturing
Splinting
Casting
Medical History
Progress Notes
Supplies/Equipment
Reports

POLICE OFFICER—MILITARY CONVERSION
130
Keywords
Community
Outreach
Crises Response
Emergency Planning
& Response
Interrogation
Investigations
management
Law Enforcement
Personal Protection
Public Relations
Safety Training
Surveillance
VIP Protection
Tactical Field
Operations
Security Operations
Asset Protection
Electronic
Surveillance
Emergency
Preparedness
Corporate Fraud
Corporate Security
Industrial Espionage
Industrial Security
Resume
Johnathan P. Kemper
708 Worthington Avenue
Kettering, Ohio 45429
(937) 555-1773 / email@email.com
Police Officer—Military Conversion
Seven Years of Experience as Law Enforcement Officer
Investigations Management / Corporate & Industrial Security
Emergency Planning & Response / Crisis Response
Comprehensive knowledge of law enforcement directing surveillance, VIP protection, and Tac-
tical Field Operations teams to protect military, government, and private facilities. Honesty.
Integrity. Excellent leadership.
Core Strengths
Riot Control
Domestic Disturbances
Terrorist Threats
Drug Investigations
Security Operations
Hostage Negotiations
Analytical Thinking
Creative Problem Solving
Professional Experience
U.S. AIR FORCE
1990 to Current
Desk Sergeant/Patrolman
Advanced from field patrol to investigations management. Provide asset protection, surveying,
and securing of multiple installations. Member of crisis response team resolving hostage situa-
tions. Lead VIP personal protection teams guarding top-ranking officials. Set up electronic sur-
veillance systems around base perimeters. Selected to represent Air Force police at community
outreach and other public relations events.
I
Led investigations of domestic disturbances, thefts, assaults, and DUIs.
I
Conducted electronic and field surveillance for crime investigations.
I
Monitored National Air Intelligence Center’s computerized systems.
I
Arrested and interrogated suspects; processed prisoners.
Education
Community College of the Air Force
Bachelor of Science, Criminal Justice, 2001
I
GPA: 3.7
I
Minor in Spanish
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I can use my military law enforcement training to help your organization meet its service goals. I
moved through numerous areas of law enforcement to an area that I find most interesting, and one in
which I excel—investigations management. I have put together teams that incorporate strengths in all
areas, such as electronic and field surveillance, corporate and industrial espionage, and tactical field
operations to handle expertly all phases of investigations. I can do the same for you.

PRODUCTION MANAGER
131
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
If you could “design” your next project manager, would the following be good enough to meet your specs?
Worldwide, “hands-on” experience with every aspect of design and production in your industry, encyclo-
pedic knowledge of compliance law, and credibility that only comes from broad experience. You will find
a dozen specific examples of performance in my resume—they illustrate the kinds of contributions I can
make to your bottom line. As you read them, I hope my personal standards become apparent. First, I
must earn people’s trust before I can deliver results. Second, I must prove my competency at every level,
every day—from shop floor to boardroom. Finally, I must deliver quality to the customer and profits to
my company.
Resume
Charles W. Morgan
1400 North Avenue
Atlanta, Georgia 30040
(770) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Production Manager
The ability to translate your corporate vision into profits
Guiding complex production teams to success
Systems view of production that creates synergy between 
people and capital investment
A credible, profit-oriented leader known for skill in recruiting, motivating, and retaining teams
of production professionals dedicated to continuous manufacturing improvement.
Core Strengths
Optimal capacity planning
Yield improvement
Cost avoidance
On-demand customization
ISO 9000 series certification
Inventory control
Professional Experience
TransKing Corporation, Norcross, Georgia
1996 to Current
Rail Program Manager
Responsible for design and manufacture of bus, truck, trailer, container, and rail temperature
controls for a company with $1B sales annually. Build enduring business “alliances” with ven-
dors that produced “win-win” situations even in niche production. Guided the renovation of a
28,000-square-foot plant without interrupting the two-shift operation required to meet cus-
tomer demand.
I
Got 32 demanding subcontractors (from our competitor!) under control. Mapped nearly
1,100 tasks to guide team one day at a time. Profits 16% above forecast.
I
Helped negotiate then managed complicated, fast-track $1.5M program. Profit level: 22%
(10% projected). Cut delivery times in half.
I
In six months, routinely cut 800 defects per rail car—a record in our company.
Education
State University of New York
Associate of Applied Science in Automotive Technology and Engineering, 1981
I
Inducted into national engineering honor society
I
Dean’s List every quarter
Keywords
Capacity Planning
Cell Manufacturing
Cost Avoidance
Cross-Functional
Teams
Cycle Time
Reduction
Facilities
Consolidation
Inventory Control
ISO 9000 Standards
Just-in-Time (JIT)
Manufacturing
Integration
Materials
Replenishment
Systems (MRP)
On-Demand
Customization
Operations
Reengineering
Operations Start-Up
Outsourcing
P & L Management
Productivity
Improvement
Technology
Integration
Turnaround
Management
Yield Improvement

PROJECT MANAGER
132
Keywords
Single/Multifamily
Price Ranges
Lot Size
Design
General Contractor
Specifications
Estimating
Purchasing
Scheduling
Material Delivery
Material Costs
Labor Costs
Architects
Subcontractors
Supervising
Quality Control
Customer Service
Warranty
Construction Defects
Maintenance
Resume
Michael Cunningham
16151 Arapaho Boulevard
Dallas, Texas 75287
(972) 555-2211 / email@email.com
CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGER
with more than 20 years of experience
Single and Multifamily Homes
$100,000 to $3 million price range
Extensive experience in the custom design, cost estimating, scheduling, and overall manage-
ment of home construction projects. Focus on quality control and completing all projects on
time and within budget.
Core Strengths
Working with architects
Design and specifications
Supervising subcontractors
Tracking material and labor costs
Cost estimating and purchasing
Scheduling and material delivery
Excellent service to home buyers
Warranty/maintenance work
Professional Experience
NORTH TEXAS HOME BUILDERS, Dallas, Texas
1985 to present
Construction Project Manager
Manage all aspects of the construction of single and multifamily homes in north Texas. Work
directly with architects in the custom design, specifications, cost estimating, and scheduling.
Secure and supervise subcontractors, and continually track material and labor costs. Focus on
quality control, providing excellent service to home buyers, and completing all projects on time
and within budget.
I
Started and finished the construction of 10 single and 15 multifamily homes in 2001,
generating more than $25 million in revenues.
I
Developed a new tracking system that reduced labor costs by 30%.
I
Created a Warranty Department for scheduling and making repairs.
I
Commended by the President for consistent, outstanding work.
Education
University of Texas, Austin, Texas
Bachelor of Arts Degree; 1981
Major: Construction Management
Minor: Business Administration
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have more than 20 years of experience in the overall management of the construction of single and
multifamily homes with price ranges from $100,000 to $3 million. I work directly with architects in the
custom design, specifications, cost estimating, and scheduling. I also secure and supervise subcontrac-
tors, and continually track labor costs. I will contribute greatly to your company by focusing on quali-
ty control, providing excellent service to home buyers, and completing all projects on time and within
budget.

PROPERTY MANAGER
133
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My background is very broad, including administration of apartments, condominiums, and luxury prop-
erties. I have a demonstrated ability to cut costs. This is accomplished through aggressive maintenance
record audits, followed by implementation of comprehensive preventative maintenance initiatives.
Through this process I ensure the safe, smooth, and economical operation of properties. I investigate
and resolve complaints without delay. This improves tenant relations, satisfying both residents and
owners.
Resume
Richard Land
6543 Beretania Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96826
(808) 555-9999 / email@email.com
On-Site Property Manager
Seasoned Community Association Manager
Residential Properties / Multisite Administration
Particularly Skilled at Tenant Relations
12+ years’ experience in various residential real estate settings.
Cost-conscious administrator adept at designing preventative maintenance strategies.
Expertly facilitate owner/tenant relationships.
Core Strengths
Condominiums
Apartments
Luxury Properties
Facilities Maintenance and Repair
Project Scheduling
Cash Flow Management
Complaint Investigations
Contractor Oversight
Professional Experience
ASSET MANAGERS, INC., Honolulu, Hawaii 1995 to Present
On-Site Property Manager
Responsible for 120-unit luxury apartment building. Supervise staff of nine, ensuring safe and
properly maintained property. Monitor pool cleaning, painting, and security contract personnel.
Act as liaison between board of directors and owners. Accountable to asset property manager.
I
Raised tenant retention rate by 50% through enhanced owner/tenant communication ef-
forts. Created biweekly newsletter distributed to owners and residents.
I
Saved over $25,000 per year since 1997 by implementing comprehensive preventative
maintenance program.
I
Directed $3 million landscape renovation project.
Education
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii
Bachelor of Arts / Business Administration, 1980
I
Graduated with honors
I
Chosen Most Creative Businessperson by campus business club
Keywords
Residential
Properties
Multisite
Management
Condominiums
Apartments
Luxury Property
Community
Associations
Complaint
Investigation and
Resolution
Tenant Retention
Tenant Relations
Preventative
Maintenance
Facilities
Maintenance and
Repairs
Maintenance Record
Auditing
Project Scheduling
Property Security
Contractor
Oversight
Renovations
Board of Directors
Liaison
Rent Collections
Cash Flow
Management
Asset Property
Manager

PUBLIC RELATIONS DIRECTOR
134
Keywords
Program
Management
Public Relations
Crisis Management
Image Development
Market Analytics
Media Relationships
Speech and Script
Writing
Press Releases
International
Markets
Interview and Crisis
Management
Coaching
Publicity Campaigns
Development
Public Information
Presentations
Leadership
Media, Print,
Television, and
Radio
Support Service
Networks
Strong Oral and
Written
Communications
Skills
Journalism, English,
Communications,
or Business Degree
Graphic Design
Analytical and
Problem-Solving
Ability
Resume
Barbara Weaver
10200 Wilshire Boulevard
Los Angeles, California 90024
(213) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Public Relations Director
Celebrity Image & Personal Marketing Consultant
Publicity Campaign Development
Crisis Management
Highly consulted by Celebrities and Fortune 500 companies to design and direct high-visibility
or politically sensitive publicity campaigns and industry promotions. Known for sizzling com-
munication strategies that sell people to people, business to business, in print, television,
radio, or on the Web. National and international media and support service networks.
Core Strengths
I
Celebrity image development
I
Interview and crisis coaching
I
Media relationships
I
Market analytics
I
Communications skills
Professional Experience
Universal Studios, Burbank, California
2001 to Present
Public Relations Director/Marketing Consultant
Assess celebrity clients for studio image and compliance with public information policies. Pro-
vide interview and crisis management coaching to client. Conduct market analytics to target
best audiences and media choices. Review staff recommendations on scripts, speeches, press re-
leases, presentations, graphic design and Web site content. Develop and manage program bud-
get and schedules. Consult with legal and marketing departments in areas of international
communications (especially censorship and royalty agreements).
I
Guided senior PR specialists in research, design, and launch of a major celebrity’s music
video—2001.
I
Past President, Public Relations Society of America: 2000−2001
Education
California State University at Los Angeles, California
Master of Science, Business Administration—1994
Bachelor of Arts, Communications—1987
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a public relations director, I have managed high-visibility publicity campaigns with annual budgets
of up to $10 million that delivered the clients huge profits. I ensure that both my target markets and
the effectiveness of the selected media are evaluated through demographics, polls, and other analytics.
My media contacts range from local news channel and newsprint to Capitol Hill and around the world,
ensuring that our message gets to those who can do the most good for our cause.

QUALITY ENGINEER
135
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Do not hire me unless you demand quality as a way of life from every team member. My strengths are
straightforward: I have gone beyond mastering the art and science of engineering quality into products.
My track record reflects a knack for having people adopt a world-class quality outlook and think that
my suggestions are their own good ideas. My contributions may be a mix of technical and leadership
skill, but the outcomes for our company is enduring market domination.
Resume
Amanda Hershkowitz
1973 78th Street
Memphis, Tennessee 37000
(901) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Quality Engineer
A decade of leading companies to quality and customers to value
Continuous quality improvement / Metric systems that work for people
Value-added processes in manufacturing and sales
A highly-trained quality systems executive with the communications skills, drive, and vision to
infuse a quality culture throughout your organization. Solid track record of producing world-
class quality.
Core Strengths
Anticipating drags on quality processes
Managing vendor quality systems
Reengineering WIP for greater ROI
Translating trend data into quality guidelines
Obtaining ISO 9000 certifications
Administering responsive QA programs
Professional Experience
Arista Corporation, Norcross, Georgia
1992 to Current
Vice President for Quality Management
Formulate QA practices consistent with master production plans. Providing QA reports for the
review and approval of management. Reviewing adequacy of QA/QC processes and standards
as part of an overarching QA framework. Reduce risk and improve organizational perfor-
mance. Reviewing testing and providing for general awareness of QA/QC requirements and
values. Business process improvement. Recommending acceptance of deliverables from vendors
as being within scope and contract. Ensuring that RFP and contracts have appropriate terms
and conditions to assure a quality product.
I
Topped 15 tough competitors to win the Tennessee Quality Award (2002)
I
Reduced scrap rate by 22% in just one quarter
I
Overhauled task groups and process analysis to reignite TQM. QA measures soared.
Education
University of Lowell, Lowell, Massachusetts
Bachelor of Science in Business, 1987
I
Summa cum laude
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Continuous Quality
Improvement
ISO 9000
Certification
Process Analysis
Quality Assurance
and Control
Quality Circles
Quality Culture
Rejection Rate
Scrap Rate
Task Groups
Total Quality
Management
Trend Information
Value-Added
Processes
Vendor Management
WIP (Work in
Progress)
World-Class Quality
Zero Defects

RADIO DISC JOCKEY
136
Keywords
Pleasant Voice
Articulate
Recording Stars
Recording Groups
Recording
Equipment
FCC Licensing
Control Board
Tape Decks
Vinyl Records (45s
and 78s)
CD Players
Archiving
Sports
Live and Recorded
Mixing
Commercials
News
Talk Shows
Sponsors
Remote Location
Equipment Set-Up
Resume
Peter H. Harris
735 College Road
South Portland, Maine 04106
(207) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Radio Disc Jockey
Varied Talk Show Host
Total Sound Room Set-Up / Unique Mixing Style
Recognized for Diversity in Broadcasting Special Events
Well-rounded disc jockey with the proven ability to wear many hats in his position while suc-
ceeding in keeping the full attention of his audience through the microphone and the radio.
Recognized for exceptional talents in his field and for having devoted many hours in promoting
many charitable organizations through fund raisers, marathon broadcastings, and personally
hosting related talk shows.
Core Strengths
Excellent Voice Projection
Industry Knowledge (20 Years)
Excellent Library of Recordings
Total Technology Emersion
Professional Experience
WABC—1010AM Radio, Portland, Maine
1982−1992
WJRK—93.5FM Radio, South Portland, Maine
1992−Current
Radio Disc Jockey
Accept phone requests; provide live and prerecord music to suit various audiences. Research
archives for requests and return when done. Maintain archives while monitoring inventory. On
occasion, write advertising copy and produce voice-overs. Ensure that airing of commercials is
timely. Host shows live, when necessary. Perform creative mixing and dubbing as needed. Con-
duct frequent telephone and mail surveys to assure airing and proper mix.
I
Trained other disc jockeys in effectively researching archives.
I
Conceptualized frequent comedy skits and won an award for creativity.
I
Created several new characters “on the air” to increase overall ratings.
I
Selected as “Disc Jockey Who Introduced the Most Hit Records in 2000”.
Education
Bates College, Lewiston, Maine
Studied Political Science
Completed two years, 1980−1982
I
Managed campus radio station WRBC—91.5FM.
I
Recognized for candid interviews with several visiting dignitaries.
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a veteran disc jockey of 20 years, my experience has taken me through several generations of record-
ing stars in addition to major changes in media presentations, equipment, quality of sound, and over-
all radio and recording technology. Currently enjoying the total evolvement of the industry to present—
working with state-of-the-art equipment in a computerized industry that produces the quality and
sounds that could only be imagined 20 years ago on the radio. Peripheral involvement through the
years has included hosting varied talk shows and on- and off-site special promotions.

RADIOLOGIST
137
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a Certified Radiologist who specializes in Interventional Procedures, MRIs, CT scans, and ultra-
sounds. I have performed over 15,000 tests, including mammograms, arthrograms, venograms,
flouroscopy, and barium studies. I believe I can be an outstanding addition to your physician team due
to my diversified experience in diagnostic overreads, interventional procedures, plain film interpreta-
tions, excellent peer reviews, and my focus on ensuring superb quality of service to all patients.
Resume
Robert C. Scooner, M.D.
689 Beltline Drive
Dallas, Texas 75240
(214) 555-8888 / email@email.com
CERTIFIED RADIOLOGIST
with more than 15 years of experience
Specializing in
MRIs, CT Scans, and Ultrasounds.
American Board of Radiology Certified Radiologist who has performed over 15,000 radio-
graphic examinations, interventional procedures, diagnostic overreads, and plain film 
interpretations.
Core Strengths
Arthrograms
Venograms
Barium Studies
Flouroscopy Screens
X-Rays
MRIs, CT Scans, Ultrasound
Mammography
Biopsies, IVPs
Professional Experience
RADIOLOGY ASSOCIATES, Dallas, Texas
1986 to present
Full-Time Radiologist
Perform radiographic examinations of patients’ internal structures and organ systems, diag-
nose results, and recommend treatments to primary care physicians and surgeons using inter-
ventional procedures and plain film interpretations. Assigned the major city of patients requir-
ing MRIs, CT scans, and ultrasounds.
I
Increased the company’s annual revenues by $300,000 by developing a marketing campaign
to secure patients requiring interventional procedures.
I
Recognized by the American Board of Radiology for outstanding work on extensive barium
studies involving patients from 1999 to 2001.
I
Featured in Radiology Magazine in June of 2001 for interventional procedures.
Education
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas
Doctor of Medicine; Major: Radiology; 1985
University of Texas at Austin
Bachelor of Science Degree; Major: Medicine, 1980
Keywords
Board Certified
Treatments
X-Ray
Flouroscopy
Biopsy
MRI
CT Scan
Mammography
Ultrasound
IVPs
Radiology
Radiographic
Examination/
Substances
Internal Structures
Physician
Radioisotopes
Interventional
Procedures
Plain Film
Interpretations
Barium Studies
Arthrograms
Venograms

REAL ESTATE BROKER
138
Keywords
Licensed Real Estate
Broker
Purchase & Sale
(P&S)
Transactions
Relocation
Closing Skills
Negotiation Skills
Prospecting
Networking
Lead Generation
Competitive Market
Analysis
Customer Service
Overcoming
Objections
Meeting and/or
Exceeding Goals
Chairman’s Club /
President’s Club
Buyer’s Agent /
Seller’s Agent
Marketing
Promotional
Activities
Advertising
Strategic Market
Planning
Mortgage
Value-Added
Services
Resume
Robert K. Beaton
495 Peregrine Point
Marblehead, MA 02478
(617) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Real Estate Broker
More than $8 million in annual sales for 10 years in up and down markets
Top 3% in field of 2000 brokers / Specialize in high-end properties
Developing and implementing creative marketing strategies
High-powered, top-performing sales professional with 10 years’ experience selling high-end
properties for a national leader in residential real estate sales. Ahead of the curve in using
technology to drive sales results. Initiatives in value-added customer service have earned the
business referrals and loyalty of both home buyers and home sellers.
Core Strengths
Prospecting
Strategic marketing
Negotiation skills
Communication skills
P&S transaction oversight
Networking
Promotional activities
Customer service
Professional Experience
RE/HOMES Northshore, Marblehead, MA
1992−Present
Real Estate Broker
Sell properties in the oceanfront communities on Boston’s North Shore. Develop marketing
strategies. Prospect for leads, build client relationships, and show properties. Negotiate terms
and support P&S transactions. Manage personal Web site as a marketing tool. Develop adver-
tising and promotional strategies. Experienced in acting both as seller’s agent and as buyer’s
agent.
I
Top Producer Award in 1999 for the Northeast Region
I
Ranked in the top 3% of brokers nationally for last three years
I
Chairman’s Club seven consecutive years ($4 million+)
I
First to use a laptop computer with clients for on-the-spot comparables
Education
University of New Hampshire, Manchester, NH
Bachelor of Arts: Sociology, 1992
Graduate of the Gaines School of Real Estate, Concord, NH, 1991
Licensed Real Estate Broker, 1991
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have ranked in the top tier of brokers within a national real estate company throughout my career.
My personal sales have ranged from $8 million to $12 million annually in a competitive, high-end res-
idential market. I am known for superior customer service and personal integrity. I have strong net-
working, lead generation, and closing skills. My competitive drive coupled with across-the-board real
estate sales skills have consistently resulted in exceptional revenue generation for my company.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

RECEPTIONIST
139
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a qualified corporate receptionist with 10-plus years of experience in a professional setting, I feel
confident that I could perform and surpass your expectations. With a focus on international relations
and utilizing (daily) exceptional executive-level administrative assistant skills, I have developed the
ability to “switch gears” very effectively while juggling multiple tasks. I am familiar with a variety of
different phone systems and PBX. Computer knowledge includes word processing, spreadsheet appli-
cations, desktop publishing, and database management.
Resume
Rachael Anne Howard
Crestview Estates—#34
Lewiston, Maine 04240
(207) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Senior Corporate Receptionist
PBX Administration / Domestic & Foreign Communications
Multilingual Communication Skills
Proven Executive-Level Business/Support Skills
Seasoned senior-level receptionist with an ability to spill over into public relations and admin-
istrative support. Outstanding personality and professional manner. State-of-the-art equip-
ment/technology trained (telephony & computer).
Core Strengths
Top Management Interaction
PBX Familiarity
Articulate (Presentations)
Detail Oriented
Administrative Assistant
Bilingual, French
Notary Public
Financial Accounting
Professional Experience
MACROSOFT INC., Silicon Valley, California 1992 to Present
Corporate Receptionist
Oversee total operation of a 100-line PBX telephone system and a staff of four; greet clients,
screen, and direct calls to 400 (plus) in-house extensions. Trained individuals to manage the
PBX area enabling time to assist (part of the day) in the executive office area. Provide French
translations of “in” and “outgoing” messages via telephone, fax, and email. Provide varied sec-
retarial and desktop publishing assistance.
I
Developed a procedural manual for the PBX area.
I
Screen, hire, and train PBX operators.
I
Developed a system which allows tracking of corporate credit card expenses.
I
Schedule and track all corporate-related travel for six individuals.
Education
University of Maine, Orono, Maine
Bachelor of Arts: Business
Office Automation, 1990
I
Dean’s List Student, four Years / GPA—3.8
I
Recipient, Margaret Chase Smith Scholarship Award
Keywords
Professional
Environment
PBX Skills
Articulate
Multitask
Capabilities
Fast-Paced
Environment
Word Processing
Spreadsheet
Applications
Bilingual (French)
Detail Oriented
Public Relations
Presentation Skills
Call Screening
Message Taking
International Calls
Travel
Arrangements
Hotel Reservations
Expense Accounts
Professional
Appearance
Commissioned
Notary Public
PBX

REGULATORY AFFAIRS COUNSEL
140
Keywords
Regulatory Policy
Antitrust
Investigation
Legislative
Federal
Communications
Commission
Integrating
Objectives
Emerging
Technologies
Information
Technology
Audit Planning and
Review
Mergers and
acquisitions
Lobbying
FCC
Complaint /Conflict
Resolution
Negotiation Skills
Strategic
Assessment
Accessibility
Broadband
Privacy
Spectrum Allocation
E-Commerce
Domain Name
Competition
Resume
Helen Kramer
333 San Pedro Street
Los Angeles, California 90012
(213) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Regulatory Affairs Counsel
Telecommunications Policy Expert
Case-Winning Negotiator
Audit Planning and Review
Expert policy advisor to emerging technology, especially on government and trade association
standardization forums. Dual degrees in both Information Technology and Corporate Law.
Core Strengths
Advising new starts
Strategic operational assessment
Policy formulation
Integrating objectives
Audit planning and execution
FCC compliance
Negotiation
Trade lobbyist
Professional Experience
Bates & Bates, LLP, Los Angeles, California
1995 to Current
Regulatory Affairs Counsel
Technical advisor to emerging telecommunications companies regarding regulatory policy for-
mulation, antitrust investigation, and legislative matters. Assess initial strategic operational
plans for Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and regional compliance regarding
broadband, privacy, network security, access, and domain name competition. Integrate compli-
ance actions with corporate objectives.
I
Key negotiator for the postponement of the FCC’s auction of the 700-megahertz band spec-
trum until 2003. This will allow emergency services to acquire interference-free transmis-
sion.
I
High-visibility as an expert witness and lobbyist to Congress regarding fair competition
practices for industry and nonprofit organizations.
I
Appointed to the Federal Telecommunications Accessibility Advisory Committee (1999−
2000).
Education
University of California at Los Angeles, California
Bachelor of Science / Information Technology, 1996
Juris Doctor / Corporate Law, 1992
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My life is dedicated to facilitating rapid growth and universal accessibility in the industry by inter-
preting standards and streamlining regulatory compliance activities for new business. My broad expe-
rience in regulatory compliance has included FCC complaints and policy proceedings, mergers and ac-
quisitions, e-commerce, privacy, and broadband. I will use my connections and negotiation skills to spot
and resolve any roadblocks to a successful venture; for example, securing the 700-megahertz auction
postponement.

RESTAURANT MANAGER
141
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Whether in high- or low-volume restaurants, I have consistently identified root problems for lagging
sales. The need for a qualified and enthusiastic staff cannot be overstated. It would be my first priori-
ty to assess the existing staff and if necessary, rehire, train and ensure continued development for new
employees. My natural leadership style in addition to my extensive experience in inventory/cost con-
trol, food/beverage operations, profit/loss, and customer service management will prove highly benefi-
cial to your vision of excellent hospitality service.
Resume
Jan Scott
1090 Encore Ave.
Columbus, Ohio 43229
(614) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Restaurant Manager
Controlling costs and ensuring profitability...
Staff Training/Development • Food Standards & Controls
Budget Planning/Administration • Customer Service Management
Seasoned management professional offering nearly 10 years’ experience in fast-paced, high-
volume food service/bar environments. Maximizing staff potential through excellent leadership
and organizational skills.
Core Strengths
Inventory/Cost Control 
Purchasing/Vendor Relations
Food & Beverage Operations
Accounting/Payroll
Facilities Management/Sanitation
Team Building and Leadership
Menu Development
Business Development
Professional Experience
Worthington Woods Resort, Columbus, Ohio
2000 to Present
Restaurant Manager
Coordinate all marketing and promotions, operations management, budgeting, weekly sales re-
porting, vendor relations, customer service. Accountable for profit & loss, total quality, and
cash management operations. Consult with general managers, F&B directors, and support
staff for strategic planning purposes.
I
Grew operating profits by 8.4% within first year.
I
Coordinated and supervised $500,000 restaurant renovation.
I
Marketed restaurant benefits and features that attracted high-profile travelers.
I
Strategically designed highly creative menu that became standard for all hotels.
Education
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
Bachelor of Science, Hotel Administration, 1992
I
Concentration: Food and Beverage Management
I
Study Abroad: èn-Provence, France, Spring 1991
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Inventory/Cost
Control
Food & Beverage
Operations
Facilities
Management/
Sanitation
Menu Development
Purchasing/
Procurement
Team Building &
Leadership
Budget Planning/
Administration
Profit & Loss
Management
Banquets/Catering
Accounting/Payroll
Customer Service
Management
Total Quality
Management
Sales and
Promotions
Business
Development
Cash Management/
Deposits
Vendor Relations
Staff Hiring/
Training/
Development
Operations
Management
Food Production
Standards &
Controls
Cash Management

RETAIL SALES MANAGER
142
Keywords
District Sales
Customer Loyalty
Business
Development
Low Employee
Turnover
In-Store Promotions
Loss Prevention
Pricing
Inventory Control
Merchandising
Security Operations
Retail Sales
Employee Retention
Stock Management
Warehousing
Operations
Product
Management
Continuous Process
Improvement
Customer-Driven
Management
Margin
Improvement
Customer Service
Credit Operations
Resume
Seth Miller
123 S. Fourth Street
Kewanee, Illinois 61443
(309) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Retail Sales Manager
11-Year Background in Performance and Process Improvement
Customer-Driven Management / Margin Improvement Skills
Start-Up and Turnaround Management Experience
Driven and experienced retail sales management professional with proven skills in cost reduc-
tion and business development. Successful background of implementing highly profitable in-
store promotions.
Core Strengths
Loss Prevention
Merchandising
Strategic Planning
Stock Management
Margin Improvement
Customer Service
Business Development
Inventory Control
Retail Sales Training
Cost Reduction
Professional Experience
STUFF-MART, Centerville, IL
1999 to Current
Retail Sales Manager
Recruited to boost retail sales and improve merchandising strategies for this highly successful
merchandising warehouse operation. Implemented effective stock management policies, creat-
ed profitable in-store promotions, and turned focus to a customer-driven management style.
Directed customer service and warehousing operations. Achieved significant margin of im-
provement and led efforts to increase customer loyalty.
I
Increased district sales by $60,000; achieved highest margin of improvement.
I
Drove sales for credit operations by training staff in up-selling techniques.
I
Implemented highly effective management strategic planning sessions.
I
Pioneered security operations to reduce inventory loss.
Education
Wisconsin University, Jasper, Wisconsin
Bachelor of Arts: Business Management, 1990
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why Should Our Company Hire You?
I am a highly enthusiastic management professional with a customer-driven management style. One
key element to successful retail management is employee retention. One key strength I possess is se-
lecting and retaining good retail employees. My track record reflects record-breaking district sales. I
have successfully designed and implemented cutting-edge in-store displays, and I have played a key
role in start-up operations and strategic planning.

RISK MANAGEMENT
143
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
At Helfer, I reengineered processes resulting in $1.2 million loss avoidance/risk reduction in one year.
We reversed $745,000 in annual losses and took broke even in one-and-a-half years. Overall responsi-
bilities include directing a risk management staff overseeing $4 million in credit exposure. Here, we
implemented a comprehensive risk management strategic plan and saved $500,000 annually through
renegotiation of information contracts.
Resume
Steven H. Nash
177 Linden Boulevard
Snyder, New York 14226
(716) 555-6954 / email@email.com
Risk Management
Seasoned Professional with Expertise in Investigating
Loss History/Trends to Predict and Avoid Future Risk
Perform Insurance Analysis, Determine Severity and
Frequency Potential, and Minimize Financial Impact
Direct risk management staff overseeing $4 million in credit exposure. Instill performance-
based culture by allocating responsibility and accountability. Develop programs to maximize
loss control.
Core Strengths
Health and Safety Programs
Carrier and Broker Selection
Operational and Risk Reporting
Self-Insurance and Noninsurance
Fidelity, Surety, and Liability
Program Development
Professional Experience
HELFER INDUSTRIES, LTD., Buffalo, New York
1982 to Current
Risk Management Specialist
Research and analyze corporate products and operations and determine appropriate coverage
levels. Negotiate contracts based on hazard identification and risk exposure. Conduct health
and safety audits and report results to senior management. Utilize PowerPoint to graphically
demonstrate ways to implement loss control.
I
Reengineered processes resulting in $1.2 million loss avoidance/risk reduction in 1 year.
I
Reversed $745,000 in annual losses and broke-even in 11/2 years.
I
Implemented comprehensive risk-management strategic plan.
I
Saved $500,000 annually through renegotiation of information contracts.
Education
Canisius College School of Management, Buffalo, New York
Bachelor of Science: Business Administration, 1982
I
Milton Seligman Business Scholar
I
Who’s Who in American Colleges and Universities
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Insurance Analysis
Financial Impact
Fidelity, Surety,
Liability, and
Property Coverage
Program Development
Loss Control
Workers’
Compensation,
Group Life, Pension,
and Medical Plans
Health and Safety
Programs
Carrier and Broker
Selection
Severity and
Frequency Potential
Operational and Risk
Reporting
Strategic Plan
Avoidance and
Transfer
Minimization,
Reduction, and
Prevention
Self-Insurance and
Planned
Noninsurance
Credit Exposure
Negotiation and
Renegotiation
Hazard Identification
Performance-Based
Culture
Risk Management
Loss History and
Trends

SALES/CORPORATE TRAINER
144
Keywords
Human Resources
Management
Program
Development
Training
Curriculum
Development
Budget Preparation
and Control
Adult Learning
Certification
Programs
Educational Needs
Assessment
Employee Training
Career Development
Counseling
Executive
Development
Programs
Employee Assistance
Programs (EAP)
Facilitator Training
Programs (Train-
the-Trainer)
Time Management /
Project
Management
Motivational
Training
Team Building
Supervisory Skills
Communications
Skills
Multicultural
Workforce
Corporate Ethics
Resume
Patricia Capizzi
1188 Bedford Drive
Camarillo, California and 93010
(805) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Corporate Trainer
Committed to the educational needs of American industry
Executive Development / Adult Learning
Human Resources Management
An energetic and success-driven education and human resources leader with a 15-year history
of turning marginally performing employees into top producers.
Core Strengths
Educational needs assessment
Curriculum development
Executive development
Motivational training
Professional Experience
Procter & Gamble Paper Product Division
2000 to Current
Oxnard, California 93030
Director of Corporate Training
Recruited as a “troubleshooter” to identify educational needs and develop training programs
for the next millennia’s executive and technical workforce. Implemented training plans within
corporate business plans, budget, and schedules.
I
Originated an educational incentive program that provides bonuses for earning career-re-
lated certifications and subsidizes recertification costs.
I
Adapted selected executive development program courses (such as time/program manage-
ment, supervision, and team building) to lower-level employees. Improved year-end produc-
tion was attributable to better employee attendance and awareness of management goals.
I
Incorporated courses such as ethics, success training, and career-life balance into all em-
ployee training plans to encourage a healthy workforce.
Education
University of California at Santa Barbara, California
Masters degree in Adult Education / 1990
Bachelor of Science degree in Psychology / 1986
Certified Job & Career Transition Coach
Member, American Counseling Association
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My expertise in corporate training stems from a solid education—degrees in Adult Education and Psy-
chology, backed by a career counseling certification and practical work in several motivational training
techniques. Additionally, I am gifted with the ability to assess correctly and meet the present and fu-
ture educational needs of industry managers and a technical workforce. Above all else, I really care
about people’s development and helping to make them successful.

SALES—ENTRY LEVEL
145
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have demonstrated an ability to be highly successful in exceeding sales quotas, opening up new ter-
ritories, and gaining market share in competitive markets. I am adept at researching and prospecting
to identify a customer’s needs. Then I would develop key selling points, tailoring them to the customer’s
needs, and closing the sale. My communication and interpersonal skills have enabled me to excel in
building relationships with existing and potential customers. What separates me from others is the in-
tensity of my commitment to growing revenues and providing superior customer service.
Resume
Gary Sloan
495 Belmont Avenue
Belmont, MA 02478
(617) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Sales Representative
Four-year track record of revenue enhancement
Presentation & closing skills / Opening up new markets
Consistently exceeding sales quotas
Outgoing, aggressive sales professional with four years of part-time experience selling in com-
petitive markets. Outperformed four full-time rental agents while earning B.S. degree. Conver-
sational Spanish.
Core Strengths
Prospecting
Organizational Skills
Presentation Skills
Communication Skills
Closing Skills
Networking
Strategic Market Planning
Customer Service
Professional Experience
BOSTON CITY RENTALS, Boston, MA
1997−Present
Rental Agent / Sales Representative
Manage the Beacon Hill and Jamaica Plain territories. Prospect for leads, show properties,
build customer relationships, present customized selling points, close sales, and provide after-
sales customer service. Build networks of relationships with city landlords. Develop strategic
market plans for market penetration. Create sales collateral. Develop advertising placements
and strategies.
I
Ranked #1 in rental sales for the last three years
I
Gained 10% market share in the saturated Back Bay market
I
Opened up a territory that represented $100K in new 2002 revenue
I
Launched the first corporate Web site to offer real-time rental data
Education
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts
Bachelor of Science: Business Administration, 2001
I
Completed degree in 3.5 years
I
Paid own way through school with sales earnings
Keywords
Sales
Prospecting
Account Management
Closing
Consultative Sales
Approach
Sales Engineering
Presentation Skills
Closing Skills
Networking
Competitive Analysis
Customer Service
Overcoming
Objections
Territory
Management
Opening Up New
Territories
Market Penetration
Gaining Market
Share
Meeting and/or
Exceeding Sales
Target
Meeting and/or
Exceeding Quotas
Persuasive
Communication
Skills
Cold-Calling
Strategic Market
Planning
Customer
Relationship
Building
Alliance Building

SALES SUPPORT/COORDINATOR
146
Keywords
Advertising
Experience
Multimedia
Advertising
Available to Travel
Internet Advertising
Computer Skills
Key Account
Management
Marketing
Strategies
Appointment
Scheduling
Travel
Arrangements
Printing/Typesetting
Knowledge
Newsletter Creation
Itinerary
Management
Sales Promotions
Product Knowledge
Co-op Advertising
Presentation
Preparation
Trade Shows
Ad Design & Layout
Promotional
Materials
Handling
Resume
Joan C. Millani
13 Pleasant Street
Sabattus, Maine 04280
(207) 555-2222 / email@email.com
Sales Support/Coordinator
Multimedia Specialist
Trade Show Coordinator and Presenter
Promotional Materials Selection and Management
Highly energetic individual who is driven by the challenges presented in sales, marketing, and
promoting new products. Outstanding team player who thrives on supporting the efforts of a
successful sales team.
Core Strengths
Multimedia Advertising
Newsletter Creation and Distribution
Marketing Strategies
Printing/typesetting Expertise
Co-op Advertising
Ad Design & Layout
Internet Research
Business Support Skills
Professional Experience
Shad’s Advertising Company, Auburn, Maine
1997−Present
Sales Support/Coordinator
Provide sales and clerical support to a sales team of eight serving a tri-state area. Assist in
maintaining communications with key accounts. Help select and prepare for shipping all pro-
motional materials for presentations and trade shows. Recommend products for special promo-
tions and advertising. Help design ads, provide copy, and prepare layout for final approval. Co-
ordinate printing with printer to assure quality and meeting deadlines.
I
Instrumental in acquiring several major accounts through presentations.
I
New accounts generated an additional $1.5 million in sales in 2001.
I
Recouped $20,000 in co-op advertising dollars in last six months.
I
Created a new and more efficient system in preparing proposals.
Education
Andover College, Portland, Maine
1995−1997
Associates Degree in Marketing / Focus: Advertising
I
Selected by Faculty to Design Cover of Yearbook
I
GPA / 4.0
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I feel confident that I could prove to be an asset to your organization. My past experience has been very
heavily focused in advertising with sales support as a major part of my responsibilities. Support skills
have included the need for much travel while creating and preparing promotional materials and as-
sisting at trade shows. Most of the coordination work I have done is through the Internet and the use
of varied in-house software programs. In addition, your company could benefit from very diversified
hands-on secretarial support skills.

SALES SUPPORT ENGINEER
147
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am your link to the most influential buying decision makers in your market: engineers. I do a lot more
than speak “engineering-ese” fluently. I know how to spark engineers’ desire to make a very smart
buy—and avoid triggering their powerful aversion to being “sold.” And what I sell is more than our
products. I sell the confidence that guides companies to think of us as their sole source for capability
that drives their own profits. I want every sale I make to be the first of many.
Resume
Cythina “Cindy” Matthews
2020 McLean Drive
Auburn, Alabama 36830
(334) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Sales Support Engineer
Positioning your company as the “sole source”
Relationship & consultative selling / Presentation skills at the engineering level
Customer needs analysis
A driven sales professional with all the engineering experience needed to uncover and fill mar-
ket niche needs—even those your customers aren’t yet aware of. Totally dedicated to the idea
that customer support always equals sales support. More than seven years as an industrial en-
gineer and more than five years as sales support engineer.
Core Strengths
Matching customers’ needs with our products Consultative selling
Leveraging market intelligence
Troubleshooting
Spotting industry trends
Mastering production procedures
Professional Experience
Railtor Packing Equipment Company, Auburn, Alabama
1998 to Current
Sales Support Engineer
Responsible for the sales process from lead generation to delivery to comprehensive follow-up.
Collaborate closely with our engineering, marketing, and sales departments to match or modi-
fy our 215-item product line to customers’ requirements. Work closely with customers to devel-
op best practices—often on site. Develop and qualify new leads for a company with $375M an-
nual sales.
I
Used customer’s requirements to spin off new product line that generated $200K in sales.
I
Helped a customer find better ways to use our legacy equipment. Sold upgrade worth
$350K.
I
Found an improved method to capture second-level leads by establishing relationships with
purchasing professionals
Education
University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama
Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering, 1985
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Engineering Sales
Technology
RFP
Consultative Selling
WAN
Data Sales
Network Design
Pricing
Semiconductor
Computers
Software
Hardware
Programming
LAN
Cisco Certified
OEM
IP
Nortel
Special Pricing
Router
Network
Architecture

SAP ANALYST
148
Keywords
Business Process
Improvements
Capacity Allocations
Customer
Relationship
Management
Demonstrated
Foresight
ERP Business
Solutions
Implementation
Projects
Materials
Management
Networking
Capabilities
Parallel Business
Models
Performance
Measurement
SAP
Project Management
Realized
Profitability
Sales and
Distribution
Seamless
Integration
Supply Chain
Management
Systems Analysis
Team Leader/
Mentor
Technology
Infrastructure
Visibility Portals
Resume
Michael Smith
25 Tulip Avenue
East Floral Park, New York 11201
(516) 555-2220 / email@email.com
SAP Analyst
Fast-track career providing ERP solutions across multiple industries
Supply Chain Management / Sales and Distribution
Materials Management / Customer Relationship Management
Award-winning IT professional with 18 years of experience leading Fortune 500 clients
through global system changes to meet the functional and technical demands of ERP business
solutions and SAP requirements.
Core Strengths
Project Management
Supplier Relationships
Systems Analysis
ERP Business Solutions
Visibility Portals
Performance Measurement
Seamless Integration
Networking Capabilities
Professional Experience
INTEGRATED SOLUTIONS, New York, New York
1994 to Current
SAP Business Systems Analyst
Continually measure the performance of ERP business solutions designed to promote the
seamless integration of networking capabilities and visibility portals. Define functional re-
quirements to support the transition from a linear, sequential supply chain to an adaptive sup-
ply chain network. Equally effective at strengthening supply chain management, customer re-
lationships management, and improving business processes.
I
Led an award-winning SAP team in the management of ERP projects
I
Built industry-specific modules integrating R/3, APO, and Extricity
I
Enhanced supplier relationships and realized profitability by $20 million
I
Optimized supply chain networks and planned capacity allocations
Education
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York
Bachelor of Science: Computer Science, 1993
I
Certification in SAP APO DP
I
Certification in SAP Retail R/3 Module
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With an 18-year career spearheading large integration projects for parallel business models, specifi-
cally Supply Chain Management, I am uniquely positioned to manage your organization’s critical ERP
implementation projects on both the technical and functional sides. I believe my ability to lead, mentor
top-gun SAP teams, and translate business objectives into actionable plans, will prove vital in the de-
velopment of a highly flexible technology infrastructure to run your business operations.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

SCHOOL PRINCIPAL
149
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I believe in promoting a nurturing culture that fosters student engagement, but to do it effectively re-
quires a combination of strategies. I mentor individual teachers and make myself available to them,
and I try to create a teamwork environment. After all, there’s no room for competition, because we’re
on the same side; we’re all student advocates. I’ve brought a number of seminars to the school to pro-
mote staff training and development. I’ve also worked with counselors and teachers to identify au-
thentic assessment techniques to ensure that we have a good measure of the needs of our students and
to help us design targeted learning goals and objectives.
Resume
Joseph Saunders
123 11th Avenue South
Metamora, Illinois 61111
(309) 123-4566 / email@email.com
Secondary School Administrator
Offering 20+ years in education, with a proven commitment 
to creating a nurturing culture
Foster teamwork among educators and effectively mentor teachers 
to promote student advocacy.
Expertise in Curriculum Development/Instruction & 
Supervision/Consulting & Collaboration
Resourceful and visionary education administrator widely experienced in program develop-
ment, grant writing, curricula development, school consolidation, computer education, staff de-
velopment, budget management, strategic planning, and community / media relations. Excel-
lent written and oral communication skills.
Core Strengths
Fostering Student Engagement
Promoting Authentic Assessment
Encouraging Lifelong Learning
Designing Courses / Curriculum Planning
Textbook Review
Mentoring Educators
Consulting/Collaboration
Evaluation of Learning Goals & Objectives
Professional Experience
ROSS GAMBLE HIGH SCHOOL, Delaware, Illinois
8/84 to Present
Principal
Oversee all operations, providing personnel development and related services to a staff of 40
teachers, aides, and counselors. Administer programming, long-range planning, and policy de-
velopment, and ensure compliance with state regulations.
I
Built a reputation as a first-class source for information, with cutting-edge teaching tech-
niques and an up-to-date resource library for staff.
I
Utilized compression planning process to develop needs assessment for at-risk students.
I
Implemented Scientific Literacy Project in collaboration with Southern Illinois University,
that was ranked one of the best in the state.
Education
Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois
Master of Science in Education Administration, 5/84
University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois
Bachelor of Science in History, 5/76
Keywords
Education
School Principal
Lifelong Learning
Program
Development
Grant Writing
Educational
Administration
Cooperative learning
Classroom
Management
Course Design
Curriculum
Planning
School Consolidation
Student Advocate
Textbook Review
Mentor
Vocational
Education
Staff Training and
Development
Teamwork
Consulting /
Collaboration
Evaluation of
Learning goals and
Objectives

SENIOR BUSINESS CONSULTANT
150
Keywords
Business Consulting
Sales Channel
Distribution
Business Process
Reengineering
Competitive Market
Position
Corporate Culture
Change
Change Management
Corporate Image/
Vision/Mission
Cross-Functional
Team Leadership
Financial
Management/
Restructuring
Accelerated Growth
Strategies
Operating Leadership
Organizational
Development
Deliverables
Performance
Improvement
Quality Improvement
Advanced
Technologies
Merger/Acquisition
(M&A) Integrations
Initial Public Offering
(IPO) Management
Efficiency
Improvement
Crisis Management/
Disaster Recovery
Resume
Tim Thompson
10 East 14th Street, Apt. 3D
New York, NY 10003
(212) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Finance and E-Business Specialist
Fortune 500, Start-up, and Global Strategic Business Consulting
Broad International Experience—Europe, Pacific Rim, Latin America
M.B.A. in Finance and M.A. in International Affairs from Wharton
Develop innovative business, finance, and e-commerce strategies that deliver impressive bot-
tom-line impact. An acknowledged global thought leader, bringing cross-cultural business ex-
pertise to every assignment.
Core Strengths
Business Process Reengineering
Corporate Culture Change
Financial Management
Organizational Development
Performance / Quality Improvement
Advanced Technologies
Accelerated Growth Strategies
Disaster Recovery
Professional Experience
Gunther, Reaburn, & Batson Consulting
1996 to Current
Managing Consultant, Global Practice
Collaborate with management teams of globally aligned companies and start-ups in all indus-
tries to provide concrete guidance in business development, business reengineering, competi-
tive market positioning, change management, corporate image / mission / vision restructuring,
operating leadership, M&A integrations, IPO management, efficiency improvement, disaster
recovery, and crisis management.
I
Raised over $40 million funding for successful Dutch telecom start-up.
I
Built Hong Kong’s first e-commerce solution, still in business today.
I
Brought public / launched (12 nations) the first non-U.S. microbrewery.
I
Hold board positions with two Fortune 1000 firms.
Education
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
M.B.A.: Finance, 1990 / M.A.: International Affairs, 1985
Georgetown University, Georgetown, VA
Bachelor of Science: International Affairs, 1983
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Immediate contribution is my hallmark—I quickly assess your business situation and deliver short-
term impacting solutions while delving deeper into the details to develop solutions-based action plans
that achieve management and staff buy-in. Using fluency in three languages and an understanding of
diverse cultures’ business practices, I can improve your global business practices.

SENIOR VP SALES
151
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
An experienced senior sales leader, I direct regional and national programs and sales teams serving Fortune 100 compa-
nies. We grow new and core business in corporations and entrepreneurial companies, using strategic plans and break-
through positioning to gain competitive advantage and convert visions into results. I believe in consultative sales com-
bined with calculated risk, and encourage my team to develop and deliver innovative solutions that build business,
generate profits, and solidify customer relationships.
Resume
Theresa Mascagni
24 Aubrey Court
Princeton Junction, NJ 08550
(609) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Senior-Level Sales Management Professional
20 Years’ Sales and Marketing Leadership
Multi-Million-Dollar Achievements in Revenue Gain
Deliver Sustained Business Growth and Solid Alliances
Transform corporate goals into profits by cross-functional teaming to develop speed-to-market
strategies, by constructing innovative sales programs, and by managing dynamic, solutions-
based sales teams.
Core Strengths
National Account Oversight
Market Evaluation and Strategy
Short- and Long-Term Goals
Sales Organization Restructuring
Sales Program Development
Sales Force Motivation and Training
Profit & Loss Oversight
C-Level Relationship Management
Professional Experience
Med Solutions, Philadelphia, PA
1998 to Current
Senior Vice President of Sales
Member of core management team directing restart for this leading manufacturer of EMS-
related medical devices. Redefined and restructured company, achieving 25% annual growth.
Used market and product evaluation, strategy, and competitive analysis to rebuild distribution
channels, create lean yet effective sales budgets, develop new accounts, and negotiate joint
partnerships for multichannel distribution.
I
Took business from $54 million to $80 million in under three years.
I
Revitalized market position, bringing to fifth in industry from tenth.
I
Reduced turnover to 10% less than industry comparables.
I
Created systems to address difficulties caused by accelerated growth.
Education
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ
Bachelor of Science: Mathematics, 1982
I
Development program in leadership, Harvard Law School, 2001
I
Development program in mentoring, University of Michigan, 2000
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Market/Product
Evaluation and
Strategy
Consultative Sales
Techniques
Relationship
Management
Core Management
Team
P&L Oversight
Sales Organization
Restructuring
Short- and Long-
Term Sales Goals
Vice President
National Account
Oversight
Sales Program
Development
Sales Force
Motivation/
Training
Competitive Analysis
Sales Budgets
Strategic Plans
Speed-to-Market
Strategies
Cross-Functional
Teaming
Solutions-Based
Sales
Multiteam Sales
management
Multichannel
Distribution
C-Level Relationship
Building/
Negotiations

SOCIAL SERVICES
152
Keywords
Crisis Intervention
Behavior
Management
Personality
Disorders
Adult Services
Casework
Community
Outreach
Diagnostic
Evaluation
Chronic Substance
Abuse
Social Functioning
Independent Living
Skills
Human Services
Mainstreaming
Protective Services
Treatment Planning
Youth Training
Program
Vocational
Rehabilitation
Client Placement
Group Counseling
Domestic Violence
Coping Mechanisms
Resume
Julie P. Rackley, LSW
123 Main Street
South Portland, Maine 04106
(207) 555-9999 / email@email.com
Social Worker / Child Protection Advocate
Licensed Social Worker
Selected to Develop Relevant Programs and Instruct Other Caseworkers
Expertise in Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders
Formed Varied Support Groups for Parents
Diversified Caseworker with an innate ability to access, evaluate, and make decisions per-
taining to children (or adults) relevant to their safety and the possible need for treatment or
rehabilitation. Many need relocation or protection from dysfunctional home environments, sur-
roundings, and guardians.
Core Strengths
Lead Group Counseling Sessions
Diagnostic Evaluation
Oversee Child Guidance Clinics
Investigate Home Conditions
Evaluate Personal Characteristics
Behavior Modification Programs
Professional Experience
Department of Human Services, Augusta, Maine
1992−Present
Child Protective Caseworker
Counsel individuals or family members regarding behavior modification, rehabilitation, social
adjustments, financial assistance, vocational training, childcare, or medical care. Lead group
counseling sessions to provide support in such areas as grief, stress, or chemical dependency.
Serve as liaison between student, home, school, family service agencies, child guidance clinics,
courts, protective adoptive home, or to protect children from harmful environment.
I
Developed a program to train other caseworkers to better understand Autism.
I
Assisted in the founding of a new outreach hotline for runaways.
Education
University of New England, Biddeford, Maine
Bachelor of Science Psychology / Concentration, Mental Health, 1992
Master in Social Services / Spring, 2003
I
Psychology National Honor Society, PSI CHI
I
Current GPA/3.8
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a candidate for my Master’s in Social Work, I also offer 10 plus years of experience in crisis inter-
vention working with people of all ages and with varying issues. In addition, I have trained other case-
workers and community providers regarding child abuse and neglect, among other areas. I believe your
organization could benefit from such diversity while benefiting from my capability to help your orga-
nization expand its services in the community.

SOCIAL WORKER
153
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I began as a case manager and counselor for substance abuse and additional clients from both adult
and youth populations, and I progressed to the management of a growing agency. In that capacity, I
have forged a number of public and private partnerships with government and public agencies, as well
as leaders in the business community. I’ve also written and administered numerous grants. I believe I
offer a unique balance of skills, ranging from clinical social work (developing mental health assess-
ments, helping patients develop effective parenting and other critical skills, and the facilitation of ther-
apy groups) to full administration, including budgeting, research, regulatory compliance, and policy
and planning.
Resume
Naomi Bridges
402 West Adams Street
Pekin, Illinois 61111
(309) 555-1111 / email@email.com
Human Services Professional
Social Services / Case Management / Staff Management
Strong qualifications facilitating cooperative partnerships 
in both the private and public sector.
Excellent communication, team leadership, and crisis management skills.
Licensed social worker with extensive experience in the development and management of spe-
cialized programs targeting the needs of multiple patient populations. Combine team leader-
ship experience with a solid background in counseling and therapy. Confident and focused
under pressure; exercise prudent judgment in decision-making areas.
Core Strengths
The Prevention of Teen Pregnancy
Vocational Education
Management/Administration
Policy and Planning
Regulatory Compliance
Mental Health Assessments
Research
Counseling/Group Therapy
Professional Experience
FAMILY SERVICES AGENCY, Peoria, Illinois 1996 to Present
Team Leader / Case Manager
Direct all aspects of programming and client services for a private agency providing service to
children and families throughout three counties. Also manage a busy caseload, with responsi-
bility for identifying client needs and structuring treatment plans in collaboration with an in-
terdisciplinary team of social workers, nurses, therapists, and physicians, with an emphasis on
behavioral change and lifestyle goals.
I
Launched a six-week high-risk teen pregnancy group incorporating childbirth and parent-
ing education. Solicited the donations of bassinets and layettes to use as incentives to moti-
vate expectant mothers to attend all six meetings; attracted 20+ participants.
I
Initiated and delivered a number of educational seminars and workshops including “Close
the Gap—Current Challenges of Adolescence,” which was sold out within a week. Elected to
serve on Peoria’s Adolescent Consortium as a result of the success of this program.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS, Urbana, Illinois, 1996
Master of Social Work
BRADLEY UNIVERSITY, Peoria, Illinois, 1991
Bachelor of Science in Social Services
Keywords
Substance Abuse
and Addiction
Vocational
Education
Adult and Youth
Populations
Childbirth and
Parenting
Education
Counseling
Management /
Administration
Policy and Planning
Regulatory
Compliance
Mental Health
Assessments
Case Management
Daily Living Skills
Parenting Skills
Behavioral Change
Lifestyle Goals
Facilitating Support
groups
Research
Grant Writing
Grant
Administration
Public & Private
Partnerships
Group Therapy

SOFTWARE ENGINEER
154
Keywords
C
C++
Visual Basic
Java
Fortran
Pascal
MCF V++
Infrastructure
Planning
Design
Development
Engineering
System
Functionality
System Stability
Innovative
Self-Starter
Independent
Team Player
Programming
Needs Assessment
Customer
Requirements
Resume
Deborah Neal
5635 Katchina Lane
Anywhere, Idaho 00000
(208) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Software Engineer
17 years of successful experience in designing and developing
sophisticated software systems
Expert Software Engineer
Outstanding Programming Techniques
Proficient in a number of programming languages. Efficient analytical, problem-solving, and
decision-making skills. Able to solve complex problems and provide working solutions. Can as-
sist others in utilizing productive programming techniques. Work well under pressure.
Core Strengths
Multidiscipline Engineering
System Functionality
MCF VC++
Embedded Kernal OS
Infrastructure Planning
C and Assembler
Software Design/Development
System Implementation
Professional Experience
AMI SEMICONDUCTOR, Lincoln, Idaho
2001 to Present
Software Engineer
Design, develop, test, and maintain real-time embedded software for proofing devices. Design,
develop, test, and maintain DSP, and MCF VC++ application software. Experience in design,
development, testing, implementation, and maintenance of systems software written in C and
Assembler running in a real-time environment. Experience with version control and cross-plat-
form development tools and procedures.
I
Completed a 12-month project in under 9 months—received $2500 award.
I
Lead the Software Engineering Team in a project that resulted in a $30,000 savings to the
customer.
Education
North Idaho College, Couer d’Alene, Idaho
Bachelor of Science Degree in Engineering. Minor: Information Technology. 1999.
I
Selected as team leader in development of a new Microsoft game client.
I
Awarded Student Innovation Scholarship.
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am organized and capable of self-management. I am a proactive team player. I have excellent pro-
gramming and functionality skills. I am innovative, creative, and take initiative to get the job done. I
can handle stress and unpredictable workloads, conflicting deadlines, and interruptions, and most im-
portantly, have strong interpersonal skills with coworkers. I have outstanding design and development
skills. I meet all qualifications described in the posting. I earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Com-
puter Science.

SPEECH THERAPIST
155
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
As a speech-language pathologist with a background working in clinical and educational settings, my
strengths include diagnostic screenings, evaluations, and therapies for speech-impaired client popula-
tions, specifically children. Combined with a commitment to fostering communication between parents,
students, and professional teams, I am confident that I would be an asset to your school district.
Resume
Cynthia Janis Miller
137 East Longwood Drive
Miller Place, New York 11764
(631) 555-9080 / email@email.com
Speech Therapy
Eight years’ experience in speech-language pathology
Screenings, Evaluations, and Recommendations
Early Intervention / Kindergarten–Secondary Education
Credentialed speech-language pathologist experienced providing speech-language therapy to
children, adult, and geriatric speech-impaired clients throughout clinical, hospital, educational,
and homecare settings.
Core Strengths
Screenings and Evaluations
Program Development
Auditory Processing Deficits
Early Intervention
Language Acquisition
Standardized Testing
Augmentative Communication
Cochlear Implants
Professional Experience
St. Augustine Catholic School, Brentwood, New York
1997 to Current
Speech-Language Pathologist
Manage the development and implementation of speech and language therapy for children
with receptive and expressive language delays, neurological auditory processing deficits, artic-
ulation/phonological disorders, and oral motor feeding impairments. Perform diagnostic screen-
ings and evaluations, develop Individual Education Plans, and attend Committee on Special
Education Annual Review meetings.
I
Advise parents/teachers on educational and communication strategies.
I
Conduct weekly support groups for parents of speech-impaired children.
I
Developed “Hear Me Out,” a socially structured after-school program.
I
Coplanned the school’s first interactive Web site, “Kids Talk.”
Education
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
Masters of Science: Speech-Language Pathology, 1992
I
New York State Licensed Speech-Language Pathologist
I
New York State Certificate of Clinical Competence
Keywords
After-School
Programs
Auditory Processing
Deficits
Augmentative
Communication
Children, Adult,
Geriatric
Clinical, Educational,
Homecare
Cochlear Implants
Committee on
Special Education
Communication
Strategies
Early Intervention
Feeding Impairments
Individual Education
Plans
Language
Acquisition
Phonological
Disorders
Planning and
Development
Receptive and
Expressive Delays
Screenings and
Evaluations
Small-Group Speech
Therapy
Speech-Impaired
Standardized Tests
Support Groups

SPORTS AGENT ATTORNEY
156
Keywords
Athlete Contract
Negotiation
Good Faith
Negotiation
Arbitration
Representation
Contract
Signing Bonus
Right Not to be
Traded
Performance
Incentive Clause
Endorsements
Fluent in Spanish
JD
Westlaw, Lexis Nexis
Free Agent
First-Round
Selection
Research, Structure
Contracts
Multimillion,
Multiyear
Contracts
Media Relations
Severance
Meticulous
Preparation
Commitment to
Community
Philanthropy
Resume
Bianca L. Freeman
1134 Holmgren Way
Green Bay, Wisconsin 54303
(920) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Sports Law Attorney
Negotiate multimillion, multiyear contracts for professional athletes
Recognized in Sports Business’ “100 Most Powerful People Behind the Scenes”
Represented 20+ first-round selections in football’s free-agent draft
With partner, successfully negotiated more than $1 billion in athletic contracts. In addition to
athlete contract negotiation, provides wealth management, endorsement, media relations, and
philanthropy services.
Core Strengths
Contract research, structure
Player representation
Multimillion contract negotiation
NBA, NFL
Endorsements
Wealth management
Media relations
Commitment to community
Professional Experience
SMITH & FREEMAN, S.C., Appleton, Wisconsin
1993 to Present
Sports Law Attorney, Partner
Research, structure, and negotiate multiyear, multimillion contracts for athletes. Negotiate
and draft endorsement contracts. Assist with media relations. Represent clients during NFL or
NBA grievances, hearings, or appeals. Recommend wealth management programs, including fi-
nancial planners and accounting services. Collect career-ending/disability proceeds. Obtain ter-
mination and severance pay.
I
Negotiated a $150 million, eight-year contract for NBA forward, Stilts Tully.
I
Negotiated a $4.2 million, two-year contract for NFL Green Bay Packer tight-end, Fred
Mertz.
I
Named to Sports Business’ “100 Most Powerful People.”
Education
Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Juris Doctor, 1990
I
Editor, Marquette Sports Law Review
I
President, Sports Law Society
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Recognized as one of Sports Business’ “100 Most Powerful People Behind the Scenes in Sports,” I am
skilled with negotiating multimillion, multiyear contracts for football and basketball athletes. In addi-
tion to successful athlete representation, I assist my clients with wealth management, endorsement,
and workers compensation services. I have a commitment to philanthropy and won’t work with clients
unless they agree to give back to their community.

SPORTS COACH
157
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
In seven years of coaching in the college ranks, I have proven myself to be a superior athletic leader.
My focus is on individual player development, both on and off the basketball court, as the basis of team
cohesiveness and success. I contribute to the positive image of the school by stressing the value of
sportsmanship, ongoing learning and development, and academic effort. My aggressive scouting and re-
cruiting program attracts noteworthy talent as the foundation for team achievement and school visi-
bility.
Resume
Paul Macca
3439 Fastbreak Lane
Denver, Colorado 80212
(303) 555-9523 / email@email.com
Intercollegiate Basketball Coach
Successful Athletic Administrator—NCAA Division 2
Turnaround Management / Team Building
Academic Standards
Results-oriented leader with excellent skills in instructing, guiding, and motivating college-
level basketball players. Effectively employ group and one-on-one training and development
programs. Member of National Association of Basketball Coaches.
Core Strengths
Team Building
Team Image
Nutrition and Fitness
Skills and Conditioning
Recruiting
Scouting
Professional Experience
THE ROCKIES UNIVERSITY, Denver, Colorado
1995 to Current
Head Coach
Lead 12-man basketball squad with emphasis on sportsmanship, personal development, life-
long learning, and academic success. Oversee staff of three assistant coaches, providing guid-
ance on scheduling, travel planning, and equipment inventory issues.
I
Improved program graduation rate from 78% to 95%. Team GPA skyrocketed to 3.6.
I
Led team to winning season five of seven years.
I
Established cross-sport summer fitness camp, boosting enrollment by 350% within four
years.
I
Upgraded off-court dress code, boosting team’s professional image.
Education
University of Denver, Denver, Colorado
Master of Arts/Sports Psychology, 1988
I
Vice President, College Leadership Guild
I
GPA 3.9
Keywords
NCAA Division 2
Athletic
Administration
Turnaround
Management
Recruiting
Scouting
Team Building
One-On-One
Training and
Development
Player Development
Team Scheduling
Travel Planning
Team Image
Leadership Training
Sportsmanship
Lifelong Learning
Skills and
Conditioning
Nutrition and
Fitness
Off-Season Camps
Academic Standards
Equipment
Inventory
National Association
of Basketball
Coaches

SURVEYOR
158
Keywords
Surveyor
Real Estate
Development
Theodolite
GPS/GIS
CAD
Scientific
Instrumentation
Plats for
subdivisions
Airspace for Airports
Land Surveys
Maps
Transit
Topographical
Subsurface
VISIO
Excel
SoftDesk
Eaglepoint
ArcView
Precise
Computations
Accurate
Resume
Nancy Salisbury
119 South 100 East
Anywhere, Idaho 00000
(208) 555-0000 / email@email.com
Surveyor
Land and Airspace
Proven Senior-Level Surveyor
Professional Land Surveyor’s License
Seasoned senior-level surveyor with ability to perform a variety of functions and support. Out-
standing skills using state-of-the-art instrumentation and equipment.
Core Strengths
Extremely precise
Experienced in fieldwork
Proficient use of GPS/GIS equipment 
Project oriented
Enjoys outdoors, walking, climbing
Goa oriented
Team builder and player
Excellent technology skills
Professional Experience
MOUNTAINVIEW ENGINEERING, Idaho Falls, Idaho
1988 to Current
Senior Surveyor
Plan and oversee a variety of field work including land and airspace distance and direction
measuring. Interpret GPS and GIS data, verify accuracy of data, prepare plots and maps, and
write reports. Research evidence of previous boundaries, analyze data to determine location,
and record results. Create plats for subdivisions. Utilize electronic distance-measuring equip-
ment. Provide expert testimony in court cases as needed.
I
Developed a new process that allows tracking of researched records.
I
Improved process for computerizing lab notes and record keeping.
I
National Society of Professional Surveyors.
I
Coordinated a successful summer survey student camp.
I
Prevented a major litigation case over boundary disputes.
Education
Idaho State University, Pocatello, Idaho
Bachelor of Science Degree in Surveying. 1988.
I
Dean’s List, two Years
I
Recipient, Michael Roberts Scholarship Award
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I meet all the qualifications outlined in the job posting, including a Bachelor’s degree. I have been a suc-
cessful surveyor saving each company money by improving existing processes with state-of-the-art
technology. I am dedicated to the project from conception to completion. My physical stamina allows me
to stand for long periods of time. I enjoy the outdoors, walking, climbing, and using scientific instru-
mentation. Researching, analyzing, interpreting, and technology are some of my greatest strengths.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

SWITCH ENGINEER
159
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I have extensive experience in circuit analysis, switch, hub, and router design in LAN/WAN hardware
installation and configuration. I am skilled in network infrastructure design and troubleshooting, as
well as applications troubleshooting. My background includes new product and upgrades to existing
networks and integrations. I have worked in analog and digital design. Taking a project from inception
to implementation supporting the system life cycle, I can set up and maintain multivendor system op-
erations.
Resume
Willy Garrou
29587 Compo Parkway
Westport, Connecticut 06880
(203) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Switch Engineer
10 years’ experience in Telecommunications
Ethernet Specialist
Experienced switch engineer with background in installations, conversions, configurations, in-
frastructure design, and architecture. Ability to support all aspects of system life cycle from in-
ception to implementation.
Core Strengths
Circuit analysis
Troubleshooting
Multivendor systems
Testing
Fiber optics
Design
Simulations
Architecture
Professional Experience
Network Engineering, Inc., New Milford, Connecticut
Switch Engineer
Provided on-site support and deployment/integration services to companies in the United
States and abroad. Performed installation, configuration, troubleshooting, and maintenance of
LAN/WAN hardware, server, PC system construction, and NetWare. Resolved applications
problems and software interface issues. Designed wireless connections to accommodate multi-
ple locations and remote access.
I
Reconstructed switch rooms to upgrade 31,000-station network
I
Designed new switching systems with gateways to new technologies
I
Worked with Lucent Technologies to customize switch for project
I
Developed simulation model for testing operations
Education
Fairfield University, Fairfield, Connecticut
Bachelor of Science, Computer Engineering. 1991.
I
Alpha Sigma Nu
I
Summa Cum Laude
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Telecommunications
Circuit Analysis
Troubleshooting
Signals
Ethernet
Architecture
Design
Testing
Simulation
Fiber Optics
Digital
Analog
Network
LAN
Outages
Multivendor
Life Cycle
Software Interface
WAN
TCP/IP

SYSTEMS ADMINISTRATOR
160
Keywords
Systems Acquisition
Systems
Configuration
Systems
Development
Methodology
Systems
Documentation
Systems
Engineering
Maintenance and
Troubleshooting
Systems
Implementation
Object Oriented
Systems Security
Network
Administration
Hardware
Software
Database
Administration
Help desk
Staff Training and
Support
Data/disaster
Recovery
Emerging
Technologies
Multimedia
Technology
Information
Technology
For-Profit and
Nonprofit
Expertise
Resume
Brook Garrou
597 Rice Street
St. Paul, Minnesota 55104
(651) 555-2201 / email@email.com
Systems Administrator
For-Profit & Nonprofit Background
10 Years of Broad-Based Experience
Proactive Technology Solutions
Technology: Hardware: LAN,; Multiuser Interface; Systems: Windows NT/2000, DOS, Nov-
ell, UNIX, PC; Applications: MS Office 2000, Photoshop, PageMaker, CAD, SQL, IndDesign,
C++, JavaScript, ACT!; Other: optics, CD-ROM, videos, phones, diverse peripherals.
Core Strengths
Hardware and software
Peripherals
Emerging technologies
Multimedia technology
Help desk
Data and disaster recovery
Staff training and support
Object-oriented development
Professional Experience
MILLENNIUM SYSTEMS INNOVATIONS, Minneapolis, Minnesota
1995 to Current
Systems Administrator
Direct engineering team responsible for configuration and field installation of customer sites.
Capitalize upon high-growth market opportunities with e-commerce, videoconferencing, CD-
ROM, and Internet enhancements. Staff and operate a 24/7 help desk supporting both internal
and external customers. Build computer systems from “nuts” up. Oversee hardware, software,
networks peripherals and related technology systems. Guide all aspects of administration to
ensure optimum acquisition, development, methodology, functionality, and security.
I
Redesigned development/engineering protocols ahead of changing user requirements.
I
Introduced time-sensitive data recovery processes, and virtually eliminated all data losses.
I
Authored Seagrams’ in-house disaster recovery process.
I
Received Outstanding Performance Awards, six years consecutively.
Education
St. Cloud State University, St. Cloud, Minnesota
Bachelor of Science: Business Computer Information Systems (BCIS), 1992
I
Computer & Technology User Services Work Study
I
BCIS Club Secretary, 1990−1992
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My expertise covers system engineering, database administration, system implementation, and securi-
ty. Proactive with emerging technologies, I frequently advance object-oriented and multimedia systems
into development. I am frequently the key resource for all hardware, software, network, and database
training and support. I’ve developed a reputation as the help desk and data/disaster recovery “Dear
Abby,” approached 24/7 by colleagues. My leadership, training, and technical expertise allows me to con-
tribute immediately in managing projects and resources.

TAX SPECIALIST
161
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With more than 20 years of experience as a tax specialist at the director level, I offer a broad record of
accomplishment in all aspects of corporate taxation. Specifically, I have designed corporate tax policy
and handled extensive reporting of sales and use, and other specialized areas. I excel in the areas of
penalty assessment reduction and advanced issue resolution. With a consistent record of savings in op-
erations, planning, and successful completion of audits, I will quickly and positively affect your bottom
line.
Resume
Ronald Lockwood
47 Plymouth Avenue
Duluth, Minnesota 55811
(218) 555-4712 / email@email.com
Senior Tax Specialist
Expert Qualifications in Strategic Planning & Financial Leadership
Corporate Tax Policy / Tax Assessment Reduction
Negotiations / Audits / Appeals / Protests / Compliance
Hands-on financial executive with 20 years of experience in all aspects of corporate taxation.
Consistent record of accomplishment planning and implementing tax strategies to achieve
competitive advantage.
Core Strengths
Tax Planning Opportunities
State & Federal Tax Work Papers
Financial Statement Reporting
Corporate Tax Policy
Revenue Apportionment
Tax Allocation Specialist
Forecasting & Management
Federal & International Tax Issues
Professional Experience
E. I. DUPONT DE NEMOURS & CO., Duluth, Minnesota
1995 to Current
Senior Tax Specialist
Challenged to direct continuous improvement and aggressive automation of all Tax Depart-
ment systems and processes. Responsible for management of successful execution of all feder-
al, state, and local tax compliance. Successful completion of all federal, state, and local estimat-
ed payments and extensions; all state and local income, property, and sales/use tax planning;
and reacting appropriately to changes thereto.
I
Finalized settlement with IRS reducing proposed deficiency by $7.9 million.
I
Used IRS Advanced Issue Resolution (AIR) to reduce cost by $500 K.
I
Successfully expedited a $4 million claim for federal refund.
I
Developed and instituted completely computerized tax provision system.
Education
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
Bachelor of Arts / Business Administration, 1983
I
Concentration: Tax Preparation, Statistics, and Operations Mgmt.
I
Magna Cum Laude distinction
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Reduced Deficiency
Tax Provision
System
Disallowances
Penalty Assessment
Reduction
Cash Management
Audit Controls
Corporate Tax Policy
Tax Analysis &
Planning
Audit Assessment
Reduction
Appeals & Protests
Tax Allocation
Strategies
Consolidated Tax
Return Filing
System
Rapid Calculation
Financial Audits
Sales and Use Tax
State and Local
Transactional Tax
Work Papers
Revenue
Apportionment
Department of
Revenue
Advanced Issue
Resolution

TELECOMMUNICATIONS/E-SOLUTIONS
162
Keywords
Wireline
Wireless Networks
Digital Networks
Packet-Switched
Networks
Fiber Optic Cable
Third-Generation
Wireless (3G)
Telephony
Mobile Networks
Network Design
Frame Relay
Network
Installation
Internet Access
IP
Project Management
Legacy Systems
Integration
E-Commerce
Infrastructure
Voice and Data
Networks
Computer
Programming
Software Design
RFP
Resume
Dan Schmitz
2288 Water Street
Long Beach, California 90806
(310) 555-1122 / email@email.com
E-Solutions Specialist—Telecommunications
Network Engineer
10 years’ experience providing e-business solutions through Internet access and
legacy systems integration and redesign.
Core Strengths / Technical Skills
I
Network operating systems: Banyan VINES, Novell NetWare, Windows NT Server
I
Network hardware: Ascend, Cisco, FORE, Nortel, Xylan
I
Network protocols: SMTP, DNS, Telnet, FTP, TCP/IP, IIS
I
Operating systems: Microsoft, Red Hat, SCO, Silicon Graphics, Sun
I
Programming: C++, C, Perl, TCL/TK, Python, Fortran, and Shell Scripting
I
Software applications: Adobe, Corel, Microsoft, Lotus, SAP
I
Internet: HyCurve, Microsoft, Novell, Open Market
I
Security: Check Point, ISC2, ISACA
I
Certified Cisco Network Professional and Cisco Design Professional—CCNP and CCDP
I
Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer + Internet—MCSE and Internet
Professional Experience
SENIOR NETWORK ENGINEER (E-Solutions)
1995 to Present
Sprint Communications Company, LP
Alameda, California
Assess medium to large business data communications needs for high-speed digital, telephony,
internal/remote LAN/WAN networks, and enterprise applications. Present project proposal to
clients along with cost-benefit analyses. Project management activities cover installation and
testing, acquisitions, personnel, schedules, and budgets. Work closely with business and techni-
cal teams to ensure minimal disruption of services and maximum customer satisfaction.
I
Transitioned a major sporting goods chain from host-based, proprietary platforms to open,
client/server architectures. Expected cost savings of $200,000 by the second year of opera-
tion.
I
Built enterprise architectures and application systems for on-line transaction processing,
decision support, and workgroup computing. Net profits increased over 20% in the first
year of ownership.
Education
California State University at Long Beach, California
Bachelor of Science in Computer Systems Engineering—1991
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I offer a substantial history of economical network design and installation successes in a variety of plat-
forms, including wireline, wireless, third generation, and fiber optic. Along with my degree in Comput-
er Systems Engineering, continual recertification in popular networking platforms assures you that I
have a solid background in current technology. In fact, I have deployed two WANs of both voice and data
for two enterprise operations of over 100 sites each. My practical understanding of e-commerce infra-
structures allows me to develop cost-effective architectures that stay technologically viable for many
years.

TELEMARKETING MANAGER
163
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
One of the major difficulties in telemarketing is employee retention. With a strong talent in team build-
ing, I am certain that I would identify, recruit, and encourage qualified employees. I would design and
implement worthwhile incentive programs and empower my sales staff with strong scripting and train-
ing in handling objections. My business-to-business/business-to-consumer telemarketing experience,
my ability to motivate, and my in-depth understanding into telemarketing operations are good indica-
tors of my long-term performance with your company.
Resume
Jessica Lane
4311 Ipmire Blvd.
Columbus, Ohio 43219
(740) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Telemarketing Manager
Driving Sales Within Advertising, Marketing, and PR Industries
Data Analysis & Interpretation / Product & Program Marketing
Revenue-to-Expense Projection / Telemarketing Operations
Accomplished, extremely motivated telemarketing manager offering three years of continuous
sales achievements and company recognition for ability to maintain optimum performance lev-
els with minimal employee turnover.
Core Strengths
Solicitation Improvement 
Revenue-to-Expense Projection
Goal Setting / Problem Solving
Compensation Reward/Recognition
B-to-B/B-to-C Telemarketing
Incentive Programs Design
Long-Term / Short-Term Forecasting
Training Coordination 
Professional Experience
SOLID EDGE CONSULTING GROUP, Columbus, Ohio
1999 to Current
Telemarketing Manager
Foster extremely productive and positive call center environment for prestigious, high-volume
public relations company. Accountable for all telemarketing operations including workforce
management and reporting, staff recruiting/coaching and development, and problem analysis/
decision making. Demonstrate expert knowledge over a variety of telemarketing applications
and methodologies.
I
Executed strategic telemarketing sales campaign that increased sales by 300%.
I
Improved overall productivity by empowering staff with effective sales techniques.
I
Recognized as Top Telemarketing Commission producer throughout employment.
I
Contributing author for innovative script development/ objection handling.
Education
Franklin University, Columbus, Ohio
Bachelor of Arts: Sales and Marketing, 1995
I
GPA 3.5
I
Student Services Assistant
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Data Analysis &
Interpretation
Product/Program
Marketing
Workforce
Management &
Reporting
Recruiting/Coaching
and Development
Telemarketing
Applications/
Methodology
Revenue-to-Expense
Projection
Problem Solving
Telemarketing
Operations
Script Development/
Objection Handling
Compensation
Reward/ Recognition
Business-to-Business
Telemarketing
Business-to-Consumer
Telemarketing
Problem Analysis and
Decision Making
Ergonomics
Goal Setting
Incentive Programs
Design/
Implementation
Short/Long-Term
Forecasting
Training Coordination
Solicitation
Improvement
Call Center

TRANSPORTATION/LOGISTICS SPECIALIST
164
Keywords
Transportability (Towing,
Self-Propulsion,
Common Carrier)
Common Carrier
(Highway, Railway,
Waterway, Airway, or
Sea Lift)
Modes of Transportation
(Truck, Aircraft, Rail,
Ship)
Program Management
Federal Regulations
System Design and
Review Interface
Reducing Transportation
Costs
Item Transportability
Optimization
Distribution and Delivery
Trade-Off Analysis
Strategic Partnerships
Global Information
Systems
Government and Industry
Networks
Intelligent Transportation
Systems
International Border
Clearance Program
Department of
Transportation
Safety and
Environmental
Considerations
Standard Dimension
Limits
Physical Properties
Dynamic Limitations
Resume
Robert Kavanaugh
1953 Orchard Street
San Diego, California 92108
(619) 555-1122 / email@email.com
Logistics Specialist
Transportation Solutions & Disaster Prevention through
Early Design Influence
Trade-Off Analysis / Alternative Solutions
Certified Professional Logistician (CPL) with 10 years’ experience in logistics transportation
and distribution management. Driven to attain “seamless transportation” and cost reductions
through early participation in the system design review process and employment of holistic ap-
proaches that consider social, political, and environmental issues.
Core Strengths
Program Development & Management
Global Information Systems
Transportation Modeling/Simulation
Federal Regulations
Government & Industry Contacts
Disaster Planning
Professional Experience
BOOZ, ALLEN, HAMILTON
1996 to Current
San Diego, California
Overland Transportation Programs Manager
Develop or redesign transportation plans and emergency plans for companies experiencing
losses in their transportation infrastructure. Select best and alternate plans based on simula-
tions of transportation modes, routes, characteristics, limitations, and program constraints.
I
Identified the logistics infrastructures for and negotiated a strategic partnership between a
major overland freight carrier and a local telecommunications company, to provide a global
information system utilizing global positioning system and Internet technology for tracking
its $50 million truck fleet and scheduling deliveries.
I
Recommended safe alternate routes for Coca-Coladeliveries into volcanic activity areas,
based on intimate knowledge of the trade corridors along Interstate-35 and government
and industry contacts.
Education
Oxnard Community College at Oxnard, California
Certified Professional Logistician / 2000
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a Certified Profession Logistician who can reduce transportation costs and cut delivery times 
dramatically through early development of master transportation and distribution plans. My practical
logistics experience ranges from arranging military airlifts and sealifts to the uninterrupted distribu-
tion of Coca-Coladuring a volcanic eruption. If there is a better way to deliver a product safely, I will
find it through my familiarity with global information systems and domestic and international carri-
ers and routes.

TRAVEL AGENT
165
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am a true travel industry professional recognized for my ability to build relationships with customers,
ensuring their repeat business. You won’t have to spend much time training me since I have been a Cer-
tified Travel Counselor for 17 years, and am an expert in the SABRE computer reservations system. I
pride myself on my knowledge of international destinations and can skillfully assemble a range of pack-
ages, from corporate travel to family vacations.
Resume
Tammy Tice
1234 Paradise Road
Las Vegas, Nevada 89104
(702) 555-4523 / email@email.com
Professional Travel Agent
Certified Travel Counselor Since 1985
Corporate Travel / Family Vacations
Ecotours and Recreational Activities
Capable and confident travel industry professional. Extensive knowledge of global distribution
systems. Proven success in developing new business and cultivating long-term client relation-
ships.
Core Strengths
International Travel
Customs Regulations
Travel Crisis Information
Vacation Packages
Charter Flights
Cruises
Customer Service
SABRE
Professional Experience
TRAVEL PARTNERS, Las Vegas, Nevada
1995 to Present
Travel Consultant
Help walk-in clients with all travel needs, including flight reservations/ticketing, transfers,
hotel accommodations, and car rentals. Partner with area businesses on customized corporate
travel packages. Take twice-a-year familiarization trips, acquiring first-hand experience at var-
ious domestic and international destinations. Responsible for maintaining travel advisory
pamphlet.
I
Assisted owner with successful transition from antiquated computer reservations system to
state-of-the art global distribution system.
I
Memberships: American Society of Travel Agents, Institute of Certified Travel Agents, In-
ternational Airlines Travel Agency Network.
Education
University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada
Bachelor of Science / Hotel Administration, 1983
I
Member, Hotel Alumni Association
I
Treasurer, Student Hotel Association
Keywords
American Society of
Travel Agents
(ASTA)
Institute of Certified
Travel Agents
(ICTA)
International
Airlines Travel
Agent Network
(IATAN)
Certified Travel
Counselor (CTC)
Computer
Reservations
System (CRS)
SABRE
Vacation Planning
Corporate Travel
Charter Flights
Hotel
Accommodations
Rental Cars
Cruises
Family Vacations
Tour Packages
Ecotours
Recreational
Activities
International
Destinations
Customs
Regulations
Familiarization
Trips
Travel Crisis
Information

TV PRODUCTION MANAGER
166
Keywords
Television
Multimedia
Crew
Production/Direction
Advertising
Commercial
Production
Television News
Cable Television
Advertising
Programming
Problem Solving
Props
Relationships
Schedule
Script Breakdown
Set Design
Shooting Schedule
Supplies
Talent
Time Management
Resume
Lori Nuss
1359 Highland Avenue
Burbank, California 91510
(818) 555-1111 / email@email.com
TELEVISION PRODUCTION MANAGER
10+ Years’ Production Experience
Skilled Manager and Negotiator
Reputation for Coordinating Diverse Teams in a Fast-Paced,
High-Pressure Environment with Critical Deadlines
Industry reputation for expertise in managing business and production functions with atten-
tion to meeting timelines and budget concerns. Proven ability to negotiate contracts securing
favorable terms for equipment, supplies, locations, services, and top talent. Background in-
cludes features, commercials, and television broadcasting. Works well with diverse tempera-
ments; adept in scheduling, directing, and coordinating cross-functional crew members.
Core Strengths
Budget Development/Management
Script Breakdowns
Negotiations
Shooting Schedules
Set Design & Props
Crew & Staff Management
Time & Resource Management
Planning & Delegating
Professional Experience
ZYX NETWORK Burbank, CA
1995−Present
Production Manager
Advanced through series of progressive production positions. Key member of team responsible
for ensuring success and high ratings of “The Hollywood Journal” daily entertainment news
show. Previous projects included the 6:00 News and L.A. Morning.
I
Recognized by Television Academy for contributions to profession.
I
Conceived and guided production of numerous special remote stories, showcasing up-and-
coming talent in Southern California.
I
Suggested and oversaw details of station participation in numerous fund raising drives in-
cluding AIDS Project L.A. and campaign for Santa Monica’s homeless population.
Education
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, Los Angeles, CA
B.A. in Film & Television
Excellent Industry Recommendations Available upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contribut-
ing to our company?
I have 10 years’ progressive experience managing production, from inception through the end of pro-
duction. I have a keen eye for breaking down scripts and developing detailed cost and crew budget re-
quirements. I realize how important it is for you to have someone focused on meeting deadlines while
staying within budget, and that has always been a priority for the projects I managed. I am skilled in
negotiating contracts including talent, locations, equipment, and supplies.

UNDERWRITER
167
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
Overachieving line production goals, while maintaining sound consumer loan underwriting decisions,
has been the hallmark of my underwriting career. I bring extensive knowledge of conventional,
conforming/jumbo, FHA, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and VA loans, as well as state and federal lending
regulations. Accustomed to decisive customer interaction and collaborative team relationships, I can
model high-level underwriting services while producing results for you.
Resume
Mary Jane Young
728 River Road
Trenton, New Jersey 08608
(609) 555-2345 / email@email.com
Mortgage Loan Underwriter
Technical Expertise in Mortgage Loan Process and Underwriting
Mortgage Banking / Consumer Lending
Wholesale Mortgage Operations in Production Environment
Analytical, decisive underwriter experienced in all types of consumer loan products, including
home equity, second mortgages, and FNMA/FHLMC, as well as “A” paper jumbo loans sold into
the secondary market.
Core Strengths
Consumer Loan Underwriting
Funding and Loan Documentation
Commercial and Investor Banking
Home Equity and Second Mortgages
Desktop Underwriting
Underwriting Team Motivation
State Fair Lending Act
FHA D/E, VA, FNMA/FHLMC
Professional Experience
FIRST NATIONAL BANK, Trenton, New Jersey
1994 to Current
Mortgage Underwriter II
Underwrite conventional first trust deed residential mortgage loan requests using bank mort-
gage credit policies, as well as standard secondary market guidelines. Serve as technical re-
source for mortgage loan criteria, with strong knowledge of state and federal lending regula-
tions, and jumbo loan underwriting. Promoted from loan processor with signing authority.
I
Overachieve line production/sales standards for mortgage underwriting, while carefully an-
alyzing credit and collateral packages for compliance with Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and
FHA investor guidelines.
I
Efficiently and accurately produce heavy underwriting services caseload with ease, making
credit decisions within acceptable service levels.
I
Consistently surpass annual goals for volume and customer service.
Education
Mercer County Community College, West Windsor, New Jersey
Associate of Science, Business Administration—1994
I
New Jersey Underwriters Certification (HUD / MVA)—1994
I
New Jersey Mortgage Banker’s License—1994
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Mortgage Loan
Underwriting
Mortgage Banking
Consumer Lending
Wholesale Mortgage
Operations
Production
Environment
Consumer Loan
Products
Home Equity
Second Mortgages
FNMA/FHLMC/
FHA/VA
“A” Paper Jumbo
Loans
Secondary Market
Consumer Loan
Underwriting
Funding and Loan
Documentation
Commercial and
Investor Banking
Desktop
Underwriting
Underwriting Team
State Fair Lending
Conventional First
Trust Feed
Residential
Mortgage Loans
Jumbo Loan
Underwriting
Line
Production/Sales

UNIX MANAGER
168
Keywords
Hardware/Software
Performance
Hardware/Software
Availability and Repair
UNIX Server Architecture
UNIX Server Hardware
Installation/
Maintenance
Database Management
Systems
Application Development
Environments/ Utilities
Problem Resolution
Failure Recovery
Server/Workstation/
Network
Interoperability
SQL Server/Oracle/
Exchange Server
UNIX-Based System
Security
UNIX-Related Team-Wide
Technical Support
Server Performance
Analysis
Hardware/Software
Research and
Requisition
End-User Support
Methodology
Sun Solaris
Computer Science Degree
ERP Administration/
Management
Experience
Budget Management
Team Leadership
Resume
Glenna Hazen
103 Dylan Street
Patchogue, NY 11772
(631) 555-1122 / email@email.com
UNIX Manager
Install, Configure, and Maintain UNIX Workstations and Servers
Support Business Processing Requirements
Skilled in Wide Array of Technical Principles, Theories, and Concepts
Seven-year background in UNIX systems administration. Strong skills in system installation,
configuration, troubleshooting, tuning, planning, backup, and disaster recovery. ERP and Sun
Solaris experience.
Core Strengths
UNIX Server Architecture
Failure Recovery
UNIX-Based System Security
Budget Management
Installation/Maintenance
Problem Resolution
System Interoperability
Team Technical Support
Professional Experience
Computer Associates, Hauppague, NY
2000 to Current
Senior UNIX Manager
Administer all changes and upgrades. Install, configure, and maintain all company UNIX sys-
tems using various Sun performance commands. Monitor, repair, document, and report on sys-
tems’ operation and performance. Oversee server administration, server revision control, and
maintenance, including software, firmware, and updates. Communicate clearly with technical
and nontechnical staff. Provide team leadership.
I
Designed innovative UNIX-related team-wide technical support model.
I
Delivered new server performance analysis adopted companywide.
I
Trained staff in new application development environments/utilities.
I
Developed leading-edge end-user support methodology.
Education
St. Joseph’s College, Patchogue, NY
Bachelor of Science: Computer Science, 1995
I
GPA 3.75
I
Vice President, Future Business Leaders
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I believe in operating IT as a contributing value addition rather than a fixed cost. As a broadly experi-
enced IT professional, I bring a wide array of hands-on skills to this position including operation and
support of UNIX-based systems and system-level applications. I have a unique ability to bridge the
communications gap that often exists between the tech side and the business side, translating both
areas’ needs and solutions so that operational goals are met, budgets are kept, and internal and exter-
nal customers are supported.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

VETERINARY ASSISTANT
169
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I currently provide clinical supervision to a team of 12 veterinary technicians, animal caretakers, and
handlers in a busy, urban veterinary practice, as well as assist veterinarians and surgeons during ex-
aminations, treatments, and surgery. Our practice specializes in care of domestic and exotic birds, as
well as all dog and cat breeds. I also write Tips and Tails monthly community outreach newsletter that
educates owners on appropriate and timely pet care.
Resume
Theresa Pizano
207 Dorothy Place
Kenmore, New York 14226
(716) 555-8390 / email@email.com
Veterinary Technician
Specialized in General Practice, Dental Care, and Surgery
Caring and Compassionate Small-Animal Health Professional
Licensed Veterinary Technician with over 10 years’ clinical experience in pre- and post-opera-
tive care, as well as general pet examination and treatment.
Core Strengths
Intensive Care
Emergency Treatment
Preventive Dental Care
Surgical Preparation and Assistance
Wound Care
Medication Dispensing
Professional Experience
TRANSIT ANIMAL HOSPITAL, Eden, New York
1992 to Present
Veterinary Technician
Assist veterinarians and surgeons during examinations, treatments, and surgery. Perform fluid
therapy, oxygen therapy, catheterization, and venipuncture. Monitor vital signs and administer
injections and anesthesia. Educate owners on patient care and provide comfort and sympathy.
Oversee and schedule laboratory tests. Purchase medical supplies and control drug inventory.
I
Provide clinical supervision to team of 12 veterinary technicians, animal caretakers, and
animal handlers in busy, urban veterinary clinic.
I
Specialize in care of domestic and exotic birds, as well as all dog and cat breeds.
I
Write Tips and Tails monthly community outreach newsletter that educates owners on ap-
propriate and timely pet care.
Education
Medaille College, Buffalo, New York
Associate in Science: Veterinary Technology, 1992
New York State Department of Education
Licensed Veterinary Technician, 1992
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Keywords
Pre- and Post-
Operative Care
Clinical Supervision
Veterinary Medicine
Patient Examination
and Treatment
Fluid Therapy
Surgical Assistance
Owner Education
Wound Care
Injections and
Inoculations
Preventive Dental
Care
Medication
Dispensing
Anesthesia
Oxygen Therapy
Emergency
Treatment
Venipuncture
Laboratory Tests
Inventory Control
and Purchasing
Patient Preparation
Community
Outreach
Small Animal
Specialty

VOLUNTEER COORDINATOR
170
Keywords
Multilevel Recruitment
Task Assignment/
Scheduling for Peak
Coverage
Community
Outreach/Public
Awareness
Public Relations
Staff Mediation and
Management
Turnover Reduction/
Participant Retention
Interviewing and
Screening
Multiple Event/ Project
Coordination
Nonprofit
Community Liaison
Confidential Records
Leadership/
Motivation/Team
Building
Telefundraising and
Events Planning
Volunteer Participation
Community Resource
Development
Program Enhancement
Training and
Supervision
Cost Savings
Advertising, Promotion,
and Media Relations
Volunteer Network
Resume
Patricia J. Houston
127 Elmwood Street
Cheektowaga, New York 14227
(716) 555-3711 / email@email.com
Volunteer Coordinator
Leadership/Motivation / Team Building
Multiple Event/Project Coordination
Solid track record of developing and implementing creative programs that substantially in-
creased levels of volunteer participation. Provide training and supervision to an enthusiastic
and hard-working corps of volunteers.
Core Strengths
Interviewing and Screening
Community Resource Development
Advertising and Promotion
Staff Mediation and Management
Events Planning
Multilevel Recruitment
Turnover Reduction
Confidential Records
Professional Experience
UNITED SERVICES, Buffalo, New York
1994 to Current
Coordinator of Volunteer Services
Recruit, train, and motivate volunteer network of 120+ participants. Create promotional mate-
rials to expand community outreach and heighten public awareness. Coordinate task assign-
ment/scheduling to guarantee peak coverage. Identify opportunities for program enhancement.
Design materials to improve public and media relations.
I
Developed 40-hour training program and monthly in-service seminars, improving quality of
service and increasing participant retention.
I
Created and promoted “Share-an-Idea Program” for volunteers, resulting in cost-saving
suggestions that reduced operating expenses.
I
As community liaison, built a visible presence and increased recruitment by 37%.
Education
Villa Maria College, Buffalo, New York
Bachelor of Science—Human Development, 1994
I
Graduated Cum Laude with 3.72 GPA
I
Youth Leadership Award and “Doing More” Award
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I led the effort to develop a 40-hour training program and monthly in-service seminars, improving qual-
ity of service and increasing volunteer retention. We created and promoted “Share-an-Idea Program”
for volunteers, resulting in cost-saving suggestions that reduced operating expenses. As community li-
aison, I built a visible presence and increased recruitment by 37%.

WAREHOUSE MANAGER
171
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
With 13 years’ experience leading and managing warehouse and shipping operations for a major fin-
ished goods inventory distributor, I have a proven track record of maximizing customer satisfaction
while achieving cost control goals well below industry standards. Efficiently scheduling warehouse per-
sonnel and closely monitoring warehouse and distribution procedures has yielded high levels of pro-
ductivity. I believe I can produce similar outstanding results for you!
Resume
Nicholas Carrington
573 Emerald Plaza, Apt. 2D
Somerset, New Jersey 08873
(732) 555-1234 / email@email.com
Warehouse Manager
Warehousing and Distribution Operations
Materials/Inventory Control Management
Inbound and Outbound Shipments
Warehouse Manager experienced in directing teams to meet tight deadlines in a results-orient-
ed environment. Ensure product quality and customer satisfaction through responsive, accu-
rate, on-time scheduling.
Core Strengths
Materials/Inventory Control
Cost Containment/Budget Controls
Human Resource Management
Safety Training/Management
Distribution Accountability
ISO 9000 Certification Standards
Troubleshooting
Written and Verbal Communications
Professional Experience
MOHAWK CARPETS, Montclair, New Jersey 1989 to Current
Warehouse/Distribution Manager
Senior warehouse manager for multimillion-dollar wholesale distributor of high-end imported
wool rugs, supplying 350 mass merchandisers such as Macy’s, Sears, and QVC. Full superviso-
ry responsibility for 25 warehouse personnel, safety management and training, cost controls,
equipment reliability, and shipment verification. Maintain an orderly stock and staging area
for finished goods inventory in a fast-paced department.
I
Doubled warehouse and shipping operations efficiency and productivity by transitioning to
computerized inventory system for 200,000 SKUs.
I
Effectively maintained tight inventory controls through internal auditor reviews and imme-
diate troubleshooting. Achieved cost management goals and percentage of loss 25% lower
than industry standards.
I
Ensured expeditious materials transactions while meeting budget goals.
Education
Burlington County Community College, Pemberton, New Jersey
Associate of Arts, Business Administration—1988
I
Computer Skills: Windows NT/2000, Microsoft Office 2000 (Word, Excel, Access) and auto-
mated inventory tracking applications.
Keywords
Warehousing
Distribution
Inventory Control
Management
Inbound and
Outbound
Shipments
Customer
Satisfaction
Scheduling
Human Resource
Management
Distribution
Accountability
Troubleshooting
Cost Containment
Budget Controls
Safety Training
Safety Management
ISO 9000
Certification
Standards
Warehouse
Personnel
Shipment
Verification
Stock and Staging
Area
Finished Goods
Inventory
Warehouse and
Shipping
Operations
Automated
Inventory Tracking

WEB DESIGNER
172
Keywords
Artistic Talent
P&L Mindset
35 mm & Digital
Photography
Life Cycle
Development.
Web Design &
Development
Search Engine
Optimization
HTML & Cutting-
Edge Software
E-Mail Campaigns
E-Commerce
Initiatives
Message
Development
Project Management
Brand Development
Static and Animated
Images
Typography/Text &
Font Management
Image Management
Client-Server
Concepts
Cross-Browser
Issues
Revenue-Enhancing
Sites
Troubleshooting
Color Theory &
Manipulation
Resume
Marit Johannsen
1812 Waterford Court
St. Paul, Minnesota 55102
(651) 555-0090 / email@email.com
Web Designer & Developer
Successfully Transform Concepts Into Interactive Reality
Artistic Talent, P&L Mindset, and Technical Savvy
Draw on artistic vision, business acumen, and passion for the field to create aesthetic sites
meeting client-driven goals. Proficient with HTML, DHTML, Cold Fusion, MS Office,
JavaScript, C++, WebLogic, Oracle, Photoshop, Fireworks, QuarkXpress, SQL7.
Core Strengths
Client-server & object-oriented concepts
Cross-browser issues
Image, brand, & message development
Search engine strategies
E-commerce initiatives/e-mail campaigns
Total Web lifecycle development
Static/animated images
Photography/color/topography
Professional Experience
VISIONLINK, LTD., St. Paul, Minnesota
1995 to Current
Web Designer and Developer
Contribute as integral member of development/design team. Perform object-oriented and
client-server-focused Web applications and development. Create original art and graphic layout
of content, banners, logos, and merchandise. Code new programs. Incorporate interactive ele-
ments and e-commerce initiatives; perform technical coding, review, and testing; and work
closely with senior executives to conceptualize, design, and launch Internet/Intranet sites fur-
thering company goals. Serve as primary “troubleshooter.”
I
Enhanced Internet site for bank garnered a 42% increase in unique user sessions.
I
New Internet site for distributor generated a 57% increase in qualified sales leads.
I
Initiated interactive “Me & You” bulletin board, growing communication flow.
I
Handpicked by management to revamp home page, praised in Web Design Monthly.
Education
University of St. Thomas, St. Paul, Minnesota
Bachelor of Arts: Computer Information Systems, 1990
I
Graduate of first program emphasis in Interactive Web Design & Development
I
GPA 3.85
References Furnished Immediately upon Request
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
I am able to transform concepts into on-line, interactive reality, managing all aspects of Web life cycle
development. My combined artistic talent and P&L mindset have resulted in the delivery of revenue-
enhancing, market-oriented sites. My innovative sites, tapping into my expertise in photography and
managing images, fonts, text, and color, are in demand. I optimize search engines through keyword re-
search/selection, meta tagging, engine submission, and position tracking. My career is marked by suc-
cess in incorporating interactive elements and e-commerce initiatives. I have earned a reputation as an
effective troubleshooter, resolving technical issues and managing ongoing support.

WRITER/EDITOR
173
Interview Q&A Using Keywords
Why should we hire you, what are your strengths, and how do you see yourself contributing
to our company?
My professional specialization is writing and editing for technical and business publications. My re-
search and interviewing skills are excellent. I have a particular gift for making complex material both
understandable and interesting to the general public. My ability to write compelling articles has had
an impact on the ability of a publication to grow and gain market share in a competitive market.
Resume
Cheryl Franks
425 Range Road
Harrisburg, PA 17107
(570) 555-1212 / email@email.com
Writer / Editor
Excel at identifying & developing compelling news angles
Award-winning writer/M.A. in Writing
Analytical/Excellent command of the English language
Award-winning journalist/reporter/editor with nine years of professional writing experience in
traditional print media and Web publishing. Extensive experience writing and editing for
newspapers, businesses, and health-care-industry organizations. Specialize in writing about
business and technical topics. Maintain high-quality standards. Produce on or ahead of dead-
line.
Core Strengths
Identifying news angles
Technical & business writing
Creating Web copy
Interviewing
Supervising writers
Researching complex topics
Editing
Meeting deadlines
Professional Experience
WALL STREET REVIEW, New York, NY
Freelance Writer
1999-Present
Research topics, interview senior executives, and write business articles. Produce market fore-
casts concerning new technologies in the pharmaceutical, automotive, chemical, and medical
equipment industries. Contribute to writing business news summaries for www.wsr.com. Edit
business articles. Supervise five other freelance writers.
I
Wrote a feature article for the Biotechnology section on market trends
I
Won “Best Technology Article 2000” (News Publishers Association)
I
Selected to provide editorial direction to six freelance writers
I
Contributed to 10% growth in circulation
Education
Smith College, Northampton, MA
B.A. in English 1990
Goddard College, Plainfield, VT
M.A. Writing, Journalism Concentration 1995
References Furnished upon Request
Keywords
Journalist
Newspaper Reporter
Editing
Features
Editorials
Interviews
Supervising
Web Copy
Business Writing
Newspapers
Magazines
Reports
Newsletters
Deadlines
Analytical
Creative
Research Skills
Print Media
Copy Editing
M.A. in Writing

This page intentionally left blank.

Account Executive, 26
Accounting Manager, 27
Accounts Receivable Supervisor, 28
Actuary, 29
Administrative Assistant, 30
Advice, getting, 13
Airline Pilot (Commercial/Private),
31
Application Developer, 32
Architect, 33
Art Director, 34
Artist, 35
Association Manager, 36
Auditor, 37
Automobile Parts Manager, 38
Branch Manager (Bank), 39
Bank Teller, 40
Benefits Coordinator, 49
Bookkeeper, 42
Brand Manager, 43
Building Inspector, 44
Call Center Director, 45
Career Counselor/Coach, 46
Certified Public Accountant, 47
CFO, 48
Change/Reengineering Consultant,
49
Chemist, 50
City Manager, 51
Civil Engineer, 52
Civil Service (Police Officer), 53
College Graduate (Accounting), 54
College Graduate (Communications),
55
College Graduate (Construction), 56
College Graduate  (M.B.A.), 57
College Graduate (Mechanical Engi-
neer), 58 
College Graduate (Sales), 59 
Commerical or Corporate Pilot, 60
175
Index
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

176
Index
Construction Foreman, 61 
Contracts Specialist , 62
Controller, 63
Corporate Attorney, 64
Corporate Recruiter, 65
Cosmetologist, 66 
Creative Designer, 67 
Cruise Director, 68
Customer Service Representative, 69 
Data Warehouse Developer, 70 
Dental Assistant, 71
Design Engineer, 72
Director of Manufacturing, 73 
Director of Marketing, 74 
Director of Operations, 75
Director of Purchasing, 76
Editor, 77
Electrical Engineer, 78 
Elementary Teacher, 79
Environmental Engineer, 80 
Estimator, 81 
Executive Chef, 82 
Executive Recruiter, Engineering, 83 
Finance Manager, Banking, 84 
Financial Analyst, 85
Financial Planner, 86 
Flight Attendant, 87 
Food /Beverage Manager, 88 
Fundraiser, 89 
Funeral Director, 90
General Manager—Hospitality, 91
Government Liaison, 92 
Graphic Designer, 93
Guidance Counselor, 94
Hair Stylist, 95 
Headhunter.net, 4
Help Desk Administrator, 96
High School Teacher, 97 
Human Resources Manager, 98  
Image Consultant, 99
Insurance/Claims Adjuster, 100
Insurance Sales, 101
Interior Designer, 102
Inventory Control Manager, 103
Internet/online, 4 
Interviewing tips, 17-19
Job-related skills, 8
Job-searching tips, 15-16
Journalist, 104
Keywords, 3
Prescreening through search, 3-4
Lab Technician, 105
Librarian, 106 
Limousine Driver, 107 
Loan Officer, 108
Loss Prevention Manager, 109
Management, 110
Manufacturer’s Representative, 111
Marketable skills, 7 
Marketing Manager, 112 
Media Buyer, 113 
Medical Billing Supervisor, 114
Monster.com, 4
National Account Sales, 115
Network Architect, 116
Network Engineer, 117
Networking tips, 13-14, 20
Nonprofit Program Director, 118 
Nurse, 119 
Nutritionist, 120
Online services, 15
Paralegal/Legal Assistant, 121 
PeopleSoft Consultant, 122 
Personal Trainer, 123 
Pharmaceutical Sales Representa-
tive, 124 
Pharmaceutical Technician, 125
Pharmacist, 126
Photographer, 127
Physical Therapist, 128
Physician’s Assistant, 129
Police Officer (military conversion),
130 
Production Manager, 131 
Project Manager, 132 
Property Manager, 133
Public Relations Director, 134
Quality Engineer, 135 
Radio Disc Jockey, 136
Radiologist, 137 

Real Estate Broker, 138
Receptionist, 139
Regulatory Affairs Counsel, 140
Restaurant Manager, 141
Resume format, 5
Retail Sales Manager, 142
Risk Management, 143
Salary negotiating tips, 19
Sales/Corporate Trainer, 144
Sales—Entry Level, 145 
Sales Support /Coordinator, 146
Sales Support Engineer, 147 
SAP Analyst, 148
School Principal, 149
Search engines, 4
Self-management skills, 9
Senior Business Consultant, 150
Senior VP Sales, 151
Social Services, 152
Social Worker, 153
Software Engineer, 154
Speech Therapist, 155
Sports Agent Attorney, 156
Sports Coach, 157
Surveyor, 158 
Switch Engineer, 159
Systems Administrator, 160
Tax Specialist, 161
Technical skills, 8
Telecommunications/E-Solutions,
162
Telemarketing Manager, 163
Tips, 12-21
Transferable skills, 8 
Transportation/Logistics Specialist,
164
Travel Agent, 165 
TV Production Manager, 166
Underwriter, 167
UNIX Manager, 168
Veterinary Assistant, 169
Volunteer Coordinator, 170
Warehouse Manager, 171
Web Designer, 172
Writer/Editor, 173
Index
177

This page intentionally left blank.
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly® 

About the Authors
Jay A. Block, CPRW (Certified Professional Resume
Writer), internationally certified career coach and
resume strategist, is the contributing cofounder of the
Professional Association of Resume Writers and
Career Coaches (PARW/CC). He helped develop the
PARW/CC national certification process and is a
widely respected national speaker, author, and career
coach. Contact him at www.jayblock.com.
Michael Betrus, CPRW, has been a hiring manager
in the telecommunications industry for several years,
and frequently engages in academic seminars for
students on campus. Michael is the author of The
Guide to Executive Recruiters and co-author, with Jay
Block, of 101 Best Resumes, 101 More Best Resumes,
101 Best Cover Letters, and 101 Best Tech Resumes.
Contact him at betrus@earthlink.net.
Copyright 2003 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.

