Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
1 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
 
 
 
LEGAL AND DISCLAIMER
THE CONTENTS OF THIS MANUAL REFLECT THE AUTHOR’S VIEWS ACQUIRED THROUGH HIS EXPERIENCE
ON THE TOPIC UNDER DISCUSSION. THE AUTHOR OR PUBLISHER DISCLAIMS ANY PERSONAL LOSS OR
LIABILITY CAUSED BY THE UTILIZATION OF ANY INFORMATION PRESENTED HEREIN. THE AUTHOR IS NOT
ENGAGED IN RENDERING ANY LEGAL OR PROFESSIONAL ADVICE. THE SERVICES OF A PROFESSIONAL
PERSON ARE RECOMMENDED IF LEGAL ADVICE OR ASSISTANCE IS NEEDED. WHILE THE SOURCES
MENTIONED HEREIN ARE ASSUMED TO BE RELIABLE AT THE TIME OF WRITING, THE AUTHOR AND
PUBLISHER, OR THEIR AFFILIATES ARE NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR THEIR ACTIVITIES. FROM TIME TO TIME,
SOURCES MAY TERMINATE OR MOVE AND PRICES MAY CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE. SOURCES CAN ONLY
BE CONFIRMED RELIABLE AT THE TIME OF ORIGINAL PUBLICATION OF THIS MANUAL. THIS MANUAL IS A 
GUIDE ONLY AND, AS SUCH, SHOULD BE CONSIDERED SOLELY FOR BASIC INFORMATION ON THE TOPIC.
EARNINGS OR PROFITS DERIVED FROM PARTICIPATING IN THE FOLLOWING PROGRAM ARE ENTIRELY
GENERATED BY THE AMBITIONS, MOTIVATION, DESIRES, AND ABILITIES OF THE INDIVIDUAL READER AND
NOTHING IS GUARANTEED. NO PART OF THIS MANUAL MAY BE ALTERED, COPIED, OR DISTRIBUTED,

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
2 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
WITHOUT PRIOR WRITTEN PERMISSION OF THE AUTHOR OR PUBLISHER.
ALL PRODUCT NAMES, LOGOS, AND TRADEMARKS ARE PROPERTY OF THEIR RESPECTIVE OWNERS WHO
HAVE NOT NECESSARILY ENDORSED, SPONSORED, OR APPROVED THIS PUBLICATION. TEXT AND
IMAGES AVAILABLE OVER THE INTERNET AND USED IN THIS MANUAL MAY BE SUBJECT TO
INTELLECTUAL RIGHTS AND MAY NOT BE COPIED FROM THIS MANUAL.
COPYRIGHT © 2009 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED LOOT4LEADS.COM.
 
 
Introduction
Thanks for taking the time and the first step in making good money through CPA networks and marketing. 
This report is just a sneak peek of my exclusive membership to my CPA power program that is only open
for limited time accepting new members.  This report won't contain any fluff or fillers, just straight to the
point on how you can apply theses same techniques to almost any kind of niche and make money through
CPA offers.  There are two strategies that I am about to reveal to you that also work hand in hand together
to maximize your revenue potential.  So let's get started on these techniques.
 
Technique 1: Making Money with the Content Unlocker
This is a fairly new concept in CPA marketing and there are a couple of CPA networks that have a content
unlocker feature that you can use on your own websites.  The content unlocker is a way to block content
from your site until a user completes a survey (which you get credit for the lead), and then the user will
have access to your site content.  The content unlocker feature is great for sites that have content
available like wallpapers, streaming videos, etc.  I suspect that this type of marketing will continue to be
popular in the future and more CPA networks will adapt to this feature.  Basically, all of these types of
offers allow incentive marketing which means that the offer allows users to complete their offer in return for
something.
I'm going to give you some live examples of how I'm using the content unlocker on some of my websites

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
3 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
that are making money each day from it.  First there are only two networks in which you can implement this
feature on your own website for right now.  CPALead.com (my top recommendation),  InstantDollarz.com,
or PerfectTracking.com all allow you to copy a line of code from their site in which you paste on your
website.  Using the content unlocker features means that you need to have a website with good content on
it that a user will actually spend the time to fill out a survey to get access to your content.  I'm sure there
will be more CPA networks down the road that implement this technique but both companies listed above
are excellent to work with and you shouldn't have any problems getting accepted into their network.
 
Technique 1 - Using the Content Unlocker on Your Website
This first technique will show you how you can setup your own website using the content unlocker feature. 
Free traffic is always the best way to get visitors to your website and/or CPA offers as all your leads will be
100% profit.   Article marketing is my favorite way in getting lots of free traffic using the content unlocker
method to my sites.  From what I've found, it's not going to guarantee you the amount of traffic you can get
from PPC, but it's 100% free so with a little time and effort it will be worth it in the long run.  In some cases,
using my article marketing method is actually a lot easier to setup a new campaign then it is through PPC. 
So this free method I am going to explain is writing many different articles on different keywords that I have
within my website using the content unlocker.  I like using ArticlesBase.com for writing my articles as it 
seems to be the best way to get top rankings in Google for my keywords that I'm targeting and they allow
up to 3 hyperlinks within your article that you can send to your site.
 
Setting Up the Site
In this example, I will take my grocery coupon free content site I created as a demonstration on how I
setup my articles.  This is a content site that I setup where I offer my visitors various website listings where
they can print grocery coupons, get free product samples, etc.  The first thing that I needed done was a
simple landing page designed for me.  I outsourced the design for this basic one page layout which cost
me $50 on ScriptLance.com.  I'm not a web designer so I find that outsourcing this type of work is the best
as you will need to have some kind of professional looking landing page.   You can see the template I had
created for me below which I will use for each one of my pages within the site.  Later on, I will show you

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
4 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
how to setup your own professional looking content website using WordPress for free.
 
The second thing that I did was research by searching through Google for legitimate websites that offer
free coupons that users could print.  I came up with about 10 of them and a couple were even CPA offers
where I will get paid for a lead just for referring someone to print free coupons!  I then created a simple one
page directory with links to all my site listings as you can see below after my landing page was designed
for me. 
This page listed above will have the content unlocker installed on it so that when a user clicks on the "Print
Coupons" link from my home page, they will be directed to this page with all the free coupon sites there. 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
5 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
The user will need to complete a survey in order to unlock the page in which I will get credit for a lead. 
Installing the content unlocker is very simple as it's simply a matter of adding one line of code that you can
get from either your InstantDollarz or CPALead account.  You can see the content unlocker in action by
visiting my live site here: http://printable-grocery-coupon.com/
 
Getting Traffic
Now it's time for me to get traffic to my site.  When writing my articles, obviously I'm not going to target
keywords like "coupons" or "grocery coupons" as I wouldn't have a chance to get top rankings in Google
for just writing an article as I would need to setup a much more in depth back linking campaign.  Instead,
I'm going to focus on longer keyword phrases like individual items that people would be searching for. 
With coupons, there are literally thousands of different combinations of individual grocery items which I
can target as each individual article.  To find out which keywords you can potentially rank on the first page
of Google, my rule of thumb is that you need to target keywords that have less than 10,000 competing
websites for that keyword phrase.  In order to find out how many sites are targeting a keyword phrase, you
can simply go to Google and put quotes into the search for your keyword phrase as listed below:
You can see above, that there are 7,320 results for this exact keyword phrase which is under 10,000 so I
should be able to rank my article in the first page of Google for this keyword phrase.
Before you write articles on specific items, what you want to do is make sure that the free content sites
offer the specific item you are targeting.  After looking through all the free coupon sites I had I was going to
write my first article I targeted to "Gillette coupons".  The most important thing to do is use your keyword
phrase in your title which I did as you can see below.  I was targeting two keyword phrases in my title:
"gillette coupons" and "printable gillette coupon".   
I wrote my article around how consumers can save money with printing coupons and then using the
keyword phrase a few more times within the article.  Most of this article text can be used for all my articles

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
6 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
as I would simply need to modify the actual item.
 
Once I submitted my article it got indexed fast by Google and I know own the top spots for keywords
gillette coupons 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
7 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
I also got the 3rd spot for keyword: printable gillette coupon
 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
8 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
Even further I'm in the top 10 for keywords: printable gillette coupons and gillette coupon.  There's nothing
more that I did in achieving these results than writing the article, using the keywords as my title, and then
using them a few more times within the body of my article. The results for just this one article are very
good as I've gotten over 5,000 article views and lots of free traffic to my website. 
 
I can do this same technique and write other articles for hundreds of different specific items to maximize
my free traffic.  Article marketing does take a little longer to setup and it's not always guaranteed that your
article will appear in the top results in Google, however it's all free traffic to your site and that means 100%
profit to your content unlocker site.
 
 
 
Technique 2: Using Google Trends and the Content Unlocker On Your Website
 
This method I am about to reveal to you is the most powerful technique that I've found to work the best. 
You will not always find this method to work daily, but you will be able to use it quite often.  This technique
is using Google Trends again, writing an article, and then sending the users to your own website using the
content unlocker to get leads.  When using the content unlocker, you need to make sure that you have
some good content that the user will be willing to complete a survey to unlock your page so this method
will work well with pictures, videos, downloads, etc.  For example, if there was a recent celebrity wedding
that took place, lots of people are searching for the wedding pictures, and if you find these pictures doing
your search research online, you can add a link to your site which directs the user to these pictures only
after they complete a survey from your content unlocker. 
 
In my live example, I am going to show you how you can make a lot of money per day with one particular
Google trend search phrase.  I saw that there was consistently a lot of searches for "Erin Andrews" a few
days in a row which tells me that the topic is very hot.  I found in my research on this topic that apparently
there was a video that was released on Erin Andrews who is a popular sports caster for ESPN from her

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
9 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
hotel room.  As I said earlier, if you have the ability to add picture, video, or any kind of download content
on your site that people are searching for, you can use the content unlocker technique on your site.  Since
people were searching for the Erin Andrews video, I created a simple landing page. 
 
You can see the basic setup I used below that only took me a couple minutes to setup.  I use Front Page
to create my simple landing pages that do not require any professional layout but any website builder or
editor should be able to create something easy like that.   I always just use an existing domain that I have
and then make a sub directory on the particular topic I choose to target.  You can see the page below as
it's as simple as you can get with a title and a couple pictures I found online.  Here's the actual site:
http://fanbrag.com/erin-andrews 
 
The most important thing is to have a noticeable text like I do that shows "Click Here to Play".  Instead of
making the user click from my home page to a second page that displays the content unlocker, I used a
feature that InstantDolllarz allows to delay the content unlocker from being shown right away.  This gives
the user a quick look at my home page that shows a thumbnail of a video where they can play the video.
 
The user will see this page for 2 seconds and then it will automatically lock the page from the code that I
got using the content unlocker from my InstantDollarz account.  The user will then see the page locked as
shown below where they will need to complete a survey to unlock the page.

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
10 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
There is a fine line on what topics you choose to setup using the content unlocker and in my research I
found that this particular video of Erin Andrews was apparently a peephole tape that someone clearly
invaded her privacy with, I chose to not actually host on my site or even give a link to this particular video. 
As with any type of pictures, video, downloads, etc. using the content unlocker, I never actually put the
content directly on my site and instead, just link the user to the particular content.  This eliminates any type
of liability that I could have by copying the content from someone else's site.  So what I did in this particular
example was link the user to Erin Andrews videos that were on Google video and from there the user can
find anything they want on Erin Andrews. 
 
Creating Your Article:
Once I had my landing page setup with the content unlocker all ready to go, it was time to create my article
in which I did on ArticlesBase which seems to work the best for me.  Again, I wanted to target the keyword
phrase that was getting the most searches that I found when looking at Google Trends.  I found that the
keyword phrase "erin andrews peephole tape video" was getting most searches on this particular day so I
was going to target those keywords in my article.

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
11 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
 
In writing my article, I used this keyword phrase within my title which is the most important part in ranking
high for the keywords I'm targeting.  Also within the body of my article, it's important to use the keyword
phrase a few more times, but not too much as that would be considered keyword spamming in Google's
eyes.  I did a little research on the topic and had enough information to write a short article of only 250
words along with putting 3 links to my website that directs people to the content unlocker.  It's important to
make your links stand out which I put in a bold font and one link that was the very first sentence so that
people who didn't want to read the article could go directly to my site to watch erin andrews videos.  You
can see the article example I wrote below:

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
12 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
 
After only a few hours, I've ranked high for the top two keyword searches on erin andrews which has
gotten me a lot of traffic.
 
 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
13 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
And also
 
 
I've had over 200,000 article views since I was able to rank high for both of the top two keyword search
phrases in google trends for Erin Andrews:
 
To maximize traffic to my site even further, I could target other keyword phrases that were popular in
Google trends.  I found that this particular topic was consistently in the top 10 for a few days straight but
with different search phrases, so I was going to target those.  For example, I found that the new hot trend
for Erin Andrews was "erin andrews peephole tape torrent".  I was going to target the top two search
phrases in my new articles.
 
 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
14 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
I wrote another article using the new keyword title and then just rephrasing and rewording the information I
wrote in my first article.  It's important to never just copy any information from a previous article or directly
from another website because this would not only be plagiarism, but Google would catch it as duplicate
content and your article would never show up in the search results.  Only after 4 minutes, I saw my new
article show up in the top positions in Google for this keyword phrase!
 
 
And also
 
It's important to note that once you find a trend that is hot and being searched over and over again, you
can easily maximize your traffic by writing new articles on the new keyword phrases that people are
searching for by looking at Google trends each day. 
 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
15 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
Technique 3: Using Current Events With the Content Unlocker on Your Website
One of my favorite ways to get instant traffic and leads from CPA offers is to again use Google Trends and 
see what people are searching for or stay up to date with current events.  However, instead of using exact
keyword phrases from Google trends, I'm going to think outside the box and target different keyword
phrases to get traffic to my site.  With the recent death of Michael Jackson, there was a ton of media
coverage and people searching for various information on Michael Jackson which I thought I could take
advantage of.  With all the hype of the memorial service for Michael Jackson that was going to be aired
live on television, I was going to focus on this as my starting point.
With this technique, I use article marketing to get in the first page of Google fast for various keywords and
have my affiliate link to a CPA offer that relates to the article I'm writing.  I also can send traffic from the
article to my website in which I can use the content unlocker and earn leads that way as well.  For this
particular example, I am going to use the content unlocker to show you how I made money from the
Michael Jackson current events. 
It was the morning of July 7th 2009 and the memorial service for Michael Jackson was scheduled for that
afternoon, so I wrote a quick article on ArticlesBase.com about Michael Jackson along with some
information on the memorial.  The key is to target certain keyword phrases that you want to rank high in the
search engines for.  In my particular case I was going to target ranking high for people searching for the
keyword phrase "watch michael jackson memorial service online" as I figured that since this was on during
the week the majority of people were going to be at work and wanted to be able to stream it live from their
computer.  Within my article, I put several links (ArticlesBase.com allows 2 within the body of the article
and 1 in the resource box) all linking to my website where I had my content unlocker setup.
The key to this technique is to target the title of your article with the keyword phrase you want to rank for
and also include some of those keywords within the description of your article as shown below:

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
16 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
Google loves article directories such as this one so you can expect to get high rankings very quick for
longer tail keyword phrases like this one.  I checked my results in Google for the keyword phrase I was
targeting and found that my article showed up in just 3 minutes from when I submitted it.  I didn't do any
bookmarking or get backlinks of this article as it just ranked naturally because of the way that Google
indexes article sites fast.

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
17 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
18 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
Once the user clicked on my link within the article that shows them where to stream the memorial service
online, it will direct them to a simple landing page I had already setup on an existing website I had to
stream the service.  You can see the basic setup I used below that only took me a couple minutes to
setup.  I use Front Page to create my simple landing pages that do not require any professional layout but
any website builder or editor should be able to create something easy like that. 
 
Once the user gets to my landing page, they will need to click on the link to stream the video which I added
the content unlocker code from InstantDollarz.com to lock the page so the user had to complete a survey
to get access to the live stream.  It's important never to add the content unlocker to your home page
because then the user has no idea what you have to offer, so I always add a link to my content unlocker on
the second page as shown below:

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
19 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
After the user completes the survey the page will unlock and once they click on the play button it will direct
them to a news website where they can actually watch the live stream so it's a win-win situation for both of
us.  With hundreds of views in just 1 day, I found that I had received several visitors to my site that
converted into leads and easy money.  The whole process only took me about 30 minutes to write the
short article and setup my content unlocker page on an existing website I had.  I know that this particular
topic won't last more than a couple of days but for only 30 minutes of work, that can potentially lead to
hundreds of dollars in leads so it's worth it to me.  By doing this process over and over for new trends, it
can consistently bring in $100+ per day using this technique.  With this type of technique you can literally
have zero competition since you will be thinking of different keyword phrases other than what Google
trends is displaying where others could be competing for those same keywords.
 
Technique 4: Article Marketing with Polls Direct Linking to CPA Offers

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
20 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
This method is definitely not new, but it works great if you apply the same techniques I'm about to explain
to you here.  Another way to earn leads from one field CPA offers by getting on the first page of Google is
using a poll technique through article marketing.  I was checking Google Trends again for the day and 
looking through some search terms I found an interesting term that I had never heard of before called
"power texting". 
 
So I clicked on the link and found that it was getting hot in which a lot of people were searching for it.  I
then did a quick Google search on the term to check out my exact competition and found there wasn't
much out there, which again was below 10,000 results as shown below. 
 
While I was searching for this phrase I got some understanding of what the term meant and how it started. 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
21 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
Basically it was the technique used to win over votes for the American Idol winner of 2009 which I got
enough info to write a quick article about on Articlesbase.com.  It took me about 10 minutes worth of
research and writing the article in which I submitted. 
Next, I bookmarked the article to get just one backlink from JumpTags.com.  If you are unfamiliar with
bookmarking, it's simply a way to get a backlink to your article so that it ranks higher in Google as you are
giving your article an authority link.  There are many social bookmarking sites, and if you go to
JumpTags.com or any other social bookmark site, you will need to register there and follow the instructions
on submitting a new link to their site which will be a link directly to your article. 
As you've seen from my first example, social bookmarking or getting backlinks to your article is really not
necessary as I got a high ranking without doing this.  Getting backlinks is to more or less maintain your
high search engine ranking.  Even though, about 15 minutes later, I searched the keyword phrase I was
targeting again and I ended up in the #6 position in just 17 minutes!  I'm not expecting to get a ton of traffic
unless this search phrase gets really hot, but this is just an easy example of how you can take lots of hot
trends in Google and write an article about the information incorporating the poll technique to get some
easy leads.  This article could soon turn into thousands of views and hundreds of leads just like my other
ones did as shown above. 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
22 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
You will see in my article that I've got two places where I put my poll to get maximum clicks to my email
submit offer.

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
23 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
 
 
 
Technique 5: How to Setup Your Own Content Site Free Using WordPress & Build
Your Email List
In this example I am going to show you how you can setup your own content site for free using
WordPress.  In this example, I will also show you how you can also build an email list and earn money on
auto pilot instead of using the content unlocker.  You will also see how I used a professional looking
WordPress template for free in this niche example.   In this technique that I am about to show you how I
earn money from one field CPA offers such as email or zip code submits and maximizing that revenue
using a squeeze page instead of the content unlocker.  Instead of the user completing a survey from the
content unlocker (technique 1) to gain access to my content, I put an opt in form that captures the users
name and email address to access my free content.  

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
24 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
Again, you need to find a niche where there are lots of searches on the particular keywords per month so
that you can get lots of traffic to your website.  I did some more keyword research and found that "tattoo
designs" were highly searched for in many different keyword combinations such as lower back tattoos,
tribal tattoos, etc.  I know that there are a few top selling Clickbank tattoo design products out there so that
tells me that people are buying this guide which means that almost anyone would rather get similar content
for free instead of paying $35 for an ebook. 
The first thing that I do when setting up a new free content site is to search for websites that actually
provide free tattoo designs with pictures, categories, etc.  The easiest way that I do this is simply perform a
google search for various keywords like "Free tattoo designs"
I will then click on every website about 3-4 pages deep into the Google results and then make a list of the
sites that are easy to navigate and contain a variety of free tattoo designs with images and such.   What I
don't want to include is any site that expects the user to sign up and pay for something.  For example, in
my search, I found this site that contains lots of categories and images of different tattoo designs so I will
make sure to bookmark this site that will be added to my free content directory for my users.

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
25 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
Typically I want to get about 10 good solid websites that have a variety of tattoo designs, images, and
quality content to provide to my users.  The research will probably take me a couple hours at most to get
the right sites ready to be put into my free content directory.  Once the research is done, the hardest part is
easy, and all I have to do is setup my website using WordPress.
The next step is to purchase a domain name in which I always try to make it keyword rich meaning that the
keywords that I am trying to target and get traffic to will be part of my domain name.  I usually use
GoDaddy or NameCheap as they seem to always have the best deals on purchasing domain names.  This
will help for both organic search engine traffic and pay per click traffic to make my domain name bold for
my keywords I'm bidding on.  So in this example I am targeting the keyword "free tattoo designs" which I
registered MyFreeTattooDesigns.info for my domain.  I sometimes register .info domains a lot because
they are the cheapest and I haven't found that .com vs. .info domains convert into more clicks comparing
the two when using PPC to promote my site.
Once I have my domain purchased, I will setup my hosting account which is HostGator since you can host 
unlimited websites and domains with one hosting account for a low price.  With HostGator I can also have
WordPress installed automatically for me within the control panel of my hosting account.
After WordPress is installed, then I will need to add the content to my website.  In WordPress, I will add a
new page that I can put my content on so that when users complete a survey to unlock the page, they will
be directed to the directory of all the free tattoo websites. 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
26 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
When adding my free content page, all I need to do is copy all the websites I found during my free tattoo
design research and paste them into my WordPress page:
The key in this technique is to put a CPA offer at the very top to get as many visitors to click on this offer
as possible to get credit for leads.  The CPA offer must be similar to what your audience is looking for and
in my case I found a CPA offer from GiveTattoos.com that will give a user a $500 gift card towards a

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
27 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
tattoo.  All I need is for the user to submit their email address and I will get paid $1.40 per lead.
To maximize my revenue even further, I add links to Tattoo affiliate programs that are on Clickbank at the
bottom of my free content page.  I could also add adsense to this page as well to earn even more.
 
After I have my content page created, I will publish it from WordPress as this step is now done.  The next
step is to create my home page or landing page where visitors will first get to my site.  For this step, I will
add another page within WordPress.  To earn money from CPA offers using this technique, I'm going to
have my landing page setup as a squeeze page so that I capture the users name and email address to
earn more revenue by setting up an auto responder to send out emails of related offers that they might be
interested in.  So once the user gets to my landing page, they will simply need to enter their name and
email address to get access to my free content.
I use Aweber as my email auto responder service as it's a breeze to set up my opt in form, send auto
responders, etc as all I had to do is paste one line of code into my WordPress page to get the form you
see above.  The first email that I instantly send is to welcome the user to my free content directory of tattoo
designs and also put a link at the bottom of the email of an exclusive offer they can get $500 towards their
next tattoo which leads them to my affiliate link for the tattoo CPA offer. 

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
28 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
For each user that enters their email address into my auto responder, I automatically have emails setup to
go out every week or so with similar CPA offers to maximize my revenue.  For example, I found another
CPA offer that will pay me $.50 per lead for each user that downloads thousands of free tattoo designs
which should convert very well for my subscriber audience.  Just search on your CPA networks for
keywords like tattoos and you will find some offers you can promote.  Once a subscriber is on your email
list, you have endless possibilities of more CPA offers to push their way and typically anything the
subscriber can get for free, the more likely they will sign up and earn you leads for your CPA offers you are
promoting.  The one thing you don't want to do is send emails daily or unrelated CPA offers or they will
most likely unsubscribe from your list or even claim you of spamming them.  I usually send out emails
every two weeks and only with CPA offers that are related to the niche in which my user can benefit from. 
The last thing I have to setup on my website is a privacy policy, contact page, and terms page to make my
site look professional to my users and to Google when I setup my adwords campaign for traffic.  Finally, it's
also important to add good content to your site like articles in which sometimes I will create on my own or
simply copy them from article directory sites which you can also do as long as you include where you got
the article from and include the author's resource box.   I use the same generic privacy policy, contact
page, and terms info on every site so it's just a matter of copying the text and pasting it into my site. 
Finally, it's time to select a design for my new WordPress site.  I usually find free WordPress templates or
themes that I can use in many different niches at: http://wordpressthemesbase.com/ All I need to do is 
download a theme I like here, upload it to my WordPress site, and then activate the them within
WordPress.  This completes the setup and later on if this website proves to be a successful campaign, I
will want to add new content and posts to the site to keep it interesting for my visitors and increase my
search engine ranking.
 
Driving Traffic to Your WordPress Site
Just like getting traffic from all my other methods, I will look for keyword phrases that I can rank high for
without too much competition.  To find keywords in the tattoo niche, I use the Google keyword tool to get 
my suggestions and how many people are searching for that keyword phrase.  I put in the keyword "tattoo"
in the box to get all the keyword suggestions along with the search volume on each keyword as seen

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
29 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
below:
 
I will start putting each keyword phrase in the Google search with quotes around the keyword to determine
how many websites are competing against me for this keyword phrase.  If it is anything under 10,000 like
the example shown below, I will write my first article around this topic.
 
I found that "celtic tattoo design had 5,400 searches per month and had 14,000 competing sites targeting
that search phrase which is above my 10,000 rule, but since it's not that far off, I'm still going to give it a try
writing my article around this keyword phrase.  Again, to get information to write on your article, simply
google the keyword phrase and visit a few sites around this topic which you can take all that information
and write your content based off that information.  Writing my article, I followed all the same strategies as I
did before as you can see below:

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
30 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
 
Since there are hundreds of different tattoo keywords, you can write several articles on each type of tattoo
design and more to maximize lots of traffic to your content site.  Once again, I received instant results on
the second page in Google in under 1 hour for my keyword phrase I was targeting "celtic tattoo design". 
As time goes on, I could potentially see my article ranked on the first page.
 
Installing the Content Unlocker on Your WordPress Site
If I wanted to install the content unlocker on my site instead of building my email list, I would simply need to

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
31 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
modify the second page of my site to remove the opt in form I used from Aweber and replace that with the
content unlocker code from InstantDollarz.  My home page will remain the same because it works as the
teaser page to get people to click onto the next page where either the opt in form or content unlocker is
displayed.
First, I will need to login and get my content unlocker code from InstantDollarz so it will display the content
unlocker on the page I want to lock.
 
Once I have the code, I need to paste that into my site.  To edit my page in WordPress, I simply click on
the edit button in the WordPress admin panel for my page that has the opt in form and replace that with
the code I got from InstantDollarz.
 
I need to click on the HTML tab in the WordPress editor and then simply paste the code there, which I
replaced over the opt in form code I had from Aweber.  Once I save the page, my site now has the content

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
32 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
unlocker displayed on my site instead of the opt in form so I will instantly earn revenue instead of over the
long term in building my email list. 
 
 
These are techniques that you can use getting free traffic and get high rankings in Google and drive traffic
to either your website and use the content unlocker to earn incentive leads or use a poll directly in your
article and send visitors directly to the CPA offer via your affiliate link.  There's also the option I showed
you to build your own email list as well to earn recurring revenue from various CPA offers. 
 
I've found that submitting articles through ArticlesBase.com works the best because you can include up to
3 links to your website or CPA offer via your own affiliate link and Google indexes their site very often as
the proof shows how fast these two articles showed up in Google.  The only draw back is that you need to
submit several articles when you become an ArticlesBase.com author for them to be approved
automatically.  When you first register to their site and submit your first few articles, they will need to be
manually approved before going live.  However after submitting some articles that are approved, they will
set your account on auto approve which will get your articles listed live instantly.  You can also apply this
technique to other large article directories like GoArticles.com and SearchWarp.com.
 
That wraps up this sneak peek at just a few solid techniques that you can follow and implement to make a
lot of money through CPA networks and offers.  If you want all my latest techniques, tools, resources, 1 on

Join My Complete VIP Membership Site Here
http://loot4leads.com/members/wso/wso.htm
33 of 33
9/3/2009 12:48 PM
1 coaching from my exclusive CPA Power Program and Membership please visit Loot4Leads.com as there
are still a few spots open to the general public.
 
Until Then,
DEEZ
 
 
 

