 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My $25,000 
Weekend 
 
How Sending Out a Single Email 
to 119 Prospects Brought in 
$25,000 in Business in Just 
3 Days 
 
By Jeff Glenellis 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2010,  Jeff Glenellis.  All Rights Reserved. 
 

 
2
Copyright Notice 
 
This book is protected under both national and international copyright 
law, and may not be copied, reproduced or distributed in any form by 
anyone other than the copyright holder.  All Rights Reserved. 
 
Legal Notice 
 
The information presented within this e-book is based upon the 
personal experiences of the author.  No claims are made that anyone 
can or will profit by any amount after following the recommendations 
contained in this book.  The “average” person does not profit from 
following the recommendations contained herein because the “average” 
person never takes the first step to put those recommendations into 
action.  This book is for informational purposes only, and while every 
effort was made to ensure complete accuracy, neither the author nor his 
affiliates assume any responsibility for any errors, inaccuracies or 
omissions.  Nothing in this book constitutes legal or financial advice.  If 
the reader seeks such advice, the reader should contact someone in their 
local area who is licensed and/or otherwise skilled in those areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
3
My $25,000 Weekend 
 
How Sending One Email Out to 119 Prospective 
Clients Got Me $25,000 in Signed Contracts 
Within 72 Hours 
 
This is not going to be a long e-book that drones on and on 
about esoteric, unrelated crap. 
 
This is just the Step-By-Step plan I regularly execute and 
which recently brought in $25,000 from new clients in just 3 
days. 
 
But I should at a minimum tell you about the skills I brought 
to this venture, and give you a very brief overview of what it 
is I did to make that kind of money. 
 
What I will be talking about is doing SEO (Search Engine 
Optimization) at a very low level (think Kindergarten, maybe 
first grade) for clients who are (1) in a business or 
profession that generates a lot of money, (2) maintains a big 
presence on the internet, and (3) is in desperate need of 
these kinds of services. 
 
Specifically, I target local area businesses (local meaning 
somewhere in the United States, but it will work anywhere 
there are businesses with a web presence) who already have 
a website, but who fail to show up within the first 20 results 
for their “money” keywords.  If you have a website that is 
buried on Page 3 or deeper for your main keywords, you 
might as well be invisible.  In fact, you ARE invisible to 
people who are looking for someone who provides your type 
of goods or services. 
 

 
4
So what I do is make you VISIBLE by getting your site 
bumped up to Page One for one or more of your “money” 
keywords. 
 
As for the skills I bring to the table, let me say that I don’t 
really have any to speak of.  Since this entire program is 
built on a Linking Campaign, with a little article marketing 
thrown in later for good measure, I can safely say that 
anyone who is absolutely brand new to Internet Marketing 
can read this short manual, follow in my footsteps and 
generate a ton of new business in as little as a weekend. 
 
So having said all that, let’s get started. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5
 
Step One:  Find Your Market 
 
By far the easiest step, just go to Google and type in the 
search phrase “US cities by population.”  You don’t need to 
use “quotation marks”…I’m just including them to show you 
the exact words to type into the search box. 
 
The first listing you should see is a Wikipedia entry: List of 
Untied States cities by population…click on this link. 
 
It will take you to a page that lists all the US cities with 
populations greater than 100,000.  These are the ponds 
where you want to fish.  You might find the right conditions 
in smaller cities, but you’ll definitely find them in this list.  
So why work harder than you need to? 
 
If you limit the size of the cities to no more than 299,999 
people, you’ll end up with a list of 209 cities.  Just working 
with these cities you’ll find enough business to keep you 
going for years (and make more money than you ever 
thought possible). 
 
Now that you have your market list, it’s time to move on to 
the next step. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6
Step Two:  Find Your Niche 
 
Here is where you decide what kind of business or profession 
you want to work with.  I strongly recommend you stick with 
just one type of business to begin with, because you can 
essentially “copy and paste” what you do for each of your 
clients, without having to go back and do a lot of original 
research. 
 
What I mean by that is you are going to pick a niche and 
figure out what the “money” keywords are (and by “money” 
keywords I mean the words and phrases most likely used by 
people who are ready to buy from your client…people 
searching for “house painters” are not necessarily looking to 
hire one, whereas people looking for “experienced Phoenix 
house painters” are in a buying frame of mind…I’ll go over 
all the keyword selection stuff shortly). 
 
Once you figure out what those keywords are, the odds are 
tremendously in your favor that those same words will work 
in every one of the cities you target for prospective clients. 
 
So why put yourself in a position to go back and start from 
scratch for a new client in a new niche when you’ve already 
done the work for one which you can use over and over 
again? 
 
The other reason you want to stick with one niche is that as 
you go along in this business and start getting clients onto 
Page One you’ll want to put together “case studies” showing 
how you helped that client improve their standings in the 
search results.  If you are helping house painters, how 
powerful is it when you show a prospective house painting 
client that you’ve already helped other house painters jump 
to Page One in their markets?  It almost sells itself at that 
point.  You appear to be a “house painter” specialist when all 
the other folks out there doing this kind of work don’t have 

 
7
any specialization at all.  Your prospect starts to think he’d 
have to be crazy to go with anyone else BUT you. 
 
I don’t want to stray off-topic here, but if you become the 
go-to guy for House Painters, you charge $2500 a year for 
your services, and you work until you have a House Painter 
client in every city on your list of 209, you’re looking at an 
annual gross income of $522,500.  Since you can outsource 
all of the grunt work that needs to be done for pennies per 
month, you’re looking at a half million dollars a year coming 
in each year, with very little continuous effort on your part. 
 
If that doesn’t get you excited, I strongly suggest you get 
someone close to you to call the local mortuary and start 
making arrangements on your behalf. 
 
Because you’re obviously DEAD! (lol). 
 
So how do you find your niche? 
 
Start with an antique you probably have lying about your 
house somewhere: The Yellow Pages.  Read through their 
list of categories to get an idea of what kinds of businesses 
are out there in every town.  There are white collar 
professions (doctors, lawyers, dentists, chiropractors, etc.) 
blue collar professions (plumbers, electricians, etc.) and a 
host of retail establishments you can choose from. 
 
I chose a sub-set of the legal profession, simply because I 
come from a family of lawyers, and I know how they think 
and what “hot buttons” I can push to get their attention.  At 
the end of this manual I’ll give you a case study on the first 
lawyer I worked for, and show you exactly how I took him 
from Search Engine Oblivion to the first page of Google, and 
got his phone to start ringing every day courtesy of this new 
found stream of traffic. 
 

 
8
As intimidating as it might sound, lawyers are people too 
(well, most of them are, anyway).  And they have the same 
fears and pressures faced by anyone in business for 
themselves: payroll, rent, utilities, a social climbing hag of a 
wife (I tossed that one in for my brother, who will never, 
ever read this if I have anything to do with it).  All of those 
things take money, and most lawyers are in dire need of a 
constant stream of new clients to keep their practice up and 
running. 
 
But the same can be said of any business person, whether in 
a profession, a trade or a retail type business.  New clients 
are the lifeblood of a business.  Your prospect knows that, 
which is why they have a website in the first place.  All you 
need to do is help them get their site to start doing what it 
was intended for in the first place: finding them new clients. 
 
So grab a copy of the phone book and start looking at the 
various categories until you find one you think is in a niche 
that (1) has at least some decent cash flow, and (2) you 
would enjoy working with. 
 
Or, just scan the list of High Dollar Businesses at the end of 
this manual.  It is in no way a complete listing of ALL High 
Dollar prospects, but it should be enough to get you started 
in the right direction. 
 
Once you’ve decided on a niche, move on to the next step. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9
Step Three-Find the “Money” Keywords 
 
Since you are going to work on a local basis (meaning work 
with clients who service one limited geographical area) you 
might as well start with your own hometown, or the town 
nearest to you on the list of towns with populations greater 
than 100,000. 
 
Using Google, type in the name of your town and the name 
of the niche you selected.  For instance, type in “Charlotte 
Plumbers”.  See how many pages come back, and scroll 
through the first 5-6 pages to see how many local plumbers 
have existing websites.  I just did that and found around 15 
websites belonging to Charlotte area plumbers that were 
buried on Page Three and beyond. 
 
Now that you know there are a bunch of prospects that can 
use your service, you need to draw up a list of “money” 
keywords.  It’s actually easier than you think.  All you need 
to do is put yourself in the position of a person who needs 
that particular business, and ask yourself what you would 
type into the search box in order to find the information you 
are looking for. 
 
In most cases, the “money” keywords will be the name of 
the town or geographical area where the prospect lives, 
along with the word or words that best describe the goods or 
service offered.  Examples: Charlotte Plumber.  Denver 
Bankruptcy Attorney.  Tampa Electrician. 
 
When you are putting together your list of key words, don’t 
forget to pluralize the business: plumbers, bankruptcy 
attorneys, electricians.  Some people will search in the 
singular, other in the plural.  You might as well cover all the 
bases on this one. 
 
You can take this a step further by adding in additional 
terms like “best” “cheapest” “fastest” and others, which are 

 
10
also used by some searchers.  However, these types of extra 
qualifiers usually do not generate enough searches each 
month to justify trying to dominate the search engines for 
those phrases.  Later on you can suggest to your client that 
they add additional pages to their websites that target these 
phrases. 
 
But for now, just target the major keywords. 
 
After you’ve isolated the “money” keywords, go back to 
Google and use their AdSense Keyword Analyzer to see how 
many searches those keywords get each month.  You can 
get to the Analyzer by going to Google and typing in “Google 
Keyword.”  The first choice that should appear will be the 
adsense.google.com link that will open the Keyword 
Analyzer. 
 
Type in your first keyword or phrase into the box labeled 
“Word or phrase”, fill in the “captcha” security check and hit 
submit.  In most cases, you should get a list of keywords 
and phrases that are related to the one you just typed in, 
along with the number of searches conducted on Google 
each month, both locally and globally. 
 
I typed in the search phrase “Charlotte plumber” and Google 
returned 100 results, the vast majority having nothing to do 
with plumbers or plumbing. 
 
However, the first 4 search results gave me all the 
information I needed to know that I was on the right track.  
These were the results: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11
Keyword  
 
Global Searches 
 
 
Local 
Searches 
 
Charlotte plumbers  
 
2400  
 
 
2400 
Charlotte plumber 
 
 
1900  
 
 
1900 
Charlotte plumbing  
 
6600  
 
 
6600 
Plumbers in Charlotte 
 
  590   
 
         590 
 
To be completely transparent here, apparently there are 
several different semi-famous people named “Charlotte 
Plummer” (and since most internet users no longer know 
how to spell, they search for “Charlotte Plumber”), so some 
of those 1900 searches for that specific term might be 
related to her.  However, for the remaining terms, these are 
all people who are looking for a plumber in Charlotte. 
 
(And that raises one more point: look at common 
misspellings for your key words and phrases, such as 
Plummer [for Plumber], Panter [for Painter], that sort of 
thing…you never know when you’ll find the motherload of 
traffic from well intentioned but poor spellers). 
 
You are going to want to keep note of your keywords and 
the number of searches performed in a month, as this 
information will help you close the client later on. 
 
Now it’s time to move on to the next step. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
12
Step Four: Locate Your Prospects 
 
You have your keywords.  Now use them.  Type them into 
Google and print out the first 6 pages of the search results 
for each word or phrase.  Set each stack of papers side by 
side, and begin to identify which of your prospects has a 
website that fails to appear on Page One or Two of the 
search results for all of your key words or phrases.  In any 
given niche in any city, you should end up with a list of 8-15 
names (maybe more, but usually not less). 
 
If a site is simply not optimized properly for “Charlotte 
plumbers” then it is probably not optimized for “Charlotte 
plumbing” either.  So you should find the same sites buried 
in the back pages of the search results. 
 
Highlight the website addresses (or copy them into a 
notebook, or however you normally keep track of 
information).  Visit each site and find their “contact us” page 
(they usually have one).  Copy down their email addresses. 
 
Then move on to the next step. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
13
Step Five: Contact the Prospects 
 
Now that you know how many prospects you have, it’s time 
to contact them.  But rather than send out 10-15 individual 
emails, instead you are going to send out 1 email, with all 
their competitors emails clearly visible in the cc: section of 
their email program (NOT the bcc: section, which is the 
BLIND carbon copy…use the CC: section so all recipients can 
see who else got your email). 
 
The idea is to let them know that you are serious and that 
any delay on their part will be costly (as you will see in the 
draft of the letter, below). 
 
Some people might feel uncomfortable sending out this type 
of email, as they fear getting into some kind of regulatory 
trouble via the CAN-SPAM Act.  But as long as you comply 
with the regulations in terms of content, you’ll be fine.  But 
if you really don’t want to send out a “group blast” then by 
all means send out individual emails to all your prospects. 
 
Better yet, lick a stamp and send them a letter by U.S. mail. 
 
Just don’t expect fast results. 
 
Or any results, for that matter. 
 
Here is the template of the letter I sent out, and I’ve given 
you a second copy, below, customized to fit our “Charlotte 
plumbers” example. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
14
^^^^^^^BLANK TEMPLATE^^^^^^^ 
 
Dear _______________ (fill in the blanks with the name of 
the business/profession) 
 
Did you know that _______ people a month are searching 
the internet for _________ ________, AND NOT A SINGLE 
ONE OF THEM CAN FIND YOUR SITE? 
 
Every month you lose out on _____ prospective clients 
because your website is buried deep in the Google Search 
Engine results.  Studies show that 98% of all internet users 
never look any deeper than Page One of those results when 
searching for _________ ________, or anything else for 
that matter. 
 
I can change that for you.  I can get your website on to Page 
One of the Google search results for ____________  
_______________, and usually within 2-4 weeks.  That 
means in less than a month’s time, when those ________ 
people search for ___________ _____________, they are 
going to find YOUR website and call YOU for an appointment. 
 
And the best part is that you don’t pay me a penny for 
my services until I have your site firmly rooted onto 
Page One of the Google Search Engine. 
 
You’ve probably already noticed that I am sending this same 
email out to _______ people who also have _____________  
___________websites.   
 
Unfortunately, I can only work with ONE COMPANY in the 
___________ area, as my services are designed to help one 
company DOMINATE the Google Search Results for 
______________  __________________. 
 

 
15
The first _____________  _____________ to contact me 
and contract for my services, wins.  The rest will be shut out 
for as long as I remain under contract. 
 
If gaining immediate access to ________ prospective clients 
each month is something that interests you, I strongly urge 
you to contact me immediately, either by phone or by email.  
I will get back in touch with you in the order in which the 
contacts are received, so don’t wait too long and find you’ve 
been locked out for good. 
 
Call or email me now and let’s get started on building your 
web presence where it will do you the most good: On Page 
One for ______________  _______________. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16
 
^^^^^ACTUAL EMAIL^^^^^ 
 
Dear Charlotte Plumber, 
 
Did you know that 6,600 people a month are searching the 
internet for Charlotte plumbers, AND NOT A SINGLE ONE OF 
THEM CAN FIND YOUR SITE? 
 
Every month you lose out on 6,600 prospective clients 
because your website is buried deep in the Google Search 
Engine results.  Studies show that 98% of all internet users 
never look any deeper than Page One of those results when 
searching for Charlotte plumbers, or anything else for that 
matter. 
 
I can change that for you.  I can get your website on to Page 
One of the Google search results for Charlotte plumbers, and 
usually within 2-4 weeks.  That means in as little as a 
month’s time, when those 6,600 people search for Charlotte 
Plumbers, they are going to find YOUR website and call YOU 
for an appointment. 
 
And the best part is that you don’t pay me a penny for 
my services until I have your site firmly rooted onto 
Page One of the Google Search Engine. 
 
You’ve probably already noticed that I am sending this same 
email out to 15 people who also have Charlotte plumbing 
websites.   
 
Unfortunately, I can only work with ONE COMPANY in the 
Charlotte area, as my services are designed to help one 
company DOMINATE the Google Search Results for Charlotte 
plumbing. 
 

 
17
The first Charlotte plumber to contact me and contract for 
my services, wins.  The rest will be shut out for as long as I 
remain under contract. 
 
If gaining immediate access to 6,600 prospective clients 
each month is something that interests you, I strongly urge 
you to contact me immediately, either by phone or by email.  
I will get back in touch with you in the order in which the 
contacts are received, so don’t wait too long and find you’ve 
been locked out for good. 
 
Call or email me now and let’s get started on building your 
web presence where it will do you the most good: On Page 
One for Charlotte plumbers. 
 
 
^^^^^END^^^^^ 
 
Can you see why this email gets an immediate positive 
response from the recipients? 
 
• Addresses a major problem?  Check. 
• Promises a solution to that problem? Check. 
• Promises and proves scarcity? Check. 
• Puts all the risk on the sender (me)? Check. 
 
The person who opens that email sees that he or she has a 
very limited window of opportunity to address a major 
problem in their business (a poorly performing website) and 
it will not cost them a penny unless you actually live up 
to your promise of getting their site onto Page One of the 
Google Search Results for their main search term. 
 
Or to put it bluntly, they have a shot at increasing their 
client list exponentially, and they don’t have to worry about 
paying you until they start seeing results. 
 

 
18
Now I know a lot of you reading this are freaking out right 
now, wondering why I would ever agree to work for 
someone for free? 
 
I’m not working for free. 
 
In fact, I charge $2,500 for one year’s worth of SEO service, 
where I agree to keep the client’s website on Page One of 
Google for one year.  And I don’t let them pay me off over 
time, either.  Once I can show their site is on Page One for 
two consecutive weeks, they pay the $2,500 to me 
immediately.   
 
That’s why you want to target businesses and professionals 
in high dollar businesses.  If you take on a client who makes 
$50 off each new client, they’ll need 50 new clients just to 
break even.  If you take on a client that makes $1500 off of 
each new client, by the time they sign up Client #2, they’ve 
paid for your services for one year and made some money 
for themselves in the process. 
 
But by agreeing that they can defer payment until they 
actually see that you can do what you promised, you’ve 
removed the biggest objection people have with hiring SEO 
experts:  How do I know I’ll get what I pay for? 
 
By giving them what they pay for BEFORE they actually have 
to pay, they have no objection to signing an agreement.  
They have nothing to lose and everything to gain. 
 
If you follow this plan in approaching the businesses in the 
niche you selected, don’t be surprised if you get 3 or 4 calls 
from prospects in any one city, and usually within the first 
24-48 hours after you send out the email.  In the current 
economy, everyone is looking for ways to bring in more new 
business, at the lowest cost they can swing. 
 

 
19
If you point out that by waiting until their site has remained 
on Page One for two consecutive weeks, there is a very good 
chance they will bring in enough new business during that 
time that your efforts will have paid for themselves 
completely, and there is no worry about having to dip into 
their personal bank accounts to pay for your services. 
 
The easiest way to prove this is to have whoever the 
gatekeeper is for the business (secretary, assistant, the 
owners themselves) ask every new client who contacts them 
“How did you hear about us?”  Once they start getting 
answers like “I found your website online” you’ll never have 
to convince them to renew your contract next year.  They 
might actually inquire about signing you up on a longer-term 
basis to insure the flow of new clients into their business 
(and NOT their competitors!) 
 
Once you’ve sent out this email to your prospect lists, sit 
back and wait for them to start contacting you.  Once you 
start getting contacts, it’s time to move onto the next step. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
20
Step Six: Signing Up the New Client 
 
This is actually easier than it sounds, even if you are the 
kind of person who is terrified to talk to someone on the 
phone. 
 
Remember, your prospects NEED YOU!  You do not need 
your prospects!  This shifts the atmosphere of fear onto 
them:  they need to fear that they are too late in getting in 
touch with you.  They need to fear that you will not be able 
to help them make more money. 
 
You, on the other hand, have nothing to fear, for if Prospect 
#1 ends up being insane and decides against using your 
services, in all likelihood you have Prospect #2 waiting in 
the wings, and the odds of finding two in a row who are 
crazy are slim at best. 
 
So keep this in mind when you are speaking with your 
prospect, or trading emails back and forth.  If they try to get 
pushy with you, demanding to know what it is exactly you 
do for your money, don’t answer.  Don’t sound too eager, 
like you are desperate for their business.  In fact, go the 
other direction.  Tell them you never disclose your methods, 
and if they balk at that, tell them “thank you” for contacting 
you, but you have four other prospective clients from their 
town you need to return calls to, and it sounds like you just 
wouldn’t be a good fit with their business. 
 
That’s all you usually need to do to whip them back into line. 
 
If you can find it, watch the movie “Boiler Room.’  There is a 
scene about 1/3 of the way through where Vin Diesel is on 
the phone with a doctor, trying to sell him some stock in a 
phony pharmaceutical company.  Actually, he’s doing the 
opposite…he’s trying to not sell the stock.  And the more 
arrogant and vague he gets with the doctor, the more the 
doctor wants to buy. 

 
21
 
(If you don’t want to watch the movie, I’ve found the exact 
scene on YouTube.  Just use the YouTube search engine to 
look for “Vin Diesel Boiler Room” and that scene should pop 
up as one of the first options.) 
 
You may not believe it until you experience it, but it works 
that way in real life too.  As long as you are in control (or at 
least appear to be) you can make your prospect do just 
about anything to get you to agree to work with him. 
 
You are the one in control of the conversation, so steer it in 
the right direction…make sure your prospect knows the 
answer to the only three questions that really matter to 
them: 
 
1. What do I (the prospect) have to do to make this 
happen?  Easy.  Just sign the contract and I (you, 
the reader) take it from there.  If you are going to 
do any on-page optimization, the prospect will have 
to get you access to their website.  But other than 
those two actions, they don’t have to lift a finger to 
get on to Page One of Google. 
2. How soon will I see results? Remember that your 
prospect is already close to Page One of Google for 
their chosen key phrase.  They usually only need a 
little extra push to make the jump to Page One, so 
seeing results in as little as 2 weeks is not an 
unreasonable claim on your part.  Just make sure 
they know that it could take 4 weeks and even 
longer to get them to Page One.  I put a 90 day cap 
on my efforts: If I can’t get them onto Page One in 
90 days, we both agree that we can walk away and 
not owe anything else under the contract, even if 
they magically appear on Page One on the 91st day. 
3. How much is this going to cost me? Here is where 
YOUR money is made.  Instead of blurting out a 
figure like $2,500 or $5,000, instead, ask them how 

 
22
much a new client normally means to their business.  
If you’ve followed my advice and targeted people in 
High Dollar businesses, the answer will usually be in 
excess of a thousand dollars.  So instead of giving 
them a dollar figure, give it to them in terms of 
clients.  If they make $1,500 per new client, and you 
charge $2,500, tell them it will cost them less than 2 
clients.  Before they get a chance to ask questions, 
do some quick math for them: In one month, 6,600 
people are searching for Charlotte Plumbers on 
Google.  You average $1,500 per new client.  You’d 
need to sign up 1.67 new clients in order to pay for 
one entire year of my services.  Considering the 
traffic looking for Charlotte plumbers, once you get 
to Page One of Google, you could easily have paid 
for my service by the end of the first day.  This way, 
you’ve minimized a dollar figure into something very 
small: less than 2 clients, which just about anyone 
on Page One of Google for a search term with 6,600 
buyers per month should be able to handle in very 
short order.  
 
In your case, you want them to sign a contract, agreeing to 
pay you X amount of dollars for your services.  In my case, I 
charge $2,500 to bump their site to Page One of Google for 
one specified search term, payable only after their site 
appears on Page One of the search results for that term for 
a period of 14 consecutive days.  I monitor the search 
results on a daily basis, and once I reach the 14 day goal, I 
send them a bill for services rendered, payable immediately. 
 
I do have a contract I spent some money having drawn up, 
and I’ve included it as a bonus to this package.  It is written 
using MS Word, so it should be a simple matter for you to 
insert your name into the first paragraph, and insert your 
name at the end of the contract where you will sign off on a 
copy after the client has delivered his signed copies to you. 
 

 
23
What I like to do, though, is start working for the client as 
soon as I get the go-ahead from them, with the promise that 
the contract is on the way (via US Mail or FedEx/UPS).  This 
way Google will start reconsidering where the site belongs in 
the search results immediately, not 4-5 days later when the 
contract arrives. 
 
And even after I get them onto Page One, I continue with 
my linking campaign over the next 12 months, just to make 
sure that if any of the competition gets a wild hair and 
decides to take us on, we have the steady link juice pouring 
in to help us maintain our position. 
 
In the event the site falls off of Page One, I will mark the 
date and time I noticed it was missing, and that will stop the 
clock on the one year agreement I have with the client.  
Once I get back onto Page One, the clock restarts and 
continues to run until 365 days on Page One is complete. 
 
And at that point, either the client agrees to re-up for 
another year (and another $2500) or we terminate our 
relationship and I can move on to the next client waiting in 
the wings.  If that happens, I’ll show you in the next section 
how you can work backwards and remove most or all of the 
links that benefitted Client #1, and switch them to Client 
#2. 
 
In fact, I’ll go over in detail what I do as far as linking/SEO 
is concerned in the next step. 
 
For now, put the signed contract in a folder with the client’s 
name on it and keep it in a safe place (preferably a fireproof 
safe).  These few pages are as good as gold to you. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
24
Step Seven: Performing the SEO to Get to Page One on 
Google 
 
By now it should be no surprise that what you will be doing 
primarily is setting up a series of backlinks to your client’s 
website.  The sites I will recommend have a high Page Rank 
score (usually PR 5 and higher) and will carry a lot of sway 
with Google when the links are finally crawled and credited 
to your client. 
 
However, there are also some “on-page” SEO items you can 
do for the client (or at least point out to him for his 
webmaster to address) that will also help tremendously.  
Let’s start with those. 
 
If you don’t already have it, I strongly urge you to grab a 
copy of Market Samurai.  This is a program that crawls the 
search engines for terms you specify, bringing back the top 
10 websites for that term, and telling you if those sites have 
satisfied about a half dozen different criteria. 
 
What Market Samurai looks for are backlinks to the top 10 
sites (and it tells you how many each site has pointing 
towards it), if any of the backlinks are .gov or .edu links, 
whether H1 tags were used in building the site, if the 
keyword(s) appear in the domain name, whether the 
competition appears in either or both the Yahoo Directory or 
DMOZ, and whether the keywords appear in the website 
title. 
 
All of these factors are taken into consideration by Google 
when analyzing a site for inclusion in the search results for a 
particular key word or phrase. 
 
And frankly, very few “local” websites satisfy even half of 
these factors.  You’ll find that a lot of these websites are 
“cookie cutter” sites that the client bought based on a phone 
call or visit from a salesman, or worse, got the site “for free” 

 
25
from the phone company when they paid for a year’s worth 
of advertising in the Yellow Pages. 
 
In either event, the sites were built by designers with little 
or no experience in SEO, and the end result probably looks 
nice, but Google can’t find a single reason to include the site 
anywhere near the top of the search results for the very 
phrases the site exists to appear for. 
 
Luckily, you can handle the backlinking without any input 
from the client.  You or the client’s webmaster (and I prefer 
to let the webmaster handle this) can add H1 tags to the 
site’s headlines.  They can add the keywords to the site’s 
title.  They can create a new page and add the keyword or 
phrase to the website name.  And all of this can be 
accomplished in under a day. 
 
If the client were to do all of this (and satisfy every factor in 
the Market Samurai SEO Competition Analysis) they 
probably wouldn’t need a single link to jump instantly up to 
Page One.  That’s how poorly the competition has optimized 
their sites. 
 
However, we are going to add a bunch of links to the site 
over time, and usually the first batch we add is more than 
enough to land us on Page One and put us that much closer 
to our payday. 
 
The link’s we are going to add are what are known as 
“Angela’s Links” which is the shorthand way of referring to a 
set of websites mailed out each month by a gal named 
Angela.  Each of these websites has a forum as a part of the 
website, and we are going to join that forum and then post a 
link to our client’s website, using the chosen key word or 
phrase as our anchor text. 
 
You can learn more about Angela’s Links at: 
 

 
26
http://angelasdiscountmarket.com/backlink_builder1.html  
 
And for the record, this is NOT an affiliate link (I don’t think 
she even has an affiliate program, to be honest) and I do 
not make a penny from her for this referral.  I’m 
recommending this product because I use it for linking my 
customer’s sites and I’ve moved every one of my clients to 
Page One of the Google Search Results for their chosen key 
words.  So ignore this recommendation at your peril. 
 
When you buy Angela’s monthly link packet (30 links for $5, 
so don’t go bitching about the extra costs involved here) she 
will provide you in excruciating detail the exact steps you 
need to follow with each forum to get the links posted, so I 
am not going to spend any time going over those steps 
here. 
 
There are other link providers out there as well, most of 
them capitalizing on the goodwill that Angela created, so you 
might as well go with the original, and reward her for her 
hard work and efforts (although $5 isn’t much of a reward in 
my opinion, but she’s happy charging that amount, so who 
am I to complain?) 
 
But just posting those links isn’t enough…you need to start 
getting those links indexed, meaning you need to “link to 
the link” in order to get your share of the “link juice” 
provided by all of those PR 5-6-7-8 sites.  I have a way to 
do that which has worked like a charm for me so far, and as 
long as you don’t abuse it, it will work for you as well. 
 
What you want to do is get your recently posted links 
crawled by the Google spider, and to do that, you need to 
get a second link posted to a site where the Google spider 
more or less lives 24/7/365. 
 
And where is that, you ask? 
 

 
27
Craigslist. 
 
I have had more Craigslist classified ads show up in the first 
couple of pages of the Google search results for crap I’ve 
sold online than any other source of ads.  I really do believe 
the spiders live there full-time. 
 
The secret is to get your ad posted in an area where you are 
not likely to get kicked off by users of craigslist for 
spamming the site.  There are a couple of ways to do this. 
 
First, pick any city in America that has a Craigslist page and 
post under “Rants and Raves.”  The sheer amount of 
gibberish and b.s. that gets posted in this section is 
unbelievable.  Truthfully, I fear for our country after reading 
just a handful of posts in this section.  I’m not going to go 
into detail; you’ll have to see for yourself. 
 
But because of the chaotic nature of this section, you can 
post just about anything you want and it will remain on 
Craigslist for days, allowing the Google spider plenty of time 
to crawl your links and get them indexed. 
 
The other option with Craigslist is to leave the U.S. and find 
a board that is not in use much in a foreign country.  I’m not 
going to name one here, simply because if I do, 100 people 
will start using the same board for the same purpose and 
put all of us in jeopardy with Craig.  Keep this on the 
downlow, use it only when necessary, and we’ll all be fine. 
 
Now, as to the actual posting of the links, what you want to 
do is get the Google spider to crawl your Forum profile and 
index the links you included in that profile (which is where 
you get the link juice to flow from the forum to your site). 
 
The following is simply an example.  You should not copy my 
titles or my body copy word for word.  Be creative.  Hell, 
spew gibberish for all I care.  All you really want is the 

 
28
spider to crawl your link.  But if you run the same ad, word 
for word, more than twice in 3 days, Craigslist will delete the 
ad (or refuse to accept it) and ultimately shut down your 
account.  So put up something different every time and you 
will be fine. 
 
I created a post in a Rant and Rave section titled “My 
Second Favorite Forum” and in the body wrote “I love Craigs 
R&R Forum the most, but my second favorite forum is” and 
at this point I insert some html as follows: 
 
<a 
href=http://www.forumsitename.com/members/profilename
.html>ForumName</a>  
 
(where I have “www.forumsitename.com...”  I type in the 
actual web address of the forum profile I have set up that 
contains the link from Angela, and where I have “Forum 
Name” I type in the actual name of the forum. 
 
Google will now crawl the link I have posted on Craigslist, 
see the links I have included in my profile, and index those 
links using the Anchor Text I used when I set the link up in 
the first place. 
 
This step only takes a minute or two to complete, and after 
you get the hang of using Craigslist, you can knock out all 
the links to your forum profiles in about an hour. 
 
The reality is that a single PR6 or PR7 link will almost be 
enough on its own to get your client’s site to Page One for 
the local search results.  Setting up a dozen or more should 
in almost every case get you cemented into one of the Top 5 
slots on Page One.  Since the overwhelming majority of local 
businesses do absolutely zero link building to support their 
sites, any effort you put forth on behalf of your clients will 
usually reap huge benefits. 
 

 
29
Now before you run off and start slamming up 30 links a day 
for each client, let me advise you on one theory that exists 
about Google and high PR links. 
 
The theory basically says that if a site gets a sudden rush of 
high PR links, without some obvious justification (like a news 
site that breaks a huge story on a popular topic, such as 
Matt Drudge did back in the day when he broke the Bill 
Clinton/Monica Lewinsky story) Google can and will ignore 
those links, rendering your efforts worthless. 
 
I personally don’t subscribe to that theory, but plenty of 
very smart marketers believe it carries some truth with it.  
So if you happen to be one of them, break up your linking 
efforts on behalf of one client over the course of a month.  
Do 5 links today, 2 tomorrow, skip the third day, do 9 the 
next, and so forth, giving your efforts the appearance of 
being random (or “organic” aka the current buzzword of the 
day).  Just remember to get some links set up to your links 
(discussed above) so that they are indexed quickly and you 
start seeing some immediate benefits. 
 
One last thing I need to mention about Google and your high 
PR links.  As soon as Google gets even one of them indexed, 
there is an excellent chance you’re going to see your client’s 
website vault onto Page One somewhere.  This isn’t a 
guarantee, but I’ve seen it happen often enough that I feel 
comfortable mentioning it here. 
 
Sadly, that move is most likely only temporary. 
 
Sometimes the same day, and sometimes several days later 
the site will drop off of Page One, and possibly even deeper 
into the search results than it was when you started (instead 
of being on Page Three, you could see it end up on Page 
Five, or possibly not find it at all). 
 
DON’T PANIC!!!!!! 

 
30
 
The “technical” term for this is the “Google Dance” and it 
happens pretty much every time a site is re-evaluated by 
Google for a particular search term.  I can’t explain why this 
happens, and frankly I don’t want to guess.  I just want you 
(and your client) to be aware this will most likely happen to 
them, so no one gets angry or depressed. 
 
Getting onto Page One and staying there is usually a process 
that takes a couple of weeks at least, and the Google Dance 
is part of that process.  Just keep adding a few links every 
couple of days, and keep monitoring your client’s site for the 
chosen Google Search Term.  
 
Once the site reappears, it should be on Page One or Page 
Two, and every couple of days you’ll see that it moves up a 
couple of slots.  Once you see it is back on Page One, start 
counting.  Also, send your client an email letting them know 
that Page One has been achieved and (2) they need to start 
tracking the source of any new business, to see how much 
that new Page One placement is worth to their business. 
 
As I noted earlier, if you were smart in picking a business 
that has a high dollar average for each new client AND a 
significant amount of search traffic each month for the 
chosen key words, there is a pretty good chance that your 
work will have paid for itself by the time your invoice comes 
due for the client. 
 
Now it’s time to move on to the next step. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
31
Step 8: Getting Paid 
 
If you’ve followed my instructions up to this point, you 
should have a handful of clients who are on the hook to you 
for a lot of money once you’ve done what you promised and 
linked their sites all the way to Page One of the Google 
Search Results for their key word or phrase. 
 
Once you get the site to move onto Page One, and the 
Google Dance is over, every day you want to send them an 
email telling them where they can be found on Page One for 
that Search Term.  Aside from bragging on how smart you 
are to pull off this amazing feat in such a short time, you are 
also documenting the 14 day period that is part of your 
contract.  Once their site has shown up on Page One for 14 
consecutive days, you are entitled to get paid. 
 
So how do you go about getting the cash out of their hands 
and into your bank account? 
 
You have several options at your disposal. 
 
The first is for you trusting sorts (like me).  You wait until 
you’ve proven yourself for 14 days, then you ask them to 
cut you a check and mail it to you (assuming you are not in 
a position to drop by their office and pick it up).   
 
Again, if you’ve chosen your niche wisely, you’re dealing 
with someone who is already used to dealing in big money, 
and your demand for payment is not going to prompt them 
to grab their secretary, empty the bank accounts and flee to 
the Bahamas.  It may take a day or two, but your check will 
appear in your mailbox, and as long as it clears the bank, 
consider yourself paid for a job well done. 
 
A second way (which is equally valid, but forces the client to 
trust you, and frankly will never get as many clients to sign 
up with you) is to have the client cut you a post dated check 

 
32
(say, 30 days in advance) which you promise to hold until 
such time as you have satisfied the 14 Day requirement in 
your contract.  Once you’ve hit that milestone, you simply 
deposit the check into your bank account, and once again, 
assuming the check clears the bank, consider yourself paid 
in full. 
 
I don’t operate that way, simply for the reason stated 
above.  I want to put 100% of the risk in this transaction on 
me, and if I ask to hold on to a post-dated check, now I am 
transferring some of that risk onto the client, who is forced 
to trust me to do the right thing and hold on to the check.  
 
Yes, the check is post-dated, meaning the bank shouldn’t 
honor it until the date on the check has come and gone.  
And yes, the client can always call the bank and place a 
stop-payment on it should he fear we are simply trying to rip 
him off. 
 
But the entire idea behind getting all the clients you can find 
to sign up with you as soon as they get your email is that 
they don’t have to even begin to worry about any of 
that. 
 
All they have to do is sign the contract, and you do all the 
work (and all of the worrying) from that point forward. 
 
Don’t screw this up for yourself.  Trust that legitimate 
businesses will pay you for your services in a timely fashion 
(and if they don’t, I cover exactly how to fix that in the next 
section).  Make hiring you the easiest decision they 
ever made.  Don’t ask for payment in advance, not 
even a post-dated check. 
 
There are times when your client will run into a cash-flow 
problem and cannot cut you a check, but can pay you by 
credit card.  In an effort to make getting paid as easy as 

 
33
possible, it’s imperative that you be able to take credit cards 
as payment. 
 
That means you need to get a merchant account, or find a 
way to take credit cards using a 3rd party. 
 
I’m not going to discuss getting your own merchant account.  
If you already have one, great.  You’re good to go.  If you 
don’t have one, simply Google “merchant accounts” and 
start applying to the vendors you find on Page One (or for 
grins, pick one on page 4, then when your transaction is 
done, ask them if they’d like to jump to Page One!) 
 
What I want to introduce you to is a 3rd party vendor who 
can accept amounts up to $2,500, and do so without all of 
the pain and suffering (and paperwork) you’ll go through 
establishing your own merchant account. 
 
The vendor is called Plimus 
(http://home.plimus.com/ecommerce/) and again, I am NOT 
getting any kind of affiliate money from Plimus for making 
this recommendation.  Like the earlier reco I made, I don’t 
think they even have an affiliate program for their company 
(which is funny, considering what they do for a living). 
 
With Plimus, you can set your price for goods or services all 
the way to $2,500, and then pay a 4.5% fee for them 
handling the transaction.  Your own merchant account would 
probably cost you less over time, and once you get rolling 
with this business, it will probably be in your best interest to 
get your own account. 
 
But for now, today, use the link above and get set up with 
your own Plimus account.  Then, if/when you run into the 
client who needs to pay by credit card, you are ready to run 
the transaction through and get paid. 
 

 
34
Along those same lines, get serious about getting your own 
website from which you will be doing this business.  Mine 
can be found at www.attorneymarketing-seo.com and you 
are free to follow the style and the format I use to set up 
your own account. 
 
What you can’t see on my site is a non-linked, password 
protected page that I send my credit card paying clients to, 
so they can click on the button for the services they 
purchased, and pay me through my Plimus account.  I don’t 
make that page easy to find simply because I don’t want 
someone coming along and “buying” my services before I 
have the chance to review their site and see if there is 
anything I can do for them. 
 
You might think that is a strange way to do business, but 
look back to Step Six.  I AM THE ONE IN CHARGE HERE, not 
the client.  I decide who I work with, not the client.  I don’t 
want to feel obligated to work with anyone simply because 
they can’t read and paid for my services in advance. 
 
You might feel differently, and you might want to leave your 
payment button open and available for the entire world.  Go 
ahead.  It’s your business and you decide how you run it.  
Not me or anyone else. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
35
Step Nine: Getting Paid Annually 
 
Now that you have the client satisfied, their site firmly 
attached to Page One for their chosen search term, now you 
need to spend a little time each month making sure they 
stay happy, so that when the end of their one year contract 
rolls around, renewing for another $2500 (or whatever price 
you decided on) will be a no-brainer for them. 
 
The way to do this is to identify the other key words and 
phrases that drive new business their way, and develop a 
backlinking campaign for those words as well.  You can focus 
on one word or phrase at a time, or spread the link love 
around by linking up all the key phrases at one time. 
 
Figure out where they are at in terms of positioning for each 
of the additional keywords, and drop the client a note letting 
them know that you’ve done some additional background 
work, and determined that they need to improve their 
ranking for those keywords as well.  Tell them not to worry 
about payment, that you will address this additional linking 
in your free time, and hopefully they will see some 
improvement in their search engine rankings before too 
long. 
 
Then just repeat what you’ve already done for them for the 
original key word.  Use Angela’s Links to get them some 
high PR forum links pointing back at them, and make sure 
you link those forum profiles to a Craigslist post so the links 
get crawled by the spiders. 
 
Within a month or so they should be ranking well for all their 
keywords, and their business should be increasing as a 
result. 
 
Once you can see that their rankings have improved, send 
them another note letting them know that you got all this 
accomplished for them, and again, at no charge.  And it’s 

 
36
not like it’s costing you anything extra to switch around a 
few key words or phrases.  After a couple of months of 
adding Angela’s Links for the original key words, you should 
have enough link juice built up to guarantee Page One 
ranking for the next decade.  So diverting a few of the links 
to some additional key words is no big deal. 
 
But what you want to make sure the client understands is 
that maintaining his Page One rankings requires constant 
monitoring on your part, and that if he wants to keep this 
prime virtual real estate in his name, he’ll need to sign 
another contract.  If he decides against doing that for any 
reason, explain to him that it’s likely his Page One rankings 
will begin to disappear soon, and there is no guarantee that 
you can come back later and get him back on Page One.  
And you aren’t lying about that.  There are no guarantees 
you can get him there in the first place…the odds just 
overwhelmingly favor your ability to do so.  But unless you 
own Google, you can’t guarantee anyone anything in terms 
of placements. 
 
Only crazy or soon to be retired clients will turn you down 
for a second (or third, or fourth or fifth) year of SEO 
services.  So the odds are again very much in your favor 
that all you will need to do is cash their check and keep 
adding some links once a month. 
 
However, there may be the occasional client who decides he 
just doesn’t need your services any longer, and refuses to 
sign up for another year. 
 
This leaves you with two choices, and they are not 
necessarily mutually exclusive. 
 
Choice One is to go back into the marketplace, and using the 
work you did for your stupid ex-client, get one of his 
competitors to sign a contract.  You just use the same 
method as described in Step Four.  Find the guys with the 

 
37
websites that are buried on Page Three or deeper for the 
money keywords, and send them all an email.  For the first 
one who responds, tell them what you did for the stupid ex-
client, and that should be enough to get them to sign a 
contract. 
 
Choice Two (which again, you can do along with Choice One, 
or not do at all…your choice) is to go back to the sites that 
you set up for stupid ex-client and change the links already 
established into links for new client.  Remember that I 
advised against telling the client what you are doing to help 
them maintain a Page One ranking.  Once that year is up, 
and no new contract is agreed upon, you are no longer 
required to “maintain” their Page One positioning, and you 
have no legal obligation to keep your original work pointing 
in their direction. 
 
You might decide that it is not worth the risk of screwing 
around with ex-clients, lawyers and the like.  I seriously 
doubt anyone would sue if they dropped off Page One after 
they terminated their contract with you, but I’ve heard of 
crazier things happening. 
 
So you might decide to simply leave well enough alone, and 
devote all your time and effort into moving new client ahead 
of stupid ex-client in the rankings. 
 
Like I said, it’s your choice. 
 
HOWEVER… 
 
If you run into a situation where client decides against 
PAYING you for your efforts, and you are forced to resort to 
collection tactics and such to get paid, when it becomes 
clear to you that you are not going to get paid, you should 
immediately remove all of your links pointing to that client’s 
website from the various forums where you set up profiles. 
 

 
38
If they aren’t paying, they aren’t clients.  And they certainly 
don’t deserve to remain on Page One if they aren’t willing to 
compensate you for your efforts. 
 
When I originally started talking about performing the SEO 
services, I mentioned that there were several on-page items 
that you or their webmaster could fix in less than a day, and 
that those items would probably be enough to get them onto 
Page One without any linking. 
 
You might be best served to wait until AFTER the client pays 
you for getting them onto Page One before you suggest the 
on-page changes.  I have moved several clients with 
pathetic on-page optimization onto Page One for their 
desired search terms, just from my linking campaign.  Since 
most of your competition for these words and phrases are as 
poorly optimized as your client’s site, you should have the 
same kind of success. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
39
Step Ten: Rinse and Repeat 
 
If you followed my directions to the letter, 30-45 days 
should have passed and your first batch of clients are now 
“put to bed” and need nothing more than some minor linking 
done for the next 11 months. 
 
So what do you do now? 
 
Start over again. 
 
Select another 10 cities on your list and start searching out 
the poorly ranked web sites for your niche.  Send out the 
emails.  Sign up 10 new clients.  Start 10 new linking 
campaigns.  When you have THOSE 10 clients “put to bed”… 
 
Start over again. 
 
Along the way, get a website developed that you can point 
your prospective clients towards, that explains what you do 
for businesses in their niche.  This can help you close clients 
who just need a slight additional push before they sign the 
contract. 
 
Also, after you have personally done the linking for your first 
few clients, look to outsource that work to someone else 
who will do it for peanuts.  Your job should simply be to find 
new clients.  Let someone else do all the grunt wok of 
setting up forum profiles and links. 
 
You can look at forums like DigitalPoint or WarriorForum and 
find people who advertise specifically for Angela’s Links, and 
will do the entire month’s campaign for $10-20.  If you have 
10 clients, you can sometimes bargain them down to a 
smaller fee per client in exchange for sending all of your 
work their way. 
 

 
40
Another option you can explore is hiring your own Virtual 
Assistant (VA) from India or the Philippines.  For simple 
linking tasks you can get a 40 hour a week employee for 
$200-300 a month. 
 
Yes, that’s not a typo. 
 
$200-$300 a month. 
 
If you want someone who is a bit more experienced and can 
do more complicated tasks, you’ll pay a bit more each 
month, but usually not more than $400 a month. 
 
Try finding a 40 hour a week employee in the US for $400 a 
month.  It simply can’t be done. 
 
I’m not going to go into how to hire a VA…there is plenty of 
information on that at the WarriorForum in both the free and 
the paid sections. 
 
Just remember, YOU don’t get paid for linking.  YOU get paid 
for bringing in new clients. 
 
Set this up the right way and you can run a half million 
dollar a year business (or more) and spend less than 5 hours 
a week doing it. 
 
And isn’t that the whole idea behind using the internet to 
make money?  
 
But there is one guarantee I can make to you without any 
fear of being called a liar or a fraud. 
 
I can guarantee that if you don’t take action on what you’ve 
just read, you are not going to make any money from this 
incredibly easy SEO business. 
 

 
41
The SEO fairy is NOT going to leave $25k under your pillow 
tonight just because you bought and read this information. 
 
You MUST take action on this, or you’ve wasted a golden 
opportunity to set up an income stream that 99.99% of the 
world’s population can only dream of. 
 
So the ball is now in your court.  I sincerely hope you don’t 
just let this one pass you by. 
 
Get busy with Step One, and then follow through with Step 
Two.  If you will just take some small action to begin with, 
the subsequent steps get easier and easier to follow through 
on, and before you know it, you’ve had a $25,000 Weekend, 
with plenty more just like them to come. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
42
My $25,000 Weekend—How It Worked Out For Me 
 
Having read this far, you already know the nitty-gritty 
details, but let me show you exactly what I did to bring in 
$25,000 over a 3 day period (Friday through Sunday) in 
January of this year. 
 
I started on a Monday night with Step One.  I already had 
the idea of using existing websites to crack the Top Ten with 
Google search results (pretty much a necessity with me, 
since I can’t design a website to save my own life).  So I did 
some brainstorming and decided to focus on smaller cities 
(100,000 to 200,000 in population…well after my $25k 
weekend, I raised my upper limit to 300k). 
 
My thinking was that in cities that size, there are going to be 
enough businesses in any “normal” niche to fill up four or 
five pages of search results. Add in all of the “yellow pages” 
aggregator sites, and it becomes more like six to eight 
pages.  All I would need would be one vendor in any niche to 
see the value to letting me work for free until there were 
some tangible results, and I would be on my way. 
 
So for Step One I did a Google search as I described earlier 
and found the Wikipedia page with the listing of all the cities 
with populations greater than 100,000.  It only took a 
minute or so to complete. 
 
For Step Two, I had already decided I wanted to work in the 
legal niche, since I had a lot of familiarity with lawyers.  I 
spun through the yellow pages and made a list of 10 
different sub-niches that all generate a lot of cash for 
lawyers who build up a steady stream of clients.  I finally 
decided to focus on one of them (and there is no way in hell 
I’m going to say which one that is…too many people buy 
these things and decide to invade the territory of the author 
rather than find their own niche). 
 

 
43
For Step Two I spent about 45 minutes. 
 
Step Three (finding the “money” keywords) only took a few 
minutes as well.  I did a Google Keyword search using the 
name of the legal niche I decided upon and scanned the list 
of results, taking note of the words and phrases that 
generated the most searches in a month.  I took notes on 
the keywords that had the most searches, as well as any 
variations in the words (pluralizing, etc.).  This step took 
about 5 minutes for each city I was targeting, or just under 
an hour total. 
 
Step Four was the most time intensive for me.  It took 
around 20-30 minutes per city to scroll through the printouts 
I made from Google, isolating those websites that looked 
like they were forever banned to the back pages of the 
search results.  Since I was focusing on 10 cities, it took a 
grand total of about 5 hours to draw up my list.  Since I 
have self-diagnosed ADD, I spread this 5 hours out over two 
days (Tuesday and Wednesday) as I tended to take a lot of 
breaks and dealt with a lot of unrelated tasks in that time. 
 
Step Five took me about an hour to write the email and then 
send it out ten times, to ten different sets of names.  I did 
this on a Thursday evening, figuring that most of my 
prospects would see the email on Friday morning and start 
contacting me immediately. 
 
Step Six was where I had my $25,000 weekend.  My 
guesstimation in Step Five proved to be true.  I started 
getting emails Friday morning from prospects who were 
interested in what I had to offer.  Literally every single one 
of them said they were most impressed by my offer to 
complete the job before I got paid.  This was the deal 
clincher for all of them. 
 
The emails continued through Friday night, all day Saturday, 
and even a few on Sunday.  I had 5 deals already locked in 

 
44
by 5 p.m. Friday, 4 more on Saturday, and the last one 
closed Sunday afternoon.  At that point they were all verbal 
agreements, since I wanted original signed contracts from 
everyone, and the earliest I could get them in the mail 
would be Monday. 
 
But for about 8 hours of actual work during the preceding 5 
days, I ended up with $25,000 worth of signed contracts, 
and 10 clients who were anxiously awaiting me to work my 
magic on their websites. 
 
Three weeks later, the Google Dance had ended for all of 
them, and we were in the 14 day countdown.  A couple of 
them had sites that dropped off Page One and back to Page 
Two for a few days (grrrrrr!) so I had to start over with the 
14 days.  But the other eight sailed through the two week 
period, and at the end of the 14 days I asked to be paid. 
 
All eight of them sent checks.  
 
Ten days later, I got checks from the remaining two clients. 
 
I had already proven to myself once that I could move a 
website onto Page One (see the case study, below).  Now I 
proved to myself I could handle multiple clients at one time. 
 
So at that point I took my own advice from Step Ten. 
 
Rinse and Repeat. 
 
There is no reason you can’t see the same level of success if 
you’ll just stick to my steps as I have them outlined for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
45
 
Case Study 
 
The very first website I ever did this kind of SEO for belongs 
to a friend of mine who practices Probate law in a city of 
around 250,000 people.  There are dozens of probate 
lawyers in that town (somewhere between 40 and 50…a few 
are very part time so it’s hard to count them, even though 
they too have websites). 
 
My friend had a website that was provided to him by the 
phone company after he signed a contract for a large ad in 
the local yellow pages.  The yellow pages web designer 
customized the site so that it had his name, address and 
phone number on the 5 pages, but otherwise it was a total 
cookie cutter site, one they give to probate attorneys 
throughout the state. 
 
The problem was, the phone company actually hosted the 
site, and my friend has no idea how to gain access to it so I 
could make some on-page SEO changes.  So on-page SEO 
was a non-starter.  All we had to work with was linking. 
 
He gave me permission to start my SEO linking campaign at 
the start of the month.  I did some digging around and 
found that for two of his four “money” keywords, he was on 
Page 4 of Google.  For two others, he was nowhere to be 
found in the first 10 pages. 
 
For grins I also checked Yahoo and Bing.  On Yahoo he was 
also on Page 4 for the same two keywords as Google, and 
nowhere in the first 10 pages for then other two.  On Bing 
he was simply invisible for all 4 phrases: nowhere to be 
found in the first 10 pages. 
 
So I knew I had my work cut out for me.  And my friend was 
less than optimistic.  Apparently he’s had several “SEO 

 
46
Experts” tell him about the marvelous things they could do 
for his site…for a price. 
 
To make a long story short, I did exactly what I lay out for 
you in Step Seven, above.  I spent 5 days posting 30 links, 
using Angela’s Links, and then using Craigslist to link back to 
a few of them, to get them crawled and indexed. 
 
I told him not to expect any great results too soon, and that 
it would likely be a couple of weeks before we saw any 
improvement in his rankings. 
 
The following Monday (seven days after I posted the first of 
the links) his site was on Page One, in the 10th slot.  It 
stayed there 2 days, and then dropped back to Page 4, 
where it remained through the end of that week. 
 
The next Monday the site had dropped to Page Six (and you 
can imagine how happy I was to see THAT!) but on Tuesday 
he vaulted to Page Two, Slot #2.  He remained on Page 2 
for two more days, then on Friday jumped to Page One, Slot 
8. 
 
The Google Dance was more or less over at that point.  Page 
One was achieved (in exactly 18 days) and now the only 
thing left to do was to crawl to the top. 
 
The next Monday he started still on Page One, Slot 8, but 
then moved up mid week to Slot 6.  He stayed in Slot 6 for 
about a week, and then moved to Slot 5.  A week later he 
was in Slot 4, and right now is in Slot 3 (behind one 
aggregate advertiser, who has both Slots One and Two).  
He’s been there for 3 months now. 
 
I only used the first 30 links I got from Angela, and never 
added another link to his site (this was an unpaid 
experiment on my part).  But I am going to add more links 

 
47
in the coming months, just to try and blast him into the 
Number 1 slot out of pride and principle. 
 
And for the record, his site does not contain any of the 
“money” keywords in either the title or the domain name.  
There are no H1 tags (or H anything else for that matter) on 
his site.  He’s not in the Yahoo Directory or DMOZ. 
 
In short, his site is about as un-optimized as it can be from 
an on-page standpoint. 
 
And he’s #3 on Google for his main keyword. 
 
Oh, and he’s now #1 on Yahoo for the same. 
 
But he’s still invisible on Bing. 
 
Oh well.  You can’t win ‘em all. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
48
A Tool Worth Considering 
 
A couple of weeks ago I was trolling around the Warrior 
Forum and found some posts regarding SENuke.  I’d heard 
bits and pieces about this product in the past, but never paid 
a lot of attention to it. 
 
Big Mistake on My Part! 
 
I jumped over to their site and found a sort of One-Stop 
Shop for all your SEO needs (well, most of them, anyway, 
for local SEO purposes). 
 
I don’t want to turn this into a sales page for SENuke, but I 
do want to point out a couple of the features that really cut 
down on the time you (or your Assistant) will spend doing 
the actual SEO work. 
 
First, they have a “keyword research” tool that will analyze 
Google results for that word or phrase and then provide you 
with an opinion as to whether “conquering” Google for that 
term will be easy, difficult, hard or impossible (they don’t 
use the word “impossible” but when you see the phrases 
indicating great difficulty, think “impossible” and move on to 
the next niche.)   
 
Why use a ladder to get one orange from the top of a tree 
when there is so much low hanging fruit you can grab 
without even stretching? 
 
By searching for your exact “local search” key phrase (such 
as “Charlotte Plumbing”) you can find out in seconds if you 
have identified a niche that will be simple for you to boost a 
poorly ranked site onto Page One of the Google search 
results. 
 
It you get an “easy” response, move forward.  If you get 
“impossible” then pick another city and start over. 

 
49
 
This tool alone makes SENuke worth the monthly 
subscription fee.   
 
But a second module (it has seven of them total) makes this 
a no-brainer for me. 
 
They have built an auto-submitter that will create around 
500 profile accounts for the same kinds of sites that you get 
from Angela every month for $5.  
 
What this tool does is automatically open profile accounts 
and post the links (using anchor text, such as “Charlotte 
Plumbers”) in more PR5-9 accounts than you will ever need 
in order to secure and maintain Page One rankings for your 
client sites. 
 
And it does this in a matter of minutes, rather than days. 
 
This means you can accept two or three times as many 
clients at one time than you would be able to if you were 
manually setting up these links each month. 
 
I was taking on 10 new clients at a time because that was 
the most I could handle comfortably. 
 
Now I search for 30 at a time, and turn my Assistant loose 
on SENuke, setting up profiles and using a few of the other 
modules (RSS, Social Bookmarking, Article Directory) to 
build additional backlinks for my client sites over time. 
 
The Pro Level membership runs about $129 a month, and it 
is without a doubt the BEST $129 you will spend, if you take 
this business seriously.  You can automate almost ALL of the 
tasks involved in bumping an existing site to Page One, and 
by using an off-shore assistant (like mine) really spend no 
more than an hour a day overseeing your growing empire of 
clients. 

 
50
List of Potential High Dollar Prospects 
 
This is a short list of businesses that come to my mind 
immediately when I think of companies that already have a 
web presence, and in most cities, have enough competition 
that there are some on Page Three and beyond on Google 
for their “money” keywords.   
 
This by no means is an exhaustive list, but most of the 
businesses listed here have a high enough “dollar value” for 
an individual new customer that they can justify hiring 
someone to improve their search engine rankings. 
 
Accountants (CPA’s, PA’s and Tax Preparers) 
Air Conditioning/HVAC companies 
Alcohol/Drug Rehab Centers 
Animal Hospitals 
Answering Services 
Apartment Complexes 
Asphalt/Paving Companies 
Assisted Living Communities 
Attorneys (20+ sub-specialties here) 
Auto Insurance Brokers 
Auto Parts 
Auto Rental 
Auto Repair 
Auto Sales (new and used) 
Bail Bonds Agencies 
Boat Cleaning 
Boat Dealers 
Building Contractors 
Burglar Alarm Companies 
Business Consultants 
Cabinet Makers 
Carpet/Rug Cleaners 
Cash Advance/Check Cashing Services 
Caterers 
Cell Phone Dealers 

 
51
Child Care Centers 
Chiropractors 
Clinics (24 hour/Emergency) 
Computer Repair 
Counselors (child, marriage, etc.) 
Credit/Debt Counseling 
Day Spas 
Dentists (cosmetic, orthodontists, emergency, etc.) 
Dieticians 
Disc Jockeys 
Dry Cleaners 
Electricians 
Employment Agencies 
Engineers 
Excavators 
Fence Builders/Menders 
Financial Planners 
Florists 
Funeral Directors 
Garage Door Sales/Service/Repair 
Gift Baskets 
Glass Installation/Repair (auto & home) 
Gold Dealers 
Handyman Services 
Hearing Aid Sales/Supply 
Home Builders 
Home Health Care Providers 
Home Inspection Services 
Home Remodelers 
House Cleaning/Maid Services 
Hot Tub Sales/Service 
Insurance Brokers (auto, home, life, health, etc.) 
Interior Decorators 
Investigators 
Janitorial Services 
Kennels 
Landscape Contractors 
Laser Vision Correction 

 
52
Loan Companies 
Locksmiths 
Manufactured Home Sales 
Masonry Contractors 
Mattress Sales 
Medical Equipment Sales/Rental/Service 
Mortgage Brokers 
Motels 
Moving Companies (house & apartment) 
Muffler Shops 
Nail Salons 
Notaries Public 
Nurseries (plants and kids) 
Nursing Homes 
Optometrists 
Painting Contractors 
Party Planners 
Patio & Deck Contractors 
Pawnbrokers 
Pest Control 
Pet Grooming 
Pharmacists 
Photographers 
Physical Therapists 
Physicians (10+ elective sub-specialties) 
Pizza Parlors 
Plumbing Contractors 
Property Managers 
Psychotherapists 
Pumps Sales/Service 
Real Estate Agencies 
Rental Yards 
Restaurants (10-20+ sub-specialties) 
Retirement Communities 
Retirement Planning 
Roofing Contractors 
Schools (trade) 
Screen Contractors 

 
53
Security Companies 
Septic Tank Installation/Cleaning/Repair 
Shutters & Siding Companies 
Storage Companies 
Surveyors 
Swimming Pool Contractors 
Swimming Pool Cleaning/Repairs 
Tax Preparers 
Taxi Cab Companies 
Termite Control 
Tire Centers (new, used and repair) 
Title Companies 
Towing Companies 
Transmission Repair 
Tree Trimmers 
Truck Rentals 
Veterinarians 
Water Damage Restoration 
Weight Loss/Control Centers 
Window/Door Contractors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

