
 G R E AT  E M P I R E S  O F  T H E  PA S T
EMPIRE OF 
ANCIENT GREECE
revised edition

G R E AT  E M P I R E S  O F  T H E  PA S T
Empire of Alexander the Great
Empire of Ancient Egypt
Empire of Ancient Greece
Empire of Ancient Rome
Empire of the Aztecs 
Empire of the Incas
Empire of the Islamic World
Empire of the Mongols
Empires of Ancient Mesopotamia 
Empires of Ancient Persia
Empires of Medieval West Africa
Empires of the Maya 

 G R E AT  E M P I R E S  O F  T H E  PA S T
JEAN KINNEY WILLIAMS
JOHN W. I. LEE, HISTORICAL CONSULTANT
Revised Edition
EMPIRE OF
ANCIENT GREECE

Great Empires of the Past: Empire of Ancient Greece
Copyright © 2009 Jean Kinney Williams
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the publisher. For 
information, contact: 
Chelsea House
An imprint of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Williams, Jean Kinney.
 Empire of ancient Greece / Jean Kinney Williams.—Rev. ed.
      p. cm.—(Great empires of the past)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-60413-165-9 (hardcover)
 ISBN 978-1-4381-2783-5 (e-book)
 1.  Greece—History—To 146 B.C.—Juvenile literature. 2.
Greece—Civilization—To 146 B.C.—Juvenile literature.  I. Title. II.
Series.
 DF215.W58 2009
 938—dc22  
 
2009004460
Chelsea House books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk quantities for businesses, associations, institutions, 
or sales promotions. Please call our Special Sales Department in New York at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
You can find Chelsea House on the World Wide Web at http://www.chelseahouse.com
Produced by the Shoreline Publishing Group LLC
Editorial Director: James Buckley Jr.
Series Editor: Beth Adelman
Text design by Annie O’Donnell
Cover design by Alicia Post
Printed in the United States of America
Bang MSRF 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
All links and Web addresses were checked and verified to be correct at the time of publication. Because of the dynamic nature of 
the Web, some addresses and links may have changed since publication and may no longer be valid. 

5
CONTENTS
 
 
Introduction 
7
 
PART I HISTORY
CHAPTER 1 Th e Beginnings of Classical Greece 
19
CHAPTER 2 Th e Athenian Empire 
35
CHAPTER 3 Th e Final Years of Classical Greece 
51
 
PART II SOCIETY AND CULTURE
CHAPTER 4 Politics and Society in Ancient Greece 
67
CHAPTER 5 Everyday Life in Ancient Greece 
85
CHAPTER 6 Greek Art, Philosophy, and Science 
109
 
 
Epilogue 
131
 
 
Time Line 
142
 
 
Glossary 
143
 
 
Bibliography 
145
 
 
Further Resources 
148
 
 
Picture Credits 
152
 
 
Index 
153
 
 
About the Author 
159


7
THE TERM ANCIENT GREEKS CAN REFER TO MANY CULTURES 
and times in world history. The ancient Greeks include the warriors 
who fought in the Trojan War in the 1200s b.c.e. and whose mythical 
stories, retold by Homer, are considered the foundation of Western lit-
erature. They also are the sophisticated (from the Greek word sophos, 
which means “wise”) Athenians of what is known as Classical Greece. 
They gave us democracy in the 400s b.c.e. and their architecture and 
literature still influences modern society. And they are the Mediter-
ranean peoples who, in the two centuries before Rome began its rule of 
the Western and Near Eastern world in the 140s b.c.e., made ground-
breaking contributions to science and mathematics.
The history of the ancient Greeks spanned many centuries, from 
about 1600 b.c.e. to 146 b.c.e. As their world was unfolding, their 
Mediterranean neighbors included Egypt, whose civilization had 
already existed for 2,000 years. To the east, in modern-day Turkey, the 
Hittites made up another powerful kingdom that battled with Egypt 
for control over Syria, which lay between them. The nearby Phoeni-
cians first developed an alphabet and advanced the art of shipbuilding. 
Trade and exchanges of culture and technology flourished among these 
kingdoms around the Mediterranean Sea. Eventually, the early Greeks 
became another important force in the area.
Ancient Greece was never a unified country. Rather, it was a col-
lection of perhaps as many as 1,500 independent city-states (cities that 
function as separate nations). The people of those city-states shared a 
culture and a language, even though they were scattered throughout the 
modern-day Greek mainland and also around the Mediterranean and 
INTRODUCTION
O P P O S I T e
Even in ruins, the 
Parthenon, a temple 
honoring Athena, the 
patron goddess of Athens, 
shows the beauty and 
power of Classical Greek 
culture. When it was built, 
the Parthenon was 101.34 
feet wide and 228.14 
feet long. It was made of 
brilliant white marble, had 
46 supporting columns, 
and contained a statue of 
Athena that was nearly 40 
feet tall.

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
Black Seas (including today’s 
Turkey, North Africa, and 
southern Italy). As the Greek 
philosopher Plato described, 
they sat like frogs around a 
pond. (ca. 429–ca. 347 b.c.e). 
These people did not call 
themselves Greeks, either. That 
name comes from the Romans, 
who called them Graeci. The 
Greeks always referred to them-
selves, and still do, as Hellenes.
Hellas was their word for the 
entire Greek world, and is what 
Greeks today call their nation. 
The image that most likely comes to mind when thinking about 
the “ancient Greeks” is that of Athens in the fifth century b.c.e.—what 
today is known as Classical Greece. Perhaps it is a scene from the 
crowded agora, or marketplace, bustling with vendors and shoppers. Or 
philosophers such as Socrates (ca. 470–399 b.c.e.), who drew crowds 
around them as they discussed their ideas about how to live a virtu-
ous life. Or perhaps the Parthenon, the architectural masterpiece of its 
day. Or graceful statues of the gods and goddesses featured in Greek 
mythology, and the stories about them that are still told today. 
All of those impressions come from the era during which the 
Greeks had enormous influences in their Mediterranean world, under 
the leadership of their largest city-state, Athens. Classical Greece 
should also come to mind during election campaigns, because the idea 
of democracy was invented by the ancient Greeks.
the earliest Greeks
The large island of Crete, south of Greece, was home to the Mino-
ans (who did not speak Greek). They were the first kingdom in the 
Aegean Sea (a part of the Mediterranean Sea that lies between mod-
ern-day Greece and Turkey). By about 2000 b.c.e., Minoans were 
building elaborate palaces that had running water and drainage in 
most rooms. They had a highly developed society with a complex 
religion.
8
What Are Connections?
throughout this book, and all the books in the great 
Empires of the past series, there are connections boxes. 
they point out ideas, inventions, art, food, customs, and 
more from this empire that are still part of the world today. 
nations and cultures in remote history can seem far away 
from the present day, but these connections demonstrate 
how our everyday lives have been shaped by the peoples 
of the past.
CONNECTIONS

9
The Minoan culture eventually overlapped with the more aggres-
sive Mycenaeans. Historians named this culture for the city of Myce-
nae on southern Greece’s Peloponnese Peninsula. They consider the 
Mycenaeans to be the first ancient Greeks, and are connected to the 
future Greek civilization by language and religion. The Mycenaean 
era lasted roughly from 1600 to 1200 b.c.e., and it gave the Greeks the 
glorious legends of King Agamemnon and Achilles fighting at Troy, and 
of Odysseus traveling home from the Trojan War. The Mycenaeans, it 
is believed, eventually took over the Minoan kingdom, and Crete later 
became part of the Greek Empire. 
During the 12th century b.c.e., invasions disrupted the Mediterra-
nean region. It is not known exactly what or who caused the disruption 
of the Mycenaean civilization. There is a gap of several hundred years in 
the history of the entire Mediterranean region about which very little is 
known—a time some historians have referred to as a Dark Age. But by 
the mid-eighth century b.c.e., the descendants of the Mycenaeans had 
begun forming city-states around the Aegean Sea. They were sending 
out emigrants (people who leave their country to settle someplace else). 
These people spread the Mycenaean language and culture by creating 
new colonies around the Mediterranean. 
Geography Prevents Unification
The Greeks never had a unified state with a single capital. Their geog-
raphy certainly did not encourage it. Greece is a land of mountains, 
and the mainland is separated south from north by water, except for a 
narrow strip of land, called an isthmus, near the city of Corinth. Many 
of the mainland’s city-states hugged the coastline and could only be 
reached by sea, since land travel was difficult and there are no rivers in 
Greece that can be safely traveled by boat.
Many Greeks also lived on the islands dotting the country’s coasts. 
Each settlement therefore grew into an independent city-state with its 
own calendar, coins, laws, and government. They were united by a com-
mon language and religion, but they were politically divided.
The Greeks were also bound together by a shared culture. This 
included the stories of their favorite heroes and of the gods and god-
desses who they hoped would make good things happen in their lives. 
In 776 b.c.e., the first all-Greek athletics competition was held in honor 
of their chief god, Zeus. In an event that symbolized their sense of 
I n t r o d u c t i o n

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
10
unity, Greek men came together from all their cities and colonies. They 
gathered in Olympia in northern Greece to compete in races, wres-
tling, and other athletic events. The Greeks continued to hold Olympic 
Games every four years for 1,000 years.
As another result of their geographical location, the Greeks became 
expert seafarers. Their comfort at sea, coupled with the sophisticated 
economies of their Mediterranean neighbors, led them to go abroad 
frequently as traders and as mercenaries (foreign soldiers hired to fight 
for another country).
athens and sparta become the main 
Greek powers
By about 600 b.c.e., Sparta and Athens had emerged as the dominant 
Greek city-states. Sparta was on the Peloponnese Peninsula and Athens 
was in the region northeast of Sparta known as Attica. Corinth and 
Thebes also were significant powers. 
The eighth, seventh, and sixth centuries b.c.e. are an era classified 
by historians as Archaic Greece (archaic is a word that means “very 
old”). This is when Homer’s epic stories about the Trojan War and its 
aftermath, the Iliad and the Odyssey, were written down. (An epic is a 
long poem about the actions and adventures of heroic or legendary fig-
ures or about the history of a nation.) Historians are not sure if Homer’s 
stories are true, but the Greeks considered these epics to be their own 
ancient history. 
During the Archaic Period another writer, Hesiod, wrote down the 
oral legends about Greek gods in a book called Theogony. The exact 
birth and death dates of Homer and Hesiod are not known. In fact, 
Homer’s actual existence is not even certain. Hesiod was active in the 
eighth century b.c.e., and the origins of works said to be written by 
Homer have also been traced to that period. 
Starting in the sixth century b.c.e. philosopher-scientists were 
no longer satisfied with the explanation that the gods had arranged 
everything. They began to ask questions about the universe. Govern-
ments ruled by oligarchies (councils of aristocrats) were being devel-
oped among city-states. By the end of the sixth century b.c.e. there 
were no kings or emperors in ancient Greece. The one exception was 
Sparta. Following a long tradition, it had two kings. But their power was 
limited.

11
I n t r o d u c t i o n
the Iliad and the Odyssey are fictional epics 
that reflect greek beliefs about their heroic 
past. the central plot of the Iliad—a war 
between the trojans and the greeks—is 
probably based on real events, but the Odys-
sey is pure fiction. Both stories have become 
classics of Western literature, and the char-
acters and events in them 
have turned up in a wide vari-
ety of books, plays, poems, 
and movies through the ages.
the 10-year war in the 
Iliad begins when paris, son 
of trojan king priam, is called 
upon to judge a beauty con-
test between the goddesses 
Aphrodite, Hera, and Athena. 
All three offer paris bribes, 
but Aphrodite’s bribe is the 
most tempting. She promises 
him the beautiful Helen—who 
is the wife of menelaus, the 
greek king. 
menelaus launches an 
expedition to recover his wife, Helen. He is 
assisted by the legendary warriors Achilles, 
odysseus, Ajax, and nestor. menelaus’s 
brother Agamemnon, king of mycenae, goes 
with them as commander-in-chief of the 
expedition. the trojan side is led by Hector, 
paris’s brother.
the story describes many conflicts within 
the ranks of the trojans and the greeks, 
including actions the gods disapprove of that 
cause the battle to tilt one way or another. 
finally, the long war is ended when Achilles 
kills Hector.
the Odyssey is an account of odysseus’s 
trip home to Ithaca. It should have been a 
brief trip—just across the Aegean Sea and 
around the southern coast of 
greece—but it ended up being 
a 10-year journey. Along the 
way, he and his men encoun-
ter an island inhabited by the 
cyclopes, the one-eyed giant. 
they visit Hades, the under-
world, and see their fallen 
friends from the trojan War. 
they put wax in their ears as 
they sail past the beautiful but 
deadly singing of the Sirens, 
and farther on their ship has 
to sneak past a six-headed 
monster called the Hydra.
After more adventures, 
only odysseus survives to 
return to Ithaca. He then has to reclaim his 
wife and kingship after a 20-year absence. 
While he was gone, many men pressured 
his wife, penelope, to marry them, claiming 
odysseus must be dead. But she put them 
off long enough to see the return of her hus-
band. His legendary skill with bow and arrow 
clears his home of these would-be kings, 
and his family is reunited. 
Plots of the Iliad and the Odyssey 
a storage jar called a 
krater shows scenes from 
the Odyssey, the famous 
epic poem by homer that 
Greeks believed was part 
of their history.

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
12
What historians today call the Classical Greek era emerged 
in the fifth century b.c.e. and lasted through most of the fourth 
century b.c.e. In the 400s b.c.e., Athens truly became the heart of 
Classical Greece. It was a military and cultural leader among city-
states, and it also put democracy into practice, which is government 
by the demos, the Greek word for “people.” Athens used its mighty 
navy to establish an empire, taking control of many other city-states. 
Through this contact, some Athenian concepts of democracy spread 
around the region. Democracy took on its fullest form from 450 to 
350 b.c.e.. beginning with Athenian leader Pericles (ca. 495–429 
b.c.e.). During this period, all 
of Athens’s male citizens par-
ticipated in the government. 
Women 
and 
non-citizens 
(which included all foreigners 
and slaves), however, could 
not participate—a situation 
similar to the United States 
until the 20th century. Greek 
democracy lasted in stron-
ger or weaker forms until the 
Roman Republic took over 
the Greek world in 146 b.c.e.
Democracy did not appear 
again in the Western world 
for many more centuries.
The Greek city-states con-
tinually fought among them-
selves, but they came together 
to fight a powerful invader, 
the Persian Empire, first 
in 490 b.c.e. When the Per-
sians returned 10 years later, 
the alliance of city-states that 
fought them off again was led 
by Athens. The Athenians felt 
the gods had shown them great 
favor by granting them victory. 
Their resulting pride and con-
The First Marathon
When persian troops landed at the greek city of marathon 
in 490 b.c.e., generals in Athens sent the olympic runner 
pheidippides to Sparta. His mission was to seek Sparta’s 
help against the invaders. the Spartans, however, were 
holding religious ceremonies and could not send troops. 
When pheidippides returned with the bad news, the greek 
generals decided to attack anyway, and they won a major 
victory over the persians.
today’s marathon foot race takes its name from that 
event in greek history. the modern marathon is just over 
26 miles, which is about the distance between Athens and 
marathon. In the first modern olympics, which were held 
in Athens in 1896, the winner of the marathon was a greek 
man named Spiridon Louis.
During his famous run to Sparta, pheidippides covered 
about 147 miles, and there is no historical record that he 
ran from marathon to Athens. (In other versions of the 
ancient story, an unnamed runner, not pheidippides, ran 
from marathon to Athens after the battle to bring news of 
the greek victory.) In 1983, a group of runners started a 
new event that covers the approximate route pheidippides 
most likely took. they called the race the Spartathlon. top 
runners have completed the course in less than 24 hours. 
CONNECTIONS

13
fidence inspired them to begin an ambitious plan to beautify their city 
and extend their influence. 
Although Athens and Sparta ruled different areas of the mainland, 
the rivalry between the two deepened as Athens’s power and status 
increased. Sparta was unique among the Greek city-states because it 
had a social structure based on a purely military model. The two city-
states had little in common when it came to politics or philosophy. 
Finally, they went to war with one another in 431 b.c.e. in a conflict 
now known as the Peloponnesian War.
MACedoniAn And RoMAn ConQUest
The Peloponnesian War began between Athens and Sparta, but 
eventually involved almost all of Greece. When it finally ended in 
404 b.c.e., Sparta was the winner and Athens was greatly weakened. 
Seventy years later, the Greeks were no match for a new superpower 
from the north, Macedon. Its ruler, Alexander III (also known as 
Alexander the Great, 356–323 b.c.e.), took control of all of Greece 
and then defeated the Persian Empire. In his continuing conquests, 
Alexander spread Classical Greek culture across a huge area in just 
a few years. 
After Alexander’s death, his top generals each took a piece of his 
empire. This included the Greek world, Northern Africa, and the Near 
East. They continued Greek cultural traditions by preserving and 
advancing the study of science, mathematics, philosophy, and history. 
i n t r o d u c t i o n
many words in the English language come 
from ancient Greek. The English word 
physics, for example, comes from the 
Greek word physis, which means “nature.” 
The Greek word atomos, meaning “indi-
visible,“ led to the English word atom, 
which refers to the smallest particle of an 
element. 
Greek words are also at the heart of 
many prefixes and suffixes used in Eng-
lish and other European languages. for 
example, the prefix dino for the word 
dinosaur comes from the Greek word dei-
nos, which means “terrifying.” The suffix 
comes from the Greek work sauros, which 
means “lizard.” 
CONNECTIONS
Ancient Greek Words Used Today

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
14
The Italian artist Raphael 
(1483–1520) painted “The 
School of Athens” on the 
wall of the Pope’s Palace 
in the Vatican in about 
1510. It shows a gathering 
of Greek philosophers in 
a fictional scene. In the 
center are Plato (on the 
left, in a red garment and 
holding his hand up) and 
Aristotle (on the right, in a 
light blue garment holding 
a book). Ancient Greek 
culture was greatly admired 
throughout history.
Greek became a widely spoken language in the Western and Near 
Eastern world. When the Romans conquered those same regions in the 
mid-second century b.c.e., they, too, learned from the Greeks and built 
upon what they learned.
When Rome finally fell eight centuries later, the classical culture 
of Greece and Rome was largely forgotten in the West. But the art, 
science, and culture of the Greeks were preserved in great libraries by 
the Islamic Empire. At a time when Western Europe had largely lost 
this knowledge, Islamic scholars expanded upon Greek scientific ideas. 
Classical ideas were rediscovered and brought alive again during the 
European Renaissance in the late 15th century c.e. Painting and sculp-
ture (often with Classical Greek and Roman themes) and the serious 
study of science, architecture, literature, and philosophy all advanced 
again in Europe. 

15
In the 18th century, a new republic that called itself the United 
States of America borrowed an idea from an ancient republic. The 
idea was government of, by, and for the people. Like Athens’s original 
democracy, that of the United States was not without flaws. In its early 
form, only white male citizens who owned property could participate. 
Also, as in Athens, slavery was legal. 
In fact, the Founding Fathers of the United States preferred a more 
Roman model of democracy—one that gave less power to citizens who 
were not rich. What they did borrow from Athens was the ideals of 
equality before the law, the participation of citizens in their own gov-
ernment, and freedom of speech. In the history of the world, there have 
been very few cultures where a playwright such as Aristophanes (ca. 
450–ca. 386 b.c.e.) could publicly make fun of the leaders he disagreed 
with in his plays—and win a prize for it.
To study ancient Greece, 
one also has to examine its 
darker side. Slavery was uni-
versally accepted and meant 
a brutal life for many people. 
It was legal to abandon an 
unwanted baby; the baby would 
either die or be picked up by 
another person and raised as 
a slave. Women and children 
had few rights. War was fre-
quent as the city-states battled 
for land. While Athens could 
boast of the individual rights 
its male citizens enjoyed, it did 
not extend these rights to the 
city-states that it ruled. 
But what set the Greeks 
apart from other ancient peo-
ples were the questions they 
asked of themselves: How 
should people live? Is jus-
tice important? What values 
are truly worth striving for? 
The Greeks loved beauty and 
I n t r o d u c t i o n
Power to the Demos
Demos is the greek word that may have the most impor-
tance to Americans today. the idea that political power 
belongs to the demos, the people, is at the heart of the U.S. 
democratic political system. the word democracy is made 
up of the greek words demos and kratos, which means 
“power.”
the American democratic system, however, is very dif-
ferent from the original democracy of Athens. for example, 
Athenian citizens all gathered in one place to make deci-
sions, and U.S. voters do not. Instead, Americans rely on 
elected representatives to carry out their wishes. this sys-
tem was developed in ancient rome, but was based on a 
greek ideal.
Demos also appears as the root of several English words. 
Demography, for example, means recording and studying 
statistics about the population in a given area, focusing on 
such things as age, ethnic background, education, religion, 
and job status. (the word also has a greek suffix—graphy 
comes from the greek word graphein, meaning “to write.”) 
CONNECTIONS

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
16
encouraged genuine intellectual and emotional expression. The theme 
of all works of Classical Greek art, science, mythology, philosophy, 
drama, and literature can be summed up in one phrase from the great 
philosopher Socrates: “Know thyself” (quoted in Bartlett’s Familiar 
Quotations).
It is not an exaggeration to say that Western civilization today is built 
upon Classical Greek civilization. The Greeks left many cultural riches, 
from logic (the study of the rules and tests of sound reasoning) to democ-
racy to rhetoric (the art of speaking or writing effectively) to drama to 
philosophy. What emerged from their many different city-states was a 
culture that set the foundation for our intellectual lives today. It is why 
students today still have much to learn from the ancient Greeks.

THE BEGINNINGS OF CLASSICAL GREECE
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE
THE FINAL YEARS OF CLASSICAL GREECE
HISTORY
P A R T • I


HISTORIANS CONSIDER THE EARLIEST EVIDENCE OF GREEK 
culture to be from a group that is now known as the Mycenaeans. They 
are called that because archaeologists first found artifacts (items from 
daily life that are left behind) belonging to them near the ancient town 
of Mycenae on the Peloponnese Peninsula. Like the Classical Greeks 
who came after them, the Mycenaeans lived in independent kingdom-
communities but shared a common language and culture. 
The Mycenaean civilization began about 1600 b.c.e., although it 
is not clear just how it originated. Their language was Indo-European, 
which means it shares its roots with languages from both Europe and 
India. Whether the Mycenaeans settled in Greece thousands of years 
before their written history began, or whether they conquered people 
already there in about 2000 b.c.e., is not known for sure. But they are 
connected to the later Greeks by language and religion.
The Mycenaeans were influenced by their neighbors, the Minoans. 
The Minoans lived on the large island of Crete, south of the Greek 
mainland and not far from the northern shores of Africa. The Minoans 
became wealthy by developing very efficient agriculture and by trading 
with other Mediterranean peoples. Some of their arts and handicrafts 
were similar to those of the Mycenaeans. 
Mycenaean chieftains or kings lived in heavily walled palaces. 
Excavated towns and palaces of the seemingly peaceful Minoans on 
Crete, by contrast, show no walls. A variety of bronze weapons and 
armor has been found at Mycenaean burial sites, along with leather hel-
mets and shields, some bronze drinking cups, and even a bronze comb 
THE BEGINNINGS OF 
CLASSICAL GREECE
19
O P P O S I T e
Many of the sacred 
buildings at Delphi can 
be visited today, although 
they are in ruins. This is 
the Tholos temple, the 
gateway to Delphi. It was 
built in the early fourth 
century b.c.e.
C H A P T E R  1

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
20
with gold teeth. Weapons do not seem 
to have been passed down from father to 
son. The fact that each soldier had new 
weapons shows that these ancient war-
riors had some wealth. 
By the mid-14th century b.c.e., the 
Mycenaeans were the most powerful 
force on the Aegean Sea. Warfare was 
carried out on a rather small scale com-
pared to the big armies of the Egyp-
tians and the Hittites. But the aggressive 
Mycenaeans were successful in their 
corner of the Mediterranean world. 
Most likely, they overran and absorbed 
the Minoan society. 
The kingdom of Troy, once located 
along the Aegean coast in today’s Tur-
key, was destroyed about 1230 b.c.e. 
Homer wrote in the Iliad about one long 
war between Troy and the Greeks (actu-
ally, the Mycenaeans). But archaeologists think Troy probably endured 
several attacks over many years.
The Mycenaeans lived in densely populated towns in today’s 
Greece and across the Aegean Sea in modern-day Turkey. Their towns 
had a more centralized government than the Greek city-states that 
appeared a few centuries later. Technically, everything the society pro-
duced belonged to the king. Local rulers then divided up the wealth as 
they saw fit. Large palaces were built for the Mycenaean kings—the one 
at Mycenae may have been the palace of the overall king. At the peak of 
their civilization in the 13th century b.c.e., the Mycenaeans traveled far 
and wide in their Mediterranean world. 
Trouble Breaks Out
About 1200 b.c.e., trouble erupted all around the Mediterranean. Groups 
of people were on the move throughout the region, destroying entire cit-
ies as they went. Palaces and artwork were destroyed, mostly by fire. His-
torians do not agree about who these destructive people were. (In fact, in 
recent years their very existence has become a subject of debate.) 
This golden funeral mask 
is from the Mycenaean 
culture. The Mycenaeans 
were ancestors of the 
Greeks and contributed 
much to later Greek 
culture. 

21
In Egyptian records from the court of Ramesses III is a description, 
dated from around 1182 b.c.e., of attacks from “sea peoples” (as noted 
in Thomas R. Martin’s book, Ancient Greece: From Prehistoric to Hel-
lenistic Times): “All at once the people were on the move, dispersed in 
war. . . . No land could repulse their attacks.” 
The attacks caused the end of the Hittite Empire, located in eastern 
Asia Minor (the Hittite capital city of Hattusas was about 110 miles east 
of modern-day Ankara in Turkey). The Egyptian Empire shrank back to 
the area along the Nile River. The Dark Age had begun.
Greek historians from the age of Classical Greece wrote that at 
about this time, a large group of the Dorian people from the north (the 
ancestors of the Spartans) moved onto the Peloponnese Peninsula. 
The Mycenaeans fled across the Aegean Sea to Ionia, or Asia Minor, to 
escape them. The Mycenaeans lost their palaces. During the following 
few centuries, all use of their 
record-keeping script ended, as 
did trade between regions. 
Modern historians have 
always believed the ancient 
historians. But more recently 
it has been argued that there 
is no archaeological evidence 
to show a large, sudden inva-
sion into Greece in that period. 
Historians have proposed many 
theories, including famine, 
disease, climate change, civil 
war, and peasant uprisings, to 
explain the collapse of Myce-
naean civilization. Still, no one 
is sure exactly what happened. 
The Dark Age peoples had 
no written language or native 
art traditions to replace those 
that had disappeared. Because 
people were on the move, food 
production around the Medi-
terranean world decreased. The 
population was greatly reduced. 
t h e  B e g i n n i n g s  o f  c l a s s i c a l  g r e e c e
The Greek Alphabet
the mycenaeans used a kind of shorthand script for record 
keeping that was somewhat similar to that of the minoans. 
the greeks, however, borrowed their alphabet from the 
phoenicians between 800 and 750 b.c.e. they adapted the 
phoenician alphabet, called cuneiform, to form the greek 
alphabet. they also took a few of the phoenician conso-
nants and used them as vowels. 
the letters of the greek alphabet are still used today in 
greece, even though some letters now have slightly differ-
ent pronunciations. And our word alphabet comes from the 
first two letters in the greek alphabet, alpha and beta. 
greek letters usually appear in the West today in scien-
tific work. for example, the brain waves produced during 
sleep are called delta waves, while an active brain produces 
beta waves. greek letters are also used in math. omega, 
the last letter in the greek alphabet, is written Ω and can be 
used in equations to refer to ohms, a unit of electrical resis-
tance, while ∑, sigma, stands for the sum of many variables 
in a math equation.
CONNECTIONS

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
22
Except for a few small prosperous areas, poverty became widespread 
throughout the region. Only Athens, located high atop a rocky outcrop, 
seems to have escaped large-scale destruction.
The Beginning of Archaic Greece
Greek peoples spread out across the Aegean Sea to Asia Minor. Their 
population had already shrunk, and no written records exist from that 
time. But, through songs or stories told aloud, the Greeks held on to their 
legends about King Agamemnon, Odysseus and Achilles, and the gods 
who helped them defeat the Trojans. These stories were a semi-historical 
memory of what Greeks believed about their past. They gave the early 
Greeks, who were so scattered geographically, a sense of unity. 
The Dark Age ended at about the same time as the Greeks devel-
oped the technology to make iron tools. This was important because 
the stronger tools improved agricultural output. Gradually, prosperity 
began to return. 
Burial sites from the ninth century, or 800s b.c.e., show increasing 
signs of material wealth. One Greek woman’s grave dating from about 
850 b.c.e. contained gold jewelry with the same designs as jewelry from 
the Near East. This means the Greeks had resumed trading with the 
Near East. 
In the eighth century b.c.e., cities began to appear again, as Greeks 
and others around the Mediterranean slowly recovered from the dis-
order of the previous centuries. Historians refer to the period of Greek 
history between the end of the Dark Age and the beginning of the Clas-
sical era of the 400s b.c.e. as the Archaic period. It lasted from about 
750 to 500 b.c.e.
By the 700s b.c.e., one military event signaled the end of the Dark 
Age in many ways. A battle was fought on the large island of Euboea 
in the Aegean Sea between the city-states of Eretria and Chalkis. The 
two armies were fighting over rich farmland. The island-city of Mile-
tus aided Eretria, while Samos was allied with Chalkis. Most of those 
fighting were soldiers who traveled on foot, not on horseback. Painted 
pottery from that time shows soldiers with helmets topped with crests, 
spears, and round shields. 
The battle was a perfect example of the new era because it marked 
a big change from the older style of warfare, where the officers were 
aristocrats who fought on horseback or chariots (two-wheeled carts 
A Hero’s Heel
According to Homer, the 
Greek hero Achilles had 
just one weakness—his 
great pride. Later, Roman 
writers added to the 
story of Achilles, say-
ing he had a weak spot 
on his body—his heel. 
As a baby, his mother 
supposedly dipped him 
in the River Styx, which 
flowed through the Greek 
underworld of Hades. 
The waters protected 
his body from injury. But 
since Achilles’ mother 
held him by his heel as 
she dipped him, that one 
spot on his body was 
vulnerable to attack. 
He died when an arrow 
struck his heel. 
In English, the phrase 
Achilles heel refers to a 
person’s one great weak-
ness, either physical, 
mental, or moral. And the 
human body has a strong 
tissue called the Achilles 
tendon that connects 
muscles in the calf to the 
bone of the heel.

23
T h e  B e g i n n i n g s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e
pulled by horses). The battle also reflected a scene that would be played 
out over and over among the Greeks in the next few hundred years: 
A Greek city-state’s army of heavily armed foot soldiers fighting with 
allies against another Greek city-state over farmland. 
In this section of the Illiad, Achilles is mourn-
ing over the death of Patroclus, his best 
friend, who was killed in battle. He was also 
wearing Achilles’ armor at the time, so now 
the great warrior has none. Achilles’ mother, 
Thetis, is a sea nymph (a mythical spirit). To 
comfort her son, she has the god Hepha-
estus make him a new suit of armor. (The 
Myrmidons are the Thessalian people, who 
were led by Achilles.)
She found her beloved son lying face  
down,
embracing Patroclus’ body, sobbing, 
wailing,
and round him crowded troops of morn-
ing comrades.
And the glistening goddess moved among 
them now,
seized Achilles’ hand and urged him, 
spoke his name:
“My child, leave your friend to lie there 
dead—
we must, though it breaks our hearts . . . 
But here, Achilles, accept this glorious 
armor, look,
a gift from the god of fire—burnished 
bright, finer
than any mortal has ever borne across 
his back!”
Urging, the goddess laid the armor down 
at Achilles’ feet
and the gear clashed out in all its bla-
zoned glory.
A tremor ran through all the Myrmidon 
ranks—none dared
to look straight at the glare, each fighter 
shrank away.
Not Achilles. The more he gazed, the 
deeper his anger went,
his eyes flashing under his eyelids, fierce 
as fire—
exulting, holding the god’s shining gift in 
his hands.
And once he’d thrilled his heart with look-
ing hard 
at the armor’s well-wrought beauty
he turned to his mother, winged words 
flying:
“Mother—armor sent by the god—you’re 
right,
only important gods could forge such work, 
not many on earth could ever bring it off! 
Now, by heaven, I’ll arm and go to 
war.”
(Source: Homer, The Illiad, Translated by 
Robert Fagles, New York: Penguin Group, 
1990.)
Achilles’ Armor 
In Their Own Words

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
24
During this time, Homer’s epic poems, the Iliad and the Odys-
sey, were written down in their present form. They had been preserved 
through an oral tradition—telling the story for an audience—for gen-
erations. These stories gave all Greeks, whatever their city-state, a proud 
past of heroes and gods. They also gave Western civilization its earliest 
literature. 
Another important writer from that time was Hesiod. His work 
Theogony told the Greeks that their history went back to the begin-
nings of the universe and gave them detailed information about their 
gods. Some elements of those myths might have come from people who 
moved to the area during the Dark Age. But mostly, they were the old 
Mycenaean legends. Temples dedicated to the Greek gods were built at 
Delphi and Olympia in northern Greece and on the island of Delos. At 
Olympia, a temple was dedicated to Zeus, who was known as the father 
of gods and men. It was here that the first athletic contests were held 
in Zeus’s honor—the Olympic games. The first games are believed to 
have been held in 776 b.c.e., and athletes from all over Greece attended. 
The games held at Olympia were a clear indication that even though 
the Greeks were scattered geographically, they maintained a common 
identity. 
Starting New Colonies 
As people became more settled and prosperity slowly returned, the 
Greeks began to send people out to form colonies. (A colony is an area 
The remains of the site of 
the ancient Olympic games 
still stand in Olympia in 
Greece.

25
that is under the political control of another country and is occupied 
by settlers from that country.) Mainland Greece is about 75 percent 
mountains. While olive trees and grapes grow successfully in Greece’s 
thin soil, it has few good areas for growing grains such as wheat 
and corn. As a city-state’s population outgrew its arable (farmable) 
land, colonization was one solution to the potential problem of food 
shortages. 
The first colonists were sent to Cumae in southern Italy in about 
750 b.c.e. Corinth’s colony at Syracuse on the island of Sicily was 
established in 734 b.c.e., and would eventually become as significant 
as Corinth itself. Within 200 years, hundreds of Greek city-states and 
their colonies were in place from the western end of the Mediterranean 
Sea in modern-day Italy, France, and Spain, to the eastern end on the 
island of Cyprus. There were Greek settlements on Africa’s north coast, 
around the Black Sea, and in Asia Minor.
By sending out colonies, overpopulation on the mainland was 
relieved, additional markets for Greek goods were created, and new 
Greek ports were established for all the trading that occurred around 
the Mediterranean. Sometimes colonists went willingly, sometimes 
they did not. 
Some colonies were founded peacefully, and wives were easily found 
among neighboring populations. But sometimes it was more challeng-
ing. Land had to be fought for and wives perhaps kidnapped from 
among the area’s natives. And sometimes a colony no longer wanted a 
connection with the mother city. The island colony of Corcyra (modern 
Corfu), for example, often had a rebellious relationship with its found-
ing city-state, Corinth. 
Before any group of colonists was sent out, the gods were consulted 
to make sure this was the right decision. Most often, Apollo’s advice 
was sought at Delphi, where the gods were believed to speak through 
priestesses, sometimes called oracles. 
Sparta and Athens established relatively few colonies. Instead, they 
conquered the land around them. Sparta conquered a southern area of 
the Peloponnese called Laconia and enslaved the neighboring people of 
Messenia. Athens grew into the large urban center of Attica by taking 
over all the surrounding land. Sparta’s only colony, in Italy, was formed 
to send away a large group of illegitimate males (boys born to women 
whose husbands were away at war).
T h e  B e g i n n i n g s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e
Rounding Up 
Colonists 
In about 630 b.c.e., the 
residents of Thera, an 
island city-state, started 
the colony of Cyrene in 
what is today Libya in 
northern Africa. Thera 
had gone through several 
years of drought and 
could no longer support 
its population. According 
to an inscription found 
in Thera, the god Apollo, 
who was consulted 
through the oracle at Del-
phi, declared that it was 
necessary for people to 
leave and form the colony.
The inscription makes 
it clear that leaving 
one’s hometown was 
not always voluntary. 
Any man from Thera 
who was chosen to 
leave faced death, the 
inscription read, if he did 
not cooperate. Anyone 
caught hiding a chosen 
colonist also faced the 
death penalty. If, after 
five years, the move 
proved to be too difficult, 
colonists could return 
home. But the colony’s 
efforts were fruitful 
and Cyrene became an 
important source of grain 
for the Greeks. 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
26
City-States and Their Rulers
The old villages and towns of the Mycenean era and the Dark Age began 
to develop into Greek city-states in the eighth century b.c.e. A typical 
city-state had an urban core, then spread out to include as much of the 
surrounding farmland as the city-state could control. Most city-states 
eventually bumped up against the outer boundaries of another city-state. 
As the Dark Age passed, the city-states’ kings gave way to councils 
of rulers from the cities’ wealthier families. This form of government 
is called oligarchy, and it was unusual among the ancient civilizations. 
Sparta was a major exception, and had two kings. 
Athens was among the oldest of the poleis, the plural of the Greek 
word for city-state. It is thought that sometime in the 700s b.c.e., several 
villages combined to form Athens, which is a few miles from a good sea-
port, Piraeus. Originally, all of Athens was on a high, flat hilltop—an easy 
spot to defend. But, like other city-states, as the population grew so did 
the city. Athens spread out around its hilltop, called Acropolis. The very 
top of the Acropolis became the location for its religious buildings. 
As an important trade center, Athens came to control Attica, a nar-
row peninsula (50 miles across at the widest point) north of the Pelopon-
nese Peninsula. Attica, with Athens as its urban core, was in the right 
spot for success. To its north were protective mountains, and its other 
sides were bounded by water (except for a thin strip of land at Corinth). 
Because Athens was close to the sea, it became a major trade center and 
also a starting and receiving point for new ideas and cultural exchanges. 
Other significant city-states to emerge included Corinth, which 
was the commercial center of Greece in the 600s b.c.e. Corinth had two 
good ports, and its fine pottery was much in demand around the Medi-
terranean. Thebes became a large city-state in the lush farmlands of 
Boeotia, the region north of Attica. Inland Sparta conquered the lower 
half of the Peloponnese Peninsula and was also a powerful city-state. 
Many Greek city-states shared a number of common traits, often 
based on their size. But Sparta stood apart in its form of government 
and its social structure. Many of its customs and practices seem shock-
ing to modern people. But in its day it was a powerhouse that inspired 
fear and also admiration because of its devotion to discipline. 
Sparta was formed when a few smaller villages combined to make 
a city-state. In two long wars during the eighth and seventh centu-
ries b.c.e., ending in 630 b.c.e., this new city-state conquered and 
enslaved the people of a large area of the southern Peloponnese called 
Make Sure to Ask 
The Right Questions
The Greeks’ oracle at 
Delphi, who interpreted 
messages from the god 
Apollo, was famous 
beyond the borders of 
Greece. In the sixth cen-
tury b.c.e., various nations 
were fighting over land 
belonging to the Medians 
in Anatolia, across the 
Aegean Sea from Greece. 
Both the Persian Empire 
under King Cyrus, and 
Croesus, the wealthy 
king of Lydia in Anatolia, 
wanted to expand their 
kingdoms. But before 
Croesus went up against 
the strong Persian forces, 
he traveled to Delphi to 
consult with the oracle. 
If he attacked Persia, 
Croesus was told, a 
great kingdom would be 
destroyed. Confident now 
that he would be victori-
ous, Croesus’s army 
advanced against the 
Persians—with disas-
trous results. He did not 
gain the Median land, and 
he lost his own kingdom 
to Cyrus. The Persians, 
now his rulers, allowed 
Croesus to return to Del-
phi to express outrage at 
the advice he was given. 
Croesus learned that he 
should have asked which 
great kingdom would be 
destroyed.

27
Messenia. The Spartans made 
Messenians serfs—agricultural 
workers who must work for a 
particular master, who owns 
the land. These former neigh-
bors-turned-serfs were known 
as helots—a class of people 
who were not quite slaves but 
also were not citizens. The hel-
ots actually outnumbered the 
citizens of Sparta, and they 
always looked for opportuni-
ties to revolt. In response, Sparta became a strictly military society, 
primarily to keep watch over the large helot population. 
the tyrants
By the 500s b.c.e., colonization had slowed because much of the avail-
able land around the Mediterranean region had been claimed. The pop-
ulations of Greek city-states began to increase again, as did the number 
of working poor. Most Greek city-states granted citizenship to all their 
free-born males, but that did little to lift poorer citizens out of poverty. 
Farmers awaiting their harvest might be forced to borrow money or 
food that had to be repaid when their crops came in. 
On the other end of the economic scale, the aristocracy, which 
owned the best or the most land (often both), was joined by a new class 
that grew rich from commerce. Some of these newly wealthy people, 
and some members of the aristocracy who genuinely believed the social 
system needed reform, seized the chance to take power. 
These new leaders were called tyrants. Although today that word is 
used to describe a merciless ruler, it was not necessarily a negative label 
at first. The tyrants tried to give the people what they needed, because 
they needed support from the city’s population—especially the new 
type of soldiers known as hoplites. 
Except for Sparta, city-states did not have professional armies. All 
men from ages 18 to 60 (including foreigners living in the city) were 
expected to serve in the army whenever they were needed. The typical 
Greek hoplite was most likely a farmer who owned enough land—per-
haps several acres that he worked alongside a couple of slaves—so 
that he could buy the necessary gear to be a soldier. Because the more 
t h e  B e g i n n i n g s  o f  c l a s s i c a l  g r e e c e
Welcome to the Polis
the greek word for a city-state is polis. this is where we get 
the English words politics and metropolis, and modern city 
names such as minneapolis and Indianapolis. Pol is used as 
a suffix for foreign cities too, such as Sebastopol in russia. 
polis is also the source of such words as police and polity, 
which means a political organization. 
CONNECTIONS

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
28
successful Greek citizen-farmers were also soldiers and were essential 
for defense of their city-state, they had an increasingly powerful voice 
in the government. So, in a city-state such as Athens or Corinth, the 
successful tyrant was one who had support of the local hoplites. 
In return for this support, a tyrant often helped the poorer classes 
by building large public works projects (often with wealth taken from the 
former rulers), such as city walls or new temples. These projects offered 
employment for many people. Sometimes the tyrants went a step further 
and reformed existing laws to make the justice system more balanced.
Athens was an exception. In Athens, if the harvest was bad in a 
particular year, poor land-owning peasants might be forced to sell 
themselves into slavery to pay their debts. While other city-states 
managed to find ways to balance the interests of the rich and poor, 
in Athens the rich refused to give up any of their wealth and power. 
Eventually, conflict between poorer classes demanding justice and the 
wealthy demanding payment led to threats of civil war. This, in turn, 
led to the most radical reform, Athenian democracy.
The Hoplites
The rise of tyrants in the bigger city-states came about at the same 
time the hoplites emerged. By the 600s b.c.e., hoplites were common 
This ceramic container 
from about 500 b.c.e. 
shows a scene with 
hoplites. Hoplites were 
highly skilled, armored 
warriors. They were also 
part-time, volunteer 
soldiers, and therefore had 
some influence over public 
policy. If they were not 
satisfied with what their 
leaders did, they would not 
fight.

29
in city-state armies. The hop-
lite soldier was outfitted with 
a bronze helmet and breast-
plate, a broad, heavy shield, 
and an iron-tipped spear up 
to eight feet long. The shield 
had a distinctive double grip: 
The soldier put his whole arm 
through a band that ran across 
the center, and then held 
another small hand grip at the 
edge. This took all the weight 
off the wrist, and enabled him 
to hold up the heavy shield 
with one arm. 
Hoplites were extremely 
effective in battle. They marched in a very tight formation called a 
phalanx. Each soldier’s shield overlapped the shield of the soldier next 
to him, leaving few places for enemy weapons to penetrate. The hoplites 
were difficult to stop as long as they stayed in their phalanx formation.
Altogether the hoplite carried and wore about 40 pounds of 
equipment in battle, which he paid for himself. The hoplite enjoyed 
a higher status than the traditional soldier, who perhaps had just a 
sword, or an archer who used a bow and arrows. Archers, for example, 
used their weapons from afar and avoided the close-up warfare the 
hoplites faced. Because less courage was required, the archers gained 
less status. Archers and other light-armed soldiers were also assumed 
to be of a lower economic class, since they could not afford the bronze 
hoplite armor. 
In his book The Wars of the Ancient Greeks, author and classics 
scholar Victor Davis Hanson describes a likely encounter between 
two companies of hoplites, each representing a city-state or a con-
federation of city-states. The front rows of each company marched 
toward one another, each trying to remain in their phalanx while 
they broke up the formation of the other. Holding their 15-pound 
shields at chest height for protection, they used their spears against 
the enemy as the lines began to stumble or break apart. All of this was 
done under a blazing Mediterranean sun as the hoplites struggled in 
their bronze protective gear amid clouds of dust, with the bodies 
t h e  B e g i n n i n g s  o f  c l a s s i c a l  g r e e c e
The Spartan Tradition
Sparta had a rigidly structured society that was dedicated 
to warfare. the name of this greek city-state led to the Eng-
lish word spartan, which has several meanings. It can refer 
to something that is plain and simple, rather than luxurious 
or fancy. people can be called spartan if they show tremen-
dous self-discipline or deny themselves the finer things in 
life. High schools and colleges sometimes nickname their 
athletes the Spartans, reflecting the courage and skill Spar-
tan warriors showed in battle. 
CONNECTIONS

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
30
of wounded and dead piling up around them. Greek city-states had 
frequent battles with one another over boundaries or other land con-
trol issues. A city-state did not hesitate to go to war to acquire more 
farmland if it would mean keeping the population fed. But although 
war was a common fact of life, large battles between Greeks in the 
Archaic period were unusual. Battles tended to be brief, perhaps 
The poet Tyrtaeus wrote the first description 
of the phalanx in a piece about the Second 
Messenian War, which probably took place 
in the last third of the seventh century b.c.e. 
(The dates and details of Tyrtaeus’s life are 
not clear. He seems to have been a Spartan, 
or at least to be living in Sparta.) Here, Tyr-
taeus emphasizes how important it is to stay 
in formation.
For those who, standing shoulder to 
shoulder, dare to come to close quarters 
and to fight among the foremost, fewer 
die and they preserve those behind 
them. All of the courage of cowards is 
dissipated. . . . Let each shake the mighty 
spear in his right hand and the frightening 
crest upon his head. Let each learn by 
practice to do the mighty deeds of war 
and not stand outside the range of the 
missiles with shield in hand. Rather 
everyone should close up to his man with 
his great spear or sword and wound or 
kill his enemy. Standing leg to leg, resting 
shield against shield, crest beside crest, 
and helmet to helmet having drawn near, 
let him fight his man with his sword or 
great spear. 
Tyrtaeus obviously admired the courage 
of the hoplites who fight in the phalanx. 
He also said their courage in keeping in 
formation meant fewer of them are killed. 
But not everyone agreed. The Greek histo-
rian Herodotus (484–425 b.c.e.) attributed 
this passage to the Persian general Mardo-
nius. In it, Mardonius criticized the way the 
Greeks fight in tight formations, out in the 
open. He said more of them die this way.
Furthermore, I hear that the Greeks are 
accustomed to stirring up war in the most 
ill-advised way through their foolishness 
and stupidity. When they declare war on 
one another they find the best and flattest 
piece of land and go there and fight. The 
result is that the victors depart with heavy 
losses; about the losers I can’t begin to 
say—they’re utterly destroyed.
(Source: Tyrtaeus quoted in Sage, Michael M., 
Warfare in Ancient Greece: A Sourcebook. 
Florence, Ky.: Routledge, 1996; Herodotus 
quoted in Dewald, Carolyn, and John 
Marincola, The Cambridge Companion to 
Herodotus. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press, 2006.)
The Phalanx 
In Their Own Words

31
lasting only an afternoon. This limited casualties and damage to the 
farmland they were defending or trying to acquire. 
Strict discipline was the key to a successful hoplite army, and 
nobody practiced discipline better than the Spartans. Sparta, unlike 
all the other Greek city-states (1,500 of them), developed into an 
entirely military state in the Archaic period. Its professional hoplite 
soldiers were the most formidable in Greece. In fact, Spartan disci-
pline was so tight that the system of government remained the same 
over many centuries. Rebellion against authority was considered 
un-Spartan.
Athens Expands Rights for  
Poor Citizens
In Athens, a coup (overthrow of the government) was attempted in 
632 b.c.e. by a wealthy Olympic champion named Cylon. The attempt 
failed, but a decade later the ruling aristocrats squabbled among them-
selves and Athens seemed ready for another coup. Around 620 b.c.e., 
the aristocrats appointed Draco (dates unknown) to lead the city, with 
the hope that he would restore order. 
Draco’s rule in Athens was so harsh that even minor offenses could 
result in the death penalty. (His name is the root of our English word 
draconian, which means excessively harsh and severe laws.) Draco was 
also the first Athenian ruler to write down the laws in an official code, 
which meant the laws applied equally to all people, rich or poor. It also 
meant that after Draco’s term as appointed ruler ended, his harsh laws 
remained in effect. 
Under Draco’s laws, rich landowners were able to take control of 
the property of any farmer who could not repay the money he borrowed 
for farming or food. More and more poor farmers in rural Attica out-
side Athens were set against wealthy landowners. 
As suffering among the lower classes increased, civil war seemed a 
possibility. The ruling oligarchy chose Solon (ca. 630–ca. 560 b.c.e.) to 
be chief lawgiver in 594 b.c.e., with the authority to make reforms in the 
city’s government. Solon was the logical choice for the position: He was 
born into the aristocratic class but was not personally wealthy. He was 
an intellectual and a poet. 
He also sought a fairer balance between Athenian society’s rich 
and poor. Solon restored to the poor control of land that had been taken 
T h e  B e g i n n i n g s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
32
in payment for debts. All peasants who had sold themselves into slavery 
for being in debt were freed. Use of the death penalty was primarily 
reserved for the crime of murder. 
More importantly, any male citizen could use the courts to seek 
justice for a wrongdoing. The idea was born that political power for 
a broader range of male citizens and justice for all Athenian citizens 
should be part of the law. Although Solon was only in power for a year, 
he remained a deeply respected figure among Greeks in the centuries 
that followed.
But in spite of his improvements and a bustling economy, poverty 
was still widespread. Tension among the city’s poor ran high. It was 
time for Athens’s first tyrant.
Pisistratus (d. 527 b.c.e.) was a respected army commander who 
seized power in 560 b.c.e. His rule over Athens was firm by 546 b.c.e. 
Pisistratus left Solon’s reforms in place, and further appealed to Ath-
ens’s poor by starting public works projects to provide employment. 
When Pisistratus died, his son Hippias (d. 490 b.c.e.) assumed 
leadership. Under Hippias, one of Athens’s leading families, the Alc-
maeonids, appealed to Sparta for help in removing him from office. 
The Spartans were glad to help. Then one of the Alcmaeonids, Cleis-
thenes (ca. 570–ca. 500 b.c.e.), assumed leadership of Athens.
Cleisthenes, who was from the same aristocratic family as Solon, 
firmly set Athens in the direction of democracy when he came to power 
in 508 b.c.e. He created an assembly of citizens with real power. This 
concept was unique in the ancient world. Many aristocrats believed it 
was dangerous to let the ordinary people have a voice in government.
Across the Aegean Sea, Ionian Greeks had more than inter-city 
squabbles or would-be tyrants to deal with. They had become subjects 
of the Lydian king, Croesus (d. ca. 546 b.c.e.). The newly-formed Per-
sian Empire, founded in 550 b.c.e. by Cyrus the Elder (ca. 585–ca. 529 
b.c.e.), defeated Croesus’s army in 547 b.c.e. Anatolia and Ionia then 
became part of the Persian Empire.
In the next 25 years Cyrus added Egypt and Babylonia to his 
empire. He was followed by Darius I (r. 520–486 b.c.e.), who contin-
ued to expand the Persian Empire’s boundaries, Darius got a few steps 
closer to mainland Greece when he defeated Thrace, a region northeast 
of Greece along the Aegean Sea. But the mainland of Greece remained 
independent.

33
Not long after the rule of Cleisthenes, however, Athens was faced 
with a challenge to provide leadership. The Persian Empire had finally 
set its sights on Greece. The independence of all the Greek city-states 
was now at stake.
T h e  B e g i n n i n g s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e


35
35
AT THE DAWN OF THE FIFTH CENTURY b.c.e., ATHENS WAS 
in position to become the leading city-state of Greece. Its seaport was 
always busy—a sign of its prosperity. Athens pulled ahead of Corinth, 
to the west, as the biggest trade center in the region. Foreigners (pri-
marily people from other city-states) went to Athens to share in that 
success, even though they could not enjoy Athenian citizenship. 
Major Athenian exports included olive oil produced from olives 
grown in the Attic countryside. The distinctive pottery of Athens, 
made from the local reddish-orange clay and decorated with black 
glaze, became a valuable export, and Athens overtook Corinth as the 
leading exporter of pottery. Slaves were also an important trading 
“product” in ancient commerce centers. 
the persian wars
With mainland Greece free from foreign interference, Athens grew 
large enough to fight off attacks from Sparta, its primary rival. It 
continued its experiment with representative forms of government. 
This was a time when other Greek city-states were losing their inde-
pendence. The island of Sicily, which was home to several city-states, 
endured many attacks from the Phoenician city-state of Carthage, 
located just across the Mediterranean in North Africa. To the east, 
Ionian Greek city-states came under the rule of the Lydians, until all 
of Anatolia fell to Persia’s king Darius I. Darius’s Persian Empire was 
centered in the Near East and stretched from Egypt to present-day 
Afghanistan.
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE
O P P O S I T e
The massive Acropolis still 
looms over the modern 
cityscape of Athens. The 
Acropolis was a huge 
temple complex. The 
Parthenon is part of this 
complex.
C H A P T E R  2

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
36
Athens became his target early in 
the fifth century b.c.e. Ionian Greeks 
rebelled against the Persian Empire in 
499 b.c.e. Athens and Eretria sent mili-
tary aid. Darius quickly regained control 
of Ionia, and now had a good excuse to 
invade mainland Greece and add it to 
his empire.
It appeared to be an easy task. The 
Greek world was very small compared 
to the Persian Empire. Although Darius 
sent only 20,000 to 30,000 soldiers—a 
relatively small force—it was still more 
than double the number of Greeks who 
eventually faced them. The Persian army 
arrived first at Eretria on the island of 
Euboea in 490 b.c.e. They burned the 
city-state as punishment for helping in 
the Ionian revolt.
From there, Marathon offered a 
good landing spot on the Greek main-
land, because it was flat and was close 
to Athens. An Athenian army of 10,000 
hoplites marched to the coast to meet 
the Persians. They were joined by 1,000 
hoplites from the small city-state of Plataea. When the Persians 
appeared to be ready for battle, Athenian general Miltiades (ca. 554–
ca. 489 b.c.e.) encouraged the Greeks to make the first move. The 
hoplites marched in phalanxes into the Persians’ formation. Although 
they were greatly outnumbered, the Athenians maneuvered their 
troops to trap the Persians between a swamp and the sea. Their heavy 
armor protected them from Persian arrows and they fought with their 
long spears. 
Expecting an attack on Athens to follow, the Greek army quickly 
marched more than 20 miles from Marathon back to Athens. But the 
Persians turned for home. The Greek historian Herodotus reported 
that the Persians lost 6,400 men, while the Athenians counted 192 dead 
and the Plataeans had even fewer. Although those figures may be exag-
gerated, they demonstrate the effectiveness of hoplite warfare. 
On this vase a Persian 
(left) and an Athenian 
warrior are shown in 
battle. The many Greek 
city-states united for the 
first time to defeat the 
invading Persians.

37
Darius planned another attack, but he died in 486 b.c.e., leaving 
his son Xerxes (ca. 519–465 b.c.e.) to take revenge for the defeat. It took 
several more years for the Persian Empire to return. This time they 
brought 75,000 to 100,000 soldiers. However, the Persians faced a more 
united Greece. The Greek infantry, led by Spartan king Leonidas (d. 
480 b.c.e.), numbered about 70,000 hoplites and about as many light-
armed troops. As Xerxes’ army made its way around the Aegean Sea 
in 480 b.c.e., the king correctly assumed that the smaller Greek city-
states would surrender without a fight. The Greeks planned to meet the 
Persians with a big force in east-central Greece at a 50-foot-wide pass 
called Thermopylae. 
Thermopylae was squeezed between cliffs and the sea. The Greek 
hoplites delayed the huge Persian army at this narrow pass for two days. 
Then a Greek traitor showed the Persians a little-known way around the 
pass and the Greeks were surprised from behind. Knowing they were 
now beaten, Leonidas and a force of slightly more than 300 hoplites, 
mostly Spartans, remained at Thermopylae to fight. Their plan was to 
delay the Persians while the rest of the Greek army retreated to defend 
the city-states to the south. Leonidas and his men were greatly outnum-
bered and had no hope of winning the battle. But if they could delay the 
Persians long enough, their main force could move into a better position 
to protect the rest of Greece. These brave Spartans, including Leonidas, 
fought until the last man was dead. They have an honored place in Greek 
legend and military history for continuing to delay an army many times 
their number. 
The Athenians expected an attack and abandoned their city. The 
Persians then destroyed it—even the temples atop the Acropolis. Then 
another narrow pass, this time at sea, led to the Persians’ defeat. Athens 
had the advantage because they had a large fleet of warships. Just before 
the Persians’ second trip to Athens in 480 b.c.e., a rich deposit of silver 
had been discovered at Laurium in southern Attica. The Athenians 
used this wealth to build a fleet of several hundred triremes. 
The Athenian warship, the trireme, was developed about the same 
time the hoplite soldier became common, around 600 b.c.e. It was 
most likely based on ship designs of the Phoenicians, who were expert 
sailors. The boat was long and narrow so it could move quickly and 
was easy to maneuver. The ships weighed up to 2,200 pounds and were 
powered by 170 oarsmen arranged in three rows, which is how the ship 
got its name—treis is Greek for “three.” The oarsmen rowed together, 
T h e  A t h e n i a n  E m p i r e
300 Spartans
The popular 2007 movie 
The 300 retells the 
story of the Battle of 
Thermopylae. The film 
relates the main story, 
but adds many fantasy 
and magical characters. 
Despite this, some his-
torians agreed that the 
basic facts of the film 
were surprisingly close 
to Herodotus’s account 
of the battle. That was 
especially true of the 
heroic military attitudes 
of the Spartans. The 
movie starred Gerard But-
ler as Leonidas and was 
directed by Zack Snyder.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
38
using the beat of a gong or a drum to keep the rhythm. The oarsmen 
rowed at a speed of up to 18 beats per minute. 
The trireme had a ramming “beak”—a battering ram made of oak 
and reinforced with a bronze cap that stuck out from the bow at water 
level. (A battering ram is a heavy object swung or rammed against 
something to break it down.) The rowers sent the trireme into an enemy 
ship, making a hole in the hull.
At the time the trireme was developed, the Greeks fought primarily 
on land and naval warfare was rare. But 100 years later, it saved their 
civilization.
Under the leadership of Themosticles (ca. 524–459 b.c.e.), the 
Athenian fleet faced 400 to 500 Persian ships off the Greek coast just 
north of Athens. The triremes proved to be the better ships and much 
of Xerxes’ fleet was destroyed. The Persian ships then turned around, 
leaving a still-large army behind in Boeotia. The Spartans led a success-
ful defense effort there at Plataea, while Athens continued to chase the 
Persian fleet. The Persians were forced home. Once again, they were 
defeated by an enemy they greatly underestimated.
The key to this military victory was Greek unity. When they were 
faced with the threat of being ruled by a foreign power, 31 independent 
Greek city-states came together to fight a common enemy. It was the 
This plaster cast shows a 
team of oarsmen working 
in a Greek trireme—a 
ship with three rows of 
oarsmen. Greek ships were 
fast and easy to maneuver, 
and the Greeks were 
excellent sailors.

39
first time in their history that 
they acted as a united group. 
Even more remarkable was the 
cooperation between Athens and 
Sparta, each of which normally 
viewed the other as an enemy. Ath-
ens and Sparta continued their 
alliance long enough to drive out 
the remaining Persians from Ionia, 
Anatolia, and northern Greece.
Athenian leaders were now 
convinced of the effectiveness of 
trireme warfare. They proposed 
forming and leading a league of 
city-states to build an even stronger 
navy, because everyone in Greece 
assumed the Persians would even-
tually return. The Greek historian 
Thucydides (d. ca. 401 b.c.e.) wrote 
in his History of the Peloponnesian 
War that the leaders of Sparta were 
glad to let the Athenians take on 
that responsibility. 
The naval alliance was orga-
nized and dominated by Athens. 
It consisted of the city-states that 
were most in danger of Persian 
attack: those in Ionia and on the islands in the Aegean Sea. Larger city-
states contributed triremes and their crews, while smaller ones com-
bined their resources to provide wealth or one ship. The alliance was 
called the Delian League, because the money was kept at the temple of 
Apollo on the island of Delos. (City and other treasuries often were kept 
at a temple where, it was believed, the god would protect them.)
from leaGUe to empire
Athens was a natural center for the Delian League. The city had 
shipyards to build triremes and it had a lot of urban poor people who 
needed jobs, such as rowing the ships. One trireme provided work for 
t h e  A t h e n i a n  E m p i r e
After the persians destroyed the religious buildings atop 
the Acropolis, Athenians allowed the rubble to remain as 
a reminder of what they had suffered and how they had 
defeated a powerful foe. But as the second half of the 
century began, pericles began rebuilding the Acropolis. 
A new temple to Athena was planned to replace the first 
temple to Athena, Athena polias (“guardian of the city”). 
the parthenon (“house of the virgin goddess”) was much 
grander in size, design, and decoration and was under 
construction for 15 years. 
pericles’ enemies complained about how expensive 
the project was. But it employed builders, artists, and 
other craftsmen—helping to maintain pericles’ political 
power. It also was a proud declaration of the special rela-
tionship the people of Athens believed they enjoyed with 
the goddess Athena, and of the greatness of Athens. By 
building the parthenon, Athenians announced for all to 
see that Athena approved of her city’s strength in defeat-
ing the persian Empire. 
The Parthenon

E m p i r E  o f  A n C i E n T  G r E E C E
40
170 lower-class paid oarsmen. In addition to rowers, each trireme car-
ried about 30 soldiers—a few officers and the rest hoplites. 
Over time, the other city-states in the Delian League mainly con-
tributed money to the military effort. The treasury of the league was 
moved to Athens, which now had a lot of money to spend. Even though it 
eventually became clear that the Persians were not returning to Greece, 
military representatives were quick to visit any city-state that tried to pull 
out of the league. For example, when the island city-state of Thasos tried 
to withdraw, Athenian triremes arrived to enforce its membership. 
By the 470s b.c.e., the Delian League had become an Athenian 
Empire. Athens had built and now commanded more than 300 tri-
remes. It was very expensive to maintain such a large force. But Athens 
was taking in large amounts of money from its silver mines and from 
the league, which had more than 150 members at its peak. 
Sparta’s military might protected it from Athens. Sparta had 
formed its own alliance, the Peloponnesian League. The league kept 
peace on the Peloponnese Peninsula for more than a century. Neverthe-
less, the growing power of Athens was alarming to Sparta.
in The Wars of the Ancient Greeks, Victor 
Davis Hanson offers figures on how much 
Athens had to spend to become an empire. 
To build, equip, and staff one trireme cost 
between 10,000 and 12,000 drachmas, with 
one drachma being a day’s wage for the 
average working Athenian. Keeping 100 tri-
remes afloat and manned for one month cost 
1.4 million drachmas; at the height of the 
empire, Athens had as many as 300 triremes 
in its navy.
Compared to fighters on horseback, hop-
lites were a bargain, because a hoplite soldier 
spent his own money (about 200 drachmas) 
on his armor and equipment. The Athenian or 
Spartan government might expect to spend 
70,000 drachmas to keep 10,000 hoplites in 
the field for one week. one good war horse, 
on the other hand, could cost several hundred 
or even thousands of drachmas. 
At the outbreak of the peloponnesian War, 
Athens and its allies had 400 triremes. Sparta 
had none and its allies had 100. Sparta, as 
usual, preferred to invest in hoplites. it com-
manded 40,000 as the war began, while Ath-
ens commanded 23,000. 
The Cost of Greatness

41
classical athens
By the middle of the fifth century b.c.e., Athens saw itself as the lead-
ing city-state in Greece. Most of its neighbors agreed. The aristocrat 
Pericles (495–429 b.c.e.) came to power in 458 b.c.e. as one of 10 gener-
als elected by Athens’s General Assembly to be both military and civil 
leaders. Under Pericles’ guidance, the Athenian Empire reached its larg-
est size. Athenian democracy, which first budded under Solon’s rule, 
firmly established many individual rights that are still cherished today, 
including freedom of speech. 
Pericles made peace with the Persian Empire and also negoti-
ated a 30-year treaty with Sparta in the 440s b.c.e. There was always 
some small military action between Athens and its allies, or between 
Athens and Sparta’s allies, such as Corinth. But there were no major 
wars in the mid-fifth century b.c.e. and Pericles was able to turn all 
his attention upon Athens. The large sums of money provided by the 
Delian League and the Laurium silver mines was used to maintain a 
strong navy, but Athens’s big income also financed some democratic 
reforms. These included daily pay for men chosen to serve on a jury 
or in the assembly, as well as an extensive public building program. 
As Athens’s prosperity continued, people from other countries 
and city-states moved to the city to find work. Pericles was con-
cerned that these new arrivals would soon have too much influence. 
So he narrowed the qualifications for citizenship; now, both parents 
had to be born in Athens for a person to be a citizen. That made it 
impossible to marry an Athenian and gain citizenship. Pericles also 
expanded trade to the Black Sea area, from which grain and fish were 
imported. 
The Athenian navy employed tens of thousands of urban poor, 
and their support enabled Pericles to stay in power for nearly 20 years. 
Pericles and the democratic system had their enemies, though. Hand-
ing so much power over to the demos bothered many aristocrats, who 
did not trust the judgment of the ordinary people.
Yet, despite some conflict between the higher and lower classes, 
life in Athens in the mid-fifth century b.c.e. was good for most 
people. There was not a great economic divide between the rich and 
the poor. All male citizens were expected to participate in their own 
government. “Unlike any other community, we Athenians regard him 
who takes no part in these civic duties not as unambitious, but as 
useless,” said Pericles in a speech recorded by Thucydides. “In short, 
t h e  A t h e n i a n  E m p i r e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
42
I say that as a city we are the school of all Hellas” (as quoted in The 
Landmark Thucydides). 
Athens’s Angry Neighbors
The Classical age of Athens was not good for slaves or the city-
states that competed with Athens. Some city-states, such as Megara 
and Corinth, saw their trade ruined, or at least crowded out, by the 
expansion of Athens. Thebes, in the lush agricultural region of Boeo-
tia, resented the power Athens held over its neighbors. Sparta to the 
south was becoming alarmed at Athens’s growth and ambition. 
Corinth and other city-states on the Peloponnese Peninsula were 
under the control of Sparta, while Athens controlled lower Attica, 
Macedon, and Thrace in northern Greece, the large island of Euboea, 
and the coastal city-states of Ionia. Much of the conflict between 
Sparta and Athens in the 430s b.c.e. was sparked by their tendency 
to get involved in the affairs of one another’s allies. Sparta believed it 
needed to maintain strict control in order to continue dominating its 
large helot population. But Athens helped Corinth’s colony, Corcyra, 
when it clashed with its mother city. Then one of Athens’s unwilling 
allies, Potidaea, sought help from Corinth to rebel. 
Pericles put Athens on a path to war by refusing to negotiate any 
of these issues with Sparta. Twenty years after Pericles came to power, 
Spartan leaders no longer felt they could tolerate Athens’s unchecked 
growth. The 30-year treaty between Athens and Sparta was not even 15 
years old, but war was at hand. 
The Greeks had united to keep the Persian Empire from grabbing 
control of the mainland. Now they were about to fight each other in 
what would turn out to be much more than an afternoon battle over 
farmland. With the extensive system of allies each had developed—the 
Delian League and the Peloponnesian League—war between Athens 
and Sparta would mean war for much of Greece.
The Peloponnesian War
The Peloponnesian War began in 431 b.c.e., when Sparta attacked 
the Attica countryside. Although Athens faced a powerful enemy, 
it was surrounded by a sturdy wall that had been strengthened just 

43
after the Persian wars. Athens’s port, Piraeus, was a few miles away 
and was also walled. So was the road between Piraeus and Athens. 
The whole structure became known as “the long walls.” The 
walled road meant no enemy could starve the city by surrounding it. 
Athens had access to food through shipments coming into its port. 
And Piraeus was protected by the strong Athenian navy. 
The war was actually fought in phases. The first one lasted 
from 431 to 421 b.c.e. Five times during that period, Spartan forces 
attacked the Attica countryside, destroying crops. The rural residents 
took refuge within the already-crowded city of Athens. Spartan sol-
diers stayed for just a few weeks, because they were always afraid to 
leave their helots unguarded for too long. But in those few weeks they 
Greek historian Thucydides wrote The His-
tory of the Peloponnesian War. Thucydides 
was an Athenian officer. After he lost an 
important battle, he was sent away from 
Athens. He then spent time among the Spar-
tans and their allies, and was therefore able 
to observe both sides during the war.
In this excerpt, he describes how much 
Sparta and her allies wanted to go to war 
against Athens.
And if both sides nourished the boldest 
hopes and put forth their utmost strength 
for the war, this was only natural. Zeal 
[enthusiasm] is always at its height 
at the commencement [beginning] of 
an undertaking; and on this particular 
occasion the Peloponnesus and Athens 
were both full of young men whose 
inexperience made them eager to take 
up arms, while the rest of Hellas stood 
straining with excitement at the conflict of 
its leading cities. Everywhere predictions 
were being recited and oracles being 
chanted by such persons as collect them, 
and this not only in the contending cities. . 
. . Men’s feeling inclined much more to the 
Spartans, especially as they proclaimed 
themselves the liberators of Hellas. No 
private or public effort that could help them 
in speech or action was omitted; each 
thinking that the cause suffered wherever 
he could not himself see to it. So general 
was the indignation felt against Athens, 
whether by those who wished to escape 
from her empire, or were apprehensive 
of being absorbed by it. Such were the 
preparations and such the feelings with 
which the contest opened.
(Source: Strassler, Robert B., editor, The 
Landmark Thucydides: A Comprehensive 
Guide to the Peloponnesian War. New York: 
The Free Press, 1996.)
Ready to Go
In Their Own Words
T h e  A t h e n i a n  E m p i r e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
44
Athens and Sparta, and their many allies, squared off during the 
Peloponnesian War. This map, ca. 431–404 b.c.e., shows the loyalties of the 
many city-states and colonies in the Greek sphere of influence.

45
seriously damaged the countryside. Their plan was to draw the Attica 
hoplite farmers out from behind Athens’s walls for a fight. 
Although Attica did not have very fertile farmland, it had well-
established olive groves. The Spartan attacks destroyed olive crops that 
were ready for harvest, or sometimes the trees themselves. Olive trees 
Pericles used his very effective oratorical, or 
public speaking, skills to inspire the Athe-
nians. One of his most famous speeches was 
a funeral oration he gave honoring the Greek 
soldiers who died during the first phase of 
the Peloponnesian War. He also reminded 
the Greeks that more fighting lay ahead. The 
speech was recorded by Thucydides. After 
Pericles praised the accomplishments of long-
dead ancestors, he said:
Our constitution does not copy the laws 
of neighboring states; we are rather a 
pattern to others than imitators ourselves. 
Its administration favors the many 
instead of the few; this is why it is called 
a democracy. . . . The freedom which we 
enjoy in our government extends also to 
our ordinary life. There, far from exercising 
a jealous surveillance over each other, we 
do not feel called upon to be angry with 
our neighbor for doing what he likes, or 
even to indulge in those injurious looks 
which cannot fail to be offensive, although 
they inflict no real harm. 
For Athens alone of her contemporaries 
is found when tested to be greater than 
her reputation. . . . The admiration of 
the present and succeeding ages will be 
ours, since we have not left our power 
without witness, but have shown it by 
mighty proofs. . . . Such is the Athens 
for which these men , in the assertion 
of their resolve not to lose her, nobly 
fought and died; and well may every on 
of their survivors be ready to suffer in 
her cause.
Indeed if I have dwelt at some length upon 
the character of our country, it has been 
to show that our stake in the struggle is 
not the same as theirs who have no such 
blessings to lose. . . .
Modern historians believe this speech 
was an important influence for President 
Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) when he 
wrote the Gettysburg Address—a speech 
he gave at the dedication of a Civil War cem-
etery. Like Pericles, Lincoln looked back to 
the past as he remembered the successful 
American Revolution and honored the dead 
in a current war. And, like Pericles, Lincoln 
talked of “unfinished work,” since the war 
was not yet over. 
(Source: Strassler, Robert B., editor, The 
Landmark Thucydides: A Comprehensive 
Guide to the Peloponnesian War. New York: 
The Free Press, 1996.)
Honoring Fallen Soldiers
In Their Own Words
T h e  A t h e n i a n  E m p i r e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
46
take at least 10 years to bear fruit, and several more years to reach their 
productive peak. Destroying so many trees seriously limited the ability 
of Attica’s farmers to earn a living. 
In addition, Athens was now seriously crowded with refugees. 
The conditions inside the walls of the city encouraged the spread 
This is Alcibiades, an 
Athenian aristocrat and 
naval leader. During the 
Peloponnesian War, he 
switched sides and joined 
with Athens’s enemy, 
Sparta. Then he switched 
sides again and lead a key 
naval victory over Sparta.

47
of disease. By the second year of the war, plague swept through the 
packed streets. In 429 b.c.e., the plague killed Pericles himself, as well 
as many of the men who were needed to row the Athenian triremes. 
Still, Athens did not send out its hoplites to fight those of Sparta 
and its ally, Thebes. Both of Athens’s enemies had more and better 
armed infantry (soldiers who fight on foot). Instead, in 425 b.c.e., Ath-
ens had an important naval victory: Cleon (d. 422 b.c.e.), a prominent 
Athenian leader battle, captured the coastal Messinian city of Pylos 
and set large numbers of helots free. Athenian forces also captured 
nearly 300 Spartan hoplites, and told the Spartans they would all be 
killed if Sparta made any return visits to Attica. That kept Sparta out 
of Athenian territory for the remainder of this first phase of the war. 
Athens suffered a significant loss the next year, when its hop-
lites finally ventured out against both Theban and Spartan forces at 
Delium. In one day’s fighting, Athens lost more than 1,000 hoplites. 
Many of the Athenian survivors had to make a night-time run home, 
pursued by the enemy. Some of the Athenian hoplites (including the 
philosopher Socrates, whose bravery was remembered later by his 
pupil, Plato) continued to put up a fight as they were retreating.
In 422 b.c.e., both sides lost their top commanders in battle: Ath-
ens’s Cleon and Sparta’s Brasidas. After 10 years of fighting, Sparta had 
captured only a little territory in Attica and a temporary peace began 
in 421 b.c.e. But there was no real end to the war. Both city-states had 
leaders who only wanted to end the conflict when their enemy com-
pletely surrendered. 
Disaster in Sicily 
The years 415 to 413 b.c.e. were disastrous for Athens. At the center of 
the disaster was a young aristocratic politician named Alcibiades (450–
404 b.c.e.). At one time, he had been a member of Pericles’ household. 
Alcibiades was one of the survivors of the battle at Delium. 
Alcibiades urged the Athenian Assembly to send a naval force 
to Syracuse. This city-state was one of Corinth’s colonies, an ally of 
Sparta, and a rich and prosperous prize. Although Syracuse was 800 
miles away and was well-defended, Alcibiades’ arguments were tempt-
ing. So were Syracuse’s riches. 
The expedition was approved in 415 b.c.e., and Alcibiades was 
named to lead it. But on the day the ships set sail, dozens of statues of 
T h e  A t h e n i a n  E m p i r e
The City Walls 
The first wall around 
the city of Athens was 
built in the sixth century 
b.c.e. during the reign of 
Pisistratus (d. 527 b.c.e.). 
After the victory over the 
Persians, the walls were 
strengthened, suppos-
edly with the help of all 
the city’s men, women, 
and children. Most resi-
dents of the polis lived 
outside the city’s walls.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
48
Hermes were damaged. Hermes was the god with wings on his sandals 
who protected travelers and boundaries, among other duties. The dam-
aged statues had been scattered throughout the city, placed at street 
intersections as well as on the ships ready to set sail. The very religious 
Greeks would not commit such an anti-religious act without much 
anger behind it. It was considered an extremely bad omen (a sign that 
predicts the future). 
Alcibiades ordered the expedition to sail anyway. His enemies 
accused him of the serious crime of damaging the statues, and a ship 
was sent after him to bring him home to stand trial. Alcibiades then 
changed sides and joined Sparta. The remaining ships pushed on. But 
they suffered total defeat at Syracuse, which had its own navy. It also 
had help from the new Peloponnese fleet, which was funded by the 
Persian Empire. The famous Athenian fleet was destroyed and 40,000 
Athenian men were killed or enslaved. 
Athens was now at its weakest point since the war began. The Spar-
tans stationed a number of troops year-round near the city-state’s walls. 
With Athens’s defenses spread so thin, 20,000 Athenian slaves, many of 
them working in the Laurium silver mines on the southern tip of Attica, 
saw an opportunity to escape. They fled to the Spartans. This cut Athens 
off from much-needed income. Working for the Spartans now, Alcibiades 
went to Ionia and stirred up rebellion against Athens among her allies. 
A Peace Offer Is Rejected 
But Athens was not defeated yet. It had money set aside in the treasury 
at the Parthenon and drew on that to rebuild a fleet. It won some battles 
off the coast of Ionia. But within the city of Athens, a new problem 
arose: The ruling aristocrats were overthrown by a group of anti-demo-
cratic aristocrats who wanted to do away with the general assembly. 
Alcibiades was part of the plot, even though he was far away. He hoped 
that when power changed hands in Athens, he could return home. 
When Athens’s naval crews received news of the overthrow, they 
threatened to return home and restore the democratic government 
by force. A compromise council was formed. It offered to forgive any 
crimes against anyone who had been forced to leave. This included 
Alcibiades, who was still a highly-regarded military leader, even though 
he had betrayed Athens. 

49
Alcibiades resumed his position as the head of a rebuilt Athenian 
navy and enjoyed a victory over Sparta on the southern coast of the 
Black Sea. According to another Greek historian, Xenophon (428–354 
b.c.e.), the message sent home by a Spartan officer after that battle was 
typically spartan in its briefness: “Ships lost. Commander dead. Men 
starving. Do not know what to do” (as quoted by Thomas Martin in 
Ancient Greece: From Prehistoric to Hellenistic Times). 
After losing the battle, Sparta offered peace. But Athens rejected 
the offer. The Athenians wanted not just peace, but to conquer Sparta. 
Sparta needed money to continue the war, and gave the Persians per-
mission to retake western Anatolia in exchange for gold. Sparta’s rebuilt 
navy defeated Athens in battle and blocked food shipments to the Athe-
nian port of Piraeus. Athens finally surrendered in 404 b.c.e. Its days as 
a military power were over.
T h e  A t h e n i a n  E m p i r e


51
51
AT THE END OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, SPARTA TORE 
down Athens’s long walls and declared Greece to be free from the 
Delian League. Corinth pressed Sparta to completely destroy Athens, 
but the Spartans wanted to be sure a weaker Athens still existed as a 
balance to Corinth’s power. 
The Spartans established a new government in Athens—a group 
of leaders who came to be called the Thirty Tyrants. This group 
of wealthy aristocrats ruled just eight months, but their rule was 
extremely harsh. For example, their members would execute Athe-
nian citizens in order to grab their property. Soon, the city-state 
of Thebes, Athens’s long-time enemy, expressed sympathy for the 
Athenians. Rather than see Thebes and Athens become allies, Sparta 
stood quietly by while Athenians overthrew the Thirty Tyrants in 
403 b.c.e. 
Athens went about restoring its democratic government. But the 
city-state did not have the wealth it had enjoyed a few decades earlier. 
Food was scarce and the city was more crowded than ever. There was 
no income from the silver mines after Sparta freed the mine slaves, and 
golden objects in the temples were melted down to pay war debts. The 
Athenian empire, after a glorious half-century, was finished. 
Historian M. I. Finley wrote in The Ancient Greeks that the dev-
astation of Athens in the Peloponnesian War was disastrous for all of 
Greece. That is because Athens was the one city that might have been 
able to unify the city-states and thus maintain peace. Perhaps that 
could have led to a genuine nation, instead of the collection of city-
states whose days of independence were nearly over. 
THE FINAL YEARS OF 
CLASSICAL GREECE
C H A P T E R  3
O P P O S I T e
Greek philosopher and 
teacher Socrates steered 
philosophy toward a study 
of behavior and morals. He 
explored important issues 
with his students by asking 
them questions. This style 
of teaching is still used 
today, and is known as the 
Socratic method.

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
52
the rise of philosophy
Athens’s days of making major contributions to world culture had not 
ended, even though its status as a world power was greatly diminished 
after the Peloponnesian War. Philosophy (from the Greek word philoso-
phia, which means “love of wisdom”) was a sixth-century b.c.e. innova-
tion that began on Ionia. Philosophy means asking why and how the 
world exists, and what place humans have in it, rather than accepting the 
conventional explanation that the gods control the universe and the fate 
of humans. 
By the fourth century b.c.e., Athens had become the international 
center for a number of philosophi-
cal movements. The most famous 
of the Greek philosophers—
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle 
(384–322 b.c.e.)—all offered new 
ideas and thought, and attracted 
many students. (Aristotle was not 
an Athenian citizen, but went to 
Athens at the age of 18 to study 
with Plato.) 
Socrates is credited with hav-
ing steered philosophy toward 
a study of behavior and morals. 
Socrates’ devoted student, Plato, 
taught Aristotle, who was also 
greatly interested in natural sci-
ence. Aristotle became the tutor of 
the young prince of Macedon, later 
known as Alexander the Great. 
When Alexander established a 
vast empire, the ideas of his teach-
ers reached around the globe. 
In the fourth century b.c.e., 
as Greek city-states weakened 
and the future seemed less cer-
tain, some philosophical move-
ments began to stress personal 
wisdom and inner contentment 
as the ideal goal for individuals. 
When the fighting of the peloponnesian War ended, nei-
ther Athens nor Sparta ever recovered their former great-
ness. the fact that the two main powers in the region 
were weakened made it much easier for philip of mace-
don to conquer the greeks 70 years later. for 2,000 more 
years, the greeks would be subjects of other empires, 
until they finally won independence again in 1829.
But the story did not end there. In 1996, the mayors of 
Athens and Sparta made the end of the peloponnesian 
War official with a ceremony at Sparta. As reported in a 
march 12, 1996 broadcast of All Things Considered, the 
two mayors issued a joint statement that said, “today 
we express our grief for the devastating war between the 
two cities of Ancient greece, and declare its end.” Each 
ancient city-state represented qualities to admire—Spar-
ta’s dedication to discipline, Athens’s defense of indi-
vidual freedom. the mayor of Athens told reporters that 
if these qualities were combined today, they could make 
a real difference in the world.
A Peloponnesian 
Peace—Finally

53
Socrates was well known during his own 
time for his conversational skills and public 
teaching. But he wrote nothing. We must 
therefore depend on the writings of his stu-
dents to learn about Socrates’ ideas. 
Socrates’ main teaching method was to 
engage in a discussion with his students. 
He would ask a series of questions about an 
issue, and also answer the questions of the 
students involved. Generally, the points of 
view expressed between student and teacher 
were different. Socrates used his questions 
to lead his students to eventually realize their 
teacher was correct. This form of inquiry has 
come to be known as the Socratic method. 
Socrates’ pupil Plato wrote a number of 
these dialogues that he attributed to Socrates. 
In this one, Socrates and Meno discuss 
human virtue: whether or not it can be taught, 
whether it is shared by all human beings, and 
whether it is one quality or many. 
Socrates: When you say, Meno, that there is one 
virtue of a man, another of a woman, another 
of a child, and so on, does this apply only to vir-
tue, or would you say the same of health, and 
size, and strength? Or is the nature of health 
always the same, whether in man or woman?
Meno: I should say that health is the same, be it 
in man and woman.
Socrates: And is not this true of size and strength? 
If a woman is strong, she will be strong by 
reasons of the same form and of the same 
strength subsisting in her which there is 
in the man. I mean to say that strength, as 
strength, whether of man or woman, is the 
same. Is there any difference?
Meno: I think not.
Socrates: And will not virtue, as virtue, be the 
same, whether in a child or in a grownup per-
son, in a woman or in a man?
Meno: I cannot help feeling, Socrates, that this 
case is different from the others.
Socrates: But why? Were you not saying that the 
virtue of a man was to order a state, and the 
virtue of a woman was to order a house?
Meno: I did say so.
Socrates: And can either house or state or any-
thing be well ordered without temperance 
and without justice?
Meno: Certainly not. . . .
Socrates: Then both men and women, if they are 
to be good men and women, must have the 
same virtues of temperance and justice?
Meno: True.
Socrates: And can either a young man or an 
elder one be good, if they are intemperate 
and unjust?
Meno: They cannot. . . .
Socrates: Then all men are good in the same 
way, and by participation in the same virtues? 
. . . And they surely would not have been 
good in the same way, unless their virtue had 
been the same?
Meno: They would not.
Socrates: Then . . . the sameness of all virtue has 
been proven.
(Source: Plato, Meno, Translated by Benjamin 
Jowett, New South Wales, Australia: 
ReadHowYouWant, 2006.)
Socrates on Virtue
In Their Own Words
T h e  F i n a l  Ye a r s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
54
The Cynics and the Stoics were two sig-
nificant movements that approached the 
goal of self-fulfillment from different 
directions. 
Diogenes (ca. 400–325 b.c.e.), 
founder of the Cynic movement, said 
virtue is the only true good, and that 
real virtue lies in self-control and inde-
pendence. He encouraged people to 
throw aside social conventions, which he 
viewed as expressions of false feelings. A 
cynic today is someone who believes 
people’s actions tend to be motivated by 
self-interest—one element of Diogenes’ 
philosophy. 
Diogenes is famous today because 
of a search he undertook. He supposedly 
walked through Athens during the day 
holding a lit lamp. The lamp, he said, 
was to help him find an honest man. 
Diogenes obviously did not need the 
lamp during the day, and he did really not 
think he would ever find a truly honest 
man. In reality, he was making a com-
ment on the state of his society. Today, 
people refer to Diogenes and his lamp when they want to highlight the 
difficulty of learning the truth, or when they begin a search that seems 
to have no end.
Zeno of Citium (ca. 335–ca. 263 b.c.e.) founded the Stoic school 
of philosophy in about 300 b.c.e. Stoics taught that true wisdom came 
from throwing off passions and practicing virtue, regardless of any 
anxiety that might result. Today, a stoic person is not affected by strong 
feelings and disregards personal comfort in order to achieve greater 
goals, such as wisdom and integrity. 
The fifth-century b.c.e. Sophists were traveling teachers who, 
for a fee, gave lessons in how to use logic to win an argument. Today, 
the word sophisticated describes someone who is knowledgeable and 
clever. 
Greek philosopher 
Diogenes, shown here in 
an Italian Renaissance 
sculpture, is famous for a 
search he undertook. He 
walked through Athens 
with a lamp, looking for 
just one honest man.

55
City-States Compete for Power 
As Athenian philosophers thought about virtue and justice, the Greek 
world was still finding reasons to make war—although that warfare was 
changing. Athens, Sparta, and Thebes spent the next 60 years vying for 
the position of top polis, often switching alliances. Athens and Sparta 
had to make do with fewer farmer-citizens filling the hoplite ranks and 
more mercenary soldiers and armed slaves. 
Athens had to increase taxes to finance the ongoing wars, and 
Athenian farmers were finding it harder to sell their produce because 
other trading partners, such as Syracuse, had their own economies dis-
rupted by war and invasions. More people then left their farms to join 
the armies as full-time professional soldiers. 
In fact, Greek soldiers were much in demand because they had 
been proven against the Persian Empire as among the best in the world. 
In 401 b.c.e., thousands of men joined the army of Cyrus the Younger 
(ca. 424–401 b.c.e.), a Persian prince who was trying to grab control of 
the Persian Empire from his half-brother, Artaxerxes (r. 404–ca. 358 
b.c.e.). One of the Greek mercenaries, Xenophon (ca. 431–ca. 352 b.c.e.), 
recounted in his book Anabasis how Greek mercenaries marched 1,500 
miles to Babylon, were defeated by Artaxerxes, and marched another 
2,000 miles back home. 
Although the huge military operation was a failure, it featured 
some new developments in Greek warfare that proved successful. For 
example, hoplites began using lighter armor and the army began using 
light-armed troops (such as those with bows and arrows). These units 
protected the hoplite phalanxes at their flanks, or sides. 
The Persian adventure also demonstrated that troops could travel 
with less baggage on long expeditions and find food and supplies 
along the way. These lessons would be put to use when Alexander the 
Great crossed the same territory later in the century—with far more 
success. 
In 395 b.c.e., Sparta began the Corinthian War against Corinth 
and its allies, Athens, Thebes, and Argos. In 394 b.c.e., it won the larg-
est hoplite battle since Plataea in 480 b.c.e. This victory was Sparta’s 
last peak of power in Greece. 
Sparta’s army now dominated the Greek mainland. So the city-
state set its sights on Greek Asia Minor, which the Persian Empire 
also wanted to control. Sparta was unable to take on the Persians, and 
T h e  F i n a l  Ye a r s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
56
withdrew in 386 b.c.e. That left the Greek city-states there to be ruled 
by the Persian Empire. 
Although Sparta remained the dominant force on mainland 
Greece, wealthy Persia kept Spartan power in check by financing a new 
fleet of ships for Athens. A new Athenian naval league was formed. But 
other city-states in the league remembered Athens’s aggressive lead-
ership of Delian League, and they formed alliances designed to keep 
Athenian power in check. This scene was repeated many times over the 
first half of the fourth century b.c.e.: Sparta or Athens would gain an 
Although Xenophon was an Athenian, he 
spent much of his life in Sparta. When de-
mocracy was reestablished in Athens in 401, 
Xenophon turned his back on its new lead-
ers and went to war in support of the Per-
sian prince, Cyrus, in his campaign against 
the king of Persia, Artaxerxes II. He brought 
along a large force of Greek mercenaries. 
During the military campaign Cyrus died 
and the mercenaries were left leaderless. 
Xenophon was elected one of the gener-
als. Fewer than 6,000 mercenaries, out of 
an original force of 10,000, survived. Xe-
nophon later wrote a book about his ad-
venture called Anabasis. The book was an 
account of the expedition, and also a tale of 
military virtues, discipline, leadership, and 
courage.
On the fifth day they did in fact reach the 
mountain; its name was Theches. Now 
as soon as the vanguard got to the top 
of the mountain, a great shout went up. 
And when Xenophon and the rearguard 
heard it, they imagined that other enemies 
were attacking in front; for enemies were 
following behind them from the district 
that was in flames. . . . But as the shout 
kept getting louder and nearer, as the 
successive ranks that came up all began 
to run at full speed toward the ranks ahead 
that were one after another joining in the 
shout, and as the shout kept growing 
far louder as the number of men grew 
steadily greater, it became quite clear 
to Xenophon that here was something 
of unusual importance; so he mounted 
a horse, took with him Lycius and the 
cavalry, and pushed ahead to lend aid; 
and in a moment they heard the soldiers 
shouting, “The Sea! The Sea!” and passing 
the word along. Then all the troops of the 
rearguard likewise broke into a run, and 
the pack animals began racing ahead and 
the horses. And when all had reached the 
summit, then indeed they fell to embracing 
one another, and generals and captains as 
well, with tears in their eyes. 
(Source: Xenophon, Anabasis. Carleton L. 
Brownson, translator. Cambridge, Mass: 
Harvard University Press, 1998.)
The Long Road Home 
In Their Own Words

57
upper hand, until the other city-states, who may have been enemies in 
recent years, joined together to defeat whoever was strongest.
But Sparta, despite its military might, could never assert its leader-
ship over fellow Greeks the way Athens had in the previous century. 
Sparta was unwelcoming to foreigners, and its militaristic society did not 
have much to offer its neighbors in the way of civics or culture. In addi-
tion, the Spartan population had been shrinking for decades. Long years 
of required military service meant men spent little time at home with 
their wives, and fewer Spartan citizens were produced with each passing 
decade. Sparta’s army was filled with increasing numbers of non-citizens, 
who eventually came to greatly outnumber the Spartans themselves.
Theban Victory
In the meantime, Thebes unified the Boeotian territory for the first time. 
Thebes was a growing city-state whose large population benefited from 
the agricultural abundance of Boeotia. Its aim was defensive—because 
it was centrally located in mainland Greece, it was the frequent target of 
invasions by other Greek city-states. Boeotian hoplites were not innova-
tive in military tactics, but they became known for their toughness in 
battle. 
In 371 b.c.e., the Boeotians, under the leadership of Theban gen-
eral Epaminondas (d. 362 b.c.e.), took on Sparta. The Thebans’ goal was 
not so much to conquer Sparta but to prevent future Spartan invasions 
into Boeotia—there had been four in just the last decade.
The generally accepted military tactic, and one the Spartans also 
used, was to position the best companies of soldiers on a phalanx’s right 
side. Epaminondas modified this by putting his best hoplites on the 
left side of his phalanx. This way, his best soldiers would fight against 
Sparta’s best soldiers. The Boeotian phalanx was also 80 hoplites across 
and 50 deep, which was unusually dense. 
The two armies met at Leuctra in Boeotia. The hoplites were defended 
by now-common cavalry and light-armed troops who shot arrows and 
even flung heavy stones. Although the Thebans and their Boeotian allies 
were outnumbered, they crashed through the Spartan phalanx, killing the 
Spartan king Cleombrotus (d. 371 b.c.e.) and hundreds of Sparta’s best 
soldiers. The Spartans were shocked to find they had been defeated.
The following year, Epaminondas led his army to Laconia, where 
a weakened Spartan army put up only a weak defense. After the 
T h e  F i n a l  Ye a r s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
58
Boeotian army looted the Laco-
nian farmlands around Sparta, 
Epaminondas led his troops west 
to Messenia. There, he freed 
Sparta’s helots from three cen-
turies of forced labor and estab-
lished a strongly fortified new 
city for them, Messene. 
Epaminondas brought his 
army back to the Peloponnese 
Peninsula several more times, 
eventually leaving Sparta power-
less beyond Laconia. Epaminon-
das died in a final battle against 
Sparta (which was now allied 
with Athens against Thebes) at 
Mantinea in 362 b.c.e. Soon after, 
Theban leadership among the 
Greeks faded. Though brief in its 
term as Greece’s most powerful 
polis, Thebes, under Epaminon-
das, accomplished the impressive 
feat not only of defeating Sparta, 
but also undoing the Spartans’ 
social system, which had been 
based on helot labor.
the macedonians
As the Greek city-states jostled for position and power, there were new 
threats from the north. Philip II of Macedon was adding other northern 
kingdoms to his own and had already gained territory in central Greece. 
Macedon was a neighboring kingdom whose people spoke a Greek 
dialect (a different form of the same language) and considered them-
selves to be of Greek ancestry. Macedon’s Aegean coastline had been 
colonized by the Greeks in previous centuries. The Macedonians were 
a tough people from a rugged country whose aristocracy was constantly 
at war among themselves. They were, however, a weak and divided state 
with little regional power. 
today, a spartan lifestyle means simplicity almost to the 
point where one has no pleasure. the term, of course, 
comes from the ancient greek people whose citizens lived 
in modest homes with little difference between those 
who were wealthy and those who were not. In fact, there 
was more equality between the classes in Sparta than in a 
large city-state like Athens. this is because, with the mes-
senians serving as slaves, no Spartan had to work. 
Luxury was rejected because it encouraged weakness. 
the Spartans also regarded cultural pursuits, such as lit-
erature, art, and music, as unnecessary. Xenophon wrote 
that the Spartans thought of food and drink as something 
of which “there should be neither too much or too little” 
(as quoted in The Cambridge Illustrated History of Ancient 
Greece). A typical Spartan dish was a cloudy black broth 
that other greeks considered especially bad. It included 
port (a fortified wine), animal blood, and vinegar. The 
Columbia History of the World quotes an unnamed visitor 
to Sparta as saying, after sampling the local food, “now I 
know why the Spartans do not fear death.”
Spartan Simplicity

59
In 359 b.c.e., ambitious 23-year-old Philip II, an able warrior, 
assumed power. Philip had a year-round professional army, and the 
only way to pay for it was to conquer more territory. He gained a foot-
hold into Greece in the 350s b.c.e. The ruling aristocracy of Thessaly, 
the prosperous region north of Boeotia and south of Macedon, allowed 
Philip (whom they considered to be a fellow Greek), to take command 
of their alliance. Philip also used arranged marriages to build his state. 
By combining powerful families, he gained more control. By the end of 
the 340s b.c.e., Philip had consolidated his power in north and central 
Greece.
The most notable leader of Athens in Philip’s era was the orator 
Demosthenes (384–322 b.c.e.). Demosthenes had been robbed of his 
inheritance by corrupt guardians after his father died, and he ended up 
writing court speeches to make a living. He overcame his initial awk-
wardness in public speaking by intensely practicing declamation (mak-
ing formal speeches). Eventually, he earned lasting fame for his stirring 
addresses warning Athens about Philip’s aggressive intentions. 
Although the Macedonians considered themselves to be Greek, 
Hellenes such as Demosthenes regarded them as uncivilized. Demos-
thenes mobilized support for a Greek alliance to head off a Macedonian 
invasion into southern Greece. 
When the Greeks joined forces against Philip, they faced a pro-
fessional army that fought year-round. Philip took the Greek hoplite 
phalanx, developed in the fifth century b.c.e., and made it deadlier by 
using longer spears that weighed about 15 pounds. Shields were made 
smaller to hang from the neck or shoulders, so both hands could hold 
the longer spear. 
Philip gave the cavalry the important role of leading off the battle 
by charging into enemy lines. The infantry followed, aided by archers 
(soldiers who shoot with bows and arrows) and other light-armed sol-
diers. Those soldiers could move quickly, too. They traveled light, with 
no servants and carrying few supplies, and they could reach any city-
state on the Greek mainland within a few days.
The siege was an important military strategy of the time that was 
used to attack walled cities. It meant cutting off a town or fort from 
the outside so it could not receive supplies and the inhabitants could 
not escape. Siege technology traditionally used simple ladders and bat-
tering rams. Philip’s military engineers designed wheeled towers that 
could be rolled up to walls and complex catapults (a military machine 
T h e  F i n a l  Ye a r s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e
Man of Words
Demosthenes is remem-
bered as one of the great 
orators of Classical 
Greece, but his skills 
did not come naturally. 
He had a weak voice 
and tended to stutter, 
and had to work hard to 
overcome his defects. 
To strengthen his voice, 
he recited speeches and 
poems while running or 
going up steps. To lose 
his stutter, Demosthenes 
practiced by speak-
ing with pebbles in his 
mouth. Today, these sto-
ries of how he improved 
his speech are well 
known. He is held up as 
a model for how a person 
can overcome personal 
shortcomings, and his 
speeches are still read 
as examples of powerful, 
effective oration. 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
60
use for throwing large objects) that hurled increasingly large objects 
to damage walls from up to 300 yards away. Philip was therefore able 
to conquer a walled city in a matter of weeks, whereas fifth-century 
b.c.e. Athens might spend months or even years trying to do so. 
But despite all this technology, Philip’s preferred method of tak-
ing a city was bribery—paying off city leaders in exchange for handing 
over the city. It was a style of warfare that had Demosthenes longing for 
the good old days, when there was plenty of “invading and ravaging” 
but “fighting was fair and open” (as quoted in The Wars of the Ancient 
Greeks). 
Using both military tactics and bribery, Philip hoped to have a large 
empire with tax-paying members whose mines and harbors would be 
under his control. His military advances proved to be extremely effec-
tive. As Hanson points out in The Wars of the Ancient Greeks, 30,000 
Macedonian soldiers proved “far more dangerous to Greek liberty than 
half a million Persians.” Demosthenes’ alliance was defeated by Philip’s 
army at Chaeronea in Boeotia in 338 b.c.e. 
Philip then formed a Greek-Macedonian league (which historians 
call the League of Corinth). He proposed that a combined army invade 
the Persian Empire.
This theater is in the city 
of Philippi in Macedon. 
It was named for Philip 
II, the Macedonian king 
who defeated an allied 
Greek army in 338 b.c.e. 
This marked the end of 
independent city-states in 
Greece.

61
With Philip II came the end of the independent Greek polis. 
Although a limited form of democracy continued in Athens, it and the 
other city-states would always be subject to other rulers. Within the 
next century, the cultural capital of the Greek world would be centered 
in a city that had not even been founded yet—Alexandria on the Medi-
terranean coast of Egypt.
Alexander Marches on Persia
Before he could capitalize on his victory over Greece, Philip was assas-
sinated in 336 b.c.e. Like his father, Alexander III became king at a 
young age but proved that youth was no obstacle to success. Alexander 
ruthlessly eliminated (by murder, if necessary) all rivals for leadership 
over the now expanded army of Macedonians and Greeks. And he pre-
pared to conquer the Persian Empire. 
When Thebes tried to withdraw from the League of Corinth in 
335 b.c.e., Alexander’s army arrived at Thebes and leveled it, except for 
its temples and the home of the poet Pindar (ca. 520–443 b.c.e.). He 
spared the famous poet to demonstrate that he was, after all, a civilized 
Greek. Six thousand Thebans were killed, and thousands more were 
sold into slavery. Alexander let it be known there was no turning back 
from the alliance for the Greek city-states. 
Alexander was cruel and ruthless, and was also a brilliant 
military general. Historians tend to either admire his 
enormous capabilities or regard him as a power-
hungry tyrant. Alexander was always conscious 
of the image he projected, and rode into battle 
at the head of his cavalry (sometimes requir-
ing rescue by his men), his cape flowing 
behind him and his crested helmet polished 
to gleam under the sun’s rays. He carried a 
copy of the Iliad on all of his campaigns. 
Having survived close calls with death, 
Alexander eventually declared himself to be 
a son of Zeus, the king of the Greek gods.
As Alexander fought his way through Ana-
tolia, he claimed that his aim was to free the Greek 
people from Persian rule. But he actually came up 
against—and slaughtered—thousands of Greek merce-
T h e  F i n a l  Ye a r s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e
Alexander the Great 
is shown on one of 
the millions of coins 
that featured his face. 
Alexander’s conquests 
spread Greek culture 
throughout much of the 
world.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
62
nary soldiers. Beginning at the Granicus River in 334 b.c.e., Alexander’s 
Macedonian-Greek army smashed all Persian opposition in Asia Minor 
before making his way to cities such as Tyre (in modern-day Lebanon).
By 331 b.c.e., he had conquered Egypt and founded one of the many 
cities named Alexandria that would dot the map of the world after 
his death. (Alexandria, Egypt remains an important city today, with a 
population of more than 3 million. It is the second-largest city in Egypt 
and its main seaport.) When Alexander inflicted a huge defeat on the 
Persian army of Darius III (380–330 b.c.e.) at Gaugamela (in modern-
day northern Iraq, near Mosul) in 331 b.c.e., he declared himself king of 
the Persian Empire. He needed thousands of mules and camels to haul 
away the huge Persian treasury of gold and other valuables.
The Hellenistic Age
Although Alexander left much destruction in his wake, he and his 
successors also founded cities that spread the best features of Greek 
civilization and served as new markets and ports for Greece. He had 
envisioned a vast empire, but Alexander did not plan for anyone to rule 
after him. Alexander’s wife, Roxane, gave birth to his son a few months 
after he died (the boy was murdered in 310 b.c.e.), but the lands he con-
quered were divided up among his top commanders. 
Alexander’s generals formed three new kingdoms that roughly 
encompassed the areas of his conquests. Antigonus II (320–239 b.c.e.), 
grandson of Alexander’s general Antigonus (ca. 382–301 b.c.e.), became 
king and heir to the throne of Macedon and maintained control over 
Greece. Seleucus (ca. 358–281 b.c.e.) took over what had been the Persian 
Empire. Ptolemy (ca. 367–282) became king of Egypt. Their descendants 
would inherit these kingdoms until the Roman Empire ruled the Medi-
terranean world. 
The city-states of Greece were no longer independent. Like their 
neighbors in other ancient civilizations, they were now part of one large 
kingdom. And because of Alexander, their culture became the founda-
tion of what is today called the Hellenistic Age. (The term was used by 
19th-century historians to describe the 293 years between Alexander’s 
death and 30 b.c.e., when the last of the Hellenistic kingdoms fell to the 
Roman Empire.)
Much of the wealth grabbed from the Persian Empire by Alexan-
der was now divided up among the three kingdoms, boosting their 

63
economies and providing employment through extensive public 
building projects. By the third century b.c.e., the Greek language 
had become the common language of international relations from 
Egypt and Jerusalem up to the Black Sea in the north and to the 
border of modern-day India in the east. Since everyone spoke the 
same language, it was much easier to exchange ideas throughout the 
Hellenistic world. Greek immigrants moved to the cities in these 
Hellenistic kingdoms, exchanging cultural and social ideas with the 
local peoples.
Although many Greek city-states were now ruled by Macedonian 
kings, parts of Greece remained free. In the regions of Aetolia and 
Achaea, city-states joined together in leagues with a strong central 
government. The member city-states also kept their own governments. 
The federal organization of the Achaean League, described by the 
Greek historian Polybios (ca. 200–118 b.c.e.), provided inspiration to 
the Founding Fathers of the United States.
An Invitation to Rome
The Romans became increasingly powerful in the Hellenistic world. 
By the middle of the third century b.c.e., they controlled most of Italy. 
When Philip V (r. 221–179 b.c.e.) of Macedon tried to expand his ter-
ritory into Ionia around 200 b.c.e., leaders in Pergamum, Athens, and 
Rhodes asked Rome to help them turn him back. Rome provided suc-
cessful help, and granted the cities it aided their independence. But it 
was now obvious that a new power had emerged in the Mediterranean. 
By the middle of the second century b.c.e., Rome had conquered 
Macedon and most of Greece. When Corinth attempted to rebel in 146 
b.c.e., it was destroyed by Rome.
Rome’s power would last longer than that of Athens or the other 
Greek city-states, for a variety of reasons. Rome had united the other 
cities of Italy—something the Greek city-states had never been able 
to accomplish in Greece. Rome was also generous in granting rights 
to foreigners. From this broad base of manpower, they could form an 
army large enough to conquer the Hellenistic world. And Hellenistic 
warfare had grown clumsy, while the Romans improved it by simplify-
ing tactics.
Hellenistic soldiers now fought with even longer spears, up to 20 
feet long, and the once-effective tactic of using cavalry to burst through 
T h e  F i n a l  Ye a r s  o f  C l a s s i c a l  G r e e c e

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
64
enemy lines was not much used. Roman soldiers also carried smaller 
spears that they threw at their enemy. Then they moved in for close 
combat using the gladius, a double-edged steel sword (from which we 
get the word gladiator) that was much easier to handle than the long 
Greek spear, and which inflicted much damage. In 30 b.c.e., the last 
of the Hellenistic kingdoms—Egypt under Queen Cleopatra—was 
defeated by the Roman Empire.

P A R T • I I
POLITICS AND SOCIETY IN ANCIENT GREECE
EVERYDAY LIFE IN ANCIENT GREECE
GREEK ART, PHILOSOPHY, AND SCIENCE
SOCIETY AND 
CULTURE


67
67
POLITICS AND SOCIETY 
IN ANCIENT GREECE
ATHENS OF THE FIFTH CENTURY b.c.e. REPRESENTS WHAT 
we today consider to be best about the politics of ancient Greece. The 
democratic government that developed there inspired later political 
thinkers in Europe, North America, and other regions who were seek-
ing to build free and fair societies. 
Yet during Athens’s early history, the city resisted the gradual eco-
nomic and political compromises that enabled the rich and poor to live 
together peacefully in other Greek city-states. The rich in Athens tried 
to hold on to power for too long, and the result was a radical democratic 
revolution in the sixth century b.c.e. 
It is important to remember that not all ancient Greeks practiced 
democracy the way the Athenians did. Many Greek city-states never 
developed a democracy at all. There were always many Greeks, includ-
ing some in Athens, who considered democracy to be rule by the 
mob—dangerous, unstable, and unwise. 
Kings And noBLes
Like other ancient civilizations of the Near East, the early Greek com-
munities were first ruled by chieftains or kings. The kings led groups 
of families to new settlements and helped organize them militarily so 
they could defend themselves from outsiders. According to Aristotle in 
his Politics (as cited by John V. A. Fine in The Ancient Greeks), a king 
ruled with the consent of the people and had limited powers, “with 
the king acting as general and judge and the head of religious obser-
O P P O S I T E
The ancient Greeks 
were practical people 
and business came first. 
The scene on this sixth-
century B.C.E. Greek 
cup shows Arcesilas II 
(ca. 560–550 B.C.E.), the 
king of Cyrene, watching 
cargo being weighed and 
loaded onto his ship. The 
cargo is a medicinal plant 
called silphium. Silphium 
exports were critical to the 
economy of Cyrene.
C H A P T E R  4

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
68
vances.” In his role as judge, the king settled arguments between oikoi, 
or households. 
These early Greek kingdoms were not large. They usually consisted 
of scattered oikoi that relied on farming to survive. But as the disorder 
of the Dark Age ended, the population of the kingdoms grew, and the 
first towns grew up around the king’s residence. 
The kings relied on the advice of the heads of the wealthiest oikoi 
to run the government. With their wealth and political influence, these 
advisors formed an elite class known as the basilees, with the king 
called a basileus. The basilees formed the nobility. The leaders of this 
nobility called themselves aristoi, “the best,” leading to the English 
word aristocrat. The Greek aristocrats looked down on what they called 
hoi polloi, “the many.” That term is still used today to describe large 
masses of poor or powerless people. 
The Rise of the Polis
The town where a king and his advisors lived became the heart of the 
political unit called the polis, or city. Over time, farms surrounding the 
city center joined the polis, creating a city-state, which the Greek still 
called polis. 
The rural oikoi who joined a polis wanted the security that came 
with being part of a larger community. At the same time, these farmers 
were used to living without direct rule, and they wanted some say in 
how their government was run. Assemblies, where male citizens gath-
ered to debate public issues, were already a key part of Greek politics in 
the eighth century b.c.e. 
As the poleis (plural of polis) developed, the basilees in most city-
states asserted their growing political and economic strength and 
forced the basileus from power. The details of this transition are not 
clear. But by the seventh century b.c.e., the aristocrats as a group con-
trolled the poleis, with several officials sharing the duties once held by 
the basileus. 
The number of government officials, or magistrates, grew as a 
city-state grew. Athens, for example, had many more magistrates, 
with specific duties, than did smaller city-states. After leaving public 
office, the most important magistrates sat on a council that passed 
laws and directed most government affairs. Council members often 
served for life. With the rise of the aristocracy and the councils, the 
The Ethnos
City-states did not 
develop everywhere in 
ancient Greece. Parts 
of the Peloponnesus 
Peninsula and northern 
Greece were dotted with 
small villages that lacked 
a central town that could 
serve as a political and 
economic capital. The 
Greeks called these 
regions the ethne (the 
plural of ethnos), which 
means “tribes” or 
“peoples.” The residents 
within one ethnos shared 
a cultural background, 
but separate villages 
rarely took united action. 
Living in an ethnos was 
considered a mark of 
backwardness, since the 
people in ethne did not 
develop complex political 
systems. 
The word ethnos led 
to the English word eth-
nic and the prefix ethno, 
which refers to a race 
of people or a cultural 
group. Ethnocentric, 
for example, describes 
someone who believes 
his or her ethnic group 
is better than all others. 
Ethnography is the study 
of human cultures. 

69
assemblies—and thus the common farmers—lost some political influ-
ence for a time. 
The polis was both a religious and a political entity, and indi-
vidual city-states had a particular patron god. Athena was the patron 
of both Sparta and Athens. Several cities in Asia Minor had as their 
patron Zeus’s brother Poseidon, who ruled the seas. A polis, the Greeks 
believed, would not prosper, nor would its citizens, without paying 
proper honor to the various gods in charge of the universe. So a series of 
festivals with various rituals to please and honor the gods was built into 
the social life of the polis. 
Aristotle believed the polis reflected a natural law: Humans are 
political creatures and are only complete when they live together in a 
community. In his Politics he wrote, “He who is unable to live in society, 
or who has no need because he is sufficient for himself, must be either 
a beast or a god: he is no part of a state. A social instinct is implanted in 
all men. . . .” (as quoted in Ancient Thought: Plato and Aristotle). 
Yet each Greek polis cherished its independence from its neigh-
bors, and some developed along very different political lines. Sparta, for 
example, was kept very strict, with two kings who shared power, while 
Athens created the environment that brought about democracy, drama, 
comedy, and philosophy. 
Despite the achievements of Athens, however, some historians 
have argued that the polis was always destined to fail. The very inde-
pendence that encouraged experimentation and diversity of thought 
also discouraged the tendency to work together as a united nation.
Citizens and Soldiers
Within the poleis were both citizens and non-citizens. The non-citi-
zens were either foreigners or slaves. Unlike most of the world through-
out most of history before and after Greece, a person did not have to 
own land to become a citizen. However, a citizen’s rights and privileges, 
varied based on social status and gender. 
Female citizens could not take part in politics, and only the wealth-
iest male citizens could hold political office. Middle-class Greeks could 
vote in the assemblies, but the poorest citizens could not. In their 
book Ancient Greece: A Political, Social, and Cultural History, Sarah 
B. Pomeroy, Stanley M. Burstein, Walter Donlan, and Jennifer Tolbert 
Roberts write that the history of Greece from 700 to 500 b.c.e. “is the 
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
70
struggle of the middle and lower 
classes to gain an equal share in 
the governance of their poleis.” 
Their success was mixed, since 
some oligarchy states remained 
after this era. Only a few poleis, 
such as Athens, developed true 
democracy. 
For some Greek citizens, 
the military was their path to 
greater political influence. Aris-
tocrats were only as powerful as 
the polis they controlled, and 
the rulers needed strong fight-
ing forces to defend their city or 
expand its influence. Most city-
states relied on their citizens to 
serve as soldiers, as opposed to 
hiring and training professional 
troops. 
Around 700 b.c.e., Greek 
warfare began to feature the 
hoplites. These citizen-soldiers 
began to demand a greater say 
in political affairs, since they 
were risking their lives to defend 
both their own and the aristo-
crats’ lands. The oligarchy had to give in, since they needed the military 
support of the middle class. 
The hoplite armies led to shifts in social attitudes. Discipline was 
a key part of the hoplites’ battlefield success. For the first time, aris-
tocrats had to learn to work well with members of the lower classes. 
Middle-class soldiers showed that they could match the bravery and 
skill of their supposed “superiors.” 
This battlefield experience fueled the call for greater political 
equality, and shaped the concept that courage in war, not noble birth, 
determined a man’s worth to his polis. Soldiers fought for the honor of 
the polis, although they might win personal honor for individual hero-
ism. Many Greeks known today for their writings and philosophy—
Alcaeus (sixth century b.c.e.) was a poet-soldier from the 
city of Mytilene on the island of Lesbos, one of the Greek 
islands on the coast of Ionia (present-day Turkey). Many 
of his poems reveal a life of fighting, drinking, and enjoy-
ing the company of women. His poetry also describes 
hoplite warfare and the rise of tyrants that were typical in 
early sixth century b.c.e. Greece. In one poem, he wrote 
of the importance of “men of strength” within a city.
Not home with beautiful roofs, 
nor walls of permanent stone, 
nor canals and piers for ships 
make the city—but men of strength.
Not stone and timber, nor skill 
of carpenter—but men brave, 
who will handle sword and spear. 
With these you have city and walls.
(Source: Atchity, Kenneth J., editor, The Classical Greek 
Reader. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1996.)
Men of Strength
In Their Own Words

71
Socrates, Sophocles, Thucydides, and Demosthenes, for example—were 
also soldiers. 
Changes in Athens
Modern historians know more about the political and social life of 
Athens than those of any other Greek polis. Its history offers the best 
example of how the average citizens gained political power, leading to 
a democratic state. The process of empowering citizens was speeded 
up by Solon, a poet-politician who was given the task of trying to settle 
down the angry lower classes of Athens. 
Solon was appointed as sole archon, or ruling aristocrat, in 594 
b.c.e. He truly sought to defend the poor from the abuses of the rich, 
which included forcing people who owed money into slavery. In one 
poem, Solon complained, “The citizens themselves, through their fool-
ish acts, are willing to destroy the great city, yielding to their desire for 
wealth” (as quoted in The Classical Greek Reader).
Solon ended the practice of enslaving debtors and canceled debts 
that the poor still owed. At the same time, the aristocrats would not 
give up too much of their overall influence. For the most part, Solon’s 
changes were moderate, not radical. He wanted to preserve the existing 
society by improving it, not create something totally new. 
Solon created a set of written laws that spelled out the rights and 
duties of Greek citizens. He divided the citizens into four distinct 
classes, based on wealth. At the top were aristocrats known as the 
pentakosiomedimnoi—a Greek word that means their farms produced 
at least 500 bushels of crops a year. These aristocrats paid higher taxes 
than other citizens did, but they also held the most important public 
offices and elected the archons. 
Beneath them were the hippeis, or “horsemen,” whose farms 
produced between 300 and 499 bushels of produce a year. This upper-
middle class provided most of the cavalry for the Athenian army, as 
well as many hoplites. They also could be important magistrates and 
serve as archons. 
The next class was the zeugitai, which translates as “oxmen.” Mem-
bers of this class could afford to keep teams of oxen but not horses, 
and their farms produced between 200 and 299 bushels of crops a year. 
The zeugitai were usually hoplites. In government, they could be less-
important magistrates. 
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
72
At the bottom were farmers and laborers called thetes, or “poor 
freemen.” In the military, they served as lightly armored foot soldiers or 
oarsmen on triremes. 
The thetes, along with members of the other three classes, could 
participate in the Athenian Assembly. The Assembly, called the Ekkle-
sia in Greek, continued to function as a forum for public debate, as it 
had for centuries across the Greek city-states. The Assembly also took 
on a new role under Solon: His legal system allowed all male citizens, 
rich and poor, to appeal decisions made by the archons and challenge 
the corrupt acts of magistrates. These appeals and challenges were 
heard in the Assembly. And that meant all male citizens from every 
class were potential jurors. 
Every male citizen, not just victims of crime or their relatives, also 
had the right to bring someone to court for committing a crime. Before 
this, families took action against each other when the member of one 
family wronged the member of another family. As Sarah Pomeroy and 
her co-authors write in The Ancient Greeks, “justice was now the busi-
ness of the community . . . as a whole,” not just individuals or their 
families.
The Athenian government during Solon’s time also included a 
council called the Aeropagus. Its members were all former archons and 
they influenced which laws were passed. Members served for life, and 
traditionally they came from the oldest and most powerful families 
in Athens. Since Solon expanded the pool of potential archons, draw-
ing from the upper-middle class as well as the aristocracy, some of the 
old families lost political influence in the Aeropagus. Still, it normally 
favored the interests of the wealthy. The evidence is not clear, but under 
Solon the Assembly seems to have had some role in electing certain 
officials and shaping laws. 
Solon’s reforms also affected the economy and citizenship. He pro-
moted the export of a key Athenian product, olive oil, while limiting 
the foreign sale of barley. Historians believe that grain may have been 
in short supply at the time, and the polis needed all the barley it could 
grow to feed its own citizens. Solon also wanted skilled foreigners to 
come to Athens, so he tempted them with citizenship if they and their 
families became permanent residents of Attica. This policy angered 
some Athenians, who considered citizenship a privileged status. Later 
rulers ended the practice. 

73
Classical Democracy
Cleisthenes, who was in power by 510 b.c.e., continued the progres-
sion toward true democracy in Athens. He wanted to break up the old 
village system of demes, which was based on family ties within certain 
geographic regions. His new system split Attica into three regions, 
called the city, the shore, and the inland. Within each region were 10 
areas called trittys (Greek for “thirds”). 
Cleisthenes then created 10 new tribes by combining one trittys 
from each region to form a tribe. Citizens were now allied by their 
political participation in one of the new tribes, rather than by family 
ties. The old aristocrats could no longer count on family influence and 
regional power to control political events. 
Cleisthenes also created a new council, called the boule in Greek 
and commonly known today as the Council of 500. Each year, each tribe 
selected 50 male citizens to sit on the Council of 500. They were chosen 
at random. The new council proposed issues for the Assembly to debate, 
met foreign diplomats, and oversaw the appointment of tax collectors. 
In general, Cleisthenes’s reforms expanded government involvement 
for Athenians. The members of the boule changed often, since they were 
selected at random, and each of the 10 tribes also elected different officials 
for the military. All of the reforms were approved by the Assembly, reflect-
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
This tablet, called an 
ostrakhon, shows that a 
man named Themistokles 
was “ostracized” in 472 
b.c.e. Who was ostracized 
was determined by a vote. 
The ostracized person was 
sent away from the polis 
for 10 years.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
74
ing a wide level of support among the population as a whole. Herodotus, in 
Book Five of The Histories, notes that Cleisthenes was deliberately trying 
to win popular support to gain the upper hand over his aristocratic rivals. 
The plan worked, because “once he had won the ordinary people over, he 
was far more powerful than his political opponents.” 
Cleisthenes’ changes also set Athens on a stronger path to democ-
racy. Government by the demos still faced threats, though, because 
some aristocrats considered uneducated citizens to be incapable of cor-
rectly using the decision-making power they were given. 
In the first half of the fifth century b.c.e., the Athenian general 
and politician Ephialtes (d. ca. 460 b.c.e.), weakened the Aeropagus. 
The details of his reforms are unclear, but he seems to have convinced 
the Assembly to give some of the Aeropagus’s powers to the boule, the 
courts, and the Assembly itself. Anti-democratic aristocrats then had 
Ephialtes assassinated—an extreme reaction to his democratic reforms. 
Despite this, the trend toward giving more decision-making power to the 
citizens of the polis continued. Partly, this was because the labor of the 
demos—the common men—was needed to drive the scores of triremes 
that now patrolled the Aegean Sea and the other coasts of Greece.
Periclean Democracy
During the time of Ephialtes’s reform, Pericles was a major supporter of 
democracy. He became the most influential Athenian leader during the 
Classical period of Greek history. In his History of the Peloponnesian 
War, Thucydides called Pericles “the leading man of his time among the 
Athenians and the most powerful both in action and in debate.” He was 
one of 10 strategoi, the men elected to direct military affairs in Athens. 
Pericles used his intelligence and personality to dominate Athenian 
politics from about 460 to 429 b.c.e. 
In the government that developed under Pericles, all male citi-
zens could participate in the Assembly after serving two years in the 
military. The Assembly met four times each month. Out of a possible 
40,000 male citizens, 6,000 were needed to lawfully carry out a few of 
the Assembly’s duties, such as granting citizenship to a foreigner. Other 
common activities could be carried out with even fewer people present. 
A council of educated and upper-class archons with the wealth and lei-
sure time to serve in unpaid government positions still oversaw much 
of the government, but the Assembly’s vote always ruled. 
Ostracism
Among the new ele-
ments the archon 
Cleisthenes seems to 
have introduced to Athe-
nian government was 
ostracism. Under this 
system, each year the 
citizens of Athens could 
vote to send one person 
out of the polis for 10 
years. After the 10 years 
passed, the ostracized 
person could return 
to Athens and reclaim 
whatever property 
he had owned before 
leaving. 
This system let the 
Athenians banish a per-
son they perceived to be 
a threat to social order. 
Ten years, the Greeks 
assumed, was long 
enough for a potential 
tyrant to lose influence 
in the community. Today, 
ostracism usually occurs 
within a particular social 
group, as its members 
choose to exclude or 
ignore someone who 
has upset other group 
members. 

75
One important reform begun under Pericles was paying citizens to 
serve on juries. Later, people were also paid for attending the Assembly 
and holding some civic positions, and could eat at public expense while 
serving in the boule. These payments further opened up participation 
in the government, since a working man could now afford to give up a 
full-time job and play an active role in public affairs. When government 
jobs were unpaid, only the wealthy could afford to spend more than a 
day or two working in the government. 
The Courts
The court system under Pericles also changed, although the first reforms 
were probably carried out by Ephialtes. These changes increased the 
role of the demos in judicial matters. All male citizens were eligible for 
jury duty, and a pool of 6,000 jurors was always available. 
Each of the 10 tribes chose 600 jurors each year, picking from a 
group of citizens who volunteered to serve. The chosen jurors were 
divided into smaller groups of perhaps several hundred per trial. With 
hundreds of jurors, it was very difficult and expensive to use bribery to 
influence the outcome of a trial. 
Like the Assembly, the jury system called on a wide variety of 
Athenian citizens, rich and poor. Under Pericles, jurors began receiving 
wages for the day they served on a trial. Trials took place in one day and 
each side got an opportunity to speak. Punishments for the guilty con-
sisted of death, banishment (sending someone away from the country), 
or a fine.
In a trial, as in the Assembly, the art of persuasive speaking was 
of great value. Sometimes a person standing trial might have a speech 
written for him or even read for him by someone skilled in rhetoric—
the art of speaking or writing effectively. 
Greek Society
In general, there were three types of Greek city-state residents. The 
first type included citizen men, women, and children. The next type 
were metics, who could be citizens of a different city-state or from a for-
eign country. The third type were slaves, who could be fellow Greeks, 
but were more likely war captives (men, women, and children) from 
another country. 
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
President of the 
Assembly
The Assembly’s presi-
dent for the day was 
chosen at random from 
among those present. 
That meant any one of 
Athens’s citizens, many 
of whom could not read, 
had a chance to preside 
over the Assembly for 
a day. This benefit of 
Athenian citizenship 
(for males over age 20, 
at least) was unique in 
the ancient world, and 
throughout the world for 
centuries to come.
While female citizens 
had few rights, male 
citizens were allowed—
even expected—to 
attend Assembly meet-
ings and vote on impor-
tant issues. (This would 
be similar to American 
citizens being allowed 
to show up in the U.S. 
Capitol building in 
Washington and vote on 
new laws in Congress.) 
For example, a vote of 
the Assembly decided 
whether or not the Athe-
nian navy would embark 
on a risky venture during 
the Peloponnesian War 
in 415 b.c.e. 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
76
In Daily Life in Greece at the Time of Pericles, Robert Flaceliere 
estimates that in Athens in the mid-fifth century b.c.e., there were 
40,000 male citizens and 20,000 male metics, and about 140,000 
women and children citizens and metics. There may have been 300,000 
slaves throughout the city-state, for a total of half a million people. Of 
these fewer than 10 percent had the right to vote. 
Citizens enjoyed the most rights and freedoms—even the poorest 
laborers. When metics moved to a city-state where they would be con-
sidered a foreigner, they gave up any rights to own property or partici-
pate in the democratic process. But in general, metics were still valued 
residents and often brought a variety of vital professional and manual 
skills with them. 
Slaves had few if any rights. The more fortunate ones had some 
degree of freedom of movement, or lived with a family that treated 
them decently.
At the top of the citizen pyramid were the aristocrats, whose 
families had provided government and military leadership for many 
generations. They lived off income from land the family had held for 
many generations. Their land was worked by slaves, as well as perhaps 
by citizens or metic laborers. 
The upper classes of Athens made contributions to their city-state 
that improved the quality of life for all residents. They might fund the 
building and manning of a trireme, or pay for a religious festival or 
the creation of a public park, or have a covered walkway in the agora 
(marketplace) built, which offered shelter from the rain and sun. The 
wealthiest classes also paid for such day-to-day things as garbage 
removal and maintaining water supplies.
Athens’s wealthiest citizens lived in comfortable but modest 
homes. Athenians did not feel it was appropriate for people to live in 
mansions or palaces. That luxury was reserved for the gods. Their most 
outstanding architectural and artistic efforts therefore went into their 
religious buildings, which were considered homes for their gods. In 
fact, any aristocrat who was interested in serving in the government, 
and was therefore dependent on the ordinary citizens for support, knew 
not to show off his wealth. If a citizen wanted the respect of the demos, 
he spent his personal wealth on public projects.
Athens’s well-educated aristocrats made enough income from 
their land to live a life of leisure. They could devote time to leading the 
Athenian government or military without pay. In fact, the true sign 

77
of a gentleman was leisure time. Any sort of work, even something as 
admired as producing fine artwork or architecture, or a profession that 
required much study, such as that of a physician, was looked down upon 
by the upper class. A true gentleman never used his hands, however 
much intellect or skill it required, unless it was for military service or 
athletics. 
Most men, however, had to work for a living. A hierarchy existed 
among those who worked in ancient Greece. Farmers who owned a plot 
of land looked down upon craftsmen, and both of them looked down 
upon traders and importers, who did not actually produce anything. 
Working for another person instead of oneself was considered a humili-
ation, so all of the above looked down upon the man who had to hire 
himself out to someone else for a living. On the other hand, all of these 
groups of people could participate in their city-state’s government and 
legal system, which is more than the metic, slave, or woman citizen 
could do. 
Historians think it is possible that the prosperity of ancient Greece, 
beginning in the Archaic Period, must have meant low unemployment 
rates. This would have been especially true for workers in carpentry 
and other building trades, and smithing, or metalworking. Many of 
the metics who flocked to Athens were unable to purchase their own 
homes, so some citizens became newly wealthy by renting homes to 
the foreigners. Renting out slaves provided another possibility for a 
good income for citizens and metics. Newly wealthy citizens often then 
became manufacturers or traders, while the old aristocrats would never 
engage in commerce because of its low social status. 
Metics
By the middle of the fifth century b.c.e., there were about half as many 
male metics in Athens as there were male citizens. Early in the sixth 
century b.c.e., Solon’s liberal citizenship laws had encouraged their 
immigration to Athens. But 150 years later, citizenship was considered 
more valuable and Pericles restricted citizenship to the children of two 
Athenian parents. Yet metics still flocked to Athens, drawn by the eco-
nomic opportunities they found there. 
Metics had no real political power or rights, but many grew rich 
as manufacturers or in commerce or banking. Socrates had a friend, 
Cephalus from Syracuse, whose shield factory employed more than 100 
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
78
slaves. Wealthy metics, in fact, had the same kinds of public obligations 
as wealthy citizens, and helped fund civic projects. 
In the years 401 and 400 b.c.e. the Athenian government awarded 
several metics citizenship for their help in overthrowing the Thirty 
Tyrants—the oppressive rulers installed by Sparta. The occupations 
listed for them included cook, carpenter, gardener, baker, household 
servant, and nut-seller.
Some of Athens’s more notable metics included the doctor Hip-
pocrates (ca. 460–ca. 377 b.c.e.), the historian Herodotus, and Aristo-
tle, the great fourth-century b.c.e. philosopher.
Slavery in Greece
Slavery played a vital economic role in ancient Greece. Slaves generally 
were foreign war captives or the wives and children of the Greeks’ slain 
enemies. But sometimes Greeks, such as the Spartans and the Mes-
senians, enslaved fellow Greeks following a raid or battle.
Much like Greek citizens, the life of a slave could vary from decent 
to miserable. A decent life could be had if a slave worked in a home in 
town or in the country, where one might become almost a family mem-
ber. Sometimes older male slaves accompanied their master’s sons to 
school and had the authority to discipline the boys if necessary. And 
those who worked for the government or a large manufacturer who 
owned many slaves enjoyed as independent a life as a slave could have. 
Greek slaves had no legal rights and they sometimes endured 
abusive owners who beat them or forced them to have sex. Slaves were 
owned by the polis or by individuals. Those belonging to the polis had 
more status and more freedom, often living independently. They might 
be put to work, for example, working as policemen in Athens or clean-
ing up garbage, or they might be assigned to maintain the temple of the 
polis’s deity. 
Female slaves were often found in households or working for a mer-
chant in the agora. Educated slaves were valuable as tutors for children 
in upper-class homes. Slaves often worked alongside their owners on 
small farms in the countryside or at crafts such as pottery, sculpting, 
and metalworking. They might be as skilled as their owners at these 
crafts. While construction of a temple called the Erechtheum was 
under way in the late fifth century b.c.e. Athens, detailed construction 
records show that much of the intricate woodworking and stone carv-

79
ing that decorated the building was done by slaves. Hoplite soldiers 
would have had little strength left for fighting if not for the slaves who 
carried much of their equipment from place to place.
Occasionally, slaves managed to improve their status. A few were 
able to earn money and save enough to buy their freedom. Some older 
slaves were freed by their masters as a reward for good service. The freed 
slaves were considered metics, which meant they could not vote and they 
needed special permission to own land. One rare case of a slave earn-
ing citizenship in Athens involved a man named Pasion (fourth century 
b.c.e.), who was freed and then managed the bank of his former owners. 
The most miserable slaves in ancient Greece worked in the mines. 
Long days in the harsh conditions of the mine made for a short life. 
But in general Athens did not have the problem of slave rebellions that 
Sparta did with its helots. While helots were not technically slaves, 
they were still brutalized by the Spartans. The Athenians had fewer 
slaves than the Spartans did helots, and they did not treat their slaves as 
harshly as the Spartans did their helots. 
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
Shown on this krater are a 
master (right) and a slave 
(left). Most slaves were 
war captives from foreign 
countries.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
80
Without helots, Sparta might never have achieved its military 
strength. And without slaves, Athens may not have had enough silver 
to outfit its navy, which played such a key role in the city-state’s rise to 
an empire.
Ancient civilizations, including that of the Greeks, seldom ques-
tioned the ethics of slavery. It was an accepted part of life. In fact, 
Aristotle argued in Politics that some people are naturally inferior and 
are fit only for slavery. He said the fact that Greek slaves were usually 
foreigners made them uncivilized, therefore inferior, therefore deserv-
ing of slavery. 
The Business of Ancient Greece
In addition to their other cultural contributions, the Greeks also “laid 
foundations of modern commerce,” according to historians Marjo-
rie Quennell and C. H. B. Quennell in their book Everyday Things in 
Ancient Greece. For wealthy Greeks, land ownership remained the 
main source of wealth. The distribution of land varied from region to 
region. Athens, for example, had a much larger number of landown-
ers, and each owned a relatively smaller piece of land. In the lush farm 
country of Boeotia, most of the land remained in the possession of a 
small number of aristocratic families.
Farming, not trade, was the foundation of the ancient Greek 
economy. Yet the Greeks were unable to grow all their own food. They 
developed an import-export trade that was supported by their skill at 
sea travel and by new Greek ports established by colonists around the 
Mediterranean. 
Scenes of trade were popular as decorations on Greek pottery. 
For example, a sixth-century b.c.e. drinking cup found in Sparta was 
illustrated with a detailed trading scene from the Greek settlement 
at Cyrene on the North African coast. In the scene, a ship is being 
loaded with a shipment of silphion, a plant that is now extinct. It 
was similar to fennel and was prized as a medicine. The local king is 
watching as the cargo is weighed, then taken below deck to the ship’s 
hold. 
Greek wine, olive oil, and prized pottery were exchanged for wheat 
from southern Russia, fish, timber, and exotic products from the East such 
as spices, perfumes, and medicines. The mines of Greece, such as the sil-
ver mine in Attica and a rich source of copper at Cyprus, provided another 

81
resource for trade. And throughout the ancient world, slaves were always 
a profitable “product.” The Athenian agora held a large slave market each 
month at the time of the full moon. 
Greek Money
By 600 b.c.e., trade was flourishing in and out of Greek ports. This was 
true both on the mainland and abroad in the Greek colonies. About 
this time, the Greeks began using coins. (Previously, all trade was con-
ducted using the barter system, where goods were exchanged for other 
goods of equal value.)
Herodotus credits the wealthy Lydian kingdom in Anatolia, west 
of Ionia, with introducing coins as currency in the sixth century b.c.e. 
The Lydian coins were made of electrum, a combination of gold and 
silver, and they were stamped with an official seal to prove they were 
genuine. Even so, until the Persian Wars there was little money actually 
circulating in Greece.
When silver was discovered at Laurium, Athenian silver coins 
became common. They were stamped with an owl on one side (a sym-
bol of Athena) and the head of the goddess Athena on the other. The 
government symbols and heads of famous people found on today’s 
coins trace their roots to that practice. 
One silver drachma was about what one skilled worker 
earned each day. Six thousand drachmas equaled one tal-
ent. An obol was one-sixth of a drachma, and bought 
enough bread for one day. One was equal to several 
copper coins. Each polis had its own coinage, 
and with all the money that began circulating 
in Greece, exchanging money and banking 
became common professions later in the 
fifth century b.c.e. It often was the work of 
metics or even educated slaves. 
During the Peloponnesian War, Sparta 
helped Athenian slaves escape the silver 
mines, and for a time silver coins were 
replaced by bronze ones. The playwright Aris-
tophanes (ca. 450–ca. 388 b.c.e.) has a humorous 
scene in one of his plays in which a character is just 
about to pay for some bread with his copper coins when 
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
This Greek coin shows an 
owl, one of the symbols 
of the goddess Athena. 
The Greeks began using 
currency around 600 b.c.e. 
The practice of stamping 
coins with government 
symbols began in Athens.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
82
someone announces that silver is now Athens’s official currency. If 
only he had bought the bread a few moments sooner!
Sparta, a Separate World
By the time the Roman Empire gained control of Greece in the second 
century b.c.e., Sparta was no longer a military powerhouse. Instead it 
had become a kind of tourist attraction. This was due not only to its 
once-legendary military might 
among the Greek city-states, 
but also its unique society.
Greek tradition claimed 
the Spartans descended from 
the Dorians, the invaders who 
supposedly swooped down 
from the north at the begin-
ning of the Dark Age. Sparta 
began as a few villages that 
grew into a city-state and 
eventually 
conquered 
the 
southern Peloponnesian area 
of Laconia. 
The Spartan social sys-
tem developed gradually from 
about 650 to 450 b.c.e. The 
reforms that changed Sparta 
into a military state are tradi-
tionally associated with Spartan 
King Lycurgus, who is said to 
have lived around 650 b.c.e. 
The Spartans believed the god 
Apollo approved Lycurgus’s 
reforms through the oracle at 
Delphi. 
It is not clear if Lycur-
gus (his name means “he who 
brings into being the works of 
a wolf”) was an actual person. 
In his book On the Polity of the Spartans, historian Xeno-
phon discusses the Spartan’s political and social system. 
He traces its roots back to Lycurgus, the legendary king 
and lawgiver of Sparta. In this section, he describes some 
typical aspects of a Spartan soldier’s appearance.
For the actual encounter under arms, the following 
inventions are attributed to Lycurgus: the soldier has a 
crimson-colored uniform and a heavy shield of bronze; 
his theory being that such equipment has no sort of 
feminine association, and is altogether most warrior-
like. It is most quickly burnished [polished]; it is least 
readily soiled. He further permitted those who were 
about the age of early manhood to wear their hair 
long. For so, he conceived, they would appear of larger 
stature, more free and indomitable, and of a more 
terrible aspect. . . . Further, the law enjoins upon all 
Spartans, during the whole period of the campaign, the 
constant practice of gymnastic exercises, whereby their 
pride in themselves is increased, and they appear freer 
and of a more liberal aspect than the rest of the world.
(Source: Xenophon, On the Polity of the Spartans. “The 
Spartan War Machine,” Ancient History Sourcebook. 
Available online. URL: http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/
ancient/xenophon-spartanwar.html. Accessed April 16, 
2008.) 
The Spartan Look
In Their Own Words

83
However, the Spartans certainly believed he was, and he is mentioned 
by the ancient historians Herodotus, Xenophon, and Plutarch. They 
believed it was Lycurgus who laid the foundations of daily life for the 
militaristic Spartans, setting up rules for everything from the educa-
tion of young boys to eating meals together. 
Sparta was the only Greek polis that kept a monarchy. It set up a 
system with two kings, perhaps as an early compromise between some 
of the larger villages. These two rulers had equal power. One focused 
on wars and foreign affairs while the other dealt with domestic issues. 
They also served as the religious leaders of the polis. 
The Spartan governing body consisted of the kings and a council 
of 28 male citizens. Collectively, the kings and the council members 
were called the Council of Elders. Any male over age 60 could enter 
the elections for the council, but most members came from the aris-
tocracy. Sparta also had an assembly of all male citizens over the age 
of 30, which voted on the laws proposed by the Council of Elders. The 
council, however, had supreme power, because it could reject decisions 
made by the assembly.
The Spartan government also had five ephors, which means 
“overseers.” They supervised the kings and the council by keeping 
track of laws and making sure they were followed. Each year the male 
citizens elected new ephors. The ephors provided some check on the 
power of the aristocracy. Sparta’s laws were not written down, but 
were learned by children in song form and passed down orally over 
the generations.
P o l i t i c s  a n d  S o c i e t y  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
No Place for Debate
Unlike Athenian citizens, 
Spartans were not 
allowed to debate in their 
assembly. They simply 
voted yes or no on the 
laws presented to them. 
Spartans were expected 
to obey the law and not 
question their rulers’ 
actions. They were said 
to dislike debate and 
rhetoric. 
The Spartan tendency 
to use simple language 
or seldom speak led to 
the English word laconic, 
which means using as 
few words as possible, 
sometimes to the point 
of being rude. The word 
laconic traces its roots 
to Laconia, the region 
of Greece that Sparta 
dominated. 


EVERYDAY LIFE IN 
ANCIENT GREECE
EVERYDAY LIFE VARIED GREATLY AMONG THE ANCIENT 
Greeks, depending on which economic group one was born into or 
whether one lived in the city or the country. Within an Athenian aris-
tocratic family, for example, a woman citizen lived more comfortably, 
materially, than a poorer citizen who sold items at the market. 
Country folk in Attica dreaded leaving their peaceful farms dur-
ing the Peloponnesian War to seek safety within Athens’s city walls. 
But city dwellers enjoyed the stimulating environment of the bustling 
agora. Urban life also offered greater opportunity to see various compe-
titions during the frequent religious festivals that occurred on a much 
grander scale in the city than in the country demes (villages).
everyday life in athens
Fifth and fourth century b.c.e. Athens was dirty and crowded, and dan-
gerous after dark. As the city began spreading out from the Acropolis 
(the hill at the center of Athens) at the end of the Dark Age, the growth 
was not planned or organized. So after about three centuries, the glo-
rious sights atop the Acropolis looked down upon a densely packed 
patchwork of little houses along narrow, winding, crowded streets. 
Poorer people lived in homes made of mud brick or stone that were 
so rickety thieves could enter them by breaking through a wall. Some 
of the poorest homes were put up against the side of a rock or in small 
cave-like openings of a rock wall, from which two or three small rooms 
were fashioned. If rent was overdue, the landlord could remove the door 
or the roof, or block the tenant’s access to water. 
85
O P P O S I T e
A tuna merchant chops 
the head off a fish in this 
vase painting from ancient 
Greece. Painted pottery 
was an important export. 
It is also an important 
resource for historians 
today, because it shows 
many scenes from Greek 
life.
C H A P T E R  5

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
86
Some Athenian dwellings were similar to modern apartment 
buildings, with several families or tenants having their own rooms in 
the same large building. Xenophon estimated that in his day, there were 
about 10,000 dwellings in Athens, most of them humble. 
The agora, or marketplace, was the heart of the city. Commerce of 
every kind was conducted there and men met to discuss politics and 
culture. It was considered impolite for women to be seen there, though 
poorer women and working women had little choice. Younger men were 
discouraged from visiting the agora until later in the day. Ideally, house 
slaves or married men did the household shopping and errands there.
Outside the city walls was the main cemetery. A little farther west 
was the deme of Colonus and just past that was the Academy, a park-like 
area dedicated to Athena with a grove of 12 sacred olive trees. It was 
from those trees that athletic winners at the Panathenaic games received 
prizes of olive oil. The Academy (where the philosopher Plato founded 
his school in 387 b.c.e.) was a popular place for strolls. It was also the site 
of a gymnasium that included a running track and a wrestling arena. 
Going much farther out into the country was difficult, because 
roads were rough and could only be traveled on foot or by donkey. In 
the dark, roads outside the city were dangerous as well because robbers 
could roam freely at night in isolated areas.
At Home
Most Athenians, whether they were in the city or the country, lived 
in small homes with two or three rooms. Cooking fires were usually 
started outside in a portable charcoal or wood stove, then brought in 
when the fire was hot with less smoke. 
Smoke was vented through a small hole in the roof. The roof could 
also provide a quick way out for the home’s occupant if, for example, a 
debt collector came to the door. And on hot nights, people often slept 
outdoors on their roofs.
No large or grand homes have been found in ancient Athens, 
although they have been found in northern Greece and on Delos. 
Athens’s wealthier classes did live in pleasant homes that had perhaps 
several rooms and an inner courtyard, and some owned both country 
and city houses. A house unearthed at Dystus on the large island of 
Euboea has two stories. On the first floor is a large hall next to the open 
courtyard, which may have had grapevines and fig trees. 

87
During the day, the women—the wife, daughters, and female 
servants or slaves—worked on weaving and spinning for the family’s 
clothing. Most likely they did this in the open-doored hall or the court-
yard, since the weather was often warm. In the evenings, the husband 
may have entertained his friends in the hall while his wife stayed in an 
upstairs room. 
Most larger homes had women’s quarters, where the female head 
of the household spent much of her time with her children when they 
were young. These quarters were often guarded by a slave to make sure 
no strangers entered them. 
Tapestries (pieces of thick fabric with designs or pictures woven into 
them) or embroidered cloth might have decorated the walls. Furniture was 
fairly simple. To dine, men lay on couches and women sat in chairs. Each 
person ate from a lightweight table that could be pushed under a couch 
when not in use. Couches were also used as beds at night. There might also 
be various stools or chairs and baby- or child-size beds. 
Most people did not have a bath at home. But there were baths 
at the gymnasiums and the number of heated public baths in Athens 
increased during the fifth century b.c.e. Daily bathing or swimming 
in the sea was common among the Greeks. Pisistratus, the army 
commander who ruled Athens in the mid-500s b.c.e., had fountains 
installed in Athens that were a source of fresh drinking water. When 
the spout was raised they could also be used for showering. 
A Man’s Life in the City
Wealthy Greek men who did not have to work had the best of what life 
could offer in ancient Greece. They had slaves to work their country 
property while they lived in town and wives to run their household. 
They had children to look after them in old age and make sure they had 
a proper funeral. They had friends to meet at the agora, the barbershop, 
or the gymnasium to discuss politics or gossip. They had an education 
that enabled them to enjoy the newest literature and drama, and few 
social restrictions placed on their time or where they could go. They 
had the most time to devote to politics, which was the only proper 
“occupation” (unpaid) for their status level.
Aristocratic men spent hours at the gymnasium, keeping fit 
between time spent in the military (they were eligible until age 60). 
Gymnasiums also served as important social centers where men dis-
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
88
cussed politics and made business 
deals. A good father would arrange 
for his son’s membership in the best 
gymnasium, so he would have a better 
chance of making influential friends. 
Sometimes the gymnasiums also 
developed into philosophical or intel-
lectual centers, such as Plato’s Acad-
emy and Aristotle’s Lyceum.
A regular outing for elite Greek 
males was the symposium. This was 
an evening drinking party held at 
someone’s home. The symposium was 
for men only, although female musi-
cians or dancers, most likely slaves, 
often provided entertainment. The 
night could be rowdy, or it could offer 
opportunities to socialize, discuss 
philosophy, and network.
Men rarely, if ever, socialized with 
women in the way they did with male friends. One exception to that 
rule was Pericles’ witty, intelligent mistress (not his wife) Aspasia (ca. 
470–410 b.c.e.). She often accompanied him to symposia (the plural of 
symposium). Symposia are still held today, although in a much different 
form. They have changed from rowdy parties to public events focused 
on discussing important issues.
Ideally, an older, married man formed a close friendship with 
a young, unmarried man and served as his mentor. Sometimes this 
relationship was also sexual. In general, the Greeks considered homo-
sexuality a way to encourage teamwork and friendship, especially in the 
military. A typical Athenian teen, as he entered manhood, would usu-
ally end this aspect of his relationship with his mentor and get married. 
But some men continued their relationship, and two men might form 
a lifelong partnership. However, such men were also expected to have 
wives and children.
There was a code of excellence that all men were supposed follow. 
Odysseus, the hero of Homer’s poem the Odyssey, was one legendary 
example. Odysseus was a farmer king. He used his strength, intelli-
gence, and good relationship with the gods to help defeat Troy and then 
Symposia were evening 
parties for Greek men. 
Scenes from a symposium 
were popular subjects for 
painted drinking cups like 
this one. Here, a young 
man lies on a couch while 
a girl dances to entertain 
him.

89
return home after two decades, despite many hardships and adventures 
along the way. 
His wife, Penelope, represented the ideal woman. She was beautiful 
and faithful to a husband who was gone for 20 years, and she continued 
to expertly manage their kingdom and their estate. 
The Lives of Women
Women did not enjoy high status in Greek society. They could not par-
ticipate in, or even attend, meetings of the Assembly, for example. They 
did not engage in cultural activities or go to the gymnasium. Most did 
not go to school.
Although Greek women had far fewer rights than men, women 
citizens had broader rights and higher status than metics or slaves. A 
citizen woman could use the court system to address legal issues, such 
as property disputes, although a man had to represent her in court. 
Xenophon gives a glimpse into the role of wealthy women and 
how they were viewed by their male “guardians” in Oeconomicus. This 
work was written as a dialogue between Socrates and his 30-year-old 
Athenian friend Ischomachus. It served as a handbook for how to run 
a household. 
In Oeconomicus, Ischomachus explains to Socrates his belief that 
“the gods, from the very beginning, designed the nature of woman for the 
indoor work and concerns and the nature of man for the outdoor work” 
(as quoted by Sarah B. Pomeroy and her co-authors in Ancient Greece). 
Although Oeconomicus described the life of a wealthy woman, it still 
reflects the ideals of Greek society. A Greek housewife ran all aspects of 
her home. She supervised slaves and servants and cared for them when 
they were ill. She saw to it that food was properly stored and prepared, 
and that the amount of food used did not exceed the amount budgeted. 
She was usually the family member who kept up with religious obser-
vances, and she managed the household accounts. She was also respon-
sible for the family’s clothing, including making and mending it.
At one point, Ischomachus’s wife appears with her face covered 
with white makeup and wearing high-heeled shoes. Ischomachus gently 
informs her that he finds her natural beauty and height much more 
attractive. He tries to make sure she appreciates the importance and 
elegance of an orderly household. This includes small details such as 
arranging pots and pans neatly and placing the vases in a good light.
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
90
The wife of a wealthy citizen 
spent much of her time indoors 
at home, although she might 
participate in a variety of festi-
vals and had a prominent role in 
family funerals. Sometimes she’d 
visit with other married women. 
Her husband or a servant did the 
shopping at the market, but she 
might occasionally go to a shop 
for something personal, such as 
new pair of shoes. She oversaw 
the rearing of her children, with 
the help of servants. 
In general, the wealthier a 
woman was, the less time she 
spent outside the home. However, 
most Greek families, citizen or 
metic, were not wealthy, and their 
female members could not afford 
to spend their days at home. 
Those women might work in the 
agora selling bread or perfume. 
Citizen women worked alongside 
metics and slave women, none of 
whom enjoyed any social status. 
As a girl growing up and 
then as a young wife, a woman 
passed from the guardianship of 
her father or another male rela-
tive to her husband. Marriages 
were arranged. Girls were usually 
about 15 or 16 years old, while 
men were often close to 30. Sometimes fathers arranged a very young 
daughter’s marriage years before the wedding actually took place. 
The primary objective in marriage, especially among the wealthy, 
was to produce successors. It was feared that women with too much 
freedom and too little attachment to their arranged marriages would 
have affairs and get pregnant. In fact, it was seen as important for all 
the social and legal inequality of women in ancient 
greece presented a sharp contrast to the image of some 
females in greek mythology. Zeus, a male, may have 
been the supreme god, but his wife, Hera, and some of 
his daughters—such as Artemis and Athena—also had 
great power. they could also torment men who angered 
them. Hera could not stop her husband from having 
affairs with mortal women, but she did make life difficult 
for some of the children he produced with these mis-
tresses. for example, she tried—but failed—to kill Zeus’s 
son Heracles. Artemis, the goddess of hunting, some-
times attacked men who disturbed her or her followers. 
the ancient greeks also wrote about a society of 
women warriors called Amazons. In some stories they 
were said to live apart from men. other stories said they 
fought alongside the greeks against common enemies. 
once considered mythical, archaeologists are now find-
ing evidence that suggests women warriors may have 
lived thousands of years ago in Scythia (near the Black 
Sea). they found graves of women that include weap-
ons. these women may have been the inspiration for the 
stories of the Amazons. today, the word amazon is used 
to describe any strong and tall or warlike woman.
The Goddesses
of Greece

91
women to have children. Greek society had a high infant mortality 
rate—that is, a large number of babies born did not survive into adult-
hood. So having babies was seen as a key part of a woman’s role.
Greek Children
Generally speaking, large families were not common in ancient 
Greece. Poorer families worried about supporting too many children. 
Families with money were careful not to split their wealth among too 
many children. Hesiod advised, “Try, if you can, to have an only son 
to care for the family inheritance: that is the way wealth multiplies in 
one’s halls” (quoted in Robert Flaceliere’s Daily Life in 
Greece at the Time of Pericles). 
A couple of centuries later, Plato similarly advised 
couples to have just one son and one daughter. To 
limit family size, women had abortions or couples left 
unwanted newborns outside to die or be “rescued.” 
Such children might be raised as slaves or, if they were 
lucky, raised by a childless couple as their own. 
Children were looked to as future providers and 
caretakers for their parents, and as the ones who would 
make sure they had a proper funeral. But the Greeks did 
not see children as merely an economic benefit. Judging 
from the number of toys that have been unearthed by 
archaeologists, children were treasured by their ancient 
Greek parents. 
A child’s early years were spent at home learning 
about Greek culture through myths and fables. There 
were toys to play with: wagons or chariots on wheels 
that could be pulled by a string, or clay dolls with 
jointed arms and legs. Children also kept dogs and 
other animals as pets.
Education from private teachers or schools was 
available for wealthier families’ sons. Boys learned to 
read and write, solve math problems with an abacus 
(a frame with beads that was used for counting), play 
a musical instrument, and sing. Physical training for 
future military life was begun at about age 12 (except 
in Sparta). Boys also took part in sporting events at the 
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
Greek children had many 
types of toys, including 
terra cotta dolls like this 
one. This doll has jointed 
legs; that is, the legs can 
move separately from 
the body. Children also 
played with small wagons, 
chariots, and small bones 
used to play a game like 
jacks.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
92
palaistra, a school devoted to physical education. They practiced such 
sports as wrestling, boxing, and throwing the javelin (a light spear). 
Girls from wealthy families remained at home, but they might 
receive some basic education in preparation for running their own 
household. Poor girls learned from their mothers or other female rela-
tives the skills they needed to farm or manage a household. A woman’s 
husband might also continue her education. 
Young girls were most visible in public at festivals. Every fourth 
year, for example, specially honored girls wove a new robe for the huge 
statue of Athena in the Parthenon. Girls might also be part of a choral 
performance.
Learning to read and write the Greek language was challenging, 
because there was no punctuation or even spaces between words. Once 
The plodding tortoise who defeats the over-
confident hare, the wolf who dresses as a 
sheep to catch a tasty meal, the fox who 
is sure the grapes he cannot reach must 
be sour—these well-known stories and 
countless others trace their roots to ancient 
Greece and a writer named Aesop. Each 
fable has a moral—a short saying that sums 
up the point of the story and offers advice for 
readers to follow. 
Some historians think Aesop was a leg-
endary figure of the sixth century b.c.e., 
not a real author, and the stories credited 
to him were actually folk tales told orally 
for generations. Other sources say he was 
a freed slave from Thrace who may have 
originally come from North Africa. Some of 
Aesop’s fables were written down around 
the third century b.c.e., and Roman writers 
began translating them into Latin during the 
first century c.e. In modern times, Aesop’s 
fables have appeared in picture books and 
been turned into cartoons. 
The Hen and the Golden Eggs
A farmer and his wife had a hen that laid a 
golden egg every day. They supposed that 
the hen must contain a great lump of gold 
in its inside, and in order to get the gold 
they killed it. Having done so, they found to 
their surprise that the hen was no different 
from their other hens. The foolish pair, thus 
hoping to become rich all at once, deprived 
themselves of the gain of which they were 
assured day by day.
(Source: Aesop’s Fables. Translated by George 
Fyler Townsend. Available online. The 
Internet Classics Archive. URL: http://
classics.mit.edu/Aesop/fab.html. Accessed 
April 29, 2008.)
Fables for the Ages 
In Their Own Words

93
a boy knew how to read and write, he began memorizing poetry— 
especially Homer’s stories, which were considered essential knowledge. 
Poorer boys and girls would learn a trade and perhaps learn some 
reading or writing as a result. But most did not have the time or money 
to learn how to read, so oral learning, through stories, speeches, and 
songs, remained the way most ancient Greeks came to know about their 
history and current events. 
In general, the Athenians valued education that stressed following 
traditions and maintaining social order.
Country Life
The urban accomplishments of ancient Greece—the Parthenon, the 
theater, government, schools of philosophy—are the most famous 
reminders of ancient Greece. But it is estimated that as much as 80 per-
cent of the Greek population lived outside the cities. They produced the 
food that was consumed by city dwellers and that helped drive the trade 
the Greeks had with other countries. The Greeks knew they depended 
on peasant farmers for their food, so festivals were often planned to 
accommodate the farmers’ busiest seasons. 
The ancient Greeks became skilled at terracing the hillsides to cre-
ate more area to farm. Agricultural terraces are built along the sides of 
hills. Rocks are used to create terrace steps along the hillsides, and then 
these steps are filled with soil. 
Although the water supplies in Attica were scarce and the soil was 
thin and rocky, farmers could still grow olives and grapes for wine. In 
between the rows of olive trees, Athenian farmers planted barley for 
their oikos. Athens had to import most of its grain, but this was not 
common among the other Greek city-states.
Goats and sheep provided milk and wool for weaving fabric, 
although sheep’s wool was much more common for clothing. Manure 
was collected for fertilizer, and manure-producing animals also pro-
vided food. Bees were kept for honey.
The country farmer and his wife might work alongside two or 
three slaves. The farmer perhaps kept his hoplite equipment stored in 
his home or displayed over the fireplace. The deme was their center, 
functioning like a small village. The farmer participated in the govern-
ment of the deme as well as in the government of the polis. 
Agricultural life could be unpredictable, and droughts or crop 
failures pushed farmers into slavery before Solon banned this practice 
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
94
in the early sixth century b.c.e.. Still, the farm life was often praised as 
the ideal way to live. Aristophanes, whose plays urged peace during the 
Peloponnesian War, wrote of a farmer who fled behind the Athenian 
walls for safety, but “gaze[d] out towards the country, yearning for 
peace, sick of the town, missing my own village. . . .” (quoted by Robert 
Flaceliere in Daily Life in Greece at the Time of Pericles).
Spartan Society 
Spartan society changed considerably after the two Messenian Wars of 
the late 700s and the mid-600s b.c.e. The wars left the Messenian people 
completely under the control of Sparta. Spartan male citizens no longer 
farmed their own land or manufactured any items for sale or trade. From 
the 600s b.c.e. on, the Spartans’ Messenian serfs, the helots, farmed their 
own and the Spartans’ land and had to hand over most of the food they 
produced to the Spartans. 
Terra cotta figures of oxen 
and a plowman show how 
the Greeks tended their 
many crops. About 80 
percent of Greeks lived 
outside the cities and grew 
food for themselves and 
the people in urban areas. 

95
Since the helots outnumbered the Spartans and often rebelled 
against them, Sparta became a strictly military society. Confident in 
the capabilities of its military, Sparta, unlike most ancient cities, had no 
walls around it.
Under the social system that developed after the defeat of the Mes-
senians, Spartan male citizens were forbidden by law to perform any type 
of work except warfare. Female citizens could only raise future hoplites 
or future mothers of future hoplites. All contributions from Sparta to the 
literature and art of Greece stopped. Individuality was almost completely 
suppressed. Both simple and crucial decisions—from what hairstyle to 
wear to when to get married—were decided by the state. 
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
Like so many Greeks, the philosopher Ar-
istotle was horrified at how much freedom 
Spartan women had. He concluded, incor-
rectly, that it was because Spartan women 
refused to be controlled by the laws of their 
city-state. He could not imagine that the 
Spartans would actually choose to allow 
their women to lead freer lives. He also con-
cluded, also incorrectly, that this freedom 
made Spartan women useless, disorderly, 
and greedy. In fact, Spartan women, like 
Spartan men, were strong, brave, and lived 
simple lives of obedience to the state. In 
fact, Aristotle’s words are more revealing 
for what they say about Greek men than for 
what they say about Spartan women. 
[A]mong the Spartans in the days of their 
greatness, many things were managed by 
their women. But what difference does it 
make whether women rule, or the rulers 
are ruled by women? The result is the 
same. Even in regard to courage, which 
is of no use in daily life, and is needed 
only in war, the influence of the Spartan 
women has been most mischievous. . 
. . This license of the Spartan women 
existed from the earliest times, and was 
only what might be expected. For, during 
the wars of the Spartans . . . the men were 
long away from home, and, on the return 
of peace, they gave themselves into the 
legislator’s hand, already prepared by the 
discipline of a soldier’s life (in which there 
are many elements of virtue), to receive 
his enactments. But, when Lycurgus, as 
tradition says, wanted to bring the women 
under his laws, they resisted, and he gave 
up the attempt. . . .
(Source: Aristotle, The Politics of Aristotle, Book 
2. Translated by Benjamin Jowett. Available 
online. “Aristotle: Spartan Women,” Ancient 
History Sourcebook. URL: http://www.
fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/aristotle-
spartanwomen.html. Accessed March 30, 
2008.)
The Women of Sparta 
In Their Own Words

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
96
There was little obvious show of wealth among Spartan citizens. 
Each citizen husband and wife received similar amounts of food, with 
financial equality among all citizens being the ideal. In reality, however, 
incomes and wealth did vary within Spartan society, and Aristotle wrote 
in his Politics that poor ephors were easier to bribe. 
In general, Sparta did not welcome foreigners. It did allow various 
neighboring peoples, called perioikoi, to keep their independence but 
required them to pay taxes and fight in the Spartan army. The perioikoi 
also performed much of the commercial work that was forbidden to 
Spartan citizens.
Spartan women enjoyed considerably more freedom than other 
ancient Greek women. Spartan men spent little time at home, so wives 
This bronze figure of 
a running Spartan girl 
from about 600 b.c.e. was 
probably an ornament 
or decoration on a larger 
vessel. Spartan girls and 
women enjoyed much 
more freedom than other 
women in Greece. For 
example, they were free to 
play and exercise outdoors, 
which was not allowed for 
women in other parts of 
Greece.

97
and daughters did not have to take care of their needs. In addition, hel-
ots did all manual labor in homes and in the fields. 
All these factors meant Spartan women did not have many 
demands on their time. They could also own property, which most 
Greek women could not, except in rare circumstances. Spartan women 
freely exercised outdoors and had a reputation for talking back to their 
husbands and male relatives. 
Spartan children belonged to the state. Boys left home at age seven 
to live in all-male barracks and begin their training as future hoplites 
and citizens. The Spartans placed little value on knowledge of literature 
and music, unless it was for military purposes. Instead, they concen-
trated on teaching discipline, loyalty, and endurance. 
Unlike sheltered Athenian girls, who rarely left their homes, Spar-
tan girls played outdoors, running, wrestling, and wearing very little 
clothing, like the boys. The idea was to raise strong young women who 
would bear healthy sons.
By age 12, Spartan boys had learned to march in bare feet. They 
were given little to eat so they would learn resourcefulness, including 
how to steal food. They also learned how to kill. By this age, boys also 
were introduced to an older male mentor and tutor. 
What They Ate
Most Greeks ate simply. Bread was the main part of every meal. In gen-
eral, there were two types of bread available at the market: maza was 
made from roasted barley meal kneaded with honey and water or oil and 
cooked over heat; artos was a round wheat loaf baked in an oven. Maza 
was less expensive and so was more common among poorer residents. 
Everything else accompanying the bread was referred to as opson, 
whether it was vegetables, olives, eggs, or meat. Vegetables were more 
expensive than lentils, so lentils were another staple food for the poor. 
Lentil soup made an inexpensive but filling meal. 
A typical Athenian breakfast (one of perhaps two daily meals) was 
maza or artos soaked in diluted wine with a few olives or figs. (Wine 
diluted with water was a regular part of the Athenian diet.) 
Meat was usually eaten only at festivals, after a sacrifice. Greeks 
ate perhaps four pounds of red meat per person each year, plus snails, 
fish, and birds. People who lived in the country had more meat in their 
diet, while city dwellers ate more fish, imported from the Black Sea. A 
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
98
favorite dish among the Spartans was a broth that included wine, ani-
mal blood, and vinegar.
what they wore
Women (or their servants) wove the cloth for the family’s clothing. 
Women usually wore a long dress called a chiton. It was made from a 
large piece of fabric, about 6 feet wide by 11 feet long. The Doric-style 
chiton was actually two dress lengths fastened with a brooch (an orna-
ment with a hinge and a catch, like a pin) at the shoulders. It hung in 
folds and was belted around the waist. The Ionian style chiton had holes 
cut for the arms and neck and also hung in folds. 
The fabric was made from finely woven wool, linen, or cotton mus-
lin. Corinth exported ready-made robes of fine linen.
the first harvest from an olive tree represents 
a long-awaited investment: It takes about a 
dozen years before a first crop is produced, 
and another 25 before the tree is fully mature. 
But then an olive tree can last for centuries.
olive oil was used by the greeks to light 
their lamps, for lubrication, and even on their 
bodies: Athletes rubbed it on themselves 
before exercising. Afterward, they used a tool 
called a strigil to scrape off excess oil and dirt 
before bathing. greek doctors also used olive 
oil as a medicine to heal wounds and treat 
such problems as nausea and insomnia. 
the philosopher Democritus (ca. 470–ca. 
380 b.c.e.) believed that eating olive oil led 
to a long life. modern doctors tend to agree. 
olive oil has no cholesterol and is one com-
ponent of the mediterranean diet, which also 
includes vegetables and whole grains. this 
diet can lower the chances of developing 
heart disease and cancer, according to a 
study of more than 20,000 adults in modern-
day greece (as reported in the New England 
Journal of Medicine).
today, olives remain one of greece’s most 
important crops. Almost 15 percent of its farm-
land is devoted to them. the European Union 
encourages farmers in greece and several 
other mediterranean countries to produce as 
many olives as possible, and the olives and 
their oil are then sold outside Europe. this 
profitable trade has led farmers to abandon the 
old practice of spacing trees fairly wide apart. 
Ancient olive groves have been plowed under 
and new farms, with tightly packed trees, have 
replaced them. In 2001, the WWf (formerly the 
World Wildlife fund) reported that the changes 
in olive farming were destroying the soil in 
parts of southern Europe, as well as depriving 
some animals of their natural habitat.
CONNECTIONS
The Importance of Olives

99
For warmth women (and men) wore a shawl-like himation, which 
was artfully draped over the shoulders. They also wore caps or veils 
and carried umbrellas to protect them from the sun. Women wore their 
long hair up, or sometimes curled, and decorated it with combs made 
from bone, ivory wood, bronze, or tortoise shell.
Men wore a short tunic. White fabric signified wealth, while others 
wore natural-colored wool. Spartan children and some poorer Athenians 
might wear a himation alone, just large enough to wrap around the body. 
Decorated vases show people of all classes in bare feet, although 
there were shoemakers. Travelers often wore boots. Wealthy women 
wore fancy shoes.
The Gods and Religion
Births, funerals, weddings, the departure of a soldier for war—all were 
conducted with great attention to rituals intended to please the gods. In 
both public and private life, religion was an important part of everyday 
activities.
The gods were believed to be living beings who constantly influ-
enced daily events. Each god had one or two areas of human activity or 
the physical world that he or she watched over. Poseidon, for example, 
ruled the seas, while Apollo was the god of both medicine and music. A 
sailor hoping for smooth waters or a doctor seeking a cure knew which 
god to pray to for help.
The most important Greek gods and goddesses, 12 in all, were 
thought to be a family known as the 12 Olympians. They lived atop 
Mount Olympus in northern Greece, the highest spot in the land. 
The gods all traced their roots to Gaia, the “mother Earth” that 
still lived beneath the Greeks. By feasting on nectar and a special food 
called ambrosia, the gods could live forever. (Today the word ambrosia 
can be used to describe an especially tasty food that is good enough for 
the gods.)
The Greek gods were a lot like the Greeks themselves. The gods ate, 
had relationships and children (sometimes with humans), and argued 
with one another. Gods could be kindly, cruel, or ridiculous. By creat-
ing gods who were just like them, the Greeks made their gods comfort-
ably familiar, even if they were sometimes fearsome. 
According to the Greeks’ religion, the gods played an active role 
in the life of humans. Festivals, rituals, sacrifices, and prayers were 
designed to honor the gods. In return, worshippers expected the gods 
A Shine for Shoes
A third century b.c.e. 
short play by writer 
Herodas (dates 
unknown) features two 
women at a shoe shop 
arguing with the shoe-
maker over the price of 
his shoes. He lists his 
fine selection, includ-
ing “espadrilles, mules, 
slippers, Ionian bootees, 
party overshoes, high 
button-boots . . . Argos 
sandals, scarlet pumps. 
. . . ” (quoted in Robert 
Flaceliere’s Daily Life in 
Greece at the Time of 
Pericles).
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e

E m p i r E  o f  A n C i E n T  G r E E C E
100
to grant them favors or produce a positive result: victory in war for a 
city, a good harvest in a particular deme, or the birth of a healthy child 
within an individual family. People also believed the gods could inform 
them about future events and heal the sick. 
The gods’ active role in human affairs extended to the physical 
world. During a storm, the Greeks would say “Zeus rains” or “Zeus 
thunders,” because Zeus was lord of the sky. They literally saw the 
immortals’ footprints in their landscape, as well; they believed a 
mountaintop got its unusual shape because the winged horse Pegasus 
stamped his hoof there, and the flat outcrop of the Acropolis was where 
Athena and Poseidon battled to control Athens. 
The Greeks did not have a single organized church that directed 
how people should worship. Non-religious figures—heads of house-
The 12 olympians are not always the same 
dozen. Some sources do not list Hades 
because he moved from mount olympus 
to the underworld. other sources do not 
include Demeter, who abandoned olympus 
when she found out Zeus had allowed Hades 
to marry her daughter, persephone, without 
her permission. This list includes Demeter, 
for a total of 13 olympians. 
in this list, Leto is a Titan, of the genera-
tion of gods who came before the olympi-
ans. metis is intelligence personified. maia 
is the daughter of Atlas, a Titan. Her name 
means “mother” or “nurse.”
The Gods and 
Goddesses of Olympus
NAME 
GOD OF
FAMILY ROLE
SYMBOLS 
Zeus
Heaven and earth, 
thunder, all gods and men
father 
Lightning bolt, eagle, oak 
tree
Hera
Women, childbirth
Zeus’s wife (and sister)
peacock
Poseidon
Seas, earthquakes, horses
Zeus’s brother
Trident, dolphin
Hades
The underworld
Zeus’s brother
pomegranates, cap of 
invisibility

101
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
Demeter
Agriculture, corn, marriage
Zeus’s sister
Sheaves of wheat, torch
Hestia
Hearth and home
Zeus’s sister
fireplace
Aphrodite
Love, beauty
Daughter of Zeus and 
Dione (also said to have 
sprung out of sea foam)
Dove, swan, roses
Apollo
Sun, poetry, music
Son of Zeus and 
phoebus, twin brother 
of Artemis
Lyre, laurel tree, 
medicine, fine arts
Ares 
War
Son of Zeus and Hera
Dog, vulture
Artemis
Hunting, moon, virgins
Daughter of Zeus and 
Leto; twin sister of 
Apollo
Deer, bow and arrows, 
moon
Athena
Wisdom, arts and crafts
Daughter of Zeus and 
metis; emerged fully 
grown from her father’s 
head
owl, olive tree, warfare
Hephaestus
The forge, metal workers
Son of Zeus and Hera; 
husband of Aphrodite
Hammer
Hermes
Wealth, travelers, trade, 
communications, thieves, 
cunning
Son of Zeus and maia
Winged sandals, 
caduceus (two snakes 
wrapped around a staff)
holds, kings, public officials—led many religious rituals. The Greek 
religion lacked dogma—a set of strict beliefs and rules. Instead, as long 
as people stuck to their age-old rituals and did not reject the gods alto-
gether, they could interpret the gods as they wished. That freedom led 
to less-than-flattering and even comical portrayals of the gods in myth 
and drama. 
The lack of dogma and a highly structured religion also gave 
Greece’s great thinkers the freedom to inquire about the nature of the 
universe without worrying that their ideas would offend any religious 
leaders. 
The only people who were thought to have direct contact with the 
gods, writes Robert Parker in The Oxford History of Greece and the Hel-
lenistic World, were seers—people who could look into the future. But 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
102
even these prophets could be ignored without risking serious harm to the 
community. “The seer knows,” Parker writes, “but the ruler decides.” 
Family Rituals
Religion played an important role in family events. Weddings often 
occurred in Gamelion, the month that was considered sacred to Hera, 
the goddess who oversaw marriage. (Gamelion is roughly equivalent 
to our January. The Athenian calendar had 10 months of 35 or 36 days 
each.) 
The evening before a teen-aged bride left to go to her new hus-
band’s home, her family offered sacrifices to several gods, including 
Zeus, Hera, and Apollo. The bride gave up her childhood toys, such as 
her dolls, as offerings to the gods. Then she took a ritual bath in water 
from a special fountain. Her groom also took a ritual bath. 
On the wedding day, the homes of both the bride and groom were 
decorated with olive and laurel leaf garlands (wreaths). The bride’s 
father hosted a sacrifice and a banquet at which men and women sat 
separately. The bride was present but wore a veil. She was dressed in 
her best clothing and wore a garland on her head. Sesame cakes were 
included in the wedding feast to ensure fertility (the ability to have 
offspring). 
After the meal the bride received her gifts, which often included 
jewels. At the end of the day, a procession formed to accompany the 
bride to her new home. Spartan brides were carried off as if they were 
being kidnapped.
Greek marriages, especially among the wealthy, were primarily a 
social institution, not a personal relationship. Their purpose was to 
produce children to be caretakers for their parents in later years and 
then to inherit the family property. In many cases, wives and husbands 
did not have much to do with each other once two or three children 
were born. 
In Sparta, men spent little time at home. Marriage was manda-
tory, but husbands continued to dine with the other men in their 
communal mess halls. Divorce was legal among the ancient Greeks, 
but a woman could not set up her own household. She would have to 
return to the legal protection of a male relative if she wanted to leave 
her husband.

103
When a baby was born, an olive branch was hung on the family’s 
front door to announce a boy, or a piece of woolen cloth for a girl. Sev-
eral days after a child’s birth, a ceremony took place to welcome the 
child into the family and purify the mother and those who had attended 
her in childbirth. Purification rituals were mandatory after a birth, 
to cleanse those involved from the “contamination” of childbirth. On 
the 10th day after a child was born, a banquet was held and the child 
received a name and gifts. 
In Sparta, babies were considered state property. All newborns 
were shown to local elders—men with some degree of social author-
ity. According to the Roman historian Plutarch (ca. 46–ca. 120 c.e.), 
the elders examined the baby. If he or she was “well-formed and lusty 
they allowed it to be reared, but if it was sickly or misshapen they 
had it taken to the place called Apothetai, a high cliff . . .” where it 
was abandoned (as quoted in Robert Flaceliere’s Daily Life in Greece 
at the Time of Pericles). Unlike other babies of that era, who were 
wrapped in tight swaddling cloths that restricted their movement, 
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e
Weddings in ancient 
Greece included many 
rituals, such as this 
banquet scene from 200 
b.c.e. On the wedding day, 
the bride’s father hosted a 
sacrifice and a banquet at 
which men and women sat 
separately. 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
104
Spartan babies were loosely covered; they began their life of exercise 
immediately.
Most Greeks believed that after they died, their spirits, called 
shades, descended into the underworld of Hades. There they wandered 
aimlessly, experiencing neither pleasure nor pain. Certain religious 
groups, however, did talk about an afterlife where souls enjoyed bliss 
they could only dream about on earth. 
In either case, a proper funeral was considered essential. At one 
point laws were passed in various city-states, particularly in Sparta, 
prohibiting lavish displays at funerals because it raised envy among 
poorer people. Athens also banned lavish funerals because showing off 
was considered undemocratic.
Many valuables have been found by archaeologists that were bur-
ied along with the dead. These include coins. Money was sometimes 
were placed in the mouth of the body to pay for the ferry trip from the 
land of the living to the underworld, which lay across the mythical 
River Styx.
Public Festivals and Rituals
Almost any time Greeks congregated as a large, mixed group, it was 
for a festival honoring a god or goddess. Athens’s annual calendar 
was packed with religious festivals, and they took up almost half 
the days in a year. Some festivals allowed metics and even slaves to 
participate. 
At the heart of a festival was the sacrifice, usually of animals but 
sometimes grain as well. The purpose of a sacrifice was to please the 
gods and stay on their good side. Before the sacrifice, thousands of peo-
ple either watched or participated in the procession that accompanied 
a herd of cattle. The cattle were led to an outdoor altar at the temple to 
Athena on the Acropolis. There, priests and priestesses conducted the 
opening festival rituals on behalf of the community. 
Sacrifices were performed outside a temple before the assembled 
crowd. The animals were butchered and a small portion of the meat 
was burnt on an altar as an offering to, in this case, Athena. Then 
the rest of the meat was roasted and distributed among the crowd 
for a communal feast. Over the next several days, Athena was enter-
tained by contests in choral singing, athletics, and instrumental 
performances.
A Place Like Heaven
A few lucky people, 
the ancient Greeks 
believed, might spend 
their afterlife in Elysium. 
This mythical land was 
the final resting place for 
heroes favored by the 
gods and was said to 
exist somewhere beyond 
the known human world. 
The poet Pindar said the 
lucky souls who reached 
Elysium found “the plains 
around their city are red 
with roses and shaded 
by incense trees heavy 
with fruit” (as quoted in 
Charles Freeman’s The 
Greek Achievement). The 
notion of Elysium has 
endured in the phrase 
“Elysian fields,” which 
poets and others have 
used to mean paradise. 

105
Women in ancient Greece played their most visible public role in 
religion and the festivals honoring the gods. In fact, there was even 
a festival called Thesmorphoria that was exclusively for women. For 
three days, they interacted freely, without any men controlling their 
actions. Women also sang in choruses at weddings and other ceremo-
nies, sometimes after receiving special training. Sappho, the great 
poet, ran a school for aristocratic girls who hoped to sing in a chorus. 
The most important public role women played was as priestesses. 
Like male priests, priestesses were employed by the city-state to serve in 
the local god’s temple. The job was not full-time and priestesses did not 
need special skills for their work. The position of priestess did not lead 
to any special political or economic power, although it might boost the 
social standing of a woman chosen for the job. 
the ancient olympics of greece led to the 
modern olympic games, first held in Athens 
in 1896. the founders of the modern games 
were inspired by the greek tradition of calling 
a temporary peace in any wars taking place 
when the olympics were scheduled to begin. 
the modern olympics were seen as a way to 
promote peace among nations. 
today, both winter and summer games 
are held, featuring hundreds of events in 
more than 35 sports. Athletes still compete 
in such greek sports as running, boxing, and 
wrestling, and the Summer olympics still 
has a pentathlon. In the modern event, men 
and women shoot, fence (swordplay), swim, 
compete in horse jumping, and run. 
In 2004, the Summer olympics returned 
to Athens. the opening ceremony included a 
pageant that retold the history of ancient and 
modern greece, and illustrated greece’s many 
lasting contributions to modern culture. Some 
ancient olympian traditions were revived, such 
as the medal winners receiving crowns of olive 
leaves. the marathon race began in marathon 
and ended in Athens, and the shotput competi-
tion was held in the ancient sporting ground in 
olympia, with spectators sitting on the grassy 
hillsides just as the ancient greeks did. 
Even when greece is not hosting an olym-
pics, it plays a central part. greece always 
marches into the stadium first during the 
opening ceremony, no matter where the 
games are held. And for both the Summer 
and Winter games, a torch is lit in olympia, 
using the sun’s rays reflected off a mirror. the 
torch is then brought by relay runners to the 
site of the games and used to light the olym-
pic flame. the olympic flame traces its roots 
to the ancient greek games, when a flame in 
honor of Zeus burned throughout the event.
CONNECTIONS
The Modern Olympics
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
106
One special job for priestesses was serving as a temple’s oracle. 
People came to the oracle seeking advice or information about the 
future. The priestess of the oracle went into a trance that supposedly 
enabled her to communicate with the temple’s god. She then provided 
an answer for the questioner. The most famous oracle was at the temple 
of Apollo at Delphi.
Art and Athletics in Religion 
Religion and its festivals led to important developments in Greek cul-
tural life that have influenced the modern world, as well. The annual 
Athenian festival honoring Dionysus led to the development of Greek 
drama. The Greeks first celebrated the god of wine and merrymaking 
by singing and dancing to praise him. The songs and dances evolved 
into plays, with first one actor speaking to the crowd, then another, 
until drama was born. Theaters then appeared across the Greek world. 
Music and dance continued to play key roles in Greek drama. Men 
played all the roles, wearing costumes and masks. Playwrights entered 
contests to see whose play would be performed, and the winners 
became some of the ancient world’s first celebrities. Actors and produc-
ers also won awards for their work. 
The festival honoring Zeus at Mount Olympia, held every four 
years, became known as the Olympics and was the best athletics 
competition in Greece. Athletics was considered an appropriate way 
for men to prove their merit and was seen as necessary for military 
preparedness. Male athletes and spectators arrived from all over 
the Greek world (women were strictly forbidden to attend). Athletes 
arrived early to give themselves time to prove to judges they were of 
Greek birth. 
The actual competition was held in an enclosed area called the 
altis. The area included two temples (one dedicated to Zeus and one to 
his wife, Hera), as well as a stadium. In fact, the English word stadium 
comes from the Greek word stadion, a unit of measurement of about 
600 feet. 
Spectators camped out on the surrounding plains at night, and by 
day crowded the grassy hillsides overlooking the stadium as runners 
raced back and forth, rather than around its perimeter. Stones embed-

107
ded in the ground held special starting gates (the stones are still visible 
today). Drawings of the games on Greek pottery show referees holding 
rods to keep eager athletes from jumping the starting signals. 
Athletes competed in the pentathlon, a combined contest of long 
jump, running, discus and javelin throwing, and wrestling. (The name 
comes from the Greek words pente, meaning “five,” and athlon, “con-
test.”) Other events included foot races of various lengths, horse and 
chariot races, boxing, and an event called the pankration. This sport 
was a blend of boxing and wrestling. Fighters could inflict pain in any 
way, except by gouging their opponent’s eyes or biting. 
All Olympic athletes competed as individuals, rather than as part 
of a city-state team. And athletes at the Olympic games not only repre-
sented physical excellence, they also represented wealth. After all, a top 
athlete needed plenty of time—leisure time—to develop his strength, 
speed, and agility. A typical Greek peasant farmer had no time to train 
for athletic competitions.
The award for Olympic champions was quite simple: Winners were 
crowned with a plain wreath of olive or laurel leaves. But once an ath-
lete returned home, the honors he received could really add up, espe-
cially because the games gained in importance over the decades from 
their beginnings in 776 b.c.e. In fact, the Olympics inspired young men 
to try to become professional athletes (there were athletic contests at 
other festivals during the off years of the Olympics). Top athletes could 
bring in a decent income from appearance fees and by participating in 
other sporting events, much as they do today.
E v e r y d a y  L i f e  i n  A n c i e n t  G r e e c e


109
109
THE GREEKS CREATED A BODY OF LITERATURE AND 
philosophy whose impact endures into the 21st century. People before 
the Greeks thought about the nature of the world, but the Greeks left 
behind a written record that stimulated debate and laid a foundation for 
future study. Norman Cantor and Peter Klein, in their introduction to 
Ancient Thought: Plato and Aristotle, wrote, “Not only did the Greeks 
fashion new forms of intellectual artistic expression—tragedy, history, 
and philosophy—but they provided an entirely new set of intellectual 
categories through which the world could be viewed and judged.” 
homer and early literatUre
The foundation of ancient Greek culture was the poet Homer. Greeks 
referred to their favorite storyteller as simply “the poet.” Homer’s sig-
nificance was so great that several city-states claimed to be his birth-
place. The stories he is credited with brilliantly retelling—the two epic 
poems Iliad and Odyssey—had been passed down orally for centuries.
Homer’s literature served a variety of purposes. With beautiful 
language, it spoke to the Greeks of their noble past and of their special 
relationship with the gods, and it offered a sense of unity that overcame 
their geographic barriers and political separation. Along with the Bible, 
Homer’s works are considered the basis of literature in the Western 
world.
The way Homer told the story of the Iliad, it is not about the Trojan 
War as much as it is about “repercussions of the quarrel between the 
mightiest Greek hero, Achilles, and . . . Agamemnon,” wrote Kenneth 
GREEK ART, PHILOSOPHY, 
AND SCIENCE
C H A P T E R  6
O P P O S I T e
This vase from about 510 
b.c.e. shows a pottery 
workshop. Pottery was 
an important export in 
ancient Greece. Earlier 
styles from Corinth 
showed black figures 
painted on red clay. Later 
styles from Athens showed 
unpainted figures on a 
black background.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
110
J. Atchity in The Classical Greek Reader. It is a story about heroes and 
gods, driven by all-too-human weaknesses and misunderstandings, and 
it is a myth “by which the Greeks explained . . . all of life and death.” 
In the Odyssey, the hero Odysseus introduces the concept of moral 
relativism (doing whatever is required at a given moment to survive). 
This earns him Athena’s admiration. “We’re both old hands at the arts 
of intrigue,” she tells Odysseus. 
The other significant early Greek writer was Hesiod, who worked 
around 700 b.c.e. He was from Boeotia, an area with rich farmland, and 
his book Works and Days dealt with agricultural life as well as his own 
philosophy. In it, he discussed the difference between good strife and 
bad strife. Good strife are those challenging situations, such as compe-
titions, that make us work harder. Bad strife is created by self-centered 
persons (or the gods) and disrupts social harmony. 
Poetry
Sappho (d. ca. 580 b.c.e.), born in Mytilene on the island of Lesbos, is 
considered one of the first poets to deal with personal thoughts and 
feelings. She was much admired by ancient Greek writers who followed 
her, including Plato. Although she was a wife and mother, she often 
wrote of erotic feelings toward other women. Consequently, members 
of the medieval Christian Church destroyed much of her poetry. 
Pindar (ca. 518–438 b.c.e.) was a Theban aristocrat educated in Ath-
ens. His lyric poetry was much in demand. Lyrical poetry was sung to 
accompaniment of the lyre, a musical instrument much like a small harp. 
Pindar was the most famous and productive lyric poet of his era.
What survives of his works are four books of victory odes he was com-
missioned to write for his fellow aristocrats, who were athletic champions. 
Just as it was not proper for generals to boast of their military accomplish-
ments, Pindar’s musical odes did not focus on any one individual’s athletic 
achievements. Rather, they described the athlete’s noble family or even 
told a mythological story related to the champion’s success.
The Birth of Drama
Greek drama developed as part of Athens’s festival tribute to Dionysus, 
who was the son of Zeus and a mortal Theban woman. Dionysus was 
the god of drama and wine. Every year playwrights were chosen to pres-
A Poem by Sappho
In gold sandals 
dawn like a thief 
fell upon me
(From The Classical Greek 
Reader)

111
ent their plays at the festival. At first, these were primarily tragedies, 
but comedies also eventually were presented. The tragedies were writ-
ten in verse and drew heavily on Greek mythology, featuring stories of 
often-tragic dealings between humans and gods. 
Plays were performed at an outdoor theater each spring. As many 
as 14,000 spectators might crowd onto the Acropolis hillside that 
served as theater seating. By the fifth century b.c.e., stone seats had 
been added to the hillside. 
The stage was a raised platform and scenery was often simple, 
but the actors’ costumes were elaborate. There might even be special 
effects, such as an actor being lifted by a crane to appear to fly. The 
G r e e k  A r t ,  P h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
This excerpt is from Sophocles’ great tragic 
play, Antigone. After King Oedipus was ex-
iled from the city of Thebes, his younger son 
Eteocles claimed that he should be king. He 
sent away his older brother, Polyneices. Poly-
neices then attacked Thebes, but neither son 
won because they killed each other in battle. 
The new Theban king, Creon, declared that 
Eteocles would be buried and honored as a 
hero while Polyneices’ body would not be 
buried, and would be left to rot. The penalty 
for trying to bury the body was death. 
Polyneices’ sister Antigone insisted that 
her brother’s body must be buried so that 
his spirit can rest in peace. She went to the 
battlefield and performed the burial rituals 
over Polyneices’ body. Then she allowed 
herself to be captured. A defiant Antigone 
was brought to Creon, who demanded 
to know how she dared to break his law. 
Antigone insisted that even if her actions 
went against Creon’s commands, they did 
not break the higher laws of the gods. Her 
impassioned speech concludes by insulting 
Creon and his laws.
I know all too well I’m going to die— 
how could I not?—it makes no difference  
what you decree. And if I have to die 
before my time, well, I count that a gain. 
When someone has to live the way I do, 
surrounded by so many evil things, 
how can she fail to find a benefit 
in death? And so for me meeting this fate 
won’t bring any pain. But if I’d allowed 
my own mother’s dead son to just lie there, 
an unburied corpse, then I’d feel distress. 
What going on here does not hurt me at all. 
If you think what I’m doing now is stupid, 
perhaps I’m being charged with foolishness 
by someone who’s a fool.
(Source: Sophocles, Antigone. Translated by Ian 
Johnston, Arlington, Va.: Richer Resources 
Publications, 2005.)
Classic Tragedy 
In Their Own Words

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
112
playwright was the show’s director, producer, and songwriter, too, 
because the dramatic storyline was enhanced by singing parts per-
formed by a chorus. 
The first Greek plays had just a single actor and a chorus, with the 
main emphasis still on singing and dancing. Aristotle credited Aeschy-
lus (525–456 b.c.e.), an aristocrat from Eleusis in Attica, with creating 
the type of performance that is familiar to theatergoers even today. 
Aeschylus added a second actor and minimized the role of the chorus 
in his work. Like most men of his time, Aeschylus fought in the Greek-
Persian Wars; in fact, his brother Cynegirus was killed at Marathon. 
Aeschylus wrote more than 70 plays, including Seven Against The-
bes, which inspired classic films such as The Seven Samurai and The 
Magnificent Seven. He won many Dionysian festival competitions, but 
he was defeated in 468 b.c.e. by the 27-year-old Sophocles (ca. 496–406 
b.c.e.). Sophocles’ plays introduced a third and later a fourth actor, 
expanding the importance and variety of dialogue in drama. 
Euripides (480–406 b.c.e.) was another great Greek dramatist. His 
plays often featured strong female roles. One example is Medea, the 
story of a non-Greek woman from the kingdom of Colchis who was 
considered a witch. She and the Greek prince Jason have had two sons 
together. But then Jason plans to marry a Corinthian princess for the 
prestige it will bring him. Medea eventually murders Jason’s bride-to-
be, and then their children. Yet Euripides presents her—an “uncivilized 
foreigner”—as a sympathetic character driven to despair and rage by 
the cold and smug Greek Jason. 
Comedy
Originally, the purpose of comedy was to critique politics, government, 
or society in a humorous way—the humor making the criticism easier 
to swallow. This particular kind of comedy is called satire. Aristo-
phanes was the greatest of the Classical Greek comic playwrights. He 
used humor to express his views on a number of social issues, including 
his desire for peace during Athens’s darkest hour—the Peloponnesian 
War. He also made fun of Athens’s leader Cleon, the philosopher 
Socrates, and even Dionysus, who was portrayed as a coward in The 
Frogs—which was being performed at the festival honoring Dionysus! 
Aristophanes wrote 40 plays, of which 11 survive. The humor in his 
plays ranged from slapstick to obscene to sophisticated and sharp. 

113
A new style of comedy developed during the fourth century b.c.e.
This new comedy eliminated satire and the chorus. It used actors to 
tell simple stories of people in real-life situations. Certain character 
types—what are called stock characters—appeared in every play. These 
usually included a young woman and the man who pursued her. 
The best-known writer of new comedy style was Menander (ca. 
342–292 b.c.e.). Aristotle and other ancient Greeks noted that Menander 
was not a particularly funny comic writer. But other playwrights praised 
his ability to write dialogue and show a more realistic version of life. 
The key feature of new comedy was that it was not political. This 
is partly because Menander wrote while Athens was under Macedo-
nian occupation, and political criticism could lead to trouble. However, 
while new comedy was more realistic, it still did not show real life. 
Menander’s plays were more like television shows now—based on real 
life, but not realistic. 
Menander’s greatest importance came as an influence on later 
Roman playwrights, such as Plautus (ca. 254–184 b.c.e.). Plautus took 
the stock characters and situations from Athenian new comedy and 
g r e e k  A r t ,  p h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
Both the form and content of ancient greek 
theater survive today. In addition, the mod-
ern English words for the two main styles of 
drama, tragedy and comedy, come from the 
greek words tragoidia and komoidia. 
Aristotle studied the works of the great 
tragic writers and described the structure he 
found in his Poetics. He believed the plot of a 
play should focus on one main theme and take 
place over just one day. from Aristotle’s writ-
ings, later playwrights came up with the idea of 
the “three unities” of place, time, and action: A 
play should be set in one location, unfold over 
a limited time frame (no more than one day), 
and focus on just one major event. Aristotle 
also said the purpose of dramatic tragedy is to 
stir fear and pity in the audience, leading to an 
emotional release called catharsis.
the three unities were held up as an 
ideal for centuries and are still taught today, 
although many playwrights do not follow 
them. Students of theater also learn about 
catharsis and the role drama plays in creating 
an emotional tension in the audience that is 
released by the ending. 
the plays Aristotle studied are still per-
formed around the world. the great greek 
playwrights wrote about themes that all 
humans understand: love, family rivalries, 
revenge, suffering, the horror of war. 
CONNECTIONS
Modern Theater and the Greeks 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
114
added gags, puns, and physical humor. His style has influenced play-
wrights and comedians right up to the present day. The musical A 
Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum is based on Plautus’s 
work, using some of the same jokes that cracked up Roman audiences 
more than 2,000 years ago. 
Recording History
Another important Greek innovation in ancient literature was record-
ing true events—history. (The word comes from the Greek istorie, 
which means “inquiry” or “research”). The Roman statesman Cicero 
(106–43 b.c.e.) called Herodotus the father of history for his books 
about the Persian wars, which were based on actual events and person-
alities—unlike Homer’s Iliad. 
Herodotus’s interests went beyond Greece, and his Histories 
include curious facts about other cultures. Much of what we know 
today about the history of the Greek world and its neighbors comes 
from Herodotus. However, since his descriptions were often based on 
how Greeks imagined life to be rather than reality, modern historians 
understand his accounts are not always accurate. 
Herodotus’s competitor was Thucydides, whose subject, the Pelo-
ponnesian War, was personally familiar to him. He began record-
ing events when the war first broke out, immediately recognizing its 
importance. He also added analysis and drew his own conclusions 
about events. He wrote in his books that he based his opinions both on 
what he saw and on what other eyewitnesses to events told him. 
Other Greek historians who followed Herodotus and Thucydides 
included Xenophon. Like Thucydides, Xenophon was exiled from 
Athens and his history was therefore sympathetic to Sparta. Another 
historian was Polybius (ca. 205–ca. 125 b.c.e.), who wrote about the 
transition of the Greek world to Roman rule. 
Modern historians value the ancient Greek historians for their 
eyewitness accounts and insights into social and political attitudes. 
Yet modern readers cannot take the ancient histories as absolute truth. 
In some cases, the historians relied on oral sources, which might have 
included legends along with facts. The Greek writers also brought their 
own opinions to what they wrote, choosing to include or exclude cer-
tain facts as they saw fit (modern historians struggle with this same 

115
issue). Still, as both literature and history, the Greek texts remain enter-
taining and useful. 
Music
Music was indispensable to the Greeks. The god Hermes was credited 
with making the first lyre from a tortoiseshell when he was an infant. 
Music was recommended by Plato as a standard part of a child’s educa-
tion, and in the Iliad Achilles was as skilled with his lyre as he was with 
his weapons. 
In The Histories, Herodotus described the 
conflict between the Greeks and the Persian 
Empire. While telling the story of their own 
civilization in conflict with another, many 
people would be inclined to take sides. But 
Herodotus tried to show each side’s per-
spective in the struggle. 
Herodotus also carefully recorded the 
customs of many peoples and countries. 
Often this information was gathered from 
people he met, rather than from seeing things 
himself. He tried to evaluate the truth of the 
information he received, and sometimes 
offered it with a caution that it might not be 
accurate. Still, modern historians believe not 
all of Herodotus’s information was accurate. 
This is part of his description of the people of 
Thrace, a region north and east of Greece.
They consider tattooing a mark of high 
birth, the lack of it a mark of low birth. 
The best man, in their opinion, is the 
idle man, and the sort least worthy of 
consideration is the agricultural laborer. 
The most reputable sources of income 
are war and plunder. So much for their 
striking customs. 
The only deities they worship are Ares, 
Dionysus, and Artemis—though their 
kings, in contrast to people generally, 
pay particular reverence to Hermes; they 
swear by no other deity but Hermes, and 
claim their own descent from him.
When a rich Thracian is buried, the 
custom is to lay out the body for three 
days, during which, after a preliminary 
period of mourning, a feast is held of 
all sorts of animals slaughtered for the 
purpose. Then the body is buried, with 
or without cremation, a mound is raised 
over it, and elaborate games set on foot. 
The most valuable prizes in the games are 
awarded for single combat. 
(Source: Herodotus, The Histories. Translated 
by Aubery de Selincourt. London: Penguin 
Classics, 2003.) 
History or Just a Story?
In Their Own Words
G r e e k  A r t ,  P h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
116
The works of poets were often 
regarded as songs, and by the sixth 
century b.c.e., the performance of 
poetry was generally accompanied 
by a lyre. The simpler form of the 
lyre could be found in Greek homes, 
while a similar and more complex 
instrument, the kithara, was played 
by professional musicians at festival 
competitions. 
Another type of festival per-
formance was the dithyramb, a 
dancing chorus that evolved into 
drama. The word orchestra comes 
from the Greek word for “dance” 
(orcheisthai), and referred to the 
round stage where the chorus mem-
bers performed. 
The aulos, a reed instrument 
(like an oboe or a clarinet) that 
often had two pipes, was also pop-
ular and was often used to play 
dancing music. But lyre playing was 
especially desirable because the performer could sing and play at the 
same time. 
pottery as art and history
The masks worn by the actors in Greek tragedies and comedies were 
quite large. They had exaggerated expressions, so audience members 
who were seated some distance from the stage could see them. One 
reason we know this is from the detailed decorations on Athenian 
pottery. The subjects of these decorations could be anything from 
mythological stories to household scenes to country farms. 
Another popular art form in ancient Greece was wall painting. 
Although none of those works survives, we can get an idea of what the 
wall art looked like from copies painted onto pottery. Most of the pot-
tery that survived the centuries unbroken has been found in tombs. 
This drinking cup shows 
two muses; the one on the 
right carries a lyre, a type 
of small harp. Music was a 
vital part of Greek culture, 
and it was a standard part 
of every Greek child’s 
education. 

117
Corinth was the most prominent producer of Greek pottery in the 
seventh and eighth centuries b.c.e. The typical Greek style of black 
figures painted on orange or red clay containers developed in Corinth. 
Corinthian potters were influenced by Near Eastern styles that featured 
geometric patterns and animal figures. However, the black figures on 
Corinthian pottery are not very detailed, and reveal little about the life 
of their makers.
The clay in Attica contains an element, illite, that gives its pottery 
glaze a beautiful glow. By the sixth century b.c.e., Athenian pottery 
was the dominant product and was imitated by the Corinthians. One 
market-savvy Athenian craftsman, Nicosthenes (d. ca. 505 b.c.e.), 
made a steady business of selling his work to the Etruscans in Italy by 
decorating his pottery with popular Etruscan themes, such as boxing 
and reproductions of scenes from Etruscan artwork. Some pottery 
was whimsical, such as the cup found in Attica and dated to about 
460 b.c.e. that is shaped like a cow’s hoof and painted with a scene of 
a farmer and his cow.
G r e e k  A r t ,  p h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
it is not so difficult to put on an ancient Greek 
drama; many of the works by Greece’s top 
playwrights have been copied and pre-
served. But it is not so easy to replicate a 
musical concert, using reproductions of 
ancient instruments. But an Australian musi-
cologist is playing musical detective to figure 
out what Greek music must have been like.
michael Atherton, a professor at the Uni-
versity of Western Sydney, is one of the 
people who studies clues about music in 
ancient Greece and then tries to reproduce 
the sounds. Although there was no form 
of written music, some of those clues are 
contained in musical documents that still 
exist, though most have missing sections. 
other clues include a few fragile and valu-
able instruments that have survived over 
the years, some descriptions from sources 
such as plato and Aristotle of how different 
instruments sounded, and pictures of the 
instruments and how they were held that are 
painted on ancient pottery. With the help of a 
violinmaker, Atherton tries to build copies of 
the Greek instruments and then figures out 
how to play them. 
Playing the Oldies

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
118
An innovation in Athenian pottery dating from about 525 b.c.e. was 
the reverse of the Corinthian black figure drawings. Instead, figures or 
objects were left unpainted but were given detail by etched-in lines, while 
the background was painted black. These painted pots offered detailed 
views of life in Athens. Winners of athletic competitions often received 
as a prize painted vases filled with olive oil from the trees of the sacred 
grove of Athena in the Academy. 
By the fourth century b.c.e., Athens was in decline economically 
and production of its famous vases died out as the pottery of southern 
Italy came into fashion. But fortunately, a number of painted vases 
survive from Athens’s most prosperous days, giving historians vividly 
detailed pictures of ancient Greek life and culture.
Sculpture Transformed
The artwork of the ancient Greeks began on a small scale with intri-
cately carved jewelry. Pieces have been found dating to the 10th and 
ninth centuries b.c.e. While Greek potters were producing more and 
more naturalistic images, Greek sculptors were gaining confidence and 
skill working with stone. 
The ancient Greeks considered the first sculptor of note to be 
Daedalus, whom supposedly lived around 1100 b.c.e. There are many 
legends about Daedalus, but there is no historical evidence that he actu-
ally existed. Even so, modern historians named a 
style of sculpture featuring small, abstract figures 
with triangular faces Daedalic in his honor. The 
unknown artists who made these sculptures were 
influenced by the art of the Near East. 
Sixth-century b.c.e. Greek sculpture looked 
Egyptian: strait-backed, stylized nude male figures 
called kouroi (the singular is kouros) faced forward 
with arms down at their sides and the left foot 
slightly in front of the right. A female version was 
a draped figure, and was usually placed in cemeter-
ies. Eventually, relief sculpture (three-dimensional 
images that emerge from a flat or curved sur-
face) began to be added to the bases of the kouroi 
statues.
By the fifth century b.c.e., Greek artists and 
writers were aware that the Greeks were building a 
The Greeks developed 
theater as part of their 
religious festivals. The 
forms of tragedy and 
comedy they created are 
the basis of all theater, 
even today. Greek actors 
usually wore masks like 
this one, which represents 
tragedy, to help audiences 
easily understand 
what characters they 
represented.

119
new political and military force in the world. They wanted to both honor 
their culture and get away from the foreign models they had once copied. 
In sculpture, this led to greater realism and the depiction of action, as in 
the Discobolus (“discus thrower”) sculpted by Myron of Eleutherae (ca. 
490–430 b.c.e.). Like all of his work, it was cast in bronze, but the only 
versions of it remaining are Roman copies in marble. 
The sculptor Polyclitus (464–420 b.c.e.) spent his long career in 
Argos, where he ran a school. His sculpture was representative of the 
Greek admiration for symmetry (being the same on both sides of an 
imaginary center line) and balance in art or architecture. The Greeks 
believed symmetry reflected perfection and that humans should imi-
tate it in their art. 
Polyclitus and his competitor Phidias (ca. 500–ca. 432 b.c.e.) were 
the masters during the Classical period of Greek art. The style of Poly-
clitus fit into a Greek ideal of art that dated back to the kouros, of trying 
to represent the perfect body. Polyclitus began a trend among sculptors. 
They copied the proportions of his sculpture and began featuring more 
humans, rather than gods, in their work. Attention to every detail of the 
subject matter, such as the folds on a cloak, showed the great technical 
skill developed during this period, and influenced artists for centuries to 
come. 
Architecture
The two main styles of architecture in ancient Greece were Doric and 
Ionic. The Doric style was seen in temples and other public buildings 
on the Greek mainland. The Ionic style was seen in Ionia and on the 
islands in the Aegean Sea. Today in architecture, the two styles are 
called orders. The orders are perhaps most easily identified by the types 
of columns used. Doric columns are wider, sturdier, and more simply 
styled than the slimmer, more decorative Ionic columns. 
A third order, Corinthian, was first used primarily inside temples. 
It dates from the fifth century b.c.e. Corinthian columns are similar to 
the ones in the Ionic order, but the tops of the Corinthian columns are 
more elaborately decorated. Roman architects later popularized the use 
of the Corinthian order on the outside of buildings. These types of col-
umns are still used today in buildings designed in the Classical style. 
The most readily available building materials in ancient Greece 
were stone and wood. In Corinth, the cultural center of early Archaic 
Greece, a temple for Poseidon was made entirely of stone. Its walls were 
G r e e k  A r t ,  P h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
Tricks of the Eye
The Parthenon was 
designed by two build-
ers, Ictinus (fifth century 
b.c.e.) and Callicrates 
(fifth century b.c.e.). 
They made use of some 
visual tricks that required 
great technical skills. 
For example, columns, 
when placed perfectly 
vertical, actually appear 
to be leaning slightly out-
ward. So the Parthenon’s 
columns were angled 
slightly inward to appear 
to be at a 90-degree 
angle to the ground. 
Also, to the human eye 
columns appear to be 
slightly tapered in the 
middle, so the actual col-
umns had a slight bulge 
added to them in the cen-
ter to compensate. Each 
column was made from 
sections, or drums, of 
marble stacked one atop 
the other, so each drum 
had to be cut precisely at 
slightly different angles, 
since the entire column 
had to lean inward. And 
the images sculpted into 
the frieze, placed high 
atop the building, would 
have been difficult for 
temple visitors to see, so 
the top part of the frieze 
was carved about two 
inches deeper than the 
bottom part. 

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
120
then covered with stucco (a type of 
plaster) and painted with geomet-
ric designs and figures. 
As Greece grew more pros-
perous, marble was preferred, 
despite the higher cost. Athens 
was fortunate to discover a large 
source of marble just to the north 
at Mount Pentelikon. The city-
state also had increasing wealth, 
thanks to money coming in from 
the Delian League after the Per-
sian Wars and from the Laurium 
silver mines, so it could afford 
this expensive material. 
Given the ready supply of mar-
ble and Athenian wealth, Pericles, 
the great Athenian leader, was able 
to establish an extensive public 
building program. They aim was 
to show the world that his was 
city the leader among the Greeks. 
The biggest and most important 
new building was the Parthenon, a 
temple dedicated to Athena (con-
struction of a new temple for the goddess had actually begun during the 
years of the Persian War, before the destruction of the Acropolis). 
Athena’s new temple was Doric in style and richly decorated with 
a 524-foot frieze, or sculpted band, around the top of the building. The 
frieze featured a single scene: the great procession through Athens that 
began the Panathenaic festival. The procession is shown moving from 
two starting points, finally meeting in the center of the eastern side of 
the building, over the temple’s entrance. 
The temple also has 92 intricately carved panels called metopes, 
and two carved column pediments, which are triangular pieces 
between the roof and the columns on the building’s front and back. The 
metopes were painted in bright colors and show mythological battles 
that proclaim the triumph of Greek culture over barbarians (uncivi-
lized people—anyone who was not Greek). 
Daedalus’s name means “cunning fabricator.” According 
to ancient greek history, he was an architect and engi-
neer as well as an artist. the ancient greeks also credited 
him with several inventions, including the axe and sails 
for ships. modern historians doubt he was a real person, 
though. 
today Daedalus is known as the main character in 
several important greek myths. on the island of crete, 
he is said to have built the first labyrinth, a maze of pas-
sageways and dead-ends, that contained the minotaur, 
a monstrous bull. Daedalus also built a set of wings for 
himself and his son Icarus, so they could escape crete 
after its king imprisoned them. the wings were made of 
bird feathers and wax. Daedalus instructed his son not 
too fly to close to sun because the wax would melt. Ica-
rus ignored his father’s advice and fell to his death. 
Artist, Architect, 
Engineer

121
Although today surviving Greek sculptures and buildings are in 
natural white marble, the ancient Greeks painted their statues and 
architectural friezes in vivid colors. So the Parthenon was not just an 
architectural marvel; it also featured an explosion of color. This must 
have been especially dramatic against the sunny, blue-sky backdrop of 
southern Greece.
Other new buildings on the Acropolis included the Erechtheum, 
an irregularly shaped building whose interior honored several gods. 
There was also the smaller Athena Nike (victory) temple. On its walls 
was a large painting depicting the victory at Marathon. 
Altogether, construction on the Acropolis lasted from about 450 
to 405 b.c.e. Historians know about how the buildings were con-
structed—including what kind of craftsmen were used and how much 
they were paid—because detailed records engraved in marble have 
survived. More importantly, the ruins of the whole project survive. 
“Mighty indeed are the marks and monuments of our empire which 
we have left,” said Pericles of the Acropolis (as quoted by Thucydides 
and found in The Cambridge Illustrated History of Ancient Greece). 
“Future ages will wonder at us as the present age wonders now.”
The buildings erected on the Acropolis and across Greece had a 
lasting impact on Western architecture. The Romans copied the various 
orders. They also copied the Greek fondness for grand public buildings 
that inspired awe for the gods and embodied the Greek values of order 
and balance. 
From the Renaissance through modern times, architects have turned 
back to these Greek and Roman ideals. (Although they did not copy the 
Greek and Roman habit of painting their buildings and sculpture. By the 
time other Europeans saw them, the paint had worn off.) The ancient 
styles are often used in buildings that are thought to be “temples” to such 
things as government, academics, and commerce. For example, the U.S. 
Supreme Court Building in Washington, D.C., with its pediments and 
Corinthian columns, reveals the importance its occupants play in the 
American legal system. In New York, the U.S. Stock Exchange is another 
Greek-temple-like structure. It is famous for the sculpture on its pediment 
showing Integrity as a woman protecting the inventions of humanity. 
Across Europe and North America today, many legislative build-
ings and parliaments echo the ancient Greco-Roman architectural 
styles. In this way, they connect the present systems of government to 
the greatness of Athenian democracy. 
G r e e k  A r t ,  P h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
Nashville’s Parthenon
Today Athens’s Par-
thenon is an ancient 
ruin. But to get an idea 
of what the Parthenon 
might have looked 
like in its glory days in 
Athens, head to Nash-
ville, Tennessee. The 
city of Nashville built a 
full-scale replica of the 
Parthenon in 1897 for 
the 100th anniversary 
celebration of Tennessee 
statehood. Surrounded 
by a large city park, it 
originally was made of 
plaster, wood, and brick, 
but was rebuilt in 1920 of 
concrete. 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
122
Thinking About the Universe 
Classical Athens was home to philosophy schools that drew students 
from all over Greece and, later, the Roman Empire. The great teachers 
of Athens remain some of the best-known thinkers today: Socrates, 
Plato, and Aristotle. At their schools, and at others, students learned 
mathematics, botany, biology, and astronomy, as well as philosophy—
the study of human values and knowledge.
But Athens was not where the idea of philosophy began. The first 
Greek philosophers came from Miletus, a city in Ionia. In the sixth 
century b.c.e., these thinkers started formally studying questions that 
humanity had been thinking about for centuries: What is the universe 
all about and what is the role of humans in it? 
Once again, the Greeks were inspired by knowledge they obtained 
from others—in this case, the Babylonians’ advanced knowledge of 
astronomy. The Babylonians kept detailed records of the movement of 
stars and planets and could accurately predict their future movements, 
suggesting the universe had some kind of order. The Greek thinkers, 
however, were not content to just record what they saw and make pre-
dictions. They wanted to understand why the universe worked the way 
it did. They then also began to ask “why” and “how” about events in the 
physical world and in the thought processes of humans. 
The Greeks’ studies were very original, because people had always 
assumed the answers to these questions were found in religion. It 
thunders because Zeus is angry, or people should behave a certain way 
because it pleases the gods. But the first philosophers doubted these 
divine interpretations of the natural world. They believed they could 
discover the order of the universe through observation and thought. 
This belief led to science and philosophy. 
Early on, these two fields were closely linked. Philosopher-scien-
tists asked, what is our world and the life in it made of? What is reality 
and what is perception? The answers to these questions combined sci-
entific theory and observation with creative reasoning. 
The First Philosophers
Thales of Miletus (ca. 640–546 b.c.e.) was the first known philosopher. 
He came up with the theory that water is the essence of life and real-
ity. This was the first time a thinker dismissed the idea that the gods 
might have something to do with reality, too. He is therefore credited 

123
with starting the field of physical science. Among his accomplishments, 
Thales predicted the solar eclipse of 585 b.c.e. 
Anaximander (ca. 610–546 b.c.e.) followed Thales, possibly as his 
student. He disagreed with Thales’ water theory, though, and suggested 
that the substance of the universe and the life in it is unidentifiable. He 
also said our world is but one of many. 
Anaximander was followed by his student, Anaximenes (ca. 590–
525 b.c.e.). He defined his teacher’s “unidentifiable substance” as air. He 
based his idea on his observations of water evaporating—water “chang-
ing into air.” Even the human soul consists of air, Anaximenes said. 
Though their theories might sound overly simple today, these three 
men from Miletus were quite revolutionary in suggesting that human 
beings can use their own reasoning and observations to come up with 
the definition of life itself.
Another great thinker from Ionia was Pythagoras (b. mid-sixth 
century b.c.e.), although his greatest fame came from work he did 
after he left his homeland. He believed the universe could be explained 
through mathematics. He taught that souls were immortal and entered 
new bodies after people died, and that a person’s actions in life influ-
enced what kind of body his or her soul would enter next. 
The Ionians were followed in the fifth century b.c.e. by other 
philosopher-scientists who continued to challenge the ideas of those 
who came before them about the universe and the nature of reality. 
Parmenides (b. 510 b.c.e.) was significant for suggesting the universe to 
be an unchanging, fixed entity, 
despite what the five senses 
might claim. His challenge, 
then, to future philosophers 
was to use intellectual meth-
ods as well as their observa-
tions to support their ideas of 
reality. 
Another Ionian, Anaxago-
ras (ca. 500–428 b.c.e.), said 
change is inevitable because of 
minute particles that are in con-
stant motion. These particles, 
or seeds, made up everything 
that existed, forming different 
g r e e k  A r t ,  p h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
The Pythagorean Theorem
the philosopher pythagoras and his followers did impor-
tant work in mathematics. pythagoras is best known today 
for the theorem that bears his name. Students around the 
world learn that the sum of the squares of the length of 
each side of a right triangle (a triangle with one 90-degree 
angle) equals the square of the length of the hypotenuse 
(the longest side): a2 + b2 = c2. With this formula, a person 
can determine the length of any side of a right triangle if he 
or she knows the length of the other two sides. 
CONNECTIONS

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
124
combinations to create such diverse things as people and dogs. His argu-
ments were expanded on by other philosophers, who said these small 
particles could not be divided into smaller particles. In Greek, these par-
ticles were called atoma, or “uncuttable.” This led to the English words 
atom and atomic. Modern science has shown that the Greek atomists 
were right about the idea of tiny particles that are always in motion and 
that make up all matter in the universe. 
socrates and plato
Socrates (470–399 b.c.e.), an Athenian, is credited with steering philoso-
phy toward the study of morality. In a city that valued beauty and wealth, 
Socrates was unusual. He came from humble birth and chose to remain 
poor. He supported his wife and children as a stonemason (someone who 
cuts and builds with stone) and served Athens as a hoplite. 
But Socrates spent his later years wandering through Athens, mak-
ing it his work to engage citizens in friendly but pointed discussions 
about justice, courage, and other moral issues. He did not ask for pay-
ment from those he taught informally. Perhaps his most famous line, as 
reported by Plato in his Apology (quoted in The Last Days of Socrates), 
is, “The unexamined life is not worth living.”
His discussions involved leading his conversation partner through 
a variety of questions, often arriving at unexpected conclusions. 
Socrates would claim he did not know the answers to the questions he 
asked. By asking questions, Socrates forced his listeners to draw their 
own conclusions, although he was always the one guiding the direc-
tion of the argument. This style of teaching is today called the Socratic 
method and is still used, primarily in law schools but also in other fields 
of study. 
Socrates was concerned with questions of right and wrong. This set 
him apart from a group called the Sophists. These were traveling teach-
ers-for-hire who were specialists in the art of rhetoric. Public speaking 
was an important skill for Greek aristocrats. One may have wanted to 
sway Assembly voters on a particular issue, be persuasive in court, or 
impress other influential men at a symposium. 
The Sophists promised to take students beyond rhetoric and teach 
them how to use logic to turn any argument in their favor. They were 
especially popular with politicians. But they came under criticism 
for their tendency to disregard right and wrong in favor of winning 
arguments.
Fanatic Followers 
The philosopher 
Pythagoras developed 
what seems today like 
a religious cult (a small 
group of people who 
follow a single leader 
and reject traditional 
practices). A group of 
students, both men and 
women, lived with him 
apart from Greek society. 
The Pythagoreans were 
vegetarians and avoided 
the usual Greek religious 
rituals. 

125
Socrates and his students, particularly Plato, opposed the Sophists 
and their methods of argument. Like his teacher, Plato sought the virtu-
ous and the ideal. His earlier writings were in the form of dialogues that 
often featured Socrates as one of the speakers and explained much of 
what Socrates taught. 
Plato also developed his own ideas. He believed that for every real, 
physical thing that existed, there was a corresponding form that was 
the ideal of that thing. He said the ideal form existed even if the real 
thing did not. For example, the form of a chair was separate from the 
real chairs that people sat on, although the real chairs had qualities of 
the form. 
Forms could also apply to human traits, such as virtue. He said 
a person could have attributes of the form of virtue, but they could 
never be completely virtuous. If this sounds a little strange, it did to the 
ancient Athenians as well.
G r e e k  A r t ,  p h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
Socrates was a good-humored character 
with a big personality and many influential 
friends. He was also an original, independent 
thinker, and this stirred suspicion in many 
Athenians. They accused him of destroying 
the morals of the city’s youth with his teach-
ings. His critics claimed that he encouraged 
people to reject the traditional Greek gods 
and discover new ways of explaining human 
existence. Although the ancient Greeks had 
no real religious rules to disobey in the first 
place, after the peloponnesian War many 
Athenians were insecure about their relation-
ship with the gods. 
Socrates was a target because of his 
refusal to follow convention. He also had a 
following of young men who were opposed 
to democracy. Some of them later became 
major figures among the Thirty Tyrants—the 
corrupt rulers put in place by the Spartans 
after they defeated Athens. But no one could 
directly accuse Socrates of supporting the 
Thirty, and in fact, he had openly disobeyed 
them. Still, Socrates was perceived to be a 
bad influence on Athenian youth. 
in 399 B.C.E., Socrates was tried by a jury 
of about 500 men. Slightly more than half 
voted to convict him of rejecting the Greek 
religion and harming the city’s youth with 
his teachings. He chose execution rather 
than admit wrongdoing and go into exile. He 
then drank poison hemlock, which was com-
monly used for suicide at the time. 
Death of a Philosopher

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
126
Plato also wrote about politics and society. His book Republic con-
tained many suggestions on how to achieve the ideal political state. It 
discussed not just government but also education and religion. 
Plato disliked traditional Athenian democracy, because he believed 
most people lacked the intelligence and moral character to rule wisely. 
He thought “philosopher kings” should rule, educating others in the 
right way to behave for the good of all society. Plato wrote in his Repub-
lic, “The law is not concerned with the special happiness of any class in 
the state, but in trying to produce this condition in the city as a whole, 
harmonizing and adapting the citizens to one another by persuasion 
and compulsion. . . .” (quoted in Norman Cantor and Peter L. Klein’s 
Ancient Thought: Plato and Aristotle). 
Aristotle
Aristotle was Plato’s most brilliant student. Aristotle arrived at Athens at 
age 17 from his home in northern Greece to study with Plato. Aristotle’s 
interests were vast. He not only continued the philosophical discus-
sion of virtue and ethics that he learned from Plato, but also conducted 
groundbreaking research in the natural sciences. 
Aristotle is also considered the first philosopher of science, because 
he tried to separate philosophy, which is the study of ideas, from science, 
the study of the natural world. He was the first person to try to spell out 
what science is and how it should be conducted. He was the first person 
to talk about biology, the study of life, and then break it down further into 
zoology, the study of animals. He also created the idea of a formal study 
of the operations of the polis, leading to the discipline we call politics 
or political science. (The word politics comes from the Greek politika, 
which means “things of the polis”—that is, doing government.) 
Aristotle separated mathematics from the study of the physical 
world—two disciplines that had previously been joined. (The word math-
ematics comes from the Greek word mathematikos, meaning “disposed 
to learn”; a mathema is a lesson or learning.) He then further divided 
math into arithmetic, plane geometry (the study of two-dimensional 
shapes) and solid geometry (the study of three-dimensional shapes). 
Even within philosophy, Aristotle narrowed down specific cat-
egories. He coined the term metaphysics, which is the branch of 
philosophy concerned with what is truly real and the nature of being. 
Metaphysics is still studied today, and metaphysical sometimes has a 

127
broader meaning, referring to things that are 
supernatural or beyond a person’s usual per-
ception of reality. 
Aristotle was also the founder of a branch 
of philosophy called logic. In a broad sense, 
logic is the rational thought humans use to 
solve problems. Aristotle developed rules of 
logic and logical argument. He created the 
syllogism, which sets up a thought with three 
statements. Once the first idea is accepted as 
true, ideas that are related to it can be shown 
to be true or false. The classic example is, “All 
men are mortal. Greeks are men; therefore, all 
Greeks are mortal.” The first two statements 
are true, so the conclusion must also be true. 
Aristotle tried to find a way to bring 
together observations, common sense and 
abstract thought. He concerned himself with 
establishing principles—basic truths. He wrote 
in The Physics (quoted in Ancient Thought: 
Plato and Aristotle) “[I]n the study of nature . 
. . our first object must be to establish principles.” Only by knowing 
the principles and causes of the natural world could humans truly 
understand it. 
Mathematics
Many thinkers whose names are not remembered today created theo-
rems (formulas or statements in mathematics or logic that are proven 
based on other formulas or statements) to explain the rules of geometry. 
These theorems rested on proofs that followed logical arguments. Some 
time around 300 b.c.e., the mathematician Euclid (ca. 325–ca. 265 b.c.e.) 
took the existing proofs and theorems and collected them into one set 
that became the foundation of geometry for the next 2,000 years. 
Euclid’s most famous work is The Elements. Plane geometry (the 
geometry of flat surfaces) and solid geometry (the geometry of three-
dimensional shapes), taken together, are still called Euclidean geom-
etry. Another kind of geometry that deals with curved surfaces is called 
non-Euclidean geometry. 
G r e e k  A r t ,  P h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
One of the most influential 
thinkers in history, 
Aristotle’s ideas continue 
to affect Western culture. 
Aristotle is also considered 
the first philosopher of 
science, because he tried to 
separate philosophy, which 
is the study of ideas, from 
science, the study of the 
natural world.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
128
Another great Greek scientist and mathematician of the Hellenistic 
period was Archimedes (ca. 287–212 b.c.e.). Levers had long been used 
to lift heavy objects. Archimedes took it upon himself to create a math-
ematical explanation for how long a lever must be to make it easier to 
lift a given weight. 
Archimedes also gave the first theoretical explanation of pi, the 
number that begins with 3.14 and continues forever. Pi is the ratio of a 
circle’s circumference (the outer edge) to its diameter (a line from the 
center point to the outer edge). Pi is part of the formula used to calcu-
late the circumference and area of a circle. In math, it is still indicated 
by the Greek letter π. 
Archimedes was also an active inventor. In this way, he was unlike 
most Greek scientists, who preferred to deal with abstract ideas. 
Archimedes is thought to be the inventor of a large screw that bears 
his name. Turning the screw moves a fluid from a low spot to a higher 
one. The Archimedes screw is still widely used today in industrial and 
engineering applications, including grain elevators, sewage treatment 
plants, and any place where drainage and pumping are required.
Other scientists of the age were very forward thinking. Aristarchus 
(ca. 310–ca. 230 b.c.e.) was the first to suggest that the sun is at the 
center of the solar system. The mathematician Eratosthenes (276–194 
b.c.e.) was able to calculate the circumference of the Earth to within 
just 100 kilometers of what we know it is today. Their ideas, however, 
did not catch on. It would be another 1,700 years or so before their 
theories were proven correct. 
Greek Medicine
Traditionally, the Greeks were like many ancient people. They discovered 
herbal cures and blended them with superstitions about sickness coming 
from evil spirits or the gods. The Greek doctor Hippocrates (ca. 460–ca. 
337 b.c.e.) was the first person to try to make medicine a true science. 
(Historians say that the writings attributed to him may have come from 
more than one source, however. Charles Freeman, in his book The Greek 
Achievement, refers to the “Hippocratic doctors,” rather than one person 
of that name.) 
By Hippocrates’ time, doctors were already rejecting the idea that 
magic or other supernatural forces could cause or cure illness. Hip-
pocrates then began applying reason and observation to the human 
Greek Numerals 
Archimedes and other 
Greek thinkers did not 
use numerals as they 
are used today. Like the 
Romans, Greeks used 
symbols to represent 
numbers. Just as each 
city-state had its own 
customs, often they also 
had their own number 
systems. Modern numer-
als did not reach Europe 
until they were brought 
from India by Arab trad-
ers hundreds of years 
later.

129
body and illness, just as philos-
ophers did with the universe as 
a whole. 
Some of his conclusions 
were wrong, such as the notion 
that four fluids, called humors, 
controlled human health, and 
that an imbalance of the humors 
caused disease. But Hippocrates 
and his followers did get some 
things right. They believed that 
good diet and exercise were the 
keys to health, and that in many 
cases the body could heal itself 
without the need for drugs.
One of Hippocrates’ last-
ing contributions to medicine 
is known today as the Hippo-
cratic Oath. All doctors after 
Hippocrates swore to Apollo 
and the other gods that they would not harm their patients. The basic 
idea of the oath is still relevant today. Doctors swear to treat the sick 
to the best of their ability, preserve patient privacy, teach the secrets of 
medicine to the next generation, and act with compassion.
The Greek scientist Herophilus (ca. 335–280 b.c.e.) added to the 
understanding of the human body by dissecting corpses. He showed 
for the first time that the veins and arteries carried blood through 
the body. He realized that a pulse was connected to a person’s heart 
beat and that the speed of the heart beat could change depending on a 
person’s health. Herophilus was also the first person to detect nerves 
and discover that they connected to the brain. He has been called the 
founder of anatomy, the study of the structure of the human body. 
g r e e k  A r t ,  p h i l o s o p h y ,  a n d  S c i e n c e
A Scientist’s Sayings
Along with his scientific contributions, Archimedes is 
known today for popularizing two phrases. He supposedly 
ran out of his house—from the bath—after figuring out a 
scientific problem, shouting the word eureka (“I have found 
it!”). today, eureka can be used when making any important 
discovery. It is also the motto of the state of california, refer-
ring to the discovery of gold there in 1848. 
Archimedes also said, regarding his study of levers, “give 
me a place to stand and with a lever I will move the whole 
world” (quoted in Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations). Since that 
time, a wide range of writers and speakers—from president 
thomas Jefferson to former vice president Al gore—have 
referred to Archimedes’ idea that with the right tools and 
knowledge, one can accomplish the seemingly impossible. 
CONNECTIONS


131
131
ALTHOUGH THE ROMAN EMPIRE DEFEATED THE GREEK 
city-states in the second century b.c.e., Greek culture had already con-
quered the Roman Empire. The two civilizations had been having contact 
since the eighth century b.c.e., when the first Greek colony was founded 
on Italy’s west coast. When Greek cities in Greece itself, Asia Minor, and 
the Middle East came under Roman dominance, they kept their Greek 
language and culture. Roman political control was placed on top of a Hel-
lenized society (a society that had adopted Greek culture). 
CULtURe ConQUeRs the ConQUeRoRs
The Romans had mixed feelings about their conquered neighbors. On 
the one hand, they eagerly took advantage of Greek contributions in 
arts and science and borrowed heavily from Greek mythology. Athens 
and the Hellenized Egyptian city of Alexandria remained centers of 
higher education, and most educated people spoke Greek. 
The first Roman emperor, Augustus (63 b.c.e.–14 c.e.), wrote his 
autobiography in Greek. The Romans absorbed many Greek words into 
their own language, Latin. However, educated Greek speakers such as 
Augustus tried not to publicly display too much admiration for Greece. 
The Romans felt pride in their own accomplishments, and some 
Romans considered the Greeks to be immoral and inferior. 
Romans might have tried to hide how Hellenized they became. But 
the truth is that they helped spread Greek culture to new parts of the 
world. At its peak, the Roman Empire stretched from Great Britain to 
EPILOGUE
O P P O S I T E
The opening ceremony of 
the 2004 Olympic Games 
in Athens reflected themes 
from Greek history and 
culture. About 10,000 
athletes representing 
202 countries took 
part in the two-week 
sporting competition 
that originated in ancient 
Greece. 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
132
the Middle East, from North Africa to Germany. The Romans did not 
conquer as much territory as Alexander had, but their control lasted 
much longer. Their culture became the dominant culture of all their 
vast empire. And that culture combined the best that both Rome and 
Classical Greece had to offer. Today, this combination is known as 
Greco-Roman culture. 
In Roman society, Greeks held a number of important jobs, 
although they often did these jobs as slaves. The Greeks dominated 
medicine, thanks to the early influence of Hippocrates and his follow-
ers. After Hippocrates, the most important doctor of the Greco-Roman 
world was Galen (129–ca. 200 c.e.). He was born in the Greek city of 
Pergamum, and came to Rome around 164 c.e. Galen proved, among 
other things, that urine flows from the kidneys, and he wrote the first 
major book on anatomy. For centuries, doctors in Europe and the Mid-
dle East considered him their most influential source.
Ptolemy (ca. 90–ca. 168 c.e.) was a famous Greek mathematician 
and astronomer. He wrote a book that argued that the sun and planets 
revolve around Earth. He was wrong, but his idea was accepted for 
almost 1,500 years. 
Early Christianity and the Greeks
Greek culture particularly took hold in the eastern parts of the Roman 
Empire. This was an area where the Greeks had carried out extensive 
trade and that Alexander had conquered. By the first century c.e., 
Rome had political control over the Jewish land of Judaea, located in 
what is now Israel and Jordan. 
In this Jewish land, influenced by Romans and Greeks, a new mono-
theistic (belief in one god) religion emerged: Christianity. Jesus Christ 
spoke the Middle Eastern language of Aramaic. But the followers who 
spread his teachings wrote and spoke primarily in Greek, which was the 
common language of the eastern Roman Empire. 
Romans generally tolerated early Christians, although there were 
sometimes persecutions. In 313 c.e., the Roman emperor Constantine 
issued an edict, or empire-wide rule, of religious freedom that allowed 
Christians to worship openly. By 400 c.e., Christianity had become the 
official religion of the empire. 
Later, debates about Christianity and what it meant took place in 
Greek. These debates reflected the kind of issues ancient Greek phi-
losophers addressed, such as the nature of matter and spirit. Western 
Saving Sculpture
Modern art lovers 
are fortunate that the 
Romans admired their 
Greek lands and culture, 
because the Romans 
helped preserved the 
Greek artistic tradition 
(though they did so 
mostly by stealing them 
from captured Greek cit-
ies). Much of the Greeks’ 
free-standing sculpture 
was cast in bronze, most 
of which did not last. 
Roman artists made 
copies of these works 
in marble, and many of 
them still exist today.

133
civilization today might be said to have drawn on two major traditions 
of thought: Greco-Roman and Judeo-Christian. 
By 395 c.e., the Roman Empire had split in half, reunited, and then 
split again. The eastern portion, including Greece, was ruled from 
Constantinople (today’s Istanbul). Even before this time, though, the 
Greek-speaking east had become the economic and political center of 
the Roman Empire. Four of the five bishops of the Christian Church 
were based in the eastern cities of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusa-
lem, and Antioch (in Syria). 
Rome itself and the western half of the empire fell to invaders in 
476 c.e. The greatness that had been Rome lived on in the more Hel-
lenized east, which became known as the Byzantine Empire.
The Byzantine emperors were aware that they carried on two great 
cultural traditions. Rome had been famous for its highly developed sys-
tem of laws and courts, as well as efficient government and skilled engi-
neering. The Byzantines also knew their roots went back even further, 
to the greatness of Classical Greece and its art, science, and philosophy. 
Greek scholars in the Byzantine Empire kept that intellectual tradition 
alive. Western Europe entered into its own Dark Age, when wars con-
tinued to break out and only a handful of Christian monks knew the 
basics of reading and writing. 
The Rise of Islam
During the centuries of the Dark Ages in Western Europe, ancient 
Greek culture was absorbed by another people: the Arabs. In the sev-
enth century, Muhammad (ca. 570–632), a merchant from Arabia (now 
Saudi Arabia), founded a new religion called Islam. 
Muhammad and his followers set out on wars of conquest. Soon 
the Islamic Arabs dominated the Middle East, North Africa, and part of 
Spain. Their lands included parts of what had been the old Greek, Per-
sian, and Roman Empires. These invaders were sometimes welcomed by 
native Greeks as being less harmful than earlier Byzantine conquerors.
Through their expansion, the Arabs and the people they ruled 
came into contact with the Byzantine Empire. Islamic scholars began to 
translate works by Aristotle, Plato, and other Greeks into Arabic. The 
scholars also read Greek texts on medicine, science, and math, then 
combined what they learned with ideas from Iran and India. 
From the 700s through the 1200s, the Arabs battled Western king-
doms that arose from the remains of Rome’s empire. The Arabs also 
E p i l o g u e
Importance of Logos
Dialogues were at the 
heart of Plato’s writing. 
At the heart of the word 
dialogue is the Greek 
word logos. In a general 
sense, logos means 
“word” or “speech.” 
The prefix dia means 
“through,” “apart,” or 
“across,” so a dialogue 
features words sent 
across from one person 
to another. To the ancient 
Greeks, logos also had a 
deeper meaning: the rea-
son or order that controls 
the universe. Early Chris-
tian writers used logos to 
mean the literal word of 
Jesus Christ, as well as 
the order and wisdom he 
represented for the uni-
verse. Logos is still used 
that way today. 

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
134
clashed with the Byzantine Empire. Yet the despite their conflicts with 
the descendants of Greece and Rome, the Arabs played a key role in the 
development of modern Western culture. 
Latin scholars in Western Europe knew that the Arabs had access 
to works that had been lost in the West. Both Arabic translations of 
ancient Greek works and original Arabic studies influenced by the 
Greeks were eventually translated into Latin. At the time, Latin was the 
language all educated people spoke in Western Europe. Western schol-
ars finally had a chance to discover the wisdom of ancient Greece. 
The Ottomans and Independence
The Arabs did not conquer the Byzantine Empire. But another Islamic 
people, the Ottoman Turks, did. The Turks came out of Central Asia 
and settled in Asia Minor. Under their ruler Osman I (1259–1324), they 
slowly began taking over Byzantine territory. By the mid-15th century, 
the Turks’ rule extended into the Balkans. In 1453 they captured Con-
stantinople, ending the Byzantine Empire. 
The Turks renamed the city Istanbul and made it the capital of 
their Ottoman Empire. After their victory, they looted the city. In the 
process, they destroyed many Greek documents, including the only 
surviving copies of ancient Greek works, such as plays by Euripides.
Once again, the Greeks were under foreign control. They would 
remain part of this new Islamic Ottoman Empire for almost 400 years. 
The Turks, however, let the Greeks practice Christianity, and a class 
of educated Greeks served in the Ottoman government. Greeks also 
played an important role as traders, and Greek priests and monks had 
ties with Orthodox Christian leaders across Eastern Europe. 
Educated Greeks in the Turkish Empire kept alive the memory of 
ancient Greece. They also led the calls for independence. Many Euro-
peans, who had rediscovered Classical Greek literature and philosophy, 
saw how important Greece had been in shaping Western culture. Some 
writers and intellectuals believed the people who had given the world so 
much should once again have their own nation. 
In 1821, a group of Greeks rebelled against the Ottoman Empire. 
That revolution failed. But by 1830, with help from other European 
nations, Greece became an independent nation—this time a unified 
one. Two years later, the Greeks crowned a Bavarian prince, Otto, as 
Seeking Truth
An early Islamic phi-
losopher, al-Kindi (ca. 
801–866), expressed 
the Arabs’ enthusiasm 
for knowledge coming 
from the Greeks. He 
wrote (as cited by Albert 
Hourani in A History of 
the Arab Peoples), “We 
should not be ashamed 
to acknowledge truth 
from whatever source 
it comes to us, even if 
it is brought to us by 
former generations and 
foreign peoples.” Then 
he echoed the values of 
Socrates and Aristotle 
by adding, “For him who 
seeks the truth there is 
nothing of higher value 
than truth itself.” 

135
E p i l o g u e
Greek influence in antiquity stretched from the western coastal areas of  
modern Turkey to southern Macedonia and Albania, including all of modern 
Greece.

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
136
their first king. They hoped his connections would help bind the new 
country to the more established nations of Europe.
Greece today
As an independent nation, Greece has gone through difficult times. 
Internal struggles led to several changes in kingship. The country was 
caught up in various Balkan wars and World War I. During World War 
II, Nazi Germany occupied Greece. After the Germans were driven out 
As in ancient times, the parthenon still stands 
on a hill overlooking all of Athens. But it has 
gone through several transformations. After 
serving greeks as a temple to Athena, it was 
used as a christian church, and then as a 
mosque (a muslim house of worship) during 
the ottoman Empire.
the parthenon was badly damaged in the 
late 1600s, when the Italian city-state of Ven-
ice controlled some of the greek islands in 
the Ionian Sea and attacked mainland greece. 
the turks used the parthenon to store muni-
tions, which exploded during the Venetian 
attack. the parthenon was left in ruins. It was 
further altered in the early 1800s, when Brit-
ish diplomat and art collector thomas Bruce, 
Lord Elgin (1766–1841) removed the sculp-
tured friezes from around the building. 
In 1816, the British museum in London 
purchased much of what was then called the 
Elgin marbles from Elgin. He claimed he had 
taken them out of greece to preserve them 
from further ruin. Some British writers, how-
ever, said that taking the sculptures ruined 
what was left of the parthenon. they added 
that no one had a right to steal art, especially 
pieces that represented such as strong cul-
tural legacy, no matter what reasons they 
gave for doing so. 
After World War II, some people sug-
gested the British should give back the mar-
bles to thank the greeks for their resistance 
against nazi germany. the British govern-
ment refused.
Interest in the issue was renewed in 
1982 when greek actress melina mercouri, 
who was then the greek minister of culture, 
addressed the International conference of 
ministers of culture in mexico. She pleaded 
for the friezes to be returned to Athens. 
The Parthenon Marbles 
Controversy

137
in 1944, a civil war followed. On one side were those who were against 
the Greek monarchy and supported communism, a political system 
marked by one-party rule and government ownership of all property 
and businesses. Their opponents supported Western-style democracy 
(and the Greek monarchy), and private ownership of property. The 
struggle was violent and bitter.
The democratic forces eventually won, and in 1949 the Greeks 
established a government with both a king and elected lawmakers. Dur-
ing the 1960s this government was replaced by a military dictatorship. 
E p i l o g u e
A committee of British classics scholars 
was formed in 1983 to lobby for return of 
the sculptures, now known as the parthe-
non marbles, to greece. In 2000, the greek 
government proposed to the British House 
of commons that the location of the par-
thenon marbles was more important than 
actual ownership. Should they not be as 
close to their original setting as possible? 
Still, some people argued that keeping 
the marbles in a British museum protects 
them from the high levels of air pollution 
in Athens. Besides, some officials claimed, 
Elgin did not steal the marbles; he had per-
mission from the ruling ottoman turks to 
take the statues, and he paid for them. 
today, a new Acropolis museum is 
planned to protect and preserve all of the 
parthenon’s sculptures, including the par-
thenon marbles. the viewpoint of the Brit-
ish committee for the restitution of the 
parthenon marbles, according to their Web 
site, is that “It is inconceivable that over half 
of its [the parthenon’s] celebrated sculp-
tural elements should be exhibited 2,000 
miles away from the . . . actual monument 
for which they were expressly designed 
and carved.” So far, the British museum’s 
reply is that the marbles are staying in 
London. 
Sculptures that form part of the Parthenon 
Marbles are now on display at the british 
Museum in london. There is an interna-
tional movement to return them to Greece, 
but so far the british Museum says it will 
not give them up.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
138
This lasted until 1974, when the dictatorship collapsed. The next year, 
the Greeks wrote a new constitution that established a republic, ending 
the role of the monarchy.
Today Greece is a member of the European Union and the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The economy still features ele-
ments of its ancient past. For example, the Greeks have the world’s 
largest fleet of merchant ships. And Greek farmers still raise grain and 
olives, just as they have for thousands of years. Yet the Greeks are also 
building a modern nation, putting more emphasis on telecommunica-
tions and industry. Perhaps most important to the economy is tourism, 
as people from around the world come to explore one of the historic 
hearts of Western civilization. 
The Legacy of Ancient Greece
This book has detailed many of the gifts passed down to modern times 
from the Greeks: the words and concepts they used that are still com-
mon today; lasting works of art and mythological tales that inspire new 
generations; systems of thought that are still taught in schools. Equally 
important is the Greek spirit that questioned why the world and its peo-
ple are the way they are. The ancient Greeks encouraged original thought 
in seeking answers, rather than merely accepting what others said. 
That spirit of openly asking questions and exploring the answers 
lives on in many forms, thanks to the Greek writings that have endured 
for more than 2,500 years. The great writings of Aristotle and others 
“laid the foundations of Western learning . . . from literature to astron-
omy, from medicine to historiography,” according to Paul Cartledge in 
The Cambridge Illustrated History of Ancient Greece. 
Part of that vast body of knowledge was lost to Western Europe dur-
ing the Dark Ages, but the best of Athens and Rome slowly reemerged 
and spread to a wider audience than ever before. That reemergence 
rested on two developments, one technical and one intellectual. 
In the 15th century, German goldsmith Johannes Gutenberg (ca. 
1400–ca. 1467) invented a printing press that used movable type, 
bringing publishing to Europe. For the first time, people could buy 
books, and printers created the first copies of ancient texts for Euro-
pean audiences. The fact that books became more widely available 
created a desire among people to read in their own language. Ancient 
Greek writings were translated and published in books. They  

139
reached a wider audience than any of the classic authors could have 
dreamed possible.
The intellectual trend that created an interest in the classics was 
the Renaissance. During the 14th century, Italy was dominated by 
powerful city-states—just as in ancient Greece. The Italian city-states 
had thriving economies, and wealthy families gave money to artists and 
scholars. These creative minds began to explore the classic works of 
Greece and Rome for inspiration. They turned away from the Christian 
culture that had dominated the arts and education since the fall of the 
Roman Empire in the West. 
This Renaissance (Italian for “rebirth”) led to paintings, sculpture, 
and architecture that were based on Greek models. Artists also felt free 
to show scenes from Greek mythology and contemporary everyday life, 
as the ancients had, instead of showing only Christian themes. 
In education, scholars read Plato, Aristotle, and the other Greeks 
and debated their ideas. They found that many of their ancient conclu-
sions were still relevant. Petrarch (1304–1374), an Italian poet, played a 
key role in this revival. He was considered the first modern humanist—
someone who places the study 
of human concerns above reli-
gion, just as the Greek phi-
losophers had done centuries 
before. Petrarch tried to learn 
ancient Greek, and he encour-
aged other scholars to do the 
same. They took his advice, 
and for the next few hundred 
years educated people across 
Europe learned ancient Greek 
so they could study the classics 
as they were written. 
The rise of humanism led 
to a new interest in science. 
Earlier scientists had already 
been influenced by Greek 
works that had been trans-
lated into Latin. The scientific 
method of the Greeks, based 
on reasoning and observation, 
Greek Moons
In 1610, using a telescope of his own design, Italian astrono-
mer galileo galilei discovered four moons circling the 
planet Jupiter. Astronomers have since found dozens more 
orbiting that large planet and have given them names taken 
from greek mythology. the first moons galileo saw were 
named for three women who had relationships with Zeus 
(Jupiter is his roman name): Io, callisto, and Europa. the 
fourth, ganymede, was named for a young trojan man 
whom Zeus brought to olympus to serve the gods. 
the word planet has greek roots. It comes from the 
word planes, meaning “wanderer.” this reflects what the 
ancient greeks realized—that the planets did not follow an 
orderly, circular path through the sky. modern scientists 
showed the greeks were right: the planets orbit in a chang-
ing path, not a perfect circle. 
CONNECTIONS
E p i l o g u e

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
140
was expanded to include experimentation. Scientists came up with a 
theory, based on existing knowledge, and then tested it to see if it was 
true. 
The scientific revolution that began in the 16th century drew upon 
the spirit of open inquiry that came from the Greeks. These new scien-
tists sometimes discovered things that proved some Greek concepts to be 
wrong. Ptolemy’s old system for explaining the universe, for example, did 
not survive. Polish scientist Nicholas Copernicus (1473–1543) suggested 
and Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) proved that the sun 
was the center of our solar system, not the Earth. Galileo, however, did 
not have the same freedom as ancient Greek scientists. The Roman 
Catholic Church forced the Italian astronomer to declare he was wrong, 
even though he knew he was right. 
European settlers who came to North America brought their knowl-
edge of Classical Greece and Rome with them. When American revolu-
tionaries considered various forms of government, they held up Classical 
Rome as an ideal. In the 18th century, most Americans did not want a 
The founders of the 
U.S. government 
admired the ancient 
Greeks’ commitment to 
democracy. The freedoms 
protected in the American 
Bill of Rights, shown here, 
are some of the same ones 
the Greeks cherished—
freedom of speech, 
freedom of religion, and 
the right to have a jury 
trial. 

141
direct democracy, as in the Athens of Pericles. They preferred a republic, 
as the Romans had, with men (and only men) who owned property elect-
ing others to create their laws. Still, many American and British thinkers 
admired features of the Greek political system. 
Aristotle wrote extensively about the constitution of Athens, and 
Americans such as Samuel Adams (1722–1803) saw that Great Britain 
had its own unwritten constitution that included laws dating back to 
the 13th century. That document placed limits on the king’s power. 
Americans also saw that the British government featured three ele-
ments Aristotle had discussed: monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy 
(though not direct democracy). 
The men who governed after the American Revolution favored 
eliminating monarchy and limiting the aristocracy. They wanted 
to give the people—the demos—a greater role in the government. 
The U.S. leaders went one step further than the British and wrote a 
formal constitution. It described exactly what the government would 
include and how it would function. The Americans also created a 
Bill of Rights, spelling out individual freedoms that would be pro-
tected. These freedoms included some of the same ones the Greeks  
cherished—freedom of speech, freedom of religion, and the right to 
have a jury trial. 
E p i l o g u e

142
1200s B.C.E.  
Mycenaean culture reaches its high point. Troy is destroyed. 
1100 B.C.E. 
Struggles among Mediterranean cultures bring a Dark Age in the entire region. 
Mycenaean palaces are destroyed.
776 B.C.E. 
As Greek civilization rebounds, the first Olympic games are held in Olympia. 
750–700 B.C.E.  
The Greek alphabet is developed. Homer’s poetry is first written down. 
750-550 B.C.E. 
Greek colonization means new Greek city-states are formed throughout the 
Mediterranean and Black Sea areas.
630 B.C.E.  
Sparta enslaves the defeated Messenians, who will serve as agricultural slaves 
for Sparta until they are freed by Thebes in the fourth century b.c.e. 
600 B.C.E. 
Hoplite infantry becomes common throughout Greece. Sappho writes poetry 
about the personal experience of love and longing.
594 B.C.E. 
Solon reforms Athenian law and extends power to the lower classes.
ca. 585–550 B.C.E. The earliest Greek philosophers, Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximemes, 
present new ideas about the universe that have nothing to do with the gods.
508 B.C.E. 
Cleisthenes puts Athens on clear path to democracy.
490 B.C.E. 
Though greatly outnumbered, hoplites from Athens and Plataea defeat the 
army of the Persian Empire at Marathon to win the first Persian War.
480–479 B.C.E.  
Greek victories in the second Persian War usher in the Athenian empire and the 
Classical period of Greek civilization, with enormous achievements in govern-
ment, literature, drama, architecture, and art.
447–432 B.C.E. 
The Parthenon is built in Athens.
431–404 B.C.E.  
The Peloponnesian War is fought between Athens and Sparta and their allies.
399 B.C.E. 
Athenian philosopher and teacher Socrates is executed.
370 B.C.E. 
Thebes, under the leadership of Epiminondas, invades Sparta and frees the 
Messenian helots. (Epiminondas dies in a later Theban victory in 362 b.c.e.)
338 B.C.E. 
Philip II of Macedon defeats a coalition of Greek forces and establishes the 
League of Corinth. After Philip’s assassination in 336 b.c.e., his son Alexander 
the Great conquers the Persian Empire and Egypt.
331 B.C.E.  
Alexander founds Alexandria in Egypt. It will become the capital of the far-
ranging Greek-speaking world after his death.
323 B.C.E.  
Alexander dies. Three Hellenistic kingdoms are established by his generals.
146 B.C.E. 
The Roman Empire conquers Greece and Macedonia.
TIME LINE

GLOSSARY
143
agora open-air marketplace
allies countries or groups that work together, 
especially during wartime; their unity is 
called an alliance
archaeologists scientists who study ancient 
people by studying the items they left 
behind
architecture the way buildings are designed 
and built
archon an appointed governor in ancient 
Athens
aristocracy a small group of people of the 
highest class or who have the most money 
and power; individual members of this group 
are aristocrats 
artifacts items from daily life left behind by a 
group of people
battering ram a heavy object swung or 
rammed against a door to break it down
cavalry soldiers who fight on horseback
chariot a cart with two wheels that is pulled 
by horses
city-state a city and its surrounding farms 
that functions as a separate nation 
civil relating to the citizens and the things 
that concern them
colony an area that is under the political con-
trol of another country and is occupied by 
settlers from that country
commerce the activity of buying and selling
coup quick, violent takeover of a government
deme a village or district in Athens; the 
demes were based on family ties and were 
the basic political unit of Athens
descendants relatives who trace their roots 
back to one person 
epic a long poem about the actions and 
adventures of heroic or legendary figures or 
about the history of a nation
fertility the ability to easily grow (for plants) 
or have offspring (for animals and people) 
hellas the word the Greeks used to mean the 
entire Greek world; what Greeks today call 
their nation
hellenism Greek culture; the adjective is 
Hellenistic
hellenized having adopted Greek culture
helot a serf in ancient Sparta, intermediate in 
status between slaves and citizens
hoplite a heavily armed foot soldier 
infantry soldiers who fight on foot
logic the study of the rules and tests of sound 
reasoning
mercenary a foreign soldier hired to fight for 
another country
metic free person who was a citizen of a dif-
ferent city-state or from a foreign country; 
metics could not participate in the Athenian 
democracy
monarchy a government controlled by a king
myth a traditional story, usually involving 
gods or magic, that often helps explain his-
torical events or a particular custom, belief, 
or aspect of nature
oligarchy a government ruled by a council of 
aristocrats
omen a sign that predicts the future
oracle a priest or priestess who is said to 
be able to communicate with the gods and 
deliver messages from them
orator an especially skilled public speaker
peninsula an area of land surrounded by 
water on three sides

E m p I r E  o f  A n c I E n t  g r E E c E
144
phalanx a group of soldiers standing and 
moving in very close formation
philosopher a person who thinks about the 
meaning of life and how to lead a better life; 
in ancient times, many philosophers were 
also scientists 
philosophy the study of the nature of the 
world
plague a highly contagious disease that 
spreads rapidly and kills many people
polis a Greek city-state
Renaissance a period in history, beginning 
in the 13th century, that stressed the impor-
tance of education, art, and the worth of the 
individual; it was also marked by a rediscov-
ery of ancient Greek and Roman culture 
republic a government in which voters elect 
lawmakers, who represent the interests of 
the people
rhetoric the art of speaking or writing 
effectively
ritual a ceremony carried out according to 
religious laws and customs
satire comedy that critiques politics, govern-
ment, or society in a humorous way
serf an agricultural worker who must work 
for a single master who owns the land
siege cutting off a town or fort from the 
outside so it cannot receive supplies and the 
inhabitants cannot escape
successor a person who comes after another 
and inherits or continues in the offices they 
held
tactic an action or strategy that is carefully 
planned to achieve a specific result
terracing building a number of flat plat-
forms, usually into the side of a hill; terrace 
farming is farming the land that is on these 
flat platforms
theorem a formula or statement in mathe-
matics or logic that is proven based on other 
formulas or statements
trireme  a long, narrow Athenian warship 
powered by three rows of oarsmen
tyrant a person who uses their power in a 
cruel and unreasonable way

BIBLIOGRAPHY
145
Adkins, Lesley, and Roy A. Adkins, Handbook to Life 
in Ancient Rome, Updated Edition. New York: Facts 
On File, 2004.
Aesop’s Fables. Translated by George Fyler Townsend. 
Available online. The Internet Classics Archive. 
URL: http://classics.mit.edu/Aesop/fab.html. 
Accessed April 29, 2008.
Aristophanes, Four Comedies, Translated by Dudley 
Fitts. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1962.
Aristotle, The Politics of Aristotle, Book 2. Translated 
by Benjamin Jowett. Available online. “Aristotle: 
Spartan Women,” Ancient History Sourcebook. 
URL: http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/
aristotle-spartanwomen.html. Accessed March 30, 
2008.
Atchity, Kenneth J., editor, The Classical Greek 
Reader. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1996. 
Boardman, John, Jasper Griffin, and Oswyn Murray, 
The Oxford History of Greece and the Hellenistic 
World. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press, 
1988.
Cahill, Thomas, Sailing the Wine-Dark Sea: Why the 
Greeks Matter. New York: Nan A. Talese/Double-
day, 2003.
Camp, John, and Elizabeth Fisher, The World of the 
Ancient Greeks. New York: Thames & Hudson, 
2002.
Cantor, Norman, editor, The Encyclopedia of the 
Middle Ages. New York: Viking, 1999.
Cantor, Norman, and Peter L. Klein, editors, Ancient 
Thought: Plato and Aristotle. Waltham, Mass.: 
Blaisdell Publishing, 1969.
Cartledge, Paul, editor, The Cambridge Illustrated His-
tory of Ancient Greece. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998.
“The Case for the Return.” British Committee for the 
Restitution of the Parthenon Marbles. Available 
online. URL: http://www.parthenonuk.com/the_
case_for_the_return.php. Accessed July 28, 2004.
Dewald, Carolyn, and John Marincola, The Cam-
bridge Companion to Herodotus. Cambridge, U.K.: 
Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Drabble, Margaret, editor, The Oxford Companion 
to English Literature, Revised ed. Oxford, U.K.: 
Oxford University Press, 1995.
Durant, Will, The Life of Greece. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1939.
Fine, John V. A., The Ancient Greeks: A Critical His-
tory. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press,1983.
Finley, M. I., The Ancient Greeks. New York: Viking 
Penguin, Inc. 1971. 
———, Economy and Society in Ancient Greece. New 
York: Viking Press, 1981.
Flaceliere, Robert, Daily Life in Greece at the Time of 
Pericles. London: Phoenix Press, 1965.
Freeman, Charles, The Greek Achievement: The Foun-
dation of the Western World. New York: Penguin 
Books, 1999.
Gardner, Helen, Art Through the Ages, Revised 
edition. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
1975.
Garraty John A., and Peter Gay, editors, The Colum-
bia History of the World. New York: Harper & Row, 
1972.
Geanakoplos, Deno J., Medieval Western Civilization 
and the Byzantine and Islamic World. Lexington, 
Ky.: D.C. Heath and Company, 1979.
Grant, Michael, The Founders of the Western World: 
A History of Greece and Rome. New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 1991.
Hamilton, Edith, Mythology. New York: Warner 
Books, 1942, 1969.

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
146
Hanson, Victor Davis, The Wars of the Ancient 
Greeks. New York: Sterling Publishing, 1999. 
Harris, Nathaniel, History of Ancient Greece. New 
York: Barnes & Noble Books, 2000.
Herodotus, The Histories. Translated by Aubery de 
Selincourt. London: Penguin Classics, 2003.
———, The Histories, Translated by Robin  
Waterfield. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press, 
1998.
“Herodotus: Solon and Croesus,” Ancient History 
Sourcebook. Available online. URL: http://www.
fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/herodotus- 
creususandsolon.html. Accessed July 10, 2004. 
Hesiod, Theogony and Works and Days. Translated 
by Catherine Schlegel and Henry Weinfield. Ann 
Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Press, 2006.
———, “Works and Days.” Available online. The 
Online Classical and Medieval Library. URL: http://
sunsite.berkeley.edu/OMACL/Hesiod/works.html. 
Accessed July 24, 2004.
Homer, The Illiad, Translated by Robert Fagles. New 
York: Penguin Group, 1990.
———, The Odyssey, Translated by Robert Fagles. New 
York: Penguin Group, 1996.
Honderich, Ted, editor, The Oxford Companion to Phi-
losophy. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Hopper, R. J., The Early Greeks. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1976.
Hourani, Albert, A History of the Arab Peoples. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, 1991.
James, Peter, and Nick Thorpe, Ancient Inventions. 
New York: Ballantine Books, 1994.
Kaplan, Justin, editor, Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations, 
16th ed. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1992.
Long, Roderick T., “The Athenian Constitution.” 
LewRockwell.com. Available online. URL: http://
www.lewrockwell.com/long/long8.html. Accessed 
July 20, 2004.
Macrone, Michael, By Jove!: Brush Up Your Mythology. 
New York: Cader Books, 1992.
Martin, Thomas R., Ancient Greece: From Prehistoric 
to Hellenistic Times. New Haven, Conn.: Yale  
University Press, 2000.
Merriam-Webster’s Geographical Dictionary, 3rd ed. 
Springfield, Mass.: Merriam-Webster, 1997.
National Public Radio, All Things Considered (tran-
scripts), “Athens and Sparta Formalize Peace After 
2,000 Years,” hosted by Neal Conan, March 12, 
1996. 
National Public Radio, Talk of the Nation (tran-
scripts), “Classical Education,” hosted by Neal 
Conan, June 29, 1998.
“Olive Subsidies Threaten the Mediterranean Envi-
ronment.” WWF-UK. Available online. URL: 
http://www.wwf-uk.org/News/n_0000000290.asp. 
Accessed July 15, 2004.
“The Parthenon of Nashville, Tennessee.” Metro-
politan Government of Nashville and Davidson 
County. Available online. URL: http://www. 
nashville.gov/parthenon. Accessed July 15, 2004.
Plato, The Last Days of Socrates, Translated by Hugh 
Tredennick. Middlesex, U.K.: Penguin Books, 
1969.
Plato, Meno, Translated by Benjamin Jowett. New 
South Wales, Australia: ReadHowYouWant, 2006.
———, Symposium, Translated by Benjamin Jowett. 
The Internet Classics Archive. Available online. 
URL: http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/symposium.
html. Accessed July 15, 2004.
Plautus, Three Comedies, Translated by Erich Segal. 
New York: Bantam Books, 1969. 
Pollitt, J. J., The Art of Ancient Greece: Sources and 
Documents. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1990.
Pomeroy, Sarah B., Stanley M. Burstein, Walter Don-
lan, and Jennifer Tolbert Roberts, Ancient Greece: 
A Political, Social, and Cultural History. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1999. 
Pritchard, James B., editor, The Harper Concise 
Atlas of the Bible. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Quennell, Marjorie, and C. H. B. Quennell, Every-
day Things in Ancient Greece, Revised by Kath-
leen Freeman. New York: G. P Putnam’s Sons, 
1965.
Sage, Michael M., Warfare in Ancient Greece: A 
Sourcebook. Florence, Ky.: Routledge, 1996.

147
147
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, “Hellas.” Poetry Archive. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.poetry-archive.com/
s/hellas.html. Accessed July 20, 2005.
Sophocles, Antigone. Translated by Ian Johnston. 
Arlington, Va.: Richer Resources Publications, 2005.
Strassler, Robert B., editor, The Landmark Thucy-
dides: A Comprehensive Guide to the Peloponnesian 
War. New York: The Free Press, 1996.
Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, Trans-
lated by Rex Warner. New York: Penguin Books, 1972.
Trichopoulou, Antonia, et al., “Adherence to a Medi-
terranean Diet and Survival in a Greek Population.” 
The New England Journal of Medicine, June 26, 
2003, Vol. 348:2599-2608.
Watkin, David, A History of Western Architecture, 2nd 
ed. London: Lawrence King, 1996.
Xenophon, Anabasis. Translated by Carleton L. 
Brownson. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University 
Press, 1998.
———, On the Polity of the Spartans. “The Spartan 
War Machine,” Ancient History Sourcebook.  
Available online. URL: http://www.fordham.
edu/halsall/ancient/xenophon-spartanwar.html. 
Accessed April 16, 2008.
Yaman, Ebru, “Music sleuth tracks down harps and 
lyres of ancients.” The Australian, April 16, 2003. 
Zimmerman, J. E., Dictionary of Classical Mythology. 
New York: Bantam Books, 1964.
B i b l i o g r a p h y

booKS
Biesty, Stephen, and Stewart Ross, Greece in 
Spectacular Cross-section (Oxford, U.K.: Oxford 
University Press, 2006)
The year is 436 b.c.e. and 11-year-old Neleus is 
taking a trip with his father and brother from 
his home in Miletus to see the Olympic Games 
in Olympia. He has many adventures and sees 
many sights along the way: Athenian warships 
at the sacred island of Delos, the silver mines 
of Laurion, the busy port and streets of Ath-
ens, and the sacred oracle at Delphi. Each is 
drawn in amazing detail, with cross-sections, 
cutaways and explosions. Each drawing is 
backed up by authoritative text. No aspect of 
Greek life is left out, including domestic life, 
religion and the gods, the role of women, chil-
dren and education, philosophy and learning, 
myths and legends, government, politics and 
law, economy and trade, warfare and slavery, 
the Olympic Games, music and drama, paint-
ing, pottery and sculpture, building and archi-
tecture, and ships and sailing.
Bordessa, Kris, Tools of the Ancient Greeks: A Kid’s 
Guide to the History & Science of Life in Ancient 
Greece (White River Junction, Vt.: Nomad Press, 
2006)
Discover the origins of ancient Greek ideas 
about anatomy, geography, and democracy, 
and the ways they continue to influence think-
ing today. Profiles of famous historical figures 
explain how their inventions are used in the 
modern world and provide insight into how 
the Greeks thought. There are 15 activities 
that recreate some of the Greeks’ scientific 
discoveries while learning how to use scien-
tific reasoning, develop basic ideas, and find 
supporting evidence.
Colum Padraic, The Children’s Homer: The Adven-
tures of Odysseus and the Tale of Troy (London: 
Aladdin Children’s Books, 2004)
This is the perfect book for children interested 
in the stories of the Illiad and the Odyssey. 
Using narrative threads from Homer’s clas-
sics, the author weaves a wonderful adventure 
tale. He starts when Achilles, aided by the 
gods, waged war against the Trojans. Then he 
follows Odysseus on his dangerous journey 
home. 
D’Aulaire, Ingri, and Edgar Parin D’Aulaire, 
D’Aulaire’s Book of Greek Myths (New York: Dela-
corte Press, 1992)
All the great gods and goddesses of ancient 
Greece are depicted in this beautifully illus-
trated book. Read about mighty Zeus, lord 
of the universe, elegant Athena, goddess of 
wisdom, powerful Hera, queen of Olympus, 
and moody Poseidon, ruler of the sea. From 
petty arguments to heroic deeds, their sto-
ries have qualities that are both human and 
fantastic. This is a wonderful introduction to 
mythology.
Day, Nancy, Your Travel Guide to Ancient Greece
(Minneapolis, Minn.: Runestone Press, 2000)
Imagine a trip to the ancient world with this 
travel-guide to fifth-century b.c.e. Greece. It 
describes the cultural influences, climate, cit-
ies to visit, monetary system, local customs, 
food, accommodations, shopping, and more. 
A short who’s who of famous people and some 
simple activities wrap up this volume. Special 
topic boxes add related and sometimes funny 
trivia.
FURTHER RESOURCES
148

149
149
Evslin, Bernard, Heroes, Gods and Monsters of the 
Greek Myths (New York: Laurel Leaf, Reissue edi-
tion, 1984)
This compelling book introduces the won-
drous and terrifying world of superhuman 
beings, such as Medusa and the Minotaur, 
and gods like Zeus, Athena, and Poseidon—
brought to life through exciting retellings of 
great adventures.
Haaren, John H., and A. B. Poland, Famous Men 
of Greece (Chapel Hill, N.C.: Yesterday’s Classics, 
2006)
Biographical sketches of 35 of the most prom-
inent characters in the history of ancient 
Greece, from legendary times to its fall in 146 
b.c.e. Among the profiles are Jason and the 
Golden Fleece, Solon, the hero of Marathon, 
Pericles, Socrates, and more. Each story is told 
in a clear, straightforward way.
Homer (translated by Robert Fagles), The Iliad and 
The Odyssey (New York: Penguin Classics, 1999)
These well-received translations of Homer’s 
classics are especially readable for modern 
audiences who want to tackle Homer’s origi-
nal epic stories. These tales of war, heroism, 
gods, monsters, and returning home again 
are as compelling now as they were 3,000 
years ago. 
McAllister, Emma, The Pocket Timeline of Ancient 
Greece (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006)
From the mysterious very ancient origins of 
the Greeks to the Archaic Period, the Clas-
sical Period, the Hellenistic Period and the 
legacy of Greek civilization, this book sums 
up Greek history in short sections. Each is 
illustrated with wonderful photos of Greek art 
and artifacts.
Pearson, Anne, Ancient Greece (Eyewitness Books) 
(New York: DK Publishing, 2007)
Learn about the history of Greek civilization, 
politics and power, gods and heroes, festivals 
and oracles, temples, women, growing up 
in Greece, fun and games, food and wine, 
clothes, beauty and wisdom, death and the 
afterlife, farming and fishing, trade, sports, 
warfare, and more by looking at Greek art and 
artifacts and drawings that recreate ancient 
Greece. The book includes a glossary and a 
who’s who.
Sacks, David, Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek 
World (New York: Facts On File, 2005)
This readable, lively collection of facts is 
presented in alphabetical entries that are logi-
cal, comprehensive, and cross-indexed. More 
than 550 entries describe the people, places, 
& events of more than 2,000 years of Greek 
civilization. Includes not only poets, politi-
cians, and rulers but also topics relating to the 
everyday lives of average citizens, women, and 
slaves. Other topics include history, politics, 
warfare and weaponry, social organizations, 
the arts, literature, language, mythology, geog-
raphy, science and technology, clothing, reli-
gion, and more. 
Skelton, Debra, and Pamela Dell, Empire of Alex-
ander the Great (New York: Chelsea House, 2009)
Learn more about the Hellenistic Age and 
how Alexander the Great, the Macedonian 
king, spread Greek civilization throughout the 
known world. This detailed look at Alexan-
der’s empire includes history, culture, religion, 
art, science, and everyday life.
dVdS
The Greeks: Crucible of Civilization (PBS Para-
mount, 2005)
This is the DVD of the PBS documentary 
that tells the story of Greek democracy from 
its first stirrings in 500 b.c.e. through to the 
cataclysmic wars that virtually destroyed the 
empire. It ends with a fascinating look at how 
the Greeks were defeated, yet their philosophy 
endured and changed the world forever. Actor 
Liam Neeson narrates, some critical events are 
re-created by actors, and computer animation 
shows what ancient ruins looked like when 
they were new. The photography at ancient 
sites is spectacular. 
f u r t h e r  r e s o u r c e s

E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
150
Web Sites
Ancient Greece
www.ancientgreece.com 
This detailed and wonderfully illustrated look 
at ancient Greece is divided into sections 
on history, architecture and art, geography, 
mythology, people, wars, culture and society, 
and the Olympics. There is also a glossary and 
a photo gallery of Greek art and artifacts. An 
extensive resources section is also included. 
The site is laid out in a way that makes naviga-
tion easy.
Ancient Greece
http://greece.mrdonn.org 
This site is divided into three sections: 
Greek origins and history, daily life, and 
the Greek city-states. The sections on the 
Greek philosophers are especially well done, 
and include really clear, easy-to-understand 
explanations of their ideas. There are also 
sections with interactive games and a library 
of clip art about ancient Greece that you can 
download.
Ancient Greek Literature and Mythology
www.infoplease.com/spot/ancientgreece-litmyth.
html
This site from InfoPlease includes translations 
of plays, poetry, and literature, biographies of 
important figures, quizzes and games, heroes 
and legends, and an explanation of the refer-
ences to Greek stories in the Harry Potter 
novels.
The Ancient Olympics
www.perseus.tufts.edu/Olympics/ 
At this site, developed by the Classics depart-
ment at Tufts University, compare ancient and 
modern Olympic sports, tour the site of Olym-
pia as it looks today, learn about the social 
and cultural ideas that are associated with the 
Games, and understand the Olympic spirit. 
The site also features stories of real ancient 
Greek athletes who were famous in their own 
time. Art from pottery and other sources illus-
trates their stories.
British Committee for the Restitution of the  
Parthenon Marbles
www.parthenonuk.com
The committee’s official Web site contains 
detailed information on the Parthenon (Elgin) 
Marbles, together with the case for their return 
to Athens. News stories detail conferences that 
discuss returning artifacts to their countries 
of origin and point out any new developments 
regarding the Parthenon Marbles. 
Elpenor: Home of the Greek Word
www.ellopos.net/elpenor/
Elpenor is a collection in Greek and English 
of all periods of Greek literature, including 
downloadable versions of Plato, Aristotle and 
the New Testament of the Bible. Language pages 
feature lessons in ancient Greek, starting with 
the alphabet, continuing with Homer and com-
bining grammar and syntax with an attempt to 
understand how these texts are relevant to life 
today. There is also a section on how Greek ideas 
have influenced Western thought. The site is 
illustrated with photographs and period art.
The Greeks
www.pbs.org/empires/thegreeks 
This multimedia Web site, a companion to 
the PBS documentary “The Greeks: Crucible 
of Civilization,” offers a lesson in ancient 
Greek, enables visitors to download a “virtual 
Socrates,” or explore Athens with an interac-
tive map. There is also a 3-D virtual Parthenon 
and biographies of many important figures in 
Greek history. The site includes a time line of 
Greek history, and information on how the 
documentary was made.
History for Kids: Ancient Greece
www.historyforkids.org/learn/greeks/index.htm
Learn about all aspects of ancient Greek life, 
including the economy, language and litera-
ture, clothing, philosophy, art, religion, food, 
sports, government, and more. There is also 
an arts and crafts section with instructions for 
hands-on projects. Each article has many links 
that encourage further exploration.

151
151
Spartan World
www. spartan-world.de/index.html
This site is all about Sparta. Read about the 
kings, hoplites, the Persian Empire and Sparta, 
Spartan shields and emblems, and the way 
children were brought up in Sparta. The site 
includes a map and a timeline.
The World of the Greeks
www.ncl.ac.uk/shefton-museum/greeks/index.
html 
This site is from the Shefton Museum at the 
University of Newcastle in Great Britain. 
Tour the museum’s collections of Greek arms 
and armor, pottery and sculpture. Or learn 
about how the Greeks lived and what they 
believed. There are fun quizzes to take after 
the tour.
Worlds Intertwined: Etruscans,  
Greeks and Romans
www.museum.upenn.edu/new/worlds_intertwined/
main.shtml 
This site from the University of Pennsylvania 
Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 
explores daily life, religion and death, art, 
economics and more. Also available is a vir-
tual tour of an exhibit that explains how the 
ancient Greek, Roman, and Etruscan cultures 
intertwined.
F u r t h e r  R e s o u r c e s

PICTURE CREDITS
PAGE
 
6:  Mike Liu/Shutterstock
 
11:  © British Museum/Art Resource, NY
 
14:  Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
 
18:  dr. Le Thanh Hung/Shutterstock
 
20:  Vanni/Art Resource, NY
 
24:  Neftalls/Shutterstock
 
28:  Giraudon/The Bridgeman Art Library
 
34:  © DeA Picture Library/Art Resource, NY
 
36:  Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
 
37:  The Bridgeman Art Library
 
46:  Alinari/Art Resource, NY
 
50:  Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
 
54:  Alinari/Art Resource, NY
 
60:  Nick Saunders/Barbara Heller Photo 
Library, London/Art Resource, NY
 
61:  Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz/Art 
Resource, NY
 
66:  Archives Charmet/The Bridgeman Art 
Library
 
73:  The Bridgeman Art Library International
 
79:  Réunion des Musées Nationaux / Art 
Resource, NY 
 
81:  Paul Picone/Shutterstock
 
84:  Scala/Art Resource, NY
 
88:  Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
 
91:  © The Metropolitan Museum of Art/Art 
Resource, NY
 
94:  Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
 
96:  © British Museum/Art Resource, NY
 103:  Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
 108:  © Harvard Art Museum/Art Resource, NY
 116:  © The Metropolitan Museum of Art/Art 
Resource, NY
 118:  Sites & Photos/Art Resource, NY
 127:  Réunion des Musées Nationaux/Art 
Resource, NY 
 130:  Anja Niedringhaus/AP Images
 137:  Graham Barclay/Getty Images
 140:  National Archives/AP Images
152

153
INDEX
Note: Boldface page numbers indi-
cate major discussions of topics; 
italic page numbers indicate 
illustrations; page numbers fol-
lowed by c indicate chronology 
entries; page numbers followed 
by g indicate glossary entries; 
page numbers followed by m 
indicate maps.
A
Academy  86, 88
Achaean League  63
Achilles  11, 22, 23, 109–110
Acropolis  26, 35, 37, 39, 104, 121
actors and acting  106, 118, 136
Adams, Samuel  141
Aeropagus  72, 74
Aeschylus  112
Aesop  92
Aesop’s Fables (Aesop)  92
Aetolia  63
Africa  13, 25, 133
afterlife  104
Agamemnon  11, 109–110
agora  86, 143
agriculture  42, 43, 93–94. See also 
country life; farming; food
Messenian serfs  27, 94, 144
olives  35, 45–46, 72, 86, 98
trade  55, 72, 80
Ajax  11
Albania  135m
Alcaeus  70
Alcibiades  46, 47–49
Alcmaeonids  32
Alexander the Great  13, 52, 55, 
61–63, 132, 142c
Alexandria  61, 62, 131
alliances  12–13, 32, 39
allies  143
alpha  21
alphabet  21, 142c
altis  106
Amazons  90
ambrosia  99
Anabasis (Xenophon)  55, 56
Anatolia  26, 32, 35, 39, 49, 61
Anaxagoras  123–124
Anaximander  123, 142c
Anaximenes  123, 142c
animals, as sacrifice  104
Antigone (Sophocles)  111
Antigonus  62
Antigonus II  62
Aphrodite  11, 101
Apollo  101
in daily life  99
oracle at Delphi  25, 26, 82, 106
sacrifices to  102
temple of  39
Apology (Plato)  124
Arabs  133–134
Arcesilas II (king)  67
archaeology  19, 20, 21, 104, 143
Archaic Greece  10, 22–24, 25, 77
Archimedes  128, 129
architecture  76, 119–121, 142c, 143. 
See also specific building
archons  71, 72, 74, 143
Ares  101
Argos  55
Aristarchus  128
aristocracy  41, 141, 143. See also 
wealthy
daily life  76–77, 87–88
division within  48
hoplites and  70
influence of  68–69, 71, 72, 73, 74
land and property ownership  27, 
80
in Macedon  58, 59
Solon’s reforms regarding  31–32, 
71–72
tyrants  27–28, 51, 70, 78, 125, 144
warfare and  22–23
Aristophanes  15, 94, 112
Aristotle  14, 78, 88, 126–127, 134
music and  117
Plato and  52, 126
revival of  139
on slavery  80
on Spartan women  95
on theater  112
on writing of Menander  113
writings  133, 138, 141
Physics, The  127
Poetics  113
Politics  67–68, 69, 80, 95, 96
Artaxerxes  55
Artemis  90, 101
artifacts  19, 143
artos  97
arts  14, 36, 106–107, 115–119, 139, 
142c. See also literature; pottery; 
theater
dance  106
music  99, 106, 115–116, 117
sculpture  118–119, 121, 132, 136, 
137
Asia Minor  55–56, 62, 69, 131, 134. 
See also Ionia
Aspasia  88
assemblies  68, 83
Assembly (Ekklesia)  47
citizen participation in  32, 41, 72, 
74, 75
Cleisthenes’ reforms and  32, 
73–74
plot to overthrow  48
astronomy  122, 128, 132, 139, 140
Athena  69, 101, 121
depiction of on coinage  81
power of  90
sacrifices to  104
temple honoring  7, 39
writings about  11, 110
Athenian Empire  35, 40, 41
Athenian law  142c
Athens  44m, 63, 142c. See also 
Assembly (Ekklesia); Delian 
League; hoplites; Peloponnesian 
War
Alcibiades betrayal of  46, 47–49
alliances with Sparta  32, 39
classical  12, 41–42
daily life  85–93
origins of  10–13, 25, 26
rivalry with Sparta  13, 55
Solon’s class system  31–32, 
71–72
treaty with Sparta  41, 42
wall around  42–43, 47, 51
Atherton, Michael  117
athletics  98. See also Olympic 
Games
children and  91–92, 97
gymnasiums  87–88
marathon race  12, 105
prizes for  86, 118
religion and  106–107
Atlas  100
atom  13, 124
atomos  13, 124
Attica  31, 37, 72, 73, 93, 117. See also 
Peloponnesian War
Athens’s control of  25, 26, 42
Augustus  131
aulos  116

154
E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
B
Babylonia  32, 55, 122
banking  80
basilees  68
bathing  87, 98
battering ram  38, 143
battles. See warfare
Bavaria  134–135
beliefs. See religion and beliefs
beta  21
Boeotia  38, 42, 57–58
boule  73–74, 75
Brasidas  47
bread  97
bribery  60, 75
British Museum  136, 137
bronze  19–20, 29, 96
Bruce, Thomas  136
building projects  28, 32, 39, 63, 120, 
121
burial. See death and burial
business and industry  80–81, 85, 86. 
See also employment; taxation; 
trade
Butler, Gerard  37
Byzantine Empire  133, 134
C
calendar  102
Callisto  139
Carthage  35
catapults  59–60
catharsis  113
Catholicism  140
cavalry  143
ceremonies  103. See also festivals
Chalkis  22
chariots  22–23, 143
children  116
birth of  103–104
life in Athens  87, 89–93
life in Sparta  25, 83, 96, 97, 104
rights of  15
chiton  98
Christianity  132–133, 134, 140
Cicero  114
citizen participation  73–74
civic duty  41–42
class and  31–32, 71–72
men and  12, 41–42, 68, 69, 72, 
74, 83
military and  70, 74
under Pericles  12, 75
United States and  15, 141
women and  12, 69
citizenship  27, 69–72, 73, 74, 77–78
land and property ownership  69, 
79
marriage and  41
city-states (polis/poleis)  44m, 60, 70, 
80, 143. See also specific city-
state
dissolution of  61, 62–63
origins of  7–8, 26–31, 68, 142c
power of  51, 52, 55–57, 68–69
civic duty  41–42. See also citizen 
participation
civil  143
civil war  31
Classical Greece  14, 16, 41–42, 51, 
139
origins  7, 12, 19–22, 142c
class system  27–28, 41, 58, 67, 68, 
69–72, 75–77. See also specific 
class
Solon’s reforms regarding  31–32, 
71–72
Cleisthenes  32, 33, 73–74, 142c
Cleombrotus  57
Cleon  47, 112
Cleopatra  64
clothing  98–99
coinage  61, 81
colonies  24–25, 44m, 142c, 143. See 
also specific colony
columns (architecture)  119, 120
comedy (theater)  112–114, 116
commerce  86, 143. See also business 
and industry; trade
communism  137
Constantine  132
Constantinople (Istanbul)  133
Copernicus, Nicholas  140
Corcyra (Corfu)  25, 42
Corinth  10
architecture  119–120
League of  60, 61, 142c
origins of  25, 42
power of  51
Roman conquest of  63
trade  98
pottery  26, 35, 85, 109, 117–118
Corinthian War  55
Council of 500  73–74
Council of Elders  83
councils  72, 73–74, 83
country life  85, 93–94, 97. See also 
agriculture; farming
coup  31, 143
courts  32, 75
Crete  8–9, 19, 120
crime and punishment  31, 32, 72. See 
also legal system
bribery  60, 75
ostracism  73, 74
Croesus (king)  26, 32
cults  124
culture  7–10, 14, 62–63, 131–132. 
See also arts
Cumae  25
cuneiform  21
Cylon  31
Cynics  54
Cyprus  25
Cyrene  25, 67
Cyrus the Elder (king)  26, 32
Cyrus the Younger (prince)  55, 56
D
Daedalus  118, 120
daily life. See also clothing; food; 
housing
aristocracy  76–77, 87–88
in Athens  85–93
children  25, 83, 87, 89–93, 96, 
97, 104
country life  85, 93–94, 97
helots  94–95, 97
men  87–89, 95
religion  99–102
slaves  78–80
in Sparta  25, 83, 94–97, 98, 102, 
103, 104
wealthy  76–77, 89–90
women  87, 89–91, 92, 95, 96–97
dance  106
Darius I (king of Persia)  32, 35–37
Darius III (king of Persia)  62
Dark Age (European)  133, 138
Dark Age (Greece)  9, 21–22, 24, 26, 
68, 82, 142c
death and burial  22, 104
debate  83
debt  28, 32, 51, 71
deinos/dino (prefix)  13
Delian League  39–40, 41, 44m, 51, 
56, 120
Delium  47
Delos  24, 39
Delphi  19, 24, 25, 26, 82, 106
demes (villages)  26, 73, 85, 93, 143
Demeter  100, 101
democracy  67
after Philip II  61
Cleisthenes and  32, 33, 73–74, 142c
modern Greece  137–138
origins of  12, 28
Pericles and  12, 41–42, 74–75, 141
Solon and  31–32, 71–72
United States and  15, 63, 139, 
140–141
Democritus  98
demos  15, 74, 75, 141
Demosthenes  59, 60
descendants  143
dino (prefix)  13
Diogenes  54, 54
Dionysus  106, 110–111, 112
Discobolus  119
disease  46–47
dithyramb  116
dogma  101
Dorian  21, 82, 98
Doric architecture  119, 120
drachmas  40
Draco  31

I n d e x
155
draconian  31
drama (theater)  106, 110–112, 116, 
142c
drought  25
E
economics  41, 63, 67, 72, 81–82, 138. 
See also business and industry; 
employment; finance; monetary 
system; taxation; trade
education  29, 131, 139
children  91–92
music  115, 116
philosophy and  86, 88
Socratic teaching method  51, 53, 
124
Egypt  7, 21, 32, 61, 62, 64, 131, 142c
Elements, The (Euclid)  127
Elgin, Lord  136
Elgin Marbles. See Parthenon
Elysium  104
emigrants  9
employment  28, 39–40, 41, 63, 75, 
77–78
environment  98
Epaminodas  57–58
Ephialtes  74, 75
ephors  83, 96
epic  10, 143. See also poetry
Epiminondas  142c
Eratosthenes  128
Erechtheum  121
Eretria  22, 36
ethne/ethnos  68
ethnocentric  68
ethnography  68
Etruscans  117
Euboea  22, 36, 42
Euclid  127
eureka  129
Euripides  112, 134
Europa  139
Europe  14, 133, 138, 139, 144. See 
also specific country
European Union (EU)  98, 138
F
fables  92
family  68, 91, 102–104. See also  
children; marriage
farming  25, 80, 93–94. See also  
agriculture; food
class and  27, 31, 71–72
warfare and  22–24, 42–47, 55, 
57–58
fertility  143
festivals  69, 85, 99, 104–106
food for  97
Panathenaic  120
sacrifices  97, 104
theater and  110–111, 118
women  105–106
finance  80
costs of warfare  37, 40, 41, 48, 49
debt  28, 32, 51, 71
monetary system  40, 61, 81–82
food  25, 49, 58, 97–98, 99. See also 
agriculture; farming
France  25
freedom  41, 141
Frogs, The (Aristophanes)  112
funerals. See death and burial
Funny Thing Happened on the Way 
to the Forum, A (musical)  114
G
Gaia  99
Galen  132
Galileo Galilei  139, 140
Ganymede  139
Gaugamela  62
geography  9, 10, 25, 26
geo-political units. See also city-states 
(polis/poleis)
colonies  24–25, 44m, 142c, 143
demes (villages)  26, 73, 85, 93, 143
kingdoms  10, 26, 62–63, 67–68, 141
Germany  136–137, 138–139
gladius  64
gods and goddesses  12, 25, 69,  
99–102. See also Acropolis; 
Delphi; festivals; temples;  
specific god or goddess
gold  49
Gore, Al  129
government and politics  10, 15, 51, 
67, 68–69, 82–83, 126, 142c. 
See also Assembly (Ekklesia); 
citizen participation; democracy; 
geo-political units; legal system; 
warfare
alliances  12–13, 32, 39
bribery  60
communism  137
councils  72, 73–74, 83
equality in  70–71
Mycenaean  20
treaties  41, 42
Graeci  8
graphein/graphy  15
Great Britain  136, 137, 141
Greco-Roman  121, 132, 133
Greece  7–9, 44m, 59 
civil war  137
legacy of  16, 138–141
modern  135m, 136–138
Greek (language)  63, 131, 132
Gutenberg, Johannes  138–139
gymnasiums  87–88
H
Hades  11, 100, 104
health and medicine  46–47, 98, 99, 
128–129, 132
Helen  11
Hellas  8, 143
Hellenes  8, 59
Hellenistic Age  13, 61–64
Hellenized  131–132, 143
helots  42, 43, 79–80, 142c, 143
daily life  94–95, 97
freedom for  47, 58
origins of  27
Hephaestus  23, 101
Hera  11, 90, 100, 102, 106
Heracles  90
Hermes  101, 115
Herodas  99
Herodotus  30, 78, 81, 83
on Cleisthenes  74
historians on  114, 115
on the Persian Wars  36
writings  37, 74, 114, 115
Herophilus  129
Hesiod  10, 24, 91, 110
Hestia  101
himation  99
hippeis  71
Hippias  32
Hippocrates  78, 128–129, 132
Hippocratic Oath  129
Histories (Herodotus)  74, 114, 115
History of the Peloponnesian War 
(Thucydides)  39, 43, 74
history (study of). See also specific 
historian
archaeology and  19, 20, 21, 104, 
143
Homer and  10, 20
oral tradition  22, 24, 83
record keeping  21, 114–115, 134
Xenophon and  114
Hittite Empire  20, 21
hoi polloi  68
Homer  22, 142c
Iliad  10, 11, 20, 23, 24, 61, 
109–110
Odyssey  10, 11, 24, 88–89, 
109–110
homosexuality  88
honor  70–71
hoplites  55, 143
costs of  40
influence of  70–71
origins of  27–31, 142c
warfare and  29–31, 36, 37, 47, 57
housing  76, 77, 85–87
humanism  139
Hydra  11
hygiene  87, 98
I
Iliad (Homer)  61, 109–110
historians on  10, 20
oral tradition of  24, 109
plot  11, 23

156
E m p i r e  o f  A n c i e n t  g r e e c e
industry. See business and industry
infantry  143
instruments, musical  116
inventions  120
Io  139
Ionia  21, 42, 48, 63
architecture  119
clothing  98
origin of philosophy in  52
Persian Empire and  32, 35, 36,  
39
iron tools  22
Ischomachus  89
Islam  133–134
Islamic Empire  13
Italy  25, 117, 139
J
Jefferson, Thomas  129
Judaism  132
Judea  132
Judeo-Christian  133
Jupiter. See Zeus
juries  41, 75
K
kings and kingdoms  10, 26, 62–63, 
67–68, 141. See also specific 
king or kingdom
kithara  116
Kindi, al-  134
komoidia  113
kouros  118, 119
krater  11, 79
kratos  15
L
Laconia  25, 57–58
laconic  83
land and property ownership  141
aristocracy and  27, 80
citizenship and  69, 79
freed slaves and  79
government ownership  137
laws regarding  31
language and writing  14. See also 
literature; public speaking; 
rhetoric
alphabet  21, 142c
children and  92–93
Greek  63, 131, 132
Latin  131, 134
printing  138–139
religion and  132
Latin (language)  131, 134
Laurium  37, 41, 48, 120
League of Corinth  60, 61, 142c
legal system  15, 68, 83. See also crime 
and punishment
based on class  71–72, 142c
courts  32, 41, 75
Draco and  31
trial of Socrates  125
tyrants and  28
Leonidas (king)  37
Lesbos  70
Leto  100
Leuctra  57
Libya  25
Lincoln, Abraham  45
literature  10, 24, 138–139, 142c. See 
also poetry; theater; specific 
author
logic  127, 143
logos  133
Lyceum  88
Lycurgus  82–83
Lydia (city)  26, 32, 35, 81
lyre  116
M
Macedon  42, 52, 58–63, 135m,  
142c
Macedonian Conquest  13–16
Magnificent Seven, The (movie)  112
Maia  100
Marathon (city)  36, 121
marathon race  12, 105
marble  120
Mardonius  30
marriage  
arrangement of  59, 90–91
citizenship and  41
power of women in  90
wedding rituals  102, 103
mathematics  21, 123, 126, 127–128
maza  97
Medea (Euripides)  112
Medians  26
medicine. See health and medicine
Megara  42
men  
citizen participation  12, 41–42, 68, 
69, 72, 74, 83
clothing  99
daily life  
in Athens  87–89
in Sparta  95
legal system and  32
parties for  88
socializing with women  88
Menander  113
Menelaus  11
Meno  53
mercenaries  10, 55, 56, 61–62, 143
Mercouri, Melina  136
Messene, origin of  58
Messenia  25, 27, 47, 58, 94, 142c. See 
also helots
Messenian Wars  30
metaphysics  126–127
metics  75–78, 79, 143
Metis  100
metopes  120
middle class  69–70, 72
Middle East  131, 133
military  22, 27–28, 82. See also 
hoplites; navy; triremes (ships); 
warfare
citizen participation and  70, 74
citizenship and  70–71
class and  71, 72
Roman  63–64
Sparta and  13, 27, 29, 31, 57
women as warriors  90
Miltiades  36
mines and mining  79, 80–81, 120
funding of a navy with  37, 40, 
41, 48
war debts and  51
Minoans  8–9, 19, 21
monarchy  83, 137–138, 141, 143
monetary system  40, 61, 80, 81–82
monotheism  132
morality  51, 52, 53, 124, 126
movies  37, 112
Muhammad  133
museums  136, 137
music  99, 106, 115–116, 117
Mycenaeans  9, 19–20, 21, 24, 142c
Myrmidons  23
Myron of Eleutherae  119
myth  143
mythology. See gods and goddesses
N
navy  43, 47–49, 56–57
funding of  37, 40, 41, 48
triremes  37–40, 72, 74, 144
Near East  13, 22
Nestor  11
Nicosthenes  117
Nike  121
nobles  67–68. See also aristocracy
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO)  138
numbers  128
O
obol  80
Odyesseus  11, 88–89, 110
Odyssey (Homer)  109–110
historians on  10
oral tradition of  24, 109
plot  11, 88–89
Oeconomicus (Xenophon)  89
oikos/oikoi  68, 93
oligarchy  10, 26, 31, 70, 143
olives  35, 45–46, 72, 86, 98
Olympia (city)  24
Olympians  99, 100
Olympic Games  12
modern  105, 131
origins  9–10, 24, 106–107, 142c
Olympus, Mt.  99, 100
omen  143

I n d e x
157
On the Polity of the Spartans 
(Xenophon)  82
oracles  25, 26, 106, 143
oral tradition  22, 24, 83
orators  59, 143. See also public 
speaking
orchestra  116
orders  119, 120
Osman I (Ottoman sultan)  134
ostracism  73, 74
ostrakhon  73
Ottoman Empire  134–136, 137
Otto (king of Greece)  134, 136
P
painting  14
pankration  107
Paris  11
Parmenides  123
Parthenon  7, 35, 39, 120, 142c
Elgin Marbles  121, 136, 137
Pasion  79
Patroclus  23
peasants  28, 32
Pegasus  100
Peloponnesian League  40, 44m
Peloponnesian War  13, 44m, 142c
end of  48–49, 51, 52
Sparta attacks Attica  42–47
Sparta attacks Syracuse  47–48
writings about  39, 43, 74, 112
Penelope  11, 89
peninsula  143
pentakosiomedimnoi  71
pente  107
Pergamum  63
Pericles  47, 77, 88
building projects of  39, 120, 121
democracy and  12, 41–42, 74–75, 
141
speeches  45
perioikoi  96
Persephone  100
Persian Empire  40, 115
Alexander the Great and  61–63
alliance against  12–13
Peloponnesian War  48, 49
Persian Wars  26, 32–33, 35–39, 41, 
49, 142c
Greek mercenaries  55–56, 60
Petrarch  139
phalanx  29–30, 36, 57–58, 59, 144
Pheidippides  12
Phidias  119
Philip II (king of Macedon)  52, 
58–61, 60, 142c
Philippi  60
Philip V (king of Macedon)  63
philosophy  14, 144. See also specific 
philosopher
rise of  15–16, 52–54, 122–127
science and  10, 122, 126
Phoenicians  7, 21, 37
physics  13
Physics, The (Aristotle)  127
physis  13
Pindar  61, 104, 110
Piraeus  43, 49
Pisistratus  32, 47, 87
plague  144
Platea  36, 38, 142c
Plato  14, 125–126
Academy of  86, 88
Aristotle and  26, 52
on democracy  126
on family size  91
music and  115, 117
revival of  139
Socrates and  47, 52
writings  133
Apology  124
Republic  126
Plautus  113–114
plays. See theater
Plutarch  83, 103
Poetics (Aristotle)  113
poetry  110, 116, 139, 142c. See also 
specific poet
epic  10, 143
warfare and  30, 70
polis/poleis  26, 27, 126. See also city-
states (polis/poleis)
politics. See government and politics
Politics (Aristotle)  67–68, 69, 80, 
95, 96
Polybios  63, 114
Polyclitus  119
poorer classes  28, 41, 68, 69–70, 91, 
142c. See also specific class
employment  39–40
housing  85–86
Solon’s reforms regarding  31–32, 
71–72
Poseidon  69, 99, 100, 119–120
Potidaea  42
pottery  26, 35, 80, 85, 88, 109, 
116–118
poverty  22, 27, 28, 32, 41
priestesses  25, 105–106. See also 
oracles
printing  138–139
property ownership. See land and 
property ownership
Ptolemy  62, 132, 140
public speaking  45, 59, 75, 124, 143
public works projects  28, 32, 39, 63, 
120, 121
Pylos  47
Pythagoras  123, 124
Pythagorean Theorem  123
R
race  68
Ramesses III  21
Raphael (artist)  14
record keeping  21, 114–115, 134
refugees  46–47
religion and beliefs  48, 69, 76, 104, 
106–107. See also festivals; gods 
and goddesses; rituals
Christianity  132–133, 134, 140
daily life  99–102
Islam  133–134
women and  25, 105–106
Renaissance (European)  14, 139, 144
republic  144
Republic (Plato)  126
rhetoric  75, 83, 124, 144
Rhodes  63
rituals  99, 102–107, 144
Roman Catholic Church  140
Roman Conquest  13–16
Roman Empire  7, 62, 63–64, 82, 
131–134, 142c
architecture  119, 121
Roman Republic  12
Roxane  62
S
sacrifices  97, 99, 102, 103, 104
Sappho  110, 142c
satire  112, 144
sauros (suffix)  14
science and technology  13, 22, 
122–124, 127–128, 129. See also 
health and medicine
humanism and  139–140
philosophy and  122, 126
warfare and weaponry  59–61
sculpture  118–119, 121, 132, 136, 
137
Scythia  90
seafarers  10
sea peoples  21
Seleucus  62
serfs  27, 94, 144. See also helots
Seven Against Thebes (Aeschylus)  
112
Seven Samurai, The (movie)  112
sexuality  88
shades  104
ships. See triremes 
shoes  99
Sicily  25, 35, 47–48
siege  59–61, 144
silphium  67
silver mining  51, 80–81, 120
funding of a navy with  37, 40, 41, 48
Sirens  11
slaves/slavery  15, 42, 51, 75. See also 
helots
daily life  78–80
participation of in festivals  104
paying of debts and  28, 32, 71
rights of  76, 78
trade of  35, 81

158
E m p i r E  o f  A n C i E n T  G r E E C E
Snyder, Zack  37
society  14, 74, 75–78, 82. See also 
class system; culture; daily life; 
economics; education; family; 
government and politics; health 
and medicine; legal system; 
religion and beliefs; science and 
technology
Socrates  8, 16, 124–125, 134
execution of  125, 142c
Plato and  47, 52
teaching style  51, 53, 124
writings about  89, 112
Socratic method  51, 53, 124
Solon  31–32, 41, 71–72, 77, 93–94, 
142c
Sophists  54, 124–125
Sophocles  111, 112
Spain  25, 133
Sparta  44m, 142c. See also hel-
ots; Peloponnesian League; 
Peloponnesian War
Alcibiades and  46, 47–49
alliances with Athens  32, 39
assembly  83
daily life  25, 83, 94–97, 98, 102, 
103, 104
militarization of  13, 27, 29, 31, 57
origins of  10–13, 25, 26–27, 
82–83
rivalry with Athens  13, 55
treaty with Athens  41, 42
women of  95
writings about  43, 82, 95
spartan  29, 58
sports. See athletics
stadion/stadium  106
statues  47–48
Stoics  54
strategoi  74
strigil  98
successor  144
Symposia  88
Syracuse  25, 47–48, 55
T
tactic  144
talent  81
taxation  55, 60
teaching  51, 53, 124
technology. See science and technology
temples  19, 24, 39, 51, 61, 119–121. 
See also Acropolis
terracing  144
terra cotta  91, 94. See also pottery
Thales of Miletus  122–123, 142c
Thasos  40
theater  60, 110–114. See also actors 
and acting; specific playwright
Aristotle on  112
comedy  112–114, 116
drama  106, 110–112, 116, 142c
festivals and  110–111, 118
tragedy  111, 113
Thebes  10, 26, 42, 142c
Alexander the Great invades  61
Sparta and  47, 51, 55, 57–58
Themistokles  73
Themosticles  38
Theogony (Hesiod)  10, 24
theorem  144
Thera (island)  25
Thermopylae, battle of  37
Thesmorphoria  105
Thessaly  23, 59
thetes  71
Thetis  23
Thirty Tyrants  27–28, 51, 70, 78, 
125, 144
Tholos (temple)  19
Thrace  32, 42
300 (movie)  37
Thucydides  39, 41–42, 43, 45, 74, 
114
Titans  100
tools  22
toys  91
trade  67, 80–81, 86, 143
agriculture  55, 72, 80
Archaic Greece  22, 25, 26
Classical Greece  42
pottery  26, 35, 85, 109, 117–118
slavery  35, 81
tragedy (theater)  111, 113
tragoidia  113
treaties  41, 42
treis  37
tribes  73
triremes  37–40, 72, 74, 144
trittys  73
Trojan War  7, 9, 10, 12, 20, 22. See also 
Iliad (Homer); Odyssey (Homer)
Troy  9, 20, 142c
Turkey  7, 70, 135m
Turks  134–136, 137
Twelve Olympians  99, 100
tyrants  27–28, 51, 70, 78, 125, 144
Tyre (Lebanon)  62
Tyrtaeus  30
U
United States  15, 45, 63, 121, 139, 
140–141
University of Western Sydney  117
V
vegetarianism  124
villages. See demes (villages)
virtue  8, 53, 56, 125
voting  69, 74, 75, 79, 83
W
wall, around Athens  42–43, 47, 51
wall painting  116
warfare  36, 142c. See also hoplites; 
military; specific war
Apollo and  26
Archaic Greece  22–23
costs of  40, 49
developments in  55–57
honoring fallen soldiers  45
Mycenaean  19–20, 21
Roman  63–64
phalanx  29–30, 36, 57–58, 59, 144
siege  59–61, 144
writings about  43, 56, 70
wealthy  27, 41. See also aristocracy
daily life  76–77, 89–90
Hellenistic Age  62–63
influence of  68–69, 71, 73, 74
obligations of  78
role in government  26
Solon’s reforms regarding  31–32, 
71–72
weaponry  19–20, 29, 55, 59–61, 
63–64
weddings  102, 103
women  89
athletics  106
citizen participation  12, 69
clothing  98–99
daily life  92
in Athens  87, 89–91
in Sparta  95, 96–97
power of in marriage  90
religion  25, 105–106
rights  15, 75, 88, 95, 96
slavery  78
socializing with men  88
as warriors  90
Works and Days (Hesiod)  110
World War I  136
World War II  136–137
writing. See language and writing
WWF (World Wildlife Fund)  98
X
Xenophon  49, 58, 83, 86, 89
historians on  114
writings  55, 56, 82
Xerxes (king of Persia)  37, 38
Z
Zeno of Citium  54
zeugitai  71
Zeus  61, 139
in daily life  100
family of  90
festival honoring  106
Olympic games and  9–10, 105, 
106–107
sacrifices to  102
temple of  24

159
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
JEAN KINNEY WILLIAMS is a free-lance writer 
who lives in Ohio. She has written many non-
fiction books on a variety of history and social 
studies topics, including Mormon Faith in 
America for Facts On File.
History consultant JOHN W. I. LEE is associate 
professor of history at the University of Califor-
nia at Santa Barbara, specializing in the study of 
ancient Greece, Greek archaeology, and ancient 
warfare.

