© Memi Lavi  
 
 
 
 
www.memilavi.com  
 
 
 
memi@memilavi.com  
1 
 
Microsoft Azure 
From Zero to Hero – The Complete Guide  
Architecture Summary 
When designing cloud architectures for Microsoft Azure, use this summary that will help you design 
the system select the right resources for the right task. 
Area 
Resources / Notes 
Compute 
Virtual Machines (VMs) – When a full control is needed, or dev platform is 
not supported on any other cloud service (e.g. C++). Can be auto scaled 
using Scale Set. 
App Service – PaaS for web apps. Use when system is a web app running 
on modern platform. Not requiring any setup or configuration. Great 
integration with authentication providers and Application Gateway. 
Azure Kubernetes Services (AKS) – If your apps already run on 
Kubernetes or Docker containers – use it. If you plan to deploy your app 
using containers – use it. 

© Memi Lavi  
 
 
 
 
www.memilavi.com  
 
 
 
memi@memilavi.com  
2 
 
Azure Functions – Use for focused, lightweight actions (calculations, 
conversions, validation etc.). Extremely efficient, beware of cold starts. 
Networking 
VNet – Virtual Network. By default inaccessible to other VNets. Design 
your app around VNets using the Hob-and-Spoke model. 
Subnet – Logical segment inside a VNet. By default accessible from other 
subnets in the VNet.  
Network Security Group (NSG) – Filters traffic based on 5 tuples. ALWAYS 
set up NSG in front of every subnet. 
Load Balancer – Balances load across various resources based on various 
algorithms. Works on Layer 4. Use ONLY for internal resources. 
Application Gateway – Used to expose web endpoint to the outside world. 
Load balancer, WAF (optional), works on Layer 7. Use in front of App 
Services. 
Data 
Relational Databases – Azure SQL (the only resource with 99.995% SLA), 
Azure MySQL, Azure Postgres 
NoSQL Database – Cosmos DB (the only resource with 99.999% SLA) 
Object Store – Blob Storage  

© Memi Lavi  
 
 
 
 
www.memilavi.com  
 
 
 
memi@memilavi.com  
3 
 
Messaging 
Storage Queue – Dead simple queueing, no additional cost, max msg size – 
64KB 
Event Grid – Messaging system for Event Driven Architectures, great 
integration with other services, max msg size – 1MB 
Service Bus – Advanced queueing solution with advanced features, 
durable, max msg size – 256KB 
Event Hubs – Big data streaming, designed for heavy load, Kafka-based. 
Max msg size – 1MB 
Authentication Azure Active Directory – Identity and Access Manager (IAM), extremely 
robust, supports MFA, conditional access and more. Great integration with 
App Services. 
Azure AD B2C – Simplifies integration with apps for identity scenarios (log 
in, log out, sign up, etc) 
Monitoring 
Set up Alerts to get notifications when something goes wrong 
Use Metrics to see system’s status 
Read Logs to find out what the system did 
Put important information on Dashboards to get wholistic view 
Use Tags to categorize the resources 

© Memi Lavi  
 
 
 
 
www.memilavi.com  
 
 
 
memi@memilavi.com  
4 
 
Security 
- Close unnecessary open ports of a VM 
- Use NSG 
- Use authentication 
- Encrypt data at rest and at transit 
- Use KeyVault to securely store secrets 
- Use Security Center regularly 
DR 
- Decide between hot and cold DR 
- Remember – hot DR is much more difficult to design and expensive 
to implement 
- Use Traffic Manager or Front Door for automatic routing 
 
I Hope you enjoyed the course, and that it made you a Microsoft Azure expert. Stay tuned to more 
courses on Azure, which will make you an even better Azure Architect! 
For any question or comment contact me at: 
memi@memilavi.com 
Thanks, 
Memi 

