DeMONoID's METHOD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hey guys today I am telling everyone about my method to get good earnings. 
 
It’s all about hard work. Hard work=More Earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Method 1: 
 
1. Youtube Accounts 
-Have access to some YouTube accounts 
 
2. Youtube Bot 
-Get a YouTube bot. (one that can comment and rate a video) 
 
3. Idea 
-Think of a something that a lot of people would want to download for example what i do is 
i upload videos of keygen's and programs (some even fake programs) and a lot people 
downloads them. You have to think outside of the box! 
 
4. Comments 
- Now use the YouTube bot to your advantage. Spam the crap out of your video(s) with 
positive comments but this all depends on how many YouTube accounts you have. If you are 
looking for a good amount of earnings i suggest doing 50+ comments on a video. 
 
If you follow these guidelines you will be successful with share cash. 
Of course you may not get the results right away this can take time and your video(s) will 
need to get a lot of views to get people to watch it. 
 
 

Method 2 
1. Found popular poker room (place where peoples play poker online). 
2. Make ~9MB .exe file call it "[poker room name] BotInstall.exe" 
(FullTiltPokerBotInstall.exe) 
3. Upload it to sharecash and short file URL with http://bit.ly/ 
4. Find a table with many people watching game (table with very high bets). 
5. Write to a chat message like: "HI download fulltiltpoker bot here [link]". 
6. If you would not get banned, repeat 5. 
Good luck! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Method 3 
This method is one of the best to start off with, what we’re going to be doing is supplying 
game cheats/hacks or whatever you want to call them, to gamers, we’re going to contact 
the gamers though forums in this method, but in later methods, we’ll be covering other 
ways of promoting your sharecash download link for this method, but forums are the best 
place to start 
 
Step 1) Finding a game download to promote 
We first need to find a file to upload to sharecash, with a bit of help from Google, this 
isn’t really very hard to do, select a game, in this example, we’re using Gunz: The Online 
Duel, so we’ll search “gunz cheats” and “gunz hacks”, go though what comes up, then 
download the files that come up. You may have to sign up to forums to get access to the 
file download links. 
 
Step 2) Uploading the game file to sharecash 
You obviously need to login to your sharecash account, if you don’t already have a 
sharecash account, you should sign up now, as you need a sharecash account to upload files 
to sharecash, okay so once you’ve uploaded the files to sharecash, grab the download links, 
make sure you know what link is for what cheat/hack, you don’t want to get mixed up! 
 
Step 3) Promoting the file download This is super easy, just take the sharecash download 
link you got, then go back to Google, search for some forums around the game, lets take 
gunz as the example, “Gunz forums”, then you go into more detailed forums “gunz clan 
forums” “gunz guild forums” “gunz cheating forums” “gunz hacking forums”. Once you’ve got 
some results, start signging up to the forums, then simply post a topic in the most viewed 
section about the cheat/hack, give it a good title “Amazing Gunz AIM Bot, 100% working & 
safe”, within the topic, try to have some pictures/videos of the 
cheat/hack/software/gunz, along with a anti virus scan and of course the download link. 
 

Step 4) Rinse & Repeat! 
This is the great part about this method, you can do it over and over again, there are 
thousands of forums for every game, there are thousands of games to pick cheats/hacks 
from, there are thousands of places to promote your sharecash download link, so what are 
you waiting for? Get out there and get promoting 
 
 
Thanks for reading!
Thanks for reading!
Thanks for reading!
Thanks for reading!    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: This Method was transferred on a PDF by Syberpro 

 

